A COVRTLY MASQVE: THE DEVICE CALLED The World tossed at Tennis.

As it has been diverse times Presented to the Contentment of many Noble and
Worthy Spectators, By the PRINCE his Servants.

Invented, and set down, By Tho: Middleton and William Rowley Gent.



LONDON, Printed by George Purslowe, and are to be sold by Edward Wright at
Christ Church Gate* 1620.

The Figures, and Persons properly raysde for Employment through the whole
MASQVE.
FIrst, Three Ancient and Princely Receptacles: Richmond, St. James's,
Denmarke-House. A Scholar. Pallas. A Soldier. Jupiter. The 9. Worthies. The
first Song, and first Dance. Time, a Plaintiff. But his grieuances delivered
courteously. The five Starches: White, Blue, Yellow, Green, and Red. The
second Dance. Simplicity, The Intermedler. Deceit, The Disguiser: The second
Song sung by Reapers. A King. A Land-Captaine. A Sea-Captaine. Mariners. The
third Song, and third Dance. The Flamen. The Lawyer. The fourth and last Dance:
the Devil an Intermixer.
TO THE TRVLY-NOBLE, CHARLES, LORD HOWARD, BARON OF EFFINGHAM, AND TO HIS
VIRTUOUS AND WORTHY LADY, the Right Honorable, MARY, LADY Effingham, Eldest
Daughter of the truly Generous and Judicious, Sr. WILLIAM COKAYN, Knight, L.
Mayor of this CITY, and L. GENERAL of the Military Forces.
TO whom more properly may Art prefer
Works of this Nature, which are high, and rare,
(Fit to delight a Princes Eye and Ear)
Then to the hands of such a Worthy Pair?
Imagine this (mixed with delight and State,
Being then an entertainment for the Best)
Your Noble Nuptials comes to celebrate:
And though it fall short of the Day, and Feast
Of your most sacred and united Loves;
Let none say therefore it untimely moves:
It can, I hope, come out of Season, never,
To find your Joys New; as at first, for ever.
Most respectfully devoted to both your HONORS, THO: MIDDLETON.

To the well-wishing, -well reading Understander, well-vnderstanding Reader;
Simplicity S. P. D.

AFter most hearty commendations (my kind and unknown friends) trusting in
Phoebus, your understandings are all in as good health as Simplicitie's was at
the writing hereof: This is to certify you further, that this short and small
Treatise that follows, called A Masque, The Device, further Entitled* The
World tossed at Tennis: How it will be now tossed in the World, I know not; a toy
brought to the Press rather by the Printer, then the Poet; who requested an
Epistle for his pass, to satisfy his perusers how hitherto he has behau'd
himself. First, for his Conception; he was begot in Braine-ford, borne on the
Bankeside of Hellicon, brought up amongst Noble, Gentle, Commons, and good
Scholars of all sorts, where (for his time) he did good and honest service
beyond the small Seas; he was faire-spoken, never accused of scurrilous or
obsceane language, (a virtue not ever found in Scenes of the like condition)
of as honest meaning reputed, as his words reported; neither too bitterly
taxing, nor too soothingly telling the Worlds broad abuses, moderately merry,
as sententiously serious, never condemned but for his brevity in speech, ever
wishing his Tale longer, to be assured he would continue to so good a purpose:
Having all these hansome qualities simply and no other compounded with
knauerie, there is great hope he shall pass still by the fair way of good
report, perseuering in those honest courses which may become the son of
Simplicity: who, though he be now in a Masque, yet is his face apparent
enough: and so (loving Cousins) having no News to send you at this time, but
that Deceit is entering upon you, (whom I pray you have a care to avoid) and
this notice I can give you of him, there are some six or eight Pages before
him; the Lawyer and the Devil behind him; in this care I leave you, not
leaving to be

Your kind and loving Kinsman, Simplicity.

PROLOGVS.
THis our Device, we do not call a Play,
Because we break the Stages Laws to day
Of Acts and Scenes, sometimes a Comic strain
Has hit delight home in the Master-vayne:
Thalia's prize, Melpomine's sad style,
Has shook the Tragic hand another while;
The Muse of History has caught your eyes,
And she chaunts the pastor all Psalteries:
We now lay claim to none, yet all present
Seeking out pleasure to find your content;
You shall perceive by what comes first in sight,
It was intended for a Royal Night.
There Is one hours words, the rest in Songs and Dances,
Lauds no man's own, no man himself aduances,
No man is lifted but by other hands,
Say he could leap, he lights but where he stands:
Such is our fate; if good, much good may't do you,
If not (sorry) we will lose our labors wi you.
AN INDVCTION TO THE MASQVE: PREPARED For his MAJESTY'S Entertainment at
Denmarke-House.
Enter Richmond, and St. James's. St. James's. WHy, Richmond, Richmond, why art
so heavy?


Rich. I have reason enough for that good sainted, Sister.

Am I not built with stone, fair, large, and freestone, some part covered
with Lead too?


St Iea. All this is but a lightheaded understanding now.
I mean, why so melancholy, thou lookst, mustily, me thinks.

Rich. Do I so? and yet I dwell in sweeter air
Then you, sweet St James's: How three days
Warming has spirited you; you have sometimes
Your vacations as other of your friends have,
If you call your self to mind.

St Iam. Thou never saw my new Gallery and my Tennis-court, Richmond.


Rich. No: but I heard of it, and from whence it came too.


St Iam. Why, from whence came it?


Rich. Nay, lawfully derived, from the Brickhils, as thou
Did thy self.

St Iam. Thou breed'st Crikets, I think, and that will serve for the
Anagram to a Critique, come, I know thy grief:
Thou fear that our late Rival, Denmarke-House,
Will take from our regard, and we shall want
The Noble presence of our Princely Master,
(In his so frequent visitation)
Which we were wont so fully to enjoy.

Rich. And is not that a cause of sorrow then?


St Iam. Rather a cause of Joy, that we enjoy
So fair a fellowship, Denmark. Why, she is
A stately Palace, and maiesticall,
Ever of courtly breeding, but of late
Built up unto a Royal height of state,
Rounded with Noble prospects, by her side,
The siluer-footed Thamesis does slide,
As (though more faintly) Richmond, does by thee. Enter Denmarke-House.
Which I (denied to touch) can only see.

Rich. Who Is this?


St Iam. It Is she her self in faith,
Comes with a courteous browe.

Den. Ye'are welcome, most nobly welcome.


St Iam. Hark you now, Richmond, did not I tell thee
T was a Royal House?

Den. Why, was there any doubt,
Of our kind gratulation? I am proud
Only to be in fellowship with you,
Co-mate and Servant to so great a Master.

St Iam. That's Richmonds fear, thou wilt rob us both*
Thou have such an enticing face of thine own.

Den. Oh, let not that be any difference,
When we do serve, let us be ready for it.
And called at His great pleasure: the round year
In her circumferent arms will fold us all,
And give us all employment seasonable.
I am for colder hours, when the bleake air
Bites with an Icy tooth: when Summer has seared
And Autumn all discolored, laid all Fallow,
Pleasure taken house, and dwells within doors,
Then shall my Towers smoke, and comely show:
But when again, the fresher morn appears,
And the soft Spring renues her Velvet head,
St James's take my blessed Inhabitants
For she can better entertain them then,
In larger bounds, in Park, sports, delights, and grounds.
A third season yet (with the Western Oars)
Calls up to Richmond, when the high-heated year,
Is in her Solsticie: Then she affords
More sweeter-breathing air, more bounds, more pleasures:
The Hounds loud Music to the flying Stagge,
The feathered Talenter to the falling bird,
The Bow-mans twelue-score prick, even at the door,
And to these I could add a hundred more.
Then let not us strive which shall be his homes:
But strive to give him welcome when he comes.

Rich. By my troth he shall be welcome to Richmond
When so ever he comes.

St Iam. And to Saint James's in faith at midnight.


Den. Mean time, it is fit I give him welcome hither;
But first, to you my Royal Royall'st ghest,
And I could wish your Banquet were a Feast:
How e're your welcome is most bounteous,
Which, I beseech you take as gracious:
To you my Owner, Master, and my Lord,
Let me the second unto you afford,
And then, from you to all: for it is you
That gives indeed, what I but seem to do.
I was from ruin raised by a fair hand,
A Royal hand: in that state let me stand
For ever now: to bounty I was bred,
My cups full brim'd, and my free tables spread
To hundreds daily, even without my door,
I had an open hand unto the poor.
I know I shall so still, then shall their prayers
Pass by the Porters Keys, climb up each stayres,
And knit, and joint, my new reedifyde frames,
That I shall able be to keep your names
Unto eternity: Denmark House shall keep
Her high Name now, till Time does fall asleep,
And be no more: mean time, welcome, welcome,
Heartily welcome; but chiefly you (great Sir,)
What e're lies in my power, command me all,
As freely as you were at your White Hall.

Exeunt. A COVRTLY MASQVE.
Enter Soldier, and Scholar. Scholar. SOldier, ta-ra-ra-ra-ra. How is it? thou
lookst as if thou had lost a field to day.


Sold. No, but I have lost a day ith field: if you take me a maunding but where
I am commanding, let (...) show me the house of correction.


Sch. Why, thou were not maunding, were thou? there is martial danger in that,
believe it.


Sold. No sir, but I was bold to show my self to some of my old and familiar
acquaintance; but being disguised with my wants, there is no body knew me.


Sch. Faith, and that is the worst disguise a man can walk in; thou were better
have appeard drunk in good clothes, much better* there is no superfluities
shame a man; as to be ouer-braue, ouer-bold, ouer-swearing, ouer-lying,
ouer-whoring, these add still to his repute; it is the poor indigence, the
want, the lanke deficiencie; as when a man cannot be brave, dares not be bold,
is afraid to swear, wants maintenance for a lie, and money to give a whore a
supper: this is pauper, cuius modicum non satis est; nay, he shall never be
rich with begging neither, which is another wonder; because many beggars are
rich.


Sold. Oh Cauina Facundia! this dog-eloquence of thine will make thee somewhat
one day, Scholar; could thou turn but this prose into rhyme, there were a
pitiful living to be picked out of it.


Sch. I could make Ballads for a need.


Sold. Very well sir; and I Will warrant thee thou shall never want subject to
write of: One hangs himself to day, another drownes himself to morrow, a
Serieant stabd next day, here a Petti-fogger ath' Pillory, a Bawd in the Carts
nose, and a Pander in the tail: Hic Mulier, Haec Vir, Fashions, Fictions,
Fellonies, Fooleries, a hundred havens has the Ballad-monger to traffic at,
and new ones still daily discovered.


Sch. Prithee Soldier, no further this way, I participate more of Heraclitus
then Democritus, I could rather weep the sins of the people then sing vm.


Sold. Shall I set thee down a course to live?


Sch. Faith, a coorse living I think must serve my turn; but why have thou
not found out thine own yet?


Sold. Tush, that's resolved on, beg; when there is use for me,
I shall be brave again, hugged, and beloved:
We are like Winter garments, in the height
And hot blood-of Summer, putoff, thrown by
For moths-meate, never so much as thought on,
Till the Drum strikes up stormesagen; and then,
Come, my well-lin'd Soldier, (with valor,
Not Valor) keep me warm; Oh, I love thee;
We shall be trimmed and very well brusht then:
If we be faced with Fur, it is tolerable;
For we may pillage then and steal our prey,
And not be hanged for it; when the least fingring
In peaceful Summer choakes us: A Soldier,
At the best, is even but the forlorn hope
Unto his Country, sent desperately out
And never more expected: if he come,
Peace's war, perhaps, the Law prouidently
Has provided for him, some house or lands
May be suspenc't in wrangling controversy
And he be hired to keep possession:
For there may be swords drawn, he may become
The abject second to some stinking Bailey;
Oh, let him serve the Pox first, and dye a Gentleman.
Come, I know my ends, but would feign provide for thee:
Can thou make?

Sch. What? I have no handicraft, man.


Sold. Cuckolds, make Cuckolds, it is a pretty trade
In a peaceful City; it is women's work, man,
And they are good pay-masters.

Sch. I dare not:
It Is a work of super-errogation, and the Church forbids it.

Sold. Prithee, what is Latin for a Cuckold, Scholar?
I could never learn yet.

Sch. Faith, the Latins have no proper word for it, that ever I read; Homo, I
take it, is the best,

Because it is a common name to all men.


Sold. You Are mad fellows you Scholars; I am persuaded,
Were I a Scholar now, I could not want.

Sch. Every man's most capable of his own grief.
A Scholar said you? why there are none now a days:
Were you a^ Scholar, you would be a singular fellow.

Sold. How no Scholars! What Is become of vm all?


Sch. I Will make it proof from your experience:
A Commander's a Commander, Captain, Captain;
But, having no Soldiers, where is the command?
Such are we, all Doctors, no Disciples now;
Every man's his own teacher, none learnes of others:
You have not heard of our Mechanic Rabbis,
That shall dispute in their own tongues backward and forward,
With all the learned Fathers of the Jews?

Sold. Mechanic Rabbis! what might those be!


Sch. I Will show you sir, (and they are men are daily to be scene)
There Is Rabbi Job, a venerable Silkeweauer,
Iehu, a Throester, dwellingith Spittle fields;
There Is Rabbi Abimelech, a learned Cobbler,
Rabbi Lazarus, a superstichious Tailor:
These shall hold up their Shittles, Needles, Awles,
Against the grauest Leuite of the Land,
And give no ground neither.

Sold. That I believe,
They have no ground for any thing they do.

Schol. You understand right: and these men by practique
Have got the Theorie of all the Arts
At their fingers ends, and in that they will live;
How ere they will dye, I know not: for they change daily.

Sold. This is strange,
How come they to attain this knowledge?

Schol. As Boys learn Arithmetique, practice with Counters*
To reckon sums of silver: so with their Tools*
They come to Grammar, Logic, Rhetorique
And all the Sciences; as for example,
The devout Weauer sits within his Loome,
And thus he makes a learned Syllogism:
His Woofe the Mayor, and his Warpe the Minor.
His Shittle then the brain, and firm conclusion,
Makes him a piece of Stuff, that Aristotle,
Ramus, nor all the Logicians can take a pieces.

Sold. This has some likelihood.


Schol. So likewise by
His deep instructiue and his mistick tools,
The Tailor comes to be Rhetorical,
First, on the spread Velvet, Satin, Stuff, or Cloth,
He chalkes out a circumferent Paraphrase,
That goes about the bush where the Thief stands.
Then comes his Sheeres in shape of an Eclypsis,
And takes away the to others too long tail:
By his Needle he understands Ironia,
That with one eye looks two ways at once:
Metonymia ever at his fingers ends.
Some call his Pickadell, Synecdoche:
But I think rather that should be his Yard
Being but Pars pro toto, and by Metaphor
All know, the Selleridge under the shop-boord,
He calls his Hell, not that it is a place
Of Spirits abode, but that from that Abyss
Is no recovery or redemption
To any owners hand what ever falls.
I could run further, were not tedious,
And place the stiffe-toed Cobbler in his form:
But let them mend themselves, for yet all is naught:
They now learn only never to be taught.

Sold. Let them alone; How shall we learn to live?


Schol. Without book is most perfect, for with 'vm
We shall hardly: thou may keep a Fence-Schoole, it is a Noble Science.

Sold. I had rather beith Crown Office:
Thou may keep School too, and do good service
To bring up children for the next age better.

Schol. It Is a poor living that's picked out of boys buttocks.


Schol. It Is somewhat better then the night-Farmer yet.


Music. Pallas descends. Hark, What sounds are these?

Schol. Ha? There Is somewhat more,
There is in sight a glorious presence,
A presence more then humane.

Sold. An amazing one, Scholar; if ever thou could conjure, speak now.


Schol. In name of all the Deities, what art thou?
Thy shine is more then Sub-celestiall,
It Is at the least heavenly Angelical.

Pall. A Patroness unto ye both, ye ignorant and undeserving Favorites of my
Fame; You are a Soldier?


Sold. Since these arms could weild A^mes
I have professed it, brightest Deity.

Pall. To thee I am Bellona: you are a Scholar?


Schol. In that poor Pilgrimage (since I could go)
I hitherto have walked.

Pall. To thee I am Minerua,
Pallas to both, Goddess of Arts and Arms,
Of Arms and Arts, for neither have precedence,
For he is the complete man partakes of both,
The soul of Arts joined with the flesh of valor;
And he alone participates with me.
Thou art no Soldier unless a Scholar,
Nor thou a Scholar unless a Soldier.
Ye 'aue Noble breedings both, worthy Foundations,
And will ye build up rotten Battlements
On such fair groundsels? That will ruin all:
Lay Wisdom on thy Valor, on thy Wisdom, Valor;
For these are mutual co-incidents,
What seeks the Soldier?

Sold. My maintenance.


Pall. Lay by thine Arms and take the City then.
There Is the full Cup and Cap of maintenance;
And your grief is want too?

Schol. I want all but grief.


Pall. No: you want most, what most you do profess.
Where read you to be rich was happiest?
He had no bay from Phoebus, nor from me
That e're wrote so, no Minerua in him,
My Priests have taught, that poverty is safe,
Sweet and secure: for nature gives man nothing
At his birth. When life and earth are wedded,
There Is neither Basin held nor Dowry given,
At parting nor is any garner stored,
Wardrope or Warehouse kept for their return:
Wherefore shall then man count his Myriade's
Of gold and silver Idols: since thrifty Nature
Will nothing lend but she will haue't again,
And life and labor for her interest?
My Priests do teach, Seek thou thy self within,
Make thy mind wealthy, thy knowing conscience,
And those shall keep thee company from hence.
Or would you wish to emulate the gods,
Live (as you may imagine) careless and free,
With joys and pleasures crowned, and those eternal,
This were to (far) exceed 'vm: for while earth lasts
The Deities themselves abate their fullness,
Troubled with cries of never contented man:
Man then to seek and find it, all that hope
Fled when Pandora's Fatal box flew open.

Sold. Divine Lady, there is yet a competence
Which we come short off.

Pall. That may as well be caused
From your own negligence, as our slow blessings:
But I Will prefer you to a greater power,
Even Jupiter himself, Father and King of Gods,
With whom I may well join in just complaint:
These latter Ages have dispoil'd my Fame.
Minerua's Altars are all ruined now.
I had along adored Paladium.
Offerings and Incense fuming on my shrine;
Rome held me dear, and old Troy gave me worship,
All Greece renowned me, till the Ida prize
Joined me with wrathful Juno to destroy 'vm,
(For we are better ruined, then profaned.)
Now let the latter ages count the gains
They got by wanton Venus sacrifice,
But I Will inuoke great Jupiter.

Schol. Do, Goddess*
And re-erect the ruins of thy Fame
For Poesy can do it.

Pall. Altitonant
Imperial crowned, and thunder-armed Jove,
Unfold thy fiery Veil, the flaming Robe
And superficies of thy better brightness,
Descend from thine Orbicular Chariot,
Listen the plaints of thy poor Votaries,
It Is Pallas calls, thy Daughter, Jupiter,
Taken from thee by the Lemnian Mulciber,
A Midwife god to the delivery
Of thy most Sacred fertile teeming brain.

Music. Jupiter descends. Hark, these sounds proclaim his willing sweet
descent,
If not full blessings, expect some content.
Iup. What would our Daughter?


Pall. Iust-iudging Jove,
I meditate the suite of humble mortals,
By whose large Scepter all their Fates are swayd,
Adverse or auspicious.

Iup. It Is more then Jupiter
Can do to please 'vm, unsatisfied man
Has in his ends no end, not hels Abyss
Is deeper gulf'd then greedy Avarice,
Ambition finds no Mountain high enough,
For his aspiring Foot to stand upon.
One drinks out all his blessings into surfets,
Another throws vm out as all were his,
And the Gods bound for prodigal supply,
What is he lives content in any kind?
That long incensed nature is now ready
To turn all back into the fruitless Chaos.

Pall. These are two noble Virtues (my dread Sire)
Both Arts and Arms well-wishers unto Pallas.

Iup. How can it be, but they have both abused,
And would (for their ills) make our Justice guilty?
Show them their shames, Minerua: what the young world
In her unstable youth did then produce:
She should grow grauer now, more sage, more wise,
Know Concord, and the harmony of goodness:
But if her old age strike with harsher notes,
We may then think she is too old, and dotes,
Strike by white Art, a Theomanticke power,
Magic Divine, not the Devils horror,
But the delicious Music of the Spheres,
The thrice three Worthies summon back to life:
There let vm see what arts and Arms commixt
(For they had both) did in the worlds broad face
Those that did propagate and beget their fames,
And (for posterity) left lasting names.

Pall. I shall, great Jupiter.


Music and this Song as an Invocation to the nine Muses; (who in the time)
are discovered on the upper Stage, placed by the nine Worthies, and toward the
conclusion descend, each one led by a Muse, the most proper and pertinent to
the person of the Worthy, as Therpsichore with David; Urania, with Joshua, etc.

After the Song Pallas describes them: Then dance and Exeunt.

The first SONG.
MUSES, Usher in those states,
And amongst 'vm choose your mates,
There wants not one, nor one to spare,
For thrice three, both your numbers are.
Learnings Mistress, fair Caliope,
Loud Euterpe, sweet Therpsichore,
Soft Thalia, sad Melpomine,
Pleasant Clio, large Eratho,
High aspiring eyde Urania,
Hony-lingued Polihymnia;
Leave awhile your Thespian Springs,
And usher in those more then Kings:
We call them Worthies, it is their due,
Though long time dead, still live by you.
Enter at the three several doors, the nine Worthies, three after three, whom
(as they enter) PALLAS describes. Pall. These three were Hebrews,
This Noble Duke was he, at whose command
Hiperion rein'd his fiery Coursers in,
And fixed stood over Mount Gilboa,
This Mattathias son, the Macchabee,
Under whose arm no less then Worthies fell.
This the most sweet and sacred Psalmograph,
These of another sort, of much less knowledge,
Little less valor, a Macedonian borne,
Whom afterward the world could scarcely bear,
For his great weight in Conquest, this Troy's best soldier;
This Romes first Caesar; these three of latter times,
And to the present more familiar.
Great Charles of France, and the brave Bulloine Duke,
And this is Britains glory, King'd thirteen times.
Ye*aue fair aspects, more to express Jove's power,
Show you have motion for a Iouiall hour.

The Worthies Dance; and Exeunt. Iup. Were not these presidents for all future
ages?


Schol. But none attaines their glories (King of Stars:)
These are the fames are followed, and pursued,
But never overtaken.

Iup. The Fates below,
The gods arms are not shortened, nor do we shine
With fainter influence; who conquers now,
Makes it his Tyrants Prize, and not his Honors,
Abusing all the blessings of the gods.
Learnings and Arts are Theories, no practiques;
To understand is all they study too:
Men strive to know too much, too little do.

Enter Time. Sold. Plaints are not ours alone (great Jupiter.)
See, Time himself comes weeping.

Time. Who has more cause?
Who more wronged then Time? Time passes all men
With a regardlesse eye, at best, the worst
Expect him with a greedy appetite.
The landed Lord looks for his Quarter day,
The big-bellied Usurer for his teeming gold
That brings him forth the child of Interest:
He that beyond the bounds of heavens large blessing,
Has made a fruitless creature to increase:
Dull earthen Minerals to propagate,
These only do expect and entertain me:
But (being come) they bend their plodding heads,
And while they count their baggs, they let me pass,
Yet instant wish me come about again.
Would Time deserve their thanks, or Jove their praise,
He must turn Time only to Quarter days.
Oh, but my wrongs they are innumerable!
The Lawyer drives me off from Term to Term,
Bids me (and I do it) bring forth my Alathae
My poor child Truth, he sees, and will not see her:
What I could manifest in one clear day,
He still delays a cloudy Iubile.
The Prodigal wastes, and makes me sick with surfets:
The Drunkard (strong in Wine) trips up my heels,
And sets me topsie-turuy, on my head,
Waking my silent passage in the night
With Revels, noise, and Thunder-clapping oaths,
And snorting on my bright Meridian,
And when they think I pass too slowly by:
They have a newfound vapor to expel me,
They smoke me out: ask vm but why they do it,
And he that worst can speak, yet this can say,
I take this whiffe to drive the Time away.
Oh, but the worst of all, women do hate me:
I cannot set impression on their checkes
With all my circular hours, days, months, and years,
But it is wiped off with gloss and pensilrie,
Nothing so hateful, as gray hairs and Time;
Rather no hair at all; it is sins Autumn now:
For those fair Trees that were more fairer cropped,
Or they fall of themselves, or will be lopt:
Even Time it self (to number all his griefs)
Would waste himself unto his ending date:
How many would eternity wish here,
And that the Sun, and Time, and Age might stand
And leave their Annual distinction,
That nature were bedridden, all motion sleep?
Time having then such foes, has cause to weep.
Redress it Jupiter.

Exit Time. Iup. I tell thee, glorious Daughter: and you things
Shut up in wretchedness, the world knew once
His age of happiness; blessed times ownde him,
Till those two ugly ills, Deceit, and Pride,
Made it a perished substance: Pride brought in
Forgetfulness of goodness, Merit, Virtue,
And placed ridiculous Officers in life;
Vainglory, Fashion, Humor, and such toys
That shame to be produced.
The phrenzie of Apparel, that is run mad,
And knows not where to settle Masculine painting;
And the five Starches, mocking the five Senses,
All in their different and ridiculous colors,
Which for their apish and fantastique follies,
I summon to make odious, and will fit vm
With flames of their own colors.

Music striking up a light fantastic Air, those 5. Starches before summoned
come dancing in, and after a ridiculous Strain, White-Starch challenging
precedence, standing upon her right by Antiquity, out of her just anger
presents their pride to vm.

These 5. Starches, White, Blue, Yellow, Green and Red, all properly habited
to express their affected colors.

Enter the five Starches. White-Starch. What, no respect amongst you? must I
wake you
In your forgetful duties? iet before me?
Take place of me? you rude presumptuous gossip:
'Pray who am I? not I the primitive Starch?
You blew-eyde Frokin, looks like fire and brimstone;
You Cawdle-colour, much of the complexion
Of high Shroue-Tuesday Batter, yallow-hammer:
And you my Tanzy face, that shows like Pride,
Served up in Sorrill sops, green Sickness baggage:
And last, thou Red Starch, that wear'st all thy blushes
Under thy cheeks, looks like a strangled Moon calfe,
With all thy blood settled about thy neck,
The Ensign of thy shame, if thou had any;
Know, I Am Starch Protestant, thou Starch Puritan
With the blew nostrill, whose tongue lies in thy nose.

Blew Star. Wicked interpretation!


Yell. Star. I ha known a white-fac't hyppocrite, Lady Sanctity,
A Yellow never came near her, and she has been
A Citizens wife too, starcht like Innocence;
But the Devils pranks not vglier: In her mind
Wears Yellow, huggs it, if her husbands trade
Could bear it, there is the spite: but since she cannot
Wear her own linen Yellow; yet she shows
Her love to it, and makes him wear Yellow hose.
I am as stiff in my opinion
As any Starch amongst you.

Green. Star. I, as you.


Red Star. And I as any.


Blew Star. I scorn to come behind.


Yell Star. Then conclude thus:
When all men's several censures, all the Arguments
The world can bring upon us, are applyde;
The sinne's not in the color, but the pride.

All. Oracle Yellow:


The Straches Dance, and Exeunt. Iup. These are the youngest Daughters of
deceit,
With which the precious time of life's beguiled,
Fooled, and abused; I Will show you straight their Father,
His shapes, his labors, that has vexed the world
From age to age, and tossed it from his first and simple state,
To the foul Center where it now abides;
Look back but into Times, here shall be shown,
How many strange Remooues the world has known. Music.

Loud Music sounding, Jupiter leaves his State; and to show the strange
Remoues of the World, places the Orb, whose figure it bears, in the midst of
the Stage: to whom Simplicity, by order of time, has first access. Enter
Simplicity. Pall. Who Is this, great Jupiter?


Iup. Simplicity: he that had first possession; one that stumbled upon the
world, and never minded it.


Simpl. Hah, hah! I Will go see how the World looks since I stepped aside from't,
there is such heauing and shouing about it, such toyling and moyling; now I
stumbled upon it when I least thought on it.

Takes up the Orb. 'Vds me, it is alterd of one side since I left it: hah,
there is a Milke-maid got with child since, me thinks; what, and a Shepherd
forsworn himself? here is a foul corner: by this light, Subtilty has laid an
egg too, and will go nigh to hatch a Lawyer; this was well foreseen: I Will mar
the fashion on it; so, the egg's broke, and 'tas a yolke* as black as buckrom:
What Is here a this side? Oh, a dainty world; here is one a sealing with his
tooth, and poor man he has but one in all, I was afraid he would have left
it upon the paper, he was so honestly earnest; here are the Reapers singing:
I Will lay mine ear to 'em:


Enter Deceit like a Ranger. Decei. Yonder Is Simplicity whom I hate deadly,
H'as held the world too long; he is but a fool,
A toy will coozen him: if I once fasten on it,
I Will make it such a Nurcery for Hell,
Planting black Souls in it, it shall never be fit
For honesty to set her simples in.

Simpl. Whop! Here Is the coozningst Rascal in a Kingdom,
The Master villain, h'as the thunders property,
For if he come but near the Harvest folks,
His breath's so strong, that he sowres all their bottles,
If he should but blow upon the world now, the stain would never get out
again: I warrant, if he were ripped, one might find a swarm of Usurers in his
liver, a cluster of Scriueners in his kidneys, and his very puddings stuffed with
Bayliffes.


Decei. I must speak fair to the Fool.


Simpl. He makes more near me.


Decei. Less, who has put that load? that carriage
On poor Simlcity? had they no mercy?
Pretty, kind, loving worm; come, let me help it.

Simpl. Keep off, and leave your cogging; foh, how abominably he smells of
controversies, Schisms and Factions! me thinks, I smell forty Religions
together in him, and never a good one; -- his eyes look like false lights,
coozening trap-windowes.


Decei. The world, sweet heart, is full of cares and troubles,
No match for thee, thou art a tender thing,
A harmless quiet thing, a gentle fool,
Fit for the fellowship of Ewes and Rams:
Go, take thine ease and pipe; give me the burden,
The clog, the torment, the heart-breake, the world;
Here Is for thee, Lamb, a dainty Oaten Pipe.

Simpl. Pox a your pipe; if I should dance after your pipe, I should soon
dance to the Devil.


Decei. I think, some serpent sure has lickt him over,
And given him only craft enough to keep,
And go no farther with him; all the rest
Is innocence about him, truth and bluntness.
I must seek other course; for I have learned
Of my Infernal Sire, not to be lazy,
Faint or discouraged at the tenth repulse:
Me thinks that world Simplicity now huggs fast,
Does look as if it should be Deceit's at last.

Exit. Simpl. So, so, l'me glad he is vanished: me thought I had much ado to
keep my self from a smatch of knavery, as long as he stood by me; for
certainly villainy is infectious, and in the greater person the greater poison:
as for example, he that takes but the tich of a Citizen, may take the scab of
a Courtier. Hark, the Reapers begin to sing, they are come nearer me thinks too.


The second SONG.
HAppy times we live to see,
Whose Master is Simplicity:
This is the age where blessings flow,
In joy we reap, in peace we sow;
We do good deeds without delay,
We promise and we keep our day,
We love for virtue, not for wealth,
We drink no healths, but all for health,
We sing, we dance, we pipe, we play,
Our work's continual Holiday,
We live in poor contented sort,
Yet neither beg, nor come at Court,
Simpl. These Reapers have the merriest lives, they have music to all they
do; they will sow with a Tabor, and get Children with a Pipe.


Enter King and Deceit. Decei. Sir, he is a fool, the world belongs to you,
You Are mighty in your worth and your command,
You know to govern, form, make laws, and take
Their sweet and precious penalty, it befits
A mightiness like yours, the world was made
For such a Lord as you, so absolute
A Majesty in all Princely noblenes
As your self is; but to lie vse-lesse now,
Rusty or lazy in a Fools pre-eminence,
It is not for a glorious worth to suffer.

King. Thou'st said enough.


Decei. Now my hope ripens fairly.


Simpl. Here Is a brave glistring Thing looks me in the face,
I know not what to say to it.

Kin. What Is thy name?


Sim. You may read it in my looks: Simplicity.


Kin. What make thou with so great a charge about thee?
Resign it up to me, and be my Fool.

Simp. Troth that is the way to be your Fool indeed;
But shall I have the privilege to fool freely?

Kin. As ever Folly had.


Simpl. I Am glad I Am rid on it.


Decei. Pray let me case your Majesty.


Kin. Thou? hence
Base Sycophant, insinuating hell-hound,
Lay not a finger on it, as thou love
The state of thy whole body; all thy filthy
And rotten flatteries stink in my remembrance,
And nothing is so loath some as thy presence.

Simpl. Sure this will prove a good Prince.


Decei. Still repulst?
I must find ground to thrive on.

Exit Deceit. Simpl. Pray remember now,
You had the world from me clean as a pick,
Only a little smutted a one side,
With a bastard got against it, or such a toy,
No great corruption nor oppression in it,
No knavery, tricks, nor coozenage.

Kin. Thou say true, fool, the world has a clear water.


Simpl. Make as few Laws as you can then to trouble it, the fewer the better;
for always the more laws you make, the more knaves thrive by it, mark it when
you will.


Kin. Thou'st counsel in thee too.


Simpl. A little against knavery, I Am such an enemy to it,
That it comes naturally from me to confound it.

Kin. Look, what are those?


Simpl. Tents, Tents; that part oth' world
Shows like a Fair: but pray take notice on it,
There Is not a Bawdy-Boothe amongst 'em all,
You have 'em white and honest as I had 'em,
Look that your Laundresses pollute 'em not.

Kin. How pleasantly the Countries lie about,
Of which we are sole Lord: what is that in the middle?

Simpl. Looks like a point, you mean a very prick?


Kin. I, that, that.


Simpl. It Is the beginning of Amsterdam: they say the first brick there was
laid with fresh Cheese and Cream; because mortar made of Lime and hair was
wicked, and committed fornication.


Enter a Land-Captaine and Deceit as a Soldier. Kin. Peace, who are these
approaching?


Simpl. Blustering fellows; the first's a Soldier, he looks just like March.


Decei. Captain, it is you that have the bloody sweats,
You venture life and limbs it is you that taste
The stings of thirst and hunger,

L. Capt. There thou have namde
Afflictions sharper then the enemies swords.

Decei. Yet lets another carry away the World,
Of which, by right, you are the only Master,
Stand curtsing for your pay at your return
Perhaps with wooden legs to every Groom
That dares not look full right upon a sword,
Nor upon any wound, or slit of honor?

L. Cap. No more, I Will be my self; I that uphold
Countries and Kingdoms, must I halt down right,
And be propt up with part of mine own strength,
The least part too? Why, have not I the power
To make my self stand absolute of my self,
That keep up others?

Kin. How cheeres our noble Captain?


L. Cap. Our own Captain,
No more a hireling; your great Foe's at hand,
Seek your defense elsewhere, for mine shall fail you,
I Will not be fellow-yoak't with death and danger
All my life time, and have the World kept from me,
March in the heat of Summer in a bath,
A furnace girt about me, and in that agony,
With so much fire within me, forced to wade
Through a cool river, practicing in life
The very pains of hell, now scorcht, now shiuering,
To call diseases early into my bones,
Before I Have age enough to entertain 'em:
No, he that has desire to keep the World,
Let him even take the sour pains to defend it.

Kin. Stay, Man of Merit, it belongs to thee,
I cheerfully resign it, all my Ambition
Is but the quiet calm of peaceful days;
And that fair good, I know, thy arm will raise.

L. Cap. Though now an absolute master; yet to thee
Ever a faithful servant.

Decei. Giue't me sir to lay up, I am your Treasurer,
In a poor kind.

Exit King. L. Cap. In a false kind I grant thee:
How many vilde complaints from time to time
Has been put up against thee? they have wearied me
More then a Battle sixteen hours a' fighting,
I Have heard the ragged Regiment so curse thee,
I looked next day for Leprosy upon thee,
Or puffes of pestilence as big as Wens,
When thou would drop asunder, like a thing
Inwardly eaten, thy skin only whole*
Auaunt, defrauder of poor soldiers rights,
Campe-Caterpiller, hence; or I will send thee
To make their rage a breakfast.

Decei. Is it possible?
Can I yet set no footing in the World?
I Am angry, but not weary; I Will hunt out still:
For, being Deceit, I bear the Devils name,
And he is known seldom to give ore his game.

Exit Deceit. Simpl. Troth, now the World begins to be in Hucksters handling;
by this light, the Boothes are full of Cutlers, and yonder is two or three
queanes going to vittaile the camp: hah, would I were whipped, if yonder be not
a Parsons daughter with a soldier between her legs, bag and baggage.


Sold. Now it is the Soldiers time, great Jupiter,
Now give me leave to enter on my fortunes,
The Worlds our own.

Iup. Stay, beguild thing, this time
Is many ages discrepant from thine,
This was the season when desert was stoopt to,
By greatness stoopt to, and acknowledged greatest;
But in thy time now, desert stoopes it self
To every baseness, and makes Saints of Shadows:
Be patient, and observe, how times are wrought,
Till it comes down to thine that rewards naught.

Chambers shot off: Enter a Sea-Captaine and Deceit as a Purser. Omnes. Hah?
what is the news?


Sea Cap. Be ready if I call to give fire to the Ordnance.


Simpl. Bless us all', herre's one spits fire as he comes, he will go nigh
to mull the world with looking on it, how his eyes sparckle?


Decei. Shall the Land-Captaine, sir, usurp your right,
Yours that try thousand dangers to his one,
Rocks, shelues, gulfs, quick*sands, hundred hundred horrors,
That makes the Land-men tremble when they are told;
Besides the enemies encounter,

Sea Cap. Peace Purser, no more, I Am vexed, I Am kindled.
You, Land Captain, quick, deliver.

L. Cap. Proud Salt-Rouer, thou have the salutation of a thief.


Sea Cap. Deliver, or I Will thunder thee a pieces,
Make night within this hour, even at high noone,
Belch't from the Canon: dare expostulate
With me? my fury? What Is thy merit, Land-worme,
That mine not centuples?
Thy lazy Marches and safe-footed battles
Are but like dangerous dreams to my encounters:
Why, every minute the Deep gapes for me,
Beside the fiery throats of the loud fight,
When we go to it, and our fell Ordnance play,
It Is like the figure of a latter day.
Let me but give the word, night begins now,
Thy breath and prize both beaten from thy body:
How dare thou be so slow? Not yet -- then --

L. Cap. Hold.


Decei. I knew 'twould come at last.


Sea Cap. For this resign,
Part thou shall have still, but the greatest mine.
Only to us belongs the golden sway,
Th'Indies load us; thou live but by thy pay.

Decei. And shall your Purser help you?


Sea Cap. No in sooth Sir,
Coward and coozner; how many Sea-Battels
Have thou compounded to be cabled up?
Yet when the fights were ended, who so ready
To cast sick soldiers and dismembered wretches,
Ouer-boord, instantly, crying, away
With things without Arms; it is an ougly sight;
When troth thine own should have been off by right:
But thou lay'st safe within a wall of hemp,
Telling the guns, and numbering 'em with farting:
Leave me, and speedily; I Will have thee ram'd
Into a Culuerin else, and thy rear flesh
Shot all into potcht eggs.

Decei. I will not leave yet;
Destruction plays in me such pleasant strains,
That I would purchase it with any pains.

Exit Deceit. Sea Cap. The motion's worthy, I will join with thee,
Both to defend and enrich Majesty.

Simpl. Hoyda* I can see nothing now for ships;
Hark a the Mariners.

The Mariners Song.
HEy, the World's ours, we have got the time by chance;
Let us the^ carouse and sing, for the very house does skip and dance
That we do now live in:
We have the merriest lives,
We have the fruitfulst Wives Of all men.
We never yet came home,
But the first hour we come,
We find them all with child again.
A shout within: then, Enter two Mariners with Pipe and Can dancing severally
by turns, for joy the World is come into their hands, then Exeunt. Simpl. What
a crew of mad Raskalls are these, they are ready at every Can to fall into the
Haddocks mouths, the World begins to love Lap now.


Enter a Flamin and Deceit like a -- Flam. Peace and the brightness of a holy
love,
Reflect their beauties on you.

Sea Cap. Whose this?


L. Capt. A Reverend shape.


Sea Cap. Some Scholar.


L. Capt. A divine one.


Sea Cap. He may be what he will for me, fellow Captain;
For I have seen no Church these five and twenty years;
I mean as people ought to see it, inwardly.

Flam. I have a virtuous sorrow for you Sir,
And it is my special duty to weep for you.
For to enjoy one world as you do there,
And be forgetful of another Sir;
Oh, of a better millions of degrees!
It is a frailty and infirmity
That many tears must go for; all too little.
What is it to be the Lord of many battles,
And suffer to be ouer-run within you?
Abroad to conquer, and be slaves at home,
Remember there is a battle to be fought,
Which will undo you, if it be not thought.
And you must leave that World, leave it betimes,
That reformation may weep of the crimes:
There Is no indulgent hand the World should hold,
But a strict graspe, for making sin so bold.
We should be careless of it, and not fond,
Of things so held, there is the best command.

Sea-Capt. Grave Sir, I give thy words their deserved honor,
And to thy Sacred charge freely resign,
All that my Fortune, and the Age made mine.

Simpl. If the world be not good now, 'twill never be good,
There Is no hope on it.

Dec. I have my wishes here, my sanctified Patron,
I Will first fill all the Chests in the Vestry,
Then there is a secret Vault for Great men's Legacies.

Flam. Art not confounded yet? struck blind or crippled,
For thy abusiue thought, thou horrid hypocrite?
Are these the fruits of thy long Orisons
Three hours together, of thy nine Lectures weekly,
Thy sowning at the hearing of an oath,
Scarce to be fetched again? Away, depart,
Thou white-fac't Devil, Author of Heresy,
Schisms, Factions, Controversies: now I know thee
To be Deceit it self, wrought in by Simony,
To blow corruption upon Sacred virtue.

Dec. I made my self sure here. Church fail me too?
I thought it mere impossible by all reason,
Since there is so large a bridge to walk upon
'Twixt negligence and Superstition.
Where could one better piece up a full vice?
One service lazy, the other ouer-nice:
There had been twixt, room enough for me.
I will take root, or run through each degree.

Exit Deceit. Simpl. Whoope, here is an alteration: by this hand, the Ships are
all turned to Steeples; and the Bells ring for joy, as if they would shake down
the Pinacles. How! the Masons are at work yonder, the free Masons, I swear
it is a free time for them: Ha! there is one building of a Chapel of ease: Oh,
he is loath to take the pains to go to Church: Why, will he have it in's house,
when the Proverb says, The Diuel's at home? These great rich men must take
their ease in their Inn: they will walk you a long mile or two to get a stomach
for their victuals; but not a piece of a furlong to get an appetite to their
prayers.


Flourish. Enter King, a Lawyer, and Deceit, as n Pettifogger. Law. No more,
the case is clear.


Simpl. *Slid, who have we here?


Law: He that pleades for the world, must fall
To his business roundly, most gracious
And illustrious Prince, thus stands the case:
The world in Greek is Cosmos, in Latin, Mundus,
In Law-French Lamonde, we leave the Greek,
And come to the Law-French, or glide upon the Latin,
All Is one business; then vnde mundus? shall we come to that?
Nonne diriuatur a munditia?
The word cleanness, Mundus, quasi mundus, clean,
And what can cleanse or mundifie the world
Better then Law, the cleerer of all Cases,
The Sovereign pill or potion that expels
All poisonous, rotten, and infectious wrongs,
From the vexed bosom of the Commonwealth?
There Is a familiar phrase implies thus much,
I Will put you to* your purgation; that is,
The Law shall cleanse you: Can the sick world then
Tossed up and down from time to time, repose it self
In a Physicians hand better improu'd?
Upon my life and reputation,
In all the Courts I come at, be assured
I Will make it clean.

Simpl. Yes, clean away, I warrant you, we shall never see it again.


Law. I grant, my Pills are bitter, I, and costly;
But their effects are rare, Divine, and wholesome,
There Is an Excomunicate Capiendo,
Capias post K. and an Ne exeat Regno.
I grant, there is bitter Egrimony in vm,
And Antimony, I put money in all still:
And it works preciously, who eiects injuries,
Makes vm belch forth in vomit but the Law?
Who cleeres the Widows case, and after gets her
If she be wealthy: but the Advocate? -- then to conclude,
If you will have Mundus, a Mundo, clean, firm,
Give him to me, I Will scowre him every Term.

Flam. I part with it gladly, take it into thy trust,
So will it thrive, as thy intent is just.

Dec. Pity your Trampler, Sir, your poor Solliciter.


Law. Thee! Infamy to our profession,
Which, without wrong to truth, next the Divine one,
Is the most grave and hono^rable Function
That gives a Kingdom blessed: but thou, the poison,
Disease, that grows close to the heart of Law,
And make rash censurers think the sound part perished,
Thou foul Eclipse, that interposing Equity,
As the dark Earth, the Moon, make the world Judge,
That blackness and corruption have possessed
The siluer-shine of Justice; when it is only
The smoke ascending from thy poys'nons ways*
Cos*nage, Demurs, and fifteen Terme-delayes:
Yet hold thee, take the Muck on it, that's thine own,
The Devil and all; but the fair Fame and honor
Of righteous actions, good men's prayers and wishes,
Which is that glorious portion of the World
The noble Lawyer strives for; that thy bribery,
Thy double-handed gripe shall never reach to:
Wit fat and filthy gain thy Lust may feast,
But poor men's curses beat thee from the rest.

Decei. I Will feed upon the Muck on it, that a while
Shall satisfy my longings, Wealth is known
The absolute step to all promotion.

King. Let this be called the Sphere of harmony,
In which being met, lets all move mutually.

Omnes. Fair Love is in the motion, Kingly love.


In this last Dance, (as an ease to memory,) all the former Remooues* come
close together, the Devil and Deceit aiming at the World, but the World
remaining now in the Lawyers possession, expressing his reverend and noble
acknowledgement to the absolute power of Majesty resignes it loyally to it is
Royal Government: Majesty, to Valor; Ualour, to Law again; Law to Religion;
Religion, to Sovereignty; where it firmly and fairly settles; The Law
confounding Deceit, and the Church, the Devil. Flam. Times suffer changes, and
the world has been
Vexed with Remooues; but when his glorious peace
Firmly and fairly settles, here is his place,
Truth his defenor, and Majesty his grace:
We all acknowledge it belongs to you.

All. Only to you, Sir.


They all deliver the World up to the King. Flam. Regis ad exemplum totus
componitur orbis. -- Which shows,
That if the World form it self by the King,
It Is fit the Former should command the thing.

Decei. This is no place for us.


Devil. Depart, away,
I thought all these had been corrupted Evils,
No court of Virtues, but a guard of Devils.

Exeunt Deceit and the Devil. K. How blessed am I in Subjects! here are those
That make all Kingdoms happy, worthy Soldier,
Fair Churchman, and thou uncorrupted Lawyer,
Virtues great miracle, that have redeemed
All Justice from her ignominious name.

Simpl. You forget me, Sir.


K. What, Simplicity!
Who thinks of virtue, cannot forget thee.

Simpl. I marry, my masters: now it looks like a brave world, indeed, how
ciuilly those fair Ladies go yonder! by this hand they are neither trimmed
nor trussed, nor ponyarded: Wonderment! O, yonder is a knot of
fine-sharpe-needle-bearded Gallants, but that they wear Stammell Cloakes (me
thinks) in stead of Scarles: 'Slid, what is he that carries out two Custards now
under the Porters long nose? oh, he leaves a bottle of Wine in the Lodge: and
all is pacified, cry mercy.


K. Continue but thus watchful o*r your selves,
That the great cunning Enemies, Deceit
And his too mighty Lord, beguile you not;
And y' are the precious ornaments of State,
The glories of the world, fellows to virtues,
Masters of honest and well-purchas'd fortunes,
And I am fortunate in your partnership;
But if you ever make your Hearts the houses
Of fals-hood and corruption, ugliness it self
Will be a beauty to you; and less pointed at:
Spots in deformed faces, are scarce noted,
Fair cheeks are stainde, if never so little blotted.

All. Ever the constant servants to great Virtue.


K. Her love inhabit you.


Exeunt. Iup. Now sons of vexation.
Envy, and discontent, what blame lay you
Upon these times now? Which does merit most
To be condemned, your dullness, or the Age?
If now you thrive not, Mercury shall proclaim
You Are vndeseruers, and cry down your Fame:
Be poor still, Scholar, and thou wretch despised,
If in this glorious time thou can not prosper:
Upon whose breast Noble employments sit,
By Honors hand, in golden Letters writ:
Nay, where the Prince of Nobleness Himself,
Proves ou^ Minerua's valiant'st hopefull'st Son,
And early in his Spring puts Armor on.
Unite your worth's, and make of two, one brother,
And be each one perfection to the other.
Scholar and Soldier must both shut in one,
That makes the absolute and complete man:
So, now into the World, which if hereafter
You ever tax of foul ungrateful crimes,
Your dullness I must punish, not the times.

Sold. Scholar, Honor to mighty Jupiter.


Jupiter ascends. Sold. The World's in a good hand now, if it hold, brother.


Schol. I hope for many ages.


Sold. Fare thee well then,
I Will over, yonder to the most glorious VVarres
That ever famde Christian Kingdom.

Schol. And I Will settle
Here, in a Land of a most glorious Peace
That ever made joy fruitful: where the Head
Of him that rules, to Learnings fair renown,
Is doubly decked with Laurel, and a Crown:
And both most worthily.

Sold: Give me thy hand:
Prosperity keep with thee.

Schol. And the glory
Of Noble actions bring white hairs upon thee:
Present our wish with reverence to this Place:
For here't must be confirmed, or 'tas no grace.

Exeunt severally. EPILOGVE.
GENTLEMEN,
WE must confess, that we have vented ware
Not always vendible: Masks are more rare
Then Plays are common; at most, but twice a year
In their most glorious shapes do they appear.
Which if you please, accept, we will keep in store
Our debted loves, and thus entreat you more,
Inuert the Proverb now, and suffer not,
That which is seldom seen, be soon forgot.
FINIS.

