Papisto-Mastix, OR THE PROTESTANTS Religion defended.

Showing briefly when the great compound heresy of Popery first sprange; how
it grew piece by piece till Antichrist was disclosed; how it has been consumed
by the breath of Gods mouth: and when it shall be cut down and withered.

BY WILLIAM MIDDLETON Bachelor of Divinity, and Minister of Hardwicke in
Cambridge-shire.

Luke 16.31. If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be
persuaded, though one rise from the dead again.

AT LONDON, Printed by T. P. for Arthur Johnson, and are to be sold at his shop
near the great North door of Paul's, at the sign of the white Horse. 1606.

Venerabili viro D. Humfredo Tendallo Collegij Reginalis apud Cantabrigienses
Magistro, reliquisque socijs eiusdem Collegij amicis and fratribus in Domino
obseruandis.
PApistomastix iste meus, me pene inuito and reluctante, se offert patrocinio
vestro, nam cum probe conscius sine meae tenuitatis, nolui proprio iudicio
tanquam sorex perire, verum cum ex aduerso intelligam vos, tanquam apes bonarum
artium, aculeos grauitatis clementiae melle temperatos gestare: appareat per me
licet, and se velo vestrae humanitatis operiat, ne minorem curam religionis,
quam famae and existimationis habuisse videar. Missus est ad me Dialogus iste
ab alumno veteri collegij vestri, cuius nomen argenteo poculo incisum apud vos
manet, nec id modo, sed ab eodem etiam sum rogatus vt futilibus argutijs
personati nescio cuius Papistae responderem. Ideoque adhibui eam, quam in
aduersa valetudine potui, diligentiam; vt manus remissas, and soluta genua
erigerem, and rectas orbitas facerem pedibus eius, ne claudus deflecteret de
via, sed sanaretur potius, Si mihi quoque, in hac lucta, manus, pedes, and
genua defuisse videantur, vestrae humanitatis erit Mineruae meae, quam Dei
prouidentia rusticanam esse voluit, non modo dare, sed alijs etia^, si qui
forti iniquiores futuri sunt, venia^ extorquere. Aeternus Deus, pater Domini
nostri Jesus Christi, vos, fratresque vestros, quos Academia peperit, ecclesia
nutrit innumerabiles, ita fulciat spiritu sancto suo: vt patentes papistarum
gulae, occlusae tandem and constrictae, sorbere simul and flare, vorare and
vomere nec possint, nec audeant.

Vester in Coelesti ministerio conseruus qualiscunque Guiliel: Middleton.

Ierem. cap. 5.26. Among my people are found wicked persons that lay wait, as
he that sets snares, they have made pits to catch men.

Tertull. de praescript. aduers. haeretic. Auolent quantum volent paleae leuis
fidei quocunque afflatu tentationum; eo purior massa frumenti in horrea domini
reponetur,

Let the chafe of a wavering faith, fly away as far as it will with every
puff of temptations, so shall the grain that is laid up in the Garner of the
Lord, be the purer.

Ierem. cap. 8.17. Behold, I will send serpents and cockatrices among you,
which will not be charmed, and they shall sting you, says the Lord.

Tertul. de praescript. aduersus haereticos. Haeretici firmos fatigant,
infirmos capiunt, medios cum scrupulo dimittunt, Heretics weary the strong,
catch the weak as in a snare, and the middle sort they leave scrupulous.

The Fore-speech of Master I. S. to the Author.
IT was my chance (good Master M.) not long since to be encountered by a
learned Gentleman in the controversy between the Papists and us, whose
arguments I could not answer, to my great grief, and offense of diverse there
present; I then wished your presence, and still desired your help for my
delivery out of that Labirinth whereinto he brought me. I know that Quaedam
falsa maiorem habent speciem probabilitatis, quam quaedam vera, (as the
Philosopher says,) and therefore I write not this as wavering in my faith: for
who so shall stagger for every argument whereunto he cannot make a learned
solution, must either be a profound Clerk, or of no faith at all; but for my
better satisfaction, and preparation unto the like encounter, let me entreat vt
mihi lumen de tuo lumine accendas. For accomplishing whereof, I will refer
you to the discourse following, wherein for avoiding of the tedious repetition
of inquam, and inquit, I have set down his oppositions under the name of Pa.
And my Answers thereunto under the name of Pro.

The Authors Answer.
SIr, I see no cause yet, why I should think otherwise of you, than I have
done ever since I first knew you. We were brought up both together in the same
University the same College, the same Chamber, and under the same Tutor, and
it has pleased you ever since to acknowledge me as one of your poor friends,
and so have I acknowledged you as my christian brother; and therefore my full
trust in the mercy of God is, that now in our age, after so long trial one of
another, Popery shall not be able to part us. The Gentleman that encountered
with you, has showed little learning, and less wit in this encounter, but if
every finger and toe that he has, could write books, and every hair of his
head, speak parables: yet Rome will fall do what he can, and the ruins of it
shall never be reedified. It is your modesty that makes you unfit, but not
unable to answer such popish garrulitie, and that cannot grieve you, if you be
wise, nor offend other, unless they be fools, turbantur quia non
illuminantur, says Austine, and therefore they that find themselves troubled
with such blind arguments, as this Gentleman of yours does afford us, may well
be thought to have little light in them: do but look over my answer, and
confer my inquam, with his inquit, without partiality, and then a Gods name
feed in that pasture you find best fenced. God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ so guide and strengthen you and your family against Iezabel and her
Prophets, that when your day of reckoning shall come, you may answer
cheerfully with the prophet Esaias, Lo, here am I, and the children which God
has given me.

The Praeface to the godly Christian Reader.
GOod Christian Reader, though the carcass of Popery, Cosmog.
the better to avoid the heat of truth, sit down and shadow it self, like
the Sciopodes in Munster, with one great leg of traditions: yet will it not
be amiss, if I slit or cleave that one great leg into two, namely,
Traditions in general, and the Romish primacie in particular, that it may
stand up the better to thy view, and so make a more open show of it own
ugliness.

Touching the first, I am not ignorant how eagerly the ancient Fathers be
urged upon us, and how easily their authority may be avoided, as being no fast
friends to Popery in this argument: yet, me thinks, the children of Abraham
should hear the words of their own Father, rather than any other father that
ever put pen to paper, namely, they Luke 16.29, 31.
have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. And again, if they hear
not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded though one rise
from the dead.

What will the Papists, nay, what can they, or any man else living say to this?
will they tell us that Moses and the prophets be hard to understand, and that
they contain not an absolute and full doctrine of life and death, unless they
be peeced out with traditions? I am sure the rich glutton in hell durst not say
so much, and yet it is to be presumed that he would have said so, if he had not
understood that it was not worth the propou^ding in Abraham's presence; thus
much he was bold to reply to the first part of Abraham's speech, nay, father
Abraham, but if one come to my brethren from the dead, they will amend their
lives, but the second part which exclusiuely refers them to Moses and the
Prophets, does so stop his mouth, that he had no whit further to plead for his
own brethren. It may be maruailed that he spoke nothing, neither of the
imperfection of the scripture, nor of Jewish traditions, nor any such thing,
but only of such apparitions from the dead; verily, if any such plea had been
of any moment, he would not have failed to do his best endeavor for his
brethren, and to put Abraham in mind of the imperfection of his answer.

Howbeit, that which he then durst not do, is thinking it to be little worth,
is now propounded and urged by the Papists the Sons and heirs of the rich
Glutton, who even in despite of Abraham, presume to reply, that it is not
enough to hear Moses and the Prophets, and that they will hear such as rise
from the dead. Oh, take heed of such desperate fellows as these be, that
regard not the doctrine of Abraham, and make themselves wiser now in shifting
off the force of his speech, than Hell it self was in the days of our
Savior, belike hell was not so wise then, as it is now, for now our Popish
Gluttons can tell us new tales of the darkness, of the imperfectnes, of the
ambiguitie, of the corruptions of the Scripture, they can prate of traditions,
and unwritten verities which are not to be found in Moses and the Prophets:
howbeit, let him that has any regard of his salvation consider with himself,
whether is the surer and the safer way to believe them, or to believe Abraham,
for it is impossible to believe both.

Captain Stapleton Lib. 12. Cap. 8.
tells us, after this wise manner, that it is one thing [to hear Moses and the
Prophets,] which Abraham requires, and another thing, [to hear them only:]
but what does he else in so doing, but show himself more impudent than the
Devil, who, when our Savior says in Matthew Math. 4.10. and Luke 4.8.
, It is written, thou shall worship thy lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve, durst not be so saucy as to tell him, that it is one thing to serve
God, as it is commanded in Deuteronomy. 6.13. and 10.20.
Deuteronomie, and another thing to serve him only, I am sure Cyprian Lib. 2.
epist. 3.
, where God himself from heaven Math. 17 5.
says, Ipsum audite, is bold to add the word, solum, twice together in one
place, yet never durst any quarrelling heretic tell Cyprian, as Stapleton
tells us, Aliud est Mosen and Prophetas audire, aliud solos audire, It is one
thing to hear them, and another thing to hear them only; but to be short,
do but look the words of Abraham Cap. 16.29.31.
in Saint Lukes Gospel, and consider of the circumstances with an upright
religious heart, and then blame me if thou find not that the word only, may
as rightly be added here in Luke, as either Christ or Cyprian have added it in
Matthew.

Stapleton goes on still, and bears us in hand against Abraham, that if
Moses and the Prophets, were only to be heard, then the new Testament should
be excluded as superfluous; but by Stapletons good leave, that's neither so, nor
so, for Deuteronomy. 18 15.
Moses himself wills us to hear Christ in all things whatsoever he should
say unto us, so does Act. 3.22
Peter teach us out of Moses, and Act. 7.37.
Saint Stephen likewise witnesses, that Moses said unto the children of
Israel, that the lord their God should raise up unto them a Prophet who^ they
should hear, therefore Moses in the old Testament has taught us to hear Christ
in the new; and if thou make question of the writings of the Apostles, 2. cor.
5.19.20.
Paul says, they were the Ambassadors of Christ, and preached the word of
reconciliation in Christ's stead: if this yet stop not Stapletons mouth, then
let him know that the new Testament is not an addition, but an exposition of
the old, but such an exposition as all the world together could not have made
without the extraordinary inspiration of the spirit of Christ: and here, for
the full determination of this point, hearken (I pray thee) what their own
Lyranus tells them in his Commentaries upon Luke, Habent Mosen qui docuit
moralia and agenda, habent prophetas qui docuerunt mystica and credenda, and
ista sufficient ad salutem, ideo sequitur, audiant illos, They have Moses
(says he) who has taught moral things that ought to be done, they have the
Prophets, who have taught mystical things that ought to be believed, and these
be sufficient to salvation, therefore it follows, hear them.

Thus is the doctrine of insufficiency of the scripture, and necessity of
Traditions condemned to death, and must go to the place of execution, unless
a better pardon be sued out for it, than any that ever I could yet see
registered in their Popish Cronicles; howbeit, we have not yet done with this
question of traditions, for there is no man so careless of his salvation, that
will set up an Altar to these unknown fictions, as Act. 17.23.
the Athenians did to the unknown God, before he know how many they be, how
few they be, what they be, and so consider with himself deliberately, whether
they be fish, or flesh, or good red herring; herein then we call upon them for
resolution, and it is good reason we should so do, till we know whether they
dream, or lie waking.

This makes a sort of them to uncase slouens, and absurdly to confess
themselves to be no better than heretics, Lib. 3. ca. 3. fund. 4.
Canus a great Papist tells us out of Origin and Hilarie, that Moses did not
write the secrecies of the law, but delivered them to Joshua by Tradition, and
so infers, that the Apostles committed the secrecies of the Gospel by tradition
to a few wise and perfect men. And Bellarmine, as great a Papist as lives this
day, Bellar. de verbo non script. lib. 4 Cap. 8.
concludes out of Paul, that all things are not to be opened to all, but some
things must be 1. Cor. 2.6.
reserved, perfectis and sapientibus; yet I doubt whether any such perfect wise
men are to be found in the world. O you perfect wise men of Rome, or of
Rhemes, or where else soever you nestle your selves in the world! can your
perfect wisdoms do so much for us, as to set down these Traditions in
black and white in a perfect Catalogue, that if any controversy arise about
this or that tradition, your black and white Book may resolve us? No, no, you
cannot do it: and therefore you tell us you may not do it in the hearing of
such simple fellows as we be, because Paul has commanded the contrary;
Sapientiam loquimur inter perfectos, is your warrant to hide these mysteries
from such poor fools as we be. But wot you what? this very allegation shall
be our warrant to pronounce, that you are perfect wise heretics, such as
Basilides, Carpocrates, Cerinthus, Valentinus, and Marcion: look in Iren. lib.
1. cap. 23. and 24. and lib. 3. cap. 2.
Irenaeus and Tertul. de prescript. aduers. haeret.
Tertullian, and there you shall find that I do not be-lye you Math. 10 27.
; our Savior wills his Disciples to speak in the open light, and to preach
on the tops of the houses, and himself confirmed this plain and open dealing
by his own practice Ioh. 18.20.
, [I spoke openly to the world, says he, I ever taught in the Synagogue, and
in the temple, where the Jews always resort, and in secret have I said
nothing.]

These places be inanswerable, and therefore some that be less wayward in this
point than their fellows, as for example, Aduers. Brent.
Petrus a Soto, In Catech. cap. 5.
Canisius, In Pan. lib. 4. cap. 100. and in fine fabulae. 6.
Lindanus, Part. 3.
Peresius, and others, reckon up a jolly company of traditions, as namely,
[the oblation of the sacrifice, their annealing, their praying to the dead, and
for the dead, their primacie of Rome, their hallowing of Fonts, their five
pretended Sacraments, the Merits of Works, their satisfactions, their tallying
up of their sins to the Priest, their worshipping of Images, their
set-fasting days, their holy time of Lent, their oblations for the dead, their
Peter's being at Rome, their real presence, their half Communion, their
reservation and adoration, their private mass, their shrifts, their
satisfactio^s, their indulge^ces, their purgatory, their single life of
Priests,] and such like, of which they say, like downright Squiers, that they
are not grounded upon the holy scripture, and that by scripture they cannot be
defended; and so says this our Papist of most of them even in Sect. 5.
this Dialogue, and therefore howsoever they trouble us with some few
light-footed allegations of Scripture: yet their own consciences tell them,
that the Scriptures will fail them in all these several questions. Would
thou know then what remains to be done? Mary I will tell thee, let all their
rich Gluttons in hell, or out of hell, dead or alive; nay, let the Devil
himself say, and do what they will or can, yet we will, and so do thou,
follow the counsel of Abraham; we will, and so do thou, hear Moses and the
Prophets, as he teaches us, and not such as will us to repose our trust in
unwritten and unsealed Traditions.

And here, to pass over to the other point I promised to speak of, let it
please thee to remember, who was the first founder of Traditions, namely,
Papias a Chiliast, whom Hist. eccles. lib. 2. 15. and lib. 3. 36.
Eusebius calls, a publisher of Paradoxes, and strange and fabulous
doctrines, an inconsiderate mistaker of the disputations of the Apostles, and a
man of small judgment, yet this is the man that laid the first stone of Peter's
being at Rome, and so consequently of the Papal Primacie, and where Peter 1.
Pet. 5.13.
says, the Church that is at Babylon saluteth you: this is the first that ever
told us that he means Rome, a worthy foundation, no doubt, to build religion
upon, and yet when he says that [ Rome is Babylon,] he puts us all in mind to
Apo. 18.2.4.
come out of Rome, the habitation of Devils, and the hold of all foul spirits,
and a cage of every unclean and hateful bird.

And here it is a world to see how the Papists labor to avoid the force of
this, and such like Prophecies. This (say they) must be meant of the
heathenish, not of the Christian Babylon. And I say again, it neither must nor
can be so meant, for who will yield, that Saint John should set down that by
way of Prophecy, which was prophesied already by Cap. 7.
Daniel long before either Saint John was banished, or Christ was incarnate?
Again, if happily Daniel be otherwise understood, why should the holy ghost
speak of the City of Rome, rather than Corinth, Philippos, Colosse,
Thessalonica, great Cities of Greece? or of Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis,
Philadelphia, Laodicea, to which Cap. 1.4.
the Revelation is dedicated? or the City of Ephesus, where it is thought
Saint John was Bishop? were not all these Cities as heathenish as Rome, and
better known to Saint John so to be, than Rome was? What? was Saint John made
a Prophet to speak against heathenish Rome which he never saw, nor came near
to, and no prophet at all to speak of the heathenishnes of so many Cities that
he had seen so often, and was so well acquainted withal? Moreover, if this
might be yielded unto, yet why should heathenish Rome be figured in the person
of a gawdie scarlet colored whorish woman, and be counted the mother of all
the filthiness, whoredoms, and abominations of the earth: whereas indeed
there was never a more manly, and more continent government in the world?

In the Cap. 7.
prophecy of Daniel the chief Kingdoms and Empires of the earth, are
described unto us by the names of Lions, and Bears, and Leopards, and strong,
terrible, and fearful beasts with iron teeth and nails of brass; and shall
we think that the most continent, most just, most strong, most terrible, and
courageous government that ever was in the world, should be compared by the
holy ghost to a fine dainty Dame, to a tender nice whore, to a proud
shameless whore, that made open show of the filthiness of her Fornication?
No, no, this very Book of Saint John's Revelation Apoc, 13, 2.
does compare the Roman Emperor to a Leopard with Bears feet, and a Lions
mouth, and the Papists themselves do so understand it.

And here observe, that beside the first beast which was like a Leopard, there
is another there spoken of, which having two horns like a lamb, spoke like a
Dragon, and did all the first beast could do, and more too, even in his sight
and presence. Now, what can this second beast be, but the [Lambe skinned] and
[Dragon tongued] Prelacy of Rome? and what other beast did the Roman Empire
ever yield unto, but this only? whereof it follows, that the first beast is
not only the heathenish Emperors, but the succession in generality, for the
heathenish never yielded any of their heads to be cured by the Romish Dragon;
nay mark further where the Apoc. cap. 18.
holy Ghost teaches, that this first beast that has seven heads and ten
horns, is ridden by the scarlet colored whore of Baylon, which cannot be
understood singly of the heathenish Emperors, but generally of the Empire of
Rome, which at length yielded his back to be sadled and ridden by that
Babylonish Harlot, which Cap. 19.20.
is afterward called a false prophet. Wherefore (as I said before) so I say
again, come Reu. 18.4
out of Babylon, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive
not of her plagues. O merciful Father, open our eyes that we may see the
ugliness of Popery in the clear glass of thy holy word, and still teach us
by the continual experience of thy gracious favor and protection, to take heed
of the savage designements of the Romish Dragon. Hardwicke the 28. of January,
1606.

(...) ad Lectorem.
Corporis angusto mihi pes fuit alter in antro,
Men's quoque vi socia corporis, aegra fuit
Ne pigeat tamen hunc librum percurrere, patris
aegroti sanus filius esse potest.
Debilis aura vias solet exiccare palustres,
Et lapides magnos guttula parua cauat.
The Contents.
Sectio. 1. Questions touching the Church, Scriptures, Fathers, and Traditions
in general by way of Introduction. Sectio. 2. Of the Lords day, eating blood,
marriage within degrees of affinity, polygamy, and punishming theft; whether
they be determined by scripture, or Tradition. Sectio. 3. and 4. Of Traditions
in general. Sectio. 5. Whether the Fathers, holding certain points of
Papistrie, be therefore excluded out of our Church. Sectio. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. Of
praying for the dead. Sectio. 11. 12. 13. 14. Of Purgatory. Sectio. 15. 16.
17. 18. Of Transubstantiation. Sectio. 19. Of prayer to Saints. Sectio. 20. 21.
22 Of vowing chastity, and Priests marriage. Sectio. 23. Of the errors of the
ancient Fathers. Sectio. 24. Of Justification by merit of our own works, and
the superabundant works of the Saints. Sectio. 25. Of free will to merit
heaven. Sectio. 26. Of the power of the keys over the quick and the dead.
Sectio. 27. A Conclusion containing certain general inducements, that Popery
is the true way that leads blind men and fools to heaven, so as they cannot
err: and that our Religion is an inexplicable Labirinth, that has no
direction, which is plain blasphemy against God the author and inspirer of
the Scripture.
A BRIEF ANSWER to a Popish Dialogue between two Gentlemen; the one a
Papist, the other a Protestant.
The Dialogue. Sectio I.
PApist. Do you believe the Catholic Church planted first by the Apostles in
Iudaea, and afterward dispersed through ye whole world, which Church has ever
since remained on earth, and shall so continue until the second coming of
Christ? Protestant. All this I do believe. Pap. Are the Protestants of this
Church, or the Papists, or both? Pro. The Protestants only. Pap. Have you any
outward means to persuade you, that the Protestants are only of this Church,
or are you moved thereunto by inspiration only? Pro. The inward means is the
spirit of God; the outward is the canonical Scripture. Pap. This inward
means lies hidden in your own breast; but how do you by this outward mean
discern the true Church? Pro. That church which does teach and practice the
doctrine contained in the canonical Scriptures, is the true Church of Christ:
contrariwise, that church which in matters of faith, teaches VVittingly and
wilfully.
any doctrine repugnant, or not grounded upon the same word, is an heretical
Church, and a synagogue of Satan. Pap. The Scriptures, you say, are the outward
mean for discerning of the true Church, have you some outward means to
discern the canonical Scriptures, or do you know them by inspiration only?
Pro. The outward mean is the uniform There be other outward means, beside
the consent of antiquity.
consent of all antiquity. Pap. You do then receive the testimony of ancient
writers for the discerning of the canonical Scriptures, why do you not
likewise believe that the Apostles did leave many things to be observed in the
Church by tradition without writing, seeing that the one and the other is
confirmed by the like uniform consent of ancient writers? Pro. The Scripture
is the sure rock whereon to build our faith, wherein all things are contained
necessary for our salvation.

The Answer.
IT is a common saying, that such as do deficere in extremo actu, fail in the
last act, are foolish Poets; but whether they be foolish Divines, or no, that
fail every where beginning and ending and all, judge you; and that you may
do it the better, observe I pray you, how untowardly this popish Divine begins
to lay his foundation, that you may the better judge of the whole frame of his
building. The word [Catholicke] is taken three manner of ways; first, for that
which is opposed to heretical or schismatic, as Ecclesia Catholica, the
Catholic Church, and Ecclesia Martyrum the Church of the Martyrs, Haeresi. 68.
in Epiphanius. Secondly, for that which is opposed to the Church of the Jews,
for such a signification has the word [Catholicke] in the inscription of Saint
James his Epistle. Lastly, for the general fellowship of all the children of
God elected and adopted in Christ Jesus before the foundations of the world: for
none else can be the members of the body of Christ: Ephesians. 1.23. and Colos.
1.24.
and in this signification it is taken in our Creed.

Now it would be known, which of these significations is meant in the first
question, the first signification restrains the word [Catholicke] to
particular Churches, and it is not like that your Papist demands, whether
you believe this or that Church in particular. Again, the second opposes the
word [Catholicke] to the church of Jury, whereas your Papist includes the
church of Jury, before there was any other church any where planted: in his
question, saying Do you believe ye catholic Church, planted first by the
Apostles in Iudaea, and afterward dispersed etc. The last signification is
applied to the Saints of God predestined to salvation, 2. Tim. 2.19
which Church was never planted by the Apostles, but by the eternal decree of
God who only knows who are his.

Again, I can hardly brook that the Church is here said to be first planted
by the Apostles, for God had his Church ever from the beginning; or that it
has remained ever since the Apostles planted it, for it has remained ever
from the beginning: now if it be said, that he means the Church under the
Gospel; Romans 15.8. Heb. 2.3.
it will trouble him to prove that the Apostles were the first planters of
that Church in Iudaea, seeing Christ himself was minister of the circumcision,
and first began to preach salvation before it was confirmed by them that heard
him.

Moreover, that the Church was ever dispersed through the whole world by the
ministry of the Apostles, is sooner said than proved; for though Paul say,
that the fall of the Jews was the riches of the world, yet does he not mean
the whole world simply without exception, no more than Saint Luke does when he
says that Augustus Caesar decreed that all the world should be taxed; Luke
2.1. Math. 28.19. Luke 24.47. Mark. 16.15. Act. 16.6. etc. 2. Cor. 10.13. etc.
and so must we understand all Nations in Matthew and Luke, and all the world
and every creature in Saint Marks Gospel: for though the words be general,
and without limitation, yet the Apostles were kept in, and guided more
particularly by the holy Ghost.

Lastly, it would be agreed upon, what faith or belief your Papist means,
when he says, Do you believe the catholic Church, whether justifying or
historical? For though he seem to fetch his question out of the Creed,
wherein the articles of justifying faith are recorded, and so to make the
catholic Church invisible, for faith is the evidence of things not seen:
Heb. 11.1.
yet when he adds planted by the Apostles in Iudaea etc. he makes it
visible, and so not to be believed. Wherefore though this first question have
neither head nor foot; yet thus in charity I conceive of it, that it
demands, whether we believe historically that there were orderly Churches or
companies professing catholic doctrine taught by the Apostles first among the
Jews, and then among the Gentiles, which profession and professors shall
continue in one place or other to the worlds end; if this be the question, then
have you answered catholiquely, first that you believe this, and then secondly
that the Protestants only are the visible and known members of Gods church.
Now where it is demanded in the third and fourth place how we know this,
whether by outward means, or by inspiration: it is answered, that the
canonical word of God does so testify, and better witness than this we
desire none; and touching this word of God, the Papists grant all those books
to be canonical, which we call canonical, though they add other Books
which we admit not for grounds and foundations of faith: but if we cannot
make good our profession by those books which both sides agree upon, and by
the same books overthrow all that the Papists hold against us at this day;
then I for my part, will soon yield to the Pope, and crave absolution upon my
knees.

Now forsooth the discerning of these canonical Scriptures is called into
question, and they must be subjected to the infirmity of man: howbeit your
answer, though it be true, yet is it insufficient; for howsoever, the uniform
consent of antiquity is not to be neglected: yet as our Savior says, Ioh.
5.36.
that he had greater witness than the witness of John; so has the holy
Scripture greater witness than the witness of the Fathers, namely, the
purity and incontrolled antiquity of it, the Majesty of the style, the
conformablenesse of the precepts thereof to the law of nature, and diverse
other outward means noted by Master Calvin in his Institutions; Lib. 1. Cap.
8.
otherwise it were hard to tell how the men of Beroea, and other ancient
Christians discerned the Scripture in the Apostles time and after, Act. 17.11.12
before any one of the ancient Fathers was borne, or had written a syllable:
and herehence it is easily gathered how vain the sixth question is, for
traditions are not confirmed by such pregnant evidence as the Scriptures are,
but hang in the wind upon the conceits of men, which may be deceived, and
therefore a Christian man may well believe the one, though he neglect the other;
Romans 1.16. Heb. 4.12. 1. Cor. 2.4. 1. Cor. 14.24.25. Luke 24.32.
the powerful working of the word of God described by Saint Paul, and the
Author to the Hebrews, and the Disciples of Christ in Saint Lukes Gospel are
sufficient witnesses to the soul, that Traditions which have not the same
image and superscription, may be refused as the commandments and doctrines of
men.

The Dialogue. Sectio II.
PA. Do you not perceive, that by this description of ye Church, you have given
two mortal wounds unto your own cause? first you have excluded the Protestant
and Puritan out of the Church by you described; and secondly, you thrust out
all the ancient Fathers, and Doctors that ever flourished in the Church since
the Apostles time? Pro. The wounds you speak of (surely) are not mortal, for
as yet I feel them not. Pap. They will prove sensible when they come to the
searching; first you have excluded the Protestant and Puritan, who hold many
points of Doctrine not These points are warrantable by Scripture, as it shall
appear.
warranted by the Scriptures, as the observation of the Sunday, in stead of
Saturday which was the Sabbath of the Jews; that Christians may eat blood
(notwithstanding the decree of the first general Council to the contrary:)
that a christian Magistrate may punish theft with death, which in a Jewish
Magistrate was a breach of the commandment; that it is a greater offense in a
christian to have Concubines, and many wives, then it was in David, who
notwithstanding was a man according to Gods own heart; that Christians should
be tied unto the law prescribed unto the Jews for marriage within degrees of
affinity, and not unto the like law prescribed to the brother, to raise up
seed unto his brother dying without issue. For all which you have no warrant
out of the scriptures. Pro. For all these points of Doctrine, we have
sufficient warrant out of the book of God; and first concerning the Sabbath of
Christians it is evident in the 20. of the Acts, that the Christians did
assemble themselves the first day of the week to hear Paul preach, and to
break bread; likewise in the 16. Chapter of Saint Paul's 1. Epistle to the
Corinths, it appears that Saint Paul did ordain in all the Churches of
Galatia, that collection should be made for the poor, upon the first day of
the week, where he does also exhort the Corinthians to do the like upon the
same day: whereby it is evident that the Sunday was appointed by the Apostles
to be the Christians Sabbath, which is nothing else but a day of rest from
labor, and a day to be bestowed in hearing the word preached, breaking of
bread, whereby is meant administration of the Sacrament, giving of alms, and
other works of devotion and piety: for proof whereof, out of the places
above alleged, I do draw this argument against you: That day wherein the
Apostles did ordain, that Christians should weekly meet together to exercise
themselves in hearing the word preached, receiving the Sacrament, and giving of
Alms: that same day did the Apostles ordain to be the Sabbath of Christians:
but the Apostle did ordain that Christians should weekly assemble themselves
upon the first day of the week for the purposes before mentioned: therefore
the Apostle did ordain the first day of the week to be the Christians
Sabbath. Pap. I deny the Mayor, for (that being granted) if the Apostles did
appoint more days in a week than one for Christians to assemble themselves for
the like Christian exercises, by the same argument you Non sequitur. Look the
answer.
may likewise prove two Sabbaths in one week; and no doubt those Christians,
who lived together in the fellowship of the Apostles, sold their possessions,
and had all things common, That is not their intent. Act. 2.45.
to the intent that they might be wholly employed in the service of God, had more
days than one in a week appointed for that purpose. Your Minor proposition
also, which is, that the Apostle did ordain that Christians should assemble
themselves upon the first day of the week, etc. is false, and not warranted by
either of the places of scripture by you alleged. In the 20. of the Acts, ye
first day of the week is not prescribed unto Christians, as a day whereon they
ought to assemble themselves for ye service of God, but there only mention is
made that ye Disciples were assembled on the first day of the week to break
bread, and that Paul (intending to depart on the morrow) continued preaching
till midnight. Let us Admit what you will, yet the first of the week is the
ordinary appointed day.
admit that Saint Paul was to depart on the Tuesday, and that the Christians
were assembled on the Monday to break bread, and to hear Paul preach before
his departure, might not I in this case, make as strong an argument, to prove
Monday to be ye Christians Sabbath, as yours is for the Sunday? In the 16.
Chapter of Saint Paul's 1. Epistle unto ye Corinths, the Apostle does prescribe
the first day of the week unto ye Corinths, as a day whereon they ought to lay
aside for the poor as their devotion shall serve; it is not preaching, prayer,
or administration of Sacraments, that is in this place enjoined, but it is a
laying aside for the poor. Why does the Apostle enjoin this contribution for
the poor to be made at that time? the answer follows in ye text, That there
be no gatherings when I come: Why would the Apostle have no gatherings when he
came? no doubt because he would not have such spiritual exercises, as he
determined to bestow among them at his return unto them Then this day was not
only for collections, but for spiritual exercises.
, hindered or impeached by such collections: if this were ye meaning of the
Apostle, then is it not like that he would appoint the Sabbath for the making
of such collections, which is wholly Not wholly, so as no time should be spared
for collections.
to be employed in such spiritual exercises as he meant to use among them at
his return, and therefore this place would better serve a wrangler to prove
that the first day of the week was not appointed to be the christians Sabbath,
then it will serve you to the contrary. Pro. Out of this place it may be
gathered that the Christians, upon the first day of the week, did weekly
assemble together, for there is no time so fit for collections, as general
assemblies; and a weekly assembly upon that day does manifestly prove it to be
the Sabbath. Pap. You can wring no general assemblies out of that place, for
the text says, Let every one put apart by himself, and lay up, which argues
rather Neither do we imagine, that all saw what every man gave, or took it
from him, but he himself laid it up, as the rest did, in the common purse;
else Paul must either gather it, or tarry the gathering of it, when he came.
a private laying up at home, than a contribution in an assembly, as your
marginall note in the English Bible interprets: for how can a man be said to
lay up that which he does deliver to another in such a contribution? Pro. It
appears in the first of the Revelation, that in Saint John's time, the first
day of the week was called the Lords day, which is as much as if he had
called it the Christians Sabbath. Pap. You shall find in that Chapter, that
Saint John was in the spirit on ye Lords day, whereupon you may conclude, that
in Saint John's time one day of the week was called the Lords day, which we do
grant; and more than that, that the first day of the week was then called the
Lords day, (which would have put you to your shifts to have proved out of the
word) yet have you gained nothing: for what consequent is this, the first day
of the week was of the Apostles called the Lords day, therefore the Jews
Sabbath is to be abolished, and the first day of the week is to be observed
for the Sabbath of Christians? might not the first day of the week be called
the Lords day in regard of Christ's resurrection, and yet the Jews Sabbath
remain, or be abolished, as other of their ceremonies were, without
substituting another Sabbath in place thereof? Or will you rather reason thus;
Saint John could be in ye spirit but on ye christians Sabbath only, Ergo, the
first day of the week is the Sabbath of christians if this be your? argument,
you do but clauum clauo pellere, for when you shall have proved your
antecedent by the word, then will I grant the consequent, and as easily may
you prove the one as the other: but let it be admitted, that you can prove by
scripture, that the Christians were enjoined by the Apostles to assemble
themselves weekly upon the Sunday, to join together in prayer, and hearing
the word preached: yet what word have you to prove, that Neither do we say,
neither can you prove it is.
all bodily labor is unlawful upon that day? they might well assemble in
prayer upon that day, and hear 2. or 3. sermons, and yet spare some time to
bestow upon their labors, and the commandment forbids labor on the
seventh day, and not The first day is now become the seventh.
on the first day of the week. Thus you may see (while you do nodum in scirpo
quaerere, by seeking to prove that by scripture, which the Church does hold by
tradition) how you are driven to wrest the scripture, and how weak and
ridiculous your arguments be. If the observation of the feast of Easter, and
other festival days, prayer for the dead, or the Sacrifice of the Mass, had
found the same entertainment with John Calvin, as the observation of the
Sabbath has done: I doubt not but that (although he would not have allowed of
traditions) yet he would have found you as sufficient proof for any of them
out of the word, as he has done for the Sabbath: for so great a mote in your
eyes is the tradition of the Church, that if your appetite serve to take liking
of any point of doctrine grounded thereon, you will make any homely shift,
rather than you will acknowledge the true Tradition, a fountain in Popery.
fountain, from whence it springs; and no marvel, for acknowledge the
authority of those traditions, which If you may do what you lift, we cannot
stand.
by the testimony of all antiquity, were first delivered by the Apostles, and
have ever since been observed, and delivered over as it were from hand to hand
by succession of Bishops, and your heresy will fall to the ground. The next
point of doctrine which you do hold without warrant of scripture, is, that it
is lawful for Christians to eat blood, which was forbidden by the decree of
the first general Council where the Apostles were present: I will find you
scripture for this in Saint Paul's Epistles.
what scriptures have you to do contrary to a Canon of so great a council?
Pro. It is manifest, that in the infancy of the church, the Apostles having to
do with the Jews, a people wonderfully addicted to the strict observation of
their law, did not think good to take from them all the ceremonies thereof at
once: but rather by little and little to seek to win them by tolerating many
things for a time, which in the Gospel were abolished; and to that intent Paul
did circumcise Timothy, Acts 16. Pap. What warrant of scripture have you to
prove that the commandment was given to be observed but for a time, in regard
of the weakness of the Jews? Pro. We have the word to prove that the
ceremonial laws were abolished by the death of Christ, whereof abstayning
from blood is one: and it is evident by the 15. of the Acts, that the assembly
of the Apostles in the first general Council at Jerusalem, was upon this
occasion; they of the circumcision which believed were greatly scandalized,
because the Gentiles, who were joined with them in the unity of the same
faith, had utterly rejected their law, whereupon much controversy did arise
between them; the Jews contending that the believing Gentiles ought to be
circumcised, and to observe the law of Moses; and the Gentiles to the
contrary. For appeasing whereof the said Council assembled, and decreed that
the Christians should abstain from blood, by eating whereof (as it seems)
the weak Jews were greatly offended, intending thereby somewhat to satisfy
the Jews, and yet not to lay too heavy a yoke upon the Gentiles. Thus you see
how by the word the eating of blood was prohibited unto the Christians of those
times, and how by the word it is permitted unto us. Pa. By what word can you
prove yt the This fellow loves to bear himself speak else would he not make
such an idle repetion.
eating of blood, which was both prohibited unto the Jews before the Gospel,
and to christians in the Gospel, is now lawful for us to do? that the law
prescribed to the Jews, concerning marriage within degrees of affinity, is
still to be retained? and that the like law which commands the brother to
raise up seed unto his brother deceased without issue, is to be abolished?
that it is lawful for a Christian Magistrate to take away a man's life for 12.
d. which was not lawful by the law of God to do, but in such cases only as
in the same law are specified? with many other such like instances too long to
repeat: when you have tired your self in searching and wresting of scriptures,
you shall find Else are you deceived.
no other warrant for them, than the continual practice and tradition of the
Church. Pro. It appears in the 5. Chapter of the 1. to the Corinths, that
Paul did disallow of marriage within degree of affinity, which is warrant
sufficient, for the retaining of the laws prescribed to the Jews on that
behalf. Pap. You have no such warrant out of that place: for the text says
only, There is a The fornication had not been so heinous, if the Son in law
might marry his Mother in law.
fornication among you, not once named among the heathen, that a man should
have his fathers wife; it will be hard for you to prove out of this place,
that the Fornication here specified, was committed by a marriage between the
Son and the Mother in law All this is but vain talk, that helps him not
awhit.
for ye laws of the Corinthians would permit no such marriage to be
celebrated, as it may be gathered out of the text: for if such a fornication be
not named among the heathen, much less is it permitted by the laws of the
Corinths, and therefore this Fornication was committed, by having his fathers
wife as a Concubine or a Whore, and not as a wife, as you imagine.

The Answer.
YOur Papist here talks in his sleep of two mortal wounds, which we by our
description of the Church, have given to our own cause; and therefore your
description must be had in memory, which as it binds the true Church to the
voice of Christ, sounding in the canonical Scriptures: so it gives us to
understand that the false Church hears the voice of stangers, and will not
be ruled by the written word of the Almighty; yet notwithstanding the true
Church may mistake the voice of Christ, and so err; whereby the first wound is
fully healed: and if it should be granted, that the Church in general cannot
err, yet it follows not, that every one in particular that builds hay or
stubble upon the foundation, is therefore no member of the Church: And so the
second wound, which speaks of the exclusion of the Fathers and Doctors, is
neither mortal, nor sensible. Now touching the first wound, which cencerneth
the Protestant and Puritan, it is here brought to certain particular points,
which I will speak of in order: The first is, the observation of the Sunday,
which you prove syllogistically out of the Scripture, after this manner.

1. The day whereon the Apostles did ordain, that Christians should weekly
meet together to exercise themselves in hearing the word preached, receiving
the Sacraments, and giving of Alms: that same day did the Apostles ordain to
be the Sabbath of Christians.

2. But the Apostles did ordain, that Christians should weekly assemble
themselves upon the first day of the week, for the purpose before mentioned.

Ergo, The Apostles did ordain the first day of the week to be the Christians
Sabbath.

Now, where your Papist says; That if the Mayor were true, then the Apostles
appointing more days than one for such exercises, should appoint more Sabbaths
in a week than one, his answer has no color or show of reason, for though
every day in the week had been so appointed: yet had they not been all
Sabbaths, unless they had weekly continued, as the first day did from week
to week, till Saint John's banishment; at what time still we find that day
kept holy, and dedicated to the Lord, as appears by the name, which the holy
Ghost gives it in the Revelation. Cap. 1.13.
Again, where he says: That the first Christians sold their possessions, to
the intent they might wholly bestow themselves upon the service of God: It would
be known by what tradition, or inspiration he found that out, seeing the
scriptures inform us, Act. 2.45.
that their intent was to supply the necessity of their poor brethren. I
trow, the other Jews that were to attend daily upon the morning and evening
hours of prayer and sacrifice, did not unload themselves of their possessions:
moreover this law and sale of possessions, though it were used at Jerusalem,
yet was it not in force in Galatia, and Achaia, and other Churches of the
Gentiles, 1. Cor. 16.2. Gal. 6, 6, etc.
which had of their own to put aside and lay up for the poor.

And touching the Minor, your Papist says, that the Troiane Christians were
assembled the first day of the week to break bread, but not appointed so to
do by the prescription of the Apostles; belike they came together by hap
hazard, or by their own appointment; howbeit, he that planted the Church of
Troas, cannot be so forgetful, as to leave every man separately to himself,
and not to appoint when they should assemble themselves, for the continual
watring of that which was planted: Act. 20.7.
now to note what time that was Saint Luke names, the first day of the week,
otherwise there is no reason why it should be mentioned: moreover whereas
Paul, and his company came to Troas the second day of the week, and tarried
there just seven days; yet no day of assembly is registered but this one only
day; and yet we may not think that Paul, and his company lay idle six days
together, and forgot the work of their calling: yea, but let us admit, (says
your Papist) that Paul was to depart on the Tuesday, and that the Christians
were assembled on the Monday, etc. Yea marry, then should we be wise men, but
the Disciples of Troas met not to hear Paul preach, (for most of them had
heard him preach before sixs days together) but to break bread, which they
would have done, though Paul had not been amongst them; and therefore this
supposition is cloudie and riculous.

Touching the place to the Corinthians, your Papist says that Saint Paul does
not prescribe the first day of the week for prayer, preaching, and
administration of Sacraments: but for a laying aside for the poor, according
to every man's devotion, and I grant all this to be true: for those holy
exercises were enjoined the churches of Galatia and Achaia, when they were
first planted, and so was the collection for their own poor: for this
collection for the Saimes at Jerusalem was extraordinary: but that the Apostle
Paul would be so troublesome, as not to content himself that this collection
should be made, as their other collections were, upon their ordinary meeting
day, but to appoint another day week by week, to the hinderance of their
several callings, is utterly incredible; nay see further, I pray you, how your
learned Papist doubleth the power of the argument which he goes about to
weaken: for when he asks [why the Apostle inioyneth this collection to be
made upon that day,] and answers himself out of the text, [that there be no
gatherings when I come,] and then asks again, [why the Apostle would have no
gatherings when he came,] and answers with a [no doubt] because he would not
have such spiritual exercises as he determined to bestow among them, hindered
by such collections: what does he else but confess, that the first day of the
week was the day, that Paul purposed to keep holy at his coming, and
therefore would not have that day bestowed upon collections, when he came, but
before his coming: otherwise if he had meant to bestow spiritual blessings
so plentifully among them upon any other day, then gatheringes made upon that
day, could not hinder him.

Yea, but if these collections were hindrances to the spiritual exercises of
the Sabbath, then it follows, that the first day of the week, wherein Paul
would have these collections made, was not appointed to be the Christians
Sabbath. Well wrangled: but howsoever this extraordinary collection, enjoined
by Saint Paul, might hinder Saint Paul himself, that preached at Troas till
midnight; nay, till the dawning of the next day, Romans 15.29.
and used to come with abundance of the blessing of the Gospel of Christ: yet
their own ordinary ministry, being far less plentiful, could not be so
easily hindered: Apol. 2.
and therefore we read in Iustine Martyr, that in his time, beside preaching
and administering the Sacraments, collections were made upon this very day in
Christian Churches.

One wrangle more remains against the force of this place to the Corinths;
namely, that no general assembly can be wrung out of it, because the text
says, Let every one put apart by himself, and lay up, which argues a private
laying up at home: for a man cannot be said to lay up that which he delivers
to another. Well wrangled again: but what? call you this a gathering? and is
this kind of laying up at every man's own home, a sufficient dispatch of all
gathering, so as there should be no gathering at all, when the Apostle should
come himself amongst them? Wherefore little wringing will serve to prove that
this laying up, is not meant of every man's own purse, or cupbord at home,
which might be done any other day, as well as the first of the week; but of
some public Chest or Box, provided for every man's free beneficence, as
every particular man himself found himself able and willing.

Now follows the place of the Revelation, where Saint John says, that he was
in the spirit on the Lords day, or, Cap. 1.10. Psa. 74.16.
as the Rhems Testament translates it, the Dommicall day; Out of which we
learn, first, that albeit all the days of the week are the Lords; yet this
day is so called (...) as being a more excellent or eminent day, than the rest,
and so consequently a day consecrated to the service of the Lord. Secondly, we
learn that this day was famously known by the name of Lords day, or
Dominicall day, in the Churches of Asia, Revel. 1.4.
to whom Saint John dedicated his Revelation for it had been to no purpose for
him to tell them, that he was in the spirit on the Lords day, if they knew
not what day that was, and how it was severed by that name from the rest of the
week, and therefore as it was an eminent day, and chosen from among the other
days of the week for the special service of the Lord, so was it celebrated
as an eminent day, and so still kept in fresh memory in the Churches of Asia:
now that this day was the first day of the week, and no other, it will be
easy to show without shifts, not only because no other day was ever
permanently kept holy, but also because we may trace the name (...), and
Dominica, applied to this day, as it were a Hare in the snow, issuing out of
this place of the Revelation, into all the Churches of Christendom. Yea, but
(says your Papist) Might not the first day of the week be called the Lords
day, in regard of Christ's Resurrection? I say no, for then it had been called
the Rising day, or, the Resurrection day; as the like days be, namely,
Ascension, Circumcision, etc. For to call it, the Lords day, in regard of
Christ's Resurrection, is utterly insensible.

When he demands further; Whether the Jews Sabbath might not remain, or be
abolished, as other Ceremonies were, Col. 2.16.16
without substituting another Sabbath in place thereof? I answer, that the
Jews Sabbath is taken away by Saint Paul, so far forth as it was
ceremonial, but the moral parts thereof, namely, that one day in a week
should be laid apart for spiritual meditations and exercises, Exodus 23.12.
and for the recreation of servants and dum creatures, was to be kept still
inviolable without any such substitution, as he dreams of: and so his other
wranglements about bodily labor, and resting the seventh day, not the first
day of the week are clean dashed; Mat. 12.5.11. Mark. 2.27. and 3.4. Luke
13.14. etc. Ioh. 5.8. etc. and 9.6.7.14. Iren. lib. 4. ca. 19.
howbeit, that which was the first day of the week, is now become the seventh
day, and bodily labor was never altogether unlawful, no not in time of the
law, as appears clearly in many places of the new Testament. Now judge you,
or any reasonable man else in the world, whether our arguments, or his answers
be weak and ridiculous: as for his Tradition, the more he urges it, the more
he confuteth himself, and confirms our exposition of these three places:
for if the Apostles delivered the observation of the Sabbath by Tradition, we
may not think they delivered it to some Churches, and not to other some; and
if they delivered it to all without exception, then was it delivered to them of
Troas, to the Galatians, Corinthians, and the Churches of Asia; if to them,
then can it not be denied, but that these places of scripture, which I have
now disputed of, do clearly contain the practice and continual observance
of the Lords day, as it was delivered to these Churches by the Apostles. I will
not vouchsafe to answer your Papists vnpowdered talk of John Calvin, that
worthy servant of God, and wire-whipper of popish merchants out of the house of
God, only this I will say, that if John Calvin were not a greater mote in his
eye, then Popish traditions are in ours, he would have spared this idle vagarie.

The next point is, eating blood, Act. 15.2^.29
which was forbidden in the first general Council, the circumstance whereof
you have well set down; howbeit your Papist still calls for Scripture, whereby
it may be showed him, that after the decree made at Jerusalem by the Apostles,
it was lawful for Christians to eat blood; which he would never do if he
were learned, and had read the Epistles of Saint Paul with any diligence?
wherefore you may stop his mouth for this point, out of these places which I
have here quoted, 1. Romans 14.2, 3, 6, 14, 20, etc. 1. Cor. 10.29. Coloss. 2.16.
Timothy 4.4. Tit. 1.15.

Now follows the third point, which hangs upon Tradition and not upon
Scripture, Leui. 28. and 20 Deuteronomy. 25.5.
namely the forbidding of marriage within degrees of affinity; as if Leuiticus
were no scripture; yea but, (may he say) Deuteronomy is scripture too, as well
as Leuiticus, yet the brother is there commanded to raise up seed to his
brother, which in Leuiticus is made unlawful; now tell us why you receive the
one and refuse the other? here must you call for the help of Tradition, or else
lie in the dust? Alas, good Papist, you are much deceived, for the law of
Leuiticus is moral, and naturally ingraffed in the hearts of all nations, as
appears evidently in the conclusion of this law in Leuiticus, from the four
and twentieth verse to the end of the eighteenth Chapter: for if this Law had
been peculiar for the Jews, there is no reason why the Canaaniticall nations
should be punished so severely, as there it is described, for the non
observance of the same: as for the other law of Deuteronomy, it is an exception
or dispensation in that particular case, for the common weal of the Jews,
wherein God had a special care of the first borne and his inheritance: again,
being repugnant to nature, and to the explication thereof twice told in
Leuiticus, Cap. 18.16. and cap. 20.21.
it might not continue longer unrepealed.

Touching the example of the incestuous Corinthian which you propound; it will
stick better to your Papists ribs, then he is aware of: for how can that
fornication be unheard of among the Gentiles, which a man commits with such
a one as he may lawfully marry? if then this Corinthian might lawfully marry
his mother in law, verily single copulation with her could not be so
abominable, as that the very Gentiles could not abide it should be once named
amongst them, and if single copulation of the mother and son in law was so
much abhorred, then was it unlawful they should marry, and so the law of God
in Leuiticus is confirmed; and so indeed your Papist gently confesses in these
words [the law of the Corinths would permit no such marriage, as may be gathered
out of the text,] etc.

The fourth point follows, namely, that it cannot be showed by scripture,
thas it is a greater offense in a Christian, to have many wives, then it was in
David, howbeit we read in Scripture, that God gave him his masters wives into
his bosom; 2. Sam. 12.8. Romans 4.15. Nulla lege prohibebatur, August. contr.
Faust: lib. 22. cap. 47. Matthew. 19.4. etc. 1. Cor. 7.2. etc. Ephesians. 5.31.
and if there be no transgression where there is no law, as Paul says, then
verily Polygamy, being neither clearly forbidden by any law, nor reprehended
by any Prophet from the beginning of the world, to the coming of Christ: it
must follow, that it was either no transgression at all in the fathers, or a
far less transgression then it is in Christians, whom Christ Jesus himself,
and the holy Apostle Saint Paul, has so manifestly instructed, that nothing
can be more evident.

Now touching the fifth and last point, of punishing theft with death, it is
confessed by your Papist, that it was lawful by the law of God, in cases
specified in the same law, that is, Cap. 22.2.
as I take it, if the thief break up a house, for that I find specified in
Exodus. Howbeit David in a case not specified, gives sentence of a thief,
that as the Lord lives, he is the child of death, that is, that he should
surely die and also that he should make a fourefolde or eightfolde restitution,
2. Sam. 12.5.6 Arbangtaijm
(Arbangtaijm) Now if the Hebrew word be taken for eightfold, as no Romanist
may deny, Exodus 21.1.
because the old catholic translation has so set it down; we see plainly,
that beside the sentence of death, Cap. 6.31.
which David justifies with an oath, the punishment specified in the law, is
doubled; nay, the incresse of the punishment appointed by the law, is clearly
made good in the Proverbs of Solomon, where it is said, that a thief being
taken, shall restore seven fold, or give all the substance that he has. Romans
13.4.
and touching the christian Magistrate, S. Paul says, 1. Tim. 5.20.
that the wicked should fear the sword of vengeance, which God has put in his
hand, where fear is made the end of punishment, as it is in Timothy: where the
same Apostle says, them that sin, rebuke openly, that the rest may fear,
but if open rebuking did not strike such a fear as bridled sinners from
corrupting their ways, then Timothy was to proceed to a more heavy censure,
that might work this fear, and so keep down sin from multiplying in the
Church, and even so ought the civil Magistrate to temper penal laws in the
civil state, that evil disposed men may fear, and never to take his laws to
be sufficiently penal, but still to increase the terror of them, till fear
to do evil; be sufficiently planted, and this equity does the Lord himself
retain in his own displeasure, or indignation against sin; Psalm. 90.11.
for so the great Prophet of God Moses teaches us in these words, thereafter
as thou art feared, so is thy displeasure: wherefore these two, displeasure and
fear, are like the two buckets of a Well, whereof the one comes up, when the
other goes down; and the one is at the highest, when the other is at the
lowest: briefly then to conclude, as the Lord saw the punishment appointed in
the law powerful enough at that time, and a long time after, to work fear in
that Nation and State, but yet was increased afterward by the Jewish
Magistrates, as they saw the disposition of the people to require it: so the
christian Magistrate finding by experience, that the state and condition of his
time and country is more desperate and less fearful to rob and steal
then the Jews were, and so not to be ruled without a greater sharpness; must
needs when this sword, and strike deeper then the Jewish Magistrate, that he
may be feared.

The Dialogue. Sestio. III. Tradition.
PAp. I will It is better to omit them, then to speak of them so childishly as
you have done of the rest.
omit those other points of doctrine, which you do hold without warrant of
scripture, for breuities sake, and pass unto the searching of the second
mortal wound, which as I said, you have given unto your own cause, reserving
your answer to the rest, unto your better leisure and premeditation; yet, by
the way let me show you the great difference between the antiquity and you
in this point, We can ackdowledge no such traditions.
who received the traditions delivered by the Apostles, without writing, and
continued and observed from hand to hand, with no less reverence, then they
did the written Scriptures. Irenaeus says of the heretics of his time, that
when the Scriptures were alleged against them, they would answer, that the
Scriptures could not be understood of those that were ignorant of the
traditions, and that when the Traditions delivered by the Apostles, and kept in
the church by succession of Bishops, were objected, they would answer, that
they had more understanding then the Bishops or the Apostles themselves, and
that they alone had found out the truth. lib. 3. cap. 2. whereby you may see
that the They might better do it then, then you now.
Catholics in the first age of the Church, did allege against the heretics of
that time, Scripture and Traditions, even as the catholics of this time do
allege the same against the heretics of this time, and herein only
consists the difference, when Scriptures are alleged against the heretics
of this time, they do fly to the interpretation; when the interpretation of
the Bishops, that is, of the ancient catholic Doctors is produced against
them, they answer in effect, that they have more understanding then the
Bishops, and that they alone have found the truth: when the Traditions
delivered by the Apostles are You may sooner allege them, then prove that the
Apostles delivered them.
alleged, they answer, that the Apostles did leave none such, or if they did,
that they are not to be received, unless they can be proved out of the
canonical Scriptures: thus you appeal from traditions to Scripture; when
scripture is brought against you, you appeal to the interpretation, and from
the interpretation of the fathers, to the interpretation of Calvin, or to the
This is but the imagination of your brain.
imagination of your own brain, as to the supreme Judge and primum mobile of
all your religion, but let us proceed in showing the great difference between
the fathers and you herein: Epiphanius, O portet autem traditione vti, non enim
omnia a diuina Scriptura accipi possunt, etc. We ought to use traditions,
beeause all things cannot be learned out of the holy Scripture. And a little
after it follows, Tradiderunt itaque sancti Des Apostoli peccatum esse post
dicretam virginitatem nubere, lib. 2. to. 2. haeres. 61. The holy Apostles of
God have delivered, that after the vow of virginity, it is sin to marry.
The same father for the confutation of Aerius, uses the authority of the
tradition of the Apostles, haeres. 75. and for the confutation of Seuerus, he
voucheth a place out of the book Then the Apostles delivered them written in a
book.
of the Apostles Constitutions, haeres. 45. Saint Augustine, Many things which
are not found in the writings of the Apostles, How can it be known, whether
this belief were right or wrong?
are believed to have been delivered by the Apostles by tradition, because
they are observed through the universal world, de baptis. cont. Donat. lib. 2.
fo. 2. The same Author says, that the universal Church does observe, as a
tradition of the fathers, that when mention is made of the dead (at the tim of
the sacrifice) that they should be prayed for, and that the sacrifice also
should be offered for them, de verb Apost. sermon. 32. Saint Chrysostom cites
a place out of the Canons These Canons are in writing.
of the Apostles; and to this effect could I allege the testimony of all
ancient fathers and doctors, as it were with one mouth, so that if you should
deny S. John's gospel, I could use none other The more unwise you.
proof against you for the one, then I can for the other, which is the
testimony and consent of antiquity, and Surety you are deceived.
surely by denying of traditions, you have brought your self into a very
intricate Dilemma, for either you must prove That is soon done.
by scripture, that the first day of the week ought to be kept holy as the
Sabbath of Christians etc. and grant that all the ancient fathers, who were
Papists, and held many things by tradition, were damned If they were Papists,
they were heretics, but they were neither of both.
heretics, or else that you are heretics your self.

The Answer.
NOw follows as it were (by the way) a blind inartificiall proof of
Traditions out of the authority of men, Lib. 3. cap. 2. Lib. 3. cap. 1.
whereof Irenaeus is the first; yet Irenaeus speaks not of Traditions, but with
this Preface, non per alios dispositionem salutis nostrae cognouimus, quam per
eos per quos Euangelium peruenit ad nos, quod quidem tunc preconiauerunt,
postea vero per Deivoluntatem in Scripturis nobis tradiderunt fundamentum and
columnam fidei nostrae futurum: We have known the manner or order of our
salvation, by none other men, then by those, by whom the Gospel came unto us:
which then indeed they preached, and afterward by the will of God delivered to
us in the scriptures to be unto us the foundation and pillar of our faith. Now
having laid this foundation in the first Chapter, and concluded withal that
all heretics dissent from the Scriptures, he begins the next Chapter after
this sort; Cum enim ex scripturis arguuntur in accusacionem conuertuntur
ipsarum scripturarum, quasi non recte habeant, neque sint ex authoritate, and
quia vary sint dictae, and quia non possit ex his inueniri veritas ab his qui
nesciant traditionem: For when they are convinced by the scriptures, they fall
to accusing the Scriptures, as if they were not (...) set down, or not of
sufficient authority, and because things are diversely spoken, and because the
truth cannot be found in them by those which know not the tradition.

These heretics are as like the Papists, as if the one had bin spued out of
the others mouth: I trow, you understand who they be that call the scriptures
of God, dead incke, a dead and a dumb thing, dumb judges, the black Gospel,
inckehorne divinity, a nose of wax, etc. if you know them not, read Jewels
Apology, and there you shall find them, Part. 4. cap. 19 di. 1. Sectione 23.
your own Papist says, that [the Scriptures without the help of church,
fathers and councels, are the fountain of all heresy and atheism,] thus
heretics do and have done always, quia ex scripturis arguuntur, says
Irenaeus, and so, either the scripture or their heresy must needs fall. But to
proceed, Irenaeus tells you why these heretics would not be ruled by the
scriptures, namely, because Paul says, sapientiam loquimur inter perfectos,
and this is Bellarmines own reason, for unwritten verities, borrowed, as you
see, 1. Cor. 2.6. De verbo Dei non scripto lib. 4. cap. 11. Tertullian.
of these old heretics, and confuted by Tertullian in his Prescriptions, but
thus the spirit of Antichrist goes on still in these days, as it did in
Irenaeus and Tertullians time, to make way to his own dreams. It was full
time for our Papist here to draw the Readers mind awry to John Calvin, and I
wot not what [appeales] and [imaginations] and [braines,] and such like flowers
of popish rhetoric; otherwise it had bin easy to see that he and his
friends are the sons and heirs of Valentinus, Marcion, Cerinthus, Basilides
and Carpocrates, all of them, or some of them, as Irenaeus teaches us: and
this may be yet better seen, in that Irenaeus being driven from scripture,
Iren. lib. 1. cap. 23. and 24. and lib. 3. cap. 2.
which these heretics contemned, to Traditions, which before they seemed to
allow of; he can no way fasten upon them, neither by Scripture, nor Traditions,
unless they might be masters of both, as being wiser men in their own
conceits, then either the Apostles that delivered them, or the Bishops that
kept them. Now judge, who be the heirs of these heretics, John Calvin, as
this Papist prateth, or the Pope and his dependants, whose religion is called
by Saint Paul ((...)) that is, 2. These. 2:7, 8 Ni^. Cusanus de auth. eccles.
supra and contrascript. Albert. Pighius, eccles. hierarch. lib. 6.13
such a mystery, as will be ruled by no law, a mystery of lawless iniquity,
and the Pope himself ((...)) that is, a lawless man, such as will stoop
neither to Scripture nor Tradition: one of his Cardinals says, Nulla sunt
Christi praecepta, nisi quae per ecclesiam pro talibus accepta sunt: There are
no precepts of Christ but these, which the Church accounts to be such; so the
Church of Rome is above the Scripture. And another Champion says, Papa
virtualiter est tota ecclesia, the Pope is in power the whole Church: and so
the Pope is above the Church. Thus the Pope must be first, the Church must be
next; and the scripture given of God by inspiration, Must have the third place.
must, consistere in tertijs, and be glad of such room, as these great masters
will afford it: Quapropter vndique resistendum est, says Irenaeus, wherefore
we must set our selves against them every way. If scripture will not serve,
we use tradition: and if both be contemned, we use all other means that may
be thought of, to draw them ad conuersionem veritatis. This is Irenaeus his
conclusion, and whole discourse in this Chapter, which makes nothing at all for
Popish traditions, which are not alleged as witnesses, and backs to the truth
of the scripture, nor yet against such as deny the perfection of the word
written.

Epiphanius is next, who, if he had said, Oportet traditione abuti, We must
abuse tradition; our Papist and his friends had been beholding to him: but
Epiphanius says else where That he gathered the truth of the doctrine of God,
Ex vniuersa scriptura, out of the whole scripture; to be an anchorhold unto us,
Here Is. 69. Epip. Anchor.
and in the beginning of his Anchorate, thus we read: De vide vobis scribam,
quum requiratis vos, and fratres nostri ea quae spectant ad vestram salutem ex
diuina and sancta scriptura firmum fundamentum fidei de patre and filio, and
spiritu sancto, and de reliqua vniuersa in Christo salute, de resurrectione,
inquam, mortuorum, and de vnigeniti in carne aduentu, and de sancto testamento
veteri ac nouo, and in summa de alijs constitutionibus perfectae salutis, I
will write unto you concerning the faith, (seeing you and our brethren require
of us the things which concern your salvation,) out of the holy scripture a
firm foundation of faith, concerning the Father, the Son, and the holy
Spirit, and all the rest of the matter of our salvation in Christ, to wit, of
the resurrection of the dead; of the coming of the only begotten in the
flesh; of the holy Testament both old and new; and in brief, of other
constitutions pertaining to the perfection of salvation. Now we may consider
with less danger of the place here alleged; wherein that Epiphanius be not
misunderstood, we must consider that these words; Omnia a diuina scriptura
accipi non possunt, We ought to use traditions, because all things cannot be
learned out of the holy Scripture; must be restrained to the matter in hand:
for Epiphanius means that the bare letter of this or that scripture, does not
afford sufficient helps to understand it self, but requires other means for
that purpose; for thus stand the words, Diuina verba speculatione indigent and
sensu ad cognoscendam vniuscuiusque propositi argumenti vim ac facultatem,
oportet and traditione vti; non enim omnia a diuina scriptura accipi possunt,
etc. The words of God have need of speculation, and sense to know the force and
power of every argument propounded: we must also use tradition, because al
things cannot be learned out of the holy Scriptures. Now by these means, he
expounds a place of Paul to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 7.28.
If a Virgin marry, she sins not; this place (says he) is meant of such
as had a long time continued Virgins, because none in that paucitie of
Christians, did offer to marry them; and therefore Paul permits, they
should marry with Jews and Infidels; you have heard his speculation: yea, but
why may not this place of Paul be meant simply of all Virgins mariageable
without exception? Epiphanius answers, Tradiderunt sancti Dei Apostoli
peccatum esse post decretam virginitatem ad nuptias conuerti, The holy Apostles
of God have delivered, that after the vow of virginity, it is sin to marry.
You have heard his Tradition; but like speculation, like Tradition. For it is
incredible that the Christians of Corinth, had not as many sons and
daughters, as many males as females, more incredible, that there was such a
paucitie of Christians in so populous a Church, as the Church of Corinth; 2.
Cor. 6.14.
and most incredible of all, that Paul should permit, that in his first
Epistle, which he forbad in his second: and so his Speculation fails him.
Moreover, it is a fond conceit to think that there were Votaries in Paul's time,
or that Paul in the seventh of the first to the Corinths, spoke not generally
of all Virgins, but of such as could not get Christian husbands, Propter
penuriam charitatis: and so his Tradition is come to nothing; No, no, if there
had been such Nuns at Corinth, the Apostle being requested to set down his
judgment for the direction of Virgins, could not possibly forget that
principal kind of Virgins, that had most need of direction, and speak only
of some other meaner regard, and that in such general terms without any
exception, or mention of votall Virgins. More over Epiphanius fortifieth his
tradition out of Paul, who says Iuniores viduas reijce, postqua^ enim
lasciuierunt contra Christum nubere volunt habentes iudicuum, quod primam fidem
reiecerunt, The younger widows refuse, for when they have begun to wax wanton
against Christ, they will marry, having damnation, because they have rejected
the first faith. Concluding thereof, that Virgins are much more to be blamed
than Widows. if they turn back from their purpose of continency; wherefore it
is not an unwritten verity, that Epiphanius obtrudeth upon us, but a
conclusion drawn out of the first to Timothy; Cap. 5.11. etc.
howbeit S. Paul rejecting young widows from vowing or promising co^tinencie,
does by the same reason reject young virgins, which be in as great danger of
breaking their faith and promise, as young widows, and so still we find, that
no such votaries were allowed to snare themselves with vows, and religious
promises in Paul's time: but left free to use the remedy of marriage, according
to the ordinance of God. But to make short work, whether Epiphanius here
speak of written or unwritten verities; yet he concludes in the end, that it
is better, even for Votaries openly to marry according to the law, than to be
wounded daily by the secret darts of concupiscence; then which, nothing can be
more contrary to the practice and principles of Popery.

Touching the confutation of Aerius, it stands upon a tradition of fasting upon
Wednesdaies and Fridayes till night, and feeding upon breed, water, and salt
six days before Easter, which is quite dead long ago. Moreover, Epiphanius
opposes his traditions to matter of faith, saying; Ecclesia acceptam a
patribus veram fidem vsque huc continet itemque traditiones, The Church does
still retain the true faith receceiued from the Fathers, and also their
Traditions. And therefore, if Aerius had offended against nothing but
Traditions, he had been sound in the Faith notwithstanding, and so no
heretic. As for the Book of the Apostles Constitutions, either Epiphanius
lost it out of his bosom, or it is that which is extant under the name of
Clemens, and condemned long ago in the sixth general Council at
Constantinople: Can. 2.
yet are these Constitutions allowed for good scripture in the last Canon of
the Apostles, Lib. 2. cap. 59 Lib. 6. cap. 14 Lib. 2. cap. 63 Lib. 5. cap. 16
which the very Papists themselves are ashamed of. And good reason, for they
say in one place, that James the brother of our Lord was not an Apostle; and in
another place, that he was not an Apostle: they say also, that the people
ought to come together every day, morning and evening, which is no where
observed; they say, that Judas was absent when Christ celebrated his last
supper, which is contrary to the scripture; to be short, these Constitutions
are so full of errors and falsehoods, that no honest Christian will father them
upon the Apostles, or allow them for canonical Scripture.

The place of Austine, which your Papist (as a blind man) casts his staff at,
is in the seventh Chapter of the second Book De baptismo contra Donatistas,
and the words be these, Multa non inueniuntur in literis Apostoloru^, neque
in Co^ciliis postereru^, and tame^ quia custodiuntur per vniuersam ecclesiam,
non nisi ab ipsis tradita and commendata creduntur, Many things are not found
in the writings of the Apostles, nor in the Councels of later time, yet because
they are kept by the whole Church, they are supposed to be delivered and
commended to us by none but them. These words, though they seem plain, have
some doubt, which somewhat quaileth the force of them: for it is not so easy
to know whether, ab ipsis, should be referred to Apostolorum, or posterorum;
howbeit, I say further, that the Traditions that Augustine speaks of, are of
the same nature with that one Tradition, which he treats of in those Books
against the Donatists; namely, the not rebaptizing of Heretics; which though
it be not expressly, and explicately set down in the writings of the Apostles:
yet Austine himself knew it might be soundly deduced out of the Scriptures,
and so he testifies almost in every Book of that work against the
Donatists.

Haeres. 75.
The other place, which he alleges out of Austine, sspeaks of a Tradition
indeed, but it was a Tradition of the Fathers, not of the Apostles, and even so
says Epiphanius of the very same tradition, Ecclesia hoc perficit traditione a
patribus accepta, the Church does this by a tradition received from the
Fathers. In Philip. homil. 3.
And therefore Chrysostom went too far, when he says, Ab Apostolis sancitum
est; it is decreed by the Apostles: but though there be places of good show in
Chrysostom, yet your Papist could say no more, but that he cites a place out
of the Canons of the Apostles, and yet quoteth neither Book, Chapter, leaf,
nor Homily, where a man may find it in Chrysostomes works; howbeit if he
mean the Apostles Constitutions, he has his answer; if those Canons that be
set down in the first book of Councels, I say, they never saw any of the
Apostles, but were begotten in later times, as it is most clear in the Canons
themselves, Can. 8.
Si quis Episcopus, aut presbyter, aut Diaconus sanctum paschae diemante
vernale aequinoctium ex Iudaeis celebrauerit, abijciatur, If any either Bishop,
or Priest, or Deacon shall according to the manner of the Jews, celebrate the
feast of Easter before the vernall equinoctial, let him be deposed. If this
had been inacted by the Apostles, it may be wondered how there could be such
ado, about the feast of Easter, between the East and West Churches, the whole
matter being so clearly decided aforehand by the Apostles themselves. Again,
when we read in another Canon, Can. 30.
that such Bishops, as came by their Bishoprics by secular Princes, should be
deposed: it is easily seen that some of these Canons were not shot off, till
the time of Christian Magistrates; for Infidels (I trow) used not to give
Bishoprics, neither was there ever any so far beside himself, as to seek a
Bishopric by their means; if this will not content your Papist: then let him
show me some reason, why these Canons are not set down as a part of the new
Testament, but marked by Pope Gelasius for apochryphall, Apud Gratian.
distinct. 15. C. Romans Ecclesia.
and then I will consider whether it be needful to give him another answer.

Thus have I run over the choicest testimonies that he could find in all
the ancient Fathers and Doctors: for if he could allege all, as it were with
one mouth, to speak for his blind Traditions, as here he bragges, it is to be
thought that either he has chose^ the best, or else that he has no judgment:
as for Saint John's Gospel, beside the Majesty of the style, let him read
Epiphanius against the Alogians, and there he shall find some better proofs
for the confirmation and defense of it, than the testimony and consent of
antiquity. Now, touching his Dilemma, which he takes to be so intricate, a
very child may easily dissolve it; for we do not hold, that any thing can
make a damned heretic, but the stiff and perverse holding and auouching of
such doctrine, as is contrary or inconsonant to the holy Scriptures, whereof
the Fathers are not guilty, neither will any Papist at this day stand in
defense of such Traditions, as agree not with the word written.

The Dialogue. Sectio IIII.
PRo. Your learning (I confess) is far beyond mine, yet if you will give me
leave to press you with your own argument, I doubt not, but I shall compel
you to make such an answer as may serve us both. Pap. Take your course. Pro.
You shall find in Epiphanius. Haeres. 73. that the Apostles did ordain, that
the Wednesdaies should be fasted through the whole year, (except in the feast
of Pentecost,) and that six days before Easter, no sustenance should be
received but salt, bread, and water: Now if you do think, that these
Traditions were left by the Apostles, why do you not observe them? and why do
you seek to lay a burden upon us, which you do refuse to bear your self?
Pap. You must understand, that from the first planting of the Church, many
things taught and delivered by the Apostles, have been altered, and taken away
partly by the Apostles themselves, and partly Then were their Successors
ouer-sawcie, unless they had warrant in the Scripture so to do.
by their Successors, as the alteration of times and events, have given
occasion to alter or take them away for the good of the Church, as the
community of all things, practiced and allowed by the Apostles, the office of
They were men as well as widow women. Romans 12.8.
Widows instituted by the Apostles; the prohibition of eating of blood
decreed by the Apostles: the antiquity did fast upon the Euens of solemn
Festival days, and watch in the nights (as the name Vigilia yet remaining
does testify) but when an abuse was perceived to grow thereby, the watching
was taken away, the fasting being continued, and practiced in the Church at
this day. August. ad frat. in Eremo Sermon. 25. We might give like instances of
ye Sundaies in Lent, which were not fasted in ancient times, with the
Wednesdayes fast, by you alleged out of Epiphanius, and many such like too
long to repeat. Out of which we gather with the Be, that the Apostles did
ordain many things in the Church, which it is lawful for themseleus How
prove you their Successors might do it?
and their Successors to alter, or take away when time and occasion should
require it, for the good of the Church: but if we shall gather hereof, that
because the Church upon grave deliberation, has taken away some What be
those things?
things delivered by the Apostles, that therefore John Calvin, or any other
private man, may (at his pleasure) reject other some, we shall suck poison with
the Spider: if I should argue with you, that because you do reject the
Wednesdayes fast, which was We hear you say so.
a Tradition of the Apostles; that therefore we may reject the observation of
the Sunday: it would seem but a weak argument, although you could be content
to confess, that the observation of Sunday is grounded only upon the
Tradition of the Church, which to do were less shame unto you, than to seek
so ridiculously It is better proved, than you can prove your Traditions.
to prove it by testimony of Scripture. The ancient Catholics (as you have
heard) did use the They might better do it then, than you now.
authority of Tradition for the conuincing of Heresies, yet was there never
any of those Heretics, that denied the authority of Traditions, because the
Catholics did not observe all the Traditions which were left by the Apostles.
Saint Augustine (in the place by me above alleged, where he says: That we
ought to believe many things, which are not contained in the writings of the
Apostles, nor in the councels of their Successors, as Traditions delivered by
the Apostles because they are observed through the universal Church) does give
us an infallible rule for the true discerning of those Traditions of the
Apostles, which we are bound to follow and embrace of which sort is all the
doctrine of the Catholic, which is not found in the written Scriptures: and
surely this is so certain and direct This rule cracks the crown of Popery.
a rule, that it cannot deceive or mislead us; for can we imagine, that a The
Apostles planted no weeds, but the envious man that loved Popery. Mat. 13.25.
weed not planted by the Apostles should spring up, ouer-spread the universal
Church, remain and continue from age to age; be delivered from Bishop to
Bishop; that so many general Councels, in the mean time, should be assembled
for the extirpation of such Bastard plants; and that so many Catholic Doctors
in the mean time should write against heresies, and yet that such a weed
should still Antichrist did work in Paul's time, and must work still, till he
be abolished by the brightness of Christ's coming 2. These. 2 7.8.
remain without check or contradiction? Contrariwise, these Traditions
delivered by the Apostles, which are now generally abolished through the
universal Church: as the Apostles (who were directed by the Spirit of God)
did first institute them, for the benefit of that state of the Church, wherein
they were ordained; even so, when times have altered the state of the Church,
the Apostles Successors (directed by the same Spirit Had they no other
direction but the Spirit? take heed you be not an Anabaptist.
) have altered or abolished them for the like benefit of the Church. In the
Apostles time, when the Ceremonies of the law were lately abolished, the Jews
and the Gentiles intermingled, and people flocked together from all parts of
the world, to hear the doctrine of the Apostles, and to see the miracles which
God did work by them, the community of all things, the prohibition of eating
of blood, and the office of widows, was profitable for that state of the
Church, and A gros^e oversight.
universally practiced; but when that state of the Church was altered, all
those ordinances were altered, with no less benefit of the Church, than
before they were observed. Pro. If the general practice of the universal
Church, be the rule whereby to discern the Doctrine, which we ought to observe
by the Tradition; then is all your Doctrine, which is not grounded upon the
Scriptures, not warranted by your own rule, because it is not practiced
universally; for the contrary is practiced by the greater part of
Christendom. Pap. This rule was sufficient before Martin Luthers time, for
then was the Catholic Religion It was never universal, and it was heretical
both before, and after Luthers time.
universal: and therefore I desire to learn of you; how (since that time) the
sufficiency thereof should be impaired: for if then it was a fault in Luther
to dissent from the universal Church: how can the same doctrine which was
naught in him, be good in his Disciples? Pro. The Greek Church did celebrate
the Feast of Easter upon the 14. day of the month of March by Tradition of the
Apostles; the Latin Church did celebrate the same feast upon the Sunday next
following after the fourteenth day of the Moon of March, (if the said 14. day
happened not upon the Sunday) by Tradition also, the like difference was
between them for the use of leauened or unleavened bread in the administration
of the Sacrament, either of them grounding their doctrine upon the Tradition:
now, if you will confess that the Traditions of the Apostles were not contrary
unto themselves, you see how uncertain and dangerous it is to ground our faith
upon unwritten Traditions. Pa. A paultry cavil.
The Lutherans and Caluinists hold contrary opinions, (either of them grounding
his doctrine upon the word of God;) will you thereupon conclude that it is a
dangerous matter for us to ground our faith upon the word of God? Pro. The
comparison is not alike, for in the one case the question is, whether of them
has the true Tradition; and in the other, whether of them does rightly
interpret the Scripture, which both parties do agree to be the word of God. Pa.
If I had said, how dangerous it is for every man to ground his faith upon Why
not his own, as well as another man's. I must like it, and so make it my own
before I can believe it.
his own interpretation, you had been prevented of this answer, but you do
mistake the matter in part, for it appears by Epiphanius haeres. 70. that
this difference between the Latin and Greek Church concerning the
celebration of Easter, did grow upon As though the Apostles did not pract se it
in their own persons in both Churches but only deliver it by Tradition.
the interpretation of the Tradition; but the rule before mentioned, prescribed
by Saint Augustine for the discerning of those Traditions, which we are bound
to embrace and follow, does free you from all this supposed danger: for if the
question be of such a point of doctrine which is not contained in the word of
God, and yet notwithstanding is practiced of some particular Churches, people,
or nations, but not universally through the whole world; such a point of
doctrine we are not bound by the said rule, to receive as a Tradition left by
the Apostles, yet notwithstanding if such a point of doctrine be not contrary
to the word of God, those churches or countries where such doctrine is
practiced, ought to receive and reverence the same as a doctrine left unto them
by their spiritual pastors and superintendents for their spiritual benefit;
concerning which, you shall find sufficient for your satisfaction, in those
aduertisements (set down by S. Bid) which Pope Gregory sent unto S. Austine
the Monk, for answer of this very question, concerning the diversity of
customs used in diverse nations in matters of Church government. But let it
be You cannot choose but grant it.
granted that it was doubtful for a time, whether the Greek or the Latin
Church did observe the right Tradition; the like doubt and question You can be
content to loose the Scripture, so you may keep your Traditions.
was sometimes made of the Apocalypse of S. John, and of other pieces of
scripture; but since the one was decided by a general Council, and both is
now received and believed of the universal Church, there remains no more
doubt in the one than in the other, the tradition leading us to the truth of
them both. Thus it appears as clear as the Sun, that the Apostles left
many things which are not contained in their writings, by Tradition; Secondly,
that many traditions left by the Apostles, are now abolished; Thirdly, that
that doctrine which is practiced and believed through the universal Church,
having no ground out of the writings of the Apostles, and which has been
universally practiced from age to age, and from Bishop to Bishop, is a
Tradition of the Apostles, and to be followed and embraced; and consequently,
that all the doctrine of the Catholics (which is not warranted by Scripture)
is That is to say, upon a fancy of your own.
grounded upon the Traditions of the Apostles, and therefore to How long? till
it please you to disa^ull them.
be followed and embraced.

The Answer.
Here your Papist takes pains to show us another point of his [learning,]
namely, why some Traditions be kept, and some be out of date; but very simply
in my opinion; for antiquity appointing both wednesdaies and frydaies to be
fasted, let him yield me any color of reason or [circumstance of times or
states] why the Church should reject the one and observe the other: they were
both in force with like authority, with like consent, in omnibus orbis
terrarum regionibus, in all the countries of the world: Haeres. ^5.
as says Epiphanius, they were agreeable in all points to Augustines rule,
which is so certain and direct, says he, that it cannot misleade us, yet for
all this, wednesday fast must be packing, and friday only must continue; what
Church, I beseech you, did this, and when, and upon what [graue consideration]
was it done? it is not enough for him to talk his pleasure flyingly of [the
community of all things] no where practiced but at Jerusalem; of [the office
of widowes] still in force where it may be had, [prohibition of blood,]
rerepealed by Saint Paul and such like; but he should show us what eare-marke
one Tradition has more then another, why it may or should be cancelled; and
touching [not fasting upon Sundays in Lent] or any time else in the year, it
was generally observed in the Catholic Church, as the same Epiphanius
witnesses, In compend* doctr. eccles. haeres. 70. epist ad Phil. lib. de
coronae militis.
who tells us also in another place out of the Apostles Constitutions, that
he is accursed of God that fasteth upon Sunday, qui affligit anima^ suam in
Dominica maledictus est Deo. Ignatius calls the^ that fast upon Sunday
((...)) Christicides, Christ killers. Whereunto Tertullian accords, saying,
Epiph. 75.
die Dominico ieiunium nefas ducimus, we count it a heinous sin to fast on
the Lords day: yet notwithstanding, the Romanists have found some [graue
consideration] or other to disanull it, and to agree rather in that point with
Aerius and Eustathius too, whereof the one was an heretic, Socrates hist.
eccles. lib. 2. cap. 33.
whatsoever the other was, apud Aerianos studium est, vt in die Dominica
ieiunent: Eustathius dominicis diebus ieiunandum docuit, the Aerians are
careful to fast on the Lords day: Eustathius taught that men ought to fast on
the Lords days. And therefore your Papist, I trow, will hereafter find it best
for him not to vpbraid us any more with Aerius: yea, but when Traditions were
alleged against the old heretics, never any of them denied the authority of
some, because other some were not observed; a great piece of matters, we may
not do it, because heretics did it not; but can he show us what heretic
ever affirmed, that of one bunch or heap of Traditions, some may be taken and
some refused; and being all birds of a feather, some may fly away quite, and
the rest may in no case fly after, but flutter still in their nest? I wis,
Augustines rule will not help in this case, for fasting upon wednesdayes, and
not fasting upon Sundays, was as generally observed every where, as any other
Tradition that can be named, nay, what Tradition can be more strongly fenced,
than that of the age of Christ in Irenaeus? Iren. lib. 2. cap. 39. and 40,
Euangelium and omnes Seniores testantur, qui in Asia apud Iohannem discipulum
Domini conuenerunt, idipsum tradidisse eis Iohannem, permansit autem cum eis
vsque ad Traiani tempora, quidam autem eorum non solum Iohannem, sed and alios
Apostolos viderunt, and haec eade^ ab ipsis audierunt and testantur de
huiusmodi relatione, quibus magis oportet credi? ne his talibus, an Ptolomaeo
qui Apostolos nunquam vidit etc. The Gospel and all the Elders which were with
John the disciple of the Lord, do testify that John himself did deliver it
unto them, and he tarried with them til the time of Traiane: now some of them
saw not only John, but other disciples also, and heard the same things of
the^, and testify of such a report: who^ then ought we to believe? whether
such men as these, or Ptolomey, who never saw the Apostles? Ioh, 6.57.
Here is scripture out of S. John's Gospel, and Tradition from John's mouth, and
others of his fellow Apostles, for the exposition of the same, here be all the
Elders of Asia that heard it with their own ears, and lived to the days of
Irenaeus that writes it, and yet for all this I think the church of Rome will
as soon believe Ptolomey the heretic, as this Tradition.

The like may be said of the celebration of the feast of Easter in the churches
of Asia, where the Tradition from Saint John and Saint Philip the Apostles to
Polycarp, and so forward, was fresh in memory, observed by many Bishops and
Martyrs, Eusebius. libr. 5. cap. 22.
and confidently and resolutely avouched by Polycrates then angel of Ephesus,
and a great multitude of Bishops gathered together in Council under their
hands: yet Victor the Pope made no account of it, and within a while after
Victors death, most men think it was condemned for heresy. Now, I pray you,
tell us what the Churches of Asia should do in this case? shall they [receiue
and reuerence] this Tradition still [as left them by their Pastors for their
spiritual benefit?] what? shall they [receiue and reuerence] heresy, crossing
the decision of a general Councell] so says your Papist, if I understand him,
yet I doubt whether [ Bid or Pope Gregory, or Austine the Monke] will make
good his saying, nay, himself within three or four lines after, eats his word
again; for the contrary definition, says he, was [receiued and believed of
the universal Church,] and so by consequent of the Churches of Asia,
notwithstanding all he said before of [their spiritual Pastors and
Superintendents,] shall I now tell you what I think? verily if this Tradition
of the feast of Easter, and that other of the age of Christ, so credibly
reported, so confidently avouched, delivered over to so few hands, and so short
a succession, were found hollow and false at the heart in the very next age
that followed the Apostles, and at length, as the received opinion is,
condemned for heresy: I know not how a man should frame himself to believe
such Traditions to be sound and undefiled, which have no such pregnant
evidence, and have run through the hands of so many pitchmongers as have
lived successively so many hundred years after the death of Victor and
Irenaeus.

Yea but, says he, this was not universally received and observed, but only
of those Churches in Asia, and therefore [we are not bound by S. Austines rule
to receive it, as a Tradition from the Apostles,] well, then succession from
hand to hand, and Bishop to Bishop in particular Churches, is not sufficient to
make a Tradition apostolical, let him hold that without partiality, as well
in Italy as in Asia: Howbeit Polycrates and those worthy Bishops and Martyrs of
Asia may not be ruled by S. Austines rule, and if that Epistle of Polycrates
subscribed Synodically by so great a multitude of Bishops may be credited: this
Tradition cannot choose but be Apostolical, and so universal in nature, though
particular in practice, but what shall we do on the other side with the
Tradition of the West Church, which was further fetched then the other by so
many winters and summers, as S. John lived after Peter and Paul, that is to
say, thirty winters at the least, and so many summers, wherein this western
Tradition might well be either Sunne-burnt or weather beaten? shall we follow
S. Austines rule here too, and so believe neither the one nor the other to be
Apostolical? ware that, friend Papist, if ye mean to go for a good
Catholic; yet it is clear, that the Tradition of the west Church was not
[vniuersally receiued] no more then the other of the East, before the Nicene
Council; and therefore either S. Austines rule was then no rule, or else no
Christian for the space of 300. years, was bound to believe that the one was
left by S. Peter and S. Paul, no more then the other by S. Philip and S. John;
nay, further we read not, that any Canon was made contra Quartadecimanos in
the Nicene Council, whereby Epiphanius or any other father should score them
up for heretics, but only that it was thought meet the Tessaredecatites
being few, Eusebius. in vita Constant. lib. 3 cap 13. and 17. Socr. lib. 5. cap.
20. and 21. Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 18. and 19. Can. 8. Apost.
should yield to the greater number: now whether they yielded or yielded not,
we have no sure evidence; only we may strongly conjecture they did not yield,
by that we read of this matter in Socrates and Sozomen; as for that peremptory
magisterial Canon, which casts every Bishop, Presbyter and Deacon out of the
Church, if he celebrate his Easter ante vernum aequinoctium cum Iudaeis; it is
not known where or when or by whom or what it was enacted, and so consequently
where or when or by whom or what it should be obeyed. Wherefore I for my part
cannot disallow the resolution of Socrates, that the feast of Easter was never
imposed upon the Church by the Apostles, but brought to observation by the free
choice and liking of Christian nations, and so continued by long custom, till
by the brawling and immoderatenesse of some wayward men, the Church was
constrained to work out her own peace by uniformity.

Now to Augustines rule (beside a number of instances which may be brought
against it, as namely, the dignity of Alexandria over Egypt, Lybia and
Pentapolis, and the dignity of Rome over the West provinces, which the
Council of Nice groundeth neither upon Scripture, Apostle, Can. 6. Ierom ad
Euagr. and in epist. ad Tot. Aug. epist. 19.
nor Council, but old custom; as also the appropriating of the name [Bishop]
to the chief Ministers, wherein the custom of the Church, no Tradition or
Council generally prevailed: to this rule, I say, that it cracks the very
crown of the popish church, for nothing not contained in the scriptures could
be universally observed, but either Traditions from the Apostles, or else the
Decrees of plenarie Councels: it is clear, that the Popes universal power is
shut out of doors; and therefore to requite [the intricate Dilemma] he
talks of, let me reason thus with your Papist. The Pope either has power to
impose decrees and constitutions upon the universal Church of Christ, or else
he has not; if he have, then [ Austines rule] is crooked and may deceive us;
if he have not, then the Popes universal shephardship over the whole Church,
is come to nothing.

Howbeit, I beseech you, mark further how he hudleth up contraries, and so
marreth the fashion of his own rule, for if all things observed universally
must be [followed and imbraced] as Traditions from the Apostles, if they be
not contained either in scriptures or Councels: then no man may presume upon
any [alteration of states and times] to abolish them, if they may [abolish]
them, and [alter] them, then are they not [bound to follow and embrace them:]
add hereunto, that as [the Apostles successors] as he says, might and have
alteted and abolished apostolical Traditions [generally practiced in the
universal Church] so I would see some reason, why they may not still upon the
like [alteration] of circumstances [abolish more of them; and so it will follow
that [all the doctrine of the Catholics not found in scripture] hangs upon
circumstances, and may if it please [the Apostles successors] be quite
[abolished,] has he not spun a fair thread, think you, that thus indangereth
his own religion? yet he croweth loud, after all this fond feather-fluttering,
that all is as clear as the Sun; yet never durst any Catholic father or
church, one or other, set down this remnant of Traditions, and unite it to the
body of the canonical Scripture, which infallibly demonstrateth that all is
not [as clear as the Sun,] and it is further to be observed, how he is
feign to clowt out Saint Austines rule with a new patch which marres all; for
when he saw that universal practice is not enough to prove a Tradition
apostolical, unless it be traced still downward from the Apostles to our
days; Are kept
he is not content with (Custodiuntur) which he finds in Austine, but adds,
[haue bin universally practiced from age to age, and from Bishop to Bishop,
which no man alive is possibly able to make good in any one unwritten
Tradition, popish or catholic, unless the Church had continually appointed
in every age, such an one as Sir Francis Drake, that should travel all the
world over from Bishop to Bishop, to know and certify the state of al
Churches, and yet that policy could not work faith further then the credit of
the man, which is a poor stay for a christian conscience.

Verily the credit of men is but a sandye foundation to build upon in matters
not written; seeing your Papist was so foully ouerseene in [the community of all
things] a matter written in great letters, and so determined in the word of
God, that all open eyes may see and perceive that it was never universally
practiced: and whereas it pleases him to talk of weeds and bastard plants,
that they could not [still remain without check or contradiction, I am sure
he has read in Matthew, Sap. 13.25.
that while men slept, the envious man sewd tares among the wheat, and that
both should grow together until harvest, and therefore no marvel though the
mystery of iniquity grew on still by little and little by reason, of men's
sleepines, and wrought closely, without any effectual contradiction, otherwise
it had not been a mystery; yet notwithstanding, when once it was grown so out
of fashion, that men saw how ugly and misshapen it was, 2. These. 2.7.8
then the spirit of the Lords mouth began to consume it, and when harvest is
come it shall be abolished, neither is it marvel that Councels and catholic
Doctors slept, while the tares of Antichristian Religion were a sowing, and so
ignorantly gave their helping hand to the inthronizing of the man of sin,
Apoc. 2.13. etc.
for the Angel of Pergamus was a faithful servant of God, yet Satan had
erected himself a throne in his Church to teach the doctrine of Baalam, Apo.
2.19. etc.
and the Nicholaitans which God hated; the like may be said of that worthy
Angel of Thyatira of whom God gave testimony that he knew his love,
service, faith, patience, and works to be more at the last, than at the first,
yet he suffered the woman Iezabel to deceive the servants of God.

The Dialogue. Sectio. V.
PAp. Now let us return from whence we have digressed, that is to say, unto
the searching of the second mortal wound, which (as I have said) you have
given unto your own cause by How prove you that we have excluded them?
excluding out of your Church all the ancient Catholic Fathers and Doctors:
for admit that you could (by expounding and wresting of scriptures) intrude
your self into such a Church as holds no Doctrine, but such as is warranted
by the canonical Scriptures; Nonsequitur.
yet must you leave out of the same Church, as Heretics and Scismatickes, all
the ancient Fathers and Bishops of the Latin and Greek Churches, neither are
you you measure us by your selves.
able to name any time or place where or when your Church was extant, or any
one Bishop or principal member thereof. Pro. What points of Doctrine are they
which the antiquity did hold without warrant of scripture? and what ancient
Fathers, Doctors, and Bishops were they that held such doctrine? Pap. In a
word, they were all Papists, which being proved, you will not deny the
consequent; All the Fathers held not these points, and some of these points
were bastards, and have no known Fathers.
they held prayer for the dead, purgatory, transubstantiation, they offered a
sacrifice for the quick and the dead, they prayed to Saints, held also vows
of chastity, the unlawfulness of Priests marriage, and the descention of
Christ's soul into Hell, call you not this Papistry? I am sure you had rather
be in your Church alone, than to be troubled with such papisticall Companions:
now shall you hear All this has nothing in it, but facing.
the opinion of every Doctor delivered by his own pen in such plain words,
as you shall not be able by any gloss or distinction to pervert, but must
needs confess that they were all out of your new Church. I will begin with
prayer for the dead, and so go on in order.

The Answer.
THe second wound, is come at length to the searching, namely, that all the
ancient Fathers and Bishops, must be excluded as heretics, and scismatickes
out of our Church, and why so? Marry because they held certain points of
Doctrine not warranted by the canonical Scriptures, is not this a deep wound
think ye? we say indeed, that no other doctrine ought to be curtant in the
Church, but such as has the image and superscription of the Canonical
Scriptures: but do you therefore say, that all such as have been carried
beyond those limits, through ignorance or infirmity, Cyprian. lib. 2. Epist. 3.
are to be put out for wranglers? Si quis de antecessoribus nostris vel
ignoranter, vel simpliciter non hoc obseruauit and tenuit, quod nos dominus
facere exemplo and magisterio suo docuit, potest simplicitati eius de
indulgentia domini venia concedi, nobis vero non poterit ignosci, qui nunc a
domino admoniti and instructi sumus, If any of our Predecessors, either of
ignorance or simplicity, did not observe and keep this which the Lord by his
example and commandment has taught, the Lord of his mercy may pardon his
simplicity; but we after we have been admonished and instructed so of the
Lord, may look for no pardon. Thus said Cyprian of the Aquarians that were
before him, and so say we of the ancient Fathers, that have added the timber,
hay, and stubble of traditions, to the gold, silver, and precious stones of
Scripture; howbeit, see (I pray you) how your Papist hanges the principal
pillars of his Religion upon tradition, and all to wring out the Fathers out of
our Church. The Fathers were all Papists, and held prayer for the dead,
purgatory, transubstantiation, Sacrifice for quick and dead, prayer to dead
Saints, vows of chastity, the single life of Priests, and the descention of
Christ's soul into hell; all these trim points of learning, you shall hear now
so proved by tradition, out of every Doctor, as you must confess to be
super excellent, yet take heed you do not expound these words every Doctor
heretically, after the imagination of your own brain; for I dare assure you,
he never saw the couers of every Doctor; and therefore you may not understand
them simply, as they sound, but charitably, for so many as have writings
extant, and could be entreated of this sudden to speak an ambiguous word or
two in these matters.

The Dialogue. Sectio VI. Prayer for the dead.
EPiphanius lib. 3. To. primo. Cap. 75. It appears there, that the Heretic
Aerius was of your opinion And of yours too, for you dare not pray for the
release of incurable sins, as the Church then did, look bet-vpon Epiphanius.
concerning Prayer for the dead, and concerning the feast of Easter, and the
equality of Ministers, he was a flat Puritan. For he held, that there was no
difference between a Priest and a Bishop, he used the Then were they good
arguments.
very same arguments, for the maintenance of his Heresy, that the Protestants
and Puritanes of this time do: for confutation whereof, this ancient Father
uses none other His confutation is so much the worse.
argument but the Tradition and continual practice of the Church. I am sure
although you do Who told you so?
exclude out of your Church Epiphanius, and all other ancient Fathers: yet
Aerius shall be received and entertained as an ancient and principal pillar
thereof: but be ye well advised before you put him into your Calendar, for he
was also an That's not so soon proved, for Austine followed Epiphanius the
first and only author of it.
Arian heretic, as Saint Augustine records; but whatsoever he holds else,
it suffices if he iumpe with you in any thing against the Catholic.

The Answer.
Here comes in Epiphanius and the heretic Aerius once again to walk a
turn or two upon the stage: howbeit, it may well be doubted by what authority
Aerius was dubbed an heretic; I am sure, Mich. Medina a stout Papist says,
De Sacr. homi. orig. and conti. lib. 1. cap. 5.
that Ierom, Ambrose, Austine, Sedutius, Primasius, Chrysostom, Theodoret,
Aecumenius and Theophilact, were of his opinion in the equality of ministers;
Again Aerius was enemy to Eustathius an Arian, and therefore if he had any
desire to remove him out of his Bishopric, Haeres. 75.
and to sit himself in his room, as Epiphanius reports, there is no
likelihood that he would be an Arian himself, but keep himself clear to
accuse and condemn Eustathius of so capital an heresy; Again the opinion of
fasting upon Sunday, and condemning ordinary and set fasting days, Lib. 2.
cap. 33.
is attributed to Eustathius in Socrates story, where we read also that he
was twice condemned, once in the council of Caesarea Cappadociae by his own
father Eueanius, and again the second time in the Council of Gangra in Paph
agonia: wherefore I persuade my self that Epiphanius mistook just
reprehension for emulation, and charged Aerius with the faults of Eustathius a
double condemned heretic, and as very a Papist, as ever Aerius was [a
Puritan,] Nuptias fieri prohibuit, a cibis abstinendum docuit, nonnullos qui
nuptias contraxerant a connubio segregauit, seruos simulatione pietatis dominis
abstraxit, benedictionem and communionem presbyteri habentis vxorem tanquam
scelus declinandum praecepit etc. He forbad marriage, taught to abstain from
meats, some that had been married he separated, he drew servants from their
masters under color of piety, he commanded to shun that blessing and
communion of an Elder that had a wife of an heinous wickedness. Call you not
this papistrie? call it what you will, I am sure it is so, and it is heresy
too: Council. Gangr.
by your leave if a nathemasit pronounced by a lawful Council be sufficient
to make an heresy; show me the like evidence against Aerius, and I will
confess him to be an heretic, otherwise I must crave leave to say of
Epiphanius, as Austine does of Philastrius, In praesat. libri de haeres, ad
quod.
Multas assertiones inter haereses numerauit, quae haereses non sunt, Many
assertions he counted for heresies, which were not heresies. Nay, I will be
bold to say further, Multas assertiones haereses non numerauit, quae haereses
sunt; Many assertions he counted not heresies, which are heresies. For he has
wittingly concealed the assertions of Eustathius, 1. Tim. 4.1.3.
which Paul calls [doctrines of devils.]

Now to the Tradition which Epiphanius brings for prayer for the dead, I say
in a word, it is accepta a patribus, Received from the Fathers, not from the
Apostles.
not [ab Apostolis] and therefore it has no further credit then man can give
it; yet notwithstanding prayer was then made, not after the Popish fashion, to
ease the dead of the pains and torments of purgatory but to persuade the
living that they are not vanished into nothing, but live and have their being
with the Lord, which knockes out the brains of purgatory, for if men ought to
believe that the dead for whom prayer is made, do viuere apud dominum; Epiph.
ibidem haeres. 75.
then may we not think that they do viuere apud inferos in purgatory, but
Epiphanius helps you with better store of reasons; you heard the first, namely,
quod credant mortuos esse and viuere apud dominum, That they believe that the
dead are alive with the Lord. The second, Quod spes sit orantibus profratribus,
velut qui in peregrinatione sint, That there is hope to them which pray for
their brethren, as to them which want in travailing. The third, Quo id quod
perfectius est significetur, To the end, that which is more perfect, may be
signified. The fourth, Vt Dominum Iesum Christum ab hominum ordine separent,
that they may separate the Lord Jesus from the order and state of bare men. The
fifth, Vt adorationem domino praestent, That they may yield adoration to the
Lord. The sixth and last he sets down in the words we have in hand, Ecclesia
hoc perficit traditione a patribus accepta, The Church does this by tradition
received from the fathers. Howbeit, the fathers tradition was no more but
[memoriam facite,] keep a memory. Lib. 1. epist. 9. et lib. 3. epist. 3.
As we may see evidently in Cyprian, whereunto was added by further curiosity,
Misericordiam Dei implorate, Beg mercy of God. And at length, Masses and
Indulgences, and oblations, and satisfactions: and a whole flood of pickepurse
inuentio^s; yea but, may it be said, memoriam facite, is little worth without
misericordiam implorate: yes, by your leave, for so the Church thought good to
animate and encourage the living to stand constant in persecution, and not to
revolt for fear from Christian profession, and touching the craving of mercy
for sinners departed, which the Church used to do, most were in Epiphanius
time, you heard before all the reasons that Epiphanius could yield, and if you
look for more, or better, you must search else where, for Epiphanius cannot
help you, but hurt you: for when he says, preces prosunt, etsi totam culpam
non abscindant, prayers profit, though they cut not off the whole fault. He
marres the fashion of purgatory, where sins are not forgiven but punished: to
be short, if you peruse the words of Aerius, you shall soon find that he never
heard of purgatorian doctrine, for when he obiecteth that if prayer profit the
dead, men need not live godly, or do any good thing in their life time: but
purchase friends to pray, that their incurable sins may be laid to their
charge, it is most clear he knew not that prayer is not available, where
there is no former merit; and that venial, not mortal or incurable sins,
are purged by the suffrages of the living.

The Dialogue. Sectio VII.
SAint Austine. Pompous funerals, great troops of mourners, sumptuous
monuments, these do bring some comfort, such as it is unto the living, but
they are not available unto the dead: but we ought What is it that puts the
matter out of doubt? let that be showed, and we will doubt no longer.
not to doubt but that the dead are relieved by the prayers of the holy Church,
by the wholesome sacrifice, and by alms which are given, that it might please
our Lord to deal more mercifully with them, than their sins have deserved.
This custom the universal Church does observe (being delivered by Tradition
Austine says, a patribus, not, ab Apostolis.
from the Apostles) that, whereas at the time of the sacrifice, commemoration
is made of All communicants, and only communicants are prayed for, is this
catholic doctrine think you?
all souls departed in the communion of the body and blood of Christ, they
should be prayed for, and that the sacrifice also should be offered for them,
de verb. Apost. sermon. 32. We ought Nor we ought not to say it, unless we
could prove it.
not to deny that the souls of the dead are relieved, by the devotion of their
living friends, when as either the sacrifice of our Redeemer is offered for
them, or alms given in the Church. Enchir. ad Laurent. prope fin. When the
Martyrs are mentioned at the altar of God, they are not prayed for: but What
all? confessors, bishops, popes and all?
all other which are dead, which are there remembered, are prayed for, de verb.
Apostol. sermon. 17. When the sacrifice, whether it be of the altar, or of alms
deeds, is offered for such as are dead Why not before as well as after? you
may as well offer for the unbaptized, as for those that be valde mali.
after Baptism, for those that be very good, they be thanksgiving; for those
which be not very evil, they be propitiatory; for those which be very evil,
although they profit not the dead, yet are they some comfort unto the living,
Dulcitij question. quest. 2. Read his epistle ad Aurelium Episcopum, and his
Treatise de cura pro mortuis. This was (no doubt) S. Austines Or else you know
not what faith is.
faith, which he wrote, taught, and practiced in his church, and which was at
that time generally received in the Latin Churches.

The Answer.
AVstine belike is plentiful in this question, for we have here four several
places out of his works, which we will briefly run over as they come: In
the first Austine is forced to turn his tale, for whereas before where this
place was alleged for Tradition; prayer for the dead, was no more but a
Tradition of the fathers: here Austine is entreated to say, that it was
delivered by Tradition from the Apostles; me thinks your Papist should know
that our writers allege this very place of Austine, to show that this manner
of praying was received of the Church long after the Apostles time, Decad. 4.
sermon. 10.
as for example Bullinger in his Decades, Illud dissimulare non possum, says
he, id quod isti traditionem Apostolorum appellant, S. Augustinum nuncupare
traditionem patrum ab ecclesia receptam, nam sermon de verbis Apostoli 32. hoc
a patribus (inquit) traditu^ vniuersa obseruat ecclesia, etc. This I cannot
hide, that that which they call a tradito^ of the Apostles, Quest. 1.
Augustine calls a tradition of the Fathers received by the Church, see Sermon.
de verbis Apostoli. 32. This (says he) being delivered by the Fathers does the
whole Church observe. And a little after concludes, His significantius innuere
videtur hunc ritu^ orandi pro defunctis, haud dubie post longa internalla a
temporibus Apostoloru^ ab ecclesia receptu^ esse, By these words he seems
more thoroughly to insinuate, that this custom of praying for the dead, was
without all doubt received by the Church a long space after the Apostles times.
Wherefore this budgening and setting down quid, pro quo, in so material a
testimony, argues a perverse resolution, rather to quench the fire of truth,
than the stubble and straw of our errors should be consumed. But for answer,
I say, that Austine himself doubted of that which here he says we ought not
to doubt of; thus he writes in the questions of Dulcitius, Sieve in hac vita
tantum homines ista patiuntur, sieve etiam post hanc vitam talia quaedam iudicia
subsequuntur, non abhorret, quantum arbitror a ratione veritatis iste
intellectus huius sententiae, Whether men suffer these things only in this
life, or whether after this life, some such judgments follow, this
understanding of this sentence, is not without some show of truth as I suppose.
Also in his Books De Ciuitate Dei, Lib. 21. cap. 26
Sieve ibi tantum, sieve hic and ibi, sieve ideo hic vt non ibi, saecularia,
quamuis a damnatione venialia, concremantem ignem transitoriae tribulationis
inueniant non redarguo, quia forsitan verum est, Whether things committed in
this world, though venial in respect of damnation, do find a transitory fire
of tribulation here only, or here and there, or therefore here, because not
there; I seek not to convince, because perhaps it is true; and in his
Enchiridion, Cap. 69.
Tale aliquid post hanc vitam fieri, incredibile non est, and vtrum ita sit,
quaeri potest, That some such thing is done after this life, it is not
incredible; and whether it be so done, it is a question. Now then if Austine
himself doubted whether men be punished transitorily after this life: I know
your Papist will give us leave to doubt, whether the dead be relieved by our
prayers.

Moreover, it is here likewise to be observed, that no soul were prayed or
offered for, or thought worthy to be remembered at the Altar, but such as
departed in the communion of the body and blood of Christ, Lib. 1. Contr.
Julian. and lib. 1 de peccat. merit. and remiss. Council. 6. cap. 83. and Carth.
Con. 3. cap. 6.
which includes a general belief of those times, that none but Communicants
could be saved; and therefore Austine urges it as hotly, as any other
tradition, that the Eucharist, as well as Baptism, was necessary to the
salvation of all, even of newborn babes, whereof it comes, that the bread
and wine was then thrust into the mouths of Infants, and dead carcasses, both
in the Greek and Latin Churches. Forasmuch then as this place of Austine,
teaches two points of general doctrine, one that prayers, Sacrifices, and
alms do profit the dead; the other, that none can be saved but
Communicants, and so prayers, and sacrifices, and doles to be made for no
other: we think our selves no more bound to receive the one at Austines hand,
than Papists think themselves bound to receive the other.

Furthermore, these Offices of the living are here said to procure greater
mercy at Gods hands, than the sins of the dead have deserved; where observe,
that the sway of the time so carried both Paulinus and Austine, two worthy
renowned Bishops, that the one would not yield though he could not tell how to
answer Saint Paul's authority; 2. Cor. 5.10. Cap. 7. par. 3.
and the other sheltered himself, as Denis does in his Hierarchy under a short
heeld answer that's ready to fall backward if you do but look upon it; Paul
says, We must receive every man according to that he has done in the body,
either good, or evil: Here Paulinus is at his wits end, and cannot tell how
this can agree with prayers, sacrifices, alms, and the Patronage of dead
Martyrs, and such like humane inventions, and yet he sticks in the mire still,
and desires Austine to help him out: see now how Austine answeareth, Meritum,
per quod ista profint, si nullum comparatum est in hac vita, frustra quaeritur
post hanc vitam, If there be no merit, by which these things may do good,
Libr. de cura pro mortu. Cap. 1.
gotten in this life, it is in vain to seek it after this life. And a little
after, Vt hoc quod impenditur possit ei prodesse post corpus, in ea vita
acquisitum est quam gessit in corpore; That this which is bestowed may profit
him after the body, it is purchased in this life which he lived in the body.
But what merit is this he talks of? does it respect God or man? if man, then
man must reward it; if God, why the Apostle assures us by Commission from God,
2. Cor. 5.10.
that we shall receive good, according to that good we have done in the flesh;
and therefore all such prayers and sacrifices are superfluous: again the prayers
and sacrifices of the living, depending upon our former merits, must needs
procure either less, or the same, or more mercy than we have merited in our
life time; if less, then they hinder us; if the same, then do they not further
us; if more, then do we not receive according to the good that we have done in
the body, as Paul says, but according to the prayers and sacrifices of our
friends. Here your Papist has a Dilemma, and a Trilemma too to work upon, if
he can do any thing, Austine and Paulinus shall be beholding to him; if
nothing, the^ Paul the Apostle must have the victory.

In the mean time the very same Dilemma and Trilemma too must repel the force
of the next place cited out of Austines Enchiridion, Cap. 100.
for there Austine adds immediately, Sed eis hac prosunt, qui cum viuere^t, vt
haec sibi postea prodesse posse^t, meruerunt, But these things profit the^, who
when they lived, deserved that they might profit them afterward. Wherefore
Austine using the same shift to rid his hands of Saint Paul's authority. Vid.
Lumb. Eb. 4. distinct. 45. D.
I must use the same answer to defend it; if two men of equal merit be
inequally rewarded, because prayers and sacrifices are offered for the one, and
not for the other, then every man receives not according to that himself
has done in the flesh, but according to that other men do for him, when he is
out of the flesh. Howbeit, this second place of Austine speaks not of prayers,
but sacrifices and alms given in the Church, which belongs to the fourth
point of doctrine, to wit, sacrifice for the quick and dead; if your Papist
think that sacrifice and prayers go together, let him take heed he be not
deceived, for Cyprian speaking of Laurentius and Ignatius Martyrs, says thus,
Lib. 4. Epist. 5. de verb. Apo. sermon. 17. and in Ioh. tract. 84.
Sacrificia pro eis semper, vt meministis, offerimus; We always as you know,
offer sacrifices for them. Yet Austine says, that Martyrs [are not prayed
for,] and that it is injurious to pray for them, but because he dispatcheth
two of his points at once, let this place and some other of Cyprian, strike
some stroke in this question of Sacrifice, we offer Sacrifices for Martyrs,
says he, Quoties Martyrum passiones and dies anniuersaria commemoratione
celebramus, As often as we celebrate the sufferings and days of the Martyrs,
with a yearly remembrance. And this sacrificing pro Martyribus, Austine
himself confesses to be nothing else but praise and thanksgiving, and so he
celebrated the day of Cyprians Martyrdom; yea, but though Martyrs be not
prayed for, Sermon. de Cyp. Mart. in oper. Cypr.
when they are remembered at the Altar; yet all other which are there mentioned,
are prayed for, says Austine in the third place: and in the last place,
sacrifices (says he) for those that be Valde boni, very good, be
thanksgiving; but for those that be not Valde mali, Very evil, they be
propitiatory. I see what Saint Austine says, yet all other beside Martyrs
stood not in need of relief, as namely, the Patriarckes, the Prophets, the
Apostles, the Evangelists, the Confessors, the Bishops, the Anachorits, and our
most holy, unspotted, most blessed Lady, Gods Mother the Virgin Marie: All
these, I trow, were not Martyrs, yet were they all prayed for in the lyturgies
of Basile, Chrysostom, and Epiphanius not to relieve them, but to glorify God
in his servants, and to profit the Church by commemoration of their virtues;
it cannot be denied, but God blessed his Church continually with many such as
were Valde boni beside Martyrs, and therefore either prayers and Sacrifices go
not always one way, or else some of these places of Austine must needs fall.

Howbeit, to return to Saint Cyprian, we read that it was decreed by his
predecessors, that if any brother at his death should leave the execution of
his will to any of the Clergy, he should not be offered nor sacrificed for;
now follows the approbation and practice of this decree, in in these words,
Cum victor frater noster de saeculo excedens contra formam nuper in concilio a
sacerdotibus datam, Libr. 1. epist. 9.
Gemintum Faustinum praesbyterum ausus sit actorem constituere: non est quo pro
dormitione eius apud vos fiat oblatio aut de precatio aliqua nomine eius in
ecclesia frequentetur, vt sacerdotum decretum religiose and necessary factum
seruetur etc. Seeing victor our brother departing out of this world, durst
contrary to the order taken of late by the Priests in the Council, appoint
Geminius Faustinus a Priest his executor; there is no reason why you should
make any offering for his decease, or that the Church should meet to
deprecation for his sake, that the religious and necessary ordinance of the
Priests may be observed. Thus far Cyprian, out of which I gather, that if
these offerings and sacrifices and deprecations had bin made for refrigeration
of souls departed: then Cyprian and his Colleagues and predecessors that made
and executed this law, had been most unmerciful and most cruel and savage
tyrants, that wrote their decrees with the blood of souls; and so we read in
one of the Sermons Ad fratres in Heremo clamant quotidie defuncti qui iacent in
tormentis, Sermon. 44.
clamant, and pauci sunt qui respondeant, vlulant, and non est qui
consoletureos, o quam grandis crudelitas, fratres mei, o quam grandis
inhumanitas, clamant ad nos quotidie, nec eis subuenire curamus, o vere magna
inhumanitas, The dead that lie in torments cry daily, they cry, and few there
are that answer; they howl and there is none to comfort them; oh how great
cruelty is this my brethren? oh how great inhumanitie? they cry to us daily,
and we have no care to help them, or verily great inhumanitie. Far was this
inhumanitie from Cyprian, and the other good bishops of Afric; and therefore
far were they from believing, that praying and sacrificing did either help
or hurt their dead brethren.

Moreover, Lib. 4. epist. 5.
we must understand that the commemoration of the dead was celebrated but once
a year, so says Cyprian of the Martyrs, and so says Tertullian of them that
were no Martyrs, neither is it like that the memory of any Christian had more
days bequeathed unto it, Lib. decor. milit.
then the memory of a Martyr: now I beseech you, consider what humanity or
charity this was, to relieve our brethren that were broiled and scorched in
extreme torments, but once a year, and to leave them to their clamant
quotidie all the year after? may not a purgatory-monger cry out here to, o
quam grandis crudelitas, o vere magna inhumanitas? Verily I must think so till
I be better informed; and this is yet further strengthened, in that these
anniuersary days were celebrated festiually cum ingenti letitia, with great
joy: for had they believed that the souls of the brethren rested not blessedly
from their labors, as the spirit says, Apoc. 14.13.
but were tormented miserably in purgatory, as your Papist says; verily these
days had been days of fasting and mourning, not days of feasting and
rejoicing, I could observe further that oblatio, or deprecatio, or facrificium
pro dormitione, imports not releeuing of souls, but a thankful remembrance
to God for the quiet and Christian departure of our brother, with a
commemoration thereof to the profit and comfort of the living, but this that
has been said, is sufficient to show the innocence of Cyprians riches from
these popish abuses.

Now let us consider a little before of Austines fourth place, for the third is
sensibly false, confuted, as you heard, in the old Liturgies, and by Austine
himself in the first place, where he says, that we should pray for all
communicated souls; and in the last two, where he says, that sacrifice is
offered, Pro baptizatis defunctis omnibus, Cap. cum Marthae.
For all deceased after baptism, for [all that are dead after baptism.] Now
then touching the distinction of souls, which this last place does afford us,
it is found long ago to want a leg, and so to be lame and imperfect: for
Pope Innocent the third will needs have it go upon four legs; namely, a
very good one, a very bad one; an indifferent good one, and an indifferent bad
one, and Austine himself graunts as much in his books De Ciuitate Dei, Lib.
21. ca. 24. cap. 110. Lib. 4. did. 40.
and in his Enchiridion, as the master of Sentences has cited him; so by this
reckoning we must find out another purgatory, for indifferent good souls: for
seeing suffrages avail them ad expiationem, to expiation, as Innocentius
says; or as Lumbard mends the matter, ad plenam absolutionem, to full
absolution; they must have a new purgatory needs, for the old will receive
none but such as have filth to purge, and are stayed by some inquinament or
other from entering into heaven, and Austine tells us that all good souls
departed, have joy; and all evil souls torments. In Ioh. tract. 49.
I doubt your papist will be fowly troubled before he show us what joy souls
have in purgatory: and here observe further, that the souls which papists send
to purgatory, though they be not valde malae, yet they be malae in Austines
opinion, whereof it follows that at the general resurrection, their torments
will be more grievous, Habent omnes animae, cum de saeculo exierint, diuersas
receptiones suas, habent gaudium boni, mali tormenta, sed cum facta fuerit
resurrectio, and bonorum gaudium amplius erit, and maloru^ tormenta grauiora
qua^do cum corpore torquebuntur. All souls after they go out of the world,
have diverse rewards, the good have joy, and the bad torments, but when the
resurection shall come the joy of the good shall be greater; and the torments of
the bad more grievous when they shall be tormented in their bodies. This will
hardly agree with the popish purgatory, which is said to be the high way to
heaven, not to hell; again, it being granted that non valde malae, be malae;
not very evil, be evil. Notwithstanding it will follow likewise, that they
must continue evil still, and so never become good, that so they may flit from
purgatory to heaven, for there the tree must lie, says the wise man, where it
falls: Eccles. 11.3. Sermon. 49. ex paruis.
which place Jerome expounds of the immutabilitie of the soul after this
life, either in good or evil; and so does Barnard in one of his Sermons, but
admit the soul may be changed, and be made a good soul, of an evil soul: now
consider what it is that works this change, whether our suffrages, or the fire
of purgatory; suffrages work no more than we have merited in our life time, as
we have seen before, having merits in our life time, we have our quietus est
in our life time, and so purgatory and suffrages are both discharged: as for
the fire of purgatory, Bellar. depurg. lib. 2. cap. 6.
it is the same with the fire of hell, Theologi fere omnes docent eodem igne
torqueri damnatos and animas purgatorij. Now if this fire have power in
purgatory so to burn away sin, that it purifieth an evil soul, and
changes it from evil to good; it would be known why the same fire in hell
does not change souls from valde malae, to non valde malae by the like
consumption of sin, and so bring them on from hell to purgatory, and from
thence to heaven: if it be said that purgatory fire takes away sin, not by
way of purification, but by way of satisfaction, though this blasphemy be
sufficiently confuted by the Prophet Esaias, Cap. 53.5.
who assures us that the chasticement of our peace fell upon Christ, and that
we are heated by his stripes: yet forasmuch ar mortal sin, in his own
nature is not infinitely more punishable than venial: it will follow, that if
hell fire satisfy the justice of God in the one, it will also in proportional
time satisfy in the other, which is not a coits cast from the heresy of the
Chiliasts.

Observe yet further that Austine here seems contented that the pearl of the
body and blood of Christ should be laid to pawn for very evil souls, even
the cursed enemies of God, and labors to excuse it when he has done; such
sacrificing, says he, is some comfort to the living, as if it were lawful to
pleasure the affections of men, with the prostitution of the mysteries of God,
and where he says elsewhere, Lib. de Cura pro mort. cap. 18. Harding Artic. 19.
oportet, we must offer for all, quia non discernimus, because we cannot sever
the good from the bad: I answer, that his quia does not make good his oportet,
for the Sacrifice consisting of dead elements, cannot apply it self without
prayer, and by prayer we may easily discard evil and cursed souls, and so
apply this pretended plaster to such sores only as may be cured.

There is yet one excuse more behind, where he tells us, that it is better our
sacrifices should be offered for such as can have no benefit by them, Lib. de
Cura pro mort. cap. vlt.
quam vt desint ijs qui egent, sicut benefacimus iniustis in hoc mundo, ne
praetereantur iusti, then that they which have need should want, as we do
good to the unrighteous in the world, least the righteous should not be
regared. This excuse were something worth, if sacrificare pro valde malis were
commanded, as benefacere iniustis is; but sacrificing for damned souls, being
simply evil, we must learn of Paul, Romans 3.8.
not to do evil, that good may come of it.

Howbeit these two last excuses teach us, that we cannot help Purgatory
unless we pray for Hell; we must offer for the unjust that be in hell, or else
the just that be in purgatory must be pretermitted, and this is done for both,
nay, for all, tagge and ragge, with all indifferency of words and deeds, in one
uniform generality of prayer, otherwise the living, seeing their dead in any
one point neglected, cannot conceive comfort, but grief and discouragement;
now, I beseech you, consider how this general oblation can possibly be so
parted among dead souls, that for some it is eucharisticall, for other some
propitiatory, and for some a mere nullitie: but what speak I of parting? it
must be all eucharisticall for those that be valde boni; it must be all
propitiatory for those that be non valde mali; and for all other, either
consolatory to the living, or nullatory to the damned, is this possible think
you? we cannot offer for Martyrs and Martyrs fellows, without agimus tibi
gratias; we cannot offer for Purgatorians without prasta quaesumus, and how
both these can be confounded in one applicatory prayer, as it were ale and
beer in one pot to serve all turns at once; it is far beyond the reach of
my wit to conceive.

Besides this, there remains yet another inconvenience, in that Austine holds
the sacrifice of alms at as high a price, in this office of relieuing souls,
as the sacrifice of the altar, and so the quality of his speech seems to
import; for when Paul says, Ephesians. 6.8.
Vnusquisque quod fecerit boni, hoc recipiet a Domino sieve seruus, sieve liber,
What good thing soever a man does, that shall he receive of the Lord, whether he
be bond, or free: He gives us to understand, that in respect of the Lords
rewarding of virtue, bond and free are of equal regard. And therefore when
Austine says, Sacrificia pro defunctis propitiationes sunt, sieve altaris, sieve
quarumcunque eleemosinarum, Sacrifices for the dead be propitious, whether
they be of the altar, or of any alms whatsoever: his meaning is, that these
two sacrifices, in respect of propitiating the dead, are of equal estimation.
I doubt whether your Papist will allow this for current divinity, that in any
work of our redemption, corruptible things, 1. Pet. 1.18.19
as silver and gold given in alms, should be aequallized to the precious blood
of Christ, which he dreams to be really present in the Sacrament: and if it
should happen that this absurdity will not stop his course; yet when
Chrysostom yields greater power to the sacrifice of Alms, than to the
sacrifice of the Altar, I trow he will stop there, if he be not desperate,
look his Sermons upon the Philippians, Sermon. 3.
and there you shall find that such as died without Baptism, called
Catechumeni, finding no help in the prayers and other sacrifices of the
Church, were notwithstanding somewhat relieved by alms giving in their names
to the poor, Omni huiusmodi destituti sunt auxilio, says he, vno quodam
dempto, quonam illo? pauperibus illorum nomine dare licet, vndeillis nonnihil
refrigerij accedit; they are destitute of every such help, one only excepted:
and what is that? men may give somewhat to the poor for their sakes, whereby
they receive some refreshing: heerehence therefore we may safely gather, I
think, that Austine and Chrysostomes sacrifice was not the same with the
Sacrifice of the Mass, wherein a popish shaueling priest without all shame or
fear of God, offers the Son of God to his Father.

Concerning the Treatise, de cura pro mortuis agenda; Instit. lib. 3. 5. 10.
Calvin has truly censured it in these words, Tot haetitationes continet, vt
suo frigore merito debeat stulti zeli calorem extinguere, etc. It contains so
many doubts, that the coldness thereof, might justly extinguish the heat of
foolish zeal. And a little after, haec vna ect fultura quia inualuit
consuetudo, etc. If that book have any better helps then haesitations, and
likelyhoods, and custom, let them be brought to light that we may see them; if
it have no other, no reason the bare frozen authority of any man living or
dead, hanging upon vnchawed and undigested conjectures, should keep us in
prison.

Epist. 64.
The Epistle to Aurelius, which we are likewise willed to read, has this
saying, Oblationes pro spiritibus dormientium, quas vere aliquid adiuuare
credendum est, super ipsas memorias non fint sumptuosae, atque omnibus
petentibus sieve typho, and cum alacritate prebeantur, neque vendantur, sed si
quis proreligione aliquid pecuniae offerre voluerit, in praesenti pauperibus
erogetur, ita nec deserere videbuntur memorias suorum, quod potest gignere non
leuem cordis dolorem, and id celebrabitur in ecclesia quod pie honesteque
celebratur. The offerings for the souls of the dead, which we must believe,
do indeed somewhat help, let them not be sumptuous over their memories, and
let them be given to all that ask them without disdain and cheerfully, and
not sold: but if any man for religions sake will offer any money, let it be
presently bestowed on the poor: so shall men not seem to forsake the memories
of their friends, which might be occasion of no small grief of heart, and that
which is celebrated in the Church, shall be godlily and honestly celebrated. It
is not very easy to guess what these oblations were, for the sacrament cannot
be sumptuous, unless we met some precious stone of great value in the
Communion Cup, as Cleopatra did in a cup of Ippocras, other oblations cannot be
sold, nor yet given to every one that asks them, if it be said that the
sacrament might be called sumptuous, not in it self, but in regard of the
pomp and costly braueries of funerals: it is easily seen, that Austine here
speaks not of funerals, but memorials; which as they were sumptuous, so were
they celebrated with feasting and joy, not with mournful calling upon God for
a jail delivery, and therefore we may better understand this same aliquid
adiunare, somewhat to help; of helping the living, who otherwise might
conceive sorrow of heart, or, of the inflaming of men's devotion to zeal and
feruencie of prayer, when they behold the representation of the death of Christ
in the reverend mysteries, then of offering Christ in sacrifice to God his
father for the relief of the dead, Vero aliquid adiuuare credendum est, We
might believe that they do indeed help somewhat, says Augustine, but that
every one that celebrated the memory of his friend, should believe that his
friends soul was in purgatory, craving yearly relief at his hands; that
says not Austine: it may be his friends soul was in heaven, it may be it was
in hell; it may be it was delivered out of purgatory the last year, or the
year before, and therefore it may be that oblations could not help him, and
so consequently that Austines [credendum] in this case, is no whit better then
an [ignorandum] howbeit you may tell your papist that this place is not for his
profit, for if his massing soul Priest may not sell his oblations and
prayers, but give them freely and cheerfully to all that ask: tht poor man
will hardly be able to keep a Concubine; Austine saw that veniale peccatum,
venial sin, was like to prove, venale, venall, or set to sale, and
therefore he says, prebeantur neque vendantur, let them be given, not sold.
But now, no money, no mass, no penny no pater noster. Wherefore to conclude
all in a word, if this had been Austines faith, he would not have taught it so
loosely and vntowardlie, yet howsoever he teaches it, as faith, or opinion, or
custom, or what else soever; the faith of one modern sacrifice
Sacrificatorians is of another Edition.

The Dialogue. Sectio. VIII.
SAint Ambrose who This Ambrose never saw S. Austine nor S. Austine him.
converted Saint Austine to the faith, die likewise hold and practice the same
doctrine: for thus he prays before the celebration of the divine mysteries.
Let the invisible form of the Holy Ghost descend to teach me thine unworthy
Priest, reverently to handle so high a mystery, that thou may mercifully
receive at my hands this sacrifice, to the help both of quick and dead,
Precatio prima praeparans ad The word Missa is not to be found in all Ambrose.
missam.

The Answer.
BElike Ambrose and Austine must agree in all points, because the one converted
the other, otherwise this tale of Austines conversion is told out of season:
but by your leave if this counterfect prayer be construed after the Popish
fashion, I doubt whether Austine will give it allowance, Howbeit, supposing
this Jack Straw to be the right Ambrose, I answer that he speaks not here
of this mystery, as it is a sacrament, putting us in mind of God, for then the
virtue of it could not depend upon the worthiness, the reverent or irreuerent
handling of the Priest, but as it is a sacrifice, putting God in mind of us:
now if Ambrose purposed to offer up the very body and blood of the son of God
in sacrifice to his father, the absurdity of receiving it mercifully in regard
of his reverent handling remains still, for the real body and blood of
Christ had been acceptable to God of it self without help of Ambroses
holiness: Contr. epist. Par. lib. 2. cap. 8.
Austine could not abide that Parmenian should say that the Bishop is mediator
between God and the people, and avouches, that if Saint John had taken so
much upon him: every good faithful Christian would have taken him for
Antichrist, rather then the Apostle of Christ, and therefore, if Ambrose had
prayed that God would mercifully receive the body and blood of his son at his
hands, making himself mediator between the son of God and his father, as
Popish Priests venture to do at this day in the Church of Rome; I may well
think Austine, notwithstanding his conversion, would have detested it. Lib. 4.
part. 2.
Cum sacerdos orauerit prohostia transubsta^tianda, eamque transubstantiata^
patri obtulerit orat pro ipsius acceptatione When the Priest prays for
transubstantiating of the host, and does offer it being transubstantiated to
the father, he prays for the acceptance of it. Thus says Durand: and the
Priest in the Mass desires God to look Propitio ac sereno vultu,
propitiously and cheerfully, upon the body and blood of Christ his son, and
to receive the same, as once he received the sacrifice of Abel etc. This is a
presumptuous and a desperate blasphemy, yet must we either make Ambrose guilty
of it in this prayer, or else see him discharged of transubstantiation, There
is a full discourse in Irenaeus, where it is proved out of the Scriptures,
Lib. 4. cap. 34.
that God ever accepted him that offered, better than the offering, and that no
oblation is pleasing unto God, when he that offers it does not please him
better, and therefore it is said in Genesis, Cap. 4.4.5.
that the Lord had respect unto Abel and his offering, but unto Cain and his
offering he had no regard; and if the offering of a wicked man were acceptable
to God, it had been out of season to charge that man to go away from the
Altar, to be reconciled with his brother, Matthew. 5.23.
before he presume to offer his oblation, so long as a man choseth his own
ways, and inwardly delights in abominations; Esa. 66.23. etc.
his killing of a bullock is as if he slew a man; his sacrificing a sheep, as
if he cut off a dogs neck; his offering an oblation, as if he offered swines
flesh; and such a man's offering incense to God, is as if he blessed an idol.
It comes to pass often among men, that the wicked is accepted for his gift,
and so absolved because the judge is either needy or covetous; but God has no
need of our sacrifices, he neither eats the flesh of Bulls, nor drinks the
blood of Goats, Psalm. 50.30.
he neither eats bread, nor drinks wine, but looks favorably upon him and
his sacrifice, that has an humble and contrite heart, and trembles at his
word, and therefore well concludes that ancient Father, Igitur non sacrificia
sanctificant hominem, non enim indiget sacrificio Deus, sed conscientia eius
qui offert, sanctificat sacrificium pura existens, and praestat acceptare Deum
quasi ab amico, Sacrifices therefore do not sanctify a man; for God has no
need of sacrifice, but the conscience of him that offers being, pure does
sanctify the sacrifice, and causes that God receives it as of his friend. I
trow your Papist will look about him, before he presume to say that the
purity of a Popish Priests conscience sanctifies the son of God, and makes
him to be accepted of his father, and so learn that this sacrifice which could
not acceptably be received of God, unless the holy Ghost did inuisibly teach
Ambrose to handle it with due reverence, was not the sacrifice of the Mass,
but the Eucharisticall sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving.

Yea but, may it be said, how can praise and thanksgiving help both the
quick and dead? how, say you? and how can the Mass do it? I am sure, I can
show the one with more ease, then any man living can show the other; for it is
easily understood, that prayer is more devout and fervent and forcible, when
our souls are possessed of the graces of God offered in the Sacrament, as
being then more inflamed with the love of God, that has not spared his own
Son, but gave him over to death for our redemption, and we may well be said
to help the dead, Apoc. 7.10. and 6.10. 1. Cor. 54. etc Luke 21.28. Romans 8.23.
Act. 3.19.
when we join with them in praising God, and in prayer to repress the rage of
Tyrants, and speedy coming of the Lord Jesus to vanquish death, and to
accomplish our redemption, and theirs in that day, which Peter calls the day
of refreshing: And that this, or some such thing as this, is the help of
quick and dead, In orat. de obit: Theod. In orat: de obit: Valent:
which Ambrose means, his own practice will euince it, for he rejoices that
Theodosius reigned with Christ, yet he prays God to grant him optatam
requiem, desired rest. So likewise of Valentinians soul he says, that it was
beautiful as the Moon, chosen as the Sun, a blessed soul, that looked
down from above upon us that be here beneath; and that both Valentinian and
Gratian his brother did enjoy the pleasures of eternal life, yet thus he
adds immediately in the same place, beati ambo, si quid meae orationes
valebunt, nulla dies vos silentio praeteribit, nulla nox non donatos aliqua
praecum mearum contextione transcurret, omnibus vos oblationibus frequentabo,
Both are blessed ones, if my prayers can do any thing, no day shall pass you
over with silence, no night shall run over, in which I will not give you some
labor of my prayers, I will frequent you in or with all offeringes; here is a
Mass of requiem, for Theodosius, and store of prayers and sacrifices for
Gratian and Valentinian, yet because Ambrose converted Austine, and both held
the same doctrine, thus must we resolve, Sacrificia pro valde bonis gratiarum
actiones sunt, Sacrifices for those that be very good, are thankesgiuings,
says Augustine; but Theodosius, Gratian and Valentinian were valde boni, for
their souls did shine as the morning star, and had the fruition of eternal
bliss in heaven, So Ambroses prayers and Sacrifices were not propitiatory, but
eucharisticall, and if this resolution please not your Papist, then let him
consider, that Austine in his Confessions prays thus for his mother,
Promisisti misericordiam misericordibus, and credo iam feceris, quod te rogo,
sed voluntaria oris mei approba Domine; Thou have promised mercy to the
merciful, and I believe thou have done that already which I desire, yet
approve o Lord the free will offerings of my mouth: and let him conclude
thereof, that Ambrose to show his love and affection, prayed voluntary for
Theodosius, Gratian, and Valentinian, as Austine did for his mother Monica.

The Dialogue. Sectio IX.
SAint Chrysostom, it was not without cause ordained of the Apostles, that in
the dreadful Mysteries commemoration should be made of the dead, as a thing
whereby much profit and advantage does redound unto them, for when the whole
congregation, and the priests do stand together, with their hands stretched
forth toward heaven: how can we choose but entreat To do what? to give them
rest? then never pray more but once, if the Lord must needs be entreated by
your prayer.
our Lord for them by our prayers? but this is to be understood of those only
which are departed in the faith. And again in the same Homily, Why do thou,
after the death of thy friends, call together the poor? Why do thou beseech
the priests to pray for them? I know thou will answer, that they may attain
unto rest: that they may find the judge favorable. Tom. 4. ad populum homilia
69.

The Answer.
Chrysostom, though he might say, Voluntaeria oris mei approba domine,
Approve the free will offerings of my mouth, as well as either Ambrose or
Austine: yet he thought himself bound to remember the dead, at the
ministration of the dreadful mysteries, even by the Apostles ordinance,
Austine never durst say any more of that order, but that it was traditum a
patribus, delivered by the Fathers, no more durst Epiphanius; neither is it
credible that either of them would hinder the credit of it, so much as to
father it upon the Fathers, if they had thought the Apostles had ordained it:
Lib. 1. Epist. 9.
we heard before that Cyprians Predecessors decreed, that if a Christian
brother dying, should appoint a Clarke ouerseer of his goods, the sacrifice
should not be celebrated for him, which neither they would have ventured to
enact, nor Cyprian and the godly Bishops of his time to approve and practice,
if they had surmised the Apostles had decreed the contrary. Again, when
Chrysostom demands, how we can choose but entreat the Lord for the dead? It
may be demanded of him again, what he would obtain for such as are departed
in the faith, for he dares pray for no other: if answer be made, he desires
they may attain unto rest; he would be told that in fide abscedere, to depart
in faith, and in fide requiescere, to rest in faith, are all one; yet thus he
prays in his Liturgy, Offerimus tibi rationalem hunc cultum pro in fide
requiescentibus, We offer thee this reasonable service, for those that rest in
the faith; And so desires rest for them that be in rest already; and indeed so
it must be, not because Chrysostom prays so, but because the spirit of God
says so, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, Apoc. 14.13.
for they rest from their labors. This place is clear; yet Bellarmine has
scraped together two answers, one out of Anselmus, who says, that Saint John
speaks of the time, that follows the last judgment, which is absurd; for
then he would have said (...) from thence-forth, not (...) from henceforth;
his other answer out of Haimo and Richardus. De S. Victore, restraines the
comfort of this heavenly voice to Martyrs and perfect men, which is a male part
impounding of the grace of God common to all that keep the commandments of
God, and live and die in the faith of Jesus, it will trouble Bellarmine, and
Victor: let father Haimo help them to persuade wise men, that Meri in Domino,
to die in the Lord, is more proper to perfect men; than ( Nubere in Domino, 1.
Cor. 7.39.
to marry in the Lord) to perfect women: howbeit, these two answers play at
hard-head, and beat out one another brains: Anselmus cannot abide we should
allow the one, and Haimo and Victor will be stark angry with us, if we allow
the other, and therefore, to please both sides, it will be our best way to
allow neither.

But to proceed, Chrysostom makes another petition for the dead, [that they
may find the Judge favorable,] wherein we must consider two things; the
sentence of the Judge, and the Execution. The sentence is either particular
presently after death, Eccles. 11.26.
or general at the last day in the clouds of heaven: touching the former
Chrysostomes petition for [fauour] comes too late; and touching the other, it
must needs be either venite benedicti patris mei, come ye blessed of my
father; or else, ite maledicti in ignem aeternum, Math. 25.34.41.
go ye cursed into hell fire: no praying or sacrificing can either revoke or
alter this sentence, Ego Iehoua, and non mutor, I am the Lord, Malac. 3.6.
Genes. 18.25.
and change not: and as the Lord is immutable, so his sentence both first and
last, is just: Shall not the Judge of the world do right? says Abraham, as if
he should say, it is impossible it should be otherwise: wherefore if any
[fauour] be to be found, it must be in the execution. Psalm. 103.20.
Now the Executioners (being either Angels or Devils) Angels must do the will
of God as it is enjoined them; at the Devils hands no [fauour] can be looked
for, now what is next? verily it is hard to tell, unless we call upon God to
rectify that which is right, to mend that which is not amiss, to undo that
which is done well, and to mitigate that punishment which is no sharper than it
ought to be; it may well stand with the folly of man's affections to make such
prayers, but it will hardly stand with the wisdom and justice of God to give
them the hearing, Suffragia aut ad hoc prosunt, vt plena sit remissio,
Enchirid. cap. 110.
aut tolerabilior damnatio, says Austine, Suffrages are profitable to make
either remission of sins more perfect, or damnation more tolerable; but how
remission or mitigation of an absolute and a just sentence damnatorie, Ad
supplicium tantum and tale, To punishment so great and of such quality: being
under execution, can possibly stand with Ego Iehoua and non mutor in Malachy:
it passes the reach of all the wit and learning I have to determine. Wherefore
well might Chrysostom say, Nouerunt, the Apostles knew, what profit redounded
to the dead, by commemoration in the dreadful mysteries, for he himself knew
not how the prayers of Priest and people could profit the dead, much less how
annual commemorations could do it.

And here let it be considered, how untowardly Chrysostom disputes, the
Apostles knew that commemoration of the dead at the altar was profitable unto
them; Ergo, the Apostles ordained it should be so. I will not stand upon the
sequel, let that go for good; but how knew Chrysostom what the Apostles
knew? who revealed their counsel unto him? if any body told him; what reason
had he to believe it? if no body told him; what reason had he to say it? and
therefore he that loves Chrysostom best, must needs confess that his
antecedent is more doubtful than his conclusion, but when he reasons
further, that the people and Priest stretching out their hands to heaven, must
needs appease Gods wrath; Ergo, commemoration of the dead is profitable: he is
much ouer-seene, for commemoration of the dead, and praying fot the dead, are
not the same, as the Papists themselves know and confess, De purg. lib. 1.
cap. 5.
Epiphanius nusquam dicit orari pro sanctis, sed memoriam fieri, says
Bellarmine, Epiphanius never says, we pray for the dead, but hold a memory of
them. And therefore herein Chrysostom is forsaken of all his friends both
Papists and Protestants; howbeit the growing of this unlucky twigge, from
profiting the quick, to profiting the dead; from commemorating at the altar,
to praying, offering, and sacrificing at the altar; from thanksgiving to
entreating, etc. is here made known unto us, so as now it is become a tree of
so great spread, that a number of unclean birds build their nests in the
branches of it.

The Dialogue. Sectio. X.
TErtullian, This ancien father was a Montanist and a Chiliaste, as it
appears by this place.
This ancient father, reasoning with a woman (whose husband was dead,)
concerning the bond that did still remain between her and her dead husband,
concludes thus, Let her pray for his soul, let her entreat that he may be
refreshed What bond? see Romans 7.2. He puts out and in, and misordereth
Tertullians words.
in the mean time, and that at the resurrection, she may have the fruition of
his company; these things if she do not, it may be truly said of her, that she
has forsaken him, infinite are the places which might be alleged to this
purpose, but this may suffice to prove that this was the belief and practice
of the Jerome says that Tertullian was not homo ecclesiae a man of the church.
Church in Tertullians time, who lived near unto the Apostles, that in
Epiphanius, Ambrose, Austine, and Chrysostomes All these were of one time and
only Chrysostom fathereth this Tradition upon the Apostles.
it was holden for a Tradition left by the Apostles, and generally believed and
practiced through That which he called the Latin church is here called
Universal, etc. Vide Sect. 7.
the universal Church, and that it has ever since bin so believed and
practiced through the world, until the bore affirmation of Luther that there
was no such Tradition left by the Apostles, prevailed more with you, than the
authority of all these ancient fathers, and the long continued practice of the
universal Church to the contrary.

The Answer.
YOur Papist here alleges Tertullian, and for very shame concealeth the
place where this testimony is to be found, if he had but named Tertullians
book de Monogamia, it had been a sufficient preservative against the contagion
of this allegation, for Jerome notes this very book, In Catal. Eccle. script.
and the book de exhortatione ad Castitatem, and some other to have been
written aduersus Ecclesiam, against the Church: and the same father writing
against Heluidius, would not vouchsafe to answer a place alleged out of
Tertullians book de Monogamia, no otherwise then thus, de Tertulliano nihil
amplius dico, quam Ecclesiae hominem non fuisse, of Tertullian I say no more,
but that he was not a man of the Church: so then Tertullian was a
paracleticall Montanist, and the first father of the Tertullianists, which
Austine speaks of in his book of heresies, ad quod vult Deum; Secondly, the
book de Monogamia is condemned of the Church; and lastly, this very place has
two plaguesores running of it, as being infected with two capital heresies,
Tertulide Monogam.
namely the heresy of the Montanists, and the heresy of the Chiliasts; these
be the words pro anima eius oret, and refrigeriu^ interim adpostulet ei, and in
prima resurrectione, consortium, and offerat annuis diebus dormitionis eius,
nam haec nisi fecerit, vere repudiauit quantum in ipsa est, etc. Let her pray
for his soul, and desire refreshing for him in the mean time, and his company
in the first resurrection, and let her offer yearly on the days of his death,
for if he do not these things, she has as much as lies in her made divorce.
Here we see first, that Tertullian does not say, ores, but oret, adpostules,
but adpostulet, offeras, but offerat, feceris, but fecerit, repudiasti, but
repudiauit, quantum in te est, but quantum in ipsa est, whereof it follows,
that he does not reason with a woman, but speak of a widow woman, reading her
a Cataphrygian lecture not to marry again, but to pray for the soul of one
husband, to entreat for a refreshing to one husband, to desire company of one
husband, to offer yearly for one husband, etc. for being a Montanist he
thought it a foul shame for her to pray thus for many husbands, Lib. de
exhort. ad Castit.
duplex iste rubor est, a double shame; says he in another place, nay
triplex, and quadruplex, if happily she marry so often, and so pray for the
souls of so many husbands: wherefore we see by this little light that praying
and offering for the dead, is held by Tertullian, as an appurtenance to
Montanisme or the Cataphrygian heresy, and this is yet further strenthened in
that Phylastrius says, the Montanists held baptizing for the dead, which could
not be done without prayers.

Now, touching the other heresy of the Millenaries or Chiliasts, your Papist
translateth [ in prima resurrectione, in the first resurrection,] [at the
resurrection,] leaving out [prima,] as a note of shame; for if there be a first
resurrection, it follows that there is another, call it a second
resurrection, or what you will. Now; every body knows that the Chiliasts
held two resurrections; one at the next appearing of Christ in the clouds,
which blesses all the godly with all bodily pleasures, meat, drink, venerie,
etc. Another a thousand years after, when the wicked shall likewise be
restored to felicity. Apoc. 20.5.6.
If any happen to reply that Saint John, (though he be no Chiliast) speaks of
a first resurrection, as well as Tertullian: I answer, that Saint John by
first resurrection, means [regeneration] which Paul calls [a rising again
with Christ] and so Beda expounds it, Colos. 3.1. Beda. in Apoc. 20.
saying, Sicut prima mors in hac vita est per peccata, ita and prima
resurrectio in hac vita est per remissionem peccatorum; As the first death is
in this life by sins, so the first resurection is in this life by the
forgiveness of sins. But Tertullians first resurrection, cannot be so
understood, unless we imagine [this life] to be after this life, which is
impossible.

This is enough, I trow, and too much for answer to Tertullian, yet another
trick of false translation would not be passed over, for where Tertullian
says, refrigeriu^ interim adpostulet ei, and in prima resurrectione
consortium, referring the word interim, to the intermediall time before the
woman enjoy her husbands company: he translateth it so, that it must needs be
referred to the refreshing of his soul before the first resurrection in
purgatory or some place of sorrow; which is not to be gathered out of this
place, for, refrigerium, does not import a former grief, but a new blessing.
And so this widow woman is not yet willed to pray for relaxation of pain, but
that her husband may have a joyful sentence of blessedness in body and soul
[in the first resurrection,] at what time she was to expect the fruition of
his companion.

Again, observe how this Popish translator has utterly omitted these words,
[and offerat annuis diebus dormitionis eius] whereby light is given us, that
all this praying and offering was but a matter of course, and custom
continually performed for preservation of the memory of our friends and
Christian brethren deceased: as there were annual oblations, Tert. de Coron.
milit.
pro dormitione, for death or sleeping, so then were also pro natalitijs, for
the birth; and as the one was rather an honor to the dead, than an
acknowledgement of their misery, so was the other: yet now [oblationes pro
natalitijs] are clean taken away, and [oblationes pro dormitione,] or [pro
defunctis] still continued, or rather augmented, or to speak more truly,
clean changed from the first institution; howbeit I will not deny but
Tertullian in time might have some good conceit of purgatory, or hell rather,
for he calls it [ infernum, Lib. de Anima sect. 17.
] but I utterly deny that ever he held any such doctrine before he was a
Montanist, or ever knew it, till his Paraclete taught him, in his Apology
against the Gentiles, within a lease or two of the end: thus he writes, Ideo
representabuntur and corpora quia neque pati quicquam potest anima sola sine
stabili materia, id est, carne, and animae non sine carne meruerunt, intra quam
omnia egerunt, Therefore shall the bodies also represent, because both the
souls offer any thing without stable matter that is the flesh, and the souls
have not deserved any thing without the flesh, in which they have done all
things. This opinion is not to be liked of, yet Tertullian held it so long as
he was a Catholic: and therefore so long as he was a Catholic [Purgatorie]
would not down with him, nor prayer for the dead; neither if your Papists own
consequence be good: And that Tertullian drew this purgatorian conceit, such
as it was from Montanus his Paraclete, do but read the last conclusion of his
Book de Anima; thus he writes [ Quum carcerem illum, quod euangelium
demonstrat, inferos intelligimus, and nouissimum quadrantem modicum delictum
mora resurrectionis illic luendu^ interpretamur: nemo dubitauit animam aliquid
pensare penes inferos, salua resurrectionis plenitudine per carnem quoque, When
we understand by the prison which the Gospel speaks of hell, and interpret
the last farthing, a small sin to be done away by the delaying of the
resurrection: no man will doubt that the soul does pay something in hell,
leaving the rest to be fulfilled at the resurrection by the flesh also. Here we
find somewhat like purgatory, though I dare not say it is the same, but let
it be so if you will. Now, see what follows in the same place immediately,
Hoc Paracletus frequentissime commendauit, si quis sermones eius ex agnitione
charismatum promissorum admiserit, This the Paraclete has often commended, if
a man admit his saying, by acknowledging the promised graces; Where you may
learn that doctrine was knocked into Tertullians head by his familiar, that is,
by the Paraclete of Montanus.

Yea, but why dare you not say, that this prison is Purgatory? do you ask
why? Marry the very words make me to stand doubtful, namely, per carnem
quoque, by the flesh also; which to my understanding import, that the soul
only must not feel smart, but caro quoque, the flesh also, and good reason it
should be so: for if nothing can enter into the kingdom of heaven before it
be purified, and we know that the modica delicta, small sins, as well as
other capital sins, taint the body, as well as the soul; we must needs
devise a Purificatorie for the one, as well as a Purgatory for the other, and
so hold with Tertullian, that the soul before the resurrection, shall suffer
per se, by it self; and after the resurrection per carnem quoque, else all is
marred. Robert Bellarmine the new Cardinal saw this place of Tertullian, I
dare say for him, yet he passes it over slightly, and cites another place for
purgatory out of the same book, Ille (id est angelus executionis) te in
carcerem mandet infernum, Bellar. de purg. lib. 1. cap. 4. and cap. 6.
vnde non dimittaris, nisi modico quoque delicto mora resurrectionis expenso,
He (that is to say, the Angel of execution) shall cast thee into infernal
prison, whence thou shall not come out, till every little sin be paid for by
the delay of the resurrection. This place he cites in two several places, and
gives us a special note to carry away with us, Nota solum esse manendum in
carcere purgatorij ad summu^ vsque ad resurrectione^; But alas good father
Robert, the other place marres the fashion of this note, for it adds, Salua
resurrectionis plenitudine per carne^ quoque, which gives us a new note, that
both soul and body must likewise suffer in this infernal prison after the
resurretion: I doubt when all is come to all, this prison will prove to be
hell, not purgatory, yet such a hell as the millinarie heresy dreamed to be
temporal, not eternal; wherefore I hope your papist will no more seek the
belief and practice of the Church in Tertullian, Ierom contra Heluid.
who was not of the Church, nor look any more in Tertullians mouth for his
age, telling us that he lived near unto the Apostles, till he can prove his
doctrine to be apostolical.

The names of Epiphanius, Ambrose, Austine, and Chrysostom are repeated here
for a show, but you have heard what private conference I had with them,
whereunto add that their witness, being single men, cannot justly be accepted
for a public record of religion, whereunto Luther of any other servant of God
may not oppose himself; they lived in a manner altogether, they could not see
over far either before, or behind, or about them, neither is it convenient
that we should make an idol of man's authority; a great sort of fathers agree
that Elias shall come before the last day, Mat. 17.12.
yet I had rather believe Christ that says, Elias is come already; many of the
fathers say, the wicked a thousand years after domes day, Lib. 2. cap. 39. and
40.
shall be saved, yet, by your leave, I had rather say otherwise, Irenaeus held
that Christ was nere fifty years old when he was put to death, and proved it
by the common consent of all the Bishops of Asia that learned it of S. John:
yet may we not believe that this was then believed through the universal
Church. Tertullian, in his Apology for the Christian Churches of his time,
says that the soul cannot suffer any thing, Sine stabili materia, id est,
earne: Yet may we not believe that Christians believed so through the world.
The same father says in the same Apology, that Christians did the^ publicly
pray, Pro mora finis, yet were it hard to say after him, Apoc. 22.20.
that the whole Church prayed against the appearing of Christ in the clouds to
vanquish death, and to accomplish their redemption. S. John prayed, Come Lord
Jesus, come quickly, And therefore I dare not say the Church ever prayed, Stay
Lord Jesus, and come slowly. Howbeit let the Catholic fathers have all the
credit and honor that bare men be capable of, we will not stand against it,
but to throw down so many kingdoms, so many dukedoms, so many flourishing
Commonweals, so many free cities and Churches, as if the bare affirmation of
one man did ouerrule them, it is too much indignity: if Luthers bare
affirmation be so mighty in operation, let not your Papist and his companions
call any more for miracles to confirm his vocation, but if it be the breath of
Gods mouth that began in him, and in his time more powerfully to consume
Antichrist; then in former ages: the^ fear, friend Papist, I say, fear the
revenging hand of God, who will not suffer his power to be derided.

The Dialogue. Sectio XI. Purgatory.
ALl the proofs before alleged, for prayer for the dead, may as well serve
for the proof of Purgatory, for such is the relation between the one and the
other: as This is but a conceit, look the answer.
they cannot be separated. For why do we pray for the dead? the answer is
made by S. Chrysostom, that Some prayed to that end without warrant, and some
to other ends etc. as shall appear.
they may attain to rest; that they may find the judge favorable, whereof it
follows that they are in a place where they want rest, and where they have
need of refreshing, yet I will allege some few places for the peculiar proof
thereof. Saint Austine expounding the place of Saint Paul the third to the
Corinths, if any man shall build upon this foundation etc. says thus, These
places are not Austines.
many there be, that by misunderstanding this place, do deceive themselves
with a false security, believing that if they do build upon the foundation,
Christ capital ofences, that those offenses may notwithstanding be purged by
a transitory fire, and that they may afterward attain everlasting life: but
this interpretation, dearly beloved, is to be corrected, for such men seduce
themselves by this flattery, for in that transitory fire, whereof the Apostle
speaks where he says he shall be safe as it were by fire, not capital
offenses, but small sins are purged, This Sermon is written, long after
Austines time, by Caesarius Arelatensis, Anno 670.
Sermon de Sanctis 41. If you take exception against the authority of this
place, as produced out of a counterfeit work fathered upon him; you shall find
in his 16. This is but facing and bracing.
Homily the same doctrine confirmed by the place of Saint Paul before
mentioned, and out of the Prophets in such plain manner, as no evasion will
serve your turn.

The Answer.
PVrgatory has his deaths wound already, yet your Papist hopes to save the
life of it by the help of Austine and Ambrose and the Great Gregory, yet none
of them will say that prayer for the dead and purgatory are so near of kin,
that the proofs of the one may serve for the other, for the Canon of the Mass
prays for such as do Dormire in somno pacis, Sleep the sleep of peace: I
doubt they sleep not over peaceably in purgatory, and if they do, yet I trow,
he will confess that Pope Leo, for whose soul they pray so devoutly once a
year, sleeps in heaven at more ease; you heard before how Ambrose prays for
Theodorus, Gratian, and Valentinian, whom he knew to be in heaven, and Pope
Innocentius the third, Cap. cum Marthae, Homil. 32.
confesses that we may pray for increase of glory to the Saints of God, and so
says Chrysostom in his Homilies upon Matthew. Again, on the other side the
Papists pray for the deliverance of souls out of hell fire, Libera domine
animas defunctorum de paenis inferni, In Missa de mort. Damas. in orat. de
mort. Lib. 1. cap. 12.
de profundo lacu, de ore Leonis, ne absorbeat eos Tartarus ne cadantin
obscurum, etc. Deliver oh Lord the souls of the dead from the pains of hell,
from the deep lake, from the mouth of the Lion, that hell swallow them not,
that they fall not into darkness: Nay the great Gregory himself prayed for
Traians soul, and delivered it out of hell; and tells us in his Dialogues that
Saint Seuerus his prayers restored a wicked man to life, that had been carried
by devils into hell, but if this be too strong for prayer to deal withal,
what then can be said of such as pray for instigation of the pains of hell?
Austine says they may be mitigated, Encharid. cap. 112. lib. 4. 1. dest. 46.
and Peter Lumbard teaches it out of Austine, now how this mitigation can be
purchased otherwise, then by the prayers and suffrages of the living it were
hard to define; Saint Macharius, fetched this point of learning out of the dead
scull or scalpe of an idolater that said thus unto him, Quando pro mortuis
offers preces, nos interim aliquid lenimenti sentimus, Damasc. in orat. pro
mort. In lib. 4. did. 45. Art. 2. quest. 2.
When thou offerest prayers for the dead, we in the mean while feel some ease
or mitigation of pain. And the Angelical doctor of Aquine grants that the
souls of the damned, reap some good by the prayers of the godly, wherefore we
see that though we grant prayer for the dead, yet purgatory will require
peculiar proofs, before it can be granted.

Austines authority is first objected out of a book of Sermons which your
Papist himself aforehand confesses to be counterfeit, yet he alleges it at
large, as though current and counterfeit were all one: nevertheless look the
Sermon through, and you shall find that these words, quia in igne reuelabitur,
and these, Si cuius opus arserit, detrimentum patietur, If any man's work
burn, he shall suffer loss: and also these, Saluus erit sic tamen quasi per
ignem, Yet he shall be saved as it were by fire, are all meant of the same fire,
and that such as build gold and silver and precious stones upon the foundation
of Christ, shall pass through it; but without any hurt, Absque vlla
violatione, and so come to heaven, Velut aurum purgatum, that is, as gold
purified or purged by fire. I doubt your Popish Gentleman will not allow all
this for current in his Divinity Mint, and therefore no reason, we should
accept of it for good payment, I could say further that this Author, yielding
somewhat to their error against whom he disputes, does but correct their
interpretation, and draw it a little aside from capital offenses to small
sins, lest denying all, and yielding to nothing, his exhortation might prove
fruitless. Howbeit the true Austine was never resolved that Saint Paul in this
place to the Corinths speaks of purgatory, as appears in his Euchiridion a
work not counterfeit, Cap. 67. and. 97.
Si homo sceleratus propter solam fidem per ignem saluabitur, and sic est
accipiendum quod ait beatus Paulus Apostolus, ipse autem saluus erit, sic tamen
quasi per ignem, poterit ergo saluare sine operibus fides etc. If a wicked man
be saved by faith only, by fire, and so it is to be taken which blessed Paul
the Apostle says, but he shall be saved, yet so as it were by fire, therefore
faith is able to save without works. Here the known Austine makes an if at
the matter, and dares not expound S. Paul as the counterfeit Austine does, of
the fire of Purgatory, nay a litttle after he interprets this fire to be,
animi dolor, saying, Cum iste animi dolor vrit, si Christus in cord fundamenti
locumhabet, id est, vt ei nihil anteponatur, and malit homo qui tali dolor
vritur, rebus quas ita diligit carere magis qua^ Christo, per ignem sit saluus.
When this grief of mind does burn, if Christ have the place of a foundation
in the heart, that is to say, if nothing be preferred before him, and the man
which is burned with such a grief, had rather want the things which he so
loves than Christ, he is saved by fire.

Yea but what say you to the place of Austine in his homilies, where the
doctrine of purgatory is so confirmed out of Paul to the Corinths, and out of
the Prophets, that you cannot avoid it? Alas, this is but a Popish brag, for
this testimony is as very a counterfeit as the other, and touching the place
it self, thus lie the words, Qui temporalibus paenis digna gesserunt, de
quibus Apostolus dixit, si cuius opus arserit detrimentu^ patietur, ipse ause^
saluus erit sic tame^ quasi per igne^, per fluuium igneum, de quo propheticus
sermo commemorat, and fluuius igneus currebat ante eum, transibunt etc. They
which have done things worthy temporal pains, (of whom the Apostle says: If
any man's work burn, he shall suffer loss; but he shall be saved, yet so as
it were by fire) shall pass through the river of fire, which the words of the
Prophet mention: and a river of fire ran before him. You see here that Paul's
place is alleged for nothing else but to show that some do things worthy of
temporal pains, which we deny not, nay we will grant further that our
works shall abide a fiery trial, yet the fire that tries every man's work,
is not a fire by nature, but by metaphore, and if it be metaphorical any
where, it must be so chiefly there, where it is slaked with sic tamen, yet so,
and quailed with quasi, as it were.

Now where this Austine says further, that these temporallists shall pass
through that fiery stream which the Prophet speaks of, Dan. 7.10.
though I might answer that they may so pass, Absque vlla violatione, without
any hurt, as has bin seen before, yet look the place in Daniels Prophecy,
and you shall soon find, that the Prophet speaks there, not of a fiery flood,
that was indeed really, but which he saw in a vision; he saw in the same vision
the ancient of days, that is, God himself sit upon a fiery throne in white
apparel, and the hair of his head like pure wool: yet I trow, no man will
therefore imagine, that God sits in purgatory; or wears apparel, or has
either head or hair; moreover the horned beast that spoke presumptuously
against God, and his Saints was slain, and his body was thrown into this
fire; I hope, purgatory fire was never made for bodies, but for souls;
neither yet for blaspheming tyrants, but for pidling offenses of small moment.

There is another place out of Ezechiel which this pretended Austine dragges
in, whether the Prophet will or no, Cap. 24.
to countenance purgatory, for whereas the holy Ghost evidently compares the
city of Jerusalem to an empty pot or kettle, set upon the hot coals of Gods
wrath, to the intent that her filthiness might be consumed: he will needs
outface us that the scripture compares a sinful soul to this pot, saying,
Sermo diuinus quodam in loco ellae animam peccatricem comparat, and then cries
out amain, Illic sermones otiosi, and cogitationes iniquae, illic multitudo
leuum peccatum, illic stannum vel plumbu^ diuersorum subrepentina delictorum
consumentur, etc. There idle speeches and wicked thoughts, there the multitude
of light sins, there the tin or lead of diverse secret sins shall be
consumed. Yet the great Gregory tells us, that they cannot be saved by fire
which build ferrum, Dial. lib. 4. cap. 39.
aes, plumbum, iron, brass, lead, upon the foundation, for by these he
understands peccata maiora, duriora, insolubilia, greater, harder, or
pardonable sins; and to say the truth, such were the sins of Jerusalem
which Ezechiel speaks of, and therefore no meat for purgatory to feed on.

The Dialogue. Sectio XII.
SAint Ambrose, This ancient father (expounding the same place of S. Paul)
says thus, he shall be saved, because the He consists of body and soul; but
both, I trow, belong not to purgatory.
substance whereon he consists, shall not perish, as his evil doctrine
shall, because an accident is the cause, and therefore the Apostle said, yet as
it were by fire: because this salvation is not without punishment, he said not,
he shall be saved by fire, as if by I trow, he may escape purgatory by merits.
his merit he should remain unburned, being examined by fire; but when he
says, yet as it were by fire, he shows that he shall be saved, and yet
receive In this world, not in Purgatory.
punishment, that being purged by fire, he may be saved, and not punished with
the damned in eternal fire.

The Answer.
AMbrose converted S. Austine, and therefore, I trow, they expound S. Paul both
alike, and indeed Ambrose here is clear against Purgatory, and must be
understood, for ought I yet see, of the fiery trial and afflictions of this
life; 1. Pet. 1.7.
for tell me, what substance does a false teacher consist of? does he not
consist, as other men do, of body and soul? why then his substance whereof he
consists, is neither examined nor punished in purgatory fire, which touches
not the body, but by that same animi dolor, grief of mind, which Austine
speaks of: moreover Ambrose here excludes merit, saying, that his merit
cannot so save him from burning, but he must needs receive punishment, that he
may be saved, which cannot be understood of the pains of Purgatory, for they
may be redeemed by the merits of this life, if you will believe counterfeit
Austine; De Sanctis sermon. 41. Hmil. 16.
totis viribus vnusquisque laboret, vt minuta peccata possit ita bonis operibus
redimire, vt de ipsis nihil videatur remanere, quod ille ignis possit absumere;
and again, Illic multitudo lenium peccatorum consume^tur, quae hic ab anima
separari per eleemosynas and lachrymas compendiosa transactione potuissent, Let
every man labor with all his might, that he may redeem his small sins
with good works, that there may seem nothing to remain of them, which that
fire may consume. There the multitude of light sins shall be consumed, which
might easily have bin separated from the soul by alms and tears.

Again, Ambrose applies Paul's words to false teachers, whose evil doctrine
shall perish, as he says, and indeed Paul speaks of the Doctors of Corinth,
and of their faults in teaching and therefore if there be a purgatory to be
found here, it must be a purgatory for preachers and teachers of evil
doctrine, Bellarm. de purg. lib. 1. cap 4. Mat. 5.19.
not for every one that commits a small pidling offense, and has paid all but a
few farthings: now where it is said, that there is the same reason of other
men's sins, I doubt they teach evil doctrine that say so, and so make them
selves thrall to purgatory, for he that breaks the least commandment, which
Papists count but a venial slip, and teaches men so, shall be called the
least in the kingdom of heaven, says our Savior, teaching us, that the sin
of a teacher and of another ordinary man, even in small things, differ much,
and may not be balanced with the same weights, for to break and teach is a
greater offense by much, then to break only, and so the one may go to heaven
without trouble, when the other must stick in the briars and stand upon his
purgation. So then this place of Ambrose, you see, is like a Carpentars tool
called a twibill, which, when a man hewes with the one end of it, is ready to
pecke out his eyes with the other: and this did Bellarmine see well enough, for
he cuts off the forepart of Ambroses testimony, which speaks of substance and
merit, and evil doctrine, and alleges only these last words; Cum Paulus
dicit, sic tamen quasi per ignem, ostendit quidem illum saluum futurum, sed
poenas ignis passurum, vt per ignem purgatus fiat saluus, and non sicut perfidi
aeterno igne in perpetuum torqueatur; When Paul says, yet so as it were by
fire, he shows indeed that he shall be saved, but shall suffer the pains of
fire, that being purged by fire he may be saved, and not tormented perpetually
in everlasting fire, as the obstinate, etc. Wherefore I like your popish
fellows simplicity a great deal better, who cites Ambrose by whole sale,
substance, accident, merit, evil doctrine, and all; for though in so doing,
he have less wit then Bellarmine, yet I will bear him witness, he has more
honesty, but to wind up all in a word, if you be desirous to know Ambroses
meaning, I think you may easily pick it out of these words of S. Austine, De
ciuit. Dei lib. 21. cap. 13.
Nos etiam in hac quide^ mortali vita esse quasdam paenas purgatorias
confitemur; We also confess that there are in this mortal life, certain
purgatory pains.

The Dialogue. Sectio XIII.
GRegorius Magnus, The The truth gives you no such thing to understand, look
the answer.
truth has said, if any man shall blaspheme the holy Ghost, he shall not be
forgiven in this world, nor in the world to come: whereby he gives us to
understand, that some sins shall be forgiven in this world; and some in the
world to come: for proof whereof, he uses also the place He says, it may be
understood, de igne tribulationis in hac vita.
of Saint Paul before cited by Saint Austine, and Saint Ambrose, to the same
effect. Dialog. lib. 4. cap. 39.

The Answer.
POpe Gregory, is here brought in with his great title to fray us, and yet,
God wot, he pleads but simply for Purgatory; for touching the place of Saint
Paul, thus he writes, Quamuis hoc de igne tribulationis in hac vita nobis
adhibitae possit intelligi, tamen si quis hoc de igne futurae purgationis
accipiat, etc. Although this may be understood of the fire of tribulation,
which we feel in this life, yet if any take it of the purgation of fire to
come etc. As if he should say, though I be of opinion, that Paul speaks of
the fire of affliction, whereby God examineth his children in this life: yet if
any take it otherwise, I will not stand against it; this is but a silly proof:
and touching the other place of Saint Matthew, out of which he concludes,
that [some sins are forgiven in this world, and some in the world to come: Cap.
12.32.
] his conclusion is clean contrary to all Logic, for no reason will lead us
to reason thus, this one sin is not forgiven, Ergo, some sins are forgiven in
the world to come; this is a plain Non sequitur, and so says Bellarmine, De
purg. lib. 1 cap. 4.
Non sequitur secundum regulas dialecticorum, It follows not according to the
rules of Logic; but will you know now how it follows? then hearken what the
Jesuit says further, Sequitur secundum regulam prudentiae, It follows
according to the rule of wisdom. So you see how it follows, and how it
follows not, it follows by the rule of wit, it follows not by the rules
of Logic, belike Wit is a Papist; and Logic a Protestant: but consider (I
beseech you) how far this Popish wit would go, if it might he suffered,
Dominus ineptissime loquitur, (says Bellarmine) si in futuro saeculo nullum
peccatum remittitur, The Lord speaks most foolishly, if no sin be forgiven
in the world to come. See how this saucy Jesuit thinks it not enough to say,
Dominus non loquitur secundum regulam prudentiae, etc. The Lord speaks not
according to the rule of wit, which has some little show of modesty; but
Dominus ineptissime loquitur, etc. The Lord speaks most foolishly, if his
Jesuitical conceit of remitting sins in another world be not admitted, this
is the desperateness of Popish Divinity: but tell me, I beseech you, is not
the speech still alike foolish, if no great sins be remitted in the world to
come? yes verily, for thus must it be conceived, the great sin against the
holy Ghost shall never be forgiven, neither there where great sins are
forgiven, that is, in this world; nor there where no great sins are forgiven,
that is, in the world to come. Is not this speech (think you) as far from
Bellarmines [regula prudentiae, rule of wit;] as the other? yet is it
propounded according to the Popish conceit; for as we think no sin, so they
think no great sin, is remitted in seculo futuro, in the world to come. Gregory
in this very Dialogue says, Dial. lib. 4. ca. 39. Sermon. 41.
that peccata maiora, greater sins, be tunciam insolubilia, be impardonable;
and counterfeit Austine says as much in his sermons De Sanctis. Now then
whereas the Pope thinks, that our Savior in Matthew gives us to understand,
that some sins shall be forgiven in the world to come; let him tell us what
sins those be, great or small; great sins be tunc iam irremissibile, as he
says himself: and if he mean small sins, then is our Saviors speech as
far out of square, as if a man should say, This great heap of corn cannot
be contained, neither in this bushel, nor in a fleeting dish.

But why should the speech of Christ be most foolish, if no sin at all be
remitted in the world to come? might not our Savior speak so by exaggeration,
that the speech might the better pierce the uncircumcised hearts, and ears of
the Pharisees? No, says the Jesuit, Exaggeratio non debet esse inepta, qualis
est, cum fit partitio and vni membro nihil respondet, An exaggeration ought not
to be foolish, as for example; when a partition is made, and nothing agrees
to one of the parts. Is this the folly he talks of? why it is easy to see,
that not to remit the sin against the holy Ghost, is answerable alike, both to
this world, and the world to come, which be the members of our Saviors
partition, for that great sin is never remitted, neither in the one, nor the
other; 1. Cor. 13.1. Galat. 1.8. Apoc. 5.3.
yet notwithstanding we have examples of such foolish partitions in the word of
God: Paul says, Though I speak with the tongues of men and Angels, whereas
Angels have no tongues to speak. And in another place, though we or an Angel
from heaven speak otherwise, etc. Yet Angels be no Preachers; so likewise the
spirit of God says, No man is able to open, read, or look upon the Book,
neither in heaven, nor in earth, nor under the earth: yet be there no openers,
or readers, or lookers upon Books in heaven, or hell.

Thus Pope Gregory is answered; Cap. 12.32.
yet that you may evidently see how insufficient this place of Matthew is to
found Purgatory upon; I will set you down diverse sufficient and full answers
which take away the force of all Popish collections. And first we may well ask
what is meant by this world, and the world to come. For, albeit men commonly
take this world, to be the space intermedial between a man's birth and his
death, which makes as many worlds, as there be men, or shall be, and every
world to have a several beginning and ending, some past, some present, some to
come: yet if I should understand it otherwise, for the whole continuance of
this world, 2. Pet. 3.10.
till it be dissolved in the great day of God, and that same new heaven and
new earth be made, whereof the world to come shall consist; the case would be
clean altered, for then the Papists must not seek for purgatory in the world
to come, as they did before, but in this world, where it is impossible to find
it, when the blind man in John's gospel says [since the world began, Ioh. 9.32.
was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was borne blind.] I
hope he means not, that such a miracle was never wrought since the day of his
birth, but from the creation. Mark. 13.19. Math. 24.21.
For so Saint Mark expounds Saint Matthew, where he says, [there shall be
great tribulation, such as was not from the beginning of the world. Again,
when we read elsewhere in Matthew, Math. 13.39.
that [the harvest is the end of the world,] he does not mean the day of
every man's death, but the day of Christ's second coming, 1. Cor. 15.24.
[for then shall be the end] says Saint Paul. And then the reapers, that is,
the Angels shall gather the tares to the fire, and the wheat to Christ's barn,
so shall it be, Math. 13.30. Math. 13.40.49.
(says our Savior) in the end of the world. Now then as this present world
began, when this heaven and this earth were created, and shall continue till
they be melted with seruent heat: so it is agreeable to reason, and not
disagreeable to Divinity, that the world to come should begin, 2. Pet 3.7.
Ibid. verse. 13.
when there shall be a new heaven, and a new earth, as Saint Peter has
fore-prophecied.

But I will not hold your Papist to such hard-meat: and therefore I answer
secondly out of Mark, who expounds Saint Matthew thus, Mark. 3.29.
Non habet remissionem in aeternum, Has not remission for ever; or, Reus erit
aterni delicti, Guilty of an everlasting sin; or, Aeternae damnationis,
Everlasting damnation. Here comes in Bellarmine sweating, and tells us that
Matthew expounds Mark, not Mark Matthew. This is strange, that a text should be
expounded before it is written, or the author extant, but why must we take
Matthew to be the expositor of Mark? Marry, Quia Mathaeus copiosius scripsit,
and pluribus verbis vtitur, Because Matthew wrote more copiously, and uses more
words. So, Glossa ordinaria, and interlinearis, or what other gloss, or brief
draught soever, may not be said to expound, unless it be more copious than
the text, than which, what can be more dotingly spoken; but go too, says he
any thing else to that purpose? Yes that he does, for thus he reasons, Aut
Christus dixit vt haket Mathaeus, vel vt habet Marcus, vel vtroque modo; si
primum veltertium, habeo intentum, si secundum, tunc Mathaeus exposuit verba
Christi, Christ spoke either as Mark has it, or as Matthew, or both ways; if
the first, or the third way, I have my intent; if the second, then Matthew
expounded the words of Christ. How like you this reason? Verily, I never heard
a worse, for it is incredible that Christ spoke word for word, either as Matthew
or Mark have set down, and it is impossible he should speak, vtroque modo,
both ways together, unless it were by way of exposition thus, Non remittitur,
idest, non habet remissionem in aeternum, neque in hoc saeculo, neque in
futuro, id est, reus erit aeternae damnationis, He shall not be forgiven, that
is to say, has not forgiveness for ever, neither in this world, nor in the
world to come, that is, shall be guilty of everlasting damnation. But let us
grant him his partition, though every part of it be false; yet may you soon
see he has said nothing; for if the first be true, then Mark has expounded
it; if the last, it is so likewise; if the second, then we have our desire,
for then the words in Matthew have no more in them, than Mark has set down;
1. Cor. 11.23.
otherwise Matthew delivered more than he received of the Lord. Wherefore that
he may be taken himself in the snares of his own reason, I will send it him
home, as a Proselite, or convert to dispute against his old Master, and to say
to him, Aut Christus dixit vt habet Marcus, vel vt habet Mathaeus, vel vtroque
modo, si primum vel tertium, habeo intentum, si secundum, tunc Marcus exposuit
verba Christi, Christ spoke either as Mark has it, or as Matthew, or both
ways; if the first, or the third, then I have my intent; if the second, then
Mark expounded the words of Christ.

A third answer we fetch out of the usual known manner of the Hebrew tongue,
which expounds one contrary by negation of the other; and contrariwise,
Psalm. 69.26. Act 1.20. Psa. 69, 29. Psalm. 109, 13. Prou. 19.5.9. Esaias 34, 10.
Mark. 3, 29.
the negative of the one, by affirming the other, as for example, [Let their
habitation be voide] id est, [Let no man dwell in their Tents.] [Let them be
wiped out,] id est, [Let them not be written.] [Let his wickedness be
remembered,] idest, [Let it not be done away.] Again, [he shall not escape or
be unpunished,] idest, [he shall perish.] It shall not be quenched day nor
night.] id est, [It shall smoke for evermore.] And to give one example for all,
Mark the Evangelist expounds himself after this manner: for when he had
said, [shall never have forgiveness,] he adds for explication, but is under
eternal damnation, (...). So then being armed with so many examples in this
behalf, and having Saint Mark to be our Captain, and as it were foreman in
our quest, we say, that not to be forgiven, neither in this world, nor the
world to come, is no more, but to be punished and perish both here and there,
to be under eternal damnation, to be out of all hope of future deliverance.

But what should we labor to answer that, that needs no answer, for we
confess, there is a doing away of sins in the world to come; and yet you are
never the nearer your Purgatory: for first, as [not to forgiue] is as much to
say, as [to punish,] so [to forgiue] is as much to say, as [not to punish;] in
which sense, there is forgiveness in the world to come, as well as in this
world. Secondly, Saint Peter says, Act. 3.19.
[Amend you lives and turn, that your sins may be done away when the time of
refreshing shall come, etc. that is, at the second coming of Christ to restore
all things, where we learn, that our sins are completely forgiven, till
death, sin, and hell be fully vanquished, and discharged at the last day.

De Purg. lib. 2. Cap. 9.
Lastly, Bellarmine says, that Mali habitus in vita contracti, are taken away,
per primum actum contrarium animae separatae, that is to say, a habit of ill
doing, which grew a long time by many bad actions, De Purg. lib. 2. Cap. 2. and
3.
is clean purged in a moment by one good deed; and yet he holds stiffely
against Luther, that souls departed can neither mereri, nor demereri; howbeit
here we find a taking away or forgiveness of sins in another world, without
scorching in purgatory, by the good deeds of souls departed. Now, whether
these deeds be merita or demerita, or what other name it will please him to
allow them, some of his Popish friends may do well to resolve us.

The Dialogue. Sectio XIIII.
THus You speak of more than you have done, or can do.
have I, for proof of this point of Catholic Doctrine, produced against you,
all the means that ever were devised to convince an heresy; and on the other
side, you are put to all the shifts, that ever heretic devised for defense of
Heresy, from the The Doctors have no authority or dominion over our faith.
authority of Doctors, and Fathers, and the continual practice of the
universal Church, you must appeal unto Scriptures; from Scriptures We make
no such appeal.
to the interpretation; and from the interpretation of We look not to be
saved by Ambrose, Aug. and Gregory's faith, but by our own. Abak. Cap. 2.4.
Ambrose, Austine, and Gregory the Great, to the interpretation and devise of
your own brain, as unto the supreme and only sufficient Judge of all
controversies. So that I must either discontinue my suit, or put the matter to
comprimise, and make your self sole arbitrator, which if I should do, and
could tell how to propound the case unto you in such covert manner, as the
Prophet Nathan did to David, I would not doubt but to draw from you the like
sentence as David pronounced against himself, as for example; if I should put
your own case unto you thus masked, and disguised, in the habit of a case in
law, John a Style seized of the Manor of Dale, whereof he and his Ancestors
have been quietly possessed time out of mind, has to show, for proof of his
title, a record of the Tower, dated the first of H. 1. whereby it appears
that the Conqueror gave this Land to one of his Ancestors; to the same
effect, he has also another like record of H. 2. and another of H. 3. John a
Noke claymeth an interest in this Land, and alleges for maintenance of his
title thereunto, that, notwithstanding the said possession and records, the
Conqueror did give no such Manor unto the Ancestors of John a Style, and
that, without a Charter from the Conqueror to be showed to that effect, his
interest is never the better. A fair Charter is produced and acknowledged by
the Plaintiff, but he desires, that the true and right interpretation of the
words may be taken; the interpretation concerning the true meaning and sense of
the words delivered by the reverend Judges in a like case, long before this
controversy grew, is showed, which ouer-ruleth the matter plainly with the
Defendant. The Plaintiff replyeth, that the Judges like men, did err in their
opinion, and that himself, and some other, that claim like interest in ye
land, can give the right interpretation of the words, whereunto he will refer
the whole trial of his cause. I pray you either tell me who is like to have
best interest to this land, or give me an Ye shall have insta^ces inow, look
the answer.
instance where the cases do differ. The Testimonies of Epiphanius,
Chrysostom, Austine, and Ambrose, who They affirm it not, but you father it
upon them.
affirm that prayer for ye dead, was a tradition of the Apostles, are the
records of the Tower, the Scriptures the Charter of the Conqueror, the
interpretation of the said Doctors of the place of Saint Paul Cor. 3. the
opinion of the Judges delivered for the explication of the true sense and
meaning of the words of the Charter. This case being agreed by our Counsel,
let it be moved at the Checker bar, and let my This should have been
omitted in common discretion.
Lord chief Barons opinion therein be a final end of the controversy between
us.

The Answer.
HEre our popish Divine will needs be a Lawyer; and therefore he puts cases
against us: but his devises and producements, are too homely to control a
truth, and to settle a man's faith and conscience. We have seen what those
Fathers and Doctors say, and we have showed him how unable they are to bear
the burden he lays upon them, and therefore he had need to deal covertly, by
masking and disguising, if ever he look to enjoy his Manor of Dale.

Howbeit, the breake-necke of all, is this, the cases differ, as may be showed
by many instances. First, you have not had quiet possession time out of mind;
for it was disturbed by Aerius, and so along even to the days of Luther, as
Bellarmine confesses in his Treatise of Purgatory. Secondly the Greek Church
was never seized of this manor. Vsque in hodiernum diem purgatorium non est a
Graecis creditum, Lib. 1. cap. 2. De haeres. libr. 8. ca. 1.
Even till this day Purgatory is not believed by the Grecians, says
Alphonsus, and so says Roffensis, in Polidore de inuentoribus rerum. Thirdly
the conqueror never gave it by charter, but it was taken rather from the
paraclete of Mountanus, as I showed before out of Tertullian, and so defended
afterward by color of charter. Fourthly your John a Style has no sufficient
record to show that prayer for the dead, is a Tradition of the Apostles.
Fifthly, if that record could be found, and were granted, yet that which he
claims by Charter from the Conqueror will not follow, Lib. de fide et^per.
cap. 13. and 16. and ad Dulcit. quaest. 1. Esa. 53.5. Romans 8.1. Apoc. 14.13
Eccles. 9.6.
as has been seen already. Sixthly, the Charter which is showed, is not
fair, but doubtful, and full of difficulties, so says Austine, one of your
own judges. Seventhly, there is a fairer Charter to the contrary in Esaias, Paul,
and Saint John, and Solomon says plainly that the dead have no part in the
world of any thing, (whether it be prayer, sacrifice, Alms, or whatsoever
else) that is done under the sun, which clearly confounds John a Style,
and all other Iackes that plead for him. Lastly, the doctors may advise, and
give counsel, and plead at the bar, but if they presume to sit upon the
bench as judges, 1. Pet. 5.3. 2. cor. 24.
and (Lords over Gods heritage) or having dominion over their faith: then are
they traitors against the Conqueror.

The Dialogue. Sectio XV. Transubstantiation.
NOw follows Transubstantiation, wherein, because I have You take much upon
you but you perform little
taken upon me to allege no proof which may by any gloss or interpretation
be wrested into another sense, there is greater difficulty, for what can be
devised to be spoken thereof so perspicuously: which by some such shift, may
not be avoided; if the fathers say that the body of Christ, after words of
consecration, is really present, that is a figurative speech; if they make
mention of the unbloody sacrifice, or of the sacrifice of the Altar: that is
who makes such an interpretation?
interpreted, the sacrifice of thanksgiving, they could not use the word
Transubstantiation, because it was not The fathers had not the wit to devise
such a trim word.
devised before the Council of Laterane: let us admit that One will hardly
serve for the universal Church.
one of the ancient fathers were risen from the dead, for to unfold what his
belief was, and what the universal Church did hold in his time concerning
Transubstantiation, what should we Transubstantiation must stand by devises, or
else it will soon fall.
devise to demand of him, or what might he devise to say unto us for final
determination thereof? if we should ask whether the very body of Christ be
present in the sacrament in form of bread, and he should answer, No father
answers so.
yea, this would not serve, but if we should reply thus. How can it be the
body of Christ? Shall I not believe mine own eyes, which tell me that it is
bread? if this doctor should Theodoret, Chrysostom, Austine, Tertul and
Ambrose himself answer so.
answer that the bread is called the body of Christ in a figurative sense,
and that in Sacraments, the sign is many times called, by the name of the
thing signified, were not this controversy clearly determined on the
protestants side? Contrariwise, If this doctor should answer, that God is
omnipotent, and therefore able to do what he will, seem it never so contrary
to our senses and understanding: that he was able to make heaven and earth of
nothing: and to do all the great wonders and miracles of the land of Egypt:
were No verily were it not: see the answer.
not the matter as clearly determined on the Papists side? what cavil could
you (in this case) imagine or devise eftsoons to call in question what this
doctors opinion should be concerning Transubstantiation will not come without a
better pull.
transubstantiation? will you imagine that he has spoken all this of Gods
omnipotency, to prove that he is able to make you As though there were nothing
held by us, but, calling, naming, signifying, and figuring?
call ye sign of the Sacrament by ye name of the thing signified, or to make
bread to be a figure of Christ's natural body? Pro. When such a doctor shall
arise from the dead, and so determine of the matter as you have imagined, I
will make you answer, in the mean time you must give me leave with reverence
to think that none of the ancient fathers wear so gross and absurd as to be
of your opinion in this point: but to admit that such a castle were built in
the air as you have imagined, I must then Then do you confess more the^ other
Protestants will.
confess that such a supposed doctor did hold Transubstantiation. Pap. This
very question was thus asked, urged, answered, and determined for the Papists,
by Saint Ambrose when he was living, and Non sequitur.
therefore you must needs grant that he did hold Transubstantiation, read his
book De ijs quae initiantur mysterijs, the Chapter begins thus, Quomodo tu
dicis mihi, hoc est corpus Christi? aliud video, panem video etc. How say
thou that this is the body of Christ? I do see it to be another thing, I do
see that it is bread, for answer hereof Saint Ambrose does allege, that God
was able to make heaven and earth of nothing, and for the proof of Gods
omnipotent power, he repeateth all the wonders and miracles of the land of
Egypt, as in that Chapter at large appears, this was, But no doubt it was
not, but if it were his faith, then was it not his opinion.
no doubt, Saint Ambrose his faith in this point, and the belief and practice
of the universal Church in his time, for it is not like that so great a doctor
did dissent from ye Catholic Church in so material a point, neither is it No,
for they were both Protestants.
probable that S. Ambrose was a Papist in this opinion, and S. Austine, whom he
converted to the Christian faith, a Protestant.

The Answer.
IF your Papist were acquainted with such another as the witch of Endor, 1.
Sam. 28.7.
it seems he would cause one ancient father or other to be raised up from the
dead to avouch Transubstantiation, his companions depend upon the apparitions
of souls, the speeches of dead corpse, and dead skuls and such like strong
illusions, as the heathen did upon their oracles, otherwise it would not be so
open and clear a matter that Popery is a doctrine of devils, he has taken
upon him to allege such proof as cannot be wrested by any gloss or
interpretation into another sense, and therefore being entangled with such a
difficulty, he thinks himself hardly able to mainetaine his credit without
help from the dead: yet me thinks a wise man should not measure other men's
wits by his own, nor imagine all glosses and interpretations to be in his own
head, nevertheless I see here that he can make glosses of words that were
never either spoken or written; if the fathers say that the body of Christ is
really present; that is a figurative speech: a figurative speech, quoth he?
that must needs be a strange figurative speech, that was never spoken, and they
be strange fathers, that drive us to shift them of by figures, when they say
nothing.

Again, if the fathers mention the unbloody sacrifice, or the sacrifice of the
Altar, that is interpreted the sacrifice of thanksgiving, here is a gloss
more then needs, for if the fathers should so say, they hurt not our cause: and
therefore no reason we should seek for glosses or interpretations to shift
them of, Eusebius. de demonstr. euang. lib. 1. cap. 10:
Sacrificium Altaris, Sacrifice of the Altar, does no more hurt us, then
sacrificium mensae, sacrifice of the table, does hurt him, and sacrificium
incruentum, sacrifice unbloody, hurts him, and not us, for the popish sacrifice
wherein blood is really offered by boulefuls, and drunk up by the Priest, if
not by the people, can hardly bear the name of an unbloody sacrifice without
some charitable gloss or interpretation, if the fathers should call it the
vnfleshly sacrifice, I think it would do his carnal presence little good, and
therefore I cannot see how the term unbloody can greatly further him.

Yet see how this fond Papist prattles one, as though these terms, Sacrifice,
Altar, and unbloody, were equivalent with Transubstantiation, they could not
use the word Transubstantiation, because it was not devised before the Council
of Lateran: a worthy devise, no doubt, if the body of Christ be made of
bakers bread, for Transubstantiation is a turning of one substance into
another, but if the bread vanish to nothing, and then the body of Christ come
into the void rooms, which the bread leaves behind it, as the Papists hold at
this day: then must the word Transubstantiation give place too, as well as the
bread, and cessio, or or substitutio, giving place, succession, substituting:
or some such new devise or other must succeed it, howbeit the old fathers
wanted no words to utter their mind, they were as well able to speak, I trow,
as Pope Innocent, and the priests of Lateran.

But though nothing else be commendable in this Lateran devise, yet may we see
by it, that it was devised only for the Latin Church, for [transubstantiatio]
is Latin, and such Latin as cannot be handsomely expressed in the Greek
tongue, and the last session of the Council of Florence, holden two hundred
years after this of Laterane gives us to understand that the Greek Church
never yielded to Transubstantiation and touching the vanishing away of the
bread, and substitution; of the body of Christ, me thinks, when I consider of
it, I hear old Nakefield tell how he came to a wild colt that lay fast a
sleep in the field, and being merrily disposed, cut a round hole in the
forehead of it, like prima tonsura clericatus, the first shauing of a clearke;
and then blew his horn in the ear of the colt, so as it started up suddenly
and plunged out at that hole, and left his kin behind him: even so the Popish
priest, finding bread a sleep upon the Altar, blows the horn of consecration
in the ear of it, and makes it skip out at some hole or other, and leave his
accidents behind it, marry herein our good Catholics go beyond Nakefield,
for he would go no further to tell that the colts skin stood still as plumpe as
it did before, though the stuffing was run away, but these men makes us
believe, that the body of Christ creepes in at the hole the bread went out, and
so fills the vacuity of the room, that the accidents or skin of the bread
remains still as well stuffed, as it was before, without corrupting, or
shrinking, or any alteration in the world; so as in the Sacrament of their
Altar, men shall see round thing: yet nothing is round, a white thing, yet
nothing is white, a thick thing; yet nothing is thick; a heavy thing, yet
nothing is heavy; a lump of accidents, yet nothing denominated round, white
thick, heavy, or any thing else by any one of them all, blame me if these men
pass not Wakefield by many degrees, they say that after consecration it is the
real body of Christ; yet if you break it, you break not the body of Christ;
if you bite it, you bite not the body of Christ; and which is most absurd, you
may eat the body of Christ, but you may neither bite, nor crush, nor grind it
with your teeth.

All this may be seen in Peter Lumbards Sententious distinctions, Lib. 4.
did. 12.
Est ibi vera fractio and partitio, says he, quae fit in pane, id est, in
forma panis, vnde Apostolus ait, panis que^ frangimus, quia forma panis ibi
frangitur and in parts diuiditur, It is true breaking and parting which is
done in the bread, that is to say, in the form of bread, whereupon the Apostle
says, the bread which we break, because the form of bread is there broken
and divided in parts. See the impudency of these men, that dare say that is
not broken, which Paul says is broken, nay which say, that is broken which
cannot be broken; for to say accidents and shows are broken and eaten with
teeth, is too great frowardness; and this did my friend Peter see well enough:
and therefore he entreats us not to think much of the matter, 1. Cor. 10.16.
saying, Ne mireris vel insultes si accidentia videantur frangi, cum ibi sint
sine subiecto, Wonder not, nor insult not, if the accidents seem there to be
broken, seeing they are there without their subject. Well, we are content to
pleasure you in so small a matter; but when you make Saint Paul to say that
broken accidents are the communication of the body of Christ; I wish you had
been better advised, but howsoever you rid your hands of us, yet Pope Leo the
ninth, and Victor his successor, and Pope Nicholas the second, and the rest of
their several Councels gathered together at Vercels, Turon, and Rome almost a
hundred years before you were borne, or your Sentences written, will not be so
easily shifted of: for Leo and Victor condemned Berengarius, and Pope Nicholas
at length compelled him violently to recant under this form of words, Ego
Berengarius confiteor panem and vinum, quae in altari ponuntur, post
consecrationem non solum sacramentum, sed etia^ verum corpus and sanguinem
Christi esse, and sensualiter, non solum sub sacramento, sed in veritate
manibus sacerdotum tractari, and frangi, and fidelium dentibus atteri, I
Berengarius do confess that the bread and wine which are laid upon the Altar,
are not only a sacrament, but the very body and blood of Christ, and that they
are sensibly handled by the priests, and broken and torn with the teeth of
the faithful, not only in sacrament, but in truth. This is a Popes
iniunction sitting in his chair, president in Council in a matter of faith
and doctrine, which is of irrefragable authority in the Popish Church:
moreover, being a public confession, it was drawn plainly without gards or
welts, and must be understood literally and Grammatically without shifs or
sleights, according to the simple purport of the words; wherefore my good
friend Peter, when you presume to say thus, Illa Berengarij verba ita
distinguenda sunt, vt sensualiter non modo in sacramento, sed in veritate
dicatur corpus Christi tractari manibus sacerdotum, frangi vero and atteri
dentibus vere quidem sed in sacramento tantum: Those words of Berengarius are
so to be distinguished that the body of Christ is said sensibly to be handled
by the Priests, not only in a sacrament but in truth: but to be broken and
torn with teeth, truly indeed, but only in a sacrament. Your gloss sets the
text upon the rack, and violenlty draws the members of it a sunder, which are
copulatiuely chained together in the text, tractari, and frangi, and fidelium
dentibus atteri, distinguenda sunt, quoth he; alas every child may see it
cannot bear such a distinction, and therefore either suffer your Popes text to
stand still in force, or else set down plainly like honest meaning men, that
your Pope and his Council have grossly erred.

Howbeit the former part of the Popes words have most need of a gloss, for
when he says, that bread and wine, after consecration, is not only a
sacrament, but also the true body and blood of Christ, if he mean the
accidents; they can be neither body nor blood, if he mean the substance, that's
vanished, Lib. 4. did. 1^.
if he mean substantia mutata in id quod facta est, the substance changed into
that which it is made, that is, in carnem and sanguinem Christi: Lib. 4: did.
11.
Into the body and blood of Christ: as Lumbard some where seems to tell us:
then is it not both a sacrament, and the true body and blood of Christ too,
but only one of them, namely id quod facta est, that whereinto it is changed,
and here you may smell Transubstantiation, though it were not yet devised, but
it stunke so, that Lumbard himself could hardly abide it, Ibid.
for thus he writes, Si quaeritur qualis sit illa conuersio, an formalis, an
substantialis vel alterius generis, definire non sufficio, If a man ask what
manner of conversion it is, whether formal, or substantial, or of some other
kind, I am not able to determine it. Which is as much to say as I cannot tell
whether the substance of bread be changed into the body of Christ, or no, for
grant me this antecedent, substantia panis mutatur, the substance of bread is
changed, the conclusion will follow of necessity, ergo, est substantialis
mutatio, a substantial change, and so he that tells me that he cannot define
whether the change of bread into flesh, and wine into blood be substantial,
tells me withal that he cannot define whether the substance of bread and wine,
be changed into the body and blood of Christ.

These be the colors, and shows, and accidents that have bewitched a great
part of the world, and these be the glosses and interpretations that have
caused men to run mad, and at length to sleep in their own excrements, but
if you look into the ages before Berengarius, you shall find such as did write
openly against these Popish accidents, and forms without subject, and against
all untoward glosses, in defense of the sacramentarie heresy, as heretics
now call it, without all controlement or contradiction, which is a maine
evidence to persuade, that these real conuersions and transmutations, which be
defended so stoutly and peremptorily in Popery, are not Catholic, but
heretical. John Scotus a learned man, venerable Beds scholar taught the same
doctrine we hold at this day, Johan. Scotus
almost two hundred years before Berengarius, so did Bertram Bertram.
a famous man in his time, as appears by his book, De corpore and sanguine
Dei, written at the request of Charles the Great, and Doctor Tonstall
witnesses, Lib. 1. de Sacr. Euchar.
that before Transubstantiation was concluded in the Counsel of Lateran, it
was lawful for every man freely to think of it as he thought good; and if
this evidence be not strong enough to carry away the matter; then would I
feign learn, how they dare stand against Pope Gelasius, that tells them
plainly, that the substance and nature of bread and wine remains still,
Gelas. contr. Eutych.
Non desinit esse substantia panis and natura vini, There cease not to be
the substance of bread and nature of wine. They tell us very demurely, that by
virtue of Christ's prayer, Luke 22, 32.
the Popes faith cannot fail, and that he is to confirm his brethren: yet
herein they make Gelasius faith to fail, and utterly refuse to be confirmed
by him, yet was it not Gelasius own private opinion, De Sacram. li. 4. cap. 4.
Dialog. 1, and 2
Ambrose says of the consecrated bread and wine: Sunt quae erant, and in aliud
commutantur, They are the same they were, and are changed into another thing.
Theodoret, Signa mystica post sanctificationem non recedunt a natura sua,
manent enim in priori substantia, and figura and forma, The mystical signs
after sanctification, do not depart from their own nature, for they remain in
their former substance, figure and form. Chrysostom, Ad Caesarium. in Math.
hom. 15.
Panis sanctificatus dignus est dominici corporis appellatione, etsi natura
panis in illo remanserit, The sanctified bread is worthy the name of the Lords
body, although the nature of bread remain in it. Origin, Ille cibus qui
sanctificatur per verbum Dei, and per obsecrationem, iuxta id quod habet
materiale, in ventrem abit, and in secessum encitur, That meat which is
sanctified by the word of God, and by prayer, according to that which is
material in it, goes into the belly, and is cast out into the draught. And
if all these authorities be rejected, ye shall they never be able to avoid
the words of our Savior Christ, who after the ministration of the Sacrament in
both kinds, concludes after this manner, [I say unto you, Math. 26, 29. Mark.
14, 25.
I will drink no more of this fruit of the vine, till I drink it new in the
Kingdom of God,] unless they can make men believe, that blood may be the
fruit of a Vine.

Let us now return to the examination of the ancient Father, which our Papist
imagines to be raised from the dead. What if he should say, says he, that
the very body of Christ is present in the Sacrament in form of bread? Many
then, (say I) he should lie, for Chrysostom says, In oper. imper. in Math.
hom. 11.
In vasis sanctificatis non est ipsum corpus Christi, sed mysterium corporis
eius continetur, In the sanctified vessels is contained not the very body of
Christ, but the mystery of his body. But forasmuch as it is here confessed,
that if this Doctor raised from the dead should answer, that the bread is
called the body of Christ in a figurative sense, and that in Sacraments the
sign is many times called by the name of the thing signified, he does clearly
in so answering, determine the controversy on the Protestants side: what
should we labor further, it being too too manifest, that the Fathers do
answer so in their Books extant at this day, and that in as plain manner as
can be wished. Qui seipsum vitem appellauit, Dialog 1. ibid.
says Theodoret. Ille Symbola and signa quae videntur, appellatione corporis
and sanguinis honorauit, He that called himself the vine, did honor the
signs which are seen with the name of his body, and blood. And again,
Seruator noster commutauit nomina, and corpori quidem symboli nomen de dit,
symbolo vero nomen corporis, Our Savior changed the names, and gave to the
body the name of the symbol, and to the symbol the name of the body.
Chrysostom, Ad Caesar. Monach. ad Bonis. Epist. 23. Contr. Adim. cap. 12.
Panis sanctificatus dignus est dominici corporis appellatione, The sanctified
bread is dignified with the name of Christ's body. Austine, Sacramenta
plerunque rerum ipsarum nomina accipiunt, Sacraments do often take the names
of the things themselves. And again, Non dubitauit Dominus dicere, Contr.
Marcion. lib. 4. In 1. Cor. 11. De his qui init. mist. cap. vlt.
hoc est corpus meum, cum daret signum corporis sui, The Lord did not stick to
say, this is my body, when he gave the sign of his body. And again,
facinus vel flagitium videtur inbere, figura ergo est praecipiens passioni
domini esse communica^du^, and suauiter atque vtiliter recondendu^ in memoria,
quod pro nobis caro eius crucifixa and vulnerata sit, He seems to command a
heinous or horrible wickedness, therefore it is a figure instructing us to
communicate of the passion of the Lord, and pleasantly and profitably to keep
in memory, that his flesh was crucified and wounded for us. Tertullian, Hoc
est corpus meum, hoc est, figura corporis mei, This is my body, that is to
say, this is a figure of my body. Ambrose, Quia morte domini liberati sumus,
huiusrei memores in edendo and potando, carnem and sanguinem, quae pro nobis
oblata sunt, significamus, Because we are delivered by the death of the Lord,
being mindful thereof in eating and drinking, we do signify his flesh and
his blood which were offered for us. And again, Post consecrationem corpus
Christi significatur, After consecration the body of Christ is signified. Such
places as these, be so common in the writings of the ancient Fathers, that it
is utterly needless to rehearse any more of them. Thus is your Papist
prevented, for our cause, you see, is clearly determined. Yet notwithstanding
it is pity the poor man's tale should not be heard, if this Doctor (says he)
should answer that God is omnipotent, and able to do what he will, that he
was able to make heaven and earth, and to do great wonders and miracles in
Aegipt, were not the matter clearly determined on the Papists side? No verily
were it not, neither would any man ever think so, if he knew the virtue and
power of a Sacrament. Pope Leo, speaking of the water in baptism, though it be
not transubstantiate, says thus, Christus dedit aquae, quod dedit matri, De
Natiuit. sermon. 4.
virtus enim altissimi, and obumbratio spiritus sancti, quae fecit vt Maria
pareret saluatorem, eade^ fecit vtregeneraret vnda credentem, Christ gave that
to the water which he gave to his mother, for the power of the most high, and
the ouershadowing of the holy spirit, which caused Marie to bring forth the
Savior, made the water to regenerate a believer. So Austine, Cont liter. pet
tan. lib. 3. cap. 49.
Nec iam baptizare cessauit Dominus, sed adhuc id agit non ministerio corporis,
sed inuisibili opere maiestatis, Neither has the Lord now ceased to baptize,
but he does it still, not by the ministry of his body, but by the invisible
work of his majesty. So Chrysostom, Angeli qui adfuerunt (in baptismo) iam
inenarrabilis operis modum non possunt enarrare, adfuerunt tantum and viderunt,
In Ioh. ho. 24.
nihil tamen operati sunt, sed pater tantum and filius, and spiritus sanctus.
The Angels which were present in baptism, were not able to declare the manner
of that unspeakable work, only they were present and beheld, but wrought
nothing, but the father only, and the Son, and holy spirit. This very
power of the most high, and ouershadowing of the holy Ghost, this very work
of the Majesty of God, is it, and only it, that makes these outward
elements, Romans 4.11. Ephesians. 4, 15, 16. Ephe. 5, 30.
seals of the righteousness of faith, and effectual signs and means of our
regeneration, and growing up into him which is the head, even Christ; so as we
be made, flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, Immortalitatis alimonia
datur a communibus cibis differens, Cypr. de caena domini.
corporalis substantiae retinens speciem, sed virtutis diuinae inuisibili
efficientia probans adesse praesentiam, A food of immortality is given
differing from common meats, retaining the form of a bodily substance, but
proouing that a divine power is present, by the invisible efficacy of it. You
see now, I trow, that Gods omnipotency, has somewhat else to do, than to
transubstantiate, bread and wine, and to uphold empty accidents that have no
subject.

And touching the words of Saint Ambrose, which be counted so pregnant for
transubstantiation, as we are here willed to read them in his Book, De ijs qui
initiantur mysterijs: So you may read them objected by Steph. Gardener, and
Chedsey, and so answered by Peter Martyr, that few Papists or none at al from
that day to this ever durst propound them. Ambrose does not say, that the
substance of bread and wine is abolished, for he flatly avouches the
contrary, when he says, sunt quae erant, they are the same they were; but
that the nature of them is changed; that whereas before they were common
creatures and profane by nature; now by consecration, they be holy signs,
such as do not only represent, but exhibit the body and blood of Christ to
the faithful receiver, and be effectual and powerful instruments, whereby
life and immortality is conuayed into us, and this exposition does Ambrose
himself confirm, where he says, toward the end of the Chapter, that this is
a Sacrament of the true flesh of Christ, and that after consecration the body
of Christ is signified. Now to make light of so wonderful a change, which
passes the capacity of Angels (as Chrysostom says) and to make it inferior
to the wonders of Egypt, whereof most were done by sorcerers, as well as by
Moses, argues an understanding darkened, with deep ignorance, and too much
addicted to Popish devises. I could add that this place of Ambrose, is
objected also by Harding, and answered by Bishop Iuell, Art. 10, diuis. 3.
and that this Book is thought by many wise and learned men to be falsely
fathered upon Ambrose, but this that I have said already is sufficient to beat
down the fond bragges of our Papist, and to show him clearly, that Ambrose is
wrested long ago out of Gardener, Tresham, Chedsey, and Hardings hands, who
were far better able to hold him, than our wandering Papists be at this day;
and therefore this is none of those inanswerable proofs he has taken upon him
to allege, and Saint Ambroses Faith or Opinion in this point, is not yet found
to be Papisticall.

The Dialogue. Sectio XVI.
EPiphanius; This ancient Father, after a large discourse made for the
Catholic exposition of diverse places of Scripture, perverted by Arius and
other Heretics, who turned all things contrary to their own reason, and
understanding into Allegories, and figurative speeches, concludes that a
Christian must believe many things beyond the comprehension of humane reason,
for proof hereof, he shows that we must believe that man was made according
to the Image of God, because it is the word of God, and not to turn it into an
allegorical sense, because we cannot comprehend what it is, wherein this
similitude does consist, which is neither in the body, nor in the soul, nor
in virtue, nor in baptism. Then he proceeds unto another like instance, Et
quot sunt quae similia sunt says he, videmus enim quod accepit saluator in
manus suas veluti euangeliu^ habet, quod surrexit in coena and accepit hac and
vbi gratias egisset dixit hoc meu^ est, hoc, and hoc, and videmus quod non
aequale est, neque simile, non imagini in carne, non inuisibili deitati, non
lineamentis membrorum, hoc enim est rotunda figurae, and insensibile quantum ad
potentiam, and voluit, per gratiam, dicere, hoc meum est, hoc, and hoc, and
nemo non fidem habet sermoni, qui enim non credit esse ipsum verum sicut dixit,
is excidit a gratia and salute. this is a very homely translation look the
answer.
And how many like examples are there? says he, for we see that our Savior
did take into his hands, as it is in the Gospel, that he rose up at supper;
and when he had given thanks, he said, this is my body, and so forth, and we
see that it is not equal, nor like unto a fleshly body, nor unto the
invisible deity, neither has it the lineaments of the members of a body, for
that is of a round figure, and impossible to be discerned of us, yet it
pleased him to say, through grace; this is my body, and so forth; and there is
no man which believes it not, for who so believes not that it is he,
according as he has said, is fallen away from grace and salvation. Thus far
this ancient Father, who So did many an heretic and scismaticke, as well as
Epipharius.
lived in Palestine 1200. years ago: out of which words, being considered with
the scope of the discourse going before, and following after from the words:
Maxima me subijt admiratio, etc. unto these words, and fabula est de caetero
ipsa veritas, and omnia allegorice dicuntur, We may collect diverse good Lessons
to the purpose in hand; first, that a Catholic man must believe many places
of Scripture to be So many be true in a figurative sense, and so is this for
one.
true, being taken in the literal sense, although it be above the
comprehension of humane reason: Secondly, that in the place of Scripture last
rehearsed, there is something, beyond the comprehension of man's reason, which
notwithstanding must be believed, and not turned into an allegory That is,
such a figurative sense, as is allegorical. For Epiphanius here speaks only
against allegories, and no other figure.
or figurative sense, which I do ground upon these words, Et quot sunt quae
similia sunt? and how many like examples may we find? If I do infer or
allege any thing amiss, reprove me: if not, let us proceed, Libro Anacoratus
circa medium. Pro. Epiphanius in that place inueigheth against Arius, and
Origin, as well for interpreting things literally, which are to be understood
figuratively, as he does for interpreting things figuratively, which are to be
understood literally: and therefore if you do interpret these words, [this is
my bodie] literally, whereas it is to be understood figuratively he inueigheth
against you, and not against me. Pap. True it is, that Epiphanius does
reprove as well the literal as the figurative interpretation, but who so
shall read the discourse with indifferency shall find, that the examples of
the blessed Sacrament; and of the similitude between man and the Image of God,
are produced and urged only to prove that many places must be understood
literally, and not turned into allegories and Epiphanius speaks not here
against any other figures, but allogories.
figures, because we cannot comprehend how they can be true in ye literal
signification; for first he inueigheth against Origin, for interpreting many
things, yt are spoken in the scriptures concerning paradise, which ought to be
understood literally, into an allegorical interpretation, then he produces
those two examples to prove that many things in scripture must be And not
turned into allegories, but other figures cannot be avoided, no not in the
Sacrament.
believed, although we be not able to comprehend how they can be true, and so
returns to the prosecution of his argument against Origin, concerning his
denial of a terrestrial Paradise, and his turning of all things thereof
spoken into allegories: but this I refer to the censure of the judicial
Reader, and will proceed in that you have not excepted against, to wit, that
there is something in the blessed sacrament which we must believe although it be
inco^prehe^sible, desiring to learn of you, whether it be a thing
incomprehensible, that the bread should be a figure of Christ's body, or what
other incomprehensible matter you do find therein? Pro. The invisible
operation of the holy Ghost in the Sacrament, is a thing inco^prehensible. Pa.
You must not so escape, for the thing that this Father notes to be
incomprehensible, is, that whereas our Savior said, it is his body, which
must be It is true, as the truth meant it.
true, because the truth has spoken it, yet it is not like unto a natural
body, but of a round form, etc. Now I will learn of you, if it be not
Christ's true body, but a figure and signification thereof, what wonder But it
is incomprehensible, how it should be so powerful a figure.
or incomprehensible matter is there, that the Sacrament (being a figure of
Christ's body) should nevertheless be of a round form, and not like unto a
natural body.

The Answer.
ANother ancient Father, is brought to speak for transubstantiation, whether
he will or no, and his testimony is so tediously dilated with multitude of
words, and false translations, and blind lessons, that it wearieth me to look
them over, yet may I not suffer such loquacitie to triumph against the truth.
Ambrose is raised, as it were from the dead, leading Saint Austine in a string,
and carrying the universal Church upon his back, as though his words had
never been nor could be answered, and this facing may become a Papist
reasonably well, but when he brings in Ephanius with a wrong translation to
second the matter, whose testimony has been often answered, and the edge and
point of it turned long ago to the very throat and bowels of
transubstantiation: I may truly say of him, as the wise man does of unadvised
pratlers; Prou. 29.20. and Cap. 26.12.
namely, that there is more hope of a fool than of him. Epiphanius says, Et
accepit haec, And he took these; speaking plurally of many round cakes, or
pieces of bread, which after he calls, hoc, and hoc, this, and this, more
distinctlyt: his our translator clean omitteth, and englisheth hoc est meum,
hoc, and hoc, this is mine, and this, and this; this is my body, and so forth.
Again, hoc est rotundae figurae, and insensibile quantum ad potentiam, this is
of a round figure and insensible, he translateth, that is of a round figure,
and impossible to be discerned of us. And again, qui non credit esse ipsum
verum, he that believes not that it is true: He translateth thus; who so
believes not that it is he, whereas ipsum verum agrees grammatically with
sermonem immediately before.

These forgeries be very material, for when Epiphanius says, hoc meum est,
hoc, and hoc, as of three round cakes, whereof every one severally and
separately is said to be the body of Christ; verily, we must either admit a
new trinity in unity, whereof every one severally is the body of Christ,
and yet all three but one body, or else we cannot hold transubstantiation, it
will not be so hard a matter to exemplify the mystery of the Trinity, which
is beyond all example, if hoc, hoc, and hoc, be a trinity in unity. Secondly,
when Epiphanius says, that the round cake is without sense, and powerless,
for so we are taught to translate it by opposition following, in these words,
Dominum vero nostrum nouimus totum sensum, totum sensitiuum, etc. We know that
our Lord is all sense, and all sensitive. We see plainly that it cannot be
said of the body of Christ simply and absolutely, unless we imagine the body
of Christ to be senseless and powerless. Lastly, when Epiphanius says, that
we must believe the words of Christ to be true, as he spoke them; we may not
think that he understood by ipsum verum, very Christ himself, body, blood,
and all, as this man translateth in favor of the popish single sacrilegious
communion, for that's not sicut dixit, as any man may easily perceive. The
Counsel of Trent decrees thus; Sess. 13. cap. 3.
Si quis negauerit totum and integrum Christum, and omnium gratiarum fontem and
authorem sub vna panis specie sumi, anathema sit. If any man shall deny that
whole Christ, and the author and fountain of all graces is contained under the
only form of bread, let him be accursed. But I beseech you, tell us by what
words this strange consecration is made? hoc est corpus meum, makes but the
body that is broken, and blood is not broken, but shed. Again, hic est
sanguis meus, makes but the blood that is shed, and the body is not shed, but
broken. Verily our Savior himself when he gave bread, gave his body, and not
blood, for that he gave after supper, when he took the cup, Luke 22, 20.
and if he gave integrum Christum, whole Christ, when he gave bread, then he
gave nothing, when he gave the cup, and therefore these good fellows had need
take heed they inuolue not the Son of God himself within their, 1. Cor. 12,
3.
Anathema sit, for no man speaking by the spirit of God calls Jesus
execrable. In decret pontiff. did. 2. cap. Comper.
No, no, they that divide this holy mystery be Sacrilegi, says Pope
Gelasius, and so by good consequent this Anathema sit, must return home, and
fall upon their own bald pates that made it.

But to leave these fashoods, and to give you the true meaning of this ancient
Father, in a summary Compendium, we must believe that bread in the Lords
supper, is the body of Christ, not simply, but in such a figure as takes not
away the truth of the Scripture, as we also believe man to be after a true
understanding, Gent. 1.26, 27
the Image of God, for as man is after a sort the Image of God, as the word of
God testifies, though he be not thoroughly so, neither in regard of body, nor
soul, nor mind, nor baptism, nor virtuous living, not any other evident and
lively similitude we see him to have with God, so do we believe that the
bread which is of a round figure, and without sense and feeling, is after a
true manner and meaning the body of Christ, as the words of Christ teach us,
though it be not so by substance or apparent proportion and portraiture of
bodily members. Wherefore though bread by nature be but a profane common
element appointed of God to feed our bodies: yet (by grace) it pleases the
Lord to make it, and to call it his body, that is a Sacrament of his body,
whereby, as by an effectual instrument, the faithful receivers are
spiritually fed and nourished to eternal life.

This I take to be Epiphanius meaning, whereunto I will add a few lessons for
more perspicuitie, and for the ouerthwarting of those two lessons, which our
Papist here gives us. Frst Epiphanius being learned and industrious, knew
well enough wherein the Image of God consisted, Ephesians. 4, 24. Coloss. 3, 10.
for Paul teaches it plainly in his Epistles to the Ephesians and Colossians.
Secondly, this Image is so defaced and ouershadowed in the posterity of Adam,
that nothing in man or about man, seems answerable or agreeable unto it.
Thirdly, notwithstanding this obscurity, we must believe the truth of Gods
word, that man is created after the Image of God, and not overthrow that truth
by allegorical subtilties. Fourthly, we have the like example in the words
of Christ at his last supper; namely, this bread is my body, which Epiphanius
knew to be spoken per gratiam, by grace; whereby that common element was
advanced supernaturally and mystically; yet truly to have the name of the
body of Christ, whereof it was a Sacrament. Fifthly, there is no apparent
equality, or likelihood, or outward sensible similitude or proportion of
members, why bread should be so called. Lastly, notwithstanding this
difficulty, we must believe that by bread, is meant true bread, and by body,
the true body of Christ, and that the one is said of the other, figuratively
indeed, because they be dispanita, yet truly as our Savior spoke, and not fly
to origenicall allegories, which overthrow the hystoricall truth of Gods holy
word, and turn it into fables.

These lessons (I trow) be plain enough, yet I doubt our Papist will not think
his knot is yet loosed; there is nothing (says he) in the Sacrament that is
incomprehensible, but Epiphanius says not so, though he say it, neither can it
be inferred, out of quot sunt and similia sunt, for the Image of God was
comprehensible in Adam, though it be defaced in us, and things may be, Similia
secundum magis and minus, but not to multiply quarrels, let us grant that he
says to be true, what then? Marry then I would learn (says he) if it be
not Christ's true body really present, but a figure thereof, what wonder or
incomprehensible matrer is there, here is a little pretty It, three times
repeated in the knitting of this knot, It, is his body, It is not like to a
natural body, and if it be not Christ's body, etc. I beseech you what means
this man by his It? is [It] something, or is [It] nothing, or what is [It?]
Epiphanius says, It, is of a round form: therefore It, is not accidens, for
rotundum is not accidens, but rotunditas; if It be a substance, then It must
be either the body of Christ, and so the body of Christ is of a round form,
or else it must be bread, and so indeed all the three Evangelists are bold to
call It, Math. 26, 26. Mark. 14, 22. Luke 22, 19. 1. Cor. 10, 16.17. 1. Cor.
11, 23, 26, 27, 28.
and so is the Apostle Paul twice in one Chapter, and four times in another,
and he himself for all this mincing of the mattter, comes down in the end
out of the clouds, and confesses the Sacrament to be of a round form, whereof
it follows, that it is neither an accident, nor the real substance of
Christ's body, but bread as the Scripture calls it. Now, for the unloosing of
his knot, I say, that it is incomprehensible, how a round piece of bread
should be such a figure, as is worthy to be called the body of Christ, and
so to exhibit and convey the graces and merits of Christ's passion into us,
that our sins are remitted, our faith increased, and we incorporate, and
made members of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones. Let him show me,
that this is not far beyond the comprehension of man's reason, and I will give
him his asking.

But for a full clearing of Epiphanius, it is to be remembered that Manes and
his disciples, living upon the sweat of other men's brows, and supposing all
things to have life and soul, as man had, were wont to consecrate the bread
and wine, that was given them to fill their slow bellies withal, after this
sort, Ego non seminauite, non messui te, non molui, in clibanum non misi, alius
obtulit and comedi, innoxius sum, etc. I sowed thee not, I reap thee not, I
ground thee not, I baked thee not, another offered it, and I did eat, I am
innocent, etc. Whereunto Epiphanius answers, ipsi non recidunt botru^, sed
edunt botru^, Haeres. 66. circa medium.
vtrum grauius est? etenim vindemians semel recidit botru^, qui vero comedit,
per de^tes sectores ac manducatores singula grana edomat, and per hoc magis
multipliciter torquet ac secat, and non amplius similis erit, ei qui semel
secuit, is qui manducauit and consumpsit, They cut not the bunch of grapes, but
they eat it, which is greater? the Grape-gatherer did once cut the vine, but he
that eats it does cut and grind with his teeth all the graces, and in the
respect he does torment it much more, and he that has eaten and consumed it,
is no longer like to him that only once cut it. You hear what Epiphanius
says for confutation of the Manichies. Now consider how that he says can
possibly be good, if the living sensitive body of Christ, blood, and all be
eaten of the Catholics; might not the Manichies then reply, that they were
more to be borne withal, that were compelled by hunger and thirst to eat and
drink living things of mean regard, crying for grief, Ego non seminaui te;
non messui, non molui, etc, Than Epiphanius and his Catholics that presumed
to eat the living flesh of Christ, and to drink his blood? verily Epiphanius
being learned and wise, would not have left his reason in this case wide open
without either fence or shelter against the adversary, if the real presence
and manducation of the body and blood of Christ, had been catholickely
believed in his time. Peter in the Acts, when a voice from heaven commanded him
to kill and eat, though he were hungry, and in a trance, yet he forgot not the
law of God, but answered, [God forbid Lord, for nothing polluted, or unclean
has ever entered into my mouth,] and shall we think, that the same Peter,
when our Savior says [take, Act. 10, 10. etc. Et cap. 11 5, etc.
eat, this is my body,] and [take, drink, this is my blood:] would never make
any question, neither he, nor any of his fellow Apostles, against the eating of
man's flesh, and drinking man's blood, if they had understood the words of
Christ after the popish fashion? Even so, he that thinks that Epiphanius,
holding the real eating and drinking of the body and blood of Christ; would
dispute, so loosely as he does, against the Manichies: must needs think
withal that his wits were in a deeper trance than Saint Peter's, and so fitter
to gather wool, than to confute heretics.

The Dialogue. Sectio XVII.
I Will leave this knot for you to unloose at better leisure, and assay you
with another argument to prove the This will you never prove while you live,
nor your child after you.
consent of all ancient Fathers, and the uniform practice of the universal
Church in this doctrine of transubstantiation: but first, I will set down
certain places out of the Fathers whereon to ground mine argument, although I
have already used the same places for the proof of prayer for the dead. This
Custom says These places are answered all of them.
Saint Austine, the universal Church does observe (being delivered by
tradition from the Elders,) that whereas at the time of the Sacrifices,
commemoration is made of all souls departed in the communion of the body and
blood of Christ, they should be prayed for, and that the sacrifice also should
be offered for them, De verb. Apost. Sermon 32. You shall also find, that
there was a Sacrifice offered for the quick and dead, in Saint Ambrose his
first prayer Praeparans ad missam, and in Tertullians Book de Monogamia about
the midst of the Book, the place begins, dic mihi soror in pace, etc.
Hereby it is manifest, that How many ages were they, I pray you?
in all these ages, the Church did That is to say, Signum and repraesentationem
sacrificij, Aug. de ciuit. dei lib. 10. cap. 15
offer a sacrifice for the quick and the dead, which being agreed upon between
us, I desire to know of you, whether that sacrifice which was offered, was the
sacrifice of the Mass (which implies transubstantiation,) the sacrifice of
the Protestats communion, the sacrifice of prayer, or the sacrifice of
thanksgiving? for if it was none of the three last, it must needs be the
sacrifice of the Mass, and so is transubstantiation proved. Pro. And why not
the Protestants communion?
It might be either prayer, or thanksgiving, for both are often times in the
Scriptures called by the name of a Sacrifice. Pap. Thus do I prove, that it
was neither: and first, that it was not prayer, it is manifest by the place of
S. Austine before cyted, De verb. Apost. Sermon. 32. where he makes mention of
the prayers, that the Church made for the dead, and of the Sacrifice which it
used to offer for them, as of two distinct things, for there he says that at
the time of the Sacrifice, prayers were made for the dead, and that the
sacrifice was also offered for them, That it was not the Sacrifice of
thanksgiving, it appears likewise by the same Doctor, by the place by me
above cited out of his Enchiridion, where he says, Neque negandum est
defunctorum animas pietate suorum viuentium relouari, cum pro eis sacrificiu^
redemptoris offertur, etc. Neither must we deny that the souls of the dead
are relieved by the charity of their living friends, when as the sacrifice of
our Redeemer is offered for them: the sacrifice therefore, which the Church did
offer, was the sacrifice of our redeemer, and it was offered that the dead
might be relieved, how can you call the sacrifice of thanksgiving the
sacrifice of our redeemer? or how can you say, that the church did offer the
sacrifice of thanksgiving, that the souls of the dead might be relieved? for
thanksgiving is for benefits received, and not for benefits to be received: it
remains therefore, that this sacrifice of the church was This is a worthy
disputer, that concludes for our communion, as well as his own Mass.
either the Protestants communion, or else that it was the sacrifice of the
Mass, and consequently that the body of Christ is really in the Sacrament.

The Answer.
THe knot he talks of, was so loosely tied, that it was no masterie to undo
it, but now we shall have such an argument as shall prove unto us the consent
of all ancient Fathers, and the uniform practice of the universal Church for
transubstantiation, these be great words; yet notwithstanding, when he grounds
this doughty argument upon Austine, Ambrose, and Tertullian, concluding
thereof, that in all these ages the church did offer a sacrifice for the quick
and the dead, I can take them for no better than the words of a man beside
himself; he knew well enough, that Ambrose and Austine were both of an age,
for he has told us once or twice, that the one converted the other, and if he
knew not that the annual offerings of a widow woman upon the day of her
husbands death, enjoined her by Tertullian in these words, Et offerat annuis
diebus dormitionis eius, was not the sacrifice of the Mass, I must needs
think his head was out of temper, if these three Fathers had written in three
several ages, it had been the least number that the word [all] could be
spoken of, Aristot. de caelo lib. 1. cap. 1.
for we call two [both,] and not all, and therefore by what wit or common
sense, he could say all these ages of one age, or two at the most, if
Tertullian had not been mistaken, I cannot possibly imagine; but for answer to
these Fathers, Contr. Collyr. haeres. 79.
Epiphanius says truly, Deo abaeterno nullatenus mulier sacrificauit, A woman
did never in any case offer any sacrifice to God: And again, Nusquam mulier
sacrificauit, aut sacerdotio functa est, A woman never sacrificed, nor
exercised the priestly office. Dialog. cum Tryphon.
Whereunto add out of Iustine Martyr, that God receives no sacrifice, (...),
but only of his Priests, whereof it follows, that the annual oblation that
Tertullian speaks of, was no sacrifice, unless you will say, Epiph. haeres.
49.
that Tertullian was a Priscillianist or Artotyrite, that allowed of Roman
Priests and women Bishops to offer bread and cheese in Sacrifice to the Lord.

And touching Ambrose, I showed before, that he offered not the very body of
Christ, which is received of merit, not of mercy, how irreuerently soever it
be handled, but celebrated the communion of the body and blood of Christ,
joined with prayer and thanksgiving; so now Austine is left alone, of whom I
may say, as our Papist taught me a while ago; namely, that it is not probable,
that Saint Ambrose was a Protestant in this opinion, and Saint Austine (whom
he converted to the Christian faith) a Papist; howbeit, you shall be further
instructed out of Lumbard, Lib. 4. did. 12
that the ancient Fathers do not use the word Sacrifice, and immolation in
proper sense, these be his words, Vocatur sacrificium and oblatio, quia memoria
est and representatio very sacrificij, and sanctae oblationis factae in Ara
crucis, It is called a sacrifice and an offering, because it is a remembrance
and representation of the true sacrifice, and holy offering made upon the altar
of the cross. And a little after, Quotidie immolatur in sacramento, Hierar.
cap. 3.
quia in Sacramento recordatio, fit illius quod factum est semel, We sacrifice
daily in the Sacrament, because in the Sacrament there is a remembrance of that
which was once done, or of that Sacrifice which was once made. Dyenis, in his
Hierarchy, calls it, De demonst. si. 1. cap. 10. Ad Hebr. hom. 17. De ciuit.
Dei. lib. 20. cap. 15.
(...) a figurative sacrifice, and Eusebius, memoriam magni sacrificij, a
remembrance of the great sacrifice, and Chrysostom, recordationem sacrificij,
a remembrance of the sacrifice, and Austine himself, signum and
representationem sacrificij, a sign of representation of the sacrifice:
wherefore we can agree with your papist no farther in this point, than to
confess that the ancient fathers, called the sacrifice of the body and blood
of Christ improperly [a sacrifice] because it is a memorial and representation
of that one all sufficient, vniterable, everlasting sacrifice, which our
Savior, the last true Priest that ever lived or shall live upon the earth,
offered to God upon the Altar of the cross, and so the ground, whereupon this
popish argument is builded, is sandy and deceitful.

Now let me show you that prayers, and supplications, and praise, and
thanksgiving are the only true sacrifices of the new testament, and that the
ancient Christians of the Primitive Church never knew or hard of any other; to
this purpose therefore you must remember that God receives no sacrifice but at
the hands of a Priest, for so we learned a little before out of Austine Martyr,
[Priests] we read of none specially so called in Gods holy word, but either
Leuiticall, or after the order of Melchizedech, Heb. 7.12.18.
whereof the one gave place to Christ, the other has place in Christ, and in
Christ only, for this priesthood is said to be, (...), Heb. 7.24.
that is, such as passes not from one to an other successively, as did the
Priesthood of Aaron, and this is yet further strengthened in that the ministers
of Christ having so great variety of names in the new Testament to show what
their office is, and what they have to do in Christ's Church, are no where
named [priests] which the holy Ghost, that knew best how to give fit names,
would never have done, if Christ had ever instituted such a kingly priesthood
to succeed him, wherefore the Priesthood of Melchisedech figuring only the
euer-standing, and neuer-passing priesthood of Christ, for no other Priesthood
can possibly be answerable to the pattern of Melchisedechs priesthood) it must
follow that such as challenge to be Priests after Melchisedechs order, are
sacrilegious traitors against Christ, and lay violent hands against his royal
prerogatives.

Neither is this doctrine preiudicall to the sacrifice of prayer and
thanksgiving, which needs no erection of a special priesthood, for as it is
a common duty, so we are all in general a holy and a kingly priesthood to
offer up spiritual sacrifice acceptable to God through Jesus Christ, 1. Pet.
2.5.9. and Revel. 1.6.
and to show forth the praises of him that called us out of darkness into
his marvelous light; so then the sacrifice of prayer and thanksgiving may
every Christian offer in private by himself, and publicly by the mouth of
Gods minister, other sacrifice the old fathers knew none; Iustine Martyr says,
In dial. cum Triphone.
that supplications and giving of thanks, are the only perfect and acceptable
sacrifices to God, (...), for these only Christians have learned to offer,
where the force of the preposition (...) for (...) is to be observed, Vide Bez.
Annot. in Math. 1.20.
which teaches us, that these Christians of these times had received this only
kind of sacrificing, and no other, of the fathers and teachers that were before
them. Ad Scapulam.
Again, Tertullian says, Sacrificamus pro salute imperatoris, sed Deo nostro
and ipsius, sed quomodo praecepit deus pura prece, The dead must be prayed for,
when they are remembered at the sacrifice in their order, and it must be
declared that it is offered also for them. In which words after he had said
generally, we sacrifice for the health of the Emperor: he then restraines this
sacrifice, first to the true God, and then secondly to the Christian manner of
sacrifycing in pure prayer, as the true God had commanded, teaching us that God
never gave commandment to offer any other sacrifice unto him; and if he had,
no doubt but the Christians of Carthage and other places in Afrike would have
offered most readily and willingly for the safety of the Emperor.

These two fathers, both in regard of their great antiquity and plainness of
their testimony, are of sufficient force to show that the first Churches never
knew what the Popist sacrifice of the Mass meant, yea but will you say
likewise that they knew not the sacrifice of the Alms, for these two
testimonies are as full against the one as the other; not so, by your leave,
Dulcit. question. 2. and Enchir. cap. 209. Phil. 4.18. Mat. 9.13. and 12. epist.
6.6.
for Alms is contained under gratiarum actio, and Austine says it is
gratiarum actio pro valde bonis, and propitiatio too pro non valde malis.
Howbeit Alms, though Saint Paul call it a sacrifice, yet needs it no
special priesthood to offer it, neither is it an immediate service of God, as
prayer is, but mediately pleases him as a work of the second table, and
therefore our Savior says, (...), I will have mercy and not sacrifice, and so
said the Prophet Osea long before, opposing sacrifice to the exercise of mercy.
Now comes in our Papist crying, thus do I prove that the sacrifice, spoken of
in the fathers, was neither prayer nor thankesging, and therefore Iustine
Martyr and Tertullian had need to look to themselves; well let us hear these
worthy proofs, and consider of them, whether they be strong enough to outface
two fathers of so great antiquity; Austine, says he, makes mention of the
prayers and sacrifices of the Church, Lib. 10. cap. 15
as of two difficult things, ergo, it was not prayer, No, nor sacrifice
neither, by your leave, but a representation of the sacrifice of Christ; for
that's Austines meaning, as himself tells you in his book De ciuitate Dei, and
so is the other argument to be answered, where your papist tells us out of
Austine, that the dead are relieved by the sacrifice of our redeemer, whereas
thanksgiving can neither be so called, nor yet relieve souls, because we give
thanks for benefits received, not for benefits to be received. For Austine
knew well enough that, to speak precisely, there was no sacrifice of our
redeemer in his time, nor any time else after the death of Christ, Dyonisius,
Eusebiu^ Chrysostom, etc.
but that which himself calls signum and representationem sacrificij, a sign
and representation of the sacrifice: and other fathers, a token, a memorial, a
recordation of the sacrifice of Christ: now whether this recording the Lords
death till he come, 2, Cor. 11.26.
do relieve the souls of the dead, it has been already disputed.

But to grant him more then either may be granted; or he can possibly
euince, namely, that it is indeed a sacrifice, as it is called, yet may it be
said, that it is so, and is called so, not absolutely in it self, as it
consists of dumme and deaf elements; but in regard of prayer and
thanksgiving, which be inseparably annexed unto it, otherwise it is not like
that Austine would say, that the sacrifice of the Altar, for those that be
valde boni, Enchir. ca. 109. and Dulcit. quaest. 2.
is thanksgiving: now if this sacrifice pro valde bonis be thanksgiving, as
Austine faith it is, why may it not be said likewise that the same, sacrifice
pro non valde malis, is prayer? I am sure Austine says it is propitiatio,
which includes prayer: and here again consider how weakly he disputes,
when he says that thanksgiving which is for benefits received, August. ibid.
not for benefits to be received, cannot relieve souls etc. For, though it may
be said, that God rewards a thankful remembrance of benefits received, with
new blessings: yet Austine writes not any where that the use of the sacrifice
is always to relieve, but sometime to give thanks, in which regard it is
called the Eucharist; but for as much as Iustine Martyr, and Tertullian
testify, that the Christians in their time did sacrifice not only by
thanksgiving, which is for benefits received; but also by prayer, which is for
benefits to be received, the edge of this wise dispute is utterly blunted.

To go yet a little further, if it should be granted him that this sacrament
is a sacrifice absolutely in it self, yet I hope it cannot relieve souls, nor
do any such feat by it self, as it consists of dead elements, unless
prayers and supplications, and giving of thanks be annexed unto it, for he
that neither prays, nor gives thanks, be he priest, or king, Aaron or
Melchisedecke, cannot be said to offer this sacrifice: and relieve souls it
cannot, unless it be offered. Now then see the unskillfulness of this prating
disputer, who teareth into pieces things that be inseparably knit together, and
so in this foolish fit, desires to know whether this sacrifie was the
sacrifice of the Mass, the sacrifice of the Protestants communion, the
sacrifice of prayer, or the sacrifice of thanksgiving; let him show me that
either his Mass, or our communion is said or song without prayer and
thanksgiving, or else let him hold his peace till he have learned to dispute
better. Augustine distinguishes his sacrifice from prayer and thanksgiving,
but he does not separate them, and so his meaning must needs be that our
prayers and supplications are profitable at all times, but specially then, when
the Communion of the body and blood of Christ is ministered, and our souls
inflamed thereby, and stirred up to greater devotion, In Philip hom. 3.
and hereunto Chrysostom accords, saying, Stante vniuerso populo, manus in
caelos extendente, caetuitem sacerdotali, verendoque posito sacrificie: quomodo
deu^ non placaremus pro istis orantes? The whole people standing, and lifting
up their hands to heaven, as also that company of the Priests, and the
reverend sacrifice laid before, how should we not appease God when we pray for
them?

This is sufficient to show that the pricking arguments you speak of, draw no
blood, and that they may be answered, sine sanguine and sudore; yet a knacke or
two of Popish knauerie is here to be discovered, that you may the better see
the sleights of these companions, for when he foresaw out answer to Austine
like to be as I have set it down: he thought it his best way to falsefie
Austines testimony after this pretty fashion; Austine says, that at the time
of the sacrifice, prayers were made for the dead, and that the sacrifice was
also offered for them, but does Austine say that the sacrifice was offered, at
the time of the sacrifice? is it credible that Austine spoke so foolishly? no,
friend Papist, Austines words are these, pro defunctis, cum ad ipsum
sacrificium loco suo commemorantur, oretur, ac pro illis quoque id offerri
commemoretur, The dead must be prayed for, when they are remembered at the
sacrifice in their order, and must be declared that it is offered also for
them. That is, when the dead are mentioned in their order at the time of the
sacrifice, let them be prayed for, and (that the people may be stirred up to
pray the more devoutly) let it be told them also, that the same sacrifice is
offered for them, and for the better explication of his meaning: Austine
presently after in the same place (as Chrysostom in the place before alleged)
mentions prayer, and not the sacrifice, saying, Orationes Deo non inaniter
allegantur, Prayers are not directed in vain to God, whereby inclusiue such
prayers are to be understood as were sharpened and set on edge by the
celebration of the sacrament.

Again observe how your Papist lets slip the Protestants communion through his
fingers, and concludes no more but thus, therefore this sacrifice of the Church
was either the Protestants communion, or else the sacrifice of the Mass; well,
but is this all he purposed to prove with his sprinckling arguments? if this
be all, our controversy will soon be at an end; and yet he never the nearer
his transubstantiation. no, no, this is not the daysie which he skipt at; he
must prove that the sacrifice of the Church, which the ancient fathers speak
of, was the sacrifice of the mass, and no other, and that shall he never be
able to do till he have removed the Protestants Communion, as well as prayer
and thanksgiving, out of his way. This he could not but know if he had any wit
in his head, and therefore what can be said else to this, but that the
Protestants Communion was too to hot for him han-dle, and that all the wit and
learning he had, was not able to outface it.

The Dialogue. Sectio XVIII.
PRo. I may say unto you here as the Auditor in Tusculanes questions said unto
Marcus, Spinosiota haec prius vt confitear me cogunt, quam vt assentiar, your
pricking arguments do rather compel me to grant, than persuade me to
consent; for although by my silence, I may seem to grant (as not being able
to unloose your Gordions knots) yet am I so far from consent, as I was at the
beginning of this conference, which brings to my remembrance a merry tale I
have heard of a scholar of Oxford, who having attained some pretty skill in
Sophistry, would needs take upon him to prove unto his father by the rules of
Logic, that two chickings which were set upon the board in a dish, were three;
the father, although he could not unfold his sons arguments, yet was he so
far from being persuaded by them, as I am now from being persuaded by yours:
and for an infallible demonstration that he could not be deceived in his
opinion, he took unto himself the two chickins, leaving the third (which lay
As the body of Christ does in the pix, for foolish Papists to feed one.
inuisibly in the empty dish) for the Logician to feed upon: even so although
you have proved your assertions by such arguments as I am It is not so hard a
matter to do.
not able to answer, and proved the same by the testimony of such reverend
witnesses, as I cannot except against: yet cannot I believe the same, because
all my senses together with infinite absurdities, and impossibilities that
would follow thereon, do infallibly demonstrate the contrary, do not all our
senses tell us, that Christ's natural body is not in the sacrament? does not
our reason and vnderstandin teach us that a natural body cannot be in infinite
places at the same instant? and that it is impossible the sacrament, being
divided into a This is a greater mystery than the mystery of the Trinity.
million of parts, that every of these parts should be the entire body of
Christ? and yet that al these bodies, are but one and the same body? can all
the arguments and reasons, by you produced and urged, be more forcible to
persuade me to be of your opinion, than these demonstrations to the contrary?

Pa. It fares with you in this business, much like as with a man that has
lost his way, who the more he bestirreth himself, the further he is from the
end of his journey, your heresy has been pursued and chased through all the
doubles and windinges which it can possibly imagine, and is now retired (like a
crafty fox) into the burrow where it was first littered and bredde, which is
the judgment and censure of humane reason, whereunto (as unto a supreme
judge) it does now appeal from the authority of Non potest per vllam
Scripturam probari. Roffensis contra captiuit: Babiloni: i. It cannot be proved
by any scripture.
scriptures, fathers, and Councels, and surely this is the very fountain and
seminary of all atheism and heresye: for if I should labor to instruct an
Infidel in the principal points of christian religion, as the resurrection of
the very same bodies after they be consumed to dust and ashes, that the Father
is God, the Son God, and the holy Ghost God, and yet that they three are but
one God, without confounding of the persons, that the Son is eternal, and
yet begotten of his father, that I marvel how this can he showed to be a
principal point of christian religion.
Christ came in unto his disciples (the Are the Protestants heretics for so
interpreting? what if he came in at the window or chimney, or lover hole? Non
dicitur quod intrauit per ianuas clausas, etc vide Durand: lib. 4. did. 44. q.
6. 1. It is not said that he entered by the door being shut.
doors being shut) not as the Protestants interpret, the doors opening unto
him, but after a miraculous and supernatural manner, as S. Austine expounds
it, Tractatu 121. euangelij S. Iohannis, all which is as contrary to the
capacity of humane reason, as the real presence in the sacrament: if the
Infidel in this case should appeal unto the same judges, might he not with
the same reason, and by the judgment of the same arbitrators, as well reject
these and many like articles of our christian faith, as you do the real
presence, if the imperfection of man's understanding be such in the
comprehension of the works of nature, that (as We must needs yield, if such
authors speak against us. So is not Gods word, 2. Tim. 3.16. and Psa. 119.105
Socrates says) Hoc solum scimus, quod nihil scimus, this one thing we do
know, that we do know nothing, how great is the imperfection thereof in the
comprehension of things supernatural, being so far remote from our senses and
understanding? the wisdom of man (as S. Paul says) is foolishness with God,
and therefore a far incompetent judge is it to determine of things
appertaining to God: from this fountain sprang first the heresy of Arius,who,
not being able to comprehend how the Son of God could be begotten, when as
there was no time of his begetting, chose rather to rend himself from the
unity of That's not the popish church. Belike the catholic church can
understand things that be above understanding without the scriptures help.
the catholic Church, and to wrest the Scriptures to his own capacity, than
to submit his own understanding (in things above understanding) unto the
censure of the Catholic Church, the sure rock and pillar of truth; and
whosoever he be, that (in matters of his faith) consulteth with flesh and
blood, measuring the same by rule of humane reason, must needs be an heretic,
if not an atheist; if you demand how the body of Christ is in the Sacrament, I
answer, I No, nor any man else living.
cannot tell, because it is ineffable, neither can I conceive it, because it is
incomprehensible; if you do allege impossibility, I answer that So answered
Praxeas the heretic, vide Tertul.
nothing is to God impossible; if you require arguments of credibilitie, you
have as many and as great as for any one article of our christian faith, you
have the uniform consent of the I pray you where does S. John say, hoc est
corpus meum, or what other plain and direct words has he, or any of the
greek churches?
four Evangelists in direct and plain words, you have the uniform consent
and practice of the l Greek churches continued and remaining at this day, so
that there is nothing wanting but the assistance of Gods holy spirit, which
you are to seek and crave be continual and hearty prayer.

The Answer.
Our Protestant here is worse afraid than hurt, the big looks of his adversary
made him afraid, but his withered arms could not hurt him; he tells us with
full mouth, and face enough, that he will prove the sacrifice of the mass
which implies transubstantiation, by the consent of all ancient fathers, and
the uniform practice of the universal Church, but when all is come to all,
he runs away, and leaves this withered conclusion behind him, ergo, the
sacrifice of the Church was either the mass, or the Protestants communion, I
trow, such arguments as these may soon be answered: but now that our
Protestant calls forth sense and reason to witness against him, and to
demonstrate infallibly that his assertion is not to be believed; he comes back
again, and entreats him to shut his eyes, and suffer himself to be hudwinked,
and then he will take pains to lead him into a popish ditch. If we rely upon
the censure of our senses and reason, says he, we are in the hie way to all
Atheism and heresy: John 20.27:29.
a strange thing that that which was a mean to faith in Christ's time, should
now become a fountain of heresy: our Savior says to Thomas, because thou
have seen, thou beleeuest: and again, put thy finger here, and see my hands,
and put forth thy hand, put it into my side, and be not faithless, but
believe: and in another place he says, Luke 24.38.
why are ye troubled? and wherefore do doubts arise in your hearts? behold my
hands and my feet, for it is I my self, handle me and see, for a spirit has
not flesh and bones, as you see me to have. Now I beseech you tell me, if the
consecrated bread had a mouth to speak, as it has an invisible mouth, if
Papists may be believed, and should say to us, why are ye troubled? and
wherefore do doubts arise in your hearts? behold my form and color, handle,
taste, and see, for the body of Christ is not round, white, sweet, heavy,
thick, gross, earthie, as you taste, feel, and see me to be. Shall we
answer that this is the fountain of heresy and Atheism? No, by your leave,
answer so who will, and who dare, this shall be my warrant to settle my
conscience, and without further trouble of mind, or doubt of heart, to believe
that it is very bread, and not the body of Christ. Moreover the holy Apostle S.
John assures us of the certentie of his doctrine by the infalliblenesse of the
outward senses, 1. John 1.1.
saying, that which we have heard, which we have seen with these our eyes,
which we have looked upon, and these hands have handled of that word of life,
that I say, which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, not that you
may be Heretics and Atheists, but that you may have felloship with us, and
that our fellowship may be with the father, and with his son Jesus Christ.

Now touching humane reason, I would gladly know whether our Papist have framed
his arguments with it, or without it? if with it; let him take heed he be not
an Heretic or an Atheist: if without it; I doubt, he shall hardly move
either Heretic or Catholic to be of his opinion: much less convert
Infidels. It were strange doctrine to teach men never to use the help of
humane reason, because Saint Paul says, Romans 1, 19.
the wisdom of this world if foolishness, for though the mystery of our
redemption in Christ Jesus, be far beyond the reach of man's wisdom: yet the
same Paul says, that (...) that you may be known concerning God, is ingraffed
in the heart of man, whereby Gods eternal power and Godhead shining in his
works is known unto him, and Peter Lumbard, Lib. 3, did. 24.
his own Prophet says, Quaeda^ fide creduntur, quae intelliguntur naturali
ratione, Somethings are believed by faith, which are understood by natural
reason. But to make short work, Paul says indeed, that the natural man
perceives not the things of the spirit of God, and God forbid we should deny
it, but yet the same Apostle presently after says, 1. Cor. 2.14. etc.
again the spiritual man discerns all things; now let him show us that
papists are spiritual men, and Protestants natural men, and then we will
veil the bonnet of his insensible and unreasonable assertions, otherwise we
may not become fools and run mad at his pleasure.

Again, where he disputes that an infidel may reject the resurrection of the
dead, the mystery of the Trinity, the eternity of the son of God, the
coming in of Christ in his natural body to his disciples the doors being
shut, and such like Articles of our Christian faith, as well as we may reject
the real presence in the Sacrament; you may see the pure simplicity of this
man, who makes Christ's entrance through a shut door, to be an Article of
faith. Howbeit his master of sentences finds documents of the Trinity in
things created, and Saint Austine says, Lib. 1. did. 3. De Trinitate lib. 6.
cap. 20.
Oportet vt creatorem per ea quae facta sunt intellecta conspicientes,
Trinitatem intelligamus, It behooves us, that we beholding in understanding
the creator by the things which were created, should understand the Trinity.
Again, Tertullian has written a book De resurrectione carnis, and
Athenagoras a Christian Philosopher has written another (...), Of the
resurrection of the dead, Tertullian. Athenagoras.
wherein this article of faith is soundly proved by humane reason, and it
being a sure ground that God cannot be without his power and wisdom, and that
the father is, Fons and origo Deitatis, as, sol, is, fons and origo lucis, The
fountain and original of the Godhead, as the sun is the fountain and
original of light. It will not be so hard to conceive by reason, that the son
of God may be begotten, and yet coeternal with God his father, but I shall not
need to labor further in this point; there is a Treatise written purposely of
this argument by Philip Morney a noble man of France, Phil. Morney.
wherein you may see how far reason may wade in these and such like articles of
Christianity, and therefore if [an infidel] fly to humane reason, he shall have
some stay to lean upon in matters of faith, whereas neither he, nor we, nor any
man else living, can find any possibility of reason or sense to induce us to
believe the real presence.

Howbeit he may do well to teach us from what an infidel should appeal to the
arbiterment of humane reason? is it like that any man will press an infidel
with Scriptures, Fathers, and Councels, and so to drive him to appeal to
reason? Paul says, that prophesying serves not for infidels, but for them
which believe, 1. Cor. 14.22
where the Apostle means such infidels, as be altogether strangers from
Christian doctrine, and must be won by signs, not by prophesying, as for
Fathers and Councels we may not prefer them to Paul and Peter in the conversion
of an infidel: and besides that, infidels will make more account of their own
Prophets Epimenides, Menander, and Aratus, Tit. 1.12
Plato, Hesiode, and Homer, and such like, than of our Fathers and Councels:
yet notwithstanding if we should confess that other matters of faith cannot be
measured by humane reason without danger of heresy: yet if you cleave to his
faith, and not to your own reason in the real presence: you cannot choose but
be an heretic, Dial, 2. in con.

The Symboles or signs of the Lords body, after the priest has inuocated,
are charged and made other shings.


and this does Theodoret evidently declare in one of his Dialogues, where the
heretic says, Symbola dominici corporis and sanguinis post inuocatione^
sacerdotis mutantur, et alia fiunt. And this he speaks of a substantial
change, as our Papists do at this day; but the Catholic answers, Signa
mysticapost sanctificationem non recedunt a natura sua, manent enim in priori
substantia, and figura, and forma. Thus has Theodoret a learned and ancient
father of the Greek Church, written almost 1200. years ago, giving clearly
to understand, that the doctrine of transubstantiation was not Catholic in
his time, but heretical, what the Greek Church thinks of it at this day,
may better be learned by the last Session of the Council of Florence, than by
the bold face of this Papist, whose head is so full of uniform consents and
arguments of credibilitie, Council. Florent. sess, vltima.
that he forgets how many of the Evangelists speak of the Lords supper.

See then what ill luck this poor man has, that both his uniform consents
fail him, the one confuted by Theodoret and the Council of Florence, the
other by Saint John's Gospel, where you shall not find one word spoken of the
Sacrament: all the four Evangelists, quoth he? how I pray you? in thought,
word, or deed? marry, says he in direct and plain words? Indeed the words of
three Evangelists are direct and plain against him, but the fourth says
nothing; Matthew and Mark say, that the Sacrament of Christ's blood after
consecration, is the fruit of the vine: Math. 26.29. Mar. 14.25. cap. 22, 20.
and Luke says, that the cup is the new Testament in his blood; now if you
understand by the cup, not wine, but real blood, it will follow that Christ
had two bloods, or a double blood, for then is it all one, as if Saint Luke
reported our Savior to have spoken thus, This blood contained in this cup, is
the new Testament in my blood, Again all these three Evangelists say, This is
my body, where the demonstratiue pronowne must needs show some visible thing or
other, else our Savior dallied with his disciples, willing them to take and
eat, when they saw nothing; and the disciples themselves were witless, to
reach out their hands to take and eat, that which they saw not, never asking
where the thing was which our Savior spoke of: now what was this visible
thing, trow ye? the body of Christ, they say is invisible, if we say it was a
lump of accidents the^ we must imagine our Savior to speak thus, this lump of
accidents is my body, which cannot be taken directly and plainly as the words
lie without figure, and therefore that sense may not be abidden, what then? can
this visible thing be but bread which our Savior did break, and his disciples
did eat, whereas neither breaking nor eating can agree either to accidents or
the inviolable body of Christ.

But go too, let us admit that our Savior spoke thus after the Catholic
fashion [this that lies hid inuisibly under these visible accidents, is my
body] then will it follow inanswerably either that Christ had two bodies, one
visible that spoke to the disciples, another invisible that lay hid under
accidents; or else, if both were but one body by miracle, that the same one
body is both visible and invisible at once which is impossible, yea but God is
omnipotent and nothing is to God impossible, yes, by your leave, and so will
Peter Lumbard tell you, Lib. 1. did. 24.
if it please you to hear him: Howbeit because the popish doctrine of
transubstantiation cannot be maintained, unless we hold that the body of
Christ is visible and not visible at once, and also circumscribed and not
circumscribed at one and the same time; I will set you down the judgment of
Saint Thomas of Aquine, who avouches in plain and direct terms, that these
contradictions cannot be avoided by appealing to Gods omnipotency whereunto
they are not subject, these be his words, Sum part. 1. quaest. 25. arti^. 3.
Quicquid potest habere rationem entis continetur sub possibilibus absolutisre
spectu quoru^ deus dicitur omnipotens, nihil autem opponitur rationi entis nisi
non ens, hoc igitur repugnat rationi possibilis absoluti, quod subditur diuinae
omnipotentiae, quod implicat in se, esse and non esse simul: hoc enim
omnipotentiae non subditur, non propter defectum diuinae potentiae, sed quia
non potest habere rationem factibilis neque possibilis: quaecunque igitur
contradictionem non implicant, subillis possibilibus continentur, respectu
quorum dicitur Deus omnipotens; ea vero qua contradictionem implicant, sub
diuina omnipotentia non continentur, quia non possunt habere possibilium
rationem, vnde conuenientius dicitur quod ea non possunt fieri, quam quod Deus
ea non possit facere; Luke 1:37:
neque hoc est contra verbum angeli dicentis, non erit impossible apud Deum
omne verbum, id enim quod contradictionem implicat verbum esse non potest, quia
nullus intellectus potest illud concipere, Whatsoever has the reason of ens is
contained under absolute possibilities, in regard whereof God is called
omnipotent, now nothing is contrary to the reason of ens but non ens, this is
therefore contrary to the reason of absolute possibility, which is subject to
the omnipotency of God, which implies in it, to be and not to be at one
instant: now this is not subject to omnipotency, not for any defect of power in
God, but because the same thing cannot have the reason of possible to be done,
and impossible: whatsoever things therefore do not imply contradiction, are
contained under those possibilities whereof God is called omnipotent; but the
things which imply contradiction are not contained under G^ds omnipotency,
because they cannot have the reason of possibilities, whereupon it is more
fitly said, that these things cannot be done, than that God cannot do them;
neither is this against the speech of the Angel, which said, No word shall be
impossible with God; for that which implies contradiction, is not a word, for
no understanding can conceive it. Thus has S. Thomas, the Angelical doctor,
the crown and foretop of all popery, dragged out transubstantiation by the
heels from under the shelter of Gods omnipotency, and will not suffer such
popish contradictions and impossibilities, as it is maintained by, to have any
succor in the almightinesse of Gods power.

The Dialogue. Sectio XIX. Prayers to Saints.
IDeoque habet ecclesiastica disciplina, quod fideles nouerunt, cum Martyrs eo
loco recitantur ad altar Dei, ibi non pro ipsis oretur, pro caeteris autem
commemoratis defunctis oretur, iniuria est enim pro Martyr orare, cuius nos
debemus orationibus commendari: and therefore it is the practice of the Church,
(as the faithful do know) that when as mention is made of the Martyrs at the
altar of God, they are not prayed for, as others are who are departed; for it
is an injury to pray for a Martyr, unto whose prayers we ought to Not by
praying to them after they are dead.
commend our selves: Austine de verbis Apostoli sermon 17. Ideo quippe ad
ipsam mensam non sic Martyrs commemoramus, quemadmodum alios qui in pace
requiescunt, vt etiam pro eis oremus, sed magis vt orent ipsi pro nobis, vt
eorum vestigijs hereamus, quia impleuerunt ipsi charitatem, qua Dominus dixit
non posse esse maiorem, and therefore at the Lords table we do not Augustine
does not say here we should pray to Martyrs:
make mention of the Martyrs, as we do of others that rest in peace, to the
intent to pray for them also, but rather that they should pray for us, that we
may constantly follow their steps, etc. Sancta Maria succurre miseris, etc.
Cauendum ne dum matris excellentia amplietur, filij gloria minuatur, etc.
Bonauent. in 3. did. 3. quest. 2. We must take heed, least while the
excellency of the mother is enlarged, the glory of the son be diminished.
Holy M^rie succor us wretches, help us that are weak hearted, comfort us
that mourn, pray for the people, etc. Austine de Sanctis These sermons be none
of Austines.
sermon 18. read also the 35. sermon de Sanctis.

The Answer.
THis point of popish doctrine may well be called a doctrine of devils, and
therefore we answer them that defend it, and urge it upon us, as our Savior
answered the devil, Matthew. 4.10. Deuter. 10.20 Romans 10.14.
avoid Satan, for it is written, thou shall worship the lord thy God, and him
only shall thou serve, when Paul says, how shall they call on him in whom
they have not believed? he shows us to whom this service belongs, namely,
to him in whom we believe, De ciuit. Dei lib. 22. cap. 10
which cannot agree to any creature in heaven or earth, and therefore well
says Austine, whose authority is here pretended, Vni Deo and Martyrum and
nostro sacrificium immolamus, ad quod sacrificium, sicut homines Dei qui mundum
in eius confessione vicerunt, suo loco and ordine nominantur, non tamen a
sacerdote qui sacrificat inuocantur. We do offer sacrifice to one and the
same God both of the Martyrs and ours, at which sacrifice, though the men which
have overcome the world in the confession of his name, are in their place and
order named, yet are they not inuocated by the Priest that sacrifices. This is
a plain testimony against the invocation of dead Martyrs, and therefore we
must not accept of these places, which our Papist here offers us, according
to the first view, but look better into them, and so expound them, as they may
agree together with that other place which I have quoted, and here I offer you
three several expositions, agreeable (I think) to Austines words here
alleged by our Papist; the first is, that the commending of us to the Martyrs
prayers here spoken of, is not by prayer made unto them when they are dead, but
by request made unto them before their Martyrdom, when they are alive, as the
thief in the Gospel prayed our Savior upon the cross before his death,
[Lord, remember me when thou come into thy Kingdom, Luke 23, 42. Libr. 1.
Epist. 1 in fine.
] Cyprian writes so to Cornelius, Si quis hinc nostrum prior diuinae
dignationis celeritate precesserit, perseueret apud Deum nostra dilectio, pro
fratribus and sororibus nostris apud misericordiam patris non cesset oration, If
any of us through the goodness of God go hence first before other, let our
love still continue when we are with God, that we cease not to pray before the
Fathers mercy, for our brethren and sisters. Secondly, when Austine says,
that the Martyrs are therefore remembered at the Altar, that they may so be
moved to pray for us, he takes the thankful commemoration of their names at
the Lords table without any further praying unto the^, Contr. Faustum lib. 20,
Cap. 21.
to be a sufficient spur to exercise them to yield us such help, as they can
afford us, and therefore he teaches us elsewhere, that Christians celebrated
the memories of Martyrs for these two intents, Vt meritis eorum consocientur,
atque orationibus adinuentur, That they may be associate to the merits, De
tempore sermon. 244.
and helped with their prayers. And in another place, that Martyrs do make
intercession for us, quando in nohis aliquid de suis virtutibus recognoscunt,
when they find any of their virtues to lie in us. Thirdly and lastly, the one
of these two places alleged for this superstitious kind of praying, may serve
for an exposition of the other, for when the one says, Iniuria est pro Martyr
orare, cuius nos debemus orationibus commendari, It is injury to pray for a
Martyr, to whose prayers we ought rather to be commended. The other tells you
that the word magis, rather, is wanting, whereby we are informed, that we
ought rather to pray to Martyrs, than for Martyrs, and yet neither the one
simply lawful, nor the other.

Now, touching the last authority out of the counterfeit Sermons De sanctis,
it is shamefully derogatorie to the mediation of Christ Jesus, so as a
Christian heart can hardly brook it; we think it a foul speech, that
Cardinal Bembus used in an Epistle he wrote to Clarles the fifth, Bembus.
wherein he calls the blessed Virgin, Dominam and Deam nostram, Our Lady
and Goddess. But here in these Sermons she is called, forma Dei, the form of
God: so likewise Ambrose Catherine in the Council of Trent calls her, Sess.
2.
fidelissimam Dei sociam, the most faithful mate of God; and these Sermons say
little less, where we read, Te rex regum vt sponsam sibi associat, Thee the
King of Kings does associate to himself as his spouse. To be short, this
wretched author calls her, Sponsam Dei, reginam coelorum, Dominam angelorum,
mundi redemptricem, reportatricem gratiae reconciliationis, The Spouse of God,
the Queen of heaven, the Lady of Angels, the Redeemer of the world, the
bringer of the grace of reconciliation; and teaches us to invoke her after
this manner, Tu es spes vnica peccatorum, per te speramus veniam delictorum, in
te nostrorum est expectatio praemiorum, Thou art the only hope of sinners, by
thee we hope for pardon of our sins, in thee we look for our rewards. And
then follows immediately, Sancta Maria succurre miseris, etc. Holy Marie
help us wretches, as our Papist here has alleged; if this Divinity may be
tolerated, then let our gathered sticks, Ierem. 7.18.
and the Fathers kindle the fire, and our women knead dough to bake cakes for
the Queen of heaven, and let the Collyridians be heretics no longer,
Christus dixit (says Epiphanius) quid mihi and tibi est mulier? non dum venit
hora mea, Here Is. 59. Ioh. 2.4.
quo non putarent aliqui magis eximiam esse sanctam Virgine^, mulierem eam
appellauit veluti prophetans, quae essent futura in terra sectarum and
haereserie genera, vt ne aliqui nimium admirati sanctam, in hanc haeresim
eiusque deliramenta dilabantur, Christ said, what have I to do with this
woman? mine hour is not yet come, that some might not think the holy Virgin
to be more excellent than she was, he calls her woman prophesying as it were,
what kinds of sects and heresies there should be in the world, least some
admiring too much her holy person, should fall into this doting heresy. And
Ambrose, In Romans Cap. 1
Isti se non putant reos qui honorem nominis Dei deferunt creaturae, and
relicto domino creaturas adorant, nam and ideo ad reges per Tribunos and
Comites itur, quia homo vtique est rex, and nescit quibus debeat rempub.
credere, ad Deum autem, quem nihil latet, omnium enim merita nouit promerendum,
suffragatore non est opus, sed mente deuota, vbicunque enim talis loquutus
fuerit ei respondebit illi, These men think not themselves guilty, which give
the honor of the name of God to a creature, and leaving the Lord, adore
creatures: for therefore indeed, we go to Kings by Tribuues and Earls,
because the King is a man, and knows not to whom to commit the public
affairs; but to God, from whom nothing is hidden, for he knows all men's
need, we have no need of any to speak for us, but a devout mind, for
wheresoever a man so qualified speaks, he will answer. These be reverend
witnesses, such as cannot be excepted against, to whom Chrysostomes witness
may be added out of his Homilies de poenitentia, Homines vtuntur atriensibus,
Homil. 4.
(says he) in Deo nihil est tale, sine mediatore est execrabilis, Men use
dore-keepers, in God there is no such thing, for he is execrable or easy to
be entreated, without a mediator. And again elsewhere, De profect. Euang.
Nihil tibi opus est patronis apud Deum neque enim tam facile Deus audit si
alij pro nobis orent, quam si ipsi oremus, et si pleni simus omnibus malis,
With God thou have no need of any Patrons, for God does not so readily hear,
if others pray for us, as if we pray our selves, although we be full of all
manner of evils. Wherefore they that set up to themselves new mediators,
whether it be of redemption or intercession, for by such nice distinctions our
good Catholics elude the authority of Saint Paul, those men dishonor Jesus
Christ our only mediator, 1. Tim. 2.5.
and so make open show to the world, that they are the members of Antichrist.

The Dialogue. Sectio XX. Vows of Chastity and marriage of Priests.
VEteribus Iudeorum sacerdotibus vxores ad vsum habere licebat, etc. It was
lawful for the ancient Priests among the Jews, to have the use of wives,
because they After that David had sorted them, not before.
had much time wherein they were not employed in the administration of their
office; but when the time drew near, wherein they were to serve in their
turns: First, having prepared themselves some days before they came unto the
Temple to offer to God, but now there ought to be Why do you not observe this
as well as the other?
seven Deacons, and so many Priests as every Church may have two Priests, and
every City one Bishop, and for this cause ought they all of them, to abstain
from women, because they are all of them bound What? night and day?
continually without intermission?
continually, to attend upon their office in the Church, neither have they any
time of intermission, wherein after their companying with their wives, they may
There was never any purification of Priests since Christ's time, yet many were
married, neither is it needful to purify an undefiled bed. Hebr. 13 4.
be purified, as the Priests of the Jews had, for they are to offer every
week, if not every day unto strangers, yet twice every week for their
Parochians, and there are daily some sick persons to be baptized, Saint
Ambrose in his Commentary upon the third Chapter of the first Epist. to
Timothy.

The Answer.
THese Vows, and single life of Priests, which our Papist here propounds for
Catholic, proceeded first from the Devil the spirit of error, and so Paul
teaches us in the first to Timothy, Cap. 4.1.3.
neither is it any thing to the purpose, that the ancient Fathers allowed of
these errors, and gave them countenance in their writings, for heretics did
so likewise as well as Catholics, and the Fathers did it not of a set
deliberate judgment, but of an extraordinary zeal and love they bare to that
kind of life, especially in Gods Ministers, Castitas blanda est, and quemlibet
ad se alliciens, Ier: in Math. cap. 19, Orig: in Romans ca. 12, lib. 9.
Chastity has a fair show, and does easily entice any man to it, says
Jerome, and Origin, Potest aliquis de Castitate plus sapere quam oportet
sapere, A man may have a better conceit of Chastity, than he ought to have;
and that the Fathers sometime went beyond the bounds of sobriety in this point
of doctrine, let Chrysostom serve for example, who writes thus in his first
Homily upon Matthew, Chrysostom: in Math. Hom. 1.
Haec ipsa coniunctio maritalis malum est coram Deo, non dico peccatum, sed
malum, This very conjunction of married couples is evil before God, I do not
say it is sin, but evil. And yet presently after in the same place he says,
Non potest fiery vt vna eademque res pro part sit iustitia, and pro part
peccatum, aut enim tota est iustitia, aut totum est peccatum, quia libido in
maritis and adulteris res vna est. It cannot be that one and the same thing,
should be partly righteousness, and partly sin, but it must be either all
righteousness, or all sin, because lust in married persons and adulterers is
one thing. You shall have another example out of the west, I mean out of
Tertullian, who though he were a Priest himself, as Jerome witnesses,
Descrip: ecclesiast: lib. 1, ca. 11. Tertul: lib. de exhort. ad castitat.
and married too, as appears by his Book written to his wife, says
notwithstanding, In matrimonio deprehendo, quae stupro competunt, In matrimony
I find some things, which are competent to adultery. And again, Nuptiae ex
eo constant quod est stuprum, Marriage consists of that which is whoredom.
The like uncivil out-roads against Gods holy ordinance, may you find in
Jerome against Iouiniane, and Heluidius, and in his Letter to Gerontia, and in
some other of the ancient Fathers, and therefore in all equity you must think
they are not fit Judges to determine either of Priests marriage, or vows of
Chastity.

Howbeit, let us hear what they say, The first is Ambrose, whose reason (drawn
from the Priests under the law) is now nothing worth among us, where neither of
the Sacraments is so often to be attended upon, but that your Priests, for
ought may appear, have time enough to be purified in, neither was this often
baptizing and communicating general every where, or most where in Ambroses
time. Again, what impuritie or pollution can there be in the true and lawful
use of marriage? does Saint Paul say, [the bed is undefiled, Hebr. 23, 4. De
bono coniug. cap. 11. Socrat. hystor. lib. 1. cap. 8.
] and Austine, Sancta sunt corpora coniugatorum fidem sibi and domino
seruantium? The bodies of married folks are holy, if they keep their faith
between themselves, and to the Lord. And does not Paphnutius that worthy
Confessor, say in the hearing of all the Fathers in the Counsel of Nice, Viri
cum vxore legitima concubitus, castimonia est? The companying of a man with his
lawful wife, is chastity? Verily, I see not why I may not answer Saint
Ambrose, as the voice of God from heaven answered Saint Peter in the like case,
[those things that God has purified, pollute thou not.] I am sure Ignatius
gives him a sharper answer, (...), Act 10, 15, and 11, 9. ad Philadelph.
That is to say, He that calls lawful copulation and procreation of
children, corruption and pollution; that man has the apostaticall Dragon, the
Devil dwelling in him.

Thirdly, we must understand that those legal impure things were not so, all
of them in their own nature, but so laid apart by Gods law as unclean to
signify the inward purity, that God required in the souls and spirits of
them that approached unto him, for there is no other reason of worth why a
Conie, Leuit. cap. 11.
or a Hare should be more unclean than a Bull, or a Cow, or why a Duck or a
Goose should be more pure, than a Swan or a Hernshaw. And this appears by the
generality of Gods grant or Patent given to Noah, Genes. 9.3.
and his Sons in the ninth of Genesis. Now this outward bodily purity was
requisite in all that meddled with Gods mysteries both priest and people, 1.
Sam. 21, 4. Exodus 19.15.
as that noble priest Abimelech teaches, who would not suffer David and his
men to eat of the hallowed bread of God, unless they had been clear before
for some good time, from the company of their wives. Here-hence then we learn
three things; first, that as meat, so marriage of it self polluted not, no not
in time of the law, but because the ceremonial law which then had place, had so
appointed. Secondly, that if it were to be observed still in this point of
companying with wives, then not only the Priest that ministers, but the
people that receives, should be subject unto it; nay, rather the people than
the priest, because the priest has no such particular commandment. And
thirdly, that outward cleanesse appointed in the law, Lib. 1. Epist. 4.
signified inward purity, and so Cyprian applies it in one of his Epistles.
Now those outward shadows, having served out their prentiship, are now made
free, and may not still be counted shadows under the Gospel, wherein the thing
signified by them, is required of God with open face without any ceremonial
obscurity, Imagines transeunt admipletae, Tertul. de Monog.
definitiones permanent adimplendae, imagines prophetant, definitiones
gubernant, the figures pass away being fulfilled, or definitions remain to be
fulfilled, that figures prophecy, but the definitions govern. Cap. 21, 17.
etc.
There be a number of blemishes reckoned up in Leuiticus, whereby the seed of
Aaron was made incapable of offering the bread of his God, yet have they no
place in the ministry of the Gospel, further than to signify how free it
should be from the blemishes of the soul.

But to send Ambrose away with his quietus est, 1. Cor. 23, and 24, etc. Exodus
30.7, 8.
we must understand that before David in the end of his reign appointed the
courses and orders of the Priests, and Levites; the high Priest himself was to
offer incense morning and evening, and otherwise to minister in the tabernacle,
yet is it clear, that he abstained not from his wives company, Quest. 82.
but begat Sons and Daughrers, and this does Austine acknowledge upon
Leuiticus, where he demands how the high Priest could offer incense daily
morning and evening, which by reason of sickness incident, and the duty of
marriage he must intermit? and then he answers, that God might preserve him
in health for his service, and that the high Priest might have prerogative
above other men, not to be defiled by the act of matrimony; yet this last
answer pleased him not, Retract. lib. 2.
and therefore in his retractations he says, that the high Priest after
morning Sacrifice might use his wife, and then wash his clothes and purify
himself against the evening, which utterly defaceth Ambroses argument, for if
the Priests under the law had such a prerogative, as the act of matrimony
could not make them unclean, or being made unclean in the morning, might so
hastily purify themselves before evening: then verily their example yields
no reason against the marriage either of popish Priests, or our Ministers.

The Dialogue. Sectio XXI.
SAint This Chrysostom was never Bishop of Constantinople.
Chrysostom. Honorabiles, inquit, sunt nuptiae and cubile thorum immaculatum,
etc. Marriage is honorable (says he) and the marriage bed undefiled, but
fornicators and adulterers God will judge: but now the privilege of marriage
cannot excuse thee, for he that has once joined himself in the All true
Christians have so joined themselves, Hebr. 12.22.
fellowship of Angels, if he shall forsake the same, and entangle himself in
the Marriage is not a snare, but a mean to save us from the snares of Satan.
snares of marriage, he shall defile himself with the It cannot be adultery,
and worse than adultery too.
sin of adultery, and although thou do oftentimes call it by the name of
marriage, yet I do pronounce, that it is so much That is to say, Epist. 6.
worse than adultery, by how much an Angel is greater and better than a
mortal man. Id est, nulla.
Tom. 6. ad Theodorum monachum homilia. 21.

The Answer.
Chrysostom is next, but it is not an Homily, but an Epistle to Theodorus
which is here fathered upon Chrysostom; howbeit, supposing that Chrysostom is
the true author and founder of that counterfeit Epistle. I answer that he is
so hot in his amplifications that he forgets himself, for if the marryage of
one that has vowed chastity be the sin of adultery: how can it be so
far worse than adultery, as he says it is? and if it be so far worse than
adultery, as an Angel is greater and better than a mortal man; then why may
not we pronounce likewise, that it is not the sin of adultery? but (I beseech
you) consider what fellowship of Angels the promise of chastity joins us
into: does not the holy Ghost say as much, and more a great deal of all the
faithful children of God married, and unmarried? [Yee are come unto Mount
Sion, Hebr. 12.22.
and to the City of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, and to the
fellowship of innumerable Angels, and to the company of the first borne which
are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of the
just and perfect men, and to Jesus the mediator of the new testament, and to
the blood of sprinkling that speaks better things than that of Abel, etc.] We
see here that a true Christian is joined in fellowship with innumerable Angels,
and far more than that comes to, yet I would reckon him for a hasty
disputer, that durst not venture thereof, to conclude, that every man or woman,
taking a wife or a husband after profession of Christianity, defiles himself
with the sin of adultery, and far worse too.

Howbeit, it may be Chrysostom had respect to that place, where our Savior
says, Math, 22.30. etc. Mar. 112.25.
that in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are married, but are as the
Angels of God in heaven; if it be so, then his votaries wait, till the
resurrection be past, and then lay claim to the fellowship of Angels, for
being as the Angels of God, is not there spoken of only in regard of not
marrying, but also in regard of not dying, Cap. 20.36.
as Saint Luke expounds it, look the Bible over and over, and you shall
never read that Angels refused man or woman's fellowship because they were
married, or accepted of it, because they were unmarried and single, and
therefore these vehement speeches of the ancient Fathers, especially
Chrysostom, may not be racked to the uttermost, but charitably and friendly
construed to the best, Chrysostom here in his vehemency, goes beyond measure
in reprehending, and the Christians of his time in their lightness went beyond
measure in vowing, yet the East-Church then never exacted any such promise or
vow, but left every Christian man and woman to their own liberty, Socrat.
histor: lib. 5. cap. 21.
Illustres presbyteri in Orient, and Episcopi etiam, modo ipsi volluerint,
nulla lege coacti ab vxoribus abstinent, nam non pauci ipsorum, dum Episcopatum
gerunt, etiam liberos ex vxore legitima procreant, Famous Ministers in the
east, yea, and Bishops also are not compelled by any law to abstain from
wives, for many of them even when they are Bishops, do beget children of a
lawful wife.

Well, but what is that charitable construction you speak of? I pray you let us
hear it, and so an end. Content, Chrysostom says, that such marriage is
worse than adultery, and Austine says as much, yet Austine expounds
himself presently in the same place, De bono viduit. cap. 9.
saying, Non quod ipsae nuptiae vel talium damnandae iudicentur, daemnatur
propositi fraus, damnatur fracta voti fides, etc. Not that the very marriages
even of such men as ought to be judged damnable, their deceitful purpose is
damnable, the breach of their vow is damnable. And again, Damnantur tales, non
quia coniugalem fidem posterius inierunt, sed quia continentiae primam fidem
irritam faecerunt, Such are condemned, not because they did afterward enter
into the state of marriage, but because they brake their former vow of
continency. You see here how Austine expounds himself, and therefore if
we charitably expound Chrysostom after the same manner, we have as good
warrant as Austine can give us, nevertheless to speak yet more precisely, we
may not take the breach of faith to be so great a sin, as the giving of it
unadvisedly beyond our strength, if a man should vow to fast bread and water
all the days of his life, and afterward feeling his strength to fail, should
fall to better fare, for the recovery of the same: there is no reasonable man
that will find fault with him for breaking that yoke of bondage at the last,
but for thrusting his neck unto it at the first Si quis castitatem promiserit,
and seruare non poterit, In Leuit. lib. 3
pronunciet peccatum suum, (says Cirill in one place,) If any man have
promised continency, and cannot keep it, let him confess his sin, But he
says again in another place, In Leuit. lib. 16.
Oportet commetiri doctrinam pro virium qualitate, and huiusmodi, qui non
possunt capere sermonem de castitate, concedere nuptias, We must measure the
doctrine according to men's strength, and grant marriage to such as cannot
receive that doctrine of continency.

The Dialogue. Sectio XXII.
EPiphanius, Quae enim ad sacerdotium tradita sunt, propter eminentiam
celebrationis sactorum, ea ad omnes aequaliter ferri putauerunt, etc. Those
traditions which were delivered peculiarly for the Clergy, by reason of their
None more supereminent, than the Apostles, who were married men, so was Peter
himself.
supreminencie in the celebration of the divine mystery, these heretics
would have all men tied unto, when they did hear that a Bishop ought to be
unreprovable, the husband of one wife, and continent, and likewise of Deacons
and Priests, for in truth since the coming of Christ, the Doctrine Where is
it forbidden in all the new testament?
of the Gospel does not admit into these offices any that have married a
second wife, by reason of the excellent dignity of priesthood, and this holy
But either Churches observed it not, as appears in Tertullian, De Monog.
church does sincerely observe, yet does not the church admit any into those
Offices, that is the husband but of one wife, whose wife is yet living with him
in the fellowship of marriage, but him only Here Epiphanius is fasly
translated, that Epiphanius might not seem unreasonable.
that either was never married, or that after the death of his first wife
lives unmarried, the church receives into the office of a Deacon, Priest,
Bishop, or Subdeacon, which is especially observed where the Ecclesiastical
Canons There is small sincerity in such Canons.
are sincerely kept, but thou will say unto me, that in many places Priests and
Deacons do live in wedlock, but this is not according to the sincerity of
the Canons, etc. Thus have I You must search better, or you will never find it.
searched, and (as I hope) made sensible the second mortal wound, which (as I
said) you have given to your own cause by fashioning unto your selves such an
imaginary and mathematical Church, as all the They acknowledged no other.
ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church did never know, nor acknowledge;
whereupon it will follow, if that out of the Church, as out of the Arc, there
be no salvation, that all these reverend Fathers and Doctors were heretics,
and are damned Spirits, or else that you be heretics your selves.

The Answer.
EPiphanius comes in now to tell his tale, and our Papist bearing good will to
traditions, englisheth quae tradita sunt, which were delivered, those
traditions which were delivered, and yet when all comes to all, those
traditions are found in Paul to Timothy and Titus, and they are as clear
against the necessity of single life in a Bishop, as can be desired. Paul
says, [a Bishop must be the husband of no more but one wife] at once, Cap.
3.2. Tit. 1.5.6.
for that's his meaning in the first to Timothy. Now in the Epistle to Titus,
he wills Titus [to ordain Elders in every City,] such as he found
irreprooueable, the husbands of one wife, etc. evidently teaching us, that
marriage was then no bar against being a Bishop, or a Minister of the
Gospel: and so says Chrysostom, Ita pretiosa res est, vt cum ipsa etiam
possit quis ad sanctum Episcopatus solium subuehi, In Tit. Sermon. 2
It is so precious a thing, that a man with it may be advanced to the seat of a
Bishop: Again he translates, qui abvna continuit, which has contained from
one, him only that was never married, adding the word [onely] to the text, and
perverting the meaning of Epiphanius, who thought it commendable for a man to
renounce his wife, ob continentiam, for continency, and tells us elsewhere,
that Priests were chosen, Here. 61. cont. Apost. in compend. doctr: eccles.
ex his qui continent a proprijs vxoribus, aut ab vnis nuptijs viduitatem
seruantibus, Of these which contained from their own wives, or after their
first wives were dead, lived unmarried. Whereby we learn that he speaks here
of such as kept their bodies clear from the use of their wives, which Saint
Paul forbids, 1. Cor. 7, 3, etc.
not of such as were never married, as our Papist dreameth.

But what be these Canons that Epiphanius talks of? where may a man find them?
what Council decreed them? what words are they conceived in? I fear me, when
all is done, they will prove Apochryphall, agreed upon in some Provinces where
the chief Bishops had been wanton, and written love Sonnets in their youth,
as one Heliodorus did, who to prove himself a new man in his age, caused such
Canons to be made against the Ministers of Thessalia. The like may be thought
of such Bishops as were chosen from among such as led vitam solitariam, a
solitary life; Socrat: eccles: hyst. lib. 5, cap. 21. Epiphan: in Comp: doct:
eccles.
as the manner was in Epiphanius time, who being magnified in the world for
their chastity, thought good to impose it as a law upon their brethren.
Again, it might well be, that these Canons being borne and bred among
heretics, such as the Montanists, Catharans, Apostolickes, and such like,
were laid hold upon by Catholic Bishops with some mitigation, thinking it no
small disgrace, that heretics should go beyond them in a virtue: then so
highly esteemed in the world, howsoever it was, Sorom: lib. 6, 23. Epiph: her:
26
yet Epiphanius being brought up solitarily among the Monks of Egypt and
Palestine, and having escaped the filthy enticements of the Guostickes, to his
great praise; it is no marvel though he were somewhat hardly conceited of
the marriage of Priests, and talk flyingly of I wot not what apochryphall
Canons, whose authors knew them not, nor they their authors.

Wherefore, till these hidden Canons be brought to light, it is fit other
known Canons should take place. In the Canons of the Apostles, thus it is
written, Episcopus, aut presbyter, Can. 5.
aut Diaconus vxorem suam pretextu religionis ne abijciat, aut si abiecerit a
communione segregetur, etsi perseueret deponatur, Let not a Bishop, Elder, or
Deacon put away his wife, under pretense of religion, if he do, let him be
barred from the communion, if he continue in his error, let him be deposed. Can
4.
In the Council of Gangra thus, Si quis discernint presbyterum coniugatum,
tanqua^ occasione^ nuptiarum quod efferre non debeat, and abeius oblatione
abstinet, Anathema sit, If any man judge of a married Bishop, as if because he
is married, he ought not to minister, and do abstain from his ministration,
let him be accursed. In the Council of Ancyra thus, Can. 9.
Diaconi, si in ipsa ordinatione protestati sint, velle se matrimonio copulari,
hi, si postea vxores duxerint, in ministerio maneant, Deacons, if in their
very ordination, they protest that they will be married, if afterward they do
marie wives, ought to remain in the ministry. In the Council of
Constantinople thus, Did. 31. quoniam, and Canon. Tertullianis Conc. 6. can. 13
Si quis praesumpserit contra Apostolicos Canones aliquos praesbyterorum and
Diaconorum priuare a contactu and communione legalis vxoris suae, deponatur,
similiter and praesbyter aut Diaconus, qui religionis causa vxorem suam
expellit, excommunicetur, If any shall presume contrary to the Canons of the
Apostles to separate any Elders, or Deacons from the company and society of
his lawful wife, let him be deposed, and likewise the Elders or Deacons, which
under color of Religion puts away his wife, let him be excommunicated. To
be short, when the Council of Nice purposed to sever Bishops, Presbyters, and
Deacons from the use of their wives, Paphnutius thought it unlawful and
intolerable so to do, and brought the whole Council to be of his mind,
Serem. lib. 1.22.
Paphnutij sententiam approbauit Concilium, and de hac nullam legem tulit, sed
eam in cuiusque arbitrio, non in necessitate poni voluit, The Council did
approve the sentence of Paphnutius, and made no decree concerning this matter,
but left it in every man's choice, and made not a matter of necessity.

But what should we talk of sincere Canons, in such matters as be ouer-ruled
and determined in the Canon of the Scripture? for if it be doubted whether a
Bishop may marie; Paul says, to avoid fornication, let every man have his
wife, and in another place, [mariage is honorable among all. And again, [if
thou take a wife, thou sinnest not. 1. Cor. 7.2. Heb. 13, 4. 1. Cor. 7.28. 1.
Cor. 7, 9, 39. Tertul. de Mo. nog.
] If you doubt whether he may marry a second wife, Paul says, [if they
(meaning widowers) cannot abstain, let them marry,] and Tertullian after his
fall to Montanisme, obiecteth against Christians, that their Bishops married
second wives, quot and digami president apud vos. If you doubt whether a
Minister may contain from the use of his wife, Paul says, [let the husband
give to his wife due benevolence.] And again, [the husband has not the power
of his own body, but the wife. 1. Cor. 7, 3. 1. Cor. 7, 4. 1. Cor. 7.5.
] If you doubt whether a Minister may contain with his wifes consent; Paul
says, [defraud not one another, except it be with consent for a time, that ye
may give your selves to fasting and prayer, and come together again, that Satan
tempt you not for your incontinencie:] and in another place, [art thou bound to
a wife? seek not to be loosed. 1. Cor. 7.27.
] Mark well these places of holy Scripture, and then judge how sincere those
Canons were, that Epiphanius talks of, I doubt you will easily find, that the
word of God and sincerity would agree better.

Now, where this reverend Father speaks of the Super-eminencie, and excellent
dignity of Priesthood, as if the honorable institution and ordinance of God
did abase it; we must needs think him too partially affected: for the Apostles
of Christ, whom our Savior advanced to the highest degree that ever was in
ministry, were almost all married men, and to say that Peter was not as
excellent an Apostle as S. John, and that the married Priests of the primitive
Church were not as excellent men in all respects, as the rest that lived singly
without wives, is more than any godly learned man will venture to avouch; yet
notwithstanding, the dignity of Priesthood, does not free any mortal man
from the danger of fornication, neither will Satan therefore cease to tempt
us, because we are Priests, but set himself so much the rather to move us to
incontinencie: and therefore if a man, feeling his own weakness, shall sooth
himself with an ouer-weening conceit of the excellency of his Priesthood,
and so neglect the remedy that God has appointed; how can that man promise to
himself any assistance from God to keep him from falling?

Thus much briefly of every point of Doctrine, and every testimony thereto
belonging, whereof you may gather, that this second wound is easily healed, I
hope the disagreement that was between Paul and Barnabas, does not prove them
to be of two Churches, or either the one or the other to be a damned heretic.
The ancient Fathers were men, and might err, and did err many of them
together, even whole Councels, as it is apparent to the world, yet God forbid
that therefore we should count them Heretics, and throw them ouer-boord out
of the Arc of Gods Church; No friend Papist, though we descent from them in
some points of doctrine, as they likewise discented from such as were before
them, yet all of us hold one foundation, and it was no part of their belief,
that such as held not these points, were out of the Church, neither is it any
part of our belief, Ad Fortunatianum Epist. 111.
that such as held them, were damned Heretics; Austine says, Catholicorum,
and laudatorum hominum disputationes velut scripturas Canonicas habere non
debemus, vt nobis non liceat, saluae honorificentiae quae illis debetur
hominibus, aliquid in eorum scriptis improbare atque respuere, We ought not to
have the same, in regard the discourses of Catholic and laudable men, as the
canonical scriptures, that we may not saving that honor which is due to those
men, disallow and refuse something in their writings. And when Jerome had
alleged the authority of six or seven Fathers against Austine, Epist: 19.
in defense of Peter's hypocrisy; Austine is bold to answer him thus, Solis
eis scripturarum libris, qui iam Canonici appellantur, didici hunc timorem
honoremque defer, vt nullum eorum authorem scribendo aliquid errasse
firmissime credam: Alios autem italego vt quantalibet sanctitate doctrinaque
praepalleant, non ideo verum putem quia ipsi ita senserunt, sed quia per illos
authors canonicos, vel probobabili ratione, quod a vero non abhorreat
persuadere potueru^t. I have learned to give this reverence and honor only to
those books of the holy scriptures, which are now called Canonical, to
believe assuredly, that no author of them did err in writing any thing. But
others I read, so that of how great learning or holiness soever they be, I do
not therefore think a thing to be true because they thought so, but because
they were able to persuade it by those Canonical authors, or by some probable
reason agreeing with the truth.

The Dialogue. Sectio XXIII.
PRo. The Doctors did err grossly in many things, as you must of force
confess, and therefore a feeble foundation are they to build our salvation
upon: Austine wrote his Retractations, and in the doctrine of purgatory, which
you labor so seriously to build upon his authority, he was so These places are
too hot for our Papist to handle.
doubtful and wavering, that sometime he writes thereof doubtfully, as [fieri
potest] it may be that there is such a thing, [forsitan ita est] peraduentute
it is so; sometime he seems to affirm it, and sometime he flatly denies it.
Irenaeus held, that the souls of the righteous should remain in a place
appointed for them of God, and not enter into heaven before the general
resurrection. Tertullian wrote a book of the unlawfulness of second
marriages. Hilarie held, that Christ did walk upon the water by the nature of
his body. Thus could I run over all the Fathers, and find in them many such
points of doctrine, which you do no less detest then we do those things
which you do labor to build upon their authority. Now tell me, why do we
exclude the Fathers out of our Church, by refusing some of their opinions, more
than you do exclude them out your Church, by refusing of other some? or why is
it not as free for us to reject their authority in the one, as it is for you
to reject it in the other? or why may not I argue (as you do against us) that
because these doctors did hold these opinions which I have set down, that
therefore the universal Church in their time, did embrace the same? or (if
that their said opinions had been erroneous) that some men or other would have
impugned the^ by writing? Pap. Your answer does consist on diverse points,
Where, or when? here I am sure you do not
all which I will prosecute particularly and in order: first therefore, I must
not deny that the doctors were men, and that they were not without their
blemishes and errors, We must d sappoint you of your hope. Look the answer.
hoping that you will also confess, that they were such men as for their great
learning and piety, have ever been admired, and had in high reverence of all
posterity, and accepted for the principal workmen in the building of Gods
spiritual Temple next unto the Apostles of Christ. To err is incident to man's
frailty, and to As you papists do.
persist in an error, is brutish, but to As you papists cannot abide to do.
acknowledge and recant an error, is the work of the holy Ghost, and a great
argument of an humble and weak spirit, and therefore if you seek to detract
from Saint Austines doctrine by abraiding him with his Retractations you do
but seek to quench the flaming fire with pouring oil upon it; but if you do
We insinuate that every thing is not Gospel that S. Austine writes
infinuate by alleging of his Retractations, yt he has retracted any thing by
me alleged against you out of his works, the book is extant, let the judge
be brought forth: your next allegation, whereby you seek to extenuate Saint
Austines authority, is the instabilitie of his His doctrine touching
purgatory, but now simply, as you insinuate.
doctrine, for one while, say you, he affirms, another he denies, another he
doubts; it were an hard matter for you to persuade any man to credit you
herein, that has read how famous Saint Austine was for his great learning
amongst the Gentiles before the conversion; and how, after his conversion, he
has been ever held for the most learned doctor and subtle disputer that ever
flourished in the Church for who so Believe not us, but your own eyes, look
and peruse the places.
believes you herein, must also believe therewithal, that S. Austine had
neither learning, wit, nor regard of his repuputation: but let us admit that
such foul blots, as you do pretend, had dropped from his pen, is it not like
think you, that in his What if he were not resolved when he wrote his
Retractatio^s, how then?
Retractations they should have bin discovered and wiped away? This might serve
for answer of this frivolous objection, concerning the instrabilitie of Saint
Austines doctrine; but because it is a string much harped on, let us assay, by
harping, whether it be a true cord or not: now do you Be like you will not know
wheere, unless it be showed you.
This place of Austine is clear against limbus puerorum.
show me where Saint Austine does deny purgatory, as I have showed you where
he has affirmed it? Pro. Austine in his 14. Chapter De verbis Apostoli, says
thus, The Lord who shall come to judge the quick and the dead, as the Gospel
says, shall divide them all into two parts, whereof one shall be placed on
his right hand, and the other on his left; to those on his right hand he shall
say, Come ye blessed etc. The one he calls his kingdom, the other damnation
with the devil, there is no third place left for infants; and a little after
he concludes thus, if there shall be a right hand and a left, since we have
none other place by the Gospel, behold the kingdom of heaven is on the right
hand. Pa. Here is a fair There be fairer shows in Austine then this.
show, but all is not gold that glistereth; S. Austine in that place, having to
deal with the Pelagians, who held that children which die before baptism,
should (by reason of their innocence) attain unto eternal salvation, but not
unto the kingdom of heaven; and that children are to be baptized, not for
eternal life, but for the kingdom of heaven: for confutation of that heresy,
does there labor to prove that whosoever does not appertain to the kingdom
of heaven, does appertain unto damnation; his argument is this. At the
general judgment, Christ shall divide the quick and the dead into two parts,
whereof one shall be on his right hand, another on his left: therefore children
which die before baptism, must either be on the right hand, to whom the
kingdom of heaven does appertain; or on the left, whose portion is That is
damnation into everlasting fire with the devil and his Angels, Mat. 25.41. I
trow this is hell, not limbus puerorum.
damnation: for, says he, there remains no third place for infants. What
makes this place against purgatory? for they that do allow low of
Purgatory, do hold also that there are but two places, to wit, heaven and
hell; and that whosoever shall be placed in purgatory for a time, does
notwithstanding appertain to one of those two places, for a third place they
likewise do not know: behold how easy a matter it is to carpe at contrariety
in any man's writings, be they never so plain and perspicuous Here the
flood-gate is opened to a great deal of profane, and irreligious talk.
even so do the Jews tax the writings of the Evangelists with contrariety,
and great appearance thereof there seems to be therein. S. John says, He
that is borne of God, sins not; And again, in the same Epistle, he says,
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us:
The Be sucketh honey, and the Spider poison, take away the authority of the
Church, Councels, and Fathers, and leave every man to his own As though fancy
had no place in Councels, and fathers, but only in Scriptures.
fancy in the interpretation of Scriptures, and open the fountain of all
heresy and Atheism. After your single encounter with Saint Austine, you seek
to overthrow ye credit of all the Doctors at once, by taxing them with many
gross errors, I grant the doctors had their errors and imperfections, so had
S. Peter, for S. Paul withstood him to his face, and We do not say they are.
are your new writers of the purest stamp, free trow ye? much less are
Cronographers and writers of civil histories: what then? shall we No, but
resolute divines.
become Skeptic Philosophers? what shall we not believe that which they do
write out of their own knowledge, and whereof themselves were eye witnesses, and
consequently shall we believe nothing but what we do Yes, what we taste,
smell, and feel too, Lord, what vain chat is this?
hear and see? If you will afford an Historiographer any credit in these
cases, afford the Catholic doctor the like in the same case, believe that
which he writes as an eye witness; if not, believe an uniform consent and
harmony of diverse of them in a matter of fact, confirmed by the testimony of
their own eyes: if not, yet believe them at the least wherein they do produce
themselves for eye witnesses, and All this is but impudent facing.
a thousand other like witnesses with them, of this last sort are most of the
testimonies of the doctors, which I have produced against you: they write that
prayers were made for the dead, that sacrifice was offered for the quick and
the dead, that it was universally observed in all Churches, they were present
themselves, and heard and saw it done, and thousands more with them, and were
themselves principal agents in the doing of it. Now let us see what those
errors be wherewith you seek to bring the ancient doctors out of credit.
Irenaeus held Belike Irenaeus never heard any news of Purgatory.
that the souls of the righteous should rest in a place for them appointed of
God until the general resurrection; that Satan did not know his own
damnation before the coming of Christ. Tertullian, that second marriages were
not lawful. Hilarie, that Christ did walk upon the water by the nature of his
body. Cyprian held rebaptization, and so might I pass through the rest of
these and such like errors, As though they were not deliberate assertions, but
only scapes.
escaped in the writings of the fathers; Erasmus alleged a threefolde reason.
First; the points wherein they erred, were not as then called in question, or,
if they were, the Church had not as then determined of them. Secondly, they
were constrained, for the confutation of heresies, to handle such high
mysteries as were beyond their capacity. Thirdly, in dealing earnestly against
heretics, they were sometime, with feruor, carried into the contrary
extreme. Now will I show you the difference beeweene these and the like
errors escaped in the writings of the fathers, and those points of doctrine
wherein I have cited them as witnesses against you; the one they deliver as
their own private opinion, the other set down as a doctrine How knew they
that, or you that they did so?
generally received, and practiced through the universal Church, the one is
(as the Proverb says) but one doctors opinion, the other an uniform consent
of many; the one the Church has rejected, the other it has received and
practices. Thus So may you see, you have said nothing:
may you see the reason why the doctors are to be rejected in the one, and
received in the other, why we do not exclude them out of our Church, as you
have excluded them out of yours. Pro. You shall find in the Fathers as many
places against those points of doctrine, as you shall find for them, and
besides that many books fathered upon the fathers are bastards. Pa. It is a
great argument of a It will at length pull the crown from your Popes head, as
desperate as you make it.
desperate cause, when we see the authority of any authenticke writer so
plain and direct against us, as it cannot be avoided by any gloss or
colorable interpretation, to seek to euade by carping at contrariety in the
same writer, and in so doing we shall show our selves more desirous to obscure
a truth than to bring it to light: touching your last objection, I am content
upon any reasonable cause of challenge, to forbear to vouch any book that you
shall suspect of bastardy. Thus have I answered all your cauils and
calumniations objected against the ancient doctors, which is your last refuge,
for when you cannot tell how by some cunning interpretation or gloss to
unloose the knot; your manner is to cut it in sunder, and to break away.

The Answer.
We are come now to a great deal of void talk of the errors of the fathers,
and doctors, and Austines retracting, and wavering in the doctrine of
purgatory. The first is confessed, not simply, but under hope that we will
also confess that the doctors were not only admired for their learning and
piety, but accepted also for the principal workmen, next unto the Apostles,
which cannot be confessed without injury to the Evangelists, and other that
had extraordinary graces, and power from above a long time after the Apostles,
Iren. lib. 2. 28. and lib. 5. 1. Eusebius histo. eccles. lib. 3. 34 and lib. 5.
7. 9.
as appears in Irenaeus and Eusebius, besides that we may not think a few
fathers, whose writings remain extant, to be excellenter workmen than a
thousand other, whose writings are lost, and their names forgotten in the
world. These few doctors whose books we have, were worthy men, yet one more
worthy than another, and no one of them nor all of them together, to be
preferred to those that were before them. And here let it be observed that
Tertullian, as he is a Montanist, is set down for one of of these admirable
doctors of the Church, for he erred not in the case of second marriages while
he was a Catholic doctor, but when he was an heretic and fallen from the
Church; nay see further how intollerably he defaceth the fathers, when he
goes about to magnify, for if they look upon them to handle high mysteries
beyond their capacity, and were carried in heat against heresy to the contrary
extreme, verily their learning and piety may well be doubted of, and if they
could not see the truth unless it were called into question, and determined
by the Church, there is no great reason why they should be so highly admired,
and had in reverence.

What man? why say you so? the doctors had their errors and imperfections no
otherwise then Saint Peter had, whom Saint Paul withstood to his face, and will
you not admire and reverence Saint Peter? Yes, sir, that I will, for we speak
not here of errors in living, which never any but Christ was free from, but
errors in writing, whereof Saint Peter was never guilty, and therefore
bethink you how, this suspicious and irreuerend calling of Saint Peter's
credit into question, to cloak the fathers errors withal, can be the part
of a good Catholic, we believe Saint Peter never erred in any thing he has
written, but you shall hardly drive us with all your wharting; to believe the
like of our new writers, or your old doctors, much less the autors of profane
Histories, but why keeps this man all this do, trow ye? would he have us
pin our religion upon the sleeves of the doctors, and civil Historiographers
too? will nothing else please him? Yes, he tells you he will be content if you
will credit an uniform consent and harmony of diverse doctors, producing
themselves for eye witnesses, and a thousand other like witnesses with them:
well, when I hear those thousand other speak, then he shall have my answer,
In the mean while have we commended to him, and tell him that I cannot believe
a million of thousands, when they say nothing; and here, I beseech you, note
how his wit ebbes, and his tongue flows beyond the banks of all possibility,
they write says he, that praying and sacrificing for the dead, was universally
observed in all Churches, they were present themselves and hard and saw it
done, and thousands more with them etc. Quid audio? Did they hear and see it
done in all Churches universally? this is no lie, my Lord, and that's all that I
will say to it.

Now touching Austine, we so much the more admire him, in that he retracted his
former errors, as many as he could well-obserue in his own works, neither
do we doubt, but that he would have retracted more if he had lived longer,
and could have considered deliberately of all that he had written, howbeit he
wrote diverse books after his [retractations], neither could he so narrowly
look into every corner of his works, but that many things worthy to be
[retracted], slipped through his fingers: to be short, his [retractations] do
evidently show, that as he was a good and an honest minded man, so he altered
in opinion as he grew in years, and was better instructed by long experience
and travel in divinity, and so consequently, that he is so far forth to be
received, as he builds upon the foundation of the canonical scripture, such
building will stand without [retracting], all other doctrine, as it begins in
man, so man may end it, neither can it stand any longer than man lists to
uphold it.

This wavering in the matter of Purgatory, our Papist denies impudently, and
cries in an agony, show me where Saint Austine does deny purgatory, as I have
showed you he has affirmed it? alas, he has showed Austines affirmation, out
of the counterfeit sermons and Homilies never either written or preached by
Saint Austine, which is a most simple kind of showing, but why does he ask
where Austine denies purgatory, and never asks one word where he doubts
of it? These be fine fellows that ask after such points as they think they
can hold talk of, and can suffer other things to pass by, as if they saw him
not: Howbeit our Protestant here cites a place out of Austines Sermons, De
verbis Apostoli, which is little to the purpose, Sermon. 4.
yet notwithstanding where our Papist answers, that he knows no third place
for infants, but either heaven or hell; what does he else but disclaim his
[limbus puerorum] which Pope Innocent the third, Cap. maiores extra de bapt.
and most of the schoolmen place above purgatory, and will needs have it to
be eternal: but to help out our Protestant, let him take these places out of
Austine against purgatory, Hypognost. lib. 5.
Primum locum fides Catholicocorum diuina authoritate credit regnum esse
caelorum, secundum Gehennam, vbi omnis Apostata vel a fide Christi alienus
aeterna supplicia experietur, tertium penitus ignoramus, imo nec esse in
scripturis sanctis inueniemus, The first place the Catholic faith does by the
authority of God believe to be the kingdom of heaven, the second to be hell,
where every Apostota and alien from the faith of Christ, shall be punished
everlastingly, a third place we knew not at all, neither shall we find in the
holy scriptures that there is any such. Again, In Ioh. tract. 49.
Habent omnes animae cum de seculo exierint diuersas receptiones suas, habent
gaudium bom, mali tormenta; sed cum facta fuerit resurrectio, and bonorum
gaudium amplius erit, and malorum tormenta grauiora, quando cum corpore
torquebuntur, All souls after they go out of the world, have diverse rewards,
the good have joy, and the bad torments; but when the resurrection shall come,
the joy of the good shall be greater, and the torments of the bad more
grievous, when they shall be tormented with their bodies. Again, In Psalm. 32.
Si texit peccata, noluit aduertere, si noluit aduertere, noluit animaduertere,
si noluit animaduertere, noluit punire, noluit agnoscere maluit ignoscere, If
we have hid our sins, he would not see them; if he would not see them, he
would not judge them; if he would not judge, he would not punish; he would not
acknowledge, he had rather pardon them. Again, Ad Hesick. epist. 80.
In quo quemque inuenerit suus nouissimus dies, in hoc eum comprehendet mundi
nouissimus dies, quoniam qualis in die isto quisque moritur, talis in die illo
iudicabitur, In Psalm. 25.
In what state any man's last day finds him, in the same shall the last day of
the world take him, because as a man dies in this, so shall he be in that day
adjudged. And again, Valeat mihiad perfectionem liberationis tantum praetium
sanguinis Domini mei, So great a price of my Lords blood is sufficient for my
perfect deliverance. Sermon. 57.
Add to these, if you will, out of the Sermons Ad fratres in Heremo, Scitole
quod cum anima a corpore euellitur, statim aut in Paradiso pro meritis bonis
collocatur, aut certe pro peccatis in inferni Tartara praecipitatur. Know this,
that so soon as the soul is taken out of the body, by and by it is either
placed in Paradise for good deserts, or else certainly cast headlong into hell
for sins.

Thus have I showed where Austine does deny purgatory, and though our Papist
list not to hear of that side, yet let me show him likewise where Austine
doubts of purgatory, Encharid. cap. 69.
Tale aliquid post hanc vitam fieri incredibile non est, and vtrum ita sit
quaeri potest, That some such thing is done after this life it is not
incredible, and whether it be so done it is a question. Ad dulcit. quaest. 1.
and lib. de fide and oper. cap. 16. de ciuit. dei lib. 21.26. Ibid. cap. 27.
Again, Sieve in hac vita tantum homines ista patiuntur, sieve etiam post hanc
vita^ talia quaedam iudicia subsequuntur, non abhorret quantum arbitror,
aratione veritatis iste intellectus huius sententiae, Whether men suffer these
things only in this life, or whether after this life some such judgments
follow, this understanding of this sentence is not without some show of truth
as I suppose. Again, Sieve ibi tantum, sieve hic and ibi, sieve ideo hic vt non
ibi, saecularia, quamuis a damnatione ventalia, concremantem ignem transitoriae
tribulationis inueniant; non redarguo, quia forfitan verum est, Whether things
committed in this world though venial in respect of damnation, do find a
transitory fire of tribulation here only, or here and there, or therefore here
because not there; I seek not to convince, because perhaps it is true. And
again, Quis sit iste modus, and quae sint ista peccata, quae ita impediunt
peruentionem ad regnum Dei, vt tamen sanctorum amicorum meritis impetrent
indulgentiam? difficilimu^ est inuenire, periculosissimum definire, ego certe
vsque ad hoc tempus, cum inde satagerem ad eorum indagatione^, peruenire non
potui, What is this manner, or what be those sins which so hinder the coming
to the kingdom of heaven, that yet the merit of holy friends may obtain
pardon for them? it is very hard to find, and very perilous to determine:
surely though I have labored earnestly to search, yet can I not find it out
until this time.

These places be sufficient to show Austines wavering in the matter of
purgatory, and if it were not for shame, I would show also where he affirms
it, because our Papist has showed it so sillily, yea, but it were a hard
matter, to persuade any man to credit you herein: then let him credit his
own eyes, let him look upon the places, and consider of them, and they, I
trow, will be sufficient to persuade so much as you say; not so, I hope, for
Austine was a great learned man before his conversion, and after his conversion
the most learned doctor, and subtilest disputer that ever flourished in the
Church, what then? altering in judgment is an argument of increase in
learning, and our Papist himself told us a while ago, that to consist in
error is brutish if therefore Austine say one thing at one time, and
afterward, upon better trial and travel, say otherwise at another; I do not
see how it can hinder his estimation, much less prove him to have neither
learning, wit, nor regard of his reputation, as our Papist here without either
learning or wit, has concluded. What? if a man set down an error, or many
errors in his young days, doubt of them in his middle age; and write the
clean contrary when he is of greater years and experience; shall he therefore
be thought to have neither learning nor wit, nor regard of his reputation? No,
friend papist, it would not hurt your reputation a whit, to deny that in a new
book which you affirm in this, and to affirm that which you deny here, and
to doubt of that whereof here you seem to be resolute, remember your own
conclusion, to err is incident to man's frailty, but to persist in error, is
brutish.

Touching the quickenesse and acuteness of Austine in disputing: I easily
confess it, for he was a learned doctor, and a most subtle disputer indeed;
yet a quick wit does soonest fall into contradiction, and the heat of a quick
disputer, carries him sometimes, as our papist tells us out of Erasmus, De
Genes. ad liter. lib. 10.
into the contrary extreme. Austine himself, speaking of Tertullian, says
thus, De Deo noluit aliter sapere, qui sane quoniam acutus est, inderdum contra
opinionem suam visa veritate superatur, quid enim verius dicere potuit, quam id
quod ait quodam loco, Esse corporale passibile est, debuit ergo mature
sententiam qua paulo superius dixerat, etiam Deum corpus esse, neque enim
arbitror eum ita desipuisse, vt etiam Dei naturam passibilem crederet, etc. He
would not conceive otherwise of God, who indeed because he was of quick
judgment, sometimes he is overcome by the sight of the truth contrary to his
own opinion; for what could he speak more truly, than when he says in a
certain place, that to be bodily is to be passible, therefore he ought to have
altered that sentence in which he had said a little before, that God is a
body, for I do not think that he was so unwise as to think that the nature
of God is passible. Here is a contradiction, namely to be bodily is to be
passible, and God is bodily, which be the premises of a Syllogism, and if you
add the conclusion, which arises of them, Ergo, God is passible, the
falsehood of it will prove the one of them to be false likewise: now the mayor
is most true, says Austine, ergo, say I, the minor is false, and so
consequently the one agrees no better with the other than truth and falsehood,
you will say then, debunt ergo mutare sententiam, it is true, but he changed it
not for ought we know, but left this, and some other contrarieties behind him
vnretracted, yet was he still accounted a very learned man, Cyprian when he
called for Tertullian, was wont to say, da magistrum, give me my master,
Austine says, acutus est, he is a quick and subtle disputer, and Erasmus,
Inter Latinos Theologos multo omnium doctissimus Tertullianus, Tertullian was
the learnedest by much, In praefat. oper. Hilaric,
of the Latin divines.

Now, where our papist still goes on, and tells us, after his absurd manner,
that the Jews tare the writings of the Evangelists with contrariety, and that
great appearance thereof seems to be therein: here is but a seeming of
appearance against the Evangelists, and therefore, I hope, he is well able to
stop any Jews mouth in that behalf, and to defend the writings of the
Evangelists against seemings of appearance: if he cannot do the like for the
fathers and doctors, then has he said nothing to purpose, but bred a suspicion
in his reader, that he had rather the Evangelists should miscarie, than the
Fathers, and this suspicion is yet increased, in that he accounts the holy
Scriptures without Churches, Fathers, and Councels, to be the fountain of all
Heresy and Atheism, for may not a man's fancy mislead him in the fathers as
well as the Scriptures, and suck poison out of the one, as well as the other? I
am sure Dioscorus cries out in the Council of Chalcedon, Ego testimonia habeo
sanctorum patrum Athanasij, Gregorij, Action 1. Ibidem.
Cyrilli in multis locis, ego cum patribus eijcior, etc. I have the testimony
of the holy fathers Athenasius, Gregory, Cyrill in mamany places, I am cast
out with the Fathers etc. So Eutyches, Ego legi scripta beati Cyrilli,
Athanasij, Ibid. Action.
and sanctorum patrum. So Carosus, Ego secundum expositionem trecentorum december
and octo patrum sic credo, etc. I believe thus according to the testimony of
three hundred and eighteen Fathers. Here be Fathers and Councels alleged by
arrand heretics as the grounds of their poison: but of the Scripture, Ad
pompeium cont. epist. Steph. de peccac. merit and remiss. lib. 1. 12.
Cyprian says, Si ad diuinae traditionis caput and originem reuertamur, cessat
error humanus, If we return to the head and fountain of Gods tradition, the
error of man does cease. And Austine, Scriptura sacra nec falli potest nec
fallere, The holy Scripture can neither deceive nor be deceived. As for the
Church he talks of, if he be straightly examined, he will tell you he means the
Church of Rome, and so no Scripture, nor enarration of Scripture may go
current, but that which Rome will afford us, that's the Church which he takes
to be, as he said a while ago, the sure rock and pillar of truth, De
express. verbo Dei.
Hosius says, Si quis habeat interpretatione^ ecclesiae Romanae de loco aliquo
scripturae, etia^si nec sciat nec intelligat, an, and quomodo cum scripturae
verbis conueniat, tamen habet ipsissimum verbum Dei, If any man have the
interpretation of the Church of Rome of some place of scripture, although he
neither know not understand, whether and how it does agree with the words of
the Scripture, yet he has the very word of God. How like you this my masters?
you need talk no more of Fathers and Councels, no, nor of learning, nor wit
neither; for the Church of Rome, whether it agree, or agree not with the words
of the Scripture, will serve the turn, you may burn your books and go about
other business, the Church of Rome will watch for you, but sirs, I pray you
tell us? will your Church of Rome, when she has given us an interpretation,
stand to it like a post, and never alter? that would be known before we yield
to this which you urge upon us. Nicho. Casanus.
No, we dare not promise you that, for we have a great man, one Nicholas
Cusanus once a Cardinal in the Church of Rome, who has entitled a book which
he has written in defense of the Church, thus, De authoritate ecclesiae, and
conciliorum supra, and contra scripturam, of the authority of the Church, and
Councels above, and contrary to the Scripture. And in that book he has set
down, Praxis ecclesiae vno tempore interpretatur Scriptura^ vno modo, and alio
tempore alio modo, nam intellectus currit cum praxi, etc. The practice of the
Church interprets the Scriptures at one time one way, and at another time
another way; for the understanding runs with the practice. Marry then, fie
upon you and upon your Church, our own fancy will prove as good an
interpreter, as either you, or your Church.

Now let us consider of his three differences between the errors of the
Fathers, and those points of doctrine whereof we have disputed, I pray you
look upon them, and you shall find the two first to be the same, and the third
little differing from the other two: the Fathers errors, says he, were private
opinions, that's the first, one doctors opinion, that's the next; rejected of the
Church, that's the last. Now, if this word rejected, be no more but not received
or allowed, for the Church never condemned every several error of the
Fathers by public sentence or decree; then all three is but one, for one
Doctors private opinion, includes a non-allowance or approbation of the
Church. Again, the foresaid points of Doctrine, (says he) are set down as
received and practiced through the universal Church, that's the first;
uniformly consented unto by many, that's the next; received and practiced by
the Church, that's the last; these three likewise, for ought may appear may go
for one: and therefore this man delights rather in number than weight, and
lays his learning abroad, as wide and side as he can, to fray men rather,
than to teach them.

Howbeit, if we give him his differences to be as many as he would have them,
what differences be they? Marry they be differences of errors from points of
doctrine, and what be those points of Doctrine, true or false? Marry they be
true, else the Church would not receive them and praise them: Why then you see
this man labors to show differences between error and truth; which is no
controversy, let him show those points of Doctrine to be true, and we will
easily yield that they differ from error, but if they be errors and falsehoods
in religion, as they be indeed, the consent of the Church, cannot help them to
be truths. It is a fond conceit, to imagine that the Church receives and
practices nothing that is erroneous, for if the Church cannot tread awrie, why
says Chrysostom, In oper. imperf. in Math. hom: 49.
Ne ipsis quidem ecclesijs credendu^ est, nisi ea dicant vel faciant quae
conuenientia sunt scripturis, We are not believe the Churches themselves,
unless they say and do those things which are agreeable to the scriptures.
If an uniform consent of many cannot err, why says Austine, Ad Paulum
Apostolum, ab omnibus qui aliter sentiunt literarum tractatoribus prouoco,
Epist. 19, ad. Ierom.
I appeal to the Apostle Paul, from all other learned men that think
otherwise. If the universal Church can decree nothing but truth; why says the
same Austine, Ipsa plenaria concilia quae fiunt ex vniuerso orb Christiano, De
bapt. cont. Donat. lib. 2. cap. 3.
saepe priora posterioribus emendantur, Even of plenarie Councels which are
gathered out of all Christendom, the former are mended by the latter. And
Gregory Nazianzen, Ad procopium.
Concilia non minuunt mala, sed augent potius, Councels do not diminish, but
increase evils rather. As for the Church of Rome which our Papist takes for his
universal Church, In Math. Can. 8.
S. Hilarie gives us a rule to cast her state by, saying, Ecclesiae, intra
quas verbu^ Dei non vigilauerit, naufragae sunt, The Churches, in which the
word of God does not watch, have suffered ship-wracke. Wherefore, if there be
any grace in the Romish Church, let me council her, not to brag and vaunt
that Christ has prayed for Peter's faith, Luke 22.32. Math. 16.8. Luke 22.57.
and that she is built upon a rock that cannot be shaken: for Saint Peter's
faith failed almost as soon as our Savior had done praying, and therefore
there is no doubt, but she may be shaken. This is Saint Paul's council too as
well as mine, for thus he writes even to the Church of Rome, when she was in
better case than she is now, by size ase and the dice, Romans 11.20. etc.
[Thou stand by faith, be not high minded, but fear, for if God spared not
the natural branches, take heed he spare not thee, for if thou continue not in
Gods bounty, thou shall also be cut off.]

Thus much of his differences; now let us see how he does apply them to the
assoyling of our Protestants objections: [You may see the reason, (says he)
why the Doctors are to be rejected in the one,] that's in their private
opinions, [and received in the other] points of doctrine, [and why we do not
exclude them out of our Church, as you have excluded them out of yours.] You
shall not need exclude them, for they neither are, nor ever were, or will be
of your Church, and where you say [wee have excluded them;] it is but a cast of
your tongues office, which cannot be made good by any of your differences, we
exclude their errors, not them, and these points, how generally soever they
were received and practiced, are no better than errors; Howbeit, (I beseech
you) observe the temeritie of this man, who talks thus hand over head of
receiving Fathers, and yet some of these Fathers he names were schismatickes
and heretics, as Tertullian for example, who was not [homo ecclesiae, Contr.
Heluid. Austin. de Haeres.
] as Jerome says, and Saint Austine has registered him for an Heretic and
Schismaticke too in his Book de haeresibus ad quod vult Deum; neither is
Hilarie, howsoever the Romish Church has made him a Saint, over hastily to be
received, De Trinitate libr. 10.
if he spoke as he thought, that Christ had Corpus ad patiendum, non naturam
ad dolendum, A body to suffer, not nature to be grieved; Ibid. lib. 12. and
alibi.
and knew not whether the holy Ghost were God proceeding from the Son, as
well as the Father, and to be adored as well as promerited; Hierom.
Jerome against the Luciferians, says, That Hilarie did Segregare se cum suis
vermitis, and nouum balneum aperire, Did separate himself with his wormlings,
and open a new bath, and wrote Books against the Church, De haereticis
rebaptizandis, Of rebaptizing Heretics.

Observe further, that our Papist reiects Ireneus, Tertullian, Hilarie and
Cyprian, in their private opinions which he specifieth, and receives them in
the other points in controversy, whereof they say nothing at all, neither has
he alleged any one of these Fathers to that purpose, but Tertullian only,
who speaks not of these points after the popish fashion. Is not this a proper
rejecting and receiving think ye? he rejects for a [priuate something,] and
receives for an [vniuersall nothing,] yet the more universal an error is,
the more hurtful it is, and therefore till he prove these points to be true,
as well as universal, he does confirm, not answer our objections, yet were
they never any of them so universal, as Cyprians rebaptization, Austines
necessity of communicating, and some other errors of the Fathers. Thus have I
taken away his answers, and unloosed his knots without cutting, and showed him
withal that not one cause, but his hanging of his Faith and Religion upon the
Doctors authority, is desperate.

The Dialogue. Sectio XXIIII.
PRo. All that you have hitherto said being admitted, yet cannot the Church of
Rome, that now is, be the true Church of Christ, because it holds many other
points of Doctrine directly contrary to the word of God; as the doctrine of
Justification by our own works, whereby you do attribute your salvation unto
your own works, and to the merits of dead Saints, as if they had works
sufficient for their own salvation, and a surplussage to be bestowed upon
others, which you term works of supererrogation, your doctrine of free will,
whereby you do attribute unto man an absolute power to do all good works,
and thereby to merit heaven. And your doctrine of the keys, whereby you do
attribute to the Pope and his Priests power to forgive the sins both of the
quick and dead, an easy way to heaven for such as have money and are disposed
so to dispose it; is not this doctrine as contrary to the word of God, as
light unto darkness? Pap. I will answer you herein as briefly as I can,
desiring you first to Which you seem not to understand your self.
understand rightly the doctrine of ye Church of Rome in these points, and then
to judge indifferently. First therefore, concerning justification by works, we
do hold with David, that the just man offends Then must he do seven good
works, else can he not be justified by works.
7. Pr. 24, 16. It is Solomon, not David, nor does Solomon say seven times a
day, that is no addition to the text.
times a day; we do acknowledge also the death of Christ to be sufficient for
the sins of the whole world; we do confess that every good and perfect gift
comes from above, and that our righteousness is as a polluted cloth, yet we
do hold therewithal, that our good works, such as they are, being cleansed in
the blood of Christ, are both They may be acceptable, but meritorious they
cannot be.
acceptable unto God, and meritorious, which we do ground upon the promise of
our Savior Christ, where he says, he that gives to one of these little ones
a cup of cold water, shall not want his What reward? temporal or eternal, or
what?
reward, grace goes before and draws us unto good works, our will
consents and works together with the grace of God, so that (as S. Austine
says) Tractat. 3. primi cap. Iohannis, God crowns his own gifts in us, and
gives us grace for grace, this is our Doctrine of Justification by works,
wherein we do Then nothing that is good in man, can merit.
ascribe whatsoever is good in man unto God as unto the Fountain: attributing
nothing unto our selves, This tale will hardly agree within it self.
but the liberty of our will, whereby to apprehend the grace of God offered
unto us, which free will also we do acknowledge to be the gift of God.
Concerning the merits of dead Saints, we do hold that as God does may times
spare the wicked for the righteous that are living among them: and show mercy
unto thousands in them that love him, and keep his commandments: even so he
does many times spare the living for the righteous sake, that are departed
hence, You are deceived, it does not appear there.
as appears in the 2. of the Kings, Cap. 13. Where you shall find that the
Children of Israel were delivered from the hand of King Aram, for Abraham,
Isaak, and Jacobs sake, whereby You must prove it better, before I can see it.
you see that the merits of dead Saints are available unto the living,
whereupon we may conclude further, that if the children of Israel were spared
for Abraham's sake who was dead, that it was lawful for the Jews to pray unto
God, that he would deliver them That is, for the covenant sake made with
Abraham, which being granted, you are at a stop.
for Abraham's sake, which being granted, why is it not as lawful for
Christians to pray unto God to be merciful unto their sins, for Saint Peter
and Saint Paul's sake? This Doctrine was believed and practiced in the Church in
Saint Austines time, as appears Can. 40. Meditationum, where he prays to be
delivered from all evil, by the prayers of the Patriarchs, by the merits of
the Prophets, etc. And more than this, the Church of Rome does not attribute
unto the merits of Saints.

The Answer.
Here our Protestant lays three capital errors to the charge of the Church
of Rome. First, justification by our own works, and the merits of dead
Saints. Secondly, free will to merit heaven. Thirdly, forgiving sins by the
power of the keys, Mar. 2, 7, and Luke 5, 21.
which the Scribes and Pharisees, as blind as they were, knew and professed to
be blasphemous, [herein I will answer you (says our Papist) as briefly as I
can,] yea, but when shall we have your brief answer?] Marry [first I must
desire you (says he) to understand rightly the doctrine of Rome in these
points;] Well, but will you then be so good as [answere us as briefly as you
can?] Yes marry will I, for I will say nothing at all, and that's as brief an
answer as can be devised. Thus this man's pleasure is to delude us with
expectation of an answer, which he (God wot) is not able to afford us, and
therefore we must be content with [we hold,] and [we confess,] and what is that
think you? Marry, [the just man offends daily, the death of Christ is
sufficient for the sins of the whole world, and our righteousness is as a
polluted cloth,] which is sufficient to persuade any man that is not
contentious, that we are not justified by our works, for that which is
sufficient needs not to be pieced and patched with a polluted clowt of our
righteousness, yea but our works justify not so long as they be polluted,
but after they are cleansed in the blood of Christ, and so they are both
acceptable and meritorious: Alas man, that's not the question whether they be
acceptable and meritorious; but whether they justify, and the filly fellow
himself, telling us that our works are cleansed in the blood of Christ, tells
us withal, that we are justified not by our works, Act. 15, 9, and Mar. 7, 21.
that want clensing, but by faith in the blood of Christ, which cleanses our
works, and makes them acceptable; howbeit, all the world together in a heap
will never be able to prove, that works polluted with an arrogant conceit or
intention of justifying, can be possibly cleansed in the blood of Christ, his
blood can no way else cleanse that which euacuateth his cross and passion, but
by taking it away quite, and reforming the proud conceits of such heretics.

And touching meritoriousnesse, the very name is odious to the servants of
God; Paul says, 1. Cor. 4, 4. Luke 17, 10.
[I know nothing by my self, yet am I not thereby justified,] and our Savior
has taught us to say, we are unprofitable servants, and have done that which
our duty bound us unto, when we have done all that is commanded, but what
should I labor to take away merits, which this man himself groundeth upon
the promise of Christ? Genes. 15, 6. To. 4, 3, 9, 13. Galat. 3.18, 22, etc.
I hope the promise of Christ was free, and must be laid hold upon by faith,
not works, as Abraham did, for he believed God, and it was counted to him for
righteousness. Again, this promise may be understood of temporal rewards,
which the Lord bestows oftentimes upon such as neither be, nor ever shall be
justified, beside a cup of cold water, Cap. 20, 23.
can merit no great matter, unless it be such water, as we read of in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, Math. 10, 42. Mar. 9, 41.
add to this that our Savior speaks of doing good to his Disciples, whom he
sent to preach in the Cities of Israel, for so Mark expounds it. To be
short, here is a reward spoken of, which we deny not, for he that freely
promised it, is true of his word and promise that he made to a thousand
generations, Psalm. 105, 8.
yet here is nothing said of Justification, I hope no man looks to be
justified by giving a cup of cold water.

But now (I trow) he comes to the point, [grace goes before, (says he) and
draws us unto good works, our will consents, and works together with the
grace of God, and so God crowns his own gifts in us, as Saint Austine
says:] Indeed Saint Austine says, Coronat dona sua, non merita tua, He
crowns his own gifts, not thy merits; speaking of the Apostle Saint Paul.
And again, Coronat in nobis Deus dona misericordiae suae, God crowns in us
the gifts of his own mercy. But what is this to [iustification by works?] As
for that which he adds in the same tractate, that [we receive grace for
grace;] he tells you that the first of these graces is faith, Accepimus de
plenitudine eius, primo gratiam; rursum accepimus gratia^ pro gratia, quam
gratiam primo accepimus? fidem, in fide ambulantes, in gratia ambulamus, We
have received of his fullness, first grace; again we have received grace for
grace; what grace have we first received? faith, walking in faith, we walk in
grace. Again, Si consequutus es istam gratiam fidei, eris iustus ex fide,
iustus enim ex fide viuit, If thou have obtained this grace of faith, thou
shall be just by faith, for the just shall live by faith. Moreover thus he
expounds gratia^ pro gratia, Ipsa fides gratia est, (says he) Et vita aeterna
gratia est pro gratia, Faith it self is grace, and eternal life is grace for
grace. And again, De plenitudine eius omnes accepimus, de plenitudine
misericordiae eius, de plenit adine bonitatis eius accepimus, quid? remissionem
peccatoram vt iustificaromus ex fide, and in super quid? gratiam pro gratia,
idest, prohac gratia, in qua ex fide viuimus, recepturi samas aliam, Of his
fullness have we all received, of the fullness of his mercy, of the fullness
of his goodness have we received: What? forgiveness of sins, that we may be
justified by faith, and what more? grace for grace, that is to say, for this
grace, in which we live by faith, we shall receive another. Now then, where our
Papist talks of [grace going before,] let him tell us plainly without
clowding whether it be faith or not: if it be faith; then he pleads our
cause, and lets his own fall; if it be not faith, then let him entreat Saint
Austine to hold his peace.

Moreover, see (I pray you) how handsomely this man's dreams agree with the
word of God: For whereas Saint Paul says, Rom, 3, 24, and 11.6, Ephesians. 2, 8 9,
we are justified freely by grace, and not of works, he is not ashamed to
talk of grace going before, which draws us at length, to work together with
the grace of God, as if the grace of God in Christ Jesus, were not able to
justify us without the assistance of our works, or as if the Apostle did not
evidently exclude works, when he says in one place, we are freely
justified, and in another, if by grace, not of works, else were grace no
grace. Besides this the same Apostle says, that if Abraham were justified by
works, he has wherein to rejoice, but no man, Romans 4, 2. Romans 4, 2. and 3 27,
Ephesians. 2.9. Romans 4, 5. etc. Romans 4, 4. Romans 11.35. De Romans pont. lib. 3. cap. 23,
and Aurithes. 2 cont. Chytraeum.
no not Abraham himself, has any thing wherein to rejoice with God. Ergo, no
man living is justified, or ever was or shall be justified by works. No, no
[faith is accounted for righteousness to him that works not, says Saint
Paul,] he that works has his wages, neither by faith nor by favor, but by
debt, and who is he that has given, or can give to God first, and he shall be
recompensed?

A man would think such evident testimonies as these be, should be past the
reach of all wrangling; Yet Bellarmine tells us, that Abraham's works, which Paul
speaks of, proceeded from nature without either faith or grace, Cap. 12.3. and
cap. 15, 6. Cap. 11.8. and Act. 7.2. etc.
as if Paul had spoken of Socrates, or Aristides, not of Abraham the Father of
the faithful; yet I am sure he had the righteousness of faith before he was
called Abraham, as appears in Genesis, and the Author to the Hebrews
testifies, that he had faith before he went out of Chalde, to dwell in
Charran. Now (I beseech you) must we needs think, that Paul speaks of such
works as Abram wrought in Mesopotamia, when he and his Father Terah served
strange Gods, Josh. 24.
not of such as Abraham wrought afterward, when he was called away from his
Fathers house, kindred, and country?

Moreover, the same Jesuit tells us, that there is a second kind of works,
which proceed from faith and Gods grace, and those works do but disponere ad
reconciliationem cum Deo, and remissionem peccatorum. Dispose us to
reconciliation with God, and remission of sins. But what does faith and Gods
grace in the mean time? do they still bring forth good works, and good
works a disposition, and so never actually reconcile us? Marry look the
Tridentine council for your answer, Ideo gratis iustificatur homo, quia nec
fides nec: opera, iqu^ iustificationem praecedunt, ipsam merentur, nimirum ex
iustitia quasi eiusmodi operibus esset debita iustificatio, A man is therefore
freely justified, because neither faith nor works which go before
justification do deserve it, to wit, of right, as if justification were due to
such works. Well said, hold you to that, and go no further, for we teach
not, that faith properly justifies, but lays hold upon Christ, that
justifies the ungodly, and makes them blessed by imputation of his
righteousness without works, as Paul teaches out of David, Romans 4, 5, 6.
but here follows a [tamen,] that marres all, Fatemur tamen haec opera,
quatenus ex fide and adiutorio diuino proficiscuntur, diuina esse opera, and
suo modo mereri, hoc est, impe^rare peccatorum remissionem, Yet we confess
that these works, as they proceed from faith and the help of God are divine,
and do merit after their manner, that is to say, obtain remission of sins.
But (I beseech you) tell us, how did this man speak of them before? did he
not understand them as proceeding from faith and Gods grace, when he said,
Haec apera non dicimus esse meritoria, We do not say that these works are
meritorious. And out of Trent Council, Ideo gratis iustificatur homo, quia nec
fides, nec opera merentur iustificationem quasi eiusmodi operibus esset debita,
A man is therefore freely justified, because neither faith, nor works which
go before justification do deserve it, to wit, of right, as if justification
were due to such works. Thus wily beguiles himself, for though the truth
stick in his teeth; yet all his tamens, and quasies, and quatenusses cannot
smother it. Wherefore let those men talk of grace, as holily as they lift, yet
when they attribute their justification to their works of the law, either in
part or in whole; they abrogate the grace of God, either in part or in whole,
and so either diminish or disanull the glory of the cross of Christ. Well,
says Austine, Detur totum Deo, tutiores viuimus si totum Deo demus, Galat. 2,
21. De bono. persevere. cap. 13.
non autem nos illi ex part, and nobis ex part commuttimus, Let us give all
to God, we live more safe if we give all to God, and not if we commit our
selves to him in part, and in part to our selves. And so Bellarmine confesses,
De Iustificat. lib. 5, Cap: 7.
when the fit is over; for thus he writes, Propteer incertitudine^ propriae
iustitiae, and periculu^ inanis gloriae tutissimum est, fiduciam totam in sola
Dei misericordia and benignitate repanere. Because of the weakness of our
own righteousness, and danger of falling into vain glory, it is the safest
way for us to repose our whole trust in the mercy and favor of God also.

Touching free will, or liberty of will, we shall speak of it anon in his
order and place, in the mean time see, I pray you, how your Papist does part
stakes with God, we attribute nothing to our selves, (says he) but the
liberty of our will. And again, [wee acknowledge our free will to be the
gift of God,] so free will is attributed to God, and to our selves too. Now let
him tell us whether this gift come by nature or by grace, if by nature, then
grace is excluded, unless ye confound nature and grace with the Pelagians: if
by grace; then our will must not work together with the grace, as he said
before, but follow after grace, as an effect and fruit of regeneration, but to
leave this till anon, we are now come, from our own merits, to the merits
of dead Saints, which labored so hard in their life time, that they earned
heaven for themselves, and left a surplussage to help others, which is clean
contrary to the law of works, which says, do this and thou shall live; Romans
3.27.
and not let another do it, and thou shall live: we must either be saved by
the law that says, Do this, or by the Gospel that says, Romans 10.5, 6, 7,
etc.
Believe this, Nihil est tertium, There is no third: No is? does not the Lord
spare the wicked for the righteous sake, that live among them? yes that he
does, but he does not save, one for another sake; temporal bleshngs, and
eternal salvation are not both of one weight, but what of that? marry even so
God does many times spare the living for the righteous sake that are departed
hence. This fellow has forgotten what he should prove, for the question is
not whether the Lord does temporally spare the living for the dead sake, but
whether the merits of dead Saints can save them from hell, and bring them to
heaven; this is a far greater matter, 2. Reg. 13.
than the deliverance of the Children of Israel from the hands of the King of
Aram, unless the King of Aram were the Devil of hell: Howbeit, Romans 11.28,
there is another place in the new Testament, that fits his turn better, where
it is said, Romans 11.28. Lib. 2, 13.
that the Jews were beloved for the Fathers sakes, yet notwithstanding both
this place, and that other of the Kings, is not to be understood of the Fathers
merits, whereof Abraham himself had none to spare, Romans 4, 2.
but of the free promise and covenant made unto the Fathers, for so it is
written expressly to the Romans, Romans cap. 11.27. Cap. 13.23.
and more expressly in the second of Kings, though your Papist here has no
list to see it, and therefore where he infers that a man may as well pray
to God to be merciful to his sins for Saint Peter and Saint Paul's sake, he
ouer-reacheth as tired Hackneys use to do, unless he can show, that God
made the like covenant with Peter and Paul, that he made with the Fathers.

Yea, but there be other places, where not only the covenant is remembered,
but also the justice and holiness of the Fathers and Patriarchs, as for
example in the Psalms, [Lord, Psalm. 132.1:
remember David with all his humility or affliction.] This is one of
Bellarmines quotations, more easily answered than quoted, De sanct. beattit.
lib. 18. cap. 19. 2. Sam. 6. and 1. Cron. 13 and 15.
for this is a Psalm appointed to be sung in David's life time when the Arc
was brought from Baalath in Kiriathiarim, or, from the house of Obed Edom; and
whereas the same man alleges another place out of the Kings, where it is
said, that for David's sake, the Lord gave King Abijam a light in Jerusalem, 1.
Reg. 15.4, 5
that is, a Son to reign after him, because David did that which was right
in the sight of the Lord. I answer, that this was a condition annexed unto the
covenant made with David and his posterity, 1. Cron. 28.7.
as David himself gives it out again to Solomon his Son.

Touching Austines Books of Meditations, I will meditate upon the matter
before I admit it for Canonical; yet me thinks craving mercy for our sins
at Gods hand for Peter and Paul's sake, and attributing salvation and
deliverance from all evil to the merits of dead men, be they Patriarks, or
be they Apostles, or Prophets, or whosoever else living or dead, being so
derogatorie to the passion and obedience of the Son of God, should be
forborne for very shame, if the fear of God cannot bridle us. De Sanctor:
beat. lib. 1. ca. 17.
Bellarmine a Captain Papist sets down this for a general rule; Sancti non
sunt immediati intercessores nostri apud Deum, sed quicquid a Deo nobis
impetrant, per Christum impetrant, Saints are not immediate intercessors for us
with God, but whatsoever they obtain of God for us, they obtain it by Christ.
I hope per Christum, by Christ, does include Christi merita, Christ's merits,
for so the same popish Doctor confesses, willing us to note three several
persons in our prayers, Vnam ipsius Dei, a quo petimus; alteram Christi, per
cuius meritum petimus; tertiam eius qui petit, One of God himself; the second
of Christ through whose merit we ask; the third his that asks. And so
concluding, that neither the first, nor the second may be attributed to dead
Saints: and therefore to crave mercy, not for Christ's sake, but for Peter and
Paul's sake, and to be delivered from all evil, not by the merits and
mediation of Christ, but by the merits of the Prophets, or the Patriarchs, or
whosoever else dead or alive, is not allowed by his own Doctors.

Yea, but the last words of that Chapter, De Sanctorum beatitudine, teach you,
that we mention Saints in our prayers after this form, Concede nobis Deus,
intercessione huius sancti, tale beneficium per Christum dominu^ nostrum, Grant
us O God, by the merit of such a Saint, such a benefit through Christ our
Lord. I grant you that this is set down as a pattern of Catholic prayer,
wherein by intercession, he understands not only the prayers, but also the
merits of dead Saints, for so we learn before in the same Chapter, in these
words, Sancte Petre da mihi hoc and illud tuis precibus and meritis, Saint
Peter give me this or that, by thy prayers and merits: Also per Christum, is as
much to say, as per Christi preces and merita, by Christ's prayers and merits,
as I showed before. Now show us how you can tell, that either hic sanctus, or
haec sancta has or will pray, or pawn their merits for you? and if you know
it not; what makes you so bold, as to speak more to God, than you know to be
true? Again, the living know not, whether the merits of these or those Saints
be drawn dry, for they cannot supererrogate more than they have, Bellar. de
purg. lib. 2. cap. 2*
have still, and give still, they cannot without a new supply, and supply they
can have none after this life: so likewise the dead know not whether their
prayers and merits shall prevail, unless they knew who be chosen, who be
reprobates, that cannot be known, because God has sealed it, as Paul says,
the foundation of God of remains sure, 2. Tim. 2, 19.
and has this seal, the Lord knows who are his, etc. Wherefore either the
Saints pray, and bestow their merits at all adventure without faith, or
assurance of Gods acceptance, which Peter Lumbard likes not of: Lib. 4,
distinct. 45.
or else this popish doctrine, is but a dream of a dry Summer. Thirdly, it
would be known, when these superfluous works are made acceptable to God? Is
it as soon as the breath is out of the Saints mouth, or before, or else a
week, or a month, or a year after, or when else? if before, or presently after
his death, as they must either begin then or never, then Christ has done that
which belongs to him already, so as we need not now conclude our prayers
with per Christum dominum nostrum. Last of all, I would know whether any of
these Saints, that had so many spare works, did themselves in their time, pray
after Bellarmines popish form? did they pray that other Saints, that were
dead before them, would procure them this or that benefit, which they had need
of? either they knew their own stoare, or they knew it not; if they knew it,
they were much to blame to join prayer with the Church after Bellarmines
pattern, and so to lavish needlessly the treasure of the Church, whereas they
might have prayed, as never any durst pray, Lord, grant me this or that, for
my own merits sake; if they knew it not, and so continued all their life
time, how come we to know it when they are dead? Iwis, it is not the Popes
Canonization that can stop this gappe, for it cannot be showed that ever
Pope presumed to canonize any one Saint before the time of Charles the great,
and if there had been any certain rule to dubbe Saints by in Austines time,
he would never have said, Multorum corpora honorantur in terris, quorum animae
torquentur in Gehenna, Many men's bodies are honored in earth, whose souls are
tortured in hell. Wherefore it behooues our good Catholics to look better
about them, before they put themselves and their prayers to so dangerous a
venture.

Now in conclusion, let me entreat you to note further, how these men open
their own shame there, where they would feign hide it, for when Bellarmine
knew, that the Church of Rome prayed to the Virgin Marie, and the Apostles
not as secondarie mediators, but principals: thus he slubbers up the matter,
as though it were but a triflle, De Sanct. beat. lib. 1. ca. 17
Non agimus de verbis, says he, sed de sensu verborum; nam quantum adverba
licet dicere, S. Petre miserere met, salua me, aperi mihi aditum coeli, etc.
dummodo intelligamus salua me, and miserere mei orando pro me, da mihi hoc and
illud tuis praecibus and meritis, We deal not about the words, but about the
sense of the words; if we respect the words, it is lawful to say, Saint
Peter have mercy upon me, save me, open me the gate of heaven, so that we
understand, save me, and have mercy upon me, by praying for me, and give me
this and that by the prayers and merits. As if he should say, Be sure ye name
Peter, or the Virgin Marie, or the Saints to whom ye pray, else all is
marred, but God the Father, 1. Tim. 2, 5.
and Christ his son, the only mediator between God and man: You may
understand them as accidental implements, that may adesse and abesse sine
interitu subiecti. You need not care greatly for naming them, for the holy
Virgin Gods mother, and Peter, and Paul, and the rest of Gods friends, will
excuse the matter. Thus these men can remember dead Saints, and let God, and
his Christ go, as though they counted it but a small matter to forget God, Psa.
9.17. Romans 10, 9.10.
and knew not that we must confess the Lord Jesus with our mouths, as well
as believe in him in our hearts. Howbeit, they that forget the mediation of
Christ in their Masse-booke, Durand. lib. 4. part 2. vide Sect. 8.
where they pray for the acceptance of his body and blood, and that God would
look upon them, propitio ac sereno vultu, (for they cannot pray pro Christo,
and per Christum both at once) will hardly remember it when they are let loose,
to wander in the wilderness of Bellarmines Intelligamus.

The Dialogue. Sectio XXV. Free Will.
COncerning Free Will, we do say with Saint James, that every good and
perfect gift comes from above, and with Saint Paul, Deus operatur in nobis
and velle and perficere: and we must not deny that which our Savior Christ
has affirmed, Nemo venit ad me nisi pater meus traxerit eum, No man comes
unto me, unless my Father shall draw him: yet we do say with Saint Austine,
that this yet Austine elsewhere makes it to be more, than persuading, look the
answer.
drowsing, is as the pleasant pasture draws the sheep, and not a violent
drawing, as a Bear drawn to the stake, man can do no good works except he
be drawn, unless he be inspired from above, but being No marvel, for then we
are regenerate and justified already, yet have we then no freedom to refuse.
so drawn and inspired, it is then in the election of man's free will, either
to be obedient thereunto, or else to refuse the same, and to quench the spirit
as Saint Paul calls it, Diabolus dat consilium, says S. Austine, sed Deo
auxiliante nostrum est eligere, vel repudiare quod suggerit, Homil. 12. If
there be no power in man to repent, or to do good works, Because God by that
means works repentance in us. 2. Tim. 2:25.
how is it that the Scriptures do so often exhort us to repentance, newness
of life, and good works, and threaten grievous punishments to those that will
not do that which (as you say) they The fault is in themselves, not in God.
This is the very objection of the Pelagians answered by Saint Austine lib. de
great. and lib. arbitr. cap. 16.
cannot do? For your full satisfaction herein, read Saint Austine, sermon 7.
de verbis Apostoli, Irenaeus libro 4. cap. 72. Saint Hilarie upon 118. Psalm.
Epiphanius Tom. 1. Haeres. 16.

The Answer.
ABsolute [freewill] either to good or evil is hardly to be found upon the
earth, yet our papist here makes as though he had found it, and might hold it
by Saint Austine, though Saint James and Saint Paul say no, howbeit man's
[freewill] may beg his bread well enough, if it have no better friends then
Saint Austine, for where that good father in his Tractats upon John, Tract. 26.
says that the father draws us unto Christ, as a green bough draws a
sheep: you must understand that this green bough resembles our faith, as our
Savior expounds it, Ioh. 6.64. etc. Ad simplician. lib. 1. quaest. 2.
and Saint Austine else where is bold to say, Quis habet in potestate sua, vt
sua men's tali viso tangatur, quid voluntas moueatur ad fidem. Who has it in
his own power, that his mind might be touched with such a sight, whereby his
will may be moved unto faith. Again, you must presuppose that the sheep is
hungry, and is not afraid of him that holds and offers that bough,
otherwise he may hold it till his arms ache: Matthew, 5.6. 1. John 4.18. Ephesians.
3.12.
and even so it fares with the sheep of Christ, for they are first brought to
hunger and thirst after righteousness, and to have the love of God which
casts out fear, before they will regard the pleasant pasture that is offered
unto them, and therefore the same father else where says, that the Lord draws
men, De correct. and gratia ad Valantin. cap. 14. Ibid. cap. 2.
Suis voluntatibus, sed quas ipse operatus est, By their wills, but yet such as
himself has wrought in them. And again, Ideo volunt, quia Deus operatur vt
sic velint, Therefore they will, because God works that they will say so.
Besides this, the sheep is naturally drawn to feed upon a green bough when
she is hungry, but our hunger after righteousness is not natural, but Gods
extraordinary and supernatural blessing, Matthew. 5.6.
which may not be confounded with nature, unless we will shake hands with
Pelagius the heretic; and yet if you consider of that general flying power
to choose or refuse good or evil, which the papists call grace, for fear of
Pelagianisme: you shall hardly discern it from nature, and therefore well
says Saint Austine against Pelagius, and Celestius, and the papists their
successors, Lib. 1. cap. 10.
Non satis est confiteri qualemcunque gratiam, sed illam qua per sua deamur,
qua trahamur, and qua detur ipsum bonum, It is not enough to confess any kind
of grace, but that by which we are persuaded, by which we are drawn, and by
which the good it self is given.

Touching the place in Austines Homilies; I answer in a word that [eligere]
and [repudiare consililum diaboli] is [nostrum] the one by nature, Ephesians. cap.
2.23.
the other by grace: by nature we are the children of wrath, and walk after
the counsel of the devil, but by grace we have some freedom from that
captivity, yet would I wish you to have a more particular regard of this
allegation: man says your papist can do no good work except he be drawn,
that's true, and inspired from above, that's true to, and what then? marry then
after this drawing and inspiring, it is in the election of man's free will
either to obey or refuse, and how is this proved? marry, you shall hear it
proved out of Austines Homilies, Diabolus dat consilium, Homil. 12.
sed Deo auxiliante, nostrum ect eligere vel repudiare quod suggerit, The
devil gives us counsel, but it is in our power, the Lord assisting us, to
choose or refuse that which he suggesteth. Is not this a worthy proof? the
question being of Gods work in us, Cap. 3.
he answers that the devil does counsel us, and we by the freedom of our
wills, may either [ eligere or repudiare quod suggerit] what? dare you accuse
Saint Austine of so heinous a crime? they be Austines very words. But by your
leave, you must prove that before it will be believed, I am sure Saint Austine
would not say that we may choose, that which the devil entiseth us unto, by
the help of God, indeed the regenerate man may [repudiare consilium diaboli]
by the help of God, but I am sure God will not help him to yield to his
suggestions. The child of God that's borne again has freewill in some measure,
but to good, not to evil, and so have the wicked, but to evil and not to
good, and both their wills are therefore free, because neither the one is
constrained to that which is good, nor the other to that which is evil, but
far was it from Saint Austines thought, that God should afford any help to
choose the councels and suggestions of the devil.

As for quenching the spirit, 1. These. 5.19.
which Saint Paul somewhere speaks of, I answer that the Greek word
signifies keeping under, or shaking, as well as extinguishing, and so the word
quenching, is sometime taken in our English tongue: secondly, the same Apostle
says else where, Ephesians. 4.30.
grieve not the spirit, which may well be interpreted, slake not, or quench
not, or keep not down the power of the spirit, yet it follows presently, by
whom ye are sealed to the day of redemption. But let it signify (utter
extinguishing and putting out) in this place to the Thessalonians, yet me
thinks he should know what Beza answers in his Annotations, Annot. in. These.
epist. 1.5.19.
where this objection is extinguished, thus he obiecteth. Si in electis nunque
extinguitur, frustra hoc praecipitur, If it be never quenched in the elect,
this precept is given in vain. Then he answers, Imo vero ideo non
extinguitur in electis, quoniam eum fouent, vt autem foueant, istis
exhortationibus adducuntur, Yea rather therefore it is not extinguished in the
elect, because they cherish it, and that they do cherish, they are provoked by
these exhortations. And hereof it comes that Saint Paul adds immediately in
the very next verse, despise not prophesying, that is, Verse. 20.
give heed to Gods holy word preached and opened unto you, whereby this fire
of the spirit was first kindled, and must still be kept burning in your hearts;
moreover it may be considered, that the Prophet David, Psalm. 51.10, 11, 12.
even in the same verse where he calls upon God to create in him a new heart,
adds further, and renew a right spirit with in me, and where he says, cast
me not away from thy presence, then he says also, take not thy holy spirit
from me, and he had not so soon said, restore to me the joy of thy salvation,
but he shows again, that all was not lost, saying, stablish me with thy free
spirit. And so we find the creating he speaks of, to be a renewing, the not
casting of him away, to be the not taking of Gods holy spirit from him, and
lastly restoring to be establishing.

One dusty reason yet remains, which our papist shakes out of the bottom of
his bag, in these words, if there be no power in man to repent, or to do good
works, why does the Scripture exhort us to repentance, news of life, and good
works, and threaten to punish us for not doing that we cannot do? 2. Tim: 2.25
do you ask why? marry Paul tells you why, saying, instruct them that be
contrary minded, proouing if God at any time will give them Repentance, that so
they may come to amendment out of the snare of the devil, where that we learn
clearly that God by the means of the Scripture draws us to repentance and
amendment of life. Repentance and remission of sins was given freely to Israel,
Act. 5.31 Act: 11.18
likewise God granted repentance to the Gentiles; if we at this day be neither
Jews nor Gentiles, or if God work not in these days, as he did in those:
then may we brag of our freedom and manumission, if not, then are they
ouer-sawcie that honor themselves with the spoils of God.

And touching Gods threatenings for not doing that we have no ability to
perform, who but a blind papist can or will therefore charge God with
injustice, considering that he gave us ability in the loins of Adam, though
now by his fall, John 15.5
and ours in him, we have lost it. Our Savior when he says, without me ye
can do nothing, does he therefore leave off exhorting, conuincing, and
threatening? or does S. Paul having once testified that it is not in him that
wills, Rom 9.16.
nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy; never after exhort men
to will and to run aright, nor threaten them, if they happen to will and to
run amiss? when Christ says, Mark. 1.15
repent and believe the Gospel, must we needs conclude against the plain
evidence of Gods word, that repentance and faith, Phil: 1.29. and hebr: 12:2 Ad
simplicianum lib. 1. quest. 2.
are not the gifts of God, but the home-spunne fruit of our own wills?
wherefore I will conclude this point with Saint Austine, whom our Papist here
seems to follow as his special guide, Quis potest recte viuere ac just
operari, nisi iustificatus ex fide? quis potest crederenisi aliqua vocatione,
hoc est, aliqua rerum testificatione tangatur? Quis habet inpotestate sua, vt
sua meus tali visu tangatur, quo voluntas moueatur adfidem? Who can believe
except he be touched with some calling, that is to say, some testification of
the things, who has it in own power that his mind should be touched with such
a sight, Despir. and liter. Cap. 34.
whereby it may be moved to faith? Again, Cur hnic ita suadeatur, vt
persuadeatur, illi autem non ita: duo sola occurrunt quae mihi placeat
respondere, o altitudo diuitiarum, Rom: 11.33 Rom: 9.14.
and nunquid iniquitas est apud deum? cui ista responsio displicet, quaerat
doctiores sed caveat presumptores. Why this man is so instructed that he is
persuaded, but another is not so, I have found two only answers that do
please me: O the depth of the riches, and is there injustice with God? he that
is not pleased with this answer, let him seek him learneder instructers, but
withal let him take heed he find them not presumptuous. Now let your Papist
tell Saint Austine, that the one was persuaded, the other not, because it is in
man's freewill either to obey or refuse, for so he may prove a presumptuous
foot like his fellows, but better learned then Saint Austine will he never be.

Yet for all this, we must read Saint Austine for our full satisfaction, as if
Saint Austine were a patron of such licentiousness, or as if a man living or
dead, by his own authority could fully satisfy any Christian conscience, yet
S. Paul in that place which Austine expounds, Ephe: 3.13.
writes to regenerate men that had their wills freed by the mercy of God, and
were to go on by the same mercy to a further perfection. Austine says, Quod
peto a vobis, rogo det vobis, De verbis Apost. sermon. 7.
That which I require of you, I desire for you. And again, Hoc a Deo petit,
quod ab hominibus exigit, This he desires of God, which he requires of men.
And again, Det vobis, inquit, non enim habetis, nisi det vobis, Let him give
you (says he) for you have it not, unless he give it you. Yea but what say
you to Irenaeus, Hilarie, and Epiphanius, do not they satisfy you? No, nor
any man else that is not a Pelagian heretic, Irenaeus says plainly, Lib. 4.
cap. 72.
Omnes eiusdem sunt naturae, and potentes retinere and operari bonum, and
potentes rursum amittere id, and non facere, All men are of the same nature,
and able to retain and to work that which is good, and able again to loose
it, and not to do it. Again, Liberae sententiae ab initio est homo, est
liberae sententiae est Deus, cuius ad similitudinem factus est, Man had
freewill from the beginning, and God has freewill, according to whose
similitude he was made. To be short, the same Father, when he says, In fide
liberum and suae potestatis arbitrium hommi seruauit Dominus, God has reserved
to man in faith, a will free and in his own power. What does he else but place
faith in the free will and power of man, than which nothing can be more
contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel, Hilar. in psalm. 118.
neither is the testimony of Hilarie and Epiphanius of much better regard, for
when the one says, Est a nobis cum oramus exordium, The beginning is from our
selves when we pray. Ide^. in psalm. 2.
Again, Vnicuique nostrum libertatem vitae sensumque permisit, He has
granted to every of us liberty of life and sense. And again, Voluntas
nostra hoc proprium ex se habere debet, vt velit Deus incipienti crementum
dare. This our will ought to have proper of it self, that when it begins,
God would give increase. And the other, Epiph. here is. 16.
Possumus peccare and non peccare, It is in our power to sin, and not to
sin. And again, Circa hominem est bona operari, aut malas res appetere: It
it in man's power to do good, or to desire evil things. I see no inckling of
any grace, but only of the natural force and power of man's will, I will not
charge these ancient fathers with all that may be gathered out of their
writings, but this I may say, under benedicite, that such sayings as these,
were the first grounds and foundations of the Pelagian heresy, August: contra
Iulianum Pelag. lib. 1. ca. 2.
Pelagianis nondum litigantibus securius loquebantur, says Austine, the
Fathres spoke with less circumspection, before they were combred with
Pelagianisme.

The Dialogue. Sectio XXI. The doctrine of the keys.
AS touching this point of doctrine, the church of Rome does teach none But by
your leave, you are deceived.
other thing, then that which our Savior Christ does in the 16. of S Matthews
Gospel in plain and express words, where he says unto S. Peter,
Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, and whatsoever
thou shall loose on earth, shall be loosed in heaven: and in the 20. of S. John's
Gospel, where he says to all his disciples, Whosoeuers sins ye remit, they
are remitted unto them, and whosoeuers sins ye retain, they are retained: so
that you see the literal sense is for us, and the question between us, is of
the right interpretation and true meaning of the words; you We do so, for
the keys of discipline are given, Matthew. 18.18.
do interpret the binding and loosing here mentioned, to be the preaching of
the word of God, whereby sins are forgiven and loosed to the penitent
hearers, and retained unto the impenitent and unbelievers: and we do say, that
by these words our Savior did give authority and commission unto his
disciples and their successors to forgive sins, not by their own power and
authority, but by the power and authority of him, whose commissioners they
be, wherein we do attribute no more unto the commissioners in the forgiving
of sins, than we do unto a servant that gives possession of his masters
land by virtue of a letter of attorney, who although he have himself no
interest in the land at all, yet has he full power to convey his masters
interest therein to He knows to whom, so does not your popish priest.
whosoever his pleasure is to have the same conveyed; it pleased God to make
water an instrument in the forgiving of sins in the Sacrament of Baptism:
and in the We know no such sacrament, this must go among other your forgeries.
sacrament of penance, to make man an instrument, unto whom we do attribute
no more (as touching the forgiveness of sins, in the one sacrament, then you
do unto water in the other: man (who cannot see the heart) gives remission to
all that pretend to be penitent and contrite: but God who sees the heart, And
would give it, though your newfound sacrament had never bin forged.
gives remission (by the ministry of man) to those only that are truly
penitent and contrite: And thus much for the true understanding of the question
between us. Now forasmuch as (the literal sense being wholly for us,) the
controversy does consist only in the right interpretation; let us compare
together your interpretation and ours, that we may the better discern whether
of them is most like to be true: We build our faith upon no man's opinion, old
or young, do you as best beseemes your p^ofession.
you do build your faith herein upon the opinion of Luther or Calvin, or
perhaps upon the conceit of your own brain; and we upon the authority of
the Here is a goodly vaunt, if the matter could be so carried away with big
words, this fellow would do well enough.
ancient fathers, and continual practice of the universal church through the
whole world, continued from the Apostles, and remaining even to this day. To
conclude, for the utter overthrow of your interpretation, thus I do argue
against it; If Christ did give this authority of binding and loosing unto his
disciples only and to their successors (as I think you will not deny it) then
cannot the preaching of the word be that binding and loosing given only to
the disciples and their successors, because As though a learned lay man had
authority to preach the word.
a learned lay man, who is none of the disciples successors, may bind and loose
in that sense that you do interpret, and open and shut the kingdom of heaven,
as well as an We allow no such ministers.
ignorant and unlearned minister: Other doctrine then this, as touching the
forgiving or retayning of sins, the church of Rome teaches not, saving that
whereas in the sacrament of Penance, temporal penance is enjoined; we do hold
that the Who gave that power to the Pope? I am sure it is more then ever Peter
had, or practiced or bequeathed to his successors, this is not to be found
either in S. Matthew or S. John.
Pope has power to release, alter, or mittigate the same, either in the life
of the party, or, if the party fortune to die before the performance of his
penance, to pardon the same after his death. For your full satisfaction herein,
I And I you to the answer.
will refer you to a learned discourse thereof written in the english tongue
by our country man Cardinal Allen.

The Answer.
THe Keys now remain to be scoured from popish rust, and to this purpose we
may consider that Saint Peter's keys are first taken in hand, Math: 16.19. John
20.23. Bellar. de pontif.
and then those keys that were committed by our Savior to the Apostles; yet
if you will believe Bellarmine, the first place out of Matthew, does but
promise that Saint Peter should be a keykeeper (I will give the etc. and the
other out of John, Romans lib. 1. cap. 2.
gives the Apostles no more but Potestate^ ordinis ad remittenda peccata,
Power of order to remit sins. Thus must your papist either be at odds with
Bellarmine, or else give claues iurisdictionis, the keys of jurisdiction,
only to Peter and his successors, and to the rest nothing but potestatem
ordinis, and so consequently he must find other places besides these, or else
his keys will neither open nor shut as he would have them. Wherefore let him
consult with Bellarmine his master, before he presume over far upon the
doctrine of the Church of Rome, and he will tell him that the keys both of
order and jurisdiction were given to Peter in these words, John 21.15. etc.
John 20.21. etc.
Pasce oves meas, Feed my sheep: and to the other Apostles in these, as my
father sent me, so send I you, and in these words to receive the holy Ghost,
whose sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whose sins ye
retain, they are retained, and here note by the way, how solemnly Father
Bellarmine tells us that our Savior in these two places gave Summam potestatem;
Chief power to all his Apostles, Sed cum quadam subiectione ad Petrum, But
with a kind of subjection to Peter. As if [summa potestas] and [subiectio]
could possibly agree together, or as if Peter himself received that same high
power among the rest, used it, Cum quadam subiectione ad se ipsum, with a kind
of subjection to himself. Such ridiculous absurdities do men run headlong
into, when they are over hastily carried away with their own dreams.

But go too, let us entreat the Cardinal to bear with his friend, and to
procure him a dispensation to understand these two places, which he cites,
after his own liking; what has he than to say? Marry then I say, our sense is
more literal then yours, well, and what says he else? Nay we say, that our
Savior by these words, does give authority and commission to his disciples
and their successors to forgive sins, not by their own power and authority,
but by the power and authority of him whose commissioners they be. Yea, but
have they commission to forgive sins wheresoever they find it, or else in
them only that God is willing to forgive? Their commission I trow, is not
universal to all without discretion, and to dream who it is that God
purposes to show mercy unto, is beyond the capacity of any man living, Papist
to Protestant; he that has a letter of Attorney from his master to give
possession of, and knows the man to whom he is commanded to convey his
masters interest, Romans 9.18.
but our master has mercy on whom he will, and whom he will he hardens,
neither may your popist Priest presume that he knows the mind of the Lord,
Romans 11.33.34.
and can find out his ways and judgments which be insearchable, and so this
silly papist here confesses, when he says, that man gives remission to
pretended penitents, which God who sees their hearts, does not ratify: now
then confer this power thus exercised hand over head to good and bad, as
papists use it, with our preaching or publishing remission to penitent sinners,
and then judge whether is most like to be the better.

And because he bragges of the literrall sense, that it makes wholly for him,
let him tell me how the general words of the Scripture, whatsoever thou shall
bind, whatsoever thou shall loose, whosoeuers sins ye remit, and whosoeuers
sins ye retain, can be literally restrained to such only as be truly
penitent? if this cannot be done without a quatefication, let him not brag
that his sense is more literal than ours, we preach remission to all that be
penitent, and so open unto them the kingdom of heaven; to the impenitent, Romans
2.8.
and such as contentiously disobey the truth, we denounce indignation and
wrath, Esaias. 5.14.
and so shut heaven, and open hell wide, that their glory, their multitude, and
pomp may descend into it, neither can this sense seem strange to such as be
conversant in the writings of the Fathers, Thus says Tertullian, Contr.
Marcion lib. 4. Esa. lib. 6. cap. 14. De Cain and Abel lib. 2. cap. 4. In Oper.
imperf. in Mat. cap. 23.
Quam clauem habebant legis doctores, nisi interpretationem legis, What keys
had the doctors of the law, but the interpretation of the law. Thus Jerome,
Soluunt Apostoli sermon Dei and testimonijs scripturarum, and exhortatione
virtutu^. The Apostles do loose, by the word of God, and testimonies of the
Scriptures, and exhortation unto virtues. Thus Ambrose, Remittuntur peccata per
verbum Dei, cuius Levites est interpres, Sins are remitted by the word of
God, of which the minister is interpreter. Thus Chrysostom, Clauicularij sunt
sacerdotes, quibus creditum est verbum docendi and interpretandi scripturas,
The key-keepers are the Priests, unto whom the word of teaching and
interpreting the Scriptures is committed.

But it may be our papist, by comparison of his interpretation and ours will
find out the truth, thus he writes, you build your faith upon the opinion of
Luther, or Calvin, or the conceit of your own brain, and we upon the
authority of the ancient fathers, and continual practice of the universal
Church through the whole world continued from the Apostles, and remaining to
this day. Here is a tale told with all circumstances pressed down, and
running over, for he might have left out either [vniuersall Church,] or,
through the whole world; either continued, or continual practice, or remaining
to this day: if he had not purposed to dazzle us with empty words, but is this
the comparison he crakes of? Now surely we must needs be hard hearted that
cannot yield to such comparisons, can you prove that we build our faith upon
Luther, or Calvin, or our own brain? or do you compare together our faith
and yours, when you compare the opinion and conceit of Luther or Calvin, with
the authority of the ancient Fathers? Alas good Papist, you cannot but know
that our faith is no man's conceit or opinion, and it is a shame for you to
confess that you build your faith upon the authority of the Fathers, or
practice of the Church, be it never so ancient; I hope the fathers builded not
upon other Fathers that were their ancients, but upon the infallible word of
God, and what should ayle us, that we may not use that means the Fathers used
before us? you may talk long enough of Fathers and traditions, and your top
gallant [Church of Rome,] as though no one Father said any thing for us, yet
when you have all done, you must give us leave, ot we will take leave to found
our faith and religion upon the written word of the Almighty.

Thus is your Popish fellows Rhetoric come to small effect, and therefore he
will now try what his Logic can do. Thus I argue, says he, to the utter
overthrow of your interpretation; how, I pray you? marry you shall hear, if
Christ give authority of building and loosing only to his disciples, and
their successors, then cannot preaching be that building and loosing, why so
man? because a learned lay man may bind and loose in that sense, as well as an
ignorant and unlearned minister, what is this I hear? may a lay man preach the
word? or any ignorant and unlearned minister either? we allow no such blind
preachers, as you do Priests, Romans 10, 15. Hebr. 5, 4.
and Paul excludes the laity from preaching when he says, how shall they
preach, except they be sent? And again, no man takes honor unto himself,
but he that is called of God as was Aaron, but mark this arguing a little
better, preaching forsooth cannot be binding and loosing, because a learned lay
man is able to preach, and may not a learned lay man bind and loose too, as
formally as your popish Priests? you will say no, because he is not authorized
so to do by the Church, and I say again, that he has as good right to bind
and loose, as to preach the Gospel, and therefore our papist must look out
some new premises, if ever he look to have good of his conclusion.

Harding, one of the captains of his host, says, that if remitting sins
consist in pronouncing and denouncing of the Gospel, every lay man, yea women,
Cont. Apolog. Cap. 6. Diuis. 2.
yea young boys and girls may assoile sinners, yea every man may assoile
himself, but these fellows never look at the order of their own Synagogue,
where an old wife, or a young girl is authorized to baptize, and so
consequently to remit sins: the Church of Rome oftentimes rolleth up the
power of the keys in a bull of lead, and sends it abroad to seek his fortune
by a lay pardoner, yet make they no doubt but remission of sins is annexed
unto it; but if we say, as Christ says, Math. 23, 13. and Luke 11.52
woe be to them that take away the key of knowledge, and so shut up the
kingdom of heaven that they that would enter, cannot come in; this forsooth
must needs be far fetched, and the litterall sense will not bear it.

But what should a man spend his leisure with such untoward and insensible
triflers, that will needs authorize the Pope to pardon the souls of the dead,
for not performing bodily penance? we hold, says he, that the Pope has power
to release, alter, or mitigate temporal penance, both in the life time of the
party, and also after his death; if any of his penance be unperformed, and so
our souls must fast bread and water, they must repent in sackecloth and ashes,
they must whippe themselves like Jesuits, and shed tears, and wring their
hands, and lie upon the cold ground, and go barefoot and barelegd, and such
like, if it please not the Popes holiness to release them: but by your Popes
leave, I had rather believe the voice of God from heaven, that tells me, that
such as die in the Lord are blessed, and rest from their labors, at the least
wise they must needs rest from corporal penance. Cardinal Allens learned
discourse is answered long ago, and the answer has meat, drink, and
lodging among you without contradiction; but let Allen and all his fellow
Cardinals say what they can, yet this I am sure off, the Pope can have no power
over any of the dead, but only Gods chosen, for reprobates are beyond his
reach, Rom: 8.33.38 39.
of the chosen, thus says Saint Paul, who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods chosen? it is God that justifies, who shall condemn? and a little after,
I am persuaded, says he, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height,
nor depth, nor any other creature can separate us from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

But to let this pass, if it be demanded, what cause the Pope has to pardon
that which the dead cannot be charged withal, what will or can any papist
possibly answer? he that is charged with four, or five, or two years
penance, or less, if he be prevented by untimely death, must either be
discharged, or else be punished for not doing that he cannot do, which himself
a while a go thought to be absurd; if it be said that in this case God
punishes not for omission of penance, but for the sin for which penance was
enjoined, Mar. 2.7. and Luke 5.21.
and not done: then the Pope must be said either to forgive that which cannot
be required, and that's folly; or else the sin which remained unsatisfied, and
that's blasphemy.

Yet notwithstanding this blasphemy is rise among papists, Contr. Apol. cap.
6. diuis. 2. Math. 9.2.6. Luke 7.48.
howsoever this fellow here would feign hide it; as the son of man, says
Harding, remitted sins to him that was sick of the Palsy, and to Marie
Magdalen; even so he has transferred the same power unto Priests: and again,
sins are released by the power of the keys in the Sacrament of penance, to
the benefit of them that after baptism be relapsed and fallen into sin
again, of which power, Apol. cap. 6. diuis. 1. De author. eccles. and council.
supr. and contr. scriptur.
no Christian doubts, unless he be a Nouatian heretic; And again, the
Nouatians were condemned by the Church, because they denied that Priests in the
Church had authority to remit sins, and so denied the Sacrament of penance:
Cardinal Cusan, Haec ligandi and soluendi potestas non minor est in ecclesia,
quam in Christo, This power of binding and loosing, is no less in the Church,
than in Christ. Your own Cardinal In his Book of Priesthood.
Allen says, that the Pope forgiueth sins properly. And Pope Julius, Julius
Council. tom. 1. de primat. Romans eccles.
Habet sacrosancta Romana ecclesia potestatem, singulari sibi priuiligio
concessam, aperire and claudere ianuas regni caelestis quibus voluerit, The
holy Church of Rome has by a special prerogative power granted unto it, to
open and shut the gates of the kingdom of heaven, to and against whom it will.
Wherefore, if the case be so plain as this papist seems to make it, why do
they not make us a new expurgatorie Index, that may blot out these, and many
more such saucy seazings upon the Lords own peculiar, out of their books? No,
no, howsoever they face out the matter, yet are they the sons and heirs of
those priests that Jerome speaks off, In Math. cap. 16.
who thought they had power to absolve the wicked and condemn the innocent,
and were wont to say even in Saint Austines time, Nos sanctificamus immundos,
August. de fide and oper. ca. 14
nos iustificamus impios, nos petimus, nos impetramus, We sanctify the
unclean, we justify the ungodly, we ask, we obtain.

The Dialogue. Sectio XXVII.
ANd here will I make and end, referring that which hitherto has been spoken,
to your better censure and further consideration; whereupon if you shall rest
resolved that you have rightly described the Church of Christ, and that you are
also a member of the same; yet No such matter, it is but the vanity of your
conceit.
must you be enforced to grant, that all the ancient fathers before mentioned,
were heretics, and that so was also that universal Church whereof they make
mention so often in their writings, Paul says, that Antichrist does sit in the
temple of God, and therefore no marvel though his seat were always in
preparing in the Church.
wherein the said heretical and papisticall doctrine was taught and practiced:
but let us admit, although it be most false that there was in the world such a
Church as you have We go by truth, not by imagination.
imagined, for the first 300 years next alter Christ, and that these ancient
fathers and doctors with their adherents did afterward ecclypse that clear
light of the Gospel which shined in those first 300. years; yet how can we
imagine that the Church of Christ (which was endowed with so many gifts of the
holy Ghost, and which ever flourished and increased most amidst the tortures of
so many heathen Emperors) could upon We do not imagine so, for the kingdom
of Antichrist was not erected upon a suddane, but by l^tle and little
irremarkeably, as weeds use to grow among the good co^ne.
a sudden be so utterly quayled and extinguished by these heretical doctors,
as that no member thereof should once take pen in hand in defense of the truth
against their heresies? or how can we Who bids you imagine so, but your
Synagogue lay hidden til Antichrist was d sclosed. 2. These. 2.3.
imagine that the Church of Christ should for the space of 1300. years lie
hidden in so secret corners of ye world, as that none of the said papisticall
doctors (who wrote against all those, by the name of heretics, which held
any doctrine contrary to that which they The ancient fathers never termed such
as you be Catholics, nor your doctrine Catholic.
termed Catholic) could hear of them? or that in all that time, no general
Council (who were gathered together from all parts of the world) should
receive intelligence No Chur h had any being then, but ours only.
of the being of your mathematical Church professing christianity in so far
different a manner? which if either any of the said doctors, or any of those
general Councels had done, Non sequitur.
we should have heard of them in the Catalogue of heretics, or have found
their opinions condemned by some general councels: so soon as Aerius arose
and denied prayer for the dead etc. he was Full simply, and full little to your
credit, but single men such as Epiphanius was in this case, have no authority
to dubbe heretics.
confuted by Epiphanius, and afterward by S. Austine; when the real presence
was It was impugned 200 nay 500. years and odd, before your Lateran councels.
first impugned, the first authors thereof were condemned by the Council of
Laterane, and so of other of your opinions, as they sprang up in latter years;
but a Protestant religion, such as is now established in England, was never
heard of in the world before king Edwards time, neither has that religion at
this day any being in the world A foul untruth without either ga^d or welt.
but in England only: And Puritany, such They profess no such matter.
as profess to be of a church which holds no doctrine but such as is
warranted by scripture, never had nor yet has any being in the world, so that
it is This fellow seems not to know what religion and Church is.
a religion, and a church, as yet in imagination only, for although Puritanes
you have cause to love them the better, for in so doing, they resemble you
Papists.
do violently and ridiculously wrest the scripture for proof of every point
of their doctrine: yet do they hold many things not warranted by scripture, as
before I have sufficiently proved. There was never heresy in the world, but
you shall read when it first sprang up, how it grew and increased, and when it
was cut down and withered away; you shall never you may read in Paul when it
first sprang, and when it shall be cut down, 2. These. 2, 7, 8
read when the catholic religion first sprang, it has for these 1300.
years (by We confess no such matter.
your own confession) increased and flourished, it has been confirmed by
infinite miracles, and watered with the blood of millions of Martyrs, and
therefore the way that leads and directs unto the catholic religion, is
But by your leave, we must doubt of it, or rather be out of doubt it is not.
no doubt, the way whereof the Prophet Esaias speaks, saying, And there shall
be a path, and a way, and it shall be called the holy way, and it shall be to
you so direct and plain, as fools shall not be able to err therein.
Contrariwise you shall In the Bible.
read when and where your doctrine first sprang up, who were the fathers
thereof, and it has been The more to blame they that did it.
cut so often as it has revived; so often as any branch thereof has sprung up, it
has been confuted and condemned by general Councels, and is registered in the
Catalogue of latter heresies: you can show no succession of bishops, no
miracles, no These be stale prattlements of no weight, beseeming such vain
ianglers.
martyrs, nor name any one member of your Church, before John Calvin; for
although Wickliffe, Husse, and Luther, with the Waldenses, and certain other
condemned heretics of Armenia and Grecia did iumpe with you in some of your
opinions, yet was none of them either Protestant or Puritan, and so none of
your Church, and therefore the way that leads to your Church, is not that
direct and plain way whereof the Prophet speaks, but rather an inexplicable
Labyrinth, wherein there is We have the holy word of God to give us light, and
to guide us, and cursed be he that looks for better direction, Amen.
no light, no path, no compass or guide to direct your course.

The Answer.
Here this man would make an end, if he could tell how, but his conscience
telling him that his discourses are weak and insufficient, he would feign
fortify them with a little general talk propounded and answered long ago:
Sect. 5. and alibi.
and therefore, though it be needless to keep down a dead Carcass with any
new answer, unless he could blow life into it with some new defense; yet
somewhat more would be added in this place, for the repressing of popish
insolency. First therefore, where it is disputed, that if our description of
the Church be right, then the ancient Fathers were heretics, and the
universal Church heretical; I am content this sequel be judged by that which
has been already disputed: if every disagreement from truth must needs be
heresy, Gal. 2.11. etc. Act. 15.39. Act. 11.2. etc.
then either Paul or Peter was an heretic, and so was either Barnabas or
Paul, who were so stirred the one against the other, that they parted asunder.
Peter was chidden of the Church of Iewrie, for communicating to the Gentiles;
yet the Church was deceived, and not Peter: 1. Co. 3, 12.13
every error is not an heresy, and every one that builds timber, hay, or
stubble upon the foundation, is not an heretic, and therefore this loose
talk is little worth.

Yea, but let us admit, says he, that there was such a Church, as you
imagine, in the first three hundred years after Christ, though it be most
false: nay, you must admit it maugre your head, neither is it false ever the
sooner with a merry word; prove it to be false, and we will be as far
from either admitting it, or imagining it as your self; but so long as you use
such a general defense, as they of Sodom and Gomorha, and the Cities
adjoining might have used against Lot, the Cananites against Abraham, and the
old world against Noah and his family; there is no cause why such goodly
shows of antiquity should control Gods truth; if Lot, Abraham, and Noah had
been ruled by prescription of time, by multitude, by authority of Princes, by
traditions of Elders, or by any thing else in the world, but Gods own mouth,
they had been as Sodom, and like to Gomorha: and yet for all that, Peter the
head Patron of Rome, as you say, and the Jews that depended upon him, played
the hypocrites together, and Barnabas a good man, full of the holy Ghost and
faith, Act. 11.24.
was led away with them to the same hypocrisy; and though the scripture
testify of Lot, that he was a just man, Gal. 2.13.
and that his righteous soul was vexed from day to day with the uncleanly
conversation of the wicked: yet, by your leave, 2. Pet. 2.7.8,
the prostitution of his daughters, his drunkenesse, and incest, Genesis 19.8.31.
etc.
do plainly euince, that he was somewhat tainted with the sins of Sodom.

Yea, but Sodom was not the Church of God, neither was there any Christian
Church established, when Peter and his company played the hypocrites. Well, Let
that be granted, yet my reason is so much the stronger, for if Strangers from
God, and young Nouises in religion prevailed so much, that the one drew Lot,
the other Peter and Barnabas to do things not convenient, how much more may
the usual slips, and falls, and infections of Christian Churches work the like
inconveniences in the Fathers and guides of the same! we do not imagine that
the Church of Christ was utterly quailed and extinguished upon a sudden, for
that's more than the gates of hell shall ever be able to bring to pass; but
this we say, and are sure, that the mystery of iniquity did work in Paul's
time, and fell not a sleep as soon as Saint Paul was dead, waking again
600. 2. These. 2.7.
years after when this mystery was disclosed, for Rome was not built in a
day, or upon a sudden, and the Master builders of it are none of the seven
Sleepers, and therefore no marvel though perusing Councels, Fathers and
Stories from the Apostles forward, we find the print of the Popes feet here
and there scatteringly, and so perceive how he went on, and grew to the
fullness of the age of Antichrist.

Neither is it prejudicial to Gods clear truth faithfully registered in the
word of God, that none took pen in hand to defend it against Antichrist: for
the Angels of Pergamus and Thyatira, Revel. cap. 2.14.15.20.
though they were Gods faithfully Ministers, yet do we not read, that either
they or any of their fellows and friends wrote or spoke any thing against
Baalamites, and Nicholaitans, and the false prophecies of Iesabell that
infected their Churches. Epist. 119. ad Ianuar.
Austine says, Multa huiusmodi propter nonnull trum vel sanctarum, vel
turbulentarum personarum scandala deuitanda, liberius improbare non audeo, I
dare not freely as I should, improoue many scandals of this kind, because of
some either holy or troublesome persons that favor them; and therefore no
marvel though the religion of Antichrist, being a compound heresy of many
simples, grew on soft and fair, and plodded still forward by little and by
little without any resistance, till the time came it should be disclosed: if
the light of truth had been suddenly eclipsed, the ancient Fathers and their
adherents, would have labored to restore it; but this eclipse growing slowly
by small pieces, they knew not the deepenesse of Satan, Revel. 2.24. Math.
13.25. etc.
and so gave the tares of Antichrist leave to grow so long among the wheat,
til they were past weeding; nevertheless look the preface of Caluines
Institutions to the French King, and there you shall find the testimonies of
Acacius, Spiridion, Ambrose, Austine, Epiphanius, Gelasius, Chrysostom,
Calixtus, Cyprian, Apollonius, Paphnutius, and others, against outward
braueries, abstinence from flesh, monkish idleness, painted Images, suffrages
for the dead, transubstantiation, the half communion, unwritten
determinatio^s, set fastings, forbidding marriage, man's weak judgment, and such
like flowers of Antichrists garland: and if these had said nothing, yet there
were many other Fathers besides these, and whether they took pen in hand,
and wrote more fully against the several branches of Popery as they grew, it
were hard to tell, yet may we affirm it with as good probability, as you may
deny it, howsoever it be, the wisdom of God having so decree to punish our
unthankfulness: the doctrine of Rome, Revel. 17.9.
which is the seat of Antichirst, grew and increased a long time, but thanks
be to God, it is now in such a consumption as eats up the flesh of it, 2.
These. 2.8.
and we have sufficient warrant that it shall be abolished.

Neither is this increase and multiplication of error, till it conquer
sincerity and truth, and break forth into open absurdities, so strange a
matter in the Church of God. Thus you may read in the Valentine Council, In
proemio.
Quorunda^ patrum vtilis fuit and religiosa suggestio retractandi de his, quae
nec recipere possumus ob ecclesiae sanctitatem, nec tamen vsquequaque
consuetudinis causa damnare, ita enim per omnes ecclesias eiusmodi vitiorum
germen inoleuit, vt ad plena remedia non facilis sit recursus, Profitable and
religious is the motion of certain Fathers, concerning retracting those
things, which because of the holiness of the Church, we may not receive, and
yet by reason of custom dare not condemn, for such a seed of vices has
grown by custom in all Churches, that now we have no easy recourse to a
full remedy. Again, Can 1.
Fratrum nostrorum vel imperitiam, vel simplicitatem, vel etiam presumptionem
damnare non possumus, nec per omnes ecclesias quae sunt iam pridem male gesta
corrigere, We cannot condemn either the unskillfulness, or simplicity, or
(if ye will) presumption of our brethren, nor correct all the things that have
been of late badly done in all Churches. Again, Quod prauae consuetudinis
vitio ab Hispaniensibus Episcopis factum est, ita reprehendimus, vt propter
numerum corrigendoru^, Innocen prim. Epist 24 ad S nod. Tolet: cap. 1.
ea quae quo quo modo facta sunt non in dubium vocemus, sed Dei potius iuditio
dimittamus, That which was done by the Bishops of Spain, through the
corruption of evil custom, we so reprove, that because of the number of
them that be to be corrected, we call not in question the things that were
disorderly done, but leave them to the judgment of God. And again, Men's
potentiae auida, Leo primus ad Anathol. Constant. Epist. 51
nec abstinere nouit a vetitis, nec gaudere concessis, dum inordinato prauoque
progressu impunitarum transgressionum augentur excessus and crebrescunt culpae,
quae toleratae sunt studio fidei reparandae and amore concordiae, A mind that
is greedy of advancement, knows neither how to abstain from things
forbidden, nor how to use well things that are granted, whilst excesses are
increased and faults multiplied, thorough the inordinate and wicked proceeding
of transgressions unpunished, which were tolerated of a desire of repayring the
faith, and love of concord. Thus may you see, that good men and worthy Fathers
of Gods Church, by bearing with small matters for the common peace and welfare
of the Church, did so multiply absurdities, that in the end, they might cast
their caps at them, sooner than repress them, and withal you may see what
Fathers Popery is an adherent unto, namely, such as the Valentine Council,
Pope Innocent and Leo speak of; as for the former ages of the Church, Bishop
Jewel in the defense of the Apology and Challenge, has so uncased the face
of Antichrist that hid it self under the visard of Fathers and Counsels, that
none of the Popes Adherents, ever went about to cover it with any answer.

Moreover, whereas this fellow relies so much upon antiquity, as if the
ancient Fathers were flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bones, why does not
he, or some of his idle companions take Master Foxes book in hand, where the
substance of all antiquity is orderly set down, Apoc. 17.5.6.
and the whole glory and power of his Babylon, that is drunken with the blood
of Saints and Martyrs, utterly defaced? I have heard that there is an answer
abroad called, [The hunting of the Fox,] but such lusty unmarried Priests as
be so well fed and fatted here in England, are fitter to haunt I wot what,
than to hunt such a Fox as he is to any great purpose: it may well be nibled
at, like a great chase among mice, but I persuaded, that Papist lives not at
this day, that either has, will, or can afford it a full answer. But to
return to this fellow that prates so of Fathers and Counsels, as though they
were al in his bosom, let it be observed how cunningly he takes that for
granted, which neither he, nor any man else living is able to justify, [let
us admit, says he, that the ancient Fathers and Doctors with their adherents
did eclipse the clear light of the Gospel, which shined in the first 300.
hundred years.] Again, how can we imagine [that the Church of Christ, for
the space of 1300. years lay hidden in so secret a corner, that none of the
Doctors could hear of it?] Again, how it can be [that in all that time no
general Counsel should have intelligence of the being of the Church that
professed Christianity in so different a manner?] And again, if any of the
Doctors, or any general Council had heard of them, they had been put in the
Catalogue of heretics, and their opinions condemned: all this silly
Sophistry called petitio principij, for we neither will, nor do, nor ever did
grant, that the Fathers eclipsed the light of the Gospel, or that the Church
in their time lay hidden in secret corners, or that no general Council had
intelligence of it: these things our Pettyfogging-Papist is feign to beg, and
to take as granted, because he can no more prove any one of them, than he can
eat a load of logges. No, no, the Fathers were members of Gods Church, and so
were, and are we: as for Popery, what is it else but a certain scumme, and
froth, that seethes out of the liquor of the ancient Fathers, which the
Scripture has taught us to cast into the fire.

And here let me set you down Doctor Whitakers words, Answer to Reinolds,
cap. 6.
that such blind Sophisters as have not seen them in his Book, may see them
here, and be ashamed: the mystery of iniquity, says he, which in Papistrie
is fully finished, began to work in the Apostles age, and so continued still
forward in the Fathers days, until it came to his height and perfection in
the Kingdom of Popery; they slipped a little, you are fallen headlong into the
pit; they were ouerseen through infirmity, you are blind of malice; they
scattered some darnell in the Lords field, you have plucked up by the roots the
good corn; they suffered loss of this building, being not agreeable with the
foundation, yet are saved; you overthrow the foundation it self, and therefore
cannot in this opinion be saved. Again, the ancient Fathers holding the ground
and foundation of Doctrine, did oftentimes build thereon stubble and straw,
partly by some superstitious opinions which themselves conceived of such
inventions, and partly by the sway and violence of custom, whereby they were
carried to a liking of those things, which they saw commended and practiced by
others, and yet God forbid that because of some errors which they held, we
should raze their names out of the Calendar of Gods Saints, or think otherwise
than reverently of them. Again, though they erred, yet were they
notwithstanding good men and holy Fathers; were not the Apostles holy men when
they dreamed of an earthly Kingdom in this world? were they void of holiness,
when they believed that the Gospel was to be preached to the Jews only?
Many holy Fathers were infected with the error of the Chiliasts, who
notwithstanding are worthily accounted Saints of God; Cyprian and many godly
Bishops with him erred about the baptism ministered by heretics, yet lost
they not for all that the opinion and name of holy Fathers, etc. Again, the
case of the Galatians is the same with yours, for as they thought to be
justified by the works of the law, so do you; as they were warned of their
error, so are you; as they without repentance lost the benefit of Christ's
sacrifice, so shall you: if the Fathers had been as often and plainly
admonished as you have been, they would being holy and sincere men, have
reformed their judgment, and keeping the head, though they erred in some part,
the Lord will not impute that error unto them. And again, they erred not so
wilfully as you, and therefore we account not of them as of you who have
multiplied your errors, and left almost no one ground of pure religion
unshaken.

This is a sufficient answer to such beggarly petitioners* yet his mouth will
not be stopped, till we show some of the Popish reuolts from Gods ancient truth,
to the several heresies whereof Popery consists. To this end therefore, we
may remember the double condemnation of Eustathius in two several councels,
Socrat. Hyst. lib. 2, cap. 33.
Casaria, and Gangra, for such Catholic Articles as run current among
Papists at this day; as for example, forbidding to marry, abstinence from
meats, sundring men from their wives, and servants from their Masters, under
color of Religion, abhorring the blessing and communion of a married Priest,
and such like articles, as were condemned, most of them, of all Churches under
heaven 200. years before Eustathius was borne, for thus writes Apollonius a
Martyr, Eusebius. hystor. lib. 5. cap. 16.
speaking of the heretic Montanus, Hic est qui coniugia dissoluere docuit,
ieiuniorum leges praescripsit, qui Pepuzam ac Tinium modicas civitates
Phrygiae, Jerusalem vocauit, vt cunctos vndique ad illas congregaret, qui
pecuniarum exactores constituit, qui sub pretextu and nomine oblationum numerum
captationem artificiose concutus est, qui salaria doctrinae praedicatoribus
subministrauit, vt per ventris studium doctrina ipsius inualesceret, This is he
which dissolved marriages, prescribed laws of fasting, which called Pepuza and
Tinium two little Cities of Phrygia, Jerusalem, that he might gather men from
every place thither, which appointed exactors of money, which under the
pretense and name of offering, did cunningly devise to get gifts, who ministered
stipends to the preachers of his doctrine, that so for his bellies sake, his
doctrine might be every where declared. The same Father and Martyr says, that
his Prophets and Martyrs did extort money, not only from the rich, but also
from the poor, even widows and Orphans; Marcion and Appelles forbad marriage,
as appears in Tertullian; The Manichies were condemned first by Pope Leo, and
then by Gelasius, as the first Fathers of communicating under one kind; De
prescrip. ad haeret. Sermon. 4. de quadrag. In decret pontif. distinct. in cap.
comperimus.

In Catalog. dogm. Manich. lib. de anima, in fine Dialog. 2. Contra Eutyc. Can.
36. Haeres. 70.


The same heretics were the Fathers of monkish idleness, and therefore
Epiphanius calls them, Desidentes vespae, and nihil operantes, etc. Idle Waspes,
and doing no work. The Doctrine of Purgatory was first reco^mended to
Tertullian by the paraclet of Montanus. The heretic in Theodorets dialogues
says, as the Papists do, Symbola dominici corporis and saguinis, post
inuocationem sacerdotis, mutantur and alia fiunt, The Symboles of the Lords
body and blood, after the invocation of the Priest, are changed and made other
things. And Pope Gelasius tells the heretic Eutiches, Non desinit esse
substantia panis, and naturavini, There cease not to be the substance of
bread, and the nature of wine. The Counsel of Eliberis enacted, that that
which is worshipped, should not be painted upon walls, thereby condemning
Popish Imagerie. Epiphanius faith of the Audians, They use great store of
Apocryphal writings. Epiphanius haeres. 46. 47. 61. etc. De preser. advers.
haeret. and libro de baptis. in fine. Eusebius. hystor. lib. 3. cap. vlt. and lib.
2. cap. 15. De prescript. advers. haeret. Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 23. and 24 and
lib. 3. cap. 2 Canus lib 3. cap. 3. fund. 4. Bellarm. de verb. non script. lib.
4. cap. 8.
Vtuntur Apochryphis multis abunde. The Tatians, the Eucratifes, the
Apostolickes, and such like heretics, were the first founders of single life,
and being so highly esteemed, it took hold in time upon the Church. Women's
baptism which is current in Popery, came first from heretics wives, of
whom Tertullian says, that they were Procaces, audentes docere, contendere,
exercismos agere, curationes repromittere, forsitan and tingere, Malepart, such
as boldly took upon them to teach, to contend, to exercise, such as promised
to cure diseases, and perhaps also to baptize. Papias a Chiliast was the first
father and founder of Traditions, and Peter's primacie, or Romish Episcopalitie.
Tertullian and Irenaeus tell us that heretics held the Apostles did not
reveal, Omnia omnibus, sed quaedam palam and vniuersis, quaedam secreto and
paucis, All things to all men, but some things openly, and to all, some
things secretly, and to a few; as namely, Basilides, Carpocrates, Valentinus,
Marcion, Carinthus. And this is the opinion of Papists at this day.

This is sufficient for a taste, that thereby you may judge how toothsome Popery
is, that consists of these, and many other such roots of bitterness: And
that you may be yet better infourmed how the good corn of true religion may
be ouer-growne with the weeds of popish errors and heresies, and yet in time
get the victory again, and ouer-maister them; Cap. 2:19.
the Church of Thyatira so highly commended in the Revelation, may be a plain
document unto us; which though it seemed to be euacuated by the Cataphrygian
heresy: Epipha. haeres. 51.
yet a hundred years after, the Church revived again and multiplied, and so
by Gods mercy conquered the woman Iezabel and her heretical Prophets, and
even so it fares with the Church of God in general, for howsoever it pleased
God for the punishment of our sins to give Antichrist leave by little and
little to grow to such a height, that at length he ouer-shadowed and
ouer-dropped all truth, and sincerity: yet, when God saw his time, he began
to raise up such worthy men as lopt off his branches, Daniel. 4.
and shook off his leaves, and scattered his fruit, and so continues, and
will continue to execute his judgments upon that man of sin, that in the end
he will not leave so much as the stumps of his roots in the earth.

Touching Puritanie, which still this fellow quarrels withal, when he can
prove it to be either a Church, or a Religion by it self, we will shape him
an answer; in the mean time, let him know that no Protestant in England, or
out of England, holds any doctrine necessary to salvation, but such as is
warranted by Scripture, neither are we left wholly to our selves in matters of
discipline, to appoint what we think good, Romans 14.23. 1. Cor. 14.26.40.
but are guided by the general rules of Gods word, how to behave our selves in
the house of God: as for wresting the Scripture, when any of you all can
justify, that the most witless Puritan in England, does wrest them more
violently and ridiculously, than your selves, then will I be a Protestant no
longer. You Papists, though your brawles be endless one with another,
Canonists against Schoolmen; Franciscans against Dominicks; Nominals, against
Reals; Thomas against Lombard; Scotus against Thomas; Occam against Scotus;
Alliacensis against Occam; Peter Sot against Catharine; Catharine against
Caietan; Caietan against Pighius; Jesuits against Priests; and Priests against
Jesuits: yet forsooth these dogs and cats are of one Cage, they are all
members of the Romish Church, but Protestants and Puritans being diverse names
that differ not in the grounds of faith, but in small points, as Richard and
Thomas, or John and James, do in color and complexion and countenance, they
forsooth cannot be both members of the same Church.

But what should I spend time with such a prater, as dares face us out, that
such a Religion as is now established in England, was never heard of in the
world before King Edwards time? I am sure there is no other Religion
established in England, but that which is clearly taught in the word of God,
brought hither first by Simon Nicephor. lib. 2. cap 4.
Zelotes, Joseph Ghildas.
of Arimathea, Saint Theodor. de cur. graecor. affect. lib. 9.
Paul the Apostle, al of them, or some of them and watered still on in the days
of Lib contra Iudaeos.
Tertullian, In Ezec. ho. 4
Origin, Apolog. secunda.
Athanasius, Initio lib. de Synod. contra Arian.
Hilarie, Homil. quod Christus sit Deus aduers. gentil.
Chrysostom, Hyst. eccles. lib. 1. cap. 10. and lib. 4. cap. 3
Theodoret; all which ancient Fathers speak honorably of the Church, and
Religion, and Prelates of Britain. Now whether this Church, and this Religion
so planted, and so watered, were the same that was restored and established in
the happy days of King Edward, and Queen Elizabeth, both Princes of blessed
memory; it is so clearly decided in the written word of God, that the crying
and yelling of our forlorn Papists, shall never be able to persuade the
contrary.

Yea, but Aerius you know, as soon as he denied prayer for the dead, was
confuted; and the first that impugned the real presence, was condemned in the
Council of Lateran, and so were other of your opinion as they sprange up in
later years. This man, you see, will not give over as long as he can say any
thing; but goo too, let us not think much to answer these triflles, Aerius
indeed denied prayer for the dead, if Epiphanius mistake not the matter; yet I
deny that he understood such kind of praying for the dead, as the Popish
Church uses at this day: Papists pray for the release of venial offenses
punishable in Purgatory, but Aerius spoke against the common error of his
time, (...).
namely, that the forgiveness of incurable sins might be procured to the
dead by the prayers of the living; if this be heresy, then be you heretics
your selves. Touching the real presence, Bertram.
it is well known, that Bertram wrote against it without any man's
contradiction, 400. years before the Counsel of Lateran. Aelfricus.
And so did Aelfricus Archbishop of Canterbury, almost 200. years after
Bertram, in a Sermon which was yearly read in our Churches at the feast of
Easter. As for the time that followed in later years, after the Lat eran
Council; we say of it, Luke 22.53.
as our Savior does of the like time, [This is your very hour, and the power
of darkness.]

Thus have I showed you briefly, but sufficiently, when the great compound
heresy of Popery first sprange, how it grew piece by piece till Antichrist
was disclosed, 2. These. 2.8.
I have told you also, how it has been consumed by the breath of Gods mouth,
and when it shall be cut down and wither. As for Miracles and Martyrs, Cath.
7.22. and 24, 24. 2. These. 2.9. and Apoc. 16.14.
the one proves you to be the brood of Antichrist, of whose lying wonders
the scripture has foretold us; the other, namely, Gods Martyrs, they cry out
for vengeance against blood-suckers, for so we are taught in the Revelation,
and such blood-suckers are you, and have ever been, as Master Fox has most
truly set it down to your everlasting shame and confusion: such Miracles as
yours be, we can show none, neither can we make Martyrs, as you can; God
give us all grace to keep that way and path, that leads and directs to the
Kingdom of heaven; and grant us rather good Bishops without succession, than
succession without good Bishops, that all of us, both Bishops and people, high
and low, rich and poor, one with another may glorify God the Father of our
lord Jesus Christ. So be it.

Ierem. Cap. 49.10. I have discovered Esau, I have uncovered his secrets, and
he shall not be able to hide himself.

Tertul. de prescript. aduersus heretic. Haereses de quorundam infirmitatibus
habent quod valent, nihil valentes, si in been valentem fidem incurrant.


Paraeneticum carmen Authoris, ad Magistrum* I. S.
SI cupis ad superos per inania tecta domorum
Altius horrendo scandere cum sonitu:
Consule Papistas hominum immanissima mo^stra,
Qui scandendi alium non didicere modum.
O scelus infandum, number crudo sanguine pascit
Italus ille suas Pontificaster oues?
Siccine pascendum, vasto Polyphemus in antro
Eructans saniem, quam bibit ante, docet?
Siccine scandendu^ ad superos docet vncta meretrix,
Quae tota innocuo mersa cruore rubet?
O fuge, quid cessas? meretricia desere castra,
Scandendique nouam disce tenere viam.
Eiusdem conclusio ad D. Doctorem Grimston medicum praestantissimum.
SI quid in hoc fuerit lectoribus vtile libro,
Non mihi, sed cutae gratia danda tuae.
Et liber, and libri dominus paulo ante redemptus,
Libertus tuus est, desijt esse suus.
Mortis serua tuo fit libera vita labor;
Libera vita tuo facta labor tua est.
Viuo igitur, viuoque tuus, viuamque per omnem
Quam dederas vitam, seu tua, seu mea sit.
FINIS.

