The Tryumphs of Honor and Industry.

A Solemnity performed through the City, at Confirmation and establishment of
the Right Honorable, GEORGE BOVVLES, In the Office of his Majesty's
Lieuetenant, the Lord Mayor of the famous City of London.

Taking beginning at his Lordships going, and proceeding after his Return from
receiving the Oath of Maioralty at westminster, on the morrow next after Simon
and Iudes day October 29. 1617.

IN DOMINO CONFIDO
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, 1617.

To the Worthy Deseruer of all the Costs and Triumphs, which the Noble Society
of Grocers in bounteous measure bestow on him, the Right Honorable, GEORGE
BOVVLES, Lord Mayor of the famous City of London.
Right Honorable,
OVt of the slightest labors and employments there may that Virtue sometimes
arise, that may enlighten the best part of man, nor have these kind of Tryumphs
an idle Relish, especially if they be Artfully accomplished, under such an
esteemed slightness may often lurk that fire that may shame the best
perfection: For instance, what greater means for the imitation of Virtue and
Nobleness can any where present it self with more Alacrity to the Beholder,
then the Memorable Fames of those Worthies in the Castle, manifested by their
Escutchions of Arms, the only Symboles of Honor and Antiquity. The Honorable
Seat that is reserved, all men have hope, that your Justice and Goodness will
exactly merit, to the Honor of which I commend your Lordships Virtues, remaining

At your Honors service, T. M.

The Tryumphs of Honor and Industry.
IT has been twice my fortune in short time to have imploiment for this Noble
Societye, where I have always met with men of much understanding, and no
less bounty, to whom cost appears but as a shadow, so there be fullness of
content in the performance of the solemnity, which that the world may judge of,
for whose pleasure and satisfaction, custom has yearly framde it, (but
chiefly for the honor of the City) it begins to present it self, not without
form and order, which is required in the meanest emploiment.

The first Invention.
A Company of Indians, attired according to the true Nature of their Country,
seeming for the most part naked, are set at work in an Island of growing
spices; some planting Nutmeg Trees, some other spice trees, of all kinds, some
gathering the fruits, some making up bags of Pepper, every one severally
imploide; These Indians are al active youths, who ceasing in their labors,
dance about the trees, both to give content to themselves and the spectators.

After this show of dancing Indians in the Island, follows triumphantly a rich
personage, presenting India, (the Seat of Merchandise) this India sits on the
top of an Illustrious Chariot, on the one side of her sits traffic or
merchandise, on the other side, Industry, both fitted and adorned according to
the property of their natures, Industry holding a golden Ball in her hand upon
which sta^ds a Cupid, signifying that Industry gets both wealth and love, and
with her associate Traffic or Merchandise, who holds a Globe in her hand,
knits love and peaec amongst all Nations, to the better expressing of which, if
you give attention to Industry, that now sets forward to speak, it will be
yours more exactly.

The speech of Industry in the Chariot.
I Was jealous of the shadowing of my grace,
But that I know this is my time and place;
Where has not Industry a noble friend,
In this Assembly, even the best extend
Their grace and love to me, (ioyde or amazde)
Who, of true Fame possessed but I have raysde,
And after added Honors to his days,
For Industry is the life-bloud of praise,
To rise without me, is to steal to glory,
And who so abject to leave such a story,
It is as clear as Light, as bright as truth,
Fame waytes their age, whom Industry their youth.
Behold this Ball of Gold, upon which stands
A golden Cupid wrought with curious hands,
The mighty power of Industry it shows,
That gets both wealth, and love, which ouerflows
With such a stream of Amity an a peace,
(Not only to it self adding increase)
But several nations where commerce abounds
Taste the harmonious peace, so sweetly sounds,
For instance, let your gracious eye be fixed,
Upon a Joy, true, though so strangely mixed.
And that you may take the better note of their adornments, India whose seat
is the most eminent, for her expression, holds in her hand a wedge of gold,
traffic her associate, a Globe, Industry a fair golden Ball in her hand,
upon which stands a golden Cupid, Fortune expressed with a silver wheel,
Success holding a painted Ship in a Haven, wealth a golden key where her heart
lies, Virtue bearing for her manifestation, a silver shield, Grace holding in
her hand a book, Perfection, a crown of gold.

At which words the Pageant of several Nations, which is purposely planted
near the sound of the words, mooues with a kind of affectionate joy, both at
the honor of the days triumph, and the prosperity of Love, which by the virtue
of Traffic, is likely ever to continue, and for a good Omen of the Everlasting
continuance of it, on the top of this curious and triumphant Pageant, shoots up
a Laurel tree the leaves spotted with gold, about which sit six celestial
figures, presenting Peace, Prosperity, Love, Unity, Plenty, and Fidelity, Peace
holding a branch of Palm, Prosperity a Laurel, Love, two joined hands, Unity
two Turtles, Plenty holding fruits, Fidelity a silver anchor. But before I
entered so far I should have showde you the zeal and love of the Frenchman and
Spaniard, which now I hope will not appear unseasonably, who not content with
a silent joy like the rest of the Nations, have a thirst to utter their
gladness, though understood of a small number, which is this.

The short speech delivered by the Frenchman in French.
La multitude m'ayant monte sur ce haut lieu, pour contempler le glorieux
triumph de ceste Iournee, le voy quen quelque sort la noble dignite de la
treshonorable societe des Grociers y est representee, don't mesiouissant par
dessus tous, le leur souhaite and a Monsegneur le Mayre le Comble de touttes
nobles and heureuses fortunes.

The same in English.
IT is my joy chiefly, (and I stand for thousands) to see the glory of this
triumphant day, which in some measure requires the noble worthiness of the
Honorable Society of Grocers, to whom and to my Lord Mayor I wish all good
successes.

This Frenchman no sooner sets a period to his speech, but the Spanyard in
zeal as virtuous as he, vtters himself to the purpose of these words.

The Spaniards speech in Spanish.
Ningunas de todas estas naciones conciben mayor y ver dadera alegria en este
triumphante y glorioso dia que yo, no, minguna de todas ellas, porque agora que
me parece* que son tan ricas, es senal que los de my nation en tratando con
ellas receberan, mayor prouecho dellas, Al my senior Don Mayor todas buenas y
dichosas fortunas, Y a los de la honrada Compania de Especicros dichosos dessi
eos, Y assi dios guarde a my senior Don Mayor, y rogo a dios que todo el anno
siguiente, puede ser tan dichoso, como esta entrada suya, a la digmday de lu
seniora, Guarde dios a su sennoria.

The same in English.
NOne of all these Nations, conceive more true joy at this triumphant day, then
my self, to my Lord Mayor all fair and noble fortunes, and to the worthy
Society of Grocers, all happy wishes, and I pray heaven, that all the year
following may be as happy and successful, as this first entrance to your
dignity.

This expression of their joy and love having spent it self, I know you cannot
part contented, without their several inscriptions; now the favor and help
must be in you, to conceive our breadth and limits, and not to think we can in
these customary bounds comprehend all the nations, but so many as shall serve
to give content to the understander, which thus produce themselves.

An Englishman. A Frenchman. An Irishman. A Spanyard. A Turk. A Jew. A Dane. A
Polander. A Barbarian. A Ruscian or Moscouian.
This fully expressed, I arrive now at that part of Triumph, which my Desire ever
hastened to come to, this Castle of Fame or Honor, which Industry brings her
Sons unto in their Reverend Ages.

In the front of this Castle, Reward and Industry decked in bright Robes, keep
a Seat between them for him to whom the Days honor is dedicated, showing
how many worthy Sons of the City, and of the same Society, have by their
Truth, Desert and Industry come to the like honor before him, where on a
sudden is shown diverse of the same Right Worshipful Society of Grocers,
manifested both by their good government in their Times, as also by their
Escuchions of Arms, as an example and encouragement to all Virtuous and
Industrious deseruers in time to come: And in honor of Antiquity is shown
that Ancient and Memorable Worthy of the Grocers Company, Andrew Bockrill, who
was Mayor of London the sixteenth year of Henry the third, 1231. and continued
so Mayor seven years together.

Likewise for the greater honor of the Company, is also shown in this Castle
of Fame, the Noble Allen de la Zouch, Grocer, who was Mayor of London the two
and fiftieth year of the same Henry the third, which Allen de la Zouch, for
his good Government in the Time of his Maioralty, was by the said King Henry
the third, made both a Baron of this Realm, and Lord Chief Justice of
England: Also that Famous Worthy, Sir Thomas Knoles, Grocer, twice Mayor of
this Honorable City, which Sir Thomas begun at his own charge that famous
building of Guild Hall in London, and other Memorable works, both in this
City, and in his own Company, so much Worthiness being the Luster of this
Castle, and ought indeed to be the Imitation of the Beholder.

My Lord no sooner approaches, but Reward a Partner with Justice in keeping
that Seat of Honor, as ouer-ioyde at the sight of him, appears too free and
forward in the Resignation.

Reward. VVElcome to Fames bright Castle, take thy place,
This seate's reserud to do thy virtues grace.

Justice. TRue, but not yet to be possessed, hear me,
Justice must flow through him, before that be,
Great works of Grace must be requird and done,
Before the honor of this Seat be won.
A whole years reverend care in righting wrongs,
And guarding Innocence from malicious tongues.
Must be imployde in Virtues sacred right,
Before this place be filled; it is no mean fight,
That wins this Palm, truth, and a virtuous care,
Of the oppressed, those the Loadstones are,
That will against Enuies power draw him forth,
To take this merit in this seat of worth:
Where all the memorable worthies shine,
In works of brightness, able to refine,
All the beholders minds, and strike new fire,
To kindle an industrious desire,
To imitate their actions, and their Fame,
Which to this Castle adds that glorious Name.
Wherefore Reward, free as the Air or Light,
There must be Merit, or our work's not right.

Reward. IF there were any error it was my love,
And if it be a fault to be too free,
Reward commits but once such heresy.
How ere, I know your worth will so extend,
Your fame will fill this seat at twelve months end.

About this Castle of Fame are plast many honorable figures, as Truth,
Antiquity, Harmony, Fame, Desert, Good works, on the top of the castle, Honor,
Religion, Piety, Commiseration; the works of those whose memories shine in
this Castle.

If you look upon Truth first, you shall find her properly expressed, holding
in her right hand a Sun, in the other a Fan of Stars, Antiquity with a
scrowle in her hand, as keeper of Honors Records; Harmony holding a golden
Lute, and Fame not without her silver trumpet, for desert it is glorious through
her own brightness, but holds nothing; good works expressed with a College or
Hospital.

On the top of the Castle, Honor manifested by a fair Star in his hand,
Religion with a Temple on her head, Piety with an Altar, Commiseration with a
melting or burning Heart.

And not to have our speakers forgotten, ( Reward and Justice) with whom we
entered this part of Triumph, Reward holding a wreath of gold, ready for a
deseruer; and Justice furnished with her Sword and balance.

All this service is performed before the Feast, some in Paul's Churchyard,
some in Cheap Side, at which place the whole Triumph meets, both Castle and
Island, that gave delight upon the water, And now (as duty binds me) I commend
my Lord and his right honorable Guess to the solemn pleasure of the feast,
from whence I presume all Epicurisme is banished; for where Honor is master of
the feast, Moderation and Gravity are always attendants.

The feast being ended at Guild Hall, my Lord (as yearly custom inuites him)
goes accompanied with the triumph toward S. Paul's, to perform the noble and
reverend ceremonies which divine Antiquity virtuously ordained, and is no less
then faithfully obserude, which is no mean luster to the City, Holy service
and ceremonies accomplished, he returns by torch-light to his own house, the
whole triumph placed in comely order before him, and at the entrance of his
gate, Honor a glorious person, from the top of the Castle gives life to these
following words.

The speech of Honor from the top of the Castle, at the entrance of my Lord
Mayors Gate.
Honor. THere is no humane glory or renown,
But have their evening and their sure sunsetting,
Which shows that we should upward seek our Crown
And make but use of time for our hopes bettering,
So to be truly mindful of our own,
Is to perform all parts of good in one;
The close of this triumphant day is come,
And Honor stays to bid you welcome home,
All I desire for my Grace and good,
Is but to be remembered in your blood,
With Honor to accomplish the fair time,
Which power has put into your hands; A crime
As great as ever came into sins band,
I do entitle a too sparing hand,
Nothing deads Honor more, then to behold
Plenty coopt up; and Bounty faint and cold;
Which ought to be the free life of the year,
For bounty it was ordaynd, to make that clear
Which is the light of goodness and of Fame,
And puts by Honor from the cloud of shame.
Great cost and love has nobly bin bestowd,
Upon thy triumph, (which this day has showd:
Embrace 'em in thy heart, till times afford
Fuller expression; in one absolute word,
All the content that ever made man blessed,
This triumph done, make a triumphant breast.

No sooner the speech is ended, but the triumph is dissolud, and not possible
to escape the hands of the defacer, things that for their quaintness (I dare so
far commend them) have not been usually seen through the City; the credit of
which workma^ship I must justly lay upon the deserts of Mr. Rowland Bucket,
chief master of the work; yet not forgetting the faithful care and industry
of my well approved friend, Master Henry Wild, and Master Jacob Challoner,
partners in the business.

The season cuts me off, and after this days trouble I am as willing to take
my rest.

FINIS.

