A SIXTH BOOK TO THE COUNTESS OF PEMBROKES ARCADIA.

Written by R. B. Esquire.

Sat, si been; si male, nimium.

Dvblin, Printed by the Society of STATIONERS. Anno Dom. M.DC. XXIV.

To THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THE truly virtuous and learned La: the Viscountesse
of Falkland.
Madam,
THIS sixth Book to the Countess of Pembrokes Arcadia, at the first birth of
it was meant for your Honor. If it contain any thing that is good, that you
may justly claim as your own, as well because it was so auspiciously begun, as
that goodness can no where find a more worthy patroness. What though it have
many faults? yet I hope you will not reject it, both because in its infancy it
was vowed to you; and that no where it could have taken a more privileged
Sanctuary, then is your favorable censure. The desire I had (seeing it was
all I could do) to acknowledge your many favors, moved me, when this addition
was scarce begun, to intend it for your Hon: and now it is ended, the
confidence I have in your well-knowne clemency, emboldens me to present it to
you; for my distrust of my self makes me fear, that as it could be given to
none more desirous to excuse the errors of weak well meaning endeavors, so
your Honor could no where light on a fitter subject for the practice of that
virtue, then is this offering of

Your servant Richard Belling.

To THE READER.
TO strive to lessen the greatness of the attempt, were to take away the
glory of the action. To add to Sir Philip Sidney, I know is rashness; a fault
pardonable in me, if custom might as well excuse the offense, as youth may
prescribe in offending in this kind. That he should undergo that burden, whose
mother tongue differs as much from this language, as Irish from English;
augments the danger of the enterprise, and gives your expectation perhaps an
assurance what the event must be. Yet let no man judge wrongfully of my
endeavors: I have added a limme to Apelles picture; but my mind never
entertained such vain hopes, to think it of perfection sufficient to delude
the eyes of the most vulgar, with the likeness in the workmanship. No, no, I
do not follow Pythagoras his opinion of transmigrations: I am well assured
divine Sidney's soul is not infused into me, whose Judgment was only able to
finish, what his Inventio^ was only worthy to undertake For this, courteous
Reader, let it suffice I place Sir Philip Sidney's desert (even in mine own
esteem) as far beyond my endeavors, as the most fault-finding censor can
imagine this assay of mine, to come short of his Arcadia.

Vale. R. B.

To HIS ENTIRELY BELOVED Kinseman the AVTHOR.
This Isle, sometimes the nurse of sacred Arts,
Wasted by war, and overgrowne with weeds
Of ignorance, that had ore'run all parts^
Did still (I see) retain some living seeds
Of that old learning, which soft peace does nourish,
And now begin afresh to spring and flourish.
Which benefit, thy country and thy friends
Reap from the happy labors of thy youth,
Who cannot back return thee less amends,
Then thus to honor thy deserts with truth:
But I more nearly bound, who in thy blood
An interest claim, as in my countries good.
It Is true, the attempt was great; nor blame I that,
Since greatest actions left as patterns be
For imitation, which to have offered at
So well as thou have done, will honor thee.
And if thy Book miss of the due applause,
Th'inimmitable president's the cause.
Another by the same.
That thou so sweetly have begun to raise
In this high silence, thy harmonious lays.
Take, as thy due, this honor for thy meed;
Thou art the first who with thy well-tuned reed
Awaked thy countries Muse, and led thereby
Into the pleasant fields of Arcady
Her flo^kes, her Pastors, and the sportfull crew
Of all her youth that shall thy steps pursue:
Who shall hereafter, to ingirt thy brows,
Bring wreathed garlands of Apollo's bows.
(...)

To his approved friend the Author.
I Read thy book on night late, and did fear
Still as I read, I saw appearing there
Sir Philip Sidney's ghost; yet looked about,
And nothing could epsy might breed that doubt,
But thy sweet harmless Book: so like in all
Was matter, phrase, and language which did fall
From thy chaste pen, that surely both being gone
Next age will write your characters in one.
And do I envy this? Yes sure I do
So far, as to have had the glory too
IN have finished such a work. But since 'twas left
For thee alone, tell me (of faith bereft)
Where you two spoke together, and I vow
To keep it from the world, as I do now
Not knowing it; that so, before to morrow
I might in honor of thy work, but borrow
Some little portion of his sacred Muse,
That might to me like flames, and spirit infuse:
For none but such, can reach that height of glory
Which thou bast got, by this immortal story.
W. MARTYN.

An Accrostick Sonnet. To his worthy and deerly beloved friend the AVTHOR Page
8. lin. 7. for laughing, read, languishing.

Rather to show my love, then sing thy praise,
I write these lines; for what is known to me,
Cannot (my Belling) s^and within my lays,
Having less words then what to speak of thee:
And (...) thy worth for want of words or phrase
Refined and quaint, want due applause, or be
Drencht in oblivion? no, the ^acred Bays
Begirts thy head, as a deserved see.
Enough, that speaks thee; for on worthless brows
Long tress'd Apollo never bestows his bows.
Live happy then, and sor thy Countries bliss
I wish thou may live long: thy Works renown thee,
No better steps thou could have tract then His.
Go on, and time, with Sidney's fame, shall crown Thee.
By the same.
To praise (my Belling) this thy work, to me
Does seem superfluous, since good eyes can see,
And seeing judge, and judging know i^s worth
Better then tongue or pen can set it forth.
Thus much I Will say, That if this age were blessed
Again by him, w^ose soul is now at rest,
The ne'^e enough admired Sidney, and
He to thy Book would but vouc^safe his hand,
Thou have therein such witty smoothness shown,
As out of doubt it would be thought his own.
H. Delaune.

A SIXTH BOOK TO THE COUNTESS OF PEMBROKES ARCADIA.
What changes in Fortune the Princes of Macedon and Thessaly have past,
together wit^ what event the uncertain actions of so blind a Goddess, have
been crowned; they may remember, whose ears have been fedd with their
eloquent Story, written by the never-enough renowned Sir Philip Sidney.

Basilius therefore having beheld with the eye of success, the accomplishment
of his misinterpreted Oracle, hastened (together with Evarchus) to his Court of
Mantinia; where the infinite assembly, and the public Sacrifices of his
Subjects, did well witness what joy did possess their hearts, whose eyes were
restored to the sight of long-eclipsed Soveraigntie. Fame also, proud ^o be the
messenger of such royal newvs, had soon (with speedy flight) past the limits
of Arcadia: so as in few days the Court was sill'd with foreign Princes,
whom either the tie of a long observed league of amity, or a neerenesse in
blood to Basilius, at such a time brought thither, to congratulate with him; or
were such whose honour-thirstie minds hunted after occasions to make known
their skill in acts of Chivalrie.

And now was the Marriage day come, when Pamela (attyred in the stately
ornament of beauteous Majesty, ledd by the constant forwardnes of a virtuous
mind, waited on by the many thoughts of the forepassed crosses in her love,
which now made up a perfect harmony in the pleasing discord of indeer'd
affection) was brought to Church: whom soon after, her sister Philochea (being
in the same degree of happiness, clad in the bashful innocence of an
unspotted soul, guided by the shamefac't desire of her Pyrocles satisfaction,
attended on by many Graces of a mild cheerfulness) followed; both equally
admired, both equally looked upon.

The Temple (where-to in triumph Beauty and Majesty were ledd prisoners by
the famous sisters) was a fit dwelling place for the Arcadian Deities; fenced
from the Sun and Winds too free access, by many ranks of even grown even
set trees: near which, in divided branches, ran two clear streams, whose
sweet murmr (as they tumbled over their bed of pibble stones) did much adorn
the religious solitariness of that place. And, that nothing should be wanting
that might set forth the careful judgment of the builder, it was seated in
such a near distance from the Palace, as might not presently bury the
gloriousness of the show, nor cloy the beholders with the tediousness of the
sight. In the way, on both hands, were many altars, on which the crowned
intralls of the much-promising sacrifices were laid. At the door the two
sisters were received by as many Virgins, attired in a white Lawn liverie,
with ^arlands on their heads of Lillies and Roses intermixed, holding in their
left hands a pair of Pigeons, the grateful offering to the Queen of Love.
Soon after, the accustomed Rites in the Arcadian nuptials being ended, the
King and Evarchus (with the rest of the Princes) returned unto a stately
Palace, sumptuously furnished; where both Art and Nature seemed to be at
variance, whether should bestow most ornaments to enrich so rare a work:
seated where the earth did rise a little (as proud to be the supporter of so
curious a building) by mean whereof, the sight had freedom to overlooke a
large territory; where the green level of the Arcadian Plains, beautified
by the intercourse of many Forests, represented the delightful mixture of a
civil Wilderness. The building of Marble, where, whether the Art in carving
into many forms, the in-vaine-resisting hardness of the stone, the cunning
in knitting these dis-joynted members, or the invention in contriving their
several rooms, did excel; was hard to be judged of.

The inside also might well be the inner part of ^o glorious an outside: for,
besides the well-matcht largeness of the rooms, and lightsome pleasantness
of the vvindowes; it was all hung with the choice rareness of farr-fetcht
Arras, in which the ingenious workman, with the curious pensill of his little
Needle, had limm'd the dumme records of revived Antiquity. Here did he present
the memorable siege of Thebs, where the ruins of her vvalls seemed yet to
hang, and make the beholders fear the downfall of the lively stones. There
you might see how cunningly he had expres't the constrained flight of the
Trojan Prince, and the cruel sacrifice of enraged Dido's love: Nor was the
story of Silla forgotten, who there stood before Minos with the present of her
fathers fatal hayre^ while you might perceive, by his bent brows and
disdainful countenance, the just reward of her unnatural attempt. With these
and others, wherein cost and invention strove for the masterie, were the
Hangings adorned: yet these many Stories did so stealingly succeed each other,
that the most curious observers eye (though his admiration might dwell on each
piece) could find no cause of stay, until he had overlookt them all. But
neither these, nor what Art or Nature could have added, did set forth so much
the Palace, as the graceful presence of the Arcadian sisters; whose beauties,
till now, of long time had borne a part with their troubled minds, in a sweet
pilgrimage to a happy event: And therefore at this present so far disburdened
of those thoughts, as 'twas to be settled in the most desired enjoying of
unspeakable bliss, the imagination would needs persuade, if it were possible,
were bettered.

Dinner being set and ended, while the Knights, (who, to honor that day with
Tilting, and to show what they dared and could affect in the service, as they
thought, of unresistable beauties) were putting on their Armor, there entered
the Hall a Page, who with submissive humbleness, told the King, he was sent
from his Master the naked Knight, who desired there to be received as a
Challenger, to eternize, as the justness of his cause required, the famous
memory of his deceased Mistress Hellen the Queen of Corinth. Basilius much
pitying the before unheard death of so excellent a Queen, willed the Page to
relate the circumstance; which being strange in it self, and of so great a
subject, wrought a passionate willingness in the hearers to be attentive.

After that fortune (said he) had bestowed by the conquest of Amphialus, at
Cecropia's Castle, the victory on his adversary the black Knight: this Queen
(having long time, by the command of Love, her inward Tyrant, made all Greece a
Stage for her wandering passions) at length went thither; where the end of her
search was the beginning of her sorrow^s. Finding the curtains of eternal
night, ready to close up his eyes, who (in the voyage her affection made) had
always been the Port she steered too: yet hoping she knew not what, that if
perhaps Proserpine should meet in Elysium his departed soul, she would in
mere compassion of her sorrow, send it back to reinhabite her ancient seat;
she carried the life-little-desiring body to Corinth, where at that time
lived an aged man, by name Arteli^, one whose fortunate experience in
desperate cures, had made famous. Him, by the powerful command of his Queen,
and the humble teare^ of a still-mistrusting lover, she conjures to employ the
uttermost of his skill, in preserving him in whom she lived. Some time there
was, ere his vital spirits, almost now proved strangers to their wonted
mansion, would accept the tie of hospitality: but when the hand of Art had
taught them courte^ie, and that each sense, though faintly, did exer^ise his
charge, Amphialus returning to himself, from that sweet ignorance of cares,
wherein he lived, began to question in what estate the Castle was against the
besiegers, thinking he had alwa^ been there, when Hellen entered the room, with
a countenance where beauty appeared through the clouds of care and fear of
his danger: Her the double and deeply wounded patient, (bearing still about
him the inward picture of Philoclea, whom long I have heard, in vain, he
loved) thought to be the same Saint, the remembrance of whom returned, together
with his vvandring soul, from which it was inseparable. Now therefore with
a laughing look (the true Herald of what he suffered) Lady, said he, though
the vvelcome harbinger of a neere-follovving death has provided this body
(while it was mine, alvvay devoted to your service) as a lodging for his
Master an ever-certaine guest; yet when I pass to the Elizian Plains (if any
memory there remain of this world of comfort, you now vouchsafe, heavens
knows, your faithful though unfortunate servant) I shall never cease to pay
the eternal tribute of thanks to vvell-deserving death, who (with his
presence) brings the happiness in life denied me.

The Queen, with a pensive silence, sorrowing she stood to act the
counterfeit of her rival, and still desirous to enjoy the sweet speech of her
revived Amphialus; was like a Passenger, whom the loud command of the rough
Winds had forced ^o wander through the unevenness of the deep furrowed Seas,
now in sight of land, equally distracted, between the desire to leave this his
unnatural habitation, where each vvave seems to be the proud messenger of
destruction, and fear to approach it, being jelous of his hard entertainment
on the rockie shore. Thus did she continue (fixed in a doubtful imagination)
loath to interrupt his pleasing speech, and more then grieved he meant not her
whom he spoke to; until Amphialus (strengthening his newly recovered senses
with the conceited presence of Philoclea) found his error, and then with a
look on his mistaken object (which he could not make disdainful, because his
happy thoughts had once adored it for Philoclea) he suddenly fell into a
deadly trance: whereat Hellen (feelingly suffering in his danger) ran to him,
and bedewing his even then lovely face with the loving oblation of her many
tears, she together poured forth the most passionate plaints that love could
invent, or grief utter^ so as a while, this accident, overthrowing the fabric
of her halfe-built comfort with the suddennnesse of so unlookt for an assault;
constrained her (with bemoning his case) to forget the ca^e of his safety.
but, being withdrawn by her servants, the indisposition of her body, caused
her a while to entertain in bed the fever of her affectionate sorrow.

In mean time Amphialus, by the skillful care of Artelio, was again brought
to enjoy that, whose loss he would account his chiefest happiness, and
faintly vvithdrawing the cover that obscured his vveake sight, and settling his
look upon Artelio; Father, said he, if you felt the inward agonies of my
tormented soul, as you see the desperate state of my low-brought body, I
assure my self you would not be so inhumane, there to employ your endeavors,
where when they have wrought their effect, they serve only to confirm the
memory of forepassed calamity, with the growing apprehension of future
misfortune: but since my destinies have so set down, that the whole course of
my life should be inevitably disastrous, I must think my Tragedy is not yet
acted, though what worse than has befalne me cannot be imagined, or what may
be kept in store (more than I have passed) far exceeds my apprehension,
though not my expectation.

Here he began to run over his unfortunate love to Philoclea, the killing of
Parthenia, his overthrow in the encounter with the black knight; inserting
many more disgraces, which, the most envious of his glory, would not have
cast as aspersions on his well-knowne fame. Thus with the thought that Fate
(whose working he could not limit) had reserved him for more mischief, he
suffered his wounds to be cured: And soon after, walking one evening, as his
manner was, in the Garden, he chose a time, as he thought, unespied by any, to
convey himself through a back door; and there finding his horse (which his
Page had brought by his appointment) he rid away, whither he knew not, and much
cared not, so he might leave her whose affection deserved a more courteous
farewell. But alas! when she heard of his going, what tongue is able to express
her sorrow, in whom the equally tormenting passion^ of grief and despair were
lifted to their uttermost height.

Two days since the departure of Amphialus posted away, striving in vain to
overtake their irrecoverable fellows; and now the third was come, to be a
prologue to the following Tragedy, when Hellen (slaking the violent course of
her incessant plaints) gave occasion to her servants to be less mistrustfull
of her actions, thinking that time began to wear away her sorrows. But she
(as by the event was gathered) using this as a policy to rid her self of the
cumber of careful attendance, when (now her truce, in show, with sorrow, and
the restraint of her plaints had wrought the effect she desired) taking her
trusty servant Mylama with her, and leaving a letter with Lada (who^, besides
Mylama, she only trusted with this secret) which upon the first knowledge of
her flight should be given to Drenus the chief of her council; wherein she
excused her secret stealing away by a vow passed to Apollo, in such manner to go
a pilgrimage to Delphos. She put her self on her journey, having an army of
passions for her convoy, led by Love and waited on by Desire, in hope of what
she knew was hopeless, yet often checking her despairing foresight, with such
unlikely possibilities, as affection (upon these occasions) is wont to supply.

Many days she had not wandered (changing places, to renew her companions in
sorrow) when coming into a pleasant valley, where, of each side, many trees
(in the green leaved mantle of their summer liverie) did apparel two
neighbor mountains, where some Sunburned sapless pines by the adva^tage of
the ground (like little in themselves deserving birth only enobled men)
over-topp'd the strait up-raised Cedar, the stock of self-begun honor. Through
this flowrie plain ran a manie-headed crystal current, that did indent the
earth as it smoothly glyded by, to make the obligation of friendship between
them more firm: and where it fame-like increased by travel, there (as it was
the natural, so) it seemed to have been the politic body of the state of
Springs; such was the constant care of the fountain Magistrates, and such the
well-agreeing union of the watery Commons. Here she stayed (invited by
solitarines, the best repose for vvaried sorrow) yet giving no respit to her
mind, she spoke nothing but Amphialus, or of Amphialus. O Amphialus, did she
say: and to this invocation the flattering Nymph (that always seconds what is
spoken) did join the like of her own; and Hellen, delighted to hear the
sound of so sweet a name beaten back upon her, for a time sealed up her lips,
listening (with attentive silence) what Echo would have further said. but she
(who of all the powers of a reasonable soul, only had a memory and a tongue
only serviceable to that use) together gave over to reflect her borrowed
language, expecting (with like stilness) her further speech. But Hellen, not
able longer to restrain the overflow of her panting heart, began to cry out,
Unkind Amphialus. This also did the Echo repeat. But she hearing, by the
rebound of the words, Amphialus accused; Discourteous Nymph, said she, and how
is Amphialus unkind? can the harmony of such excellence admit so foul a
fault to bear a part with his virtues? Yet, woe is me, he is unkind: could his
hard heart else suffer this love of his, (which I only name, because it is the
only part worth naming in me) thus long unregarded? Could not my Crown
(crowned in being a footstool to Amphialus) have purchased some respect? Alas
no: how could unhappie H^llen expect the Fates reserved so great a blessing in
store for her?

She had not long debated the reasons of her misfortune, when Rinatus (the
only brother to Timotheus, but younger by many years) chanced to pass that
way: a man on whom Fame had bestowed, and deservingly, the name of Valiant; yet
of disposition so mischievously cruel, and ambitiously proud, that where his
deeds might well have claimed so great an honor, there his conditions (as well
weighed) brought a reproachful burden to the balance of his reputation. He,
(his father dying young, and unwilling to dismember his estate, and unable
otherwise to satisfy the hopes of his sons ambition) hearing of the vvarres
of Laconia, went thither; where soon he purchased the opinion of a man
resolute to undertake, and fortunate to execute what he had undergone: and
serving under Eborbas (chief co^mander for the King) because of the sympathy
of humors between them (whereby Nature did insinuate for Rinatus, and taught
him flattery without dissimulation) he grew great in his favor. Soon after,
this Eborbas, in a conflict between him and the Helots, being mortally
vvounded; yet in death, careful of the vvelfare of his country, recommded
this Rinatus (partly for his good liking of him, but principally for his
experience in vvarres, and well-seconded judgeme^t) to the King: who, though
with some opposition, the country men repining at his (a strangers)
advanceme^t, after his trusty Eborba's death, preferred him to the same place.
his discharge of which, outwent so far the envy of the jealous Noblemen, that
well might their King and they, in the death of the valiant Eborbas, deplore
the loss of a private man, but must confess, that his watchful care and
undanted well-ordered courage did survive in this their General.

In this esteem he had scarce lived a year, when hearing of his brother and
nephews death, together with his undoubted right to the large territory
which his brother in his life time had enjoied, he notwithstanding continued in
the charge to which he was lately advanced; framing, in his conceit, his
new-acquired greatness but as a step to clime the soveraigntie of Laconia,
which being elective, he thought the easier to be compas'd, having, by his
bounteous affability, gained ^he hearts of the soldiers, and being already
possessed of the chief Forts (the best strength of the country) wherein he had
placed such, who had their devotions linked to his will, because they ought him
the benefit of their creation. But finding the accomplishment of these
practices to depend upon the death of the King, which his youth promised was
unlikely soon to happen, and fearful to draw on the discovery of his
practices, by seeking any secret means to make him away, who^ the vvatchful
eye of dutiful observance did vvarrant secure from any traiterous plots; he
solicites the King to dispense with his presence, who (seeing the ground of
his journey to be the just cause of his long-deferr'd revenge, for Timotheus
his brother, and Philoxenus his nephews death. Now a peace was lately
concluded with the Helots, and therefore his absence the more excusable) upon
condition of a speedy return, though unwilling, yet for his satisfaction,
grants his request: who now on his journey, and having in his way to cross
this valley, met the unfortunate Queen, whom, though her habi^e might
disguise, her words (overheard) did assure Rinatus his willingness to
believe, that she was the same she so often spoke her self to be, the
unfortunate Hellen.

A while he stood doubtful of the person, a while amazed at so fortunate an
encounter, and a long time perplexed what punishment his revenge would judge
fit for (the conceited heinousness of) his brother and nephews death. At
length the Queen (now first vvithdrawing her thoughts from that object,
vvhereto affection in sweetest contemplation had bound them, and suffering her
mind, before retired within it self, now to be informed by her servants
senses) seeing this stranger near her, began, as her manner was, to find by
inquiry what he knew of Amphialus. Wicked woman, replied Rinatus, the
all-seeing Justice has now delivered thee to receive fit punishment for
Philoxenus and Timotheus death: and using no more words, presently caused her
to be mounted on horseback, prolonging her life to make her death the more
miserable. Thus far has Mylama discovered, who, poor Lady, was there
left, most cruelly beaten, to be the reporter of Rinatus revenge, and her
Mistress hard hap.

The last act of this Tragedy, my Master had the fortune to know, by one of
trust and great esteem in the Court of Laconia, to which Rinatus had conveyed
Hellen, where, for a time, she was honorably entertained, finding no want
but of command and liberty: the King, belike, fearing the power of the
vvronged Corinthia^S, preser^ing her as a sure Card for a dead lift. But when
he understood that one Tenarus (a man apt to practice innovations, and at th^s
time able, when the many-headed multitude vvanted the awful presence of their
sovereign) took upon him the government, pretending a title to the crown as
descended from those, from who^ Hellens ancestors (as he alleged) had
traitorously forced it. Then did the Tyrant of Laconia, finding the way secure
for his mischievous practice, vehemently importuned by Rinatus, and urged
forward by the politic wickedness of his own desire to pleasure the new
King, secretly cause Hellen to be poisoned. Such was the end of this great
Queen, justly beloved of all who heard the fame of her virtues, and therefore
justly to be deplored of all, who hear the unredeemeable loss of so many
perfections.

Basilius and the rest of the Princes were much moved with so tragical a
story, especially Musidorus, who (in search of Pyrocles) having the fortune to
see her, could witness, that though fame had borrowed all men's mouths to
proclaim her many excellencies, yet it was far from doing right to her
desert. But this was no fit lodging for pity to dwell in, where joy had so
great command. The Messenger therefore being permitted to part, with free
leave for his Master to enter the lists, Judges were appointed, and the
Challenge proclaimed.

The Challenger understanding of the Kings liking of his demand, came forth of
his Pavillion with Armor so lively representing nakedness, vvounded in many
places, (where the staunchlesse blood, in the course the vvorkeman had
allotted it, seemed to dropp destruction) that many thought a madness had
possessed him (so unarmed, so wounded) to present himself in such a trial,
where a surer defense, and a sounder body were more needful. Before him went
six, as Savages, bearing the Lances for his first courses; who, coming within
distance to be heard, did sing these following Verses.

Too soon you fled from hence to that fair place,
The happy period of a well-run Race:
Too late I stay, in griefe's eternal night,
To do this penance for my over sight.
Once let me dye, let not my dying life
Prolong my woes, and keep my thoughts at strife:
Let him that did offend your heavenly eyes,
Now please your anger with selfe-sacrifice.
Then one of them reaching him a lance, he began his course against Tyro
Prince of Andria, famous for his constant love to the fair Lydia, now married
and Queen of Epire, and ever fortunate in the course of his adventures: but
here his fortune gave place to virtue, or rather joined with her to assist the
naked Knight; for at the third encounter he was put beside his Saddle, much
bruised in body, and no less afflicted in mind.

The next that supplied his place, was Pawsanias, a Macedonian, one who in his
late wars had done Evarchus faithful service; and now, thinking to be as
successful in this enterprise, had put on Armor to do honor to his Mistress:
but his first course compelled him to acknowledge he was deceived, seeing
himself fall so far short of his expectation.

To him succeeded Nicanor, a Corinthia^ knight, advanced by the new King: one
extremely confide^t of himself, because never tried, and now very forward,
fearing to be preve^ted of the honor, for which already, in conceit, he had
triumphed at Corinth, with the great applause of the people, and the good
liking of the King. But the naked Knight, at second course, cut off both his
life and imagined trophee: for, couching his lance, and allotting it in his
course a just descent, rightly levelled by his well-judging experience, it met
with Nicanors sight, and passing through that weak resistance, it pearc't his
right eye, and with it his brain; so as Nicanor fell down, forgetful both of
his forethought fame and following reproach. With this adventure the Tilting
that day ended; the Sun, with loose rays, posting to his Western home, and
the naked Knight retired himself to his Pavillion, whence he sent his Page,
who humbly, for his Master, entreated that his unwillingnesse to be known,
should excuse the omission of his duty to the King.

Thus that night drew on, which, to them who enjoyed de^ight, seemed to have
put on all her sails to be the speedier in passing over. But far other was
the naked knights apprehension: he (who made her ugly darkness a pattern of
the sorrow his afflicted soul endured) thought she was becalmed in the Sea of
his misfortune. At length Phoebus, weary of his importunity, made have to
distribute his grateful light, to his care-tyr'd senses; and he, as soon
embracing the smallest show of comfort, put on his Armor. About two hou^es
after the Judges being set, and Basilius and Evarchus (with the rest of the
Court) present, Leonatus the young King of Pontus (who had bin there to
acknowledge his beholdingnes to them, whom he was deservingly bound to) took
the field. His Armor was of a dark color, through which many flames seemed
to break out, as when the clouds, great in labor with exhalations, at
length give way to their more violent power: His three first Courses promised a
more happy event, than Fortune meant he should enjoy; for (having performed
them with a well-ordered firmness in his seat, and a moving constancy in the
carriage of his lance, to the great delight of the beholders) the fourth time
he was dismounted: whose disgrace Pyrocles was ready to revenge, but he was,
by a secret look from Philoclea, commanded the contrary. Then Telamon,
Phelauceas and Diremus felt, with little advantage in Fortune, the like
success.

Thus most part of that morning the naked Knight, with little resistance, had
the best against all comers, which most of the lookers on, with public
acclamation, did testify: but he, having given over the use of himself to
sorrow, sometimes by the careless shaking of his head, did let them know, they
burdened his desert with the unpleasing weight of his praise; and staying a
while on horseback, expecting the next adventurer, with such a demeanor of
himself as (though it did accuse him of much grief) could not conceal the
grace of his stately presence. But when he saw none ready to take the field,
with an humble bend taking his leave of the king, he softly trotted toward his
Tent, not so much to repo^e his body as to give a quiet way to the assaults of
his mind. At length, when all the beholders expectation were almost wearied,
there entered the Lists a Lady, attended only by one Page, who having lighted,
presently went toward the place where Basilius sat; where first kneeling,
then taking away a black Scarffe (which grief had hyr'd to join with her
self, in eclipsing the excellent feature of a most fair face) she began to
speak: but Basilius and Genecia hastily ran to embrace Hellen the Queen of
Corinth, for this was she. Great was the joy for her revived presence, and
great the desire to know the means of her sa^etie: But she (accounting these
gratulations cumbersome, and the relation of her adventures tedious) fixing her
watery eyes on Basilius: Great King, I am (said she) that unfortunate Hellen,
sometime Queen of Corinth, now both deprived of crown and kingdom, by
Tenarus. Yet why should I mention this, as fit to be inserted among my greatest
misfortunes? The cause why now I come, is my care of Amphialus his safety, in
whom I live, to whose disdain I have vowed the tribute of my constant love:
He (alas, why should I live to speak it?) not long since, following the
course of his adventures, came to Amasia, where he was made prisoner, and
carried to Dunalbus Prince of that country; whose brother it was Amphialus his
fortune to kill in rescue of a Lady, to whom he would have offered
dishonorable violence. These news came to mine ears (to add more to many
miseries) at that time when I chanced to be at Delphos, pouring forth my
heartiest devotions for my most beloved, my most unkind Amphialus: but the
pitying God, either to stay my hands from the execution they intended (but to
what end might that be, that God knows; no time can unbend my affection) or (as
heaven grant it may be) in commisseration of my case, thus comforted me; Hellen
ret^rne, a naked Knight shall find
Rest for thy hopes, and quiet to thy mind.
Thus far have I wandered, ledd by that divine promise, in pursuit of such a
one, but no where can I find a happy event to confirm that Oracle: yet dare I
not despair, having so high a warrant; nor hope, having so bad success.

You are fortunately come, said the King. This Knight, whose skill in Arms
has made your well-deserving virtues famous, may be that man, pointed out by
the finger of heaven, to release Amphialus, who both in name and armor
represents a naked Knight. O no, said the Queen, it cannot be expected that
Apollo would leave so plain a way for us to track out the footsteps of his
obscure mysteries. Madam, replied Basilius, (having first placed her in a
Chair by him) the all-seeing providence, with whom the ends of all things are
present, is sometimes pleased to cast forth the Emblem of our destinies, so
strangely hidden in the covert of ambiguous words, that doubtless it serves to
beget nothing but matters of distrust, and labyrinths of errors, where the
imagination a thousand vvayes may be led astray. Of this you have a present
proof, confirmed by my experience. and sometimes the same Justice unfolds the
secret of our fate, and plainly lets us know the mystery of our fortune: yet
even that plaineness, to the curious search of our stil-mistrusting brain,
becomes a reason sufficient to enforce us to a contrary belief. This last I
think (if in the interpretation of an Oracle my opinion may be received) is
that mean, whereby Apollo both reveals and hides the author of Amphialus
freedom. This said, he sends presently for the naked knight, who, as soon
obeying the Kings command (as he was completely armed) came before him; to
whom Basilius cheerfully told (as glad to be the reporter of so good news to
him, whose prowess in arms deservingly gained much of his good opinion) of
Hellens being there, together with her desire to employ him in an action the
heavens had also interested him. What is it, replied the naked Knight, that
without such a command I would not endeavor to accomplish for my most dear
Hellen? and then with excess of comfort and astonishment, his vveake limbs
were ready to give over the support of his joy-burdened body; but, being
upheld by Musidorus who stood next him, his overcharged spirits had time to
recollect themselves.

The Queen gathering comfort from his promise, and seeing fair likelihood o^
the Oracles accomplishment; with the oratorie of love, who thinks no words
but his own able to express his mind^ began in this manner. Sir, ill fortune
my awful governesse, as in the most of my actions she is pleased to keep a
hard hand over me, so in this (distrustful belike of my willingness) she
forces me to repeat my wonted lesson of receiving courtesies without power of
requital; making one undeserved favor from you, become a cause of further
beholdingness to you: But the glory that follows your good success in this
adventure (the best spur to set forward brave spirits to noble actions) has
almost assured me, that the love you profess, and a distressed Ladies cause,
need not join petitioners in a request your virtue must be willing to grant.
The reward of your victory, is the releasing of Amphialus; of whom I may
speak, and the world with me, all prayse-worthy things. Madam, replied the
naked Knight, I thought the Gods could not have favored me more, then in
giving you respite of life, and me power to be serviceable to you: but when I
consider the end I must employ my endeavors too, it buries my conceited
happiness in the grave of a certain misfortune. Shall I labor to preserve
that monster of men, whose story (if the world will needs read) contains
nothing but a volume of disasters, and a vain discourse of a few adventures,
cast upon him by the blindness of chance? Shall I hazard my life for him,
against whom, had I lives innumerable, I would venture them all? Shall I live
to make another happy in your favor, and cross mine own desires? No Madam,
I will sooner leave my blood here before you, as a testimony that fear has no
interest in my disobedience to your command, then I will make my after-life
truly miserable in the burden of a hopeless affection. To this the Queen a
while in tears, as if her eyes strove to speak for her, made a silent
answer: but when her sighs had breathed forth the overcharge of her breast,
first she kneeled, then faintly said; O eternal president of this Court of
cares, when will thy just pity co^miserate my distress! Alas Sir, what new
way have the Gods found to vent their malice on me! have I made disdain my
only mishap, and must now affection to mewards be another undeserved
misfortune? Behold Sir, and if you can, with pity, a Queen, borne to
command, a suppliant at your feet, begging what goodness sollicites you to
grant; Release Amphialus: and if your jealousy thinks he has too much
interest in my love, restore him to the world that wants him; I will vow a
Virgins life. Stay, virtuous Queen, replied the naked Knight, and lifting up
his Beaver, Receive, said he, thou best of women thy overjoyed Amphialus.

The Queen, as when the Ocean swells with the rage of a tempest, if on a sudden
these blasts be appeased, yet the proud waves, mindful of their forepast
injury, and indisposed to so speedy a reconcilement, some while retain the
rough remembrance of the vvindes malice: so were her thoughts, before moved by
the storm of despair, though now she had cause of contented quiet, on a
sudden, incapable of so unlook't for a happiness; first doubt, then amazement,
lastly excess of joy, by succession were admitted to the Helm of her
distressed heart. But when joy had once got to be the Steers-man, his want of
practice (by his long absence from that employment) soon brought a confusion:
here the warm tears of sorrow, there the cold dropps of a present comfort,
did strive whether would show himself most officious in drowning her pale
blushing cheeks. At length they both, no longer able to resist this powerful
invasion of their minds (as by mutual consent) fell, the one intwin'd in the
others arms, and made the earth happy in bearing such matchless lovers: But
their senses being soon restored to their wonted function, after some
passionate words (to which their eyes and touch of their hands gave the life of
expression) Amphialus, divided into many minds by the turbulent working of his
thoughts (turning toward his uncle) with his eyes fixed on the ground, stood
with the grace of a man condemned, who, having led a loathsome life in an ugly
dungeon, is now brought to a freedom o^ looking upon the open air, yet sees
the day is but a Taper to light him to his execution. Of the one side he was
brought from the hell of despair, wherein he lived, in the assurance of
Hellens death, to the certainty of her life and presence: of the other, what
was his treason to his uncle, to expect but an infamous death, and a divorce
from his newborn happiness. The shame also of a crime so foul as his
rebellion, was not the least torment to his mind, unwillingly beaten from a
settled course of virtue by Cecropia's practices. At length (when these
thoughts, that almost overcame all the powers of life in him, were themselves
overcome by his resolution) casting himself at Basilius his feet, he thus
said. Great Sir, if treason in a subject, and unnaturalness in a nephew be
punishable, here you have before you a fit exercise for your justice: I am that
subject, whose rebellion interrupted the contented quiet of my Kings solitary
life, and brought him to behold the bloody tragedy of a civil discension in
his divided State: I am that nephew, whom a vvilfull disobedience made a
traitor to the neernesse of his blood. Hither did I come ( Orestes-LIKE
tormented by the inward fright of my guilty conscience) with my blood to vvash
away (if good fortune, in the defense of the cause I undertook, would draw
death upon me) the stains of such unpardonable faults^ but now that I have
found what I least looked for (and then he cast a side look on Hellen) for her,
I confess, I should desire to live, if your just indignation might find
mercy for so heinous offenses. which I will not strive to mitigate (how ever
justly I may:) for I would think such faults ill excused, with which (to
ease my self) I must have burdened my nearest friends.

Basilius first graciously lifting him from the ground, Nephew, replied he, did
I retain the memory of your youthful oversights, this your virtuous
acknowledgement were sufficient to bear them away: but long since I have
buried in oblivion, the thought of your rashness, because I knew (by what after
happened) that the Gods had made you an instrument to work their ends. it were
injury therefore to question his actions, whose will was not his own, being
overrul'd by their all-co^manding decree. No, nephew, I do not only pardon
these transgressions, but freely also do resign all such possessions as your
father held in Arcadia, taken from you in the last war, and now in the hands
of Philanax. Live happy in your choice: I shall be proud of our alliance with
the crown of Corinth, and shall rejoice to see the succession continue in our
blood. This said, he ledd him to Genecia, then to Evarchus: but when he came to
Musidorus, This, nephew, is that black knight (said he) who, at your last
meeting, gave such evide^t proof of his unco^querable valor: This is Musidorus,
the Prince of Thessaly, whom the Gods have bestowed as a blessing on my
daughter Pamela. Amphialus now assured by the kings speech, unto whose hand the
honor of his conquest had fallen (for doubt had long tormented him, that some
baser hand had reapt the glory of his victory;) Prince Musidorus, said he, my
hard success in our last encounter much perplexed me: not that my confidence of
my self, was lifted to such an arroga^t presumption, to think my strength and
skill in Arms matchless; but that it grieved me, an unknown Knight (one whom
the world might think had concealed his name, lest together with him, his bad
fortune in trials of that kind, might be discovered) should have the better
of me. But now that I know to whose lot my victory has fallen, I do not
only bring an excuse, but an honor, from the worthiness of the conqueror.

Courteous Amphialus, replied the Prince, whose side the advantage of Fortune
did then incline to, if it may be determined; with greater reason, and more
desert should the honor be give^ you, than bestowed on me: but however, such
trial I then made of your manhood, that hereafter I shall desire to be of your
part. Worthy Prince, said Amphialus, your virtue will always choose to be of the
weaker side: and so turning to Philoclea, Divine Lady, said he, in your
excellent choice of the famous Pyrocles, you have (besides the happiness
gained to your self, for which the world may envy you) showed me the way to
my best hopes, by graffing my affection in the stock of my Helle^s constancy.
Dear cousin, replied Philoclea, I am glad it was in my power, and your good
fortune so much to better your choice in so excellent a remove. And so casting
a bashful look toward Pyrocles^ Sir, said she, we may join in
thankesgiving: this is my cousin, whose virtuous disposition during our
imprisonment, was our safest defense against my aunt Cecropia's cruelty. I do
acknowledge it, said Pyrocles, and besides this favor (in which we have a
common interest) Sir, I must crave pardon for a vvound given you at such a
time, when belike you made Patience your only defense. Amphialus stood ^ith
his eye fixed on Pyrocles: for his memory supplied him with a confused
remembrance of such a face. Zelmane he could not take him to be; her sex and
this change, at their first birth destroyed these apprehensions. Pyrocles, his
heart swore he was not, whose youth and beauty God vvot were no fit live^ie
for such atchieveme^ts as the world famed him for. Thus a while he
continued, troubled with the uncert^intie of conjectures, until Pyrocles
(happily conceiving the cause of his amazement) stopped his further admiration,
by letting him know, that the then Zelmane was the now Pyrocles. Whereat
Amphialus, as one newly wak't out of a dream, cried out, Anaxius: Anaxius,
said he, '^was the Prince of Macedon (not a woman) overcame thee. Wheresoever
thy soul be, let it keep this time festival, as the birthday of thy glory.
And so, after mutual embraces, together with the rest of the Princes, they
entered the Palace: where, when they were seated, the eyes of all the company
were set on the Queen of Corinth, longing to know the story of her strange
fortune, now a Queen, then a prisoner, now alive, then dead; which she, at
Basilius entreaty, with a majesty (which her fortune could not change,
because 'twas innate) thus declared.

Great Sir; that I was made prisoner by Rinatus, and by him carried to
Laconia, Fame (together with the news of my supposed death) belike has
brought you: the rest, since you esteem worthy your hearing, I shall esteem
worthy my relation.

There yet governes (and then did) among the Nobility of Laconia, one Creton,
a man elected to the crown rather to recompense the desert of his ancestors
than for his own virtues, beloved and borne with for the same reason: such an
everlasting monument, of it self, can goodness leave to posterity. To him
when I was brought, my guilt and my guilty self, with the best oratorie
Rinatus had, was made known; who with vehement importunity desired, that my
speedy punishment (as my fault) should be terrible. The King answered, Though
he found his demands reasonable, and such to which he was sure there could be
no opposition made, yet he thought it fit the Nobility should be acquainted
with so weight a cause^ before he proceeded further in it; and so for this
time (being committed to the charge of Partinax, Chamberlain to the King) I
was dismissed. The next day, the Council being sent for, my cause ran the
hazard of many opinions: some thought it fit I should dye; and though
Justice, said they, might not dispense with such severitie, yet it was fit to
please Rinatus, one who had deserved well, and had the power (if otherwise he
were dealt with) to revenge his injury. Others (the more in number, and
esteemed the vviser, because the King held with them) opposed this sentence,
alleging, so inconsiderate an act might call the safety of Laconia in
question: for, said they, shall we think the Corinthians so degenerate, that
being justly incenc't against us, they will not endeavor to revenge the death
of their Prince, in shade of whose reign they enjoy that peace and plenty
their neighbors envy them for? and if they stir in it, what people is so
barbarous, whom the justness of their cause will not procure into the society
of this war? See then if a private man's satisfaction, be to be compared to
these ensuing dangers: no, let her live, and when the Gods do otherwise
dispos^ of her, let her death come without the ruin of Laconia. This
determined, a new doubt arose, how I should be disposed of: They that before
thought it expedient I should dye (now that opinion was put by) concluded that
it was best to send me to Corinth with an honorable convoy, so to tie them, by
a perpetual bond of gratitude, to be their friends, whom they so much feared
to be their enemies. the rest, to gratify the king, whose affection they
perceived to lean that way (and well assured it was an advice too profitable
to be rejected that gained a kingdom) though his promise after the Q. death
(who not long before left him a widower) had bin pas't to Lemnia a fair and
virtuous La: daughter to my keeper Partinax; yet they wished, if so he pleased,
my crown might vvin me to his bed, little doubting but I had thought it an
egregious felicity to be so graced. The King after many protractions, at
length, as if he were wrought to it (by a desire to satisfy the Nobility
rather then self-will) declares his mind, to be directed by them: which once
known, behold the flattery of Court began to fawn upon me; who more observed,
who more admired? only Rinatus, much impatie^t of this my greatness (in Court)
uttered some words in choler, which made known (by further inquiry) a
conspiracy of his against the King; so as soon after (the rather to give me,
whom they studied to please, satisfaction) he was beheaded.

But long it was not before Fortune, neither constant to my happy adversity,
nor adverse felicity, had brought thither (sent by the usurper Tenarus) a
wise, but wicked instrument, who^ he called his Ambassador, who labored by the
policy of his high reaching brain, and the secret practices of his
undermining gold, so far for his Masters ends, that now in an instant the
stil-changing face of Court-respect began to frown upon me; my death was
decreed, and (until the time were appointed for it) my self made a close
prisoner in my accustomed jail. But the King, chiefly moved with the hope of
my crown, and drawn by a self-conceit of liking to my sorrow, (which perhaps
had a sympathy with his melancholy) would needs continue the suit of his
affection to me, though he durst not interpose his overrul'd authority for my
liberty. Thus for a time did I live, accompanied by some few vvho^ the king
might trust with his inte^ts; he in show courting his first love Lemnia, and
making that a pretense to come private to her ^athers house near adjoining to
Court. But indeed (as at that time he could have no reason to dissemble with
me) this kindness came another way: which Lemnia suspecting, and being as
far gone in affection to this double-dealing King, as he was in the
profession of a little-regarded love to me, her vvatchfull eye soon found the
advantage of a happy opportunity to hear himself speak his own deceit;
with such a heart-burning vehemency, that Lemnia (who had placed her self
unknown to either of us, behind the hangings) scarce could suppress her
entry, to play a part in our Comedy of affection. But to his dema^ds truth
answered for me plainly, that death, in whose expectation I lived, would be
far more pleasing, then the marriage he thought so reasonable: adding
vvithall to my speech, much of Lemnia's praise, which she deserved, to instruct
his eyes that indeed were blind, in his choice.

But when he parted, vowing to be severe in my punishment unless I resolved
better at his next coming, behold Lemnia (with tears in her ei^s) fell at my
feet: and when she saw amazeme^t in my looks, with a kind bashfulnesse
taking my hand, and rising with that help; Virtuous Lady, said she, if ever
you have been acquainted with the tyranny of all-commanding affection, to
that Judge I appeal, who (though courtesy and good manners oppose him) will
find my fault excusable: This man, who in your presence has been the trumpet
of his own inconstancy, first with the vehement protestation of his sincere
affection, won me in gratefulnes to meet him, in the recompense of his unknown
dissimulatio^, if such then it were; and now, with the good liking of the
State, were the solemnities appointed for our marriage, when your arrival
croft those hopes, and drew his thoughts to their natural temper of
unstayednes. But since I have found by this fortunate unmanerlinesse, your
answers so resolutely opposed to his demands, henceforth I vow to work your
freedom, or bring my self to perish with you. Her fault found an easy
pardon at the tribunal she appealed too: I thank't her (as there was good
cause) for her desire of my good, only I wished, if my freedom could not be
procured without danger to her, she would not heap miseries upon me, by
joining her self a companion in my disaster. She comforts me with the hope of
a better event: and to bring her intention to a wished success, she vvins my
unvvillingnes to show some favor to the King; which next day I did, having
placed Lemnia where she had placed her self the day before, to be a witness
to our conference^ for otherwise perhaps her love this second time might have
egged her suspicion, already prone that way, to the distrust of a practice
betwixt us. And happy was this forced dissimulatio^: for the king not long
before his coming to me, had received advertisement that the usurper of
Corinth had levied an army, and set forth many ships to invade Laconia,
making the delay of my promised execution the pretense of this vvarre^ which
being also known to the Nobility, they (who together with this foreign
enemy feared the rebellion of the Helots, who always lay in vvait for an
opportunity of such advantage) now, more then ever, began to solicit the king
to satisfy so potent an enemy in so just a dema^d. The king well vveighing
the iminent dangers that were to be prevented by my death, and seeing the
little comfort he did enjoy by prolonging of my life, (likely every day to
increase my obstinacy, being none of those lovers that would die for his
disdaining Masters) was ready to deliver me over as a sacrifice for the State
and country; when behold, his sails were filled with a selfe-opinion in my
favor. Born up therefore with the vvings of hope, he returns to Court, where
love (or some indulgent Fate) inspired this project into his head: He calls the
Nobility, and after a long narration of the mischiefs that hung over Laconia,
he desires their advice for prevention. They glad that the only opposer, as
they thought, of their designs, would have recourse to their directions, in
that cause wherein they were jealous of his partaking, after a flatte^ring
insinuation (the common Exordium to men of his place) they concluded that it
was fit Hellen should dye. I doubt it not, said he; nor was it to that end I
sought your counsel, that the necessity of the times, the welfare of our
person, and the preservation of our state required her death: but it much
perplexed me, that our fame should bleed with her, or that the world should say,
the threats of the king of Corinth had enforced us to behead her who^ lately we
were to take to wife. 'Twas this, my Lords, that caused my misinterpreted
resolution hang in suspense: for this I have turned my invention into all
forms, and now behold I have found an even way to lead me between the perrils
of a threatened war, and the ill-bought quiet of an ignominious peace. My will
is, she be brought to Court (for Partinax his house I think not convenient for
this project) and placed here, with such about her as I know most trusty in
such a secret: then, that her keepers at farthest within two days poison her;
which done, we will give it out she dyed of a disease. and to confirm this opinion
in the vulgar, we will honor her death with such funeral pomp as the state
of her life required. Thus shall our cause of dissension with Corinth be taken
away, and we freed from that imputation the world might justly lay upon us.
The Nobility with silent admiration, began to applaud what he had determined,
chiefly Partinax, who (making the common cause his pretense) labored by all
means to confirm a resolution so necessary for his daughter Lemnia's
happiness.

The king having dismissed the Council, acquaints me with these his proceedings,
setting forth with no mean pride, the pregnancie of his own wit, who had
found a way to overreach such graybearded dotards: for, said he, you shall
that night when you are thought to be poisoned, be conveyed hence (by two of
chiefest trust about me) unto my Castle of Nicos. then will I cause a statue,
formed to your proportion, to be coffined up, on which (forsooth) my grave
Council shall solemnly wait, and perform the ob^equies in that ceremony
requisite; mean time you shall live, and live beloved of him who has
undergone this dangerous enterprise, and will do many more to indeer his
affection to you. And when the limms of this dis-joynted State be set again,
you shall be restored to be your self, and to enjoy this Crown of Laconia so
much envied you: till when, I lock these projects in the closet of your
secrecy.

The good king was scarce gone from me, when I made Lemnia of counsel with
me, who se^ing the fitness of the time, being my journey to Nicos was to be
performed in the night, and the easy execution o^ so dangerless an enterprise,
my guard being only two of the kings servants; she gives in charge to a
sufficient number of such vvho^ she knew faithful to her, to meet them midway,
and after they had well beaten my convoy (to discharge them of the suspicion of
their consenting to the fact) to carry me to the next sea port, where there
stayed a ship bound for Delphos; to which I needs would be^d my course. This
being resolved upon, the Lady (equally troubled with the care of my safety,
and the loss of my presence) wept many tears, which I confess had been
ingratitude in me not to second; so as a while sorrow seemed to have flowen
thither to bathe her self in our eyes: but love at length, in both of one
another good, had well near calmed this passion, when the guard, appointed
by the king, was come, and ready to carry me to Court. But why should I,
great Sir, any longer stay you in a story, whose tediousnes I am well assured
has tired you? know therefore, that this means of my safety was as
fortunately executed, as happily contrived; the king not once daring to send to
seek me, lest he should by that discover his own craft used in this dangerous
deluding of the Laconian Noblemen.

But I was scarce a month absent, when he whose eyes held the raines of
his constancy, the object being removed, married (as it was before
determined) the beauteous Lemnia; who now in possession of his love, stick't
not to make known to him this whole matter, which otherwise in her behalf I
was bound to keep secret. Thus sir, if my desire to obey your commands has
made the story of my misfortunes tedious, you may excuse me, since all is done
for your satisfaction.

Fair Queen, replied Basilius, the sweetly delivered strangeness of the
story, would still ravish the hearers with a desire of a further cause of
attentiveness, did not a greater desire in us who know your virtues, hasten
to hear the end of your much pitied distress: and so calling Amphialus to
him, having agreed on the day of marriage between the Queen and him, they all
arose; for now their appetites (growing jealous of the satisfaction their minds
received by the former discourse) began to solicit them in the behalf of
their stomachs.

After dinner, when most of the company began to impe the wings of time with
the feathers of several recreations, Amphialus and Hellen privately went
together into an arbor in the garden, where first with tears (the common
apology of overjoyed affection) they spoke their minds in silence, their
panting hearts (as they embraced) with mutual desire beating their envious
garments, that gave them not l^ave to meet. At length Hellen gracefully shaking
her head, as if she would shake away the drops that (like the morning dew on
full-ripe Cherries) hung on her rosy cheeks: O Amphialus, said she, and then
kissed him, as loath to leave so perfect a sentence without a comma; I will not
say you were unkind, but, and there with his lips (loath belike to accuse him)
she closed up her speech. My sole happiness, replied Amphialus, (softly
wringing her hand) though the foulenes of my fault be no fit subject for her to
speak of, who breathes nothing but goodness, yet I vva^t not an accuser, my
soul sets forth my ingratitude; nor can I yet conceive, how mercy can be so
far removed from justice, as to find a pardon for my offense: but you have
given it, and (if it be any requital) it shall be my after life's study to love
and honor your virtues, as it was hitherto to offend you. It is fit therefore
(said Hellen, with the counterfeit setlednes of Matie) we impose a penance upon
you for your oversight; and this it shall be, that henceforth you neither speak
nor think of that you account your fault: and to help you in obeying my
commands, I must entreat you to keep your mind and tongue for a time busied in
telling me what befell you in your travel since our being at Corinth. and do it
not so niggardly, as if you meant to conceal what fame has so largely blown
abroad: yet if you were exposed at any time to much danger, dwell not there
too long, least I forget I have you here.

Most dear Lady, said Amphialus, to conform my self to your last request,
would make me disobedient to your first command. Shall I begin with my
departure from you? alas, at what time should I more employ my memory and
speech in discovery of my faulty self than now? But I see your eyes begin to
take anger into them, I will no longer insist on mine own accusation.

Know therefore, most constant Lady, that accompanied only with Fidutio my
Page, when I had past the limits of your dominion, at that time of day when the
high mounted Sun makes least shadows, wearied with travel, and desirous of
some shelter from the Suns violent rays; I laid my self under the
protection of an Olive tree, thinking to set my mutinous thoughts at peace, but
it would not be^ these outward signs could not appease the fury of an inward
enemy. Thus I lay, deerly purchasing the little ease of my body with the
affliction of my mind, until mine ears like faithful servants, desirous to
end this dissension between their Master and himself, caused all the powers of
my mind to join in attentivenes: and mine eyes, loath to be out-gone in such
good offices, did look that way from whence the noise came; where I might
discern six men armed, on horseback, carry a fair Lady with them, whose
tears and outcries well showed her indispositio^ to that journey. This sight
moved compassion in me, and pity brought a desire to help her distress: but
my horse (devining belike my intent, and unwilling to leave his food) could by
no means be taken; so that madd with anger, I began to repeat over all the
misfortunes that ever had befaln me, to let this know it wanted no fellows,
when there came posting that way, one who^ (by his have)^ I ghest to have been
of the company gone before. Of him I entreated to know what fault could be so
heinous that might take away the name of injury from so unmanly a violence as
they offered to so beauteous a Lady: but he with a scornful silence smiled,
and would be gone^ and so perhaps he might, had not the narrownes of the way,
and his courteous horse, that would not tread upon me, compelled him to stay.
Whereat his anger burst forth into these threats: Villain, thy want of armor
shall not excuse thee from a death wilfully drawn upon thee; and though there
be no glory, there will be satisfaction in thy overthrowe. Then drawing his
horse a little back, he lighted, and without further complement runs toward
me: but his fury brought him too hastily to his death; for thinking belike his
threatening mouth was able to defend it self, he forgot to put by my sword,
that by good fortune was laid in his way, and so justly his death entered at his
mouth, whose life I think was in his tongue. At his fall Fidutio came in, who
helping to fit on the armor, of which we had disfurnisht this unserviceable
knight, I mounted on his horse, that seemed to have regarded my have more than
mine own: and riding on the spur, I overtook my company; for so they would
needs make themselves, saluting me by the name of their friend Satibarsis. But
their better observance soon put them out of that opinion: so as ghessing
(indeed rightly) that I had killed Satibarsis, and by that mean got his armor;
without desire to be further then by their own conjecture satisfied, they
joined all hands in his revenge. But the Ladies cause was just whose rescue I
came too, and the all-seeing providence (that would not see justice overlai'd)
fought for me. And now five of them had either received their wel-deserved
paime^t of death, or were kept by their wounds from further opposition, when
the sixth (who all this time had held Lady and looked on) seeing my hand whose
weakness had left such presidents of the effects of a good cause, now set
against him alone; took his prisoner by the hair, and with his sword gave her a
deep wou^d in the neck. That inhumane act would have give^ desire to the most
barbarous, and power of revenge to the most cowardly: but he (as if he meant to
save me a labor) making have that their vvarme blood should meet, with the
same sword runs himself through, dying as just a ludge as he was a traitorous
offender. Amazement would have fixed mine eyes upon him, but the La: vvound
brought them to her succor. Experience on my self made me skillful, and my
fair patient, officious: so that tying up the wound, for some time I ^tanch't
the blood. She in mean time, with her vvatrie eyes bent to heavenward,
heartily praying for my good fortune, and many times thanking her destiny
that (with her death) had ended the miseries of her ever-dying life. When I had
done comforting her (as I thought) with my opinion of her safety, I entreated
to know her name, and the cause of this injury done to her. No, no, replied
she; Courteous stranger, the comfort of my neer-comming death (in spite of the
torment the memory of my most vvretched life puts me too) brings this
cheerfulness I now present in my looks: and though the least delay of my end
is accompanied with a world of sorrows, yet I am glad, for satisfaction of
your demand, my breath is a while preserved.

My name is Leaucade, the only daughter to Count Brunio, a man of large
possessions in this country; whom (you may well think because in expectation
of his lands) many sued for, and those not of the meanest esteem: but my
carelessness of love had taught me such a carriage, that further then of the
favor of my courtesy (of which they did all indifferently partake) none could
boast. And this, till about a year since, was my daily practice, disdaining
(as most that have not known it, do) so ridiculous a passion as I then esteemed
love. At which time this Fluento, whose happy hand has done us both right,
came to my fathers Court^ a neighbor Prince, with whom (for incroaching upon
the bounds of his territory) my father has had much dissension. But a
reconcilement being made between them, and both alike thinking the best means
to perse^er in amity, were to have us two joined in marriage; without my
knowledge (as i^ it were fit I should be a stranger to their proceedings)
determine of the match. But alas sir, at this time I was so far from being at
their dispose, that I was not at my own: for love (I think keeping mischief
until it were ripe for me) had presented a Gentleman to mine eyes, by birth
noble; whose ancestors, all to his father (being men of known virtue in the
country) were admitted to the prime offices of the kingdom. but he, taking a
pride to be unthriftie, and little esteeming these public imploime^ts,
lavish't exceedingly both his fame and patrimony; yet it seemed he only made
away his estate to purchase goodness for his child: such a son he was
father too, so rare, so excellent. His name was Persidas; and at that word the
tears gusht forth in such abundance, that it seemed her blood had changed his
course and color, to run forth at the sluices of her eyes: Alas sir, what shall
I say of him, or who from Leaucade will believe the desert of Persidas? But
alas, if they deserve no credit that love him, in this country you must hear
nothing of him; the knowledge of his person, and the love of his virtues, being
things unseparable. In him begun this tragedy, in me it ends: for when my
father and Fluento had drawn their agreements to a head, then, and not before,
he thought it time (he said) to let me know my happiness. And thus, finding me
alone, he breaks the matter to me: Dear child, I have ever sithence the
death of your virtuous mother (though much importuned by many) reserved you to
these years unmarried, because your content should be of counsel with me in
your choice. and happy was this delay for the honor of our house; for behold
Fluento makes his fortunes serviceable to your will: Prince Fluento daughter,
whose powerful greatness the neighbor Potentates stand in awe of, Him I have
won for you; and so forward we be, that this day fortnight he is to take you to
wife. Father, said I, that your wisdom has deferred my marriage hitherto to
give me the comfort of election, my obedience (my only requital) shall be the
same it ever was to you: and yet I vvonder, that having attained to these
years, when my judgment in my choice may be received, you will exclude me
from the end for which I was so long reserved. Just like a Physician that tells
his patient he has brought a potion to cure him, yet says he must by no
means take it. I must be married to Prince Fluento, and yet your meaning is, I
should have liberty to choose; as if this enforcement destroyed not my freedom
of election. That he is a man beyond all respects (as you praise him) fit for
your estate, I may well grant you: but that he is unfit for your daughter, I am
priviledg'd to say. At this his severe look, before he spoke, began to lay
before me my obedience: and when he had first walked two or three turns in
the room, Daughter, daughter, said he, I never thought you were so wilful;
Where I pray you in this country is there a match fit for your birth, if not
Fluento? Beware, beware you do not give your posterity just cause to curse
you, that denied them so great, so good a father. I answered, that I thought it
were too tender a respect of children, vvho^ perhaps I might not have, or
should not enjoy, to choose a father for them, and not a husband for my self;
and too senseless a feeling of the honor of my house, to vvrong my self to do
my birth right. Then kneeling on my knees, Sir, said I, solicit me no more, I
have not power to grant. He hastily, when it was scarce delivered, snatched
this word: And why not power to grant, said he? Because Persidas is the
anchor-hold of my life and love. Persidas, cried out my father! now all
misfortune fall thick upon me: shall my means help to make up a Bankrout in his
estate? Accursed be my Fate, that gave me life to hear it. Persidas! why sure
it cannot be. Sir, said I, if my love were not far passed, my desperate
presumption would not bring a truth, much less an untruth to move your anger.
And if those after-hopes have not clean compelled you to forget you are my
father, have pity on me; if so, I crave the trial of the law. This last
request (after conference with Fluento) finding my obstinacy, he condiscended
to. But because I perceive sir, you are a stranger here, and that the
knowledge of this law does much concern the story of my present mishap, I
will make it known to you.

This kingdom of Argos, wherein you are, was governed not long sin^e by
Phenissa, a woman worthy to have come to that place by election, if nature
had not bestowed it upon her by descent from her famous ancestors. This Queen
(that you may see we want not the president of greatness to excuse
affection) in her fathers life time, though by him she was promised to
Dioxippus, the tyrant of Syracusa; was enamoured of one Eumenes Governor (for
the Lacedaemonians) of the Island and city of Delphos. And when it well might
be thought the kings death and her succession had taken away the restraint of
her will, yet she growing less willing when she was most powerful; like a
horse that finding the raynes hang loose upon him, begins to stay his fury: so
she, though by this change she had not received any slacknesse into her
affection, began to tender the case of her country that lay open to the
invasion of her proud enemy Deoxippus, if so she would have made him.
Preferring therefore now this common respect, before her private satisfaction,
as she had done her obedience in her fathers life time before her love; she
buries her self in the grave of Deoxippus loathsome bed.

When the unexpected news of Phenissa's marriage came to the ears of her
faithful lover Eumenes, his passion (as Agamemnons at the death of Iphigenia)
can best be expressed in silence: all the wild furies that distracted grief
could gather, being su^moned to the siege of his soon overthrown heart. hastily
thereupon to the Temple his mad passion bears him; where casting himself at
the feet of Apollo, Unjust God (said he) have I for this given up thy
ungratefulness, the offerings of my daily prayers? but if I wrong thy name,
show thy justice in revenging my death: whereat, transported with violence of
sorrow, running his head against the Altar, his bloody brains flew forth of
their battered lodging. Soon after, the contagion of a most pestilent air
brought such a plague among the Argians, that many daily felt the fury of the
Gods revenging indignation: amongst whom, the king and Queen (reserved belike,
the more to be punished in their subjects calamity) after the desolatio^ of
their wel-peopled country, both in one day, by the same infection, ended their
lives and government; wherewith this mortality ceafed, as hitting now at
length the mark it aimed at.

The few remane^t of the Nobility sent to Delphos to know what fault of theirs
had brought these miseries upon their country; where being informed of what was
past, Apollo advised them to provide that no such mischief should after
happen. They well weighing whence it arose, being fully satisfied by the
Oracle, enact this law: That neither private nor public respect shall detain
a virgin from revealing her love. and if her friends or parents thinks another
then she has chosen, more fit for her, the combat between them two shall
determine the Gods pleasure. How unwilling I was to hazard my Persidas in this
trial, love that bleeds in the thought of a danger, can best assure you: but
his earnestness that it might be so, and the hard constraint that it could not
be otherwise, won me to it.

The day therefore being appointed, Fluento (upon who^ Fame, the flatterer of
greatness, had pined the opinion of valor) entered the lists, mounted on a bay
Courser, whose armor all over represented a green Plain, through which ran
little rivelets of blood that sprung from the wounds of many Centaures,
dispearc't over all the field. In his shield he bore the counterfeit of
Hercules and Deianira, with this word, ^ndeer'd by Conquest. From him my
Persidas drew the eyes and hearts of all the company: his horse was a fiery
sorrel: his armor like the azure sky, curiously spotted with many stars,
(whose glimpse the well set Diamonds, by reflection of the Sun, represented)
showed as if night had flowen thither to end in that assembly, some
controversy between her and her brother. In his shield he caused Andromada
and Perseus to be engraven, with this word, Never too deerly bought. But I
must hasten to the event, said she; for long I find you may not enjoy your
Historian: Know therefore that my Persidas, contenting himself only with the
victory, when he might have taken (woe is me that he was so merciful)
Fluento's life, was accepted by my father for his son in law; good fortune,
as I then thought, changing my husband, and not my day of marriage. In mean
time Fluento, repining at his disgrace, and desirous even upon the basest
tea^mes to be revenged, plotted a treachery unheard of against him. This
morning, having before heard we were to hunt in this forest, Fluento (with
that company your valor has brought to their deserved ends) lay in wait for
us: and when my self and my Persidas (Count Bruni^ my father and the rest
having followed the chase) were left alone, behold these bloody villains,
coming unawares upon him, with many vvounds sent hi^ soul to that place,
vvhither mine (hoping to find a more lasting union in that life, then our
loves has found in this) does also hasten. and with this word, her dull
languishing eyes began to roll as if they strove to reserve motion in spite of
death; yet raising her self a little, her love found breath to say this, Let
me be buried by my Persidas: and so grasping my hand, as it were to put me in
mind of her last words, alas she dies.

But many tears I could not have bestowed as obsequies upon her, when some
of her fathers train, who by chance crossing that way where Persidas lay
dead, guided by Fidutio (who, with their helps had now taken my horse) came to
this place; to whom when I had related all what I learned from Leaucade of
Persidas his death, together with her last will, we all joined hands in
carrying her to the next village: vvhither also certain of their fellows
(whom they had left behind to that end) conveyed the body of Persidas; from
whence soon after, Count Brunio (having begged of grief a little respite of
life to fulfill his daughters testament) brought them both, with all funeral
pomp, to his chief city Coniga, where he ^aus'd a stately Tomb to be built
for them, on which this Epitaph was engraven: Love, Beauty, Valor, when their
death drew nigh
Consulted long, where they should buried lie:
At length with one consent they hastened hither,
And chose this place to be entombed together.


Leaving the woeful kingdom of Argos, no better accompanied then with Fidutio,
yet better guarded by Satibarsis armor; my sorrow I think that bore infection
with it, made all places where I came fit stages for tragedies: for descending
unto a green valley, where of each side the rocky mountains threatened the
humble earth with the frowns of their downe-cast brows, I might see a young
man leaning with both hands on his sword, breathing as overtoyl'd with labor,
and round about him four or five cast prostrate at his feet, who were dead,
or thought their counterfeiting so to be would prove their best defense against
this young man's fury. But the clashing of my armor had no ^ooner made known my
approach, then he came running toward me, uttering words whereby I might
gather his quarrel to me brought the excuse of mistake with it. Not to draw on
therefore his misconceived opinion, that his breathless companions did witness
would be dangerous for me; Sir, replied I, I am so far from maintaining their
cause, whose revenge upon a lone man, being so many, mine own eyes do
persuade me was injurious, that had I come at the beginning of your fight
(though this event shows I should but have robbed you of part of the honor of
this action) I would have joined my self to you.

Alas sir, said he, to oppose your self against me, (though it were the more
unjust) would be the most secure way: for what you see, is but a forerunner
of a certain destruction soon at hand. Leave me therefore, courteous ^ir, and
seek for safety; death to me is so grateful, that I envy you should be a
partner in so great a gain. But it were a fault unpardonable to have abandoned
the most accomplished man, that ever mine eyes, before that time, beheld: my
resolution therefore, though hard against his will, must have prevailed with
him; so that entreating to know the cause of his former fight, and further
doubt, I found his courtesy as forward in the relation of his own danger, as
it was obstinate in the care of my safety.

Sir, said he, seeing my story will be but a heap of misfortunes, I shall do
well to lay the foundation my self, then whom the Sun looks not upon a more
miserable creature: My name is Cari^lio, nephew (by his brother Castor) to the
king of Natolia, brought up in my youth in the good opinion of my uncle, and
the great expectation of many; Fortune then belike proroguing my miseries
until a more serious age should make me more sensible of them which time had
no sooner brought on, but that my ill fate, to train me up for the burden of
the mischief that was prepared for me, began by little and little to make me
acquainted with the course I was to run; first taking away my father, whose
virtuous age deserved (if that may be thought a recompense for desert) a longer
time in this life: when he was dead, and that the slipperie steps of my rash
youth vvanted the stay of his fatherly advice, presently (not knowing what one
man's hands I should put the raynes of my then unbridled youth into, and yet
well seeing I might not trust my self with mine own government) I chose
many friends; and being by nature given to hate pride, to eschew a vice so
loath^ome (thinking it might not be done otherwise) I began to affect
popularitie. But I had scarce lived thus a twelue-month, when my cousin the
kings son, a young man, who (besides the hope of succession, for which the
Courtiers did adore him) had nothing more then ordinary in him, grew suspicious
of my practices, as he termed them: to which humor (besides the mistrust of his
own little desert) his Sycophants, the bellows of this fire, did daily add
further causes to increase his jealousy. But seeing the discovery of his
suspicion would little please the king, who ever since the death of my father
had doubled his care upon me; he was compelled to dissemble a good liking
toward me. In mean time a truce, made for some few years with the Duke of
Amasia, being expired, the war grew hot on both sides: at length, after the
trial of many changes in fortune, necessity mediating a peace between them,
my self being given as hostage for performance of certain conditions of my
uncles part, a perpetual league was concluded on^ 'twas now, and not before,
mischief began to unmaske her self, and take a pride to grow terrible. There
was at Court during my abode there, attending upon the Duchess, a Lady by
name Alcida, whose many excellencies won as many hearts as she had beholders,
nature making her beauty and shape but the most fair Cabinet of a far
fayrer mind. To her mine eyes at first sight gave up my heart, with so
fortunate an encounter in affection, that this surrender was but a mutual
exchange; she having in a merciful gratefulnes, fixed her love one mine. But
her parentage, though not base, was so mean in respect of my birth, that
thence whole armies of afflictions did invade my mind; equally distracted
between my desire to enjoy this my best of happiness, and fear of my uncles
displeasure, on whom this match (for his care and love of me) I was sure would
draw on an untimely death. But before I could determine a doubt of ^o great
consequence, the conditions of the league being faithfully performed; I was
safely at a day prefixed, sent back to Natolia, desirous (even in my soul
desirous, I am sure) rather by their breach of covenant to have hazzarded my
life, then thus cruelly to be taken away from her presence, who (far beyond my
life) was most dear to me. Soon after my return, the king (as if the Gods
had stayed him to see the quiet of his State, now that was brought to pass,
worn with age, and much broken wi^h travel and care in his last wars) left
his kingdom to his degenerate son and successor; who had no sooner seized
upon the government, but meaning to begin his reign with an admirable act of
policy, now his power was unrestrained, limits me to the absence from my
country, declaring my blood for ever incapable of succession: and not content
with this, to such a height his undeserved malice to me was raised, that he
dealt with some bad ministers of his wickedness, secretly to make me away. To
prevent therefore what was plotted against me (disguising my self) I hastily
fled away, and making use of necessity to further my affection, I put my self
into the service of a Nobleman here in the Court of Amasia; easily remaining
undiscovered, among them who would sooner fall out with their eyes, then
believe that the greatness wherein they lately had seen me, could admit so
great a change: By mean whereof, I enjoyed the presence of my Alcida, whose
constancy neither time nor abse^ce (the mothes of affection) nor what is
more, this my change in fortune, could alter.

Thus while I lived in this happiness of servitude, Mermidon (brother to the
Duke) having commanded with fortunate success against the Dazians, returned to
Court; where seeing this Lady, he became enamoured of her, to no other end
then to satisfy his lust: and thinking at first (because he was in good
esteem^ with himself) she would have strained her modesty to sue for the
accepta^ce of a present so grateful to him, a while he was silent; but when he
perceived the vanity of his fruitless expectation, and found that this delay
increased the fury of his passion, dispensing with the Matie he had taken on,
he began to make known his love to her (for such a title did he give to so base
a desire) forgetting not vvithal to tell her, that to excuse her modesty, he
had first spoken her wishes. But the virtuous Alcida loathing as much the
thought of such a sin, as she loved the memory of me, (together with a
^esolute denial) let him know how base his mind was that made so injurious a
request. Whereat Mermidon, because this answer came unexpected, was so much the
more amazed. But bringing arguments from his late practice in the war, he
began to think his honor would be the greater, if after long resistance, he did
surprise a well defended fort: and therefore daily both by rich gifts, the base
enamell of affection, and many promises (which to win the more upon her, were
sent by one of her own sex, who, if example might move her, could tell of
such a president in her self) did he seek to undermine her resolution. Mean
time my constant Alcida seeing the inte^perance of Mermidons lust to bring the
threats of force with it, not daring to speak with me, because our conference
began to be suspected, sent me a letter to hasten her carrying away, appointing
this the fatal place of our meeting.

I much rejoiced to be so near my happiness, the rather, that since our last
conference I received intelligence, that my young cousin of Natolia being made
away by one whom he had raised to an undeserved height in his favor, the
country was in great distress by the factious ambition of the Nobility, and
that the best affected to the State, much desired my presence. But these
means, how well soever as I thought, conducing to my happiness, by the
unmercifulness of my hard destiny were prevented, as one of those, whom 'twas
my fortune to kill, at his death revealed: for Mermido^ having intercepted the
messenger, mad with rage to find his hopes crossed by so mean a man, as he
took me to be; having again sealed up the letter, he caused it to be
delivered, and determining to be revenged, sent these men to apprehend me,
himself intending to follow presently, leading with him my dearest Alcida, whom
in my presence (to ad a glory to the execrablenes of the offense) he means to
ravish. And now sir, you have heard (said he) all what my self knows of my
birth and fortune, ever till this time (when I am well assured my end is near
at hand) kept secret.

He scarce had closed up this lamentable story with a hearty sigh, the
compendious abridgment of his sufferings, when we might discern Mermidon with
twenty more (so distrustful is treachery, though there be no cause to fear)
make toward us: but that sight, together with the thought of Alcida's
distress, was a signal sufficient for Cariclio to begin his unequal
encounter; so as like a she Tygre, who at her return to her cave finds her
little ones to be stolen, with a wild fury, breathing nothing but destruction,
he runs amongst them, making way for my willingness to second his attempt. A
while the justnes of the cause, and Cariclio's valor (to which the glory is
only due) with the death of many, did hold the victory in an equal balance:
at length the multitude of our assaylants made injury the stronger, bringing
to a death much to be pitied so incomparable a man at Arms as was Cariclio;
yet not before he had (in the sight of Alcida) sent Mermidon to be his
harbinger at Carons Ferry. And when by his death, the only stay and support of
the fight was removed, if sometimes my desire of revenge made good the ground
Cariclio had bequeathed me, alas how could I long resist without him? Know
therefore, excellent Lady, that here I was made prisoner, and together with
Alcida, carried back to Court, though (I call Cariclio's ghost to witness) I
sought all meane^ to join my self, even in death, a companion to his virtues.
The solemnity intended for our execution, and the preparation of new forms of
torment, for us that had been parties in the murder of the Dukes brother, won
some lingering days of life to the inward torture of our expectation. in mean
time the everlasting providence (that by changing the intentions and doomes of
men, will let them know, there is a power beyond theirs) sent an unexpected
mean to help our distress.

Plangus the famous Prince of Iberia, at this time making have with a few such
as virtue had joined partners in his cause, and taking into his Army such of
Evarcus soldiers as in a tempest at Sea were driven to Byzantium, to the
succor of Erona, (whose story you cannot be ignorant of) and being to pass
through Amasia, sent to the Duke to demand a through-fare for his soldiers. But
he who of long time had observed an unviolable league with the Armenians,
knowing the pretense of this war, and despising the weakness of those few
Plangus led with him, not only denied his request, but gathering a great power
of soldiers (whom since his last wars he had kept in garrison in his
frontier towns) meant, with the overthrow of her ungrateful nephew, to
gratify Artaxia and her ill chosen husband Plexertus. But the excellent
Plangus (then whom this age shows not, for conduct in war, a better
General) with the well ordering those few resolu^e Troops, and skillful
industry in choice of advantages; in two ^et battles put him to the vvorst:
After which the Duke, not able to reinforce his weakened power, put himself
(with the relics of his late overthrow) into his chief city, wherein we
were prisoners; to which Plangus, finding no open resistance, with vvondrous
celeritie followed him. And though the town by Nature and Art for site and
forti^ication were thought impregnable, yet being defended but by such who by
their own loss held a too superstitious opinion of the enemies, it was soon
forced by Plangus his victorious Troops, who believed the success of nothing
impossible, to which their ever-fortunate Captain would lead them. With the
sack of this city (wherein he took the Duke, with his son, prisoners)
Plangus having enrich't his soldiers with the booty, and his own fame by
the speediness of the conquest, not able to assure the country to his
devotion, otherwise then by dismembring his Army, and delaying his chief
ends; moved with a necessary clemency, having first received six months pay
for his soldiers, and the Dukes son as hostage, to bar his desire of
revenge, (making Alcida and my self, to secure our freedoms, companions in
his travail) he leaves the Amasians to their former government.

Many days journey we had not been in our way to Armenia, when the good
Alcida, by the inward vvorking of her thoughts, began to find ^he burden of her
grief too heavy for her; which when the dullness of her ever-watry eyes, and the
paleness of her cheeks had bewrayed to us, we carried her to a Monastery near
adjoining, dedicated to Diana, and much famed for the strictness of the
Virgins orders that be attendants on the Goddess her ceremonies: where, having
reco^mended her to the governesse of the house, alas I left her, bound even by
the greatest tie of gratefulness to follow him whom I ought my life to.

These former accidents, most dear Lady, together with the excellent Plangus
his company, in whom sorrow was drawn to the life, made me reflect upon my
ungrateful self, and consider how ^ruell I had been to you, whose desert
passed my best endeavors of requital: so that (far engaged to the memory of
your virtues) thenceforth the thought of my most deer H^llen, vvon my heart to a
most passionate affection. The Qu^ ^t this interrupted his speech, with this
answer: My A^phialus, they who ^ollow example^ in their actions, are ^o match
rightly what they are to do, and what they see done. Leaucade, Alcida, and
Fro^a might justly claim the reward of love but Hellen (whose desert was
far^e short) could expect but disdain. Disdain, said Amphialus! you renew a
punishment. your mercy did once forgive. And here, with tears in his eyes,
he would have kneeled to beg a further pardon: but Hellen, kissing away the
burden his eyes went with, made as much have to prevent his suit with the
like of her own. so that a ^riendly composition being made (as it well might be
where both were parties, and both Judges in one cause) the Q got the
continuance of the story (which Amphi^lus would put off to another time) to boot
And then, willing to discharge himself of the debt he ought for so good a
bargain, he thus began.

Madam; though my memory be a continued record of much sorrow, yet among the
many stories grief has engraven in me, there is none compared with the
disaster of Plangus and Erona, that deserves compassion: Know therefore, my
only happiness, that Plangus having received advertisement how the Nobleman,
unto whose faithful custody Erona (upon the accord between him and Artaxia)
was delivered, being hardly besieged by Plexer^us, and brought to an
extremity by famine, had yielded to a composition; that if within five days
he were not succored he must deliver the Castle. Plangus therefore
overrunning the fame of his coming with his presence, the fif^ night was near
Plexertus Camp, where (by one of the enemies, who^ his Scouts had taken) he
was informed that late that evening, the keys of the city and Fort were
given up to Plexertus, but that he deferred his entry till morning, leaving the
next gate to the Camp open, that all night his officers might prepare a
magnifice^t triumph for him^ as for Erona, he would determine nothing of her,
until he had received the honor due to his victory. At these news Plangus,
causing the reporter to be safely kept, and giving to his vvearied soldiers
some time to refresh themselves, after the toil endured in their last days
travel, an hour before day (rightly imagining the air was then apt to
disperse a dull ^leepinesse among Plexertus careless soldiers) he calls his
Troops together: and setting before them the easines of the victory, the
riches of the Camp, and the necessity of the time; he did encourage them with
the repetitio^ of their former conquest in Amasia, the justness of their
cause, and the fame o^ their enterprise. and then presently disposing of them
for his most advantage, he sets upon his enemy, who dreamed of nothing but
security. But what should I fright you, most dear Lady, with the
particulars of this fight? It will suffice you know, that Plangus (doing things
in his own person, past the power of expression) made a bloody slaughter among
them. Some few there were that escaped, among whom Plexertus (fortune being
always indulgent to mischief) found, in the speed of his horse, a dishonorable
safeguard for his wretched life. This t^mult being soon perceived by the
citizens (whom sorrow made vvatchfull, and the well-knowne treacheries of
Plexertus, suspicious) they as soon imagined this was a practice of his,
contrary to his faith give^, to sack the town. This once conceited, it seemed
by the hideous cries and confused lamentations, that, as sorrow had put on the
vizzard of night to make grief ugly; so black night had borrowed the mouth of
sorrow to implore compassion. The people leaving their vvalls and houses, ran
to their Temples and Altars, offering up (as they thought) their last devotions
to their Gods. Nor did this mistake bring forth the effect of mistrust only in
the City: the Camp had likewise this fear added to their present misfortune.
for Plexertus soldiers (like Satyrs, frighted with the sound of the horn
themselves blow) thinking the Vantguard of the enemy had entered the town, and
caused this confusion; durst not venture to make themselves masters of it. But
between both, unable to determine of a mean of safety, stood fixed in a
stupid irresolution.

Mean time Aurora, vvearie of aged Titons bed, began to vvarne Phebe of her
brothers approach; when Erona, who had set down in her settled judgment, a
death vvorthie the greatness of her birth, now first giving ear to the cries
of the citizens, and misdoubting the same false measure they expected: and not
long after, hearing a man armed coming up the stairs to her lodging, she took
a poisoned cup (long before for that end prepared) and making have lest she
should be made a present to the proud Conqueror the wicked Plexertus, she
drank more then half when her eyes met with the eyes of Plangus, who
(unfortunate Gentleman) desirous to be the messenger to Erona of Erona's
freedom, had made ^his have. The sight of Plangus stayed her full draught a
while; but unable to satisfy her self how he might come thither, she began to
imagine that it was the force of the poison which dimmed her eyes, and placed
the character of Plangus (ever present to her mind) upon each object. With
this thought she was ready to begin again, when Plangus, falling at her
feet, let her know the event of so many dangers undergone for her: Whereat
Erona being much astonished, lifting him up from the ground, thus said; Prince
Plangus, you come in a fit time to receive a hearty vvelcome, and as hearty a
farewell. What I mean by this leave-taking, alas you will too soon know: now
suffer me, only at such a time, when the end will assure you I did not
flatter, speak a few words. I would have you believe, yet I am sorry, for
your sake, I have practiced such a mean to work a belief in you: True it
is, most excellent Plangus (nor let that truth accuse me of inconstancy) that
since the death of Antiphilus, whose memory even at this time is dear to me,
though at first the excess of sorrow had closed up my mind from the thought of
a second choice; yet enforced by your desert, and to reward mine own love in
rewarding your desires, I was resolved to satisfy you, and make my self
happy. but my envious Fate, finding the times fit to cause me to despair, has
made your self the instrument to bar our hopes for ever. Dear Erona,
replied the Prince, what may there now be that the most partial judgment can
equal to the excess of content Plangus enjoyes in the welfare of his free and
loving Erona? For this I have paid the merciful heavens the tribute of my
vows and tears: to this harbor, through the Sea of grief, (having imbarqu't
my careful love in the ship of my desire) I have always bent my course; and
shall I now, when my vvishes be at anchor in so secure a haven, fear fortune?
No, no, most dear Lady; you are the life and being of what I only esteem
happy. Alas Plangus, said the sweet Erona, the testimonies of your love have
been so many, that I fear (and only fear) they who have heard your
undeserved affection, and are not present at this my dying protestation, will
for ever record (together with my want of judgment) my injury to your
virtues. Your dying protestation, said Plangus! affright not my soul with such
h^avie news. Long may you live: the Fates must be indulgent to your youth and
beauty. And perhaps, said she, so they might, had not my self hastened Clotho
to cut in two the halfe-spun thread of my life. And then she let him know how
(to prevent the tortu^es and disgraces Artaxia's indignation had prepared for
her, seeing the city brought to that desperate state in which he found it, and
thinking himself to have been an officer sent by Plexertus to bring her
before him) she had poisoned her self. Plangus at these last words (with a
fixed look upon Erona, as if his eyes would for ever dwell there) indenting his
hands and suffering them to fall down, or rather not able to stay them, sinkes
to the ground; and was a while happy in this excess of sorrow, that made him
senseless of all sorrow. Erona would have forced her self to help him, but
this sight (joined with the inward working of the poison) constrained her to
bear him company in his happy forgetfulness of his misfortunes. But when,
by the help of her women, her senses were restored, and that my endeavors
wrought the same effect on Plangus: as if this had been but griefs dumb show;
Alas excellent Prince, said she, what unexpected effects has the speech of my
death brought forth! and yet though I were silent, I believe these deadly
signs in mine eie^, this trembling in my full-swolne veins, and the often set
and rise of the blood in my cheeks, would express it. But my Plangus; should
you, whom the world is proud of, take it so to heart? Erona loves you: why so
may a more deserving Lady. yet Plangus remember me, and it will be the best
part of my souls li^e to live in your memory. Then taking his hand, and
placing it on her heart, that now proudly began to beat the loud alarm of
death; Feel he^e, said she, the battery is begun, and this Fort is abandoned
of all the powers of life^ only my desire to be with you, desperately a while
keeps the breach. But o my Plangus. and at that word death closed up (in
eternal silence) her tongue that yet still moved, as loath to leave her speech
imperfect.

It was a desperate grief, and wild passion, that seized upon the heart of
the poor Plangus. Accursed earth, did he say, how dare thou support the
burden of these many mischiefs, cast by the spiteful heavens into this sink
of misery? 'Twas I, Erona, brought an untimely set to thy sun shine of
goodness. and do the heavens mean I should breathe, that have so much
wronged them? What do they do? will they hear me speak that killed Erona? But
they would have me live, to torture me with the memory of my guilt. No no; I
will prevent their project: that were a punishment fit for an ill-meant
offense, not an unfortunate. And with these words, drawing his sword, and
lifting up his Bases, he would have run himself through the belly: but I
stayed his hand from so unmanly (as I then alleag'd it) a violence, forcing
(wi^h the remembrance of our friendship, and my much-prevayling tears) the
sword, but not his resolution, from him. Then did I begin to allege all that I
thought in reason might remove him from his purpose: for well I might see in
the unappal'd stayednesse of his countenance, the greatness of some
determination. To all my objections, for a time his eyes gave a more heedfull
attention, than did his ears: But when I came to call his valor in question,
whose unspotted memory hitherto, I said, this last inconsiderate act would
accuse of a little firm constancy, in bearing the changes of fortune; Alas,
said he, and will you my friend be cruel to me? Is it certain Amphialus, that
it well becomes that courage you would have in your friend, to bear an equal
temper both in the frowns and smiles of fortune? and is it not as certain, that
when the malice of heaven has joined with fortune in producing a monstrous
effect, there cannot be left in man so infinite a power of suffering, which he
dare oppose to such unlimitted works? No, I will not gyant-like bandy against
the Gods: such is their will; I must die. Then leading me softly over to
Erona, as if he would persuade me the violence of passion had not been his
guide to this resolution; See Amphialus, said he, this is she whom you would
have me to live after^ what can mine eyes, now she is gone, desire to look on?
Erona, a woman, could dye for Plangus; and would you have me wrong mankind
with a greater fear of death, or my love with a less desire to dye? This
said (but with a countenance that promised no suddenness in the execution,
especially to me who was Master of his sword, his only offensive vveapon)
behold with a downe-cast look (which sorrow excused, though deceit had then, I
am sure, put it on to further mischief) and such a pace as used slownesse to
the same end, he approach't the vvindow; where the remain of Erona's
intercepted draught, appointed by the destinies to be fatal to them both,
stood in a gilt cup: this he hastily takes, and as hastily drinks off. I, all
confused, pale, and trembling (as if the poison had wrought its effect in me)
made, alas, too slow speed to him. But Plangus, (now first presenting an
unfayned cheerfulness in his looks, as if this draught had given him life)
kneeling near Erona; Divine soul, said he, if confidence in thy Plangus
constancy makes thee hover near this sacred mansion of thine, to see the end
of his sufferings, o stay a while and bear me with thee: thy presence, when I
appear before Radamanth, will be a countenance to my cause. Then turning
himself to me; Amphialus, Revenge ( Amphialus) Erona's death upon the wicked
Plexertus: his blood will be the best sacrifice to my ghost. Lead the Army
to Byzantiu^, and restore the Amasian hostage. Then putting his trembling lips
to the pale lips of Erona, he coldly kissed away his life.

What my sorrow was to be a looker on these tragedies, these tears, even at
the remembrance of that time, may testify: yet leaving the bodies to be
imbalmed (with the Nobleman, who in her life time had been faithful to
Erona) dissembling the death of Plangus, lest it should work an innovation
among the soldiers; with some choice Troops of light horsemen I followed
Plexertus, who posting to Court, had received advertiseme^t from thence, how
Arguto (the admirable engine by whom he wrought much mischief) being lately
fallen from the faith vowed to his practices, had revealed to Artaxia the
purpose his Master had to dispatch her out of his way, since now he had a
soon by her to whom he might be guardian: esteeming it more content to be
great alone, than to share the royalties of her own kingdom with Artaxia. These
news made his flight as dangerous as would be his stay: but when he
understood (for the heavens had made this the rendevow where his misfortunes
should meet) that the Princes of Thessaly and Macedon (of whom his
treacheries were to expect their just reward) did live, and should be happy
in the addition of Arcadia to their greatness: that Leonatus had seized upon
his seigniories in Trebisond for his treason to Pyrocles and Musidorus, of
which not long before he had gloriously boasted: that there was no new form
of dissimulation left, to which in this extremity he might have recourse; O
then the ugliness of his guilty conscience, that until this time had made
peace with his wickedness, presented before him the progress of his ill-spent
days, drawn to life in the colors of despair: now his father, now his
friends, Tideus and Telenor were summoned by his soul to make party against
him. In this affright he continued all that day, which scarce was time
sufficient for him to read over his misdeedes: and when the silent night,
drawn in he^ Ebon Chariot, had spread her curtains to hide her brothers face,
Plexertus (glad to see her flatter his mind in this likeness of darkness)
resolved, by despair, that the Godds wanted mercy for his faults, and well
assured men had less; he secretly went into a Garden, to which a back door
from his chamber led him: where, loathing as much to die, as wishing he were
dead, he spent some time in execrations on himself. At length, tying a cord
(newly taken out of his bed) to the stump of an Elder tree (that stood with
such conveniencie as if it would invite him to that exercise) he slipped into his
death, easing the earth until morning of the burden of so detestable a wretch.

But when the day appeared, and made known his death, the magistrates of the
town (striving who could be best sighted in the discovery of the murder,
hoping to have the reward of their diligence from their Queen Artaxia) soon
found out, as a man to be most suspected, the messenger come from Court, whom
Plexertus had (till late in the night) kept in his chamber, to know of him the
particulars o^ Arguto's revolt. This fellow, because none more likely, in the
vvilde form of their popular justice, was to dye a thousand manner of deaths:
But he, making just protestations of his innocence, being questioned what
occasion he had so long to stay the last night with the King, if not for that
end. He plainly let them know, what Arguto discovered; which he then reported to
Plexertus. The many-headed multitude called not the truth much in question of
what they heard, but with the same violence as before (every one in this also
thinking to gratify the Queen) ran to as uncertain a form of execution on
the dead, as they did before to a judgment of the living: first they stripped
the body naked, then dragged it through the streets; now they open his belly,
and suffer his gutts to mark forth his progress, doing many mo indignities to
him who had deserved many more. I much rejoiced to hear Plexertus had been
so just to himself: yet I determined to join Erona's revenge on Artaxia (to
Plexertus his judgeme^t on himself) but her an untimely death had freed from
my revenge. for taking to the heart Plexertus his treacheries, and her brother
Teridates unrevenged death, she calmely gave her self over to a life
oppressing grief, leaving her kingdom and young son to the care of
Salindor, whom she appointed Protector during the minority.

Returning therefore somewhat grieved that both Plangus and Er^na's death,
without my help had been revenged, I conveyed the bodies to Lycia, where the
sumptuousness of their Tombs shows their estates, and their everlasting fame
their everliving virtues. From hence I would have parted private; but
remembering Plangus his last will, I passed through ^masia, restoring his son to
the Duke: and coming to Byzantium, I gave up my charge into the hands of
Lisantus a Macedonian, leaving the soldiers full of hearty sorrow for the
death of Plangus their General.

Soon after, hearing of your death, and resolved to sacrifice my blood to your
memory, to disingage my self of some part of my faultiness; leaving Fidutio
in Thrace (lest by him I should be discovered) disguising my self in an
armor, fitly (as I thought) presenting the massacre of my naked heart: passing
the Courts of Elis and Argos, and lastly coming hither, I met (what should I
more say?) with thee my Hellen, reserved to be a blessing beyond what most I
could desire. And so with a sincere fervencie kissing her hand, they both
walked toward the Palace: where having ended Supper, while Basilius and
Evarcus (with the rest) expected a Mask, prepared for them; the Queen of
Corinth let them know what she had heard of Plangus and Erona, together with
Plexertus deserved end, and the death of Artaxia. The audience greatly pitied
their fortunes, especially Pyrocles, who much grieved to hear of Plangus his
death, for the love he bore his virtues; and was no less troubled at
Plexertus his mischance, for his dear servant Zelmanes sake. But the entry of
the Maskers caused him put over those thoughts to more solitarines, his eye
being fed with a dainty variety of representations, and his ears with most
harmonious well-agreeing music: to which the footing kept so good time, that
doubtful it was whether the music conformed it self to the life of their
motion, or the Maskers their motion to the musicks liveliness. But night
(mask't in these sports) crept on undiscovered: and though Pyrocles and
Musidorus at other times would dispense with the length of the sports, yet now
(in respect of the armfulls of joy they were to expect in bed) they thought
them tedious; which once perceived, their dances were sooner at an end then was
intended.

Thus days and nights past over, as if they had no other Sphere then delight
to move in; and the appointed time for Amphialus his marriage was at hand: to
which Basilius invited the Shepherds, both to change their daily pleasures, as
also to show Evarcus, that though a greater cause had moved him to the
solitary course of life by him embraced; yet the wits of Arcadia, and the
pleasantness of their harmless life, might have drawn him to that
retiredness.

The Eclogves.
Kalydolus now minded to marry his daughter, and uncertain whether he should
bestow her on the contented young Arcadian Menaleas, or the much-having,
much-wanting Thessalian Coridon, who both were then present, hearing of this
summons; puts over their cause to be determined by Basilius: And Strephon and
Klaius, no less desirous to bring Vrania's name to Court, joined themselves to
the rest. Nor was Agelastus wanting, who not for a Mistress but Heraclitus-LIKE
thinking man, was made to mourn; and repining at the vanity of greatness,
had maintained a religious sorrow. No sooner was the company set, and that
their silence began to proclaim their expectation, but Strephon who before his
coming had prepared an Epithalanium, began thus to sing.

Str. Sweet linck of hearts, joys surest anchor-hold,
Loves peaceful Crown, the harbor of desires.
Hymen approach, but think not Pan too bold,
If to invoke thy name our love aspires.
Dwell here for ever, that this couple may
Renew the blessings of their marriage day.
Firm be their root of love, and cause a bliss
From forth this royal happy stock to spring;
That all the world may justly say he is
Worthy to be, and to succeed a king.
But shorten not their days; for it is decreed,
The best can be, but worthy to succeed.

Amphialus thankt Strephon, for his hearty wishes: but he had scarce ended,
when Klaius looking upon him with as sower a countenance as their friendship
could allow; thus said.

Kla. I pray thee Strephon, if these glorious shows,
Of Courts admired greatn^sse, do not close
Thy mind, from former thoughts, where can thy lays,
Find other subject then Vrania's praise?
Or do thou fondly think, thou were too blame,
To breathe among these Lords Vrania's name?
Or is it certain that her flames in thee
Are quenched, that lately doubled were in me?

Str. Nor so, nor thus; that verse I last day made,
As with my flock I sat in Hestars shade:
I studied it; yet all my study was
I vow, to strive to let Urania pass.
For'twas the only name my pen would write,
My thoughts imagine, or my lips indite.
Am I not bold, when nights vast stage is set,
And all the stars and heavenly audience met,
To speak my mind, while their bright twinkling flame
Seems to rejoice to hear Vrania's name?
And shall I fear, that what the heavens approved,
By men (though great men) should be disallowed?
But where you think that I have checked mine eye,
And freed your Strephon from their treachery:
O no, mine is the Giant Tithius maw
That does increase to feel a Vulturs paw.
No day runs over, but my loves deep sore
Renues his pain, and festers more and more:

Kla. No day runs over but our loves deep sore
Renues his pain, and festers more and more!
Alas, where is pity then? belike it flies
The place we come too, frighted with our cries.

Str. Pity; why friend it is certain that their eyes
Who know they can or' come, learn to despise.
Yet Klaius why should we repine? our Saint
Is pleased sometime to hear our loves complaint.
And if mine eyes (to ease my inward pain)
Become not flatterers, she does not disdain.

Kla. Disdain! that were a bliss, so great a weight
Might lift our sorrows to their utmost haight:
And then perhaps our own despair would mend
Our lingering hopes, that must or break, or bend.
O no, ours is a worse calamity,
A heedlesse care, and careless courtesy.

Then Klaius pawsing a while, with crossed arms and a down-cast look, began
again these following Verses to Strephon, whom he spoke to as representing the
person of sorrow.

Kla. Foul sorrow, will thou always build thy nest
In the wild mountains of my care-swolne breast?

Str. O yes, I find it happy for my breed,
And near your heart whereon I use to feed.

Kla. But gentle grief, if not for pity, spare
Me, for Vrania's sake: she has a share
In these my wounds, and she must feel the smart
Whose image's carved so lively in my heart.

Str. O no, she shares no pain, from whose fair eyes
The wound did first, and now the cure must rise.

Kla. Why gentle grief, you are witness of my love,
Then always sigh my plaints until you move.

Str. O no, there is too much rigor in such laws,
They bind a man to speak against his cause.
Suppose I move, this is my recompense;
Joy must succeed, and I am banished hence.

Kla. Then must I dye unpittied, no help's found
Since you my spoksman do conceal my wound.

Str. O no, let not that make us to despair:
She knows we love her, but she knows she is fair.

When they ended, Musidorus (in whose memory their courtesy to him, had
engraven a beholdnes) forgot not to approve what they had said. But the
audience had little time to determine whether they deserved, what the Prince
thought them worthy of; when Corido^, who longed to hear the debate between him
and Menalcas (for Kalidolus daughter) ended, clapping him on the shoulder, thus
said.

Cor. Fond beardlesse boy, now shall the chastisement,
(Fit for thy rash youths unweighed attempt)
Fall heavy on thee; but you may relent,
I Will not be crnell if you do repent.
O no you will not, you will be always blind:
That graceless smile bewrayes thy scornful mind.
Sing then, and show these goodly dotes in thee,
With which thy brainlesse youth can equal me.

Menal. Gray bearded frenzy, what can thou allege
To shun my blows, but thy age's privilege?
Thy tongue may safely snarle, while his offense
Is still protected by that reverence.
The dotes, old Dotard, I can bring to prove
My self deserves that choice, are only love.
A prizelesse Treasure, not to be expressed,
A guest too great, for thy cough-breeding breast.

Corid. Young man, thou speak as if thy brains were wood,
Who can determine of that inward good?
I say I love, and will Menalcas grieve
That all the world should Coridon believe?
But that is not it; these flames will soon decay
If they be not maintayn'd some other way.
A thousand sheep I have, whose snow-white fleece
Do add a luster to these parts of Greece:
On whom as many lambs do wait hard by,
That wear their damms white curled livery.
O what a joy will it be to her I love,
Each morn and even, to see her sheep remove
From field to fold, while she may freely say
That Lamb is fat, that Lamb I Will eat to day?

Menal. Blind fortune, I Will confess, has given you more:
Yet I am richer; my content's my store.
A thousand sheep thou have, it is very like,
But thy diseas^s want arethmetick.
Nature between our years a marriage made:
We bloome together, and at once may fade.
But your old age is gone too far before,
Time beats you on, and you will return no more.

Cor. Hasty young man, do not despise the end
To which your self, as to a center bend.
What if I want your bodies active toys?
My settled mind a greater good enjoyes.

Menalc. Old man, thou speak as if thy brains went wood,
Who can determine of that inward good?
Think thou will that sweet beauty take delight
To hear thee cough a proverb in the night?
O no, there are some other joys in bed,
They must partake whom you desire to wedd.

Coridon inwardly out of countenance to hear his own words byte so sore upon
him, would have shrunk away; but hoping he had found a Judge whom the cause
concerned, stood a while to attend what Basilius would have said. But the king
put it over to Musidorus, who (glad to find an occasion to pleasure Minalcas,
his first Master in the practice of a Shepherds life) thus ended it.

Coridon, said he, could I as well lop away some of your overgrowne years, to
make your ma^ch with Kalidolus daughter equal, as I can add to Minalcas
state, I would for a time suspend my judgment: for readily I know not whether
of you two deserves best; but in the one my power seconds my will, as in the
other my will overgoes my power. Kalidolus daughter I therefore adjudge to
Menalcas; and I will make him worthy of her, the rather, that I know his rash
youth would impatiently bear a repulse, where your experience (when it
reflects upon it self) with more discretion may consider she vva^ but a
woman. Glad was Menalcas to speed so well: nor v^as Coridon displeased,
because the Prince (as he conceived) had entertained a good opinion of his
wisdom. Thus when they ended, Pyrocles, who marked Agelastus his silent
pensiveness, desired to hear him disburthen his mind of the thoughts that
brought him to so deep a study; thinking that Agelastus stood fixed, with the
eye of his mind cast upon the beauty of some fair Mistress: but he, who
thought of nothing less, thus answered his expectation.

Agel. Nor fate, nor fortune, whose enforcing power,
Man still complains, upon his state to lower;
Do work these changes: man himselfe's the cause;
They be but wheels that keep their movers laws:
Yet always when he sees his fault too late,
He turns it over upon chance or fate.
Each man is borne a King, his passions be
The practice of his soveraignetie:
Who though they still their sovereign's good pretend
^onspire his ruin for their private end.
The love of skin-thick beauty draws his eye
To yield to love, his reasons Majesty.
His fear throws Bugbeares in his way, his state
Is still infested by revengefull hate.
His idle grief, for what he might prevent,
Or might not, does usurp his government.
Thus he whom God ordained a King to be,
Obeyes his subjects, and is never free.
Besides, whose state's so firm, into whose way
The world flings not his joys injurious stay?
The surges of the deep, whose jaws devour
The Merchants far-fetcht hopes, the skies that pour
A second deluge on the plow-mans corn,
When now his fields are ready to be shorn;
The soldiers long remat, the doubtful chance
Of bloody war, the newfound ordinance,
The City horns, the Courts brave flattery,
Do force content to dwell with poverty.

Then looking round upon the Princes, as if by their survey he were again
enabled to speak, he thus said: Honor, thou spongie Idol of man's mind,
That sok'st content away, thou have confinde
Ambitious man, and not his destiny,
Within the bounds of form and ceremony.
Oh happy life of shepherds, whose content
Rests in a soul that is free and innocent:
They stay their lodging, and remove their roof,
Not for their own, but for their flocks behoof;
While some (to fill the blanks of their mean story)
Do travel in their cares, to gain vain glory.
They never leave the plains, unless sometime
To look about them, they the mountains clime,
But dwell not there; for even this change does show
What choyser sweets they do enjoy below.
Here the rough winds do buzze about their ears,
The rockie steepness adds unto their fears:
Here they are ready to be torn assunder,
By malice's hateful blasts, and envie's thunder.
From hence they may descend; but greatness stay,
If you come down, it must be the other way:
For it is a bliss, in which your honor shares,
That though you would, you cannot leave your cares.
When Agelastus ended, the company might see a man, who seemed to be
misfortunes herald, with a rope about his neck, make toward the Queen of
Corinth, and cast himself at her feet. They, thinking it had been some
Shepheardish invention, expected a while the conceit of it: but approaching
after a time nearer to him, they might discern that it was Tenarus the usurper
of Corinth; who hearing of the Queens welfare, and her happy marriage to
Amphialus (finding in his own practice for the Crown, the Corint^ians
aptness to embrace change, and considering the powerfulness of his enemies)
had come thi^^er in the basest form of humbleness, to set a belief upon his
submission. Him the Queen (because he was a suitor on her marriage da^)
pardoned, and restored to his possessions, forfeyted by his treason to the
Crown; only she caused his liberty to be restrained, until her going to
Corinth: whither, after she had taken leave of Basilius and the rest of the
royal company, she took her journey; making Amphialus, within a year after
her departure, a happy father of a much-promising son, whom the named
Haleamphilus. Evarcus also soon after, with his son Pyrocles, and Philoclea,
and his nephew Musidorus, together with Pamela (who was desirous both to
accompany her sister, and to see her mother of Thessaly) parted from Mantinea;
leaving Basilius and Gynecia, when they had accompanied them to the frontiers
of Arcadia, to the happy quiet of their after life.

Stat. THAEB. Tu long sequere and vestigia semper adora^
Sidnei --

Finis.
These FOLLOWING VERSES at several times came to the hands of the right worsh.
Sir R^c who being the Authors dear friend, and therefore thinking them too good
to perish, has caused them here to be annexed to his book.

Directions to a Painter to draw his Mistri^.
Vvelcome Apelles: may a faithful eye,
A steadie hand and painful industry
Crown thy endeavors. Here my Mistress stands;
Draw such a face, such hay^e, such eyes, such hands.
The pensil's ready, and the Painter's set;
The table's placed must bear her counterfeit.
He views her face, and with that look there sinkes.
A powerful charm, as who of Lethes drinks
He stupid stands, forgetful of his Art,
While wonder carves her figure in his heart.
At length revived, he weanes his charmed sight,
And then all things seem overcast with night.
His trembling hand an ill formed line indents,
Meander-LIKE, erring in thousand bents:
For now his eye, though that her face be near,
Powers in the Species to his heart not here.
Asking at length how such a shivering cold
So soon withdrew his blood; the cause he told,
And did entreat she might retire from thence,
Whose aspect dimmed his sight, and bound his senc^.
She Is gone: he then desires my tongue should be
The glass, wherein my Mistress he might see.
I do obey, willing to bear a part
In her description, with the Painters Art.
Draw first an Orb, a perfect Spheare-like round,
With amber locks d^sheveld, bravely crowned:
Let Ivorie, and never-melting snow,
Both soft, and sleek, upon her ^orehead grow.
Draw then Favonius sweetly breathing here,
And softly bounding from my Mistress leere.
Let him bear back when^ then he smoothly purles^
Her waving tresses in the golden curles.
O give him leave a while to kiss her hair,
To bind himself, then loose the captive air:
But when constraind he needs from thence must go,
Paint him unwilling; for I know he is so.
Draw here bright Phoebus in his midday Coach,
And let his rays my Mistress eyes approach.
Then like the Ocean against a high swollen stream,
A while let them encounter beam to beam.
At length, draw him eclipsd, to end these wars,
With greater light, as he does smaler stars.
Then d^aw her nose, whose alabaster white
May join in all eyes wonder with delight.
Here place the air, still waiting to succeed
His fellow servant, who too largely feed
For his attendance: pass her pretty pores,
Their swee^ly breathing ever-open dores^
And save the inward treasure of her heart,
Stored with her thoughts, all goodness chiefest part.
When he is compeld from thence to take his flight,
O let him often stay, to bless his sight^
From selfe-swolne mountains of increasing air,
With the best prospect of so sweet a fair.
But when these liquid ^ills, striving to stay,
O returned with pride of greatness, break away,
Then let him vanish, and uns^ene remain,
As now despayring to return again.
Draw next her cheeks, and let a crimson redd
(Not strictly bounded, nor too largely spredd)
Be here enthroned: draw then her pure white skin,
The veil transparant of the blood within.
From these two founts convey (but under ground)
The rosy dye, which in her lips is found.
Now paint them shut, that so their mutual kiss
May be the model of a peaceful bliss.
Now let her speak, then let the gentle wind,
Close up his lips, to hear my Mistress mind.
Nay, this Favonius must observe I know,
His ears being charmed, he must forget to blow.
Shape here a figure to perclose the face,
Not merely round nor pointed, both disgrace
Her perfect feature: But I Will bring her in;
Though I want words, you may express her chin.
P. O stay, you are better to dispense with some,
Then cause me leave a blanke for what is to come.
Then draw, but what? alas a shadowing night
Now stops the current of mine eyes delight.
Her Band, her Gown, be envious vayles that ^ide
Her stately neck, her round and slender side:
Yet now a while again that cloud remove,
And draw her hand, the adamant of love.
Here meare the soft and alabaster plains,
With the neat windings of her azure veins;
And cause them first from forth five Rocks of snow,
As from their springs, in many streams to flow:
And let them still increase, as swollen with pride
Nature had made them through such fields to glide.
Now Painter, you may draw her outside down:
Your Art (without my help) can paint a gown.
O draw it not so long, 'twill hide her foot,
These graces sweet support, and graceful root.
Paint not a spangled Rose, to show the In
Where such a neat fine guest is lodged within.
Now all is done, but Painter you must censure
If this come near my Mistress portrature.
P. Yes sir, this color, and this form of face,
Resemble somewhat; but the life of grace,
Life's active motion in her rolling eye,
Her humble state, and courteous majesty,
What art can paint, or what mellefluous tongu^
Can fit the subject with a worthy song?
Then to conclude, good sir I must confess,
Your tongue did little, and my hand did less.
Finis.
The description of a Tempest.
Bound for my country from the Cambrian shore^
I cut the deep, the Mariners implore,
With whistling prayer, the wind grown too mild,
To hasten to beget their sails with child.
The humble Sea, as of our ship afraid,
Pale, breathless prostrate at our feet, is laid.
The Morn scarce out of bed, did blush ^o see
Her rude beholders so unmannerly.
She scarce had blushed, when she began to hide
Her rosy cheeks, like to a tender Bride.
To suit Aurora, all the heavens put on
A mournful veil of black, as she had done;
And gave the garments to the Sea they wore,
Wherewith it grows more blew now then before.
This stage being set, the lightnings tapers were,
The drumms such thunder as affright each ear.
Upon this summons, great King Eolus,
Attended on by Nothus and Zephirus,
Enters, and where the King his steps does place,
The waves do swell, trod with so proud a grace.
He was to speak, but opening of his mouth,
The boisterous wind did blow so hard at South,
I could not hear, but as the rest told me,
He spoke the prologue for a Tragedy.
Behold huge mountains in the watery maine,
That lately was a smooth and liquid plain,
Ore which our Sea-drunke Barque does reeling ride.
She must obey, but knows not to which tide:
For still she plowes that rugged mutinous place,
All skillful Pilots call the breaking race.
A while ambition bare her up so hie,
Her proud discolored flagg does touch the sky:
But when the winds these waves do bear away,
She hangs in air, and makes a little stay:
But down again from such presumptuous height
She Is headlong borne by her attractive weight,
Into the hollow of a gaping grave,
Entombed of each side with a stately wave.
Down pour these billows from their height of pride:
Our Barque receives them in at every side.
But when they find no place where to remain,
The scuddle holes do let them out again.
At length, as Castles where no force can find
A conquest, by assault are undermined:
So in our Barque, whose walls no wave^ could break,
We do discover a most traiterous leake.
To this, though much our hopes do now decline,
We do oppose the Pump, our countermine:
That midway breaks, whereat our Master cries
All hope is past, the Seas must close our eyes.
And to augment deaths hideous show the more,
We in the Poope can scarce discern the Prore:
Such ugly mists had overcast the air,
That heaven I thought had meant we should despayre^
But in the last act of this Tragedy,
Behold our great Gods all-d^s^erning eye,
Caused in an instant these thick mists disband^
The winds are calmed, and we at Skerries land.
Dread ruler of the floods, whose powerful will
Each thing that has a being must fulfill;
Whose hand marks forth the end of each man's dayes^
And steers our humane ship in unknown ways:
To thee great guide this incense I present,
Thou gav'st me time to live and ^o repent.
To his near kinswoman.
Laid in my bed, to give each wearied sense
For ^ormer pains, a drowsy recompense;
My ^aking mind, ^o whose ill hap it ^ell
To be my care-tyr'd bodies Centinell:
Borne on the winged Cha^^st of my thought,
Unto the bank^s of Acheron was brought:
Where greedy Tantall makes a vain pu^ s^^te
To catch the co^sening, falling, flying fruit.
Sometimes his watery mouth and downecast eyes,
For pity craves the ebbing stood to rise.
But in his prayer he deceip^ prepares,
And strives to catch the Apples unawares:
They at his motion as a shadow fly,
And give a sur^e^^ only to his eye.
I smiled; ^e l^ok'd, and w^sht I might remain
Another Tantall with as little gain.
I f^ig^ted si a^^, and straight my curious eye
Proved Tantals wish a ^atall prophecy.
I see the sweetness of your ruddie leere,
And cannot taste, and yet I am too near:
Neerenesse does dull, and set my teeth on edge;
Your blou^ restraines affection's privilege.
I love to look upon you, yet less dear
You never are, then when I see you're near.
Distance in some does quench affections ^ire,
But neerenesse is the death of my desire.
Thus neerenesse hurts; O that the Fates allowed
That You or Love a little were removed.
On her lips.
Shamefac't Cherrie, blush no more,
Nor esteem your beauties store
To be lessened, cause you see
Her lips excel much worth may be
In your Vermillion, though no eye
Can discern a par^lie.
You worthy were to set at odds,
As did the Apple, all the Godds:
But then had nature shown this pay^e,
These rosy lips so sweetly fair;
Both would be prizelesse, and the bliss
That crowned reward had been a kiss.
He shows his Mistress how he came to love her before he saw her.
Dear fair, the blind boy loath to be deprived
Of seeing her, whom fame so much admired.
Assumed mine eyes, to gaze on that bright day
Which to the world your orient beams display:
And now returns them freight with love to me^
To make me smart for what the wagge did see.
Thus I, though absent, love; do not despise
What Cupid gives for interest of mine eyes.
On the beauteous black Ophelia
Heavens glorious Senators of late,
To mend the worlds confused state,
Met on Olympus, where the wrongs
By Poets over-studied songs,
Done to the Gods, they must redress,
And after coming tongues repress.
Unshorn Apollo shows his hair,
By thousands cut ^o make her fair
Whom they adore. The Sun does say,
He scarce has time to serve the day
They hale him so who poetize,
Into their Mistress beauteous eyes;
That he is hid with mere disgrace,
To see two Suns in every face.
But mother Earth, to move the more,
Vnlac'd the garment she then wore:
Then said, Behold ^ do^ complain
Who most have cause, I feel the paine^
My Alabaster and my Pearl
Make up the parts of every gyrle^
See all the rooms of Poetry
Hung round with my embroydery.
They all were moved, a mean was found
To help the Gods, and save the ground:
With one consent they do decree,
The chief of beauties black should bee^
Then Jove, to see how beauty might
Become that color, brings to light
The sweet Ophelia, whose black eyes
(The Stage whereon loves tragedies
Be daily acted) show they err
Who bring their similes so far.
The Suns bright rays, Apollo's hair
Fit not this new well chosen fa'yre;
No gorgeous lemms, no earthly pelf,
Black has no likeness but it self.
A Farewell.
Live ever happy, let my love remain
A pledge for me, till I return again.
Let not these lips, whose sweetly yielding tuc^
With one dear kiss reward my love too much,
Be made a sponge, whence each man may be free
To suck the Nectar only due to me.
Seal up these eyes, let not them wound each heart,
I do desire few fellows in my smart.
Let these thrice-happie gloves still shade the plains,
Thus sweetly interlac'd with azure veins:
Cut not their singers, lest the curious eye
Perhaps these shafts of love chance ^^espie.
What would it then avayle to hide the rest,
When that sole part inslames his wounded breast?
Be always sitting: no, that posture ^ills
The steadie eyes with that, that charms that kills.
Walk then awhile; alas that motion gives
Life unto beauty, it by moving lives.
What can you then observe, what may I wish
That helps not to betray where beauty is?
Then dearest, since no art can hinder love,
I will make you famous if you constant prove.
O gain that praise, add that unto your feature:
You are the fairest, be the faithfull'st creature.
To his BOOK.
There is a Saint whom you may ^inde,
If you have ears, or be not blind^;
Even she whose speech and beauty charms
The blind boy from his mothers arms.
Not that; O what a fool thou art,
Come back and read her in my heart:
And then before you fly away,
I Will teach you w^ere and what to say.
I Will show you ways, that though I fail
To gain a ki^^e, you may prevayle.
Tie up in knots your strings, and lie
Near her, in gilded braverie.
She Will look, and with her snow-white hands
Strive to untye your knottie bands.
Yield not: if she ask the cause,
Say, that such are women's laws.
Then will a pretty rage, incense
Her teeth to offer violence.
Be happy then, enjoy a bliss:
I want, you have; you gain, I wish.
She kissed in anger, you will complaine^
Would I had kisses of disdain.
What if a niggard cherries have,
Of which his friends a few do crave;
The cherries taste nothing the worse
That he bestows them with a curse?
Let others have I know not what,
I Will buy such fruit at any rate.
But be not proud, forget not me,
Thou silly piece of Poetry.
Say that my Love, my only store,
Is gone, and can return no more.
She Will send it back, she will say, but swear
She cannot, till her eyes forbear
To wound anew; else like a boy
That lets his hopping Sparrow toy
In new-go! freedom, and again
Restraines him with his flaxen rain:
She Will give and take, and loose and tye^
And make a sport of victory.
O no, ^faith I am more wise,
I Will never leave to love her eyes.
Finis.

