CERTAIN MATTERS CONcerning the Realm of Scotland, composed together. The
Genealogy of all the Kings of Scotland, their lives, the years of their
coronation, the time of their reign, the year of their death, and manner
thereof, with the place of their burial. The whole Nobility of Scotland,
their surnames, their titles of honor, the names of their chief houses, and
their marriages. The Arch-bishopricks, Bishoprics, Abbacies, Priories, and
Nunries of Scotland. The Knights of Scotland. The form of the oath of a Duke,
Earl, Lord of Parliament, and of a Knight. The names of Barons, Lairds, and
chief Gentlemen in every Sherifdome. The names of the principal Clannes, and
Surnames of the Borderers not landed. The Stewartries and Baileries of
Scotland. The order of the calling of the Table of the Session. The description
of whole Scotland, with all the Isles, and names thereof. The most rare and
wonderful things in Scotland.
As they were Anno Domini, 1597.

LONDON, Printed by A. Hatfield, for John ^lasket dwelling at the sign of the
Blacke^ Bear in Paul's Churchyard. 1603.

A CRONOLOGIE OF all the Kings of Scotland, declaring what year of the world
and of Christ they began to reign, how long they reigned, and what qualities
they were of, according as they be set forth and imprinted with the great
book of the Statutes of the Realm of Scotland.
FERGVS, the first king of Scotland, the son of Ferquhard, a Prince of
Ireland, began to reign in the year of the world 3641. before the coming of
our Savior Jesus Christ, 330. years: In the first year of the 112. Olympiade:
and in the 421. year of the building of Rome: about the beginning of the 3.
Monarchy of the Grecians, when Alexander the great overthrew Darius Codomannus
the last Monarch of Persia. He was a valiant Prince, and died by shipwreck,
upon the seacoast of Ireland, near unto Craig-fergus, in the 25. year of his
reign.

2 Feritharis, brother to Fergus, began to reign in the year of the world,
3666. in the year before the coming of Christ 305. He was a good Iusticiar.
In his time there was a Law made, that if the sons of the King departed,
were so young, that they could not rule, that then in that case, the nearest in
blood should reign, being in age sufficient for government: and then after his
death, the Kings children should succeed: which law continued unto Kenneth the
third his days, 1025. years almost. He was slain by the means of Ferlegus,
Fergus his brothers son, in the fifteenth year of his reign.

3 Mainus, king Fergus son, succeeded to his fathers brother, in the year of
the world, 3680. and in the year before the coming of Christ, 290. He was a
wise and good king, and married the King of Picts daughter, that did bear him
two sons. He died peaceably in the 29. year of his reign.

4 Dornadilla succeeded to his father Mainus, in the year of the world, 3709.
In the year before the coming of Christ, 262. A good king. He made the first
laws concerning hunting. He had two sons, and died peaceably in the eight
and twentieth year of his reign.

5 Nothatus succeeded to his brother Dornadilla in the year of the world, 3738.
and the year before the coming of Christ 233. He was a greedy and a cruel
tyrant. He was slain by Doualus, one of his Nobles, in the twentieth year of
his reign.

6 Reutherus, Dornadilla his son, began to reign in the year of the world,
3758. in the year before the coming of Christ, 213. He was a good King, and
died peaceably in the six and twentieth year of his reign.

7 Reutha succeeded to his brother Reutherus, in the year of the world, 3784.
In the year before the coming of Christ, 187. A good King. He of his own
accord left the kingdom, and lived a private life, when he had ruled
fourteen years.

8 Thereus, Reutherus son, began to reign in the year of the world, 3798.
in the year before Christ, 173. He was an unwise and cruel Tyrant. He was
expelled and banished the realm, in the twelfth year of his reign, by his
Nobles: And Conanus, a wise and grave man, was made governor of the land. He
died in exile in the city of York.

9 Iosina succeeded his brother Thereus, in the year of the world, 3810. In
the year before Christ, 161. He was a quiet and good Prince, a good Medicinar
and Herbister, or skillful in Physic and the nature of herbs. He died in
peace, in the four and twentieth year of his reign.

10 Finnanus, Iosina his son, began to reign in the year of the world,
3834. In the year before Christ, 137. A good King. He was much given to the
superstitious religion of the Druydes. He died in peace, in the 30 year of his
reign.

11 Durstus, Finnanus son, succeeded to his father in the year of the world,
864. In the year before Christ, 107. A cruel and traiterous Tyrant, slain by
his Nobles in battle, in the ninth year of his reign.

12 Euenus the first, succeeded to his brother Durstus, in the year of the
world, 3873. In the year before the coming of Christ, 98. A wise, just and
virtuous Prince. He died peaceably in the ninteenth year of his reign.

13 Gillus, Euenus bastard son, succeeded to his father, in the year of the
world, 3892. In the year before Christ, 79. A crafty Tyrant, slain in battle
by Cadallus, in the second year of his reign.

14 Euenus the second, Donallus son, King Finnanus brother, began to reign
in the year of the world, 3894. In the year before the coming of Christ, 77.
A good and civil King. He died in peace, in the 17 year of his reign.

15 Ederus, son to Dochamus, that was son to Durstus the eleventh King,
began to reign in the year of the world, 3911. In the year before the
coming of Christ 60. A wise, valiant and good Prince. He died in the eight and
fortieth year of his reign.

16 Euenus the third, succeeded to his father Ederus, in the year of the
world, 3959. In the year before the coming of Christ, 12. A luxurious and
covetous wicked King. He was taken by his Nobles, and imprisoned, and died in
prison in the seventh year of his reign.

17 Metellanus, Ederus brothers son, began to reign in the year of the
world, 3966. Four years before Christ's Incarnation. A very modest and good
King. He died in the 39 year of his reign. In his time there was peace at
home and abroad, and our Savior Jesus Christ was borne, and suffered death in
his reign.

18 Caractatus, the son of Cadallanus and of Eropeia, which was daughter to
Metellanus, began to reign in the year of the world 4005. In the year after
the birth of Christ, 35. He was a wise and valiant King, and reigned twenty
years.

19 Corbredus 1. succeeded to his brother Caractacus, in the year of the world
4025. In the year of Christ 55. A wise King, and a good Iusticiar, or Executor
of Justice. He died in peace in the 18 year of his reign.

20 Dardannus, Nephew to Metellanus began to reign, in the year of the world
4042. In the year of Christ 72. A cruel tyrant. He was taken in battle, and
beheaded by his own subjects in the fourth year of his reign.

21 Corbredus 2. surnamed Galdus, son to the former Corbredus, began to
reign in the year of the world 4046. In the year of Christ, 76. A valiant
and worthy King: for he had many wars with the Romans, and was often
victorious over them. He died in peace, in the 35. year of his reign.

22 Lugthacus, succeeded to his father Corbredus the second, In the year of
the world 4080. In the year of Christ, 110. A lecherous bloody Tyrant. He was
slain by his Nobles in the third year of his reign.

23 Mogallus, son to the sister of Corbredus the second. He began to reign
in the year of the world, 4083. In the year of Christ, 113. A good King and
victorious in the beginning of his reign: But in the end of his life, became
inclined to tyranny, lechery and covetousness, and was slain by his Nobles in
the 36 year of his reign.

24 Conarus succeeded to his father Mogallus, in the year of the world, 4119.
In the year of Christ, 149. A lecherous tyrant. He was imprisoned by his
Nobles, and died in prison in the 14 year of his reign, and Argadus a Noble
man was made Governor.

25 Ethodius the first, son to the sister of Mogallus, began to reign in the
year of the world 4133. In the year of Christ 163. He was a good Prince. He
was slain by an Irish Harper, whom he admitted to lie in his chamber, in the
33 year of his reign.

26 Satraell succeeded to his brother Ethodius the first, in the year of the
world, 4165. In the year of Christ, 195. A cruel Tyrant. He was slain by his
own Courtiers in the 4 year of his reign.

27 Donald 1. the first Christian King of Scotland, succeeded to his brother
Satraell in the year of the world 4169. In the year of Christ 199. A good and
religious King. He was the first of the Kings of Scotland that coined money of
gold and silver. He died in the eighteenth year of his reign.

28 Ethodius the second, son to Ethodius the first, began to reign in the
year of the world 4186. In the year of Christ 216. An unwise and base-minded
King, governed by his Nobles. He was slain by his own Guard in the sixteenth
year of his reign.

29 Athrico succeeded to his father Ethodius the second, in the year of the
world 4201. In the year of Christ, 231. A valiant Prince in the beginning, but
he degenerated and became vicious: and being hardly pursued by his Nobles for
his wicked life, slew himself in the twelfth year of his reign.

30 Nathalocus, as some write, son to the brother of Athrico, began to reign
in the year of the world, 4212. In the year of Christ, 242. A cruel tyrant,
slain by his Nobles, and cast away into a privy, in the eleventh year of his
reign.

31 Findocus, son of Athrico, began to reign in the year of the world,
4223. In the year of Christ, 253. A good King and valiant, slain by fained
Hunters, at the instigation of Donald, Lord of the Isles, his brother, in the
eleventh year of his reign.

32 Donald the second, succeeded to his brother Findocus, in the year of the
world 4234. In the year of Christ, 264. A good Prince. He was wounded in
battle, and being overcome, died for grief and sorrow in the first year of
his reign.

33 Donald the third, Lord of the Isles, brother to Findocus, began to reign in
the year of the world, 4235. In the year of Christ, 265. A cruel tyrant,
slain by Crathilinthus his successor, in the twelfth year of his reign.

34 Crathilinthus, Findocui son, began to reign in the year of the world
4247. In the year of Christ, 277. A valiant and a godly King. He purged the
land from the Idolatrous superstition of the Druides, and planted the sincere
Christian Religion. He died in peace in the four and twentieth year of his
reign. In his time was Constantine the great Emperor of Christendom borne in
England.

35 Fincormachus, son to the brother of the father of Crathilinthus, began
his reign in the year of the world, 4271. In the year of Christ, 301. A
godly King and valiant. He was a worthy furtherer of the kingdom of Christ in
Scotland. He died in peace in the seven and fortieth year of his reign.

36 Romachus, brothers son to Crathilinthus, began to reign in the year of
the world, 4318. In the year of Christ, 348. A cruel Tyrant, slain by his
Nobles, and his head stricken off, in the third year of his reign.

37 Angusianus, Crathilinthus brothers son, succeeded to Romachus in the
year of the world 4321. In the year of Christ, 351. A good King, slain in
battle by the Picts, in the third year of his reign.

38 Fethelmachus, another brothers son of Crathilinthus, he began to reign
in the year of the world, 4324. In the year, of Christ, 354. He was a valiant
King: for he overcame the Picts, and slew their King. He was betrayed to the
Picts by an Harper, and slain by them in his own chamber, in the third year
of his reign.

39 Eugenius the first, Fincormachus son, began to reign in the year of the
world 4327. In the year of Christ, 357. A valiant, just and good King. He was
slain in battle by the Picts and Romans in the third year of his reign and
the whole Scottish nation was utterly expelled the I Will, by the Picts and
Romans, and remained in exile about the space of four and forty years.

40 Fergus the second, Erthus sons son to Ethodius, Eugenius the first his
brother, returning into Scotland, with the help of the Danes and Goths, and
his own contrymen, who were gathered to him out of all countries where they
were dispersed, conquered his Kingdom of Scotland again out of the Romans
and Picts hands. He began his reign in the year of the world, 4374. In the
year of Christ, 404. He was a wise, valiant and good King. He was slain by
the Romans in the sixteenth year of his reign.

41 Eugenius the second, son of Fergus the second, succeeded to his father in
the year of the world, 4390. In the year of Christ, 420. He was a valiant and
a good Prince. He subdued the Britons, and died in the two and thirtith year
of his reign.

42 Dongardus succeeded, to his brother Eugenius the second, in the year of
the world, 4421. In the year of Christ, 451. A godly, wise and valiant Prince.
He died in the fifth year of his reign.

43 Constantine the first, succeeded to his brother Dongardus, in the year of
the world, 4427. In the year of Christ, 457. A wicked Prince. He was slain by
a Noble man in the Isles, whose daughter he had defiled, in the two and
twentieth year of his reign.

44 Congallus the first, son of Dongardus, began to reign in the year of
the world, 4449. In the year of Christ, 479. A good and quiet Prince. He died
in peace in the two and twentieth year of his reign.

45 Goranus, or Conranus succeeded to his brother Congallus the first, in the
year of the world, 4471. In the year of Christ 501. A good and wise Prince.
He died in the four and thirtith year of his reign.

46 Eugenius the third Congallus son, succeeded to his father and uncle, in
the year of the world 4505. In the year of Christ 535. A wise king and a good
Iusticiar. He died in the three and twentieth year of his reign.

47 Congallus the second, or Conuallus, succeeded to his brother Eugenius the
third, in the year of the world, 4528. In the year of Christ 558. A very good
Prince. He died in peace in the eleventh year of his reign.

48 Kinnatillus succeeded to his brother Congallus the second, in the year of
the world, 4539. In the year of Christ, 569. A good Prince. He died in the
first year of his reign.

49 Aidanus, son of Goranus, the forty fifth king, began to reign in the
year of the world, 4540. In the year of Christ, 570. A godly and good Prince.
He died in the five and thirtieth year of his reign.

50 Kenethus the first, surnamed Keir, Congallus the second his son, began to
reign in the year of the world, 4575. In the year of Christ, 605. A
peaceable Prince. He died in the first year of his reign.

51 Eugenius the fourth, son of Aidanus, began to reign in the year of the
world, 4576. In the year of Christ, 606. A valiant and a good King. He died in
the sixteenth year of his reign.

52 Ferquhard, or Ferchard 1. succeeded to his father Eugenius the 4. in the
year of the world, 4591. In the year of Christ, 621. A bloody tyrant. He slew
himself in the prison, whereinto he was put by the Nobles of his Realm, in
the twelfth year of his reign.

53 Donald the fourth, succeeded to his brother Ferquhard the first, in the
year of the world, 4602. In the year of Christ, 632. He was a good and
religious King. He was drowned in the water of Tay, while he was fishing, in
the foureteenth year of his reign.

54 Ferquhard, or Ferchard 2. succeeded to his brother Donald the 4. in the
year of the world, 4616. In the year of Christ, 646. A very wicked man. He was
bitten by a Woolfe in hunting: of the which ensued a Fever, whereof he died in
the 18. year of his reign.

55 Malduine, son to Donald the fourth, began to reign in the year of the
world, 4634. In the year of Christ, 664. A good Prince, strangled by his wife,
who suspected him of adultery, in the twentieth year of his reign. She was
therefore burned.

56 Eugenius the fifth, Malduine his brothers son, began to reign in the
year of the world, 4654. In the year of Christ, 684. A false Prince, slain
by the Picts in battle, in the fourth year of his reign.

57 Eugenius the sixth, son to Ferquhard the second, began to reign in the
year of the world, 4658. in the year of Christ, 688. A good Prince. He died
in peace in the tenth year of his reign.

58 Ambirkelethus, son of Findanus, son of Eugenius the fifth, began to
reign in the year of the world, 4667. In the year of Christ, 697. He was a
vicious Prince, and was slain by the shot of an arrow in the second year of
his reign. The shooter thereof is unknown or set out in history.

59 Eugenius the seventh succeeded to his brother Ambirkelethus, in the year
of the world, 4669. In the year of Christ, 699. He died in peace in the
seventeenth year of his reign. A good Prince.

60 Mordacus, Ambirkelethus son, began to reign in the year of the world,
4685. In the year of Christ, 715. A good Prince. He died in the sixteenth
year of his reign.

61 Etfinus, Eugenius the seventh his son, began to reign in the year of
the world, 4700. In the year of Christ, 730. He died in peace in the one and
thirtieth year of his reign.

62 Eugenius the eight, Mordacus son, began to reign in the year of the
world, 4771. In the year of Christ, 761. A good Prince in the beginning of his
reign: and then after, degenerating from his good life, he was slain by his
Nobles in the third year of his reign.

63 Fergus the third, Etfinus son, began to reign in the year of the world,
4734. In the year of Christ, 764. A lecherous Prince, poisoned by his wife in
the third year of his reign.

64 Soluathius, Eugenius the eight his son, began to reign in the year of
the world, 4737. In the year of Christ, 767. A good Prince. He died in peace
in the twentieth year of his reign.

65 Achaius, Etfinus son, began to reign in the year of the world, 4757. In
the year of Christ, 787. A peaceable, good and godly Prince. He made a league
with Charles the great Emperor, and King of France, which remains
inuiolably kept to this day. He died in the two and thirtieth year of his
reign.

66 Congallus, or Conuallus, Achaius fathers brothers son, began to reign in
the year of the world, 4789. In the year of Christ, 819. A good Prince. He
died in the fifth year of his reign.

67 Dongallus, Soluathius son, succeeded in the year of the world, 4794. In
the year of Christ, 824. A valiant and good Prince. He was drowned, coming
over the river of Spey, to war against the Picts, in the seventh year of his
reign.

68 Alpinus, Achaius son, began to reign in the year of the world, 4801. In
the year of Christ, 831. A good Prince. He was taken in battle, and beheaded
by the Picts, in the third year of his reign.

69 Kenneth the second, surnamed the Great, succeeded to his father Alpinus, in
the year of the world, 4804. In the year of Christ, 834. A good and a valiant
Prince. He utterly overthrew the Picts in diverse battles, expelled them out of
the land, and joined the kingdom of the Picts to the Crown of Scotland. He
died in peace, in the twentieth year of his reign.

70 Donald the fifth, succeeded to his brother Kenneth the second, in the year
of the world, 4824. In the year of Christ, 854. A wicked Prince. He slew
himself in the fifth year of his reign.

71 Constantine the second, son of Kenneth the second, began to reign in the
year of the world, 4829. In the year of Christ, 859. A valiant Prince. He was
slain by the Danes in a battle, stricken at Carraill in Fife, in the
sixteenth year of his reign.

72 Ethus, surnamed Alipes, the son of Constantine the second, succeeded to
his father in the year of the world, 4844. In the year of Christ, 874. A
vicious prince. He was imprisoned by his Nobles, where he died in the second
year of his reign.

73 Gregory, surnamed the Great, son of Dongallus the second, began to reign
in the year of the world, 4846. In the year of Christ, 876. A Prince valiant,
victorious and renowned through the world in his time; he died in peace in the
eightteenth year of his reign.

74 Donald the sixth, son of Constantine the second, began to reign in the
year of the world, 4863. In the year of Christ 893. A valiant Prince. He died
in peace, being loved of his subjects, in the eleventh year of his reign.

75 Constantine the third, son of Ethus, surnamed Alipes. began to reign in
the year of the world, 4874. In the year of Christ, 904. He was a valiant
King, yet he prospered not in his wars against England, and therefore being
weary of his life, he became a Monk, and died after he had reigned forty
years as King.

76 Malcolme the first, son of Donald the sixth, began to reign in the year
of the world, 4913. In the year of Christ, 943. A valiant Prince, and a good
Iusticiar, or Executor of Justice. He was slain in Murray, by a conspiracy of
his own subjects, in the ninth year of his reign.

77 Indulfus, son of Constantine the third, began to reign in the year of
the world, 4922. In the year of Christ. 952. A valiant and a good Prince. He
had many battles with the Danes, whom he overcame; but in the end he was slain
by them in a stratageme of war, in the ninth year of his reign.

78 Duffus, the son of Malcolme the first, began to reign in the year of
the world, 4931. In the year of Christ, 961. A good Prince, and a severe
Iusticiar, or Executor of Justice. He was slain by one Donald at Forres in
Murray, and was buried secretly under the bridge of a river beside Kinlosse;
but the matter was revealed, and the murderer and his wife that consented
thereto, severely punished. He reigned five years.

79 Culenus, Indulfus son, began to reign in the year of the world, 4936.
In the year of Christ, 966. A vicious and effeminate Prince. He was slain at
Methuen, by Radardus, a Noble man (whose daughter he had defiled) in the fourth
year of his reign.

80 Kenneth the third, Duffus brother, began to reign in the year of the
world, 4940. In the year of Christ, 970. A valiant and a wise Prince: but in
the end he became cruel, and slew Malcolme his brothers son: and in Gods
judgment, who suffers not innocent blood to be unpunished, he was slain, as
some say, by a shaft or arrow, shot by a device or slight, out of an image
fixed in a wall, at Fetticarne, by the means of a Noble woman there, called
Fenella, in the four and twentieth year of his reign.

81 Constantine the fourth, surnamed Calvus, Culenus son, began to reign in
the year of the world, 4964. In the year of Christ, 994. An usurper of the
Crown. He was slain in battle, at the town of Crawmond in Louthian, in the
second year of his reign.

82 Grimus, Duffus son, began to reign in the year of the world, 4966. in
the year of Christ, 996. A vicious Prince. He was slain in battle by
Malcolme the second, his successor, in the eighth year of his reign.

83 Malcolme the second, son of Kenneth the third, began to reign in the
year of the world, 4974. In the year of Christ, 1004. A valiant and a wise
Prince, who made many good laws, of the which a few are yet extant. He was
slain by a conspiracy of his Nobles at the Castle of Glammes, who after the
slaughter, thinking to escape, were drowned in the water of Forfar: for it
being winter, and the water frozen and covered with Snow, the Ice brake, and
they fell in, in the righteous judgment of God. He reigned thirty years.
Some write, that after a great victory in battle, he did give much of his
lands to his Nobles, and they agreed that he should therefore have the wardship
and custody of their heirs, as long as they were under the age of one and
twenty years, and the profits of all their lands, over and above their
charges for education, and the disposing of them in marriage, and the money
that should be given for their marriage: And that he first did give unto his
Nobles sundry several titles of Honor. Which wardships, marriages, times of
full age, and reliefes, and manner of Liueries of their lands out of the Kings
hands, be in Scotland, very much agreeing to the Laws of England, as many
other parts of the Laws do.

84 Duncane the first, son of Beatrix, daughter of Malcolme the second, began
to reign in the year of the world, 5004. In the year of Christ, 1034. A good
and a modest Prince. He was slain by Macbeth traitorously, in the sixth year
of his reign.

85 Macbeth, son of Douada, daughter of Malcolme the second, began to reign
in the year of the world, 5010. In the year of Christ, 1040. In the beginning
of his reign he behaved himself as a good and just Prince, but after, he
degenerated into a cruel Tyrant. He was slain in battle by his Successor
Malcolme the third, in the seventeenth year of his reign.

86 Malcolme the third, surnamed Cammoir, son of Duncane the first, began to
reign in the year of the world, 5027. In the year of Christ, 1057. A very
religious and valiant Prince: he married Margaret, daughter to Edward surnamed
the Outlaw, son to Edward surnamed Yron-side, King of England, a very good
and religious woman, according to those times, who bare unto him six sons
and two daughters. The sons were Edward the Prince, Edmond, Etheldred, Edgar,
Alexander, David: the daughters were Mathildis or Maud, surnamed Bona, wife to
Henry the first, surnamed Beauclearke, King of England, the son of William
the Conqueror of England: of her virtues there is extant this old Epigram:
Prospera non laetam fecere, nec aspera tristem;
Prospera terror ei, aspera risus erant:
Non decor effecit fragilem, non sceptra superbam;
Sola potens humilis, sola pudica decens.


That is: Prosperity reioiced her not, to her grief was no pain;
Prosperity affraied her alas, affliction was her gain:
Her beauty was no cause of fall, in royal state not proud;
Humble alone in dignity, in beauty only good.


She founded the Church of Carleill. The other daughter was Marie, wife to
Eustathius Earl of Boloigne. King Malcolme builded the Churches of Durehame
and Dumfermeline. He was slain with his son the Prince Edward, in the six
and thirtieth year of his reign, at the besieging of Anwicke, by Robert
Mowbray, surnamed Pearce-eie, and was buried at Tinmouth; but after, he was
removed to Dumfermeline.

87 Donald the seventh, surnamed Bane, usurped the crown after the death of
his brother, in the year of the world, 5063. In the year of Christ, 1093. and
was expelled in the first year of his reign, by Duncane the second, the
bastard son of King Malcolme the third.

88 Duncane the second, usurped the Crown, in the year of the world, 5064, in
the year of Christ, 1094. A rash and foolish Prince. He was slain by
Makpendir the Thane or Earl of the Meirnes, when he had reigned little over a
year, by the procurement of Donald the seventh.

Donald the seventh, made King again in the year of the world, 5065. In the
year of Christ, 1095. And reigned three years. He gave the West and North
Isles to the King of Norway, for to assist him to attain to the Crown of
Scotland. He was taken captive by Edgar, his eyes put out, and died miserably
in prison.

89 Edgar, the son of Malcolme the third, began to reign in the year of the
world, 5068. In the year of Christ, 1098. He builded the Priory of Coldingham.
He was a good Prince. He died at Dundie without succession, and was buried at
Dumfermeline, in the ninth year of his reign.

90 Alexander the first, surnamed Fearce, succeeded to his brother, in the year
of the world, 5077. In the year of Christ, 1107. A very good and valiant
Prince. He builded the Abbacies of Scone and of Saint Colmes-Inche. He married
Sybilla, daughter to William Duke of Normandy, etc. He died in peace, without
succession, at Striuiling, in the 17 year of his reign, and was buried at
Dumfermeline.

91 David the first, commonly called S. David, the youngest son of King
Malcolme the third, succeeded to his brother in the year of the world, 5094.
In the year of Christ, 1124. A good, valiant and religious Prince, according
to those times. He builded many Abbacies, as Haly-rude-house, Kelso, Iedburgh,
Dun-dranan, Cambus-kenneth, Kin-losse, Mel-rosse, New-bottle, Dumfermeline,
Holme in Cumberland, and two religious places at New castle in Northumberland.
He erected four Bishoprics, Rosse, Brechin, Dumblane and Dunkeld. He married
Maude, daughter of Woldeofus Earl of Northumberland and Huntingdon, and of
Iuditha, daughters daughter to William the Conqueror, King of England, by whom
he had one son named Henry, a worthy and good youth, who married Adama,
daughter to William Earl Warren, who bare unto him three sons, Malcolme the
Maiden, William the Lion, and David Earl of Huntingdon, and two daughters,
Adama wife to Florentius Earl of Holland, and Margaret wife to Conanus Duke of
Britain. He died before his father. S. David died in peace at Carleill, in the
29 year of his reign, and was buried at Dumfermeline.

92 Malcolme the fourth, surnamed the Maiden (because he would never marry)
succeeded to his grandfather David 1. in the year of the world, 5123. In the
year of Christ, 1153. A good and meek Prince. He builded the Abbay of Cowper
in Angus, and died at Ied-burgh, and was buried at Dumfermeline in the twelfth
year of his reign.

93 William, surnamed the Lion, succeeded to his brother Malcolme the fourth,
in the year of the world 5135. In the year of Christ, 1165. A good and a
valiant King. He married Emergarda, daughter to the Earl of Beau-mount. He
builded the Abbacy of Aber-brothok, and she builded the Abbacie of Balmerinoch.
He died at Striuiling in the 49. year of his reign, and was buried at
Aber-brothok.

94 Alexander the second succeeded to his father William, in the year of the
world, 5184. In the year of Christ, 1214. A good Prince. He married Ieane,
daughter to John, King of England, by whom he had no succession. After her
death he married Marie, daughter to Ingelrame, Earl of Coucey in France, by
whom he had Alexander the third. He died at Kernery in the West Isles, and was
buried at Mel-rosse in the 35. year of his reign.

95 Alexander the third succeeded to his father, in the year of the world,
5219. In the year of Christ, 1249. A good Prince. He married first Margaret,
daughter to Henry the third, King of England, by whom he had Alexander the
Prince, who married the Earl of Fla^ders daughter, David and Margaret, who
married Hangonanus, or as some call him, Fricus, son to Magnus 4. King of
Norway, who bare to him a daughter, named Margaret, commonly called, The Maiden
of Norway, in whom King William his whole posterity failed, and the crown of
Scotland returned to the posterity of David Earl of Huntingdon, K. Malcome 4.
and King William his brother. After his sons death (for they died before
himself without succession) in hope of posterity, he married Ioleta, daughter
to the Earl of Dreux in France, by who^ he had no succession. He builded the
cross Church of Peibles. He died of a fall from his horse, upon the sands,
betwixt Easter and Wester King-horne, in the 37. year of his reign, and was
buried at Dumfermeline.

After the death of Alexander the third, which was in the year of the world,
5255. In the year of Christ, 1285. there were six Regents appointed to rule
Scotland: for the South side of Forth, were appointed Robert, the Archbishop
of Glasgowe, John Cummin, and John the great Steward of Scotland. For the North
side of Forth, Mak-duffe, Ear of Fife, John Cummin Earl of Buchan, and
William Fraser, Archbishop of Saint Andrews, who ruled the land about the
space of seven years, until the controversy was decided betwixt John Ballioll
and Robert Bruyse, Grandfather to Robert Bruyse the King of Scotland, who did
come of the two eldest daughters of David Earl of Huntingdon: for Henry
Hastings, who married the youngest daughter, put not in his suit or claim with
the rest, and therefore there is little spoken of him.

96 John Ballioll was preferred before Robert Bruyse, to be King of Scotland,
by Edward 1. surnamed Longshanks, King of England, who was chosen to be the
Judge of the controversy: which preferment was upon a condition, that John
Ballioll should acknowledge King Edward the first, as superior: which
condition he received. He began his reign in the year of the world, 5263. In
the year of Christ, 1293. He was a vaineglorious man, little respecting the
weal or Commonwealth of his Country. He had not reigned fully four years,
when he was expelled by the said Edward the first, King of England: and leaving
Scotland, he departed into the parts of France, where he died long after in
exile. And so Scotland was without a King and government the space of nine
years: during which space, the said Edward the first, surnamed Longshankes,
cruelly oppressed the land, destroyed the whole ancient monuments of the
kingdom, and shed much innocent blood.

97 Robert Bruyse began to reign in the year of the world, 5276. In the year
of Christ, 1306. A valiant, good and wise King. In the beginning of his reign,
he was subject to great misery and affliction, being oppressed by England: but
at length, having overcome and vanquished Edward the second, King of England,
commonly called Edward of Carnaruan, at the field of Bannock-burne, he
delivered Scotland from the wars of England, and set it at full liberty, all
Englishmen by force being expelled out of the land. He married first Isabel,
daughter to the Earl of Mar, who bare unto him Mariory, the wife of Walter,
the great steward of Scotland, from whom, and the offspring of the Stewards, the
King now ruling is descended. After her death, he married Isabel, daughter to
Haymerus de Burc, Earl of Hultonia or Hulster in Ireland, who bare unto him
David the second, Margaret the Countess of Sutherland, and Maude that died
young. He died at Cardros, and was buried at Dumfermeline, in the four and
twentieth year of his reign.

98 David the second succeeded to his father, Robert Bruise, in the year of
the world, 5300. In the year of Christ, 1330. A good Prince, subject to much
affliction in his youth, being first after the death of Thomas Ranulph his
Regent, forced to fly into France, for his own safeguard, and then returning
home, was taken at the battle of Durhame, and was holden twelve years almost,
captive in England: but after, he was restored to his liberty. He married first
Ieane, daughter to Edward the second, King of England: and after her death, he
married Margaret Logie, daughter to Sir John Logie, Knight, and died without
succession at Edinburgh, in the fortieth year of his reign, and was buried at
Haly-rude-house.

99 Edward Ballioll, son to John Ballioll, usurped the crown of Scotland,
being assisted by Edward the third, King of England, in the year of the world,
5302. In the year of Christ 1332 But he was expelled at length by David the 2.
his Regent, and David the second established King.

100 Robert the second, surnamed Bleare-eie, the first of the Stewards, son
to Walter Steward, and Margery Bruyse, daughter to K. Robert Bruyse, succeeded
to his mothers brother, in the year of the world, 5341. In the year of
Christ, 1371. A good and a peaceable Prince. He married first Eufem^, daughter
to Hugh Earl of Rosse, who bare unto him David Earl of Strathern, Walter
Earl of Athol, and Alexander Earl of Buchan, Lord Badzenoth. After her death,
for the affection he bare to his children begotten before his first marriage, he
married Elizabeth Mure, daughter to Sir Adam Mure, Knight, who had borne unto
him John, after called Robert the third, Earl of Carrict, Robert Earl of Fife
and Menteith, and Eufeme, wife to James Earl of Douglas. He died at Dun-donald
the 19 year of his reign, and was buried at Scone.

101 Robert the third, surnamed John Farne-zeir, succeeded to his father, in
the year of the world, 5360. In the year of Christ. 1390. A quiet and a
peaceable Prince. He married Anabel Drummond, daughter to the Lord of Stobhall,
who bare unto him David the Prince, D. of Rothesay, that died in prison of very
extreme famine at Falkland, and James 1. taken captive in his voyage to
France, and detained a captive almost the space of eighteen years in England.
He died of grief and sorrow at Rothesay, when he heard of the death of the one
son, and captivity of the other, and was buried at Paisly, in the 16 year of
his reign.

Robert Earl of Fife and Menteith governed Scotland, in the year of the
world, 5376. In the year of Christ. 1406. He died in the 14 year of his
government, James the first being a captive in England.

Murdo Steward succeeded to his father Robert Earl of Fife, in the government
of Scotland, in the year of the world 5390. In the year of Christ, 1420, and
ruled four years, James the first being yet a captive in England. Both the
father and the son Walter, were executed after, for oppression of the
subjects, by King James the first.

102 James the first began to reign in the year of the world, 5394. In the
year of Christ, 1424. He was a good, learned, virtuous and just Prince. He
married Ieane, daughter to John Duke of Summerset and Marquis Dorset, son to
John of Gaunt, the 4. son to Edward the 3. the victorious King of England:
who bare unto him, James the 2. and six daughters, Margaret wife to Jews the
11. the Daulphine, after King of France, Elizabeth, Duchess of Britayne, Ieane,
Countess of Huntley, Eleanor, Duchess of Austria, Marie, wife to the L. of
Camp veere, and Anabella. He was slain at Perth traitorously by Walter Earl
of Athole, and Robert Grahame, and their Confederates, in the 31. year of his
reign, if we count from the death of his father; and in the 13. year, if we
count from his deliverance out of England, and was buried at the Charter house
of Perth, which he builded.

103 James the second succeeded to his father, in the year of the word, 5407.
In the year of Christ, 1437. A Prince subject to great troubles in his youth,
He married Mary, daughter to Arnold, Duke of Geldre, daughter to the sister of
Charles surnamed Audax, the last Duke of Burgandy, etc. who bare unto him three
sons, James the third, John Earl of Mar, Alexander Duke of Albany, and Mary,
wife first to Thomas Boyde, Earl of Arrane, and after his beheading, to James
Hammilton of Cadzou. He was slain at the siege of Roxburgh in the 24 year of
his reign.

104 James the third succeeded to his father in the year of the world, 5430.
In the year of Christ, 1460. A Prince corrupted by wicked Courtiers. He married
Margaret, daughter to Christianus 1. surnamed Dives K. of Denmark, Norway and
Sweden. He was slain at the field of Bannock-burne, in the 29 year of his
reign, and was buried at Cambus-kenneth.

105 James the fourth succeeded to his father, in the year of the world 5459.
In the year of Christ 1489. A noble and courageous Prince. He married Margaret,
eldest daughter to Henry Earl of Richmond, King of England, and of Elizabeth,
daughter to Edward 4. K. of England, in whose two persons, the two houses of
Lancaster and York were united, and the bloody civil wars of England
pacified. He was slain at Flowdon by England, in the 25 year of his reign.

106 James the fifth succeeded to his father in the year of the world, 5484. In
the year of Christ, 1514. A just Prince and severe. He married first Magdalene,
daughter to Frances 1. King of France, who died shortly thereafter without
succession. After, he married Mary of Lorayne, Duchess of Longevile, daughter to
Claude, Duke of Guise, who bare to him two sons, that died in his life time,
and one daughter, named Mary, mother to our Sovereign Lord the King James that
now is. He died at Falkland, in the 29 year of his reign. He was buried at
Halyrude-house.

107 Mary succeeded to her father James 5. Anno mundi, 5513. Anno Christi.
1543, a virtuous princess: she married first Frances 2. Dolphin, after King of
France: then after his death, returning home into Scotland, she married H.
Stewart Duke of Albany etc. Lord Darley, son to Matthew, Earl of Lennox, (a
comely Prince, Pronepnoy son, the daughters daughter of Henry the seventh,
King of England) to whom she did bear James the sixth. She was put to death in
England the eighth of Febr. after eighteen years captivity.

108 James the sixth, a good, godly and learned Prince, succeeded to his mother
in the year of the world, 5537. In the year of Christ, 1567. He married Anna,
daughter to Frederick the second, King of Denmark, etc. and Sophia, the
daughter of Vlricus the Duke of Mekelburgh, who has borne unto him already,
Henry Frederick the Prince, the ninteenth of February, 1593. And Elizabeth,
the ninteenth of August, 1596. Margaret, 1598, the 24 of December. Charles, D.
of Rosay, the 19 of February. He is now in this year of our Lord Jesus Christ
1603. not only King of Scotland where he has reigned 36 years, but also King
of England, France and Ireland, after the decease of our late most gracious
Sovereign Lady, Elizabeth our Queen, who died the 24 of March now last past.

Miracano: Soloccubuit, nox nulla secuta est.

FINIS.
THE EARLS OF SCOTLAND, THEIR SVRNAMES, TITLES OF HONOR, THEIR marriages, and
names of their chief houses.
LOdouicke Steward, Duke of Lennox, married the second sister of John Ruth-vene,
Earl of Gowry that now is. His chief house, Cruikstone.

EARLS.
James Hammilton, Earl of Arran, unmarried: His chief house, Hammilton Castle.

2 William Douglasse, Earl of Angusse, married the eldest daughter of Laurence,
now Lord Olephant: his chief house, the Castle of Douglasse.

3 George Gordon, Earl of Huntley, married the eldest sister of Lodouicke, now
D. of Lennox, his chief house Strath-bogy.

4 Colene Camphell, Earl of Argyle, Lord Justice general of Scotland, married
a daughter of William Dowglasse, now earl of Morton: his chief house,
Inuer-aray.

5 David Lyndesay, Earl of Crawfurd, married the sister of Patricke, now Lord
Drummond: his chief house Fyn-heauin.

6 Francis Hay, Earl of Arroll, Constable of Scotland, married the daughter of
William, Earl of Morton: his chief house, Slaynes.

7 John Stewart, Earl of Atholl, married the sister of John, Earl of Gowry,
his chief house, Blayre-Athole.

8 George Keyth, Earl of Marshell, married the sister of Alexander, Lord Home,
his chief house, Dunnotter Castle.

9 Francis Steward, Earl Bothwell, married the sister of Archbald, Earl of
Angus: his chief house, Creichton.

10 Andrew Leisly, Earl of Rothes, married the daughter of Sir James Hammilton:
his chief house, Bambreich.

11 James Stewart, Earl of Murrey, unmarried: his chief house, Tarneway.

12 Alexander Cunningham, Earl of Glencarne, married the eldest sister of
Camphell of Glonorchy, Knight: his chief house, Kilmawres.

13 Hugh Mont-gomery, Earl of Eglinton, young, unmarried: his chief house,
Ardrostan.

14 John Kenedy, Earl of Cassils, unmarried: his chief house, Dun-vre.

15 John Grahame, Earl of Montroze, married the sister of Patrike, Lord
Drummond that now is: his chief house, Kincardin.

16 Patrike Stewart, Earl of Orknay, young, unmarried: his chief house,
Kirk-wall.

17 John Erskin, Earl of Mar, married the second sister of Lodovicke, now Duke
of Lennox: his chief house, Erskin.

18 William Dowglasse, Earl of Morton, married the sister of the Earl of
Rothes that now is: his chief house, The Castle of Dalkeith.

19 James Dowglasse, Earl of Buquhan, young, unmarried: his chief house,
Auchter-house.

20 George Sincler, Earl of Caithnes, married the sister of the Earl of Huntly
that now is: his chief house, Girnego.

21 Alexander Gordon, Earl of Sutherland, married the fathers sister of the
Earl of Huntly that now is: his chief house, Dunrobene.

22 John Grayme, Earl of Monteith, married the sister of Campbel of Glenorchy,
Knight: his chief house, Kirk-bryde.

23 John Ruthvene, Earl of Gowry, young, unmarried: his chief house, Ruthven.

24 The Earl of March. The rents thereof are annexed to the Crown.

THE LORDS OF SCOTLAND.
ALexander, Lord Home, married the eldest daughter of William, Earl of Morton
that now is: his chief house, Home Castle.

2 John Fleming, Lord Fleming, married the daughter of the Earl of Montroze:
his chief house Cummernauld.

3 John Stewart, Lord Innermaith, young: His chief house, Red Castle.

4 James Hay, Lord Zester, married the daughter of Mark, now L. of Newbottle:
his chief house, Neydpeth.

5 John Maxwell, L. Maxwell, married the sister of Archebald, Earl of Angusse:
his chief house, Loch-maben.

6 William Maxwell, now L. Harreis, married the sister of Mark, now L. of
Newbottle: his chief house, Terreglis.

7 Thomas Boyd, L. Boyd, married the sister of the Sheriff of Aere that now is,
called Campbell, Knight of Lothiane: his chief house, Kilmarnok.

8 Allane Cathcart, L. Cathcart, married the sister of the Knight of Bargany a
Kennedy: his chief house Cathcart.

9 Robert Semple, L. Semple, married the daughter of Hugh, Earl of Eglinton:
His chief house, Castle-Semple.

10 Alexander Leuingston, L. Leuingston, married the sister of Francis, now
Earl of Arrol: his chief house, Callender.

11 James Lyndesay, L. Lyndesay, married the daughter of the Earl of Rothes:
his chief house, Byris in Lothien.

12 Robert Seyton. L. Seyton, married the daughter of Hugh Earl of Eglinton:
his chief house, Seyton by the Sea.

13 John Abirnethie, Lord Salton, young, unmarried: his chief house, Rothe-may.

14 Robert Elpheston, L. Elpheston, married the daughter of the Knight of
Stobhall, called Drummond: his chief house Kil-drymmy.

15 John Lion, L. Glammis, unmarried: his chief house Gla^mis.

16 Patrik Gray, L. Gray, married the sister of the Earl of Orknay that now is:
his chief house, Fowlis.

17 James Ogilbie, L. Ogilbie, married the sister of the Knight of Bonitoun: his
chief house, Boshayne.

18 Andrew Stewart, Lord Ochiltrie, married the daughter of the Knight of
Blarwhan, called Kennedy: his chief house, Ochiltry.

19 Henry Sincler, Lold Sincler, married the sister of the Lord Forbesse: his
chief house, Rauins-heuch.

20 Hugh Someruell, Lord Someruell, unmarried: his chief house Carne-wath.

21 John Fraser, Lord Louat, married the Knight of Mackenzies daughter: his
chief house, Bewly.

22 Robert Rosse, Lord Rosse, married the daughter of Hammilton of Roploch: his
chief house, Hakket.

23 Robert Chreichton, Lord Sanquhar, unmarried: his chief house, The Castle of
Sanquhar.

24 Laurence Olephant, Lord Olephant, married the fathers sister of Frances now
Earl of Arrol: his chief house, Duplene.

25 Patrike Lord Dru^mond, married the Knight of Edgles sister, called Lynsay:
his chief house Drymmen.

26 John Forbes, Lord Forbes, married the sister of Seyton of Towch: his chief
house, Drummenor.

27 James Borthuike, Lord Borthuike, married the sister of the Lord Zester that
now is: his chief house, Borthuike Castle.

Lordships newly erected, since the year 1587.
28 John Maitland, Lord Thirlestane, Chancellor of Scotland, married the
fathers sister of the Lord Fleming that now is: his chief house, The Castle of
Lawder.

29 Alexander Lindesay, Lord Spyny, married the daughter of John, Lord
Glammisse, Chancellor for the time of Scotland: his chief house, the Castle of
Spyny.

30 Claud Hammilton, Lord Paisly, married the sister of Robert, Lord Seyton that
now is: his chief house, Halsyde.

31 Robert Keyth, Lord Altry, married the heretix of Benholme: his chief house
Benholme.

32 Alexander Seyton, Lord Vrquhard, President of the College of Justice,
married the daughter of Patrike, Lord Drummond: his chief house, Vrquhard.

33 Mark, Lord of Newbottell, married the sister of the Lord Harreis: his
chief house, Preistons-graynge.

The Bishoricks of Scotland.
Archbishops. Saint Andrews. Archbishops. Glasgow. Orknay. Caithnes. Rosse.
Murray. Abirdene. Brechin. Ilis. Dunkell. Dumblane. Galloway. Argyle.
THE ABBACIES, PRIORIES, and Nunries of Scotland.
Abbacies.
Fern. Kinlosse. Deir. Abirbrothok. Cowper. Scoone. Lundores. Balmerynnoch. S.
Colmes Inche. Dunfermeling. Culrosse. Inche-chaffray. Straphillane.
Cambuskinneth. Manwell. Hallyrud-house. Newbottle. Kelso. Melrosse. Dryburgh.
Iedburgh. Paislay. Kilwinning. Corsragwel. Salsett. Sweetheart, or New Abbay.
Dundranane. Glenluce.
Priories.
Bewly. Monimuske. S. Andrews. Pettenweeme. Portmooke. Inche-mahomo.
Coldinghame. S. Mary I Will. Haly-wood. Blantyre. Pluscarden.
Nunries.
Hadington. North Berwick. S. Bothanis. Ekkillis. Cauldstreame. The sisters of
Seynis.
THE NAMES OF THE KNIGHTS OF SCOTLAND.
SIR Robert Stewart of Straichtdone, knight. Sir Robert Stewart of Largis,
knight. Sir Alexander Stewart of Dalswintone, knight. Sir James Stewart of
Done, knight. Sir William Murrey of Tillibarne knight. Sir William Dowglasse of
Hawyk, knight. Sir Patrik Houstone of that ilk, knight. Sir John Maxwell of
nether Pouok, knight. Sir William Leuingstone of Kylsith, knight. Sir John
Muir of Cauldwoll, knight. Sir Robert Drummond of Carnoch, knight. Sir James
Home of Sunlawis, knight. Sir James Streueling of Keir, knight. Sir William
Ruthuene of Bandane, knight. Sir Hugh Someruell of Lynton, knight. Sir
Alexander Stewart of Garleis, knight. Sir John Gourdoun of Lochinuar, knight.
Sir James Wemis of that ilk, knight. Sir Walter Scot of Branxholme, knight. Sir
Patrik Hepbrowne of Lufnes knight. Sir Simon Prestoun of that ilk, knight. Sir
David Holme of Wedderburne, knight. Sir Robert Lawder of Popell, knight. Sir
James Schaw of Sawquhy, knight. Sir John Ed^^stou^ of that ilk, knight. Sir
William Sinclair of Roslyne, knight. Sir John Colhoune of the Lusse, knight.
Sir James Cokburne of Skirlyne, knight. Sir Archebald Neper of Edinbelly,
knight. Sir James Forest of Corstarfin, knight. Sir James Dunbar of Mochrom,
knight. Sir James Stewart of Cragihall, knight. Sir John Ormistoun of that ilk,
knight. Sis Thomas Young of old Bar, knight. Sir John Carmichell of that ilk,
knight. Sir John Campbell of Lauers, knight. Sir James Iohnstone of Dunwiddie,
knight. Sir James Meluill of Auld-hill, knight. Sir Alexander Stewart of
Garleis, knight. Sir Robert Ker of Sesford, knight. Sir Walter Scot of
Brank-sholme, knight. Sir Thomas Kennedy of Cullaine, knight. Sir James
Scrymgeor of Duddop, knight. Sir Duncane Campbell of Glenorquhy, knight. Sir
James Scot of Ballwery, knight. Sir Robert Gordoun of Glen, knight. Sir Patrik
Gordoun of Auchindoun, knight. Sir George Ogilby of Dunbog, knight. Sir James
Chesholme of Dundorne knight. Sir Matthew Stewart of Minto, knight. Sir George
Balquhannan of that ilk, knight. Sir James Edmestoun of Duntreth, knight. Sir
Alexander Home of Symbie, knight. Sir George Stewart of Innerketoun, knight.
Sir David Lyndesay of Edgell, knight. Sir Thomas Stewart of Garntully knight,
Sir Alexander Bruce of Arthe, knight. Sir Walter Ogilby of Finlater, knight.
Sir Patrik Bannantine of Kna, knight. Sir John Meluill of Grantoun knight. Sir
Andrew Murray Arngosk, knight. Sir Robert Meluill of Murdocarny, knight. Sir
Robert Maxwell of Spottis, knight. Sir John Maxwell of Nether-Pooke, knight.
Sir Robert Maxwell of Dunwiddie, knight. Sir Richard Cokburne of Clerkingtoun,
knight. Sir James Lyndesay of Pitroddy, knight. Sir Michael Balfoure of
Balgaruy, knight. Sir Robert Meluill of Bruntyland, knight. Sir John Hammilton
of Lethrisk, knight. Sir David Lyndesay of the Mont, knight. Sir George Home of
Prymroknow, knight. Sir John Anstruther of that ilk, knight. Sir Hugh
Carmichell of Westone, knight. Sir John Lyndesay of Wodheid, knight. Sir James
Saundelands of Slammanno Mure, knight. Sir William Cokburne of Skeirling,
knight. Sir John Kar of Hersell, knight. Sir Thomas Gourdoun of Cluny, knight.
Sir John Gourdoun of Pitlurg, knight. Sir William Lawder of Haltoun, knight.
Sir George Dowglasse, knight. Sir Andrew Stirling of Keir, knight. Sir William
Stewart of Kaberstoun, knight.
The oath of a Duke.
Ye shall fortify and defend the true and Christian Religion, and Christ's
holy Euangell, presently preached in this Realm, and shall be leill and true
to our Sovereign Lord, the Kings Majesty: and shall defend his highness Realm
and lieges, from all allieners and strangers, at the uttermost of your power:
so help you God, and by the oath that ye have else made.

The oath of an Earl.
Ye shall fortify and defend the true and Christian Religion, and Christ's
holy Euangel presently preached in this Realm, and shall be leill and true to our
Sovereign Lord the Kings Majesty: and shall defend his Highness Realms and
lieges from all allieners and strangers, at the uttermost of your power: so
help you God, and by the oath that ye have else made.

The oath of a Lord of Parliament.
Ye shall give due and faithful counsel to our Sovereign Lord, the Kings
Majesty's weal, publicly in Parliament, as in all other places needful, and
secretly according to your knowledge, for the preservation of his Realm, and
Common weal thereof: And shall never hide nor conceal any point of treason
or crime of Leismaieste, that shall appear to be conspired against his said
Royal person, but shall incontinent with all possible diligence reveal the
same: so help you God, and by the oath that ye have else made.

The Oath of a Knight.
1 I Shall fortify and defend the Christian Religion, and Christ's holy
Euangel, presently preached in this Realm, to the uttermost of my power.

2 I shall be loiall and true to my Sovereign Lord, the Kings Majesty, to all
orders of Chieualry, and to the noble office of Arms.

3 I shall fortify and defend Justice at my power, and that without favor or
feud.

4 I shall never fly from my Sovereign Lord, the Kings Majesty, nor from his
Highness Lieutenants in time of mellay and battle.

5 I shall defend my native Realm from all allieners and strangers.

6 I shall defend the just action and quarrel of all Ladies of Honor, of all
true and friendlesse Widows, of Orphelings, and of maidens of good fame.

7 I shall do diligence wheresoever I hear there are any murderers,
traitors, ormasterfull Reauers, that oppress the Kings Lieges, and peure
people, to bring them to the Law at my power.

8 I shall maintain and uphold the Noble estate of Cheualry, with Horse,
Harness, and other knightly Habiliments: And shall help and succor them of
the same order at my power, if they have need.

9 I shall enquire and seek to have the knowledge and understanding of all the
Articles and points contained in the book of Cheualrie.

All these premises to observe, keep, and fulfill, I oblesse me: so help
me, God, by mine own hand, so help me God, etc.

THE NAMES OF THE BARONS, Lairds, and chief Gentlemen in every Sherifdome.
Innernes.
MAcloyd of the Lewis. Macloyd of Harrich. Donald Gormesoun. Mackneill of
Barray. Mulcalloun of Rosay. John Mudzart captain of the Clanrannalts. The
Lord of Glengarry. The L. of Kneydart. Mackenzie. L. of Garloche. L. of
Balnagowne. L. of Fowls. Sheriff of Cromartie. Dumbeith. Forsse. Otansceale.
Mackye. Neill Huchesoun in assent. Macken-tosche. Captain of the
Clanchaniroun. L. of Glenewes. Raynold Mack-raynald of Keppache.
Narne.
Lord of Caddell. Baron of Kilrawake. L. of Park. Dolesse of Cantrey. Dolesse
of Budzert.
Elgin and Fores.
The Sheriff of Murray. James Dumbar of Tarbert. Robert Dunbar of Grangehil,
Alexander Dumbar of Kilboyake. The L. of Innes. The L. of Innermerkie. The L.
of Duffus. Alexander Innes of Crumby. The L. of Brodie. The L. of Altrie. The
L. of Densyde. The L. of Cowbin. L. of Pettendreigh, Dowglasse. The L. of
Main. The Baron of Vrtane. The L. of Grant. Patrik Grant of Ballindalloche.
Bamff.
The Lord of Findlator. The L. of Boyne. George Ogiluie of Dunlugus The L. of
Durn. The L. of Ley, Abircromney. The L. of Ratie. The L. of Pettendreight, of
that ilk. John Ogiluie of Glashanthe. Walter Ogiluie of Baldanie. Walter Ogil.
of Carncowsies. John Ogil. of Auchannany. The L. of Auchannaquhy. Adame Gordon
of Auchindowne. Alaster Gordon of Beldorny.
Abirdene.
The Lord of Fyuie. Thomas Meldrum of Eden. The L. of Delgatie. The L. of
Vrie. The L. of Petslego. The L. of Fillorth. Troupee.
The L. of Pettindrum. New forest. Mueske.
The L. of Boquhollie. The L. of Towie. L, of Vdache. The L. of Garnestoun. The
L. of Geych. The L. of Petlurge. The L. of Lesmoir. Craig of Achindoir.
The L. of Abirgeldie. The L. of Clunie, Gordon. John Gordon of Carnborrowe.
John Gordon of Anachie. Robert Gordon of Halhead. John Gordon of Kennartie.
Alexander Gordon of Knoke-spak. George Gordon of Auchmenzie. Master William
Gordon of Dulpersie. George Gordon of Creichie. The L. of Corfinda. The L. of
Bruix. John Forbes of Towy. The L. of Corse. The L. of Asslow^ne. The L. of
Cragular. Master Duncane Forbes of Monimusk. John Forbes of Poffling. The L. of
mekle Frasyre. The L. of Carndauie. The L. of Petfechie. The L. of Achinhoofe.
The L. of Auchlossin. The L. of Cushuie. The L. of Skene. The L. of Thamestoun.
The L. of Tulligownie. Patrik Gordon of Bracanch. The L. of Portestoun. The L.
of Caskyben. Patrik Keyth of Harthill. William Keyth of Lyklyheid. The L. of
Balquhane, Leslie. The L. of Warderis. The L. of Petcapill. The L. of Leslie.
Andrew Leslie of new Leslie. Patrik Leslie of Kincragy. Alexander Leslie of
Dyce. The L. of Glake. The L. of Meldrum. Seyton. The L. of Straloth. The L. of
Toquhone. The L. of Ondney. The L. of Essilmont. Cheyne. The L. of Arnaige. The
L. of Petmeddun. The L. of Dumbrek. The L. of Haddo. The L. of Tibbertie. The
L. of Lesk. The L. of Feuerne. The L. of Colestoun. The L. of Auchinhampers.
The L. of Tullet. L. of Fendraucht, Creichton. The L. of Kelty. The L. of
Culter. The L. of Sanquhin. The L. of Echt. The L. of Glenkindy. The L. of
Wattertoun. The L. of Tillemorgund. James, king of Barrauch. William Blakehall
of Barrauch. The L. of Randeistoun. The L. of Gartly. The L. of Achmacoy.
Kincardin or the Mernes.
The Lord of Glenberuie, Dowglasse. The L. of Petarro, Wishert. The L. of
Lawrestoun. The L. of Arbuthnot. The L. of Thornetoun, Balbegenot Wood. The L.
of Hakerton, Falconer, Kelhyll. Archibald Wood of witston. Robert Keith of
Canterland. L. of Matheris. L. of Morphie. Allerdes. Balmayne. Bry. Halgreene.
The L. of Muchales. Dulyward. Monbodo. Cair.
The L. of Benholme. John Moncurre of Slaines.
Forfaire.
The L. of Dun. The L. of Balnamone. Colloss. The L. of Balzordy. The L. of
Edzell, Lyndesay, The L. of Kinnaber. The L. of Craig, Keyth. The L. of
Vllishauen. The L. of Dysert. Robert Guthre of Lownane. Andrew Gray of Donynad.
Robert Guthre of Emblathmont. The L. of Bonnytoun. The L. of Kinnard^. Arrot.
Auld-bar.
L. of Guthre. Hilton.
The L. of Kilcadrum. Halkerton Guthre.
L. of Gardin. The L. of Lies. The L. of Kelly. The L. of Innerquharratie,
Clouay. The L. of Balfour, Ogiluie. The L. of Powrie, Ogiluie. Duntrune
The L. of Balumbree. The L. of Grainge, Durham. Laws. Westhall. Strikmartine.
L. of Teling. The L. of Lundie, Campbell. The L. of Auchinlecke. The L. of
Carmylie. Strathauchin of Claypots. Constable of Dundie, Skrimgore. The L. of
Powrie, Fothringhame. The L. of Fintrie, Grayme. The L. of Clauerhous, Grayme
L. of Innernitie, Creichton. Andrew Gray of Lowrie. Brigtoun. Cossumes.
Thorneton of that ilk.
Lion of Wester, Ogyll. Fenton of Easter, Ogyll. The L. of Casse, Reynd.
Melgund. Logywischert.
L. of Drumkilbo, Tyrie. Duncany. Logie Mekle. Cowtie.
Alexander Lindsay of Vain. David Lindesay of Barnyard. Kingany. Vnnaquhy.
Gagy.
Thomas Ogiluie of Westcraige. John Ogiluie of Innerkeillour. Archibald Ogiluy
of Lawton. Balmly.
The L. of Rossie of that ilke.
Perth, and Stewartries of Stratherne and Monteith.
The Lord of Petcur. The L. of Ruthuene. The L. of Banff, Ogiluie. George
Creichton of Camnay The L. of Balgilbo. Gormotre. Ardblair.
The L. of Drumlochie. George Drommond of Blair. The L. of Lethintree, Herring.
Mekillour.
Rettray of Craighall. L. of Murthlie, Abircrombie. The L. of Moncur.
Inchesture.
The L. of Inchemartyne. The L. of Kynnard. William Bruce of Fingask. Patrik
Gray of Belligarno. Patrik Drummond of Abirnethie. Euillilke.
The L. of Kilspindie. Peter Hay of Moeginche. L. of Leyis. L. of Hill. Murey.
Petfour. Segyden.
The L. of Kilfawnes, Lyndesay. The L. of Bathyoke, Blayre. The L. of
Balhou^ie. The L. of Ballindayne. The L. of Cultmalondie. Moncreif of that ilk.
Easter Monctreif. Baron of Fingask, Dundas. The L. of Cragie. Patrik Murray of
Tibbermure. Tibbermallauch. Kinuaid. L. of Innernytie, Creichton. The L.
Strathurde. Loncardie. L. of Glennurquhy, Campbel. The L. of Weym. The L. of
Garntullie. The L. of Glenlyoun. Baron of Fandowy. L. Strowane, Robertson.
Arntillie. Fastcalze. Baron Read. Baron Ferguson. Baron Cunyson. Baron of
Monnesse. Innermytie, Petcarne. Balmamo, Aflek. L. of Duncrub, Rolloc. L. of
Keltie. L. of Tullibarden. L. of Abircarnie. Strowane. Patrik Murray of
Auchtertyre. George Drummond of Ballot L. of Innerpeffre. John Drummo^d
Coquholze. Baron of Bordland, Drummond. L. of Perkellony, Drummond.
Cultiuragane. L. of Comrie. Cromlix. L. of Laweris, Campbell. Monyware. Monze.
Cultoquhay. Gorthie, Lundy. L. of Inchbrachy. L. of Keir. L. of Kippanrosse. L.
of Knokhill. L. of Laeny. L of Glennegeis, Haddan. Blair of Bagray. Alexander
Ruthuen of Frelands. George Norrie of Boquhoppill.
Fyfe.
L. of Mukdrum. L. of Baluaird; Murray. L. of Casche. L. of Rossie. L. of
Halhill, Meluill. John Arnot of Woodmill. L. of Perbroth, Seyton. L. of
Culermie, Barclay. John Aiton of Drummure. L. of Creich, Betone. L. of
Fairnaie. Sir Alexander Lindsay of the Mont, Lion King of Arms. Sir Robert
Meluill of Murdocarnie. Francis Tullos of Hilcarnie. L. of Monquhany, Balfoure.
L. of Nauchtane, Creichton. L. of Kenneir. L. of Forret. John Leslie of
Parkhill. L. of Carselogie, Claypen. L. of Wilmerstoun. L. of Dersy, Learmont.
Kembake. Brachmont, Nydie. L. of Sandfurde, Hay. L. of Sandfurde, Narne. David
Balfoure of Kirktoun. Cullochie. L. of Erlishall, Bruce. L. of Reres, Forbesse.
Alexander Inglis of Stratyrum. L. of Inglis Tarbet. Craighall. Patrik
Kinninmont of Callinche. Blaebo. Lathoccar. Balfoure of Lambilaethame. Kinkell.
L. of Petmylie. L. of Ardrie, Lummisdayne. L. of Balcomye, Learmont. L. of
Barnys. L. of Saegy. L. of Camno. Randerstoun.
L. Saint Monanes, Sa^delands. L. of Anstruther. L. of Carruber. L. of Ardros.
Sanfurd, Dudingstoun. Gordonishall.
L. of Balkaskie, Strange. L. of Largo, Wode. Kincraig. Giblestoun. Innerdeuat.
L. of Lundie, Lundie. L. of Durie, Durie. L. of Bafoure, Beton. L. of
Balgonie. L. of Lorrie, Wardlaw. Further, Petcarne. Kirkfurther. Peter Balfoure
of Bandone. L. of Cletty, Ramsay. Gondlane.
L. of Ramornie. Lathriske. Orky.
William Skringeour of the myres. Arnot. Stratherney. Auchmowtie.
L. of Easter Wemes, Coluill. L. of Wester Wemes, Weymes. L. of Abats Hall,
Scot. L. of Raith, Meluill. L. of Balwerie, Scot. L. of Bamowtow, Boswell. L.
of Seyfeild. Orroke.
John Beton of Capildra. Balram.
Walter Lesly of Otterstoun. Aytoun. Martyme.
L. of Pettincreif. L. of Petfirrane. L. of Rossythe, Stewart. L. of Dowhill.
L. of Cleische, Coluill.
Kinrosse.
L. of Lochleuen, Dowglasse. L. of Burly, Balfoure.
Clackmannan.
L. of Clackmannan, Bruce. L. of Tulliallane, Blacater. L. of Sawchy. Bruce of
Kennet. L. of Manner.
Striuiling.
L. of Garden. L. of Arthe, Bruce. L. of Carnoke, Drummond. L. of Carnoke,
Bruce. L. of Plean. Goodman of Kersie. Goodman of Throske. Archibald Bruce of
Powfowles. David Bruce of Kinnaird. Thomas Bruce of Barbarschels. M. David
Rollok of Powes. L. of Skemure. L. of Denneuay. L. of Donipace, Leuingston. L.
of Haning. L. of Pentasken. L. of Castelcarie. L. of Kerss, Monteith. L. of
Polmaiss. L. of Towch, Seyton. L. of Leckie. L. of Gargunnoke, Seyton. L. of
Randifurde. John Buchannan of Arnpriour. John Shaw of Broiche.
Linlithgow.
Sheriff of Linlithgow, Hammilton. L. of Dundas, Dundas. L. of Cragiehall,
Stewart. L. of Barnebowgal, Mowbray. James Dundas of Newliston. Alexander
Drummond of Medope. Robert Hammilton of Inchmachane. Mungo Hammilton of
Pardonen. John Hammilton of the Grainge. L. of Ballinhard, Cornwell. L. of
Ricarton, Hepburne. Durhame of Duntervie. Bathcart, Hammilton.
Edinburgh principal.
L. of Cawder, Sandelands. L. of Halton, Lawder. L. of Pumphraston, Dowglass.
Hirdmanschelis.
L. Barbachlaw, Cochran. Lennox.
L. of Stanypeth. L. of Dalmohoy. L. of Ricarton, Drummond. L. of Currihill,
Wardlaw. L. of Colingtoun, Fowlis. L. of Reidhall, Otterburne. L. of
Cowmistoun, Fairlie. L. of Costorphin, Foster. L. of Brade, Fairlie. L. of
Marchistoun, Neper. L. of Innerleith, Towris. L. of Laureistoun of that ilk. L.
of Pilrig, Monipenie. L. of Restalrig, Logane. L. of Cragmiller, Preston. L. of
Edmiston of that ilk. L. of Nuderie, Wachop. Hill of that ilk. L. Brunstoun,
Creichton. Edmeston of Wowmet. Hay of Mounktoun. L. Shiref-hall, Gyffert. L. of
Langton. Bellendyne of Leswade. L. of Dalhousie, Ramsay. L. Kokpen, Ramsay.
Whytehill, Preston. Poultoun.
L. of Rosling, Sincler. L. of Pennicuke of that ilk. L. Newhall, Creichton. L.
Southhouse. Elphingston of Schank.
Constabularie of Haddington.
L. Fawsyde of that ilk. L. Elphingston, Iohnstone. L. Prestoun, Hammilton. L.
of Langnederie, Dowglasse. L. of Ormestoun, Cokburne. L. of Hirmedstoun. L. of
Blansse. L. of Samelstoun, Hammilton. L. of Newtoun. L. Newhall, Cockburne. L.
of Clerkintoun, Cockburne. L. of Colstoun. L. of Tallo, Hay. L. of Benestoan.
L. of Stanypeth. L. of Whittinghame, Dowglasse. L. of Cosfurde, Acheson. L. of
Wauchton, Hepburne. Hepburne of Gylmerton. Hepburne of Smeton. Hepburne of
Kirklandhill. L. of Sydserff. L. of Congilton. L. of Knows. L. of Scowgall.
Sincler of Whytekirk. L. of Bas, Lawder. L. of Spot, Dowglasse. L. of
Innerwike, Hammilton. L. of Broxmouth, Home. Alexander Home of Northberwike.
Robert Home of the Hewch. L. of Waddalie. Hartrem Wood.
Berwike and Lawderdaill.
L. of Wederburne, Home. L. of Blacatour, Home. L. of Aytoun, Home. L. of
Coldenknowes, Home. L. of Polwart, Home. Home of Manderstoun. L. of Huton hall,
Home. L. of Langton. L. of Cockburne. L. of Billie, Renton. L. of Blanerne,
Lummis-dayne. L. of Cumleche, Aflek. L. of Edingtoun. Slychthous. Butterdayne.
Hoprig. Easter Nisbet. West Nisbet. Wedderlie. Thorniedykes.
L. of Spottiswood. Cranston of Thirlstanemaines. Corsbie. Bemersyde. Mertoun.
L. Swyntoun. L. Redpeth. Greenlaw. Lochurmacus.
L. Gammilscheilis, Home. Wyliclewcht.

Roxburgh.
L. of Cesfurde, Ker. L. of Lilteldane, Ker. L. of Greynheid, Ker. L. of
Corbet, Ker. Gradon, Ker.
Ker of Gaitshaw. Mow. Haddane.
Shiriffe of Teuiotdail, Dowglasse. Tympenden. Hundeley. Hunthill. Edzarstoun.
Bedreull, Turne-bull. Mynto. Wawchop.
William Turnebull of Barnhils. George Turnebull of Halreull. Hector Lorane of
Harwood. Grinyslaw of little Newton. Mader of Langton. Mungo Bennet of Cheftis.
Ouertoun, Frasier. Riddale of that ilk. L. Makkayrstoun, Makdowgal. Andrew Ker
of Fadownsyde. L. of Backcleuch, Scot. Raph Haliburton of Mourhouslaw. Thomas
Ker of Cauers. Howpasloth, Scot. Baron Gledstanes. Langlands. William Ellot of
Torsly hill. Scot of Sintoun. Scot of Eydschaw. Walter Vaich of Northsintoun.
Scot of Glaeke. L. of Chesholme of that ilk. L. of Cranstoun. Kirktoun of
Stewartfield. L. of Linton, Ker. Ker of Ancrum. Carncors of Colmissie.
Selkirk.
Murray of Fawlahill, Sheriff. Scot of Tuschelaw. Scot of Thirlstane. Scot of
Aikwood. Turnebull of Phillophauch. Ker of the Shaw or Dalceiff. Hoppringle of
Galloscheilis. Hoppringle of Whytebank. Hoppringle of Torwodley. Hoppringill of
Blindley. Hoppringill of Bukholme. Hoppringill of Newhall.
Peibles.
The Knight of Traquair, Stewart. ^ of Pyrn, Cranston. L. of Horsburgh. L. of
Greistoun. L. of Cardrono. L. of Henderstoun. L. of Smeythfield, Hay.
Winkistoun, Twedie.
L. of Blackbarrony, Murray. Bernys. Cauerhill. Fowllaeche, Stewart.
L. of Drummelzear, Twedie. Dawik. Pobinde. Frude. Halkshaw. Glengirk.
Geddes of Rachane. Inglis of Langlandhill. L. of Straling. Hartire. Romannos.
Prettishoill. Meluingsland. Ormestoun. Bonytoun. Posso, Nasmyth.
John Hammilton of Coltcote.
Lanerk.
Captain of Crawfurde Castle, Carmichell. L. of Carmichael. L. of Lamington,
Baillie. L. of Bakebie. L. of Symontoun. L. of Cultermaines. Flemming of
Carwood. Dowglasse of Todholes. West-hall, Grahame. Baillie of the hills.
Menzeis of Culterrawes. L. of Westraw, Iohnestone. L. of Annestoun. L. of
Cobingtoun, Lyndesay. Crimpcramp. Hammilton of Crawfurde-Iohne. L. of Ley. L.
of Cleghorne, Barclay. L. of Corhouse, Bannatyne. Ierverswod, Leuingstoun.
Bonytoun, Cunninghame. Blackwood. Staniebyres. Auchtyfardill. Weir of
Kirktowne. L. Cambusnethan, Someruel. L. of Carphin, Baillie. Cleland.
Murdeistoun. Ieruestoun. Ernoke. Lawchope. Steuingstoun.
Hammilton of Roploch. Hammilton of Hagges. Hammilton of Lethame. Hammilton of
Orbestoun. Hammilton of Nelisland. Hammilton of Stanehouse. L. of Siluertonhil,
Hammilton. L. of Dunrod. L. of Calderwood, Maxwell. L. of Castelmylk. L. of
Mynto, Steward. L. of Gilbertfield.
Renfrew.
Cathcart. Ouer-Pollok. Neather-Pollok, Maxwell. L. of Stanelie. L. of
Iohnstoun, Wallace. L. of Ellerslie, Wallace. L. Houstoun. Newerk.
L. Caldwell. Shaw of Grenoke. Crawfurd of Cartisburne. Cunninghame of
Waterston. L. Craganis. Walkinschaw. Barrochane. L. Biltries, Semplo. Barscube.
L. Boghall, Stewart. Bishoptoun. Cardonald, Stewart. Foulwood. Thirdpart.
Wheitfurne. Scottistoun. Ardgowane. Balgarrane. Ramfurley. Porterfield of that
ilke. Raalstoun.

Dumbretoun.
L. of Lusse. L. of Cowgrane. L. of Ardardane. L. of Arnecapill. L. of
Kilmahow. Bullull. Manis. Balney. Noblestoun. Camstrodane. Darleith.
Hammilton of Cochno. Craigernalt. Gloret. Striueling of Letrer. Lucas
Striueling of Baldorrane. Edmistoun of Balewin. L. of Bardowie. L. of Kincaid.
L. of Woodhead. L. of Blairshogill. L. of Ballykinrane. L. of Auchinloche. L.
of Kilsythe, Leuingston. L. of Baddinheth, Boyd. Board.
Drumry, Hammilton. L. of Kilcrewch. Gartskeddane. Gartschoir.
L. of Mackferland. L. of Buquhannane. L. of Drummakcill.
Tarbert.
L. of Auchinbrek. L. of Archinlais, Campbell. L. of Lawmont. L. of
Macklawchlane. Macknachtan. Skippinche. Ottir. Duntrune. Straquhir. Mackowle of
Lorne.
John Stewart of Appin. Mackondoquhy of Inneraw. Mackoneil of Dunniveg and
Glennes. Macklane of Dowart. Macklane of Cowle. Macklane of Lochbwy. Macklane
of Arndnamurchy.
Bute.
The Sheriff of Bute, Stewart. The L. of Camys.
Aere and Bailleries of Kyle, K^^rik and Cunninghame.
L. of Kilburnie. L. of Crawfurdland. L. of Ladyland, Barclay. Auchnamys.
L. of Kerrisland. L. of Kelsoland. Trierne.
L. of Glengarnoke. L. of Cunninghame heid. L. of Auchinharuie. L. of Aiket.
Cunninghame.
L. of Clonbaith. Montgomerie.
L. of Longshaw. L. of Heslet. Giffin. Stane.
Braidstane, Montgomerie. L. of Blair. L. of Portincorsse. L. of Huncarstoun.
L. of Fairlie. L. of Dreghorne. L. of Perstoun, Barclay. L. of Rowallane, Mure.
L. of Montgrenane. L. of Robertland, Cunninghame. Cunninghame of Towrlands.
Cunninghame of the hill. Sheriff of Air. Cesnockle. Skeldoun.
Campbell of Glenoske. Campbell of Kinzeclewcht. Gastoun, S^ewart. Halrig.
Hammilton of Sanquhair, Sornebeg. L. of Bar. L. of Craggie-wallace. Carnell.
Wallace. Sewalton. Wallace. Dundonald. Adamtoun. Gairgirth. Chalmers.
Lefnoreis. Crawfurde. Kerst. Crawfurde. Doungane.
William Crawfurde of Clolynane. Dowglasse of Penieland. Cunninghame of
Lagland. L. of Caprington. Cunninghame. Cunninghame of Poquharne. Shaw of
Glenmure. L. of Eutirkin. Dunbar. L. of Scankistoun. Campbell. L. of Barkymmem.
Stewart. L. of Auchinlek. Boswell. L. of Bargany. Kennedie. L. of Blairquhane.
Kennedie. Kennedie of Giruanmaynis. Kennedie of Skeldon. L. of Carmichaell.
Goodman of Ardmillane. Goodman of Dromnellane. Kennedie of the Coist.
Balmaclennochane. L. of Kelwood, Currie. L. of Carltowne. Cathcart. Kennedie of
Knotidaw. Kennidie of Bramestoun. Boyde of Penkill. Boyde of the Throchrig. L.
of Dundaffe. L. of Kilkerane. L. of Kilhenzie. Kennedie of Tornagannoch. Schaw
of Halie. Schaw of Germet.
Wigtoun.
L. of Garlies, Stewart. L. of Mochrum, Dumbar. L. of Garthland, Makdowgall.
Agnew Shirefe of Wigton. L. of Kynhylt. L. of Ardwell, Makculloch. Killassyre.
Laerg.
L. of Maerton, Maggee. L. of Maerton, Mackulloch. L. of Barnbarrawch, Vaus. L.
of Craichlaw, Mure. Kennedie of Barquhome. Kennedie of Vchiltre. Campbell of
Arie.
Dumfreis, with the Stewartries of Kirkenbright, and Annandail.
L. of Lochin-war, Gordon. L. of Troquhayne, Gordon. L. of Barskeoche, Gordon.
L. of Airdis, Gordon. Sheirmaes, Gordon. Gordon of the Cule. L. of Broghton,
Murray. L. of Dalbatie. L. of Portoun, Glendonyng. L. of Bumby, Mackclellane.
Mackclellane of Maerton. L. of Cardenes. Lidderdaill of S. Mary I Will. Lindesay
of Barcloy. Heries of Madinhoip. L. of Mabie, Heries. Macknaucht of
Kilquhanatie. Glenduynning of Dru^rasche. Maxwell of the Hill. Sinclair of
Auchinfranke. Maxwell of the Logane. Maxwell of Dromcoltrane. Stewart of
Fintillauche. Leuingston of little Ardis. L. of Drumlanrig, Dowglasse.
Dowglasse of Gashogill. Creichton of Carco. Creichton of Liberie. Mackmath of
that ilk. Dowglasse of Daluene. Menzies of Castelhill. Menzies of Auchinsell.
L. of Auchingassill, Maitland. L. of Closburne, Kirk Patrik. Kirkmichaell.
Goodman of Friar, Kersse. L. of Lag, Greir. L. of Amysfield, Charterhouse.
Maxwell of Gowhill. Maxwell of Porterrake. Maxwell of Tynwald. Maxwell of
Conhaith. Maxwell of Carnsallauch. Maxwell of the I Will. Brown of the Lawne.
Cunninghame of Kirkschaw. L. of Craigdarroch. L. of Bardannoch. Kirko of
Glenesslane. Ballaggane.
L. of Iohnestoun. L. of Wamfra, Iohnestone. L. of Eschescheiles. L. of
Corheid, Iohnestone. L. of Corry. L. of Newbie, Iohnestone. L. of Graitnay,
Iohnestone. Iohneston of Craighop-burne Iohneston of Newton. Iohneston of
Kirkton. L. of Apilgirth, Iarden. L. of Holmends. L. of Cock-poole, Murray. L.
of Moryquhat. L. of Wormondby. L. of Knok. Goodman of Granton. Boidisbyke.

The names of the principal Clannes, and surnames on the Borders not landed,
and chief men of name amongst them at this present.
EAST MARCH.
Brumfieldes.
John Brumfield, Tutor of Greynelawdeyne. Adame Brumfield of handaikers.
Brumfield of Pittilesheuche. Alexander Brumfield of Eastfield. Alexander
Brumfield of Hasilton maines. James Brumfield of Whytehouse. The Lord of
Toddorike. Alexander Brumfield of Gordon maines.
Trotter.
The Lord of Pentennen. William Trotter of Fouleschawe. Cuthbert Trotter in
Fogo. Tome Trotter of the hill.
Diksons.
The Goodman of Buchtrig. The Goodman of Bolchester. Dikson of Haffington.
Dikson in new bigging.
Ridpeths.
Thomas Ridpeth of Crumrig. Alexander Ridpeth of Angellraw.
Haitlies.
The Goodman of Lambden. John Haitlie of Brumehill. George Haitlie in Hordlaw.
Laurence Haitlie in Haliburton.
Gradenis.
Jasper Graden in Ernislaw.
Youngs.
James Young of the Cri^^e. Will Young of Otterburne. David Young of Oxemsyde.
William Scot of Feltershawes.
Dauisons.
Roben Dauison of Symeston. Iok Dauison of Quhitton. James Dauison of Byrnirig.
George Dauison of Throgda^.
Pringils.
James Hoppringill of Towner. Wat Hoppringill of Clifton. John Hoppringil of
the Be^ts. David Hoppringill of Morbottle.
Tates.
Will Tate in Stankfurde. David Tate in Cheritries. David Tate in Bair-ers.
Will Tate in Zettane.
Middlemaists.
Robin Middlemaist in Milrig.
Burns,
David Burn of Ellisheuch, Raph Burn of the Coit.
Dagleschis.
Iok Dagleisch of Bank. Robert Dagleisch in wideope^.
Gilchristis.
Hugh Gilchrist called of Cowbene. Will Gilchrist in Cauertoun.
MIDDLE MARCHES.
Hall.
John Hall of Newbigging. George Hall, called Pats Geordie there. Andrew Hall
of the Sykes. Thom Hall in Fowlscheils.
Pyle
George Pyle in Milkheuch. John Pyle in Swynside.
Robeson.
Raph Robeson in Pre^derlech. Rinzean Robeson in Howsto^.
Anislie.
William Anislie of Fawlaw. Lancie Anislie in Cxnem.
Oliver.
David Oliver in Hynha^cheid Will Oliver in Lustruther, George Oliver in
Clareley.
Laidlow.
Ryne Laidlow in the Bank. John Laidlow in Sonnyside.
LIDDISDAIL.
The Lord of Mangerton. The Lairds Iok. Chrystie of the Side.
Quhithauch.
The Lord of Quhitauch. Ionie of Quhitauch. Sym of the Maynes.
Merietoun quarter.
Archie of West burnflat. Wanton Sym in quhitley side. Will of Powderlanpat.
Ellots.
Redhench. Robert Ellot, and Martyne Ellot.
Thoirlishop.
Rob of Thoirlishop, Arthure fire the Brays.
Gorrumbery.
Archie Keen, Will of Morspatriks horse.
Park.
Ionie of the Park, Gray Will.
Burnheid.
Gawins Iok, Ade Cowdais.
Welshaw.
Will Colichis Hob, Hob of Bowholmes.
Niksons.
John Nikson of Laiest burn. Georgies Harie Nikson. Cleme Nikson, called The
Crune.
Crosers.
Hob Croser, called Hob of Ricarton. Martine Croser. Cokkis John Croser. Noble
Clemeis Croser.
Hendersons.
Rinzian Henderson in Armiltonburne. Ienkyne Henderson in Kartley,
Debaitable Land. Sandeis Barnes Armestrangs.
Will of Kinmonth. Krystie Armestrang. John Skynbanke.
Lardis Rinzians gang.
Lairdis Rinziane. Lairdis Robbie. Rinzian of Wanchop.
Grahames.
Priors, John and his Bairnes. Hector of the Harlaw. The griefs and cuts of
Harlaw.
EWISDAIL.
Armestrangs of the Gyngils.
Ekke of the Gingils. Andrew of the Gyngils. Thome of Glendoning.
Scots.
Thome the Flower. Anfe of the Busse.
Ellots.
John the Portars son. Will of Deuislies. Will the Lord.
ESKDAIL.
Battisons of Cowghorlae.
David Batie. Hugh Batie. Mungoes Arthurie. Adame of the Burn.
Batisons of the Scheill.
Nichol of the Scheill. Androw of Zetbyre. John the Braid. Wat of the Corse.
Iohnes.
John Armstrang of Hoilhons. John Armstrang of Thornequhat. Will Armestra^g of
Ternsnihill.
Littils.
John Littill of Cassoke. Thome Littill of Finglen. Ingrahames Archy Littill.
ANANDAIL.
Irwingis.
Edward of Bonschaw. Lang Richies Edward. John the young Duke. Chrystie the
Cothquhat. Willie of Graitnayhill.
Bellis.
Will Bell of Alby. John Bell of the Turn. Mathie Bell called the King. Andro
Bell called Lokkis. Androw.
Will Bell Reidcloke.
Carlilles.
Adame Carlisle of Bridekirk. Alexander Carlisle of Egleforhame.
Grahames.
George Grahame of Reupatrik. Arthour Grahame of Blawoldwood. Richie Grahame
called The Plump.
Thomsons.
Young Archie Thomson. Sym Thomson in Polloden.
Romes.
Roger Rome in Tordoweth. Mekle Sandy Rome there.
Gassis.
David Gasse in Barch. John Gasse, Michaels son in Rig.
THE SHRIEFDOMES AND Shriefs of Scotland.
Orknay, The Shriefe thereof heritable, Earl of Caythnes. Innernes, The Earl
of Huntlie. Cromartie, Vrquhart of Cromartie. Narne, John Campbell of Lorne.
Elgene and Forress, Dumbar of Cumnok. Abirdene, The Earl of Huntlie.
Kincardin, The Earl of Marshall. Forfar, The Lord Gray. Perth, alias Saint
Iohnstone, The Earl of Gowry. Fyfe, The Earl of Rothosse. Kynross, The Earl
of Morton, of Lochleuin and Dalkeyth, Clackmannan, The knight of the Karss.
Sterling, The provost of the town for the time. Dumbarten, Earl of Lennox
Sterling-shire, extra Burgum, The Earl of Mar. Tarbart, The Earl of Mar.
Laynrik, The Earl of Arran, Lord Hammilton. Renfrew, The Lord Sampill. Aere,
Campbell, Knight of Lowdon. Wigton, Patrik Agnew, of that ilk. Drumfreis, Lord
Sanquhat. Pebles, Lord Zester. Selkirk-Murray, of Fallahill. Roxburgh,
Dowglasse of Cauers, called sheriff of Tiuidaill. Barwik Lord Home. Edinburgh,
The provost of the Town for the time. Lothien, The Earl Bothwell. The
Cunstabularie of Hadington, The Earl Bothwell. Lithgow, Hammilton of Kenneill.
THE STEWARTRIES OF SCOTLAND.
Stratherne. Monteith.
The Lord Dr^mmond. Kircudbricht. Annandaill.
The Lord Maxwell.
THE BAILLERIES OF SCOTLAND.
Kyle, The Knight of Cragy wallace. Carik, The Earl of Cassils. Cunninghame,
The Earl of Eglinton.
THE ORDER OF THE CALLING of the Table of the Session.
Monday.
Redemptions of lands.

Reductions of all kinds.

Transferrings.

Loss of Superiorities.

For making, sealing, and subscribing of Reuersions.

Tewsday.
Recent spoils without the time of vacants.

Acts of Aiurnall.

Wednesday.
The common Table of the four quarters of the Realm, by order, every one
after another, as is divided in the acts of the Institution, in the print books
of Parliament.

Thursday.
The same Table.

Friday.
The Kings actions, strangers, the poor.

Saturday.
The Lords of Session, and members thereof, The Prelates, payers of
contribution, and the common Table foresaid. And upon the Wednesday and
Thursday, to call common priuileged matters, such as Hornings, Free-persons,
Euidents, Fortalices, Warnings, Letters conform to rolements, Decreits,
Arbitrailes, Taks, Pensions, Ordinary letters, Gifts, Registring of contracts,
Actions to become civil or profane, Double poindings, Bills, Supplications,
And their last actions to be called of new by ordinance of the Lords of
Session, for expedition of causes.

The Shires of Scotland.
The Shires of the first quarter as follows: that is to say, Forfair,
Kineardin, Banff, Elgin, Forres, Narne, Innernes, and Cromartie.

The Shires of the second quarter, Edinburgh, Lynlythgow, Selkirk, Roxburgh,
Peblis, Berwick, and Hadington.

The third quarter, Striuiling and Renfrew, Lanerk Wigton, Dumfreis,
Kilcudbright, and Annandaill.

The fourth quarter, Perth, Clackmannan, Argyle, and Bute.

The Senators begin their sitting and rising as follows.
They begin to sit down in Edinburgh, on the morn after Trinity Sunday,
while the first day of August, and after to be vacant while the first day of
November next ensuing; and then to begin and sit, while the xix. day of March
next, and then to be vacant, while the morning after Trinity Sunday, as
aforesaid.

THE NAMES OF THE FREE BVRROWES, subject to pay extent and subsidy within
Scotland.
SOVTH.
Edinburgh. Sterling. Lithgow. Rothsaye. Dumbarten. Renfrew. Ruglen. Aere.
Irwing. Glasgow. Kircudbricht. Wigtoun. Whithorne. Laynerik. Iedburgh.
Sel-kirk. Peblis.
NORTH.
Abirdene. Dundie. Saint Iohnston, alias Perth. Banffe. Dumfermeling. Carraill.
Forfar. Brechin. Mont-rosse. Elgene. Innernes. Arbrothe. Saint Andrews.
Cowpar. Cullane. Fores.
The Kings Palaces and Castles.
Haddington. North-Barwick. Dumbar. Drumfreis. Narne. Thaine. Dysert. Kirkady.
Palaces appertaining to the King.
THe Palace of Halyrud-house, beside Edinburgh in Lothien.

2 The Palace of Dalkeyth, reserved for the use of the Prince, with the
Orchard, Gardens, Banks, and wood adjacent thereunto, within four miles of
Edinburgh.

3 The Palace of Lithgow, within the town of Lithgow, in Lithgow-shire

4 The Palace of Falkland, and the town of Falkland adjacent thereunto, with
the Park: In Fyfe.

Castles appertaining to the King.
Desert.
The Castle of Roxburgh, now demoleist by the Law, and by the commandment
of the King, and three Estates: In Teuiotdaill. The monuments yet stand to this
hour, but desert. The Castle and fortalice of Dumbar, a house of great
strength: till within these late years, it was demoleist by James Earl of
Murray, Rege^t of Scotland. In Lothien. Desert.
1 The Castle of Edinburgh, inhabited by John Earl of Mar. 2 The Castle and
strength of of Blacknes in Lothien, inhabited by Sir James Sandelands. 3 The
Castle and strength of Sterling, inhabited by John Earl of Mar, and his
Deputies. 4 The Castle of Dumbarton, inhabited by John Lord Hammilton. 5 The
Castle of Lochmaben in Annandaill, occupied by the Lord Maxwell. 6 The Castle
of Kirkwall, in Orknay, appertaining to the King, inhabited by the Earl of
Orknay.
A true description and division of the whole country of Scotland: of the
situation, distance and commodities in every part thereof.
SCotland is divided from England, first, by the high hills of Cheuiot, and
where the hills do end, by a wall called, The Marchdike, made in our time;
and then by the waters, Esk and Seloua. By North, The borders in order.
those borders from the Scots sea to the Ireland sea. The Countries lie in
order as follows: The Maers (wherein stands the Town of Barwicke, at this
present possessed by England) lies upon the North side of Tweed, which is
compassed by the Firth of Forth on the East, by England on the South: Westward
on both the sides of Tweed lies Teuiotdail, taking the name from the water of
Tiot, The causes of their denominations.
divided from England by the hills of Cheuiot. Next unto Teuiotdail, lie
Countries that are not great: Liddisdail, Ewisdail, and Esdail, taking their
names from three waters, Liddall, Ewis, and Esk. The last is Annandail, which
also has the name from the water of Annan, dividing the Country almost in
two, and runs after Solo^^, into the Ireland sea. Now let us return to
Forth. The Country of Lothian is compassed by it at the East. Coeburnspeth,
and Lamermure, diuides it from the Maers, and then turning somewhat Westward,
it ioynes with Twedaill, and Lawderdaill: Tweddaill taking the name from the
River of Tweed, which runs through the same, and Lawderdhill from the Town
of Lawder, or rather from the water of Lider, running through the Country.
Liddaill, Nithisdaill, and Clyddisdaill, march with Tweddaill at the South and
West parts thereof: Nithisdaill taking the name from the water of Nith, running
through it into the Ireland Sea. Lothian, so named from Loath, King of Pights,
is bordered on the South-east by Forth, or the Scottish sea: on the Northwest
by Clyddisdaill. This Country in civility, and abundance of all other things
necessary for the use of man excelles very far, all the rest of the
countries of Scotland.

There run five waters through it. Tyne and Esk, (which both run in one at
the foot of the wood of Dalkeith, before they enter into the sea) Leith and
Almon. Of those waters, some spring out of Lamermure, and some out of Pentland
hills, and run into Forth. The Towns of Lothian.
The Towns of Lothian, are Dunbar, Hading, commonly called Hadington,
Dalkeith, Edinburgh, Leigh. Linlithgow lies more westwardly: Clyddisdaill lies
on both the sides of Clyde, which for the length thereof, is divided in three
shires.

In the Ouerward, there is an hill, not to call hich, out of the which, spring
rivers running into three sundry seas: Twede into the Scottish sea, Annand into
the Ireland sea, and Clyde into the great Ocean. The chief towns of
Clyddisdaill.
The chief Towns of Cliddisdaill are, Lanark, and Glasgow: North-west from
Cliddisdaill, lies Kyle: beyond Kyle lies Galloway, which is divided from
Clyddisdaill by the water of Cloudan. All Galloway almost declines to the
South, the shire whereof incloseth all the rest of that side of Scotland: It is
more plentiful in store, than Corns.

G^lloway described.
The waters of Galloway, Vxe, Dee, Kenne, Cree and Loss, run into the Ireland
sea: There is almost no great hills in Galloway, but it is full of Craggie
knolles: The waters gathering together in the valleys betwixt those knolles,
make almost innumerable Loches, from whence, the first flood that comes before
the Autumnall Equinoctial, causes such abundance of waters to run, that
there come forth of the said Loches, incredible numbers of Eeles, and are
taken by the Countrymen in wand Creeles, who salting them, obtain no small
gain thereby. The farthest part of that side, is the head, called Nonantum,
under the which, there is an haven at the mouth of the water of Lussie, named
by Ptolome, Rerigonius. In the other side of Galloway oueragainst this Haven,
from Clyddis-forth, there enters another Haven, named commonly Lochryen; and by
Ptolome, Vidogora: all that lies betwixt these two Havens, the Country people
call the Rynns, that is, the point of Galloway: who also call it Nonantum, the
Mule, that is, the Beck.

The whole Country is named Galloway: for Gallovid, in the ancient Scottish
tongue, signifies a man of Gallia: under Lochrien at the back of Galloway,
Carrik described.
lies Carrik, declining easily till it come to Clyddisforth. The waters of
Stenzear, and Greuan divide Carrik: upon the cruiks of those waters, there are
many pretty villages. Carrik, betwixt the waters, where it rises in knolles,
is fertile of beastiall, and reasonable good ground for Corn. The whole
Country of Carrik, both by sea and land, has abundance, not only sufficient
for themselves, but also largely to support their neighbors. The water of
Dunes, deuides Carrik from Kyle. Dune springs out of a Loch of the same name,
in the midst whereof, is an Isle, on the which is builded a little Tower. Kyle
described
Next unto Carrik, lies Kyle, marching upon the South with Galloway, upon the
Southeast with Clyddisdaill, upon the West with Cunninghame, separated from
thence by the water of Irwing.

The water of Air runs through the midst of Kyle: at the mouth of the water,
stands the town of Air, a notable market stead: The Country generally, is
more abundant of valiant men, then of Corn and cattle, the ground being but
poor and sandy, which sharpens the men's industry, and confirms the strength
of the mind and body, by scarceness of living.

From Kyle Northward, Cunninghame described.
lies Cunninghame, renewing Clide, and reducing it to the quantity of a
reasonable river. The name of this country is Dens, signifying in that
language, the Kings house: whereby it appears that the Danes have been
sometimes masters thereof. Next unto Cunningham Eastward lies Renfrew, Renfrew
described.
so named from a little town, wherein they use to keep Session of Justice to
the country. It is commonly named the Barronie, and is divided in the midst by
two waters, both called Carth. Clyddisdaill.
After the Barronie, follows Clyddisdaill, lying on either side of Clyde,
which in respect of the quantity thereof, and lands of Glasgow, is divided in
many jurisdictions. They that dwell upon the lands of Glasgow, have their
own Justice seat within the Town of Glasgow. The most notable waters of
Clyddisdaill, are Eruenne and Douglasse running into Clyde, upon the South side
thereof, and upon the North side there is another called Auenne, which cuts
Lothian from Striueling shire. These two waters have gotten their names of
Walter at the beginning, instead of proper names, as also the water of Auone in
Walls has done, with a little difference for the propriety of the language
sake.

Auenne deuides Sterling shire from Lothian at the South: The Firth or Forth at
the East, which piece and piece becomes narrow, till it grow to the quantity
of a reasonable River, near unto Striueling bridge. There is but one water
worthy to make account of, that runs through it, named Carron, near unto the
which there are some ancient monuments upon the East side of Carron. There are
two little earthen knolles, Two ancient monuments.
builded as may appear by men, commonly called Duini pacis; that is, The
knolles of peace. Two miles downward upon the same water, there is a round
building without lyme, made of hard stone, in such sort, that one part of the
uppermost stones is indented within the stone that lies directly under it: so
that the whole work, by this conjunction mutual, and burden of the stones,
vpholds it self, growing narrow by little and little, from the ground to the
head; where it is open like a Doue-coat. The country people do call it
Arthours oven.
The common sort of people, following there own fantasies, have devised sundry
Authors of this work, and that the same was appointed for sundry uses, every
man appropriating an use according to his own devise: And I led by conjecture,
was sometime indeed of opinion, that this was the Chapel of the God Terminus,
which as we read, was appointed to be open above. The two knolles Duini pacis,
lying so near it, do somewhat fortify this my conjecture; as, that peace had
been concluded there, and this work set up in the memory thereof; and that
the same should be the border of the Roman Empire.

I could not be drawn from this opinion, until I understood, that there are
sundry works in a certain I Will, like unto this Chapel in all things, except
that they are broader and wider. In which respect, I am compelled to suspend my
judgment farther, than to think that these have been monuments of things
done, and especially of victories gotten, and set up in those places, as it had
been out of the world, the rather to be kept from the injuries of enemies: But
truly, whether they be monuments of victory, or (as some believe) Sepulchers
of Noble men, I trust they have been monuments to continue in eternal memory,
but builded by rude and unlearned men, like to this Chapel standing upon
Carron: There is a piece of ground at the right side of Carron, plain almost
round about, growing to a knoll: near midway, betwixt the Duini pacis and this
Chapel, into the which, at the turning of the corner, appears at this day,
the rooms of a pretty Town: But by laboring of the ground where it stood,
and taking away of the stones, for building of Gentlemen's houses thereabouts,
the foundations of the Walls, and description of the rooms cannot be
discerned.

Beda, the English Writer, disertly names this place Guidi, placing the same in
the very corner of Seuerus Wall. Many notable Romans have made mention of this
Wall: Hereof as yet remain sundry apparances, as stones gotten, bearing
inscriptions, containing testimonies of safeguard received of Tribunes and
Centurions, or else of their Sepulchers. And seeing that from the Wall of
Adrian, to this Wall of Seuerus (as the grounds of both do witness) it is
little less then an hundred miles, the ignorance of them that have written the
English matters, was either great, not understanding the Latin Writers who
entreated of them, or else their oversight that so confusedly handled that,
which was so clearly written. Howsoever the matter be, if they be not worthy
to be reproved for this their deed, at least, I think them worthy to be
slightly admonished thereof, specially, for that of the Records foresaids, and
of the History of Beda, the English Writer; it is certain, that there was
sometime the Bordour between the Bryttaines and the Scotts.

They that tell that Camelot stood here, allege also, that this Chapel
before mentioned, was the Temple of Claudius Caesar, and both the one and the
other is a vain lier: for that Camelot is a Colonie of the Romans, three
hundred miles distant from this place, if truth may be given to Ptolomeus, or
Itinerarium Antonins. And Cornelius Tacitus makes this error with the rest of
the whole narratiue, most known; chiefly in that he writes, that the Romans,
after they had lost Camelot, fled for their own preservation, to the temple of
Claudius Caesar: And (whether this Chapel was the Temple of Terminus, or a
monument of any other thing wanting a door, whereof presently it has neither
sign or token, being the height of a stones cast) yet it could never cover ten
armed men of war, or scarsely contain so many within the walls thereof.

Besides this, after Claudius Caesar's journey, almost forty years, Julius
Agricola was the first Roman that ever entered in those parts. Also was it not
fifty years after Agricola, that Adrianus made a wall betwixt Tyne and Esk,
to be the border of the Roman Province, whereof to this present in diverse
places signs do remain? Septimius Seuerus, about the year of God 210, entered
into Britannie, and beyond this border appointed by Adrian, 100 miles, he made
a wall from the Firth of Clyde, to the mouth of Even, where it enters into
Forth. Of this wall, even at this day, there are many and clear
demonstrations. Moreover, we never find in the ancient monuments, that
Camelodonum was the chief seat of the Pights: but that their Regal seat was
in Abirnethie, as also the Metropolitan seat of their Bishop: which afterward
was transported to Saint Andrews.

If it were inquired, what moved the Romans to bring a Colonie there, or how
they sustained the same in so barraine a ground; and, as things were at that
time, wild and unmanured, and subject to the daily injuries of most cruel
enemies: they will, as I suppose, answer, (for I can not see what other thing
they can say) that they furnished it by sea, what time ships sed to pass up
Garron, even to the town wall. If this were ^e, of necessity the ground of
both the banks of Forth, was then ouerflowed by the great Ocean, and so was
barren: and yet now, that is the only ground that is supposed to be plentiful
of corns in those parts. There is another question somewhat more difficill. If
both the banks of Forth were drowned with salt water, why ended not the
Romans their wall rather at that part, then with superstuous labors, to
draw it further in length by many miles? Beyond Striuiling-shire, lies the
Lennox, divided from the Barrony of Renfrew, by Clyde: from Glasgow, by the
water of Heluin: from Striuiling-shire, by hills: from Teth, by Forth: and
then ends in the hills of Grangebean; at the foot whereof, Loch-lomond runs
down a low valley, four and twenty miles of length, and eight of breadth,
having more then four and twenty Islands within the same. This Loch, besides
abundance of other fishes, has a kind of fish of the own, named Pollac,
very pleasant to eat. The water of Leuin runs out of Loch-lomond southward,
which water has given the name to the country. Leuin enters into Clyde,
near to the Castle of Dumbarton, and town of the same name. The westmost of
the hills of Grangebean, make the border of the Lennox. The hills are cutted
by a little bosom of the sea, named for the shortness thereof, Ger-loch. Beyond
this Loch, there is a far greater Loch, named from the water that runs in
it, Loch-long: and this water is the march between Lennox and Couall. This
Couall, Argyle (or rather Ergyle) and Knapdaill, are divided in many parts, by
many narrow creekes, that run out of the firth of Clyde into them, whereof
there is one most notable, named Loch-fyne, from the water of Finne that
runs into it. This Loch is threescore miles of length. In Knapdaill, is
Loch-haw, and therein a little Island, with a strong Castle. The water of Aw
runs out of this Loch, and is the only water of all that country, that
does run into the Deucalidon Sea. North-west from Knapdaill, does lie
Kentyir, (the head of the country ouer-against Ireland,) from which it is
divided by a little Sea. Kyntyir is more long then broad, joining to Knapdaill
by so narrow a throat, that it is scarce one mile in breadth, and the same
throat is nothing else but very sand, lying so low, that Mariners drawing
their ships ofttimes through it, make their journey a great deal shorter, then
it would be, keeping the common course. Lorne, lying upon Ergyle, does march
with it, until it come to Haber, a plain country, and not unfruitful. The
country where the hills of Grangebean are, are most easy to be traveled,
named broad Albin, and that is to say, the highest part of Scotland: and the
highest part of broad Albin, is called Drunnalbin, that is, the back of
Scotland, so termed, not altogether without cause: for forth of that back,
waters do run into both the Seas, some unto the North, and some unto the
South. Forth of Locherne, the water of Erne runs North-east, and enters
into Tay, under Sainct-Iohnstoun three miles. The country that lies on each
side of this water, taking the name from it, is called in the ancient Scottish
language, Straitherne. Straith, of old, in that tongue, was called a country
lying along a water side. Betwixt the hills of this country and Forth, lies
Teth, taking the name from the water of Teth, running through the midst
thereof. The hills called Ochels, march with Teth, which for the most part, A
fertile soil.
(as also the ground, lying at the foot of them) are accounted to be of the
Stewardrie of Straitherne. The rest of that country to Forth (through
ambition) is divided in sundry Jurisdictions, as in Clackmannan-shire,
Culros-shire, and Kinros-shire, from which all the country that lies betwixt
Forth and Tay, Eastward, like a wedge in a narrow point of the Sea, is called
by one name, Fyfe, abundant within the self in all things necessary to the
use of man. It is broadest where Lochleuin divides it: from thence it
becomes narrow, until it come to the town of Carraill. There is but one
water to make account of, in all Fyfe, named Leuin. There are many pretty
towns upon the coast in three sides of Fyfe. The town of Saint Andrews, for
the study of good learning. The town of Cowper stands almost in the midst
of Fyfe, which is the Sherifes seat for administration of justice. Upon the
march betwixt it and Stratherne, stands Abirnethy, of old the chief City
of the Pights. Near it, Erne runs into Tay. The water of Tay comes forth
of Loch-tay, in Broadalbin. The Loch is four and twenty miles of length. Tay
is the greatest river in Scotland, which turning course at the hills of
Grangebean, ioynes with Atholl, a fertile country, situate in the very
wilderness of the same mountains: at the foot whereof there is a part of
Atholl, lying plain, named the Blair, Atholl-
which word signifies a ground proper for wood.

Under Atholl, upon the South side of Tay, stands the Town Caledon, which
only retains the ancient name, commonly called Dunkeld, Dunkeld.
that is, a knoll full of Nut-trees. The Nut-trees growing in that unmanured
ground, and covering the earth, with the shadow of the boughs thereof, have
given the name, both to the town, and people.

Caledones indeed, or Caledonij, were sometime one of the most renowned people
of Britain, and made the one half of the kingdom of Pights, whom Ammianus
Marcellinus divides into Caledones, and Vecturiones, of whom at this day,
scarcely does remain any memorial of Name.

Twelve miles under Dunkeld, in the same right side of the river of Tay, Gowrie.
stands Saint Iohnestone: upon the North side of the water, Eastward from
Atholl, lies Gowrie, a fertile ground for corn, and under it again, betwixt
Tay, and Esk, lies Angusse, or as the ancient Scots call it, Angusse.
Eencia. Some men also are of opinion that it was named Horrestia, or according
to the English Phrase, This town is now called by all men in the Vulgar
tongue, Downdee.
Forrestia. In Angusse are the Towns of Cowper, and Deidoun (the gift of God,
as Boethius, to gratify his country, ambiciously names it) but I trust, the
ancient name of the town was Taidunum, from the word Dun, called the Taw, or
Knoll, that stands upon Tai: at the foot whereof this town is builded.
Fourteen miles North from Tai, right by the Sea side, stands Abirbrothock',
otherwise named Abrinca: from thence ye may perfitly see the Red head a
far off. South-east cuts Angusse even in the midst, and North-east diuides
it from the Maernis. The Maernis for the most part is a plain ground, till it
pass Fordoun, and Dunnotter, the Earl Marshels Castle, and come to the hills
of Grangebean, which begin there to decrease and end in the Sea.

North, from the Maernis, is the mouth of the water of Deua, or Dee, commonly
named, and about a mile from Dee Northward, the mouth of the water of Done. At
the mouth of Dee stands Abirdene, Abirdene.
renowned for the salmond fishings thereof: and at the mouth of Done, the
Bishops seat, Abirdene, an university. flourishing in all kind of arts.
and common schools flourishing in all kind of science of liberal arts. I
find in some old monuments, that the Town nearest to the South, was called
Abirdee, but now, both the one Town and the other, is called Abirdene, devised
only to the words old and new, as new Abirdene, and old Abirdene. At this
narrow point, lying betwixt these waters, the country of Mar begins, Mar.
growing always wider and wider, till it be 60 miles in length, and come to
Badzenoch. The country of Badzenoch, Badzenoch.
has as it were a back, running out through the midst of it, which spouts
forth waters into both the seas. Habre.
Habre marches with Badzenoch, tending by little and little toward the
Deucalidon sea: a Country as abundant of commodities both by sea and land, as
any Country within Scotland is. First, it is good for Corn, and store: the
shadows of the Woods, the rivers and the springs, make it very pleasant: and
it has also great plenty of fishes, as any Country within Scotland: for
besides the abundance of fresh water fishes, produced by a great number of
waters, the sea runs within the country, in a long Channel, and being
narrow at the mouth, the water kept in betwixt two high banks, and spreading
wide inward, makes the form of a stanke or rather of a Loch, from which it
has gotten the name Abre, by the Country men, that is in their language, A
place where ships may lie as sure as in a Haven. The same name is given to all
the Country that lies round about: such as speak the English tongue, name
both the Creek of the sea, and the country, Lochabre, but altogether without
reason, and indecently. These three Countries, Habre, The broadnesse of
Scotland. Buquhan.
Badzenoch, and Mar, comprehend the breadth of Scotland, betwixt the two
seas. Next unto Mar, Northward lies Buquhan, divided from Mar by the water
of Dune. This Country runs farthest in the Germane Sea, of all the Countries
of Scotland; fertile in store, and increase of the ground, and in it self,
sufficient to satisfy for all other commodities necessary for the Country.
There is abundance of Salmond fish taken in all the waters thereof, except
Rattry, wherein to this hour, was never seen any Salmond. Upon the coast of
Buquhan, there is a cave, the nature whereof is not to be forgotten. From the
crown of the Cave, A strange. thing.
there drops down water, which water, upon the instant, is turned into little
round stones. If the Cave were not from time to time cleansed by man's labor,
it would in short space be filled to the head. The stone that is ingendered of
this water, is of nature half stone, half Ice, fresh and never growing
solid, as the Marble does.

When I was in Tollosse, about the year of God, 1544. I understood by credible
men, that there was a Cave, into the Pirenee mounts, near unto the place of
their habitation, like unto this Cave in all things. Boyne and Enzee.
Boyne and Enzee lie from Buquhan, Northward to Spey, which deuides them from
Murray. Spey springs forth of the North-side of the mountains of Badzenoch,
whereof we have made mention; and not far from the spring thereof is a Loch,
forth of the which, comes the water of Lute, running into the West sea. By
report, there was at the mouth of this water, a good Town, named Innerluther,
from the name of the water. Surely, if we will consider the nature of the
people that dwell thereabouts, the commodity of sailing and portage by sea,
this is very proper for an Haven.

The ancient Kings allured by these commodities, sometime dwelt there, in the
Castle of Enone, which Castle, many at this time (sinisterly informed) suppose
to be Dunstaffage: for the ruins and signs of Dunstaffage, even to this day
may be seen in Lorne.

There are some small Countries cast in betwixt Buquhan and the Westsea, which
(having no notable thing worthy of memory within them) we ouerpasse. Murray.
Murray lies betwixt Spey and Naes, sometime named, as some suppose, Verar. The
Germane sea running betwixt these two waters backward, makes the shire narrow,
and yet for the quantity, it is wealthy in corn and store, and is the first
country of Scotland for pleasure and commodities of fruitful trees. There are
two towns in it, Elgin, upon the water of Loxi, keeping at this day the
ancient name; and Innernes, upon the water of Naes. Naes comes forth of a Loch
34 miles of length, A Loch of a strange nature.
named Loch-naes. The water of Naes is almost always warm, and at no time so
cold that it freezeth: yea, in the most cold time of winter, broken ice falling
in it, is dissolved, by the heat thereof. West from Lochnaes, there lies eight
miles of continent ground: and that small piece is the only impediment that
the seas join not, and make the remanent of Scotland an Island: for all the
land that lies betwixt the strait and the Deucalidon sea, is cutted by creeks
and Loches of salt water running into the land. The country that lies by North
Naes, and these straits, is commonly divided in four Provinces, Nauern, or, as
the common people name it, Stranauerne, from the water of Narn.

From the mouth of Naes, where it enters into the Germane sea, Rosse: the
description thereof.
North, lies Rosse, shooting into the sea, in great promontories or heads, as
the word it self expresses: For Rosse in Scottish, is called, An head. The
country of Rosse is of greater length, then breadth, extended from the
German to the Deucalidon sea, where it rises in craggy and wild hills, and
yet in the plain fields thereof, there is as great fertility of Corn, as in
any other part of Scotland. There is in Rosse, pleasant dales with waters, and
Loches full of fishes, specially Loch-broome. It is broad at the Deucalidon
sea, and grows narrow by little and little, turning Southward. From the other
shore, the Germane sea (winning the self an entry betwixt high Clints) runs
within the land in a wide bosom, and makes an healthful port and sure refuge
against all tempests and storms: The entry of it is easy, and within it, is a
very sure Haven, against all injuries of sea, and a Haven for great Nauies of
ships.

Nauarne.
Next unto Rosse Northward: is Nauarn, so named, from the water of Nauarn,
which the common people (following the custom of their country speech)
calls, Stranauerne. Rosse-marches with Stranauerne at the South. The
Deucalidon sea, at the West and North, runs about it, and at the East it
ioines with Caithnes. Sotherland.
Sotherland, is so cast in amongst these countries, that it is neighbor to
them all, and marches with every one of them at some part. At the West, it has
Stranauerne: at the East, Rosse: and at the North, Caithnes, lying over against
it. The Country people, in respect of the nature of the ground, are more given
to store then to Corn. There is no singular thing in it that I know, Hills of
white Marble.
except the hills of white Marble: a rare wonder in cold countries, and
serving for no purpose, because that ouer-great delicacie, the curious caruer
of such things, is not entered in that country.

Caithnes, Caithnes.
where it marches with Stranauerne, is the furthest North country of all
Scotland. And those two Countries draw the breadth of Scotland into a narrow
front. In them are three promontories or heads: the highest whereof, is in
Nauernia, named by Ptolomie, Orcas, or Taruidum. The other two, not altogether
so hie, are in Caithnes, Veruedrum, now named Hoya; and Berubrum, untruly by
Boethius called Dume, now commonly called Dunnesbey, or by some, Duncans-bey. Of
this word (as appears, some letters taken away) the word Dunsbey is come. At
the foot of the hill, there is a pretty creek, which they that travel from
Orknay by sea, use for an haven. Creek is commonly called a Bay. This Creek
then being named by such as dwelt thereabout Duncans-bey or Dunnachis-bey, the
common people joining both the words in one, have (in their fashion) made the
word Dunsbey. In this Country Ptolomie places Carnauij, of which names, there
remain yet some signs: for the Earl of Caithnes chief Castle is named
Gernigo. It appears, that the people named by Ptolomie, Cornauij, were called
by the Britaynes, Kernici: for indeed, not only in this Country, but also in
the furthest place of this I Will, that is in Cornewales, he places the people,
named Cornauij, and they that speak the Britayne tongue, call the same people,
Kernici. It may be, that he should not judge amiss, that should esteem
Cornewales to be spoken for Kernice-wales, taking that name from the Frenchmen,
called Kernici. It appears likewise, that some signs of this name, although
obscure, remained in the midst of the I Will: For Beda writes, that the
beginning of Seuerus wall, was not far from the Abbay of Kebercurnike; but in
these places now, there is no appearance of any Abbay. Yet there is in that
part, a Castle of Dowglasses, ruinous and half decayed, named Abircorne.
Whether one of these words, or both, be corruptly driven for Kernici, I leave
the Reader to judge.

Of the Isles of Scotland ingenerall.
NOw rests it to speak somewhat of the Isles, the part of all the Britain
History, inuolued in greatest errors. We will leave the most ancient writers,
of whom we have no certainty, and follow that which men of our own time, more
truly and clearly have written. The desdiuided.
They divide all the Isles, (which, as it were, crown Scotland) in three
classes or ranks, the West Isles, Orkenay Isles, and Shetland Isles. They call
them West, that lie in the Deucalidon sea, from Ireland almost to Orknay, upon
the West side of Scotland. They that either in our Fathers days or ours, have
written any thing of Brittayne, call these Isles Hebrides, (a new name indeed)
whereof they bring neither ground, nor evidence from the ancient writers.

Some writers have placed Aebudae, Aemode, or Acmode, in that part of that Sea:
But so diversely, that they scarcely agree, either in the number, the situation,
or names. Strabo (to begin at him, as most ancient) perchance may be pardoned,
for that in his time, that part of the world was not sufficiently explored, and
he therefore has but followed the uncertain brute. Mela reckons seven
Aemodae; Martianus Capella also many Acmodae; Ptolomeus and Solinus five
Aebudae. Plinius seven Acmodae and thirty Aebudae. We will retain the name
that is most frequent and common amongst the ancients, and call all the West
Isles Aebudae, and show their situation, the nature of every one of them, and
commodities thereof, out of recent authors, that have lately written, as most
certain. First, we will follow Donald Munro, a man both godly and diligent,
who traveled all these Isles upon his feet, and saw them perfectly with his
eyes. They lie scattered into the Deucalidon sea, The numbers of the Scottish
Isles are 300 Isles and above.
to the number of 300. and above. Of old, the Kings of Scotland kept these
Isles in their own possession, until the time of Donald, brother to King
Malcome the 3. who gave them to the king of Norway, upon condition, that he
should assist him, in usurping of the kingdom of Scotland, against law and
reason. The Danes and Norway people kept possession of them for the space of
160. years: and then King Alexander the third, ouercomming the Danes and
Norway men in a great battle, thrust them out of the Isles: yet afterward they
attempted to recover their liberty, partly, trusting to their own strength;
and partly, moved by sedidions in the maine land of this Country, creating
Kings of themselves, as not long ago, John (of the house of Clandonald) did
usurp the name of King, as others had done before. In food, raiment, and all
things pertaining to their family, they use the ancient frugalitie of the
Scots.

Their bankets are hunting and fishing. The manner of their bankets.
They sees their flesh in the ^ripe, or else in the skin of the beast,
filling the same full of water. Now and then in hunting, they strain out the
blood, Their drink.
and eat the flesh raw. Their drink is the broth of sodden flesh. They love
very well the drink made of whey, and kept certain years, drinking the same
at feasts: It is named by them, Blandium. The most part of them drink water.
Their custom is to make their bread of Oats and Barley, (which are the only
kinds of grain that grow in those parts:) Experience (with time) has taught
them to make it in such sort, that it is not unpleasant to eat. They take a
little of it in the morning, and so passing to the hunting, or any other
business, content themselves therewith, without any other kind of meat, till
even.

They delight in marled clothes, Their attire, colored garments.
specially, that have long stripes of sundry colors: They love chiefly purple
and blew. Their predecessors used short mantles, or plaids of diverse colors,
sundry ways divided: and amongst some, the same custom is observed to this
day: but for the most part now, they are brown, most near to the color of
the Hadder: to the effect, when they lie amongst the Hadder, the bright color
of their plaids shall not bewray them: with the which, rather colored, then
clad, they suffer the most cruel tempests that blow in the open field, in
such sort, that under a wrythe of Snow, Their manner of lodging.
they sleep sound. In their houses also, they lie upon the ground, laying
betwixt them and it, Brakens, or Hadder, the roots thereof down, and the tops
up, so prettily laid together, that they are as soft as feather-beds, and much
more wholesome: for the tops themselves are dry of nature, whereby it dries the
weak humors, and restores again the strength of the sinews troubled before,
and that so evidently, that they, who at evening go to rest sore and weary,
rise in the morning whole and able. As none of these people care for
feather-beds and bedding, so take they greatest pleasure in rudeness and
hardness. If for their own commodity, or upon necessity, they travel to
any other Country, they reject the feather-beds and bedding of their Host.
They wrap themselves in their own plaids, so taking their rest: careful
indeed, lest that barbarous delicacie of the maine Land (as they term it)
corrupt their natural and Country hardness.

Their armor in time of war.
Their armor wherewith they cover their bodies in time of war, is an Iron
Bonnet, and an Habbergion, side, almost even to their heels. Their weapons
against their enemies, are bows and arrows. The arrows are for the most part
hooked, with a barble on either side, which once entered within the body,
cannot be drawn forth again, unless the wound be made wider. Some of them
fight with broad swords and axes. In place of a drum, they use a bag-pipe. They
delight much in music, but chiefly in Harps and Clairschoes of their own
fashion. The strings of the Clairschoes are made of brasse-wire, and the
strings of the Harps, of sinews: which strings, they strike either with their
nails, growing long; or else with an Instrument appointed for that use. They
take great pleasure to deck their Harps and Clairschoes with silver and
precious stones: and poor ones, that cannot attain heereunto, deck them with
Crystal. They sing verses prettily compound, containing (for the most part)
praises of valiant men. There is not almost any other argument, whereof their
rimes entreat. They speak the ancient French language, altered a little.

THE ISLES LYING ABOUT Scotland, that speak the ancient language, called the
West Isles, are these that follow.
THe first of them all, is the I Will of Man, untruly by some men named Mon: by
the ancients called Dubonia, by Paulus Orosius, Menenia, or rather Maenante,
and in the old country speech, Manium. Before this time, there was a Town in
it, named Sodora, wherein the Bishop of the Isles had his seat. It lies almost
midway betwixt Ireland and Cumbir, a Country of England, and Galloway, a
Country of Scotland, 24 miles in length, and 18 in breadth. Next unto Man, is
Ailsay, into the Firth of Clyde: an hard high craig on all sides, except at an
entry. It is never occupied by any man, but that at sometimes there come a
great number of Boats there to fish keeling. There are many Conies and
Seafowles in it, specially of that kind, which we call Solayne-Geese. It has
Carrik upon the North-east, Ireland upon the North-west almost, and Kyntyre
upon the South-east. Four and twenty miles from Ailsay, lies Arrane, almost
direct North, 24 miles of length, and 16 of breadth. All the whole Island rises
in high and wild mountains. It is manured only upon the sea side. Where the
ground is lowest, the sea runs in, and makes a well large Creek into it: the
entries whereof are closed by the Island Molas, the hills rising on all sides,
and breaking the rage of the winds, in such sort, that within is a very sure
haven for ships: and in the waters, which are always calm, such abundance
of fish, that if there be more taken than the Country people think should
serve them for a day, they cast them in again into the sea, as it were in a
stanke. Not far from Arrane lies the little I Will Flada, fertile of Conies.
Farther in it, is situate the I Will of Bute, within the Firth of Clyde, eight
miles of length, and four in breadth: distant from Arrane, as is said, eight
miles South-east, and from Argyle South-west, little more than half a mile
from Cunnynghame, which lies by-East of it, six miles. It is a low Country,
commodious enough for Corn and store: In it is a town of the same name, An
ancient Castle.
and therein is the old Castle of Rosa. There is another Castle in the
midst of it, named Cames, in their own language, in Greek Kamcos: that is,
very crooked. The I Will Mernoca, a mile of length, and half a mile of breadth,
lies low South-westward, well manured and fertile for the quantity. Within
the Firth of Clyde, lies little Cambra, and great Cambra, not far distant one
from another. Great Cambra is fertile of Corn, and little Cambra of fallow
Dear. From the Mule of Kyntyre Littia, more then a mile, is Porticosa auona,
getting that name from the creek of Walter, that kept the Danes Navy there,
at what time they had the Isles in their hands. From the same Mule North-west,
over against the coast of Ireland, lies Rachuda: and from Kyntyre four miles,
the little I Will Caraia: and not far from thence, Gigaia, six miles of length,
and a mile and a half of breadth. Iura.
Twelve miles from Gigaia, lies Iura, four and twenty miles of length. The
shoreside of Iura is well manured, and the inward part of the Country is cled
with wood, full of Dear of sundry kinds. Some think that this I Will was named
of old, Dera, which word in the Gothicke tongue signifies a Dear. Two miles
from Iura, lies Scarba, in length, from the East to the West, four miles, and
a mile in breadth: in few places occupied. The tide of the sea betwixt this I Will
and Iura, is so violent, that it is not possible to pass it, either by sail
or air, except at certain times. At the back of this I Will, are many
unworthy little Islands scattered here and there. Ballach, or Genistaria,
Gearastilla, Longaia, the 2. Fidlais, the 3. Barbais, distinguished by their
own proper names, Culbremna, Dunum, Coilp, Cuparia, Beluahua, Vikerana,
Vitulina, Lumga, Seila, Scana. These three last Isles are indifferent fertile of
corn and store, and pertain to the Earls of Argyle. Next unto them is
Sklata: so named, from a Sklait quarre that is in it. Then Naguisoga and
Eisdalfa, and Skennia, and that which is named Thiana, from an herb hurtful
to the corns, Lutea.
called Guld, not unlike to the herb Lutea, but that it is somewhat more
waterish colored. Vderga, and the kings Island: then Duffa, that is, black:
and the Island of the Church, and Triaracha, and then the Island Ardua, Hun^lis,
Viridi^, and Ericca. Item, Arboraria, Capra^ia, Cunicularia, and it, that is
named the Island of Idle-men: and Abridica, and Lismora, wherein sometime was
the Bishops feate of Argyle: It is eight miles of length, and two in breadth.
In this Island, besides the commodities that it has common with the rest, there
are Mines of mettalles. Then Ouilia, the Island Traiecte, the Island Garna (that
is sharp) the Island of the stane. Gressa, and the great Island, Ardiescara,
Musadilla, and Bernera, sometime called the holy Girth, notable by the tree
Taxus, which grows in it. Taxus, a tree not unlike to the Fir Tree, but the
fruit thereof is venomous.
Molochasgia, Drinacha, full of thorns and Bourtree, ouer-couered with the
ruins of old houses. Wrichtoun, fertile of wood. Item, Ransa, Kernera. The
greatest Island, next unto Iura, westward, is Yla, 24. miles of length, and
sixteen of breadth, extended from the South, to the North, abundant in store,
Cornea, Dear and Lead. There is a fresh water in it, called Laia, and a creek
of salt water, and therein are many Islands: In it also, is a fresh water Loch,
wherein stands the Island, named Fulnigania, sometime the chief seat of all
the Iles-men. There the Governor of the Isles, usurping the name of a King, was
wont to dwell. Near unto this Island, and somewat less then it, is the round
Island, taking the name from Counsel: for therein was the Justice seat, and
fourteen of the most worthy of the Country, did minister Justice unto all
the rest, continually, and entreated of the weighty affairs of the Realm, in
counsel, whose great equity and discretion kept peace both at home and
abroad, and with peace, was the companion of peace, abundance of all things.
Betwixt Ila and Iura, lies a little Island, taking the name from a Cairne of
stones. At the South Side of Ila, do lie these Islands: Colurna, Muluo^is,
Os^una, Brigidana, Corskera, the low Island, Imersga, Beathia, Texa,
Ouicularia, Noasiga, Vinarda, Caua, Tarsheria. The great Island Auchnarra, Island
like a man.
the Island made like a man, the Island of John Slakbadis. At the west corner of
Ila, lies Ouersa, where the sea is most tempestuous, and at certain hours
vnnauigable. The Merchants Island. And Southwest-ward from it, Island of Weauers.
Vsabrasta, Tanasta, and Nefa. The Weauers Island. Eight miles from Ila,
somewhat toward the North, lies Ornansa. Next unto it, the Swines Island. Half
a mile from Ornansa, Colnansa. North from Colnansa, lies the Mule, twelve miles
distant from Ila. This I Will is four and twenty miles of length, and as much in
breadth, unpleasant indeed, but not unfruitful of Corns. There are many woods
in it, many heardes of Dear, and a good haven for ships: There are in it two
waters, entering into the Sea, over against the Dowe Island: and there are two
waters, well spread of Salmond fish, and some strippes not altogether empty
thereof. There are also two Loches in it, and in every one of the Loches an
Island, and in every Island a tower. The sea running into this Island at four
sundry parts, makes four salt water Loches therein, all four abounding in
Herring. To the North-west lies Calumbaria, or the Dowe Island: to the
South-est, Era: both the one and the other profitable for Bestiall, for Corns,
and for fishings. From this Island, two miles, lies the Island of Sanct-colme,
two miles of length, and more then a mile of breadth, fertile of all things,
that that part of the heaven uses to produce: Renowned by the ancient
monuments of that country, but most esteemed for the sincere holiness and
discipline of Sanct-colme. There were in this Island, two Abbeys, one of Monks,
another of graie Friars: a Court, (or as it is termed at this time) a parish
Church, with many Chappelles, builded of the liberality of the Kings of
Scotland, and governors of the Isles. When as the English men had taken
Eubonia, and therein the ancient seat of the Bishops of the Isles, they placed
their seat into the old Cloister of Sanctcolme. There is as yet remaining
amongst the old ruins, a burial place, or Churchyard, common to all the
Noble families of the West Isles, wherein there are three tombs, higher then
the rest, distant every one from another a little space, and three little
houses situated to the East, builded severally upon the three tombs: upon the
west parts whereof, there are stones graven, expressing whose tombs these
were, Burial places of the Kings of Scotland.
which stand in the midst, bearing this title: The tombs of the Kings of
Scotland. It is said there were 48. Kings of Scotland buried there. The tomb
upon the right side, has this inscription: Kings of Ireland.
The Tombs of the Kings of Ireland. It is recorded, that there were four
Kings of Ireland buried there. It, that is upon the left side, has this
inscription: The Tombs of the Kings of Norway. Kings of Norway.
The report is, that there were eight Kings of that Nation buried there. The
notable houses of the Isles, have their Tombs in the rest of the Churchyard,
every one severally by themselves. There are about this Island, and near unto
it, six little Islands, not unfruitful, given by the ancient Kings of
Scotland, and governors of the Isles, to the Abbey of Sanct-Colme. Soa is a
very profitable ground for sheep, albeit the chief commodity of it consists
in sea-fowles that build therein, specially of their eggs. Next unto it, is
the I Will of Women. Then Rudana. Near unto it, Bernira: and from that, Skennia,
half a mile distant from the Mule. It has a Priest of the own, but the most
part of the parishioners dwell in Mule. The sea sides of it abound in Connies.
Five miles hence, lies Frosa: all these Isles are subject to the Monks of
Saint Colmes Abbey. Two miles from Frosa, lies Vilua, five miles of length,
fruitful for the quantity of Corn and store. It has a commodious Haven for
galleys or boats.

Upon the South side of it, lies Toluansa, the ground whereof is not
unfruitful. There is a wood of Nut-trees in it. About three hundred paces from
this Island, lies Gomatra, two miles long, and one mile broad, extended from
the North to the South. From Gomatra four miles Southward, lies 2. Staffae,
the one and the other full of Hauening places. Four miles South-east from
Staffa, lie two Islands, named Kerimburgae, the more and the less, environed
with such shore, high, and furious tide, that by their own natural defense,
(supported somewhat by the industry of man) they are altogether invincible.
One mile from them, lies an Island, whereof the whole earth almost is black,
grown together of rotten wood and moss. The people make peates of it for
their fire: where-from it is called Monadrum: for that kind of earth, which in
the English language is called Moss, in the Irish is called Monadrum. Next
unto this I Will, lies Longa, 2. miles of length, and Bacha half as much. From
Bacha 6. miles lies Tiria, eight miles in length, and three in breadth. Most
fertile of all the Islands, in all things necessary for the sustentation of
man. It abounds in store of Corns, fishings, and Sea-fowles. In this Island,
there is a fresh water Loch, and therein an old Castle. It has also an haven
not incommodious for boats. From this Island two miles, lies Sunna, and from
Sunna as far lies Colla, twelve miles of length, and two miles of breadth, a
fertile Island. Not far from it, is Calfa, almost all full of wood. And then
two Islands, named meekle Viridis, and little Viridis. Item, other two of the
same names. Over against the Mules head, and not far from it, lie two
Islands, named Glassae, and then Ardan-eidir, that is, the high Island of the
rider. Then Luparia, or the Wolf Island: and after it a great I Will, lying North
from the Island Colla, extended East and West. Then Ruma, sixteen miles in
length, and six in breadth, rising high in strait hills, full of woods, and
scrogges, and for that cause, it is inhabited in very few places. The
Sea-fowles lay their eggs here and there, in the ground thereof. In the
midst of the spring time, when the eggs are laid, any man that pleases may
take of them. In the high rocks thereof, the Sea-guse, whereof we spoke
before, are taken in abundance. From this Island, four miles North-east-ward,
Horse-Iland. Swine-Iland.
lies the Horse Island; and from it half a mile, the Swine Island, for the
quantity fruitful enough in all things necessary. The Falcon builds in
it. It has also an haven. Not far from it, lies Canna and Egga, little
Islands, fertile enough. In Egga are Solan-geese. Soabrittella, more profitable
for hunting, then for any other commodity necessary for man. From this Island
the I Will of Sky, greatest of all the Islands that are about Scotland, lies North
and South, 40. miles in length, and eight miles broad in some places, and in
other places 12. miles, rising in hills, in sundry places full of woods and
pastorage. The ground thereof fertile in corn and store: and besides all other
kinds of beastiall, fruitful of Mares, for breeding of horse. It has five
great rivers, rich of Salmond, and many little waters, not altogether bare
thereof. The sea running into the land on all sides, make many salt-waters,
three principal, and 13. others, all rich in herring. There is in it a
fresh water Loch, and five Castles. The I Will, in the old Scottish tongue, is
called Scianacha, that is, winged: because the heads, betwixt the which the Sea
runs into the land, spreads out like wings: but by common custom of
speech, it is called Sky, that is, a wing. About the Sky, lie little Islands,
scattered here and there. Oronsa, fertile in corn and store. Cunicularia,
full of bushes and Connies. Paba, infamous for throate-cutting. For that in the
woods thereof, robbers lie in ambushments, to trap them that pass that way.8.
miles South-west from it lies Scalpa, which, (besides sundry other commodities)
has woods full of troops of Dear. Betwixt the mouth of Zochcarron and
Raorsa, lies Crulinga, seven miles of length, and two of breadth: there is a
sure haven in it for ships. There are in it also, woods of Bucke, and Dear in
them.

Half a mile from Crulinga, is Rona, full of wood, and Hadder. There is an
haven in the innermost Loch thereof, perilous for robbery, to them that pass
that way, because it is a meet place to hide ambushments in. In the mouth of
the same Loch, is an Island of the same name, called for shortness, Ger-loch.
From Rona six miles Northward, lies Flada: two miles from Flada, Euilmena.
Upon the south side of Sky, lies Oronsa: and a mile from it Knia, Pabra, and
great Bina: and then five little unworthy Islands. Next unto them is, Isa,
fertile in corns. Beside it, is Ouia, then Askerma, and Lindella.8. miles from
Sky southward, lies Linga, and Gigarmena, Benera, Megala, Paua, Flada, Scarpa
Veruecum, Sandara, Vatersa: Which, besides many other commodities, has a
haven, commodious for a number of great ships, whereinto fishermen of all
countries about, conuene certain times of the year ordinarily. These last
nine Islands, are subject to the Bishop of the Isles. 2. miles from Vatersa, is
Barra, running from the North-west, to the south-east, 7. miles in length,
fruitful of corns, and profitable for fish. There runs into it, a Loch,
with a narrow throat, growing round and wide within. In it there is an inch,
and in the inch a strong Castle. Upon the North-side of Barra, there rises an
hill, full of herbs from the foot to the head, upon the top whereof, is a
fresh water well. The spring that runs from this well, to the next sea, A
strange kind of fish.
carries with it little things, like as they were quick, but having the shape
of no beast, which appear (although obscurely) in some respect, to represent
the fish, that we call commonly, Cockles. The people that dwell there, call
that part of the shore, whereunto these things are carried, The great sands:
Because, that when the sea ebbes, there appears nothing but dry sands, the
space of a mile. Out of these sands, the people dig out great Cocles, which
the neighbors about judge either to grow (as it were) of that seed, that the
springs do bring from the well, or else indeed, to grow in that sea. Betwixt
Barra, and Wist, lie these little Islands following: Oronsa, Onia, Hakerseta,
Garnlanga, Flada, great Buya, little Buya, Haya, Hell saea, Gygaia, Lingaia,
Foraia, Fudaia, Eriscaia. From these Islands, Vistus lies Northward, 34 miles of
length, and 6 miles of breadth. The tide of the sea, running into two places of
this I Will, causes it to appear three Islands: but when the tide is out, it
becomes all one Island. In it are many fresh water loches, specially one,
three miles long. The sea has worn in upon the land, and made it self a
passage to this Loch, and can never be holden out, albeit the inhabitants have
made a wall of sixty foot broad, to that effect. The water enters in amongst
the stones, that are builded up together, and leaves behind it, at the ebb,
many sea-fishes. There is a fish in it, like to the Salmond in all things,
except, that with the white womb, it has a black back, and wants skailes.
Item, in this Island are innumerable fresh water loches. There is in it caves
covered over with Hadder, that are very dens for knaves. In it are five
churches. 8 miles West, from it lies Helsther Vetularum, so named, (as I
believe) because it appertains to the Nuns of the I Will of Ione. A little
further North, rises Haneskera: about this Island, at certain times of the
year, are many Sealches, they are taken by the contrymen. South-west,
almost sixty miles from Haneskera, lies Hirta, fertile in corn and store,
specially in sheep, which are greater then the sheep of any the other Islands:
The Inhabitants thereof are rude in all kind of craft, and most rude in
Religion. After the Summer Solstice, which is about the seventeenth day of
June, the Lord of the Island sends his Chamberlain to gather his duties, and
with him a Priest, A barbarous people.
who baptizeth all the children that are borne the year preceding: And if it
chance the Priest not to come, then every man baptizeth his own child. The
tenants pay to their Lords, certain number of Sealches, of Reisted Wedders,
and Sea-fowles. The whole Island passes not one mile in length, and as much in
breadth. There is no part of it, that can be seen by any of the other Islands,
except three hills, which are upon the coast thereof, and may be seen from
high places of some other Islands. In these hills are very fair sheep, but
scarsely may any man get to them for the violence of the tide. Now let us
return to Wistas. From the North point thereof, is the Island Velaia, one mile
of breadth, and twice as long. Betwixt this point, and the Island Harea, lie
these Islands following, little of quantity, but not unfruitful: Soa, Stroma,
Pabaia, Barneraia, Emsaia, Keligira, Little Saga, Great Saga, Harmodra, Scarua,
Grialinga, Cillinsa, Hea, Hoia, Little Soa, Great Soa, Isa, Little Seuna, Great
Seuna, Taransa, Slegana, Tuemen.

Above Horea, is Scarpa, and half a mile toward the West, Equinoctial from
the Lewis, lie seven little Islands, which some name Flananae, some holy places
of girth and refuge, rising up in hills that are full of herbs, but
unlabored of any man. There is never almost one foure-footed beast in them,
except wild sheep, which are taken by hunters, but they serve of no purpose
for eating, because in stead of flesh, they have a kind of fatness: and if
there be any flesh upon them, it is so unpleasant, that no man (unless he be
very sore oppressed with extreme hunger) will taste of it.

Further North, in the same rank, lies Garn Ellan: that is, the hard I Will.
Lamba, Flada, Kellasa, Little Barnera, Great Barnera, Kirta, Little Bina, Great
Bina, Vexaia, Pabaia, Great Sigrama, Cunicularia, so named from the plenty of
Conies that are there, Little Sigrama: The Island of the Pigmeis. In this Island
is a church, Island of Pigmeis.
wherein the Pigmeis were buried (as they that are neighbors to the Island,
believe.) Sundry strangers digging deeply in the ground, sometimes have
found, and yet to this day do find very little round heads, and other little
bones of man's body, which seems to approve the truth, and appearance of the
common brute. In the North-east side of the Island Leogus, there are two Loches
running forth of the sea, named the North and South Loches, wherein at all
times of the year, there is abundance of fish for all men that list to take
them. From the same side of the Loch, somewhat more Southerly, lies Fabilla,
Adams Island, the Lamb Island, Item Hulmetia, Adams Island.
Viccoilla, Hanarera, Laxa, Era, the Dow Island, Tora, Iffurta, Sealpa, Flada,
Senta: At the East side whereof, there is a passage under the earth, vaulted
above a flight shoot of length, into the which little boats may either sail
or row, for eschewing of the violent tide, raging with great noice and danger
of them that sail betwixt the Island and the head that is next unto it.
Somewhat Eastward, lies an Island, named Old Castle, a room strong of nature,
and sufficient enough to nourish the inhabitants in corns, fish, and eggs of
Sea-fowles that build in it. At that side where Lochbrien enters, is situate
the Island Eu, all full of woods only meet to cover Thieves, who lie in wait
for passengers coming that way. More Northerlie, lies the Island Grumorta, and
it is likewise full of woods, and haunted by throat-cutters. The Island, named
the Priests Island, lies that same way, profitable for pastourage of sheep, and
full of Sea-fowles. Next unto it is Afulla. Neighbor to Afulla, is great
Habrera: then little Habrera, and near unto it, Horse-Ile.
the Horse-Ile: and besides that again, the Island Marta Ika.

These last mentioned Islands, lie all before the entry of Lochbrien, and from
them Northward, lie Haray and Lewis, 16 miles of length, and 16 of breadth.
These three make an Island, which is not divided by any haven or port of the
Sea, but by the several Lordships of the heritours thereof. The South part, is
commonly named Haray: In it sometime was the Abbey named Roadilla, builded by
Maccleude Hareis. It is a Country fertile enough in Corns, but yet the
increase comes rather of digging, and deluing, than by earing with the
plough. There is good pastourage for sheep in it, chiefly a high hill
ouer-couered with grass, to the very top. Master Donald Monro, a learned and
godly man, says, that when he was there, he saw sheep (as old as that kind
of Bestiall uses to be) feeding masterlesse, perteining peculiarly to no man,
the commodity whereof is the greater, for that there is neither Woolfe, Fox,
or Serpent seen there: albeit that betwixt that part, and Lewis, there be
great woods full of Dear, but they are of stature low, and not great of body.
In that part also of the Island, is a water, well stored of Salmond fishes. Upon
the North side of it, it is well manured upon the sea side. There are in it
four Churches, one Castle, seven great running waters, and twelve less, all
(for their quantities) plentiful of Salmond fish. The sea enters within the
land in diverse parts of the Island, making sundry salt water Loches, all
plentiful of Herring. There is in it great commodity of sheep, which feed at
their pleasure upon the hadder, and amongst the bushes and craigs. The
Inhabitants gather them together every year once, either within some narrow
room, or else within some flaik foldes, and there conform to the ancient
custom of the Country, they pluck off the wool of them.

The most part of the hie land hereof, is moory ground: the superfice whereof
is black, congealed together by long progress of time, of moss and rotten
wood, to the thickness of a foot, or thereabouts: the upper scruffe is cast in
long thick turffes, dried at the Sun, and so won to make fire of, and
burnt in stead of wood. The next year after, they mucke the bare ground, where
the scruffe was taken away, with sea ware, and sow Barley upon it.

In this Island is such abundance of Whales taken, Whales.
that (as aged men report) the Priests will get of small and great together, 27
Whales for their tenth. There is also in this Island, a great Cave, wherein the
sea at a low water abides two faddome high, and at a full sea, it is more than
four faddome deep: people of all sorts and ages sit upon the rocks thereof,
with hook and line, taking innumerable multitude of all kind of fishes.
South-east from Lewis, almost threescore miles, there is a little Island low
and plain, well manured, named Rona, the Inhabitants thereof, are rude men,
and almost without religion. The Lord of the ground limits certain number of
households to occupy it, appointing for every householde, few or many sheep,
according to his pleasure, whereon they may easily live and pay him his rent.
Whatsoever rests at the years end, more than their necessary sustentation,
they send the same yearly to Lewis to their master. The rent for the most part
which they pay, A happy people.
is barlie meal, sewed up in sheepe-skinnes in great quantity, (amongst them
grows no store of any other kind of grain.) Mutton, and so many sea-fowles
dried at the Sun, as they themselves leave uneaten at the years end, are
sent to their master. And in case, at any time the number of persons increase
in their houses, they give all that exceed the ordinary number, to their
master; so that in my opinion, they are the only people in the world that want
nothing, but has all things for themselves in abundance, vncorrupt with
lechery or avarice, and are endued with innocence and quietness of mind
(which other people with great travel seek out by the institutions and
precepts of Philosophy) purchased to them by ignorance of vice, so that they
appear to want nothing of the highest felicity that may be, except only, that
they are ignorant of the commodity of their own condition.

A miracle.
There is in this Island, a Chapel, dedicated to Saint Ronan: wherein (as aged
men report) there is always a Spade, wherewith, when as any is dead, they
find the place of his grave marked. In it, besides diverse kinds of fishings,
there are many Whales taken. Sixteen miles West from this Island, lies
Suilkeraia, a mile in length, but in it grows no kind of herb, no not so
much as Hadder: There is only black craggie hills in it, and some of them
covered with black moss. Sea-fowles lay their eggs in sundry places
thereof, and do hatch. When they are near their flight, the inhabitants of
Leogus, next neighbors unto it, sail thither, and remain there eight days,
or thereabout, to take and gather the fowls, drying them at the wind, and
load their boats with the dried flesh and feathers thereof. In that Island is
seen a rare kind of foul, A strange kind of Foul, haunting in the I Will of
Suilkeraia.
unknown to other countries, named Colca, little less in quantity, then a
Goose. These fowls come there every year in the Spring time, hatch and
nourish their young ones, till they be able to live by themselves. About that
same very time, they cast their feathers, and become stark naked of all their
body, and then they get themselves to the sea, and are never seen again, till
the next Spring. This farther is notable in them: their feathers have no
stalk, as other fowls feathers have, but they are all covered with a light
feather, like unto Down, wherein is no kind of hardness.

The Isles of Orkenay in the North of Scotland.
Now follow the Isles of Orkenay, lying scattered, partly in the Deucalidon sea,
partly in the German seas, toward the North parts of Scotland. The ancient
writers, and the late writers, both agree sufficiently upon their name; but yet
never man (so far as I know) has given any reason of the same, neither yet
is it sufficiently known, who were the first possessors thereof. All men
notwithstanding, allege their original to be from Germany, but of which
country they are descended, none has expressed: Unless we list to conjecture
from their speech they sometime spoke, and yet speak the ancient language of
the Goths. Some are of opinion, that they were Pights, chiefly persuaded
heereunto, through their division by the sea named Perth, and Firth from
Caithnes, who likewise suppose, that the Pights were of their original Saxons,
moved heereunto by the verse of Claudian, taken out of his 7. Panegericke:
Maduerunt Saxone fuso
Orcades, incaluit Pictorum sanguine Thule,
Scotorum cumulos fleuit glacialis Ierne.


But these men's errors may be easily confuted, partly by Beda, an English Saxon
himself, who affirms, that God was praised in seven sundry languages amongst
the Britains: and that the Pights language was one of them, may well appear;
for if that at that time the Pights had spoken Saxon, (which was then the
uncorrupted speech of the Englishmen) he would then have made no division
betwixt the Saxons, and the Pights language: and party also confuted by
Claudian himself, who in the very same verses, disertly notes the Pights, a
several people from the Saxons, affirming, the Country of the one nation to
be Orknay, and the Country of the other, Thule: from which Country soever they
be descended, at this day, their language differs both from the Scottish and
English tongues, but not much differs from the Goths.

A healthful country.
The common people to this day, are very careful to keep the ancient frugality
of their Predecessors, and in that respect they continue in good health for the
most part, both in mind and body, so that few die of sickness, but all for
age. The ignorance of delicacie, is more profitable to them, for preservation
of their health, then the Art of medicine, and diligence of Mediciners is to
others. The same their frugality, is a great help to their beauty and quantity
of stature. There is small increase of Corns amongst them, except of Oats and
Barley, whereof they make both bread and drink. They have sufficient store of
quick goods, Neat, Seepe and Goats, and thereby great plenty of milk, cheese
and butter. They have innumerable sea Fowls: whereof (and of fish, for the
most part) they make their common food. There is no venomous beast in Orknay,
No venomous beast in Orknay.

Their Horse.


nor none that is evil favored to look upon. They have little Nagges, little
worth in appearance, but more able and mettelled for any turn, then men can
believe. There is no kind of tree, no not so much as a sprig in Orknay, except
Hadder: The cause hereof, is not so much in the air and ground, as in the
sloth of the Inhabitants. This may be easily proved by roots of trees that are
taken out of the ground, in sundry parts of the I Will. When Wine comes there in
ships forth of strange countries, they geedily swallow it, till they be drunken.

S. Magnus Bicker.
They have an old Cup amongst them, which (to the effect their drunkenesse may
have the greater authority) they say did appertain to Saint Magnus, the first
man that brought the Christian Religion into that country. This Cup exceeds
far the common quantity of other Cups, so as it appears to have been kept
since the banquet of the Lapithes. By it they try their Bishop first, when he
comes amongst them. He that drinks out the whole cup at one draught, (which
is seldom seen) is by them extolled to the skies; for hereof, as from a
blyth presage, they conceive with themselves, increase in their goods, the
years following. Hereupon, we may easily conjecture, that the frugalitie
whereof I speak, proceeded not so much from reason, and care to be frugall,
as from poverty and scarcity. And the same necessity (that was Mother of
this frugalitie at the beginning.) kept her daughter long after amongst the
offspring of that I Will, till such time, as the countries lying near unto it,
(Luxury increasing) being corrupted, the ancient discipline by little and
little deformed, they likewise gave themselves to deceitful pleasures. Their
traffic also with Pirates, was a great spur to the decaie of their
temperancie. The Pirates fearing to frequent the company of them that dwelt in
the continent land, got fresh water forth of the Isles, made exchange with the
inhabitants thereof, giving them wines, and other slight merchandise for fresh
rivers, or taking the same upon slight prices from the people: who being a
small number without arms, and lying so wide one from another, in a
tempestuous Sea, staying and impeding their incurrence for mutual defense, and
finding themselves unable to withstand those Pirates, considering also their
own security, joined with advantage and pleasure, were contented, not
altogether against their wills, to receive them; at least, they opponed not
themselves directly unto them.

The contagion of manners began not in the simple people, but it did both begin
and continued in the wealthy men, and Priests. For the common sort at this
day, keep some remembrance of their accustomed moderation. Dangerous seas.
The Orkenay sea is so tempestuous and raging, not only in respect of the
violent winds, and aspect of the heavens; but also in consideration of the
contrarious tides, running headlong together from the West Ocean, that the
Vessels, (coming in any strayt betwixt two lands) can neither by sail nor
oar, once relieve themselves of raging tides, and whirling waves of the Seas.
If any dare approach the strait, they are either violently brought back into
the sea, by the rage thereof, broken upon rocks, and driven upon skares, or
else by the sworle of the seas, sunk in the waves thereof. These Straits may
be passed at two times of the tide, when the weather is calm, either at a
deep neep, or at a full sea. At these times, the great Ocean, offended with
contentious tides (whose force raised huge contrary waves) sounds (as it were)
the retreat, in such sort, that the surges of the seas, often before raging,
return again to their own camps. Writers agree not upon the number of these
Isles of Orkenay. Plinius says there be 40. Isles of them. Others think there
is but 30. or thereabout. Paulus Orosius accounting them to be 33. in number,
judges the nearest the truth. Of these there be 13. inhabited, the remanent
are reserved for nourishing of Cattle.

There are also some little Islands amongst them, of so narrow bounds, that
scarcely (albeit they were labored) are able to sustain one or two laborers.
Others are but either hard crags bare, or else crags covered with rotten Moss.
The greatest of the Orkenay Islands, is named by many of the ancients, Pomona:
At this day, it is called, The firm land, for that it is of greater quantity
then any of the rest: It is 30. miles of length, sufficiently inhabited. It
has twelve Country parish Churches, The ancient and new name of the chiefest
Town in Orkenay.
and one Town, named by the Danes (to whose Jurisdiction these Islands were
sometimes subject) Cracomaca, but now the name being corrupt, it is called in
Scottish Kirkwaa.

In this town there are two little Towers builded, not far the one from the
other: one of them appertains to the King, the other to the Bishop. Betwixt
these two towers, stands one Church, very magnifique for such a Country.
Betwixt this Church and the towers on either side, are sundry buildings, which
the Inhabitants name, The Kings town, and the Bishops town. The whole Island
runs out in Promontories or heads, betwixt which, the sea runs in, and
makes sure havens for ships, and harbors for boats. In six sundry places of
this I Will, Mines of Lead and Tynne.
there are Mines of as good Lead and Tynne as is to be found in any part of
Britayne. This Island is distant from Caithnes 24. miles or thereabouts, divided
from thence by the Pights sea, of whose nature we have already spoken. In this
sea are diverse Islands scattered here and there, of whom Stroma for the
quantity, lying four miles from Caithnes, is one, and that not unfruitful:
but because it lies so near to the continent land of Britain, and that the
Earls of Caithnes have always been Masters and Lords thereof, it is not
accounted amongst the Isles of Orknay. From this Island Northward, lies South
Ranalsay, which is distant from Duncan-bey, (or rather Dunachis-bey) sixteen
miles, and may be sailed with tide, although there be no wind, in the space
of two hours, the course of that Sea is so vehement. Ranalsay is five miles
long, and has a commodious haven, named after Saint Margaret. From it,
somewhat Eastward, there lie two little unoccupied Islands, meet for pastouring
of cattle, called by the Orkenay men, in their original language, Holmes;
that is, plain grassie ground upon water sides. Toward the North, lies Burra;
Westward lie three Islands, every one of them besides another; Suna, Flata, and
Fara, and beyond them, Hoia, and Walls, which some men think but one Island,
and others esteem it two: for that at the time of the Equinoctials, the Spring
tides are very great and high; and at the dead Neap, the sands are bare,
joining them together at one straight throat, making one Island of both: Yet
when the tide turns and filles the straight again, they appear to be two
Islands.

In these Isles are the highest hills that are in all Orkenay. Hoia and Walls
are ten miles of length, distant from Ranalsay eight miles, and more then 20.
miles from Dunkirk in Caithnes. By North of it, is the I Will Granisa, situate in
a narrow Firth, betwixt Caithnes and Pomona. The West side of Pomona looks to
the West Sea directly: Into the which, so far as men may see, there is
neither Island nor Craig. From the East point of Pomona, lies Cobesa; and upon
the North side, it is almost environed by the Isles adjacent thereunto. Siapinsa
turning somewhat East, lies 2. miles from Kirkwaa, even over against it, 6.
miles of length. Right West from Siapinsa, are the two little Islands, Garsa and
Eglisa, 4. miles of length: In this Island they say, Saint Magnus is buried.
Next unto it, and somewhat nearer the continent land, is Rusa, 4. miles of
length, and 3. miles of breadth in some places, well peopled. A little
westward lies the little Island Broca. Besides all these Isles, there is another
band of Isles, lying to the North, the East-most whereof, is Stronza, and next
it, Linga, five miles of length, and two of breadth: then sundry Islands, named
Holmes. The Haa five miles of length, and two of breadth. By East of it, lies
Fara: and North from Fara, Wast^a, running out into the sea in many heads and
promontories. Above Stronza, at the East end of Etha, lies Sanda, Northward,
ten miles of length, and four of breadth, where it is broadest. Sanda is most
fertile of Corn, of all the Islands of Orknay; but it has no kind of fire
within it self; so the In-dwellers are compelled to make exchange of their
victuals for Peits (a kind of black Moss; whereof, almost all the
North-parts of Scotland make their fire) with their neighbors the Ethanes.
Beyond Sanda, lies North Rannalsaa, two miles of length, and two of breadth. No
man may pass it, but in the midst of Summer, and that, what time the sea is
very calm. Upon the South Side of Pomona, lies Rusa, six miles of length: and
from it Eastward, Eglisa, wherein, as is reported, Saint Magnus is buried. From
Eglisa South, Veragersa: and not far from it, Westraa: from which, Hethland
is distant 80. miles, and Papastronza lies 80. miles from Hethland. In the
midway betwixt, lies Fara, that is, the fair Island, standing in the sight of
Orknay, and Hethland both: It rises in three high promontories or heads, and
shore craig round about, without any kind of entrance, except at the
South-east, where it grows a little lower, making a sure harborow for small
boats. The In-dwellers thereof are very poor: for the fishers that come out of
England, Holland, and other Countries, near unto the great Ocean, yearly to
fish in these seas, in their passing by this Island, they spoil, reife, and
take away at their pleasures, whatsoever they find in it. Next unto this
Island, is the greatest I Will of all Hethland, which in respect of the quantity,
the In-dwellers name, The Mane-land, 16. miles of length. There are sundry
promontories or heads in it, amongst which, there are only two to make account
of: the one long and small, runs North: the other broader, as in some part
16. miles, runs Northeast. It is inhabited for the most part upon the
seacoast. Within the country, there is no kind of quick beast, except the
foul flying. Of late the laborers attempted to manure farther within the
Country then their predecessors were accustomed to do, but they reported small
advantage for their pains. There is very good fishing round about the whole
country, and so their commodity stands by the sea. From this Land 10. miles
Northward lies Zeall, 20. miles of length, and eight miles of breadth, so wild a
ground of nature, that no kind of beast will live in it, except they that are
bred in the same. They say that the Bremes Merchants come thither, and bring to
them all foreign wares they need, in abundance. Betwixt this Island and the
maine land, lie these little Islands: Linga, Orna, Bigga, Sanctferri: 2. miles
Northward from these, lies Vnsta, more then 20. miles of length, and six
miles of breadth, a plain country, pleasant to the eye, but it is compassed by
a very tempestuous sea. Via and Vra, are cast in betwixt Vnsta and Zeall. 2.
Islands, Skenna and Burna, lie Westward from Vnsta, Balta, Hunega, Fotlara,
seven miles long, and 7. miles Eastward from Vnsta, 8. miles from Zeall: over
against the sea that deuides Zeal from Vnsta, lies Fotlara, more then 7. miles
of length. There are diverse unworthy Islands lying upon the Eas^side of the
maine land: Mecla, the three Islands of East Skennia, Chualsa, Nostvada, Brasa,
and Musa. Upon the West side lie West Shemniae, Roria, little Papa, Venneda,
great Papa, Valla, Trondra, Burra, great Haura, little Haura, and so many
Holmes lying scattered amongst them. The Hethlandish men use the same kind of
food that the Orknay men use, An Island wherein no kind of she-beast will live
24 hours together, except Ky, Ewes, Conies and such beasts, as may be eaten.
but that they are somewhat more scarce in housekeeping. They are appareled
after the Almaine fashion, and according to their substance, not unseemly.
Their commodity consists in course cloth, which they sell to Norway men, in
fish, oil, and butter. They fish in little cockboats, bought from the Norway
men that make them. They salt some of the fish that they take, and some of them
they dry at the wind. They sell those wares, and pay their Masters with the
silver thereof.

A MEMORIAL OF THE MOST rare and wonderful things in Scotland.
AMong many Commodities, that Scotland has common with other Nations, it is
not needful to rehearse in this place, in respect of their particulars,
declared at length before: It is beautified with some rare gifts in it self,
wonderful to consider, which I have thought good not to obscure (from the good
Reader) as for example.

In Orknay, besides the great store of sheep that feed upon the maine land
thereof, the Ewes are of such fecunditie, that at every lambing time, they
produce at least two, and ordinarily three. There be neither veneme us or
ravenous beasts bred there, nor do live there, although they be transported
thither.

In Schetland, the Isles called Thulae, at the time when the Sun enters the
Sign of Cancer, for the space of twenty days, there appears no night at all;
and among the rocks thereof, grows the delectable Lambre, called Succinum:
Where is also great resort of the beast called the Mertrik, the skins whereof
are costly furrings.

In Rosse, there be great Mountains of Marble, and Alabaster.

In the South of Scotland, specially in the Countries adjacent to England,
there is a Dog of marvelous nature, called the Suth-hound; because, when as he
is certified by words of Art, spoken by his Master, what goods are stolen,
whether Horse, sheep, or Neat: immediately, he addresseth him suthly to the
sent, and follows with great impetuositie, through all kind of ground and
water, by as many ambages as the thieves have used, till he attain to their
place of residence: By the benefit of the which Dog, the goods are recovered.
But now of late, he is called by a new popular name, the Slouth-hound: Because,
when as the people do live in sloth and idleness, and neither by themselves,
or by the office of a good Herd, or by the strength of a good house, they do
preserve their goods from the incursion of thieves and robbers: then have they
recourse to the Dog, for reparation of their sloth.

In the West, and North-west of Scotland, there is great repairing of a Foul,
called the Erne, of a marvelous nature, and the people are very curious and
solist to catch him, whom thereafter they punze off his wings, that he shall
not be able to fly again. This Foul is of a huge quantity: and although he
be of a ravenous nature, like to the kind of Haulks, and be of that same
quality, gluttonous; nevertheless, the people do give him such sort of
meat, as they think convenient, and such a great quantity at a time, that he
lives contented with that portion, for the space of fourteen, sixteen, or
twenty days, and some of them for the space of a Month. The people that do
so feed him, do use him for this intent: That they may be furnished with the
feathers of his wings, when he does cast them, for the garnishing of their
arrows, either when they are at wars, or at hunting: for these feathers
only do never receive rain, or water, as others do, but remain always of
a durable estate, and incorruptible.

In all the Moore-land, and Mosse-land of Scotland, does resort the black
Cock, a foul of a marvelous beauty, and marvelous bounty: for he is more
delectable to eat, then a Capon, and of a greater quantity, cled with three
sorts of flesh, of diverse colors, and diverse tastes, but all delectable to the
use and nouriture of man.

In the two Rivers of Dee and Done, besides the marvelous plenty of Salmon
fishes gotten there, there is also a marvelous kind of shel-fish, called the
Horse-mussell, of a great quantity: wherein are engendered innumerable fair,
beautiful and delectable Pearls, convenient for the pleasure of man, and
profitable for the use of Physic; and some of them so fair and polished,
that they be equal to any mirror of the world.

And generally, by the providence of the Almighty God, when dearth and
scarcity of victuals do abound in the land, then the fishes are most
plentifully taken for support of the people.

In Galloway, the Loch, called Loch-myrton, although it be common to all fresh
water to freeze in Winter, yet the one half of this Loch does never freeze at
any time.

In the shire of Innernes: the Loch, called Loch-nes, and the river flowing
from thence into the sea, does never freeze: But by the contrary, in the
coldest days of Winter, the Loch and river are both seen to smoke and reeke,
signifying unto us, that there is a Mine of Brimstone under it, of a hot
quality.

In Carrik, are Kyne, and Oxen, delicious to eat: but their fatnes is of a
wonderful temperature: that although the fatnes of all other comestable
beasts, for the ordinary use of man, do congeale with the cold air: by the
contrary, the fatness of these beasts is perpetually liquid like oil.

The wood and Park of Commernauld, is replenished with Kyne and Oxen, and
those at all times to this day, have been wild, and all of them of such a
perfect wonderful whiteness, that there was never among all the huge number
there, so much as the smallest black spot found to be upon one of their
skins, horn, or clooue.

In the Park of Halyrud-house, are Foxes, and Hares, of a wonderful
whiteness, in great number.

In Coil, now called Kyle, is a rock, of the height of twelve foot, and as
much of breadth, called the Deaf Craig, For although a man should cry never so
loud, to his fellow, from the one side to the other, he is not heard, although
he would make the noise of a gunne.

In the country of Stratherne, a little above the old town of the Pights,
called Abirnethie, there is a marvelous Rock, called the Rock and stone, of
a reasonable bigness, that if a man will push it with the least motion of his
finger, it will move very lightly, but if he shall address his whole force,
he profits nothing: which mooues many people to be wonderful merry, when they
consider such contrariety.

In Lennox, is a great Loch, called Loch-lowmond, being of length 24. miles, in
breadth eight miles, containing the number of thirty Isles. In this Loche are
observed three wonderful things: One is, fishes very delectable to eat, that
have no fynnes to move themselves withal, as other fishes do. The second,
tempestuous waves and surges of the water, perpetually raging without winds,
and that in time of greatest calmes, in the fair pleasant time of Summer, when
the air is quiet. The third is, One of these Isles, that is not corroborate nor
united to the ground, but has been perpetually loose: and although it be
fertile of good grass, and replenished with Neat; yet it moves by the waves of
the water, and is transported sometimes toward one point, and otherwhiles
toward another.

In Argyle, is a stone found in diverse parts, the which laid under straw or
stubble, does consume them to fire, by the great heat that it collects there.

In Buquhan, at the castle of Slains is a cave, from the top whereof distilles
water, which within short time does congeale to hard stones, white in color.
In this country are no Rottons seen at any time, although the land be
wonderful fertile.

In Lothien, within two miles of Edinburgh, Southward, is a wel-spring, called,
Saint Katherins well, which flows perpetually with a kind of black fatness,
above the water: whereof Dioscorides makes mention. This fatnes is called
Bitumen aquis supernatans. It is thought to proceed of a fat mine of Coal,
which is frequent in all Lothien, and specially of a sort of coal, called
vulgarly the Parret coal: For as soon as it is laid in the fire, it is so fat
and gummy, that it renders an exceeding great light, dropping, frying, hissing,
and making a great noise, with shedding and dividing it self in the fire, and
of that marvelous nature, that as soon as it is laid in a quick fire,
immediately it conceiues a great flame, which is not common to any other sort
of coal. This fatnes; is of a marvelous virtue: That as the coal, whereof it
proceeds, is sudden to conceive fire and flame, so is this oil of a sudden
operation, to heal al salt scabs and humors, that trouble the outward skin of
man, wheresouer it be, from the middle up, as commonly those of experience have
observed. All scabbes in the head, and hands, are quickly healed by the benefit
of this oil, and it renders a marvelous sweet smell.

At Abirdene is a well, of marvelous good quality to dissolve the stone, to
expel sand from the reins and bladder, and good for the collicke, being
drunk in the Month of July, and a few days of August, little inferior in
virtue to the renowned water of the Spaw in Almanie.

In the North seas of Scotland, are great clogges of timber found, in the
which, are marueilously engendered a sort of Geese, called Clayk-geese, and do
hang by the beak, til they be of perfection; ofttimes found, and kept in
admiration for their rare form of generation.

At Dumbartan, directly under the Castle, at the mouth of the river of Clyde,
as it enters into the sea, there are a number of Claik-geese, black of color,
which in the night time do gather great quantity of the crops of the grass,
growing upon the land, and carry the same to the sea. Then they assemble in a
round, and with a wondrous curiosity, do offer every one his own portion to
the Sea-floud, and there attend upon the flowing of the tide, till the grass
be purified from the fresh taste, and turned to the salt: and lest any part
thereof should escape, they labor to hold it in, with labor of their nebbes.
Thereafter orderly every foul eats his portion. And this custom they observe
perpetually. They are very fat, and very delicious to be eaten.

FINIS.

