The abridgement or Summarie of the Scots Chronicles, with a short description
of their original, from the coming of GATHELVS their first Progenitor out of
Graecia into Egypt. And their coming into Portingall and Spain, and of their
Kings and Governors in Spain, Ireland and Albion, now called Scotland,
(howbeit the whole number are not extant) with a true Chronology of all their
KINGS.

Their Reigns, Deaths and Burials, from FERGVSIVS the first King of Scotland,
until his Royal MAJESTY, now happily Reigning over all Great Britain and
Ireland, and all the Isles to them appertaining.

With a true description and division of the whole Realm of Scotland, and of
the principal Cities, Towns, Abbeys, Fortes, Castles, Towers and Rivers, and
of the commodities in every part thereof, and of the Isles in general, with a
memorial of the most rare and wonderful things in SCOTLAND.

By JOHN MONIPENNIE.

Printed at Britains Bursse by John Budge. 1614.

To the most High and Mighty Monarch, JAMES by the grace of God, King of Great
Britane, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc.
IT May be by many justly (most gracious Sovereign) imputed to me for no small
presumption, to present to your Royal Majesty, a Prince of so great learning
and excellent judgment, these simple fruits of my unskillful endeavors taken
in this short abridgement. In most humble and obedient manner, I do prefer
unto your Highness these my weak and unlearned labors, according to my
ability, which how unworthy they be of so great a princely favor, as well for
the meannesse of me the writer, as for the plainness and rudeness of the
style, yet if for the worthiness of the matter, and of your Majesty's great
accustomed clemency, vouchsafe then your Highness favorable regard, they
shall be as fortunate, as if they had been composed by greater and more
learned men, wherein briefly ^ay be seen, the great and infinite mercy of God
toward your royal person, that it has pleased his superexcellent wisdom by
his mighty power to preserve your Highness ancient Kingdom of Scotland,
unconquered under the Empire and government of one hundredth and six Kings,
your Majesty's royal progenitors: and in special when almost the whole world
was brought under the Roman Empire by the sword. Also to reduce in one
peaceable Monarch, these ancient mighty lands and many Islands, which have been
divided in many several Kingdoms, one of Britons seven of Saxons, one of
Scots, one of Pictes, one of Orkenay, and six of Ireland,: also some of the
valiant and illustre noble acts of your Highness most royal and ancient
progenitors, and of their reigns, lives, deaths, and burials. Accept them
most mighty Monarch, I most humbly beseech your royal Majesty, in your
Highness gracious protection, and according to my bounden duty incessantly
with all humility, I will pray the great God of all might and power (to his
eternal glory) long to preserve your Royal Majesty, and your gracious Queen
in blessed health and peace, to reign over these your Highness great united
Kingdoms, and to enlarge the same, and your Majesty's most royal and hopeful
posterity to the worlds end.

Your Majesty's most humble, and obedient Subject,

JOHN MONIPENNY.

THE ABRIDGMENT OR SVMMARY OF the Scots CHONICLE.
WITH A SHORT DESCRIPTION of their original from the coming of GATHELVS,
their Progenitour out of Graecia into Egypt, and of their Kings and Governors
in Spain, Ireland, and Albion: (howbeit the whole number are not extant) with
a true Chronology of all their Kings, lineally descended from FERGVSIVS the
first King of Scotland, unto his sacred Majesty, now happily reigning over all
Great Britain, Ireland, and all the Isles to them appertaining.

GATHELVS son of CECROPS, King of ATHENS, by his insolence made many invasions,
in Macedonia, and Achaia, in Graecia. And because he could not suffer
correction, he with many valiant Grecians came into Egypt, and followed Pharao
in his wars against the Aethiopians; who with great cruelty had wasted the
most part of Egypt, unto Memphis the principal city of that Realm; Pharao
with support of Gathelus vanquished and overcame the Aethiopians in a most
dangerous battle. And Gathelus valiantly vanquished and wanne their principal
city called Meroe. After this great victory, he being a lusty person, strong
of body, and of a great spirit, wan great favor with the King and his
familiars, that the Kings daughter SCOTA was given in marriage unto Gathelus,
with many lands. Shortly after Pharao died, and another Pharao succeeded; who
oppressed the Israelites with great servitude and tyranny. Gathelus abhorring
such cruelty, conferring with MOSES; also having respons of the Oracles of
Egypt, was foreseen of the plagues to come upon Egypt, made provision for all
things necessary for sailing, and took shipping with his wife Scota, his
valiant Grecians, and many Egyptians from the river Nilus, the year of the
world 2453. After long sailing and travel he arrived at the land of Numidia,
being stopped to land, he pulled up sails, and with dangerous and painful
passage through the Straites, he landed in one part of Spain then called
Lusi^nia, by his arrival called Portgathel, now Portingall: at his landing the
old inhabitants came against him with arrayed battle, whom he vanquished. He
builded one City upon the river Munda, then called Brachare, now called
Barsolona. Then after he came into the North part of Spain, now called Gal^ia;
where he builded a city called Brigance, now Compostella, where he reigned
with Princely dignity, and instituted laws, and named his people Scotts,
after his wife Scota: for she had born unto him two sons twins, HIBER and
HEMICVS. He brought with him from Egypt the marble fatal chair, which was
transported to Ireland, and to Albion, now called Scotland; wherein all their
Kings were crowned, until the time of King Edward the first, who transported
the whole ancient regal monuments of Scotland, with the marble fatal chair
to Westminster, where it remains to this day: The Scots shall brook that
Realm, as native ground,
(If words fail not) where ever this chair is found:
Gathelus sitting in his marble chair within this city of Brigance, governed
his people with Princelydignity peaceably, and instituted laws. And seeing his
people increase with such great multitude, and not willing to violate the
band, made with the old inhabitants, being informed by diverse expert
explorators, that there was an Isle opposite to Spain on the North, with a
rude people inhabited, having no laws nor manners. Therefore he brought all
the ships he could get with expedition to the next Sea port, with sufficient
provision, with Hiber and Hemicus, accompanied with valiant warriors, and
ordained Hiber to be Admiral to pass the said Isle, which they obeyed: and
hoisting sails with fortunate winds, arrived the fifth day after in the said
Island. Immediately landing, their people then pitched their Tents on the next
trenches. The rude inhabitants amazed at the arriving and landing of such a
multitude of warriors, fled with their cattle and goods into their
Cauernes. Hiber commanding certain of his warriors to pass forth; and if
the inhabitants would be willingly subdued, no slaughter to be committed upon
them. The inhabitants being brought as prisoners to the Admiral, and seeing
him merciful, rendered themselves and their goods: and he received them with
such benevolence, that he suffered the old inhabitants to increase with his
people, under one name and law, and called the land Hibernia, now Ireland.
Hiber returning into Spain, left his brother Himecus with a strong garrison of
valiant warriors, with wives and children to inhabit the land, and to hold
the same under obedience and subjection. At his return into Spain his father
being deceased, he succeeded King, and augmented his Empire, and conquered
sundry lands from the Spaniards, having with him at all times a strong guard of
valiant men. By his puissance and ch^alrie he subdued the people in such
manner, that he was holden in great estimation and reverence, that they were
constrained to seek his peace; the land being named after Hiber, Hiberia: the
Scots and old inhabitants grew under one name and blood with such tender and
friendly benevolence (not remembering of old injuries) each one willing to
defend his neighbor (as well in peace as wars) as his brother or father. Of
Hiber descended by long progression, a great posterity lineally succeeding,
amongst whom were many noble and famous Kings; howbeit the whole number of them
are not extant.

HIMECVS governed Ireland in great felicity justice, and tranquillity, both the
Scots and the old inhabitants during his life time. Immediately after his
decease, arose an odious controversy between the Scotts and the old
inhabitants for the government, every nation contending to have a governor of
their own blood, which contention enduring long time, at last they created two
Governors, between whom was continual battles and great slaughter on either
side, through ambition and burning desire to be sole Governor of all Ireland.
After long and dangerous battles, the two people broken with sundry
displeasures, were constrained to take peace; howbeit the same endured but a
short time, each one of them pursuing other with battle; and yet they dwelt
many years together, by enterchange of peace and wars, while at the last the
Scots suffering many injuries, sent their Ambassador to METELLIVS, who was then
King of the Scotts in Spain, desiring to have support against the old
inhabitants of Ireland, declaring them to be a rude wild people, impatient to
suffer any Empire above them; So that the Scots can have no tranquillity,
unless the said people were the more speedily tamed and subdued. This foresaid
message was the more acceptable to the King Metellius: for it concerned the
Commonwealth both of the Scots nation in Spain and Ireland, descending (by
long progression) of our lineage and blood, and willingly satisfying the
aforesaid Ambassadors request, trusting the same to be no less honor and
glory to himself as profit to his friends. Therefore the King sent his three
sons HERMONEVS, PTOLOMEVS, and HIBERT with a great Army of valiant men into
Ireland, where they with right dangerous battles vanquished the old
inhabitants, and brought them under subjection. Hermonens returning into
Spain, left his two brethren to govern the land, who governed the same long
time after in great tranquillity and justice, ins^ituting laws, and instructed
the Priests to make insence and sacrifice in the same manner as the Egyptians
used: so both the people increased many years in great felicity, peace and
riches during the Government of Ptolomeus and Hibert, and long after their
decease. But too great prosperity engenders evil manners, and causes men to
work often displeasures upon themselves, finding no foreign enemies to
invade them at home. The people after long peace were divided for the
government, contending for the same with great rigor and slaughter on both
sides, until the one had almost utterly destroyed the other, if they had not
been reconciled by a noble man, named Thanaus, principal Ambassador, sent by
the King, then reigning over the Scots in Spain (rejoicing of the felicity
succeeding to his friends) and to cause them by his prudent consultation, to
increase together under one mind. Thanaus being a prudent man, bearing
nuturall affection to both the parties, persuading them at sundry conuentions
to remove all contention, and to elect one (whom they thought most expedient)
to be their King, and to be obedient to him in all their government. Through
this persuasion the whole people had such fervent desire to have one King, that
all old injuries being forgotten, they appointed Thanaus to elect a King, whom
he thought most expedient) and he seeing their minds willing to have a
nuturall King, declaring to them that there is in Spain a noble Prince of
great severity and justice, named SIMON BREK, well accustomed with your laws,
and lineally descended from the ancient King Metellius, whom he thought most
fittest to be their King. The whole people hearing the name of SIMON BREK, were
well content to have him their King, because that name was esteemed very
fortunate in those days. Then after with consent of the whole people,
Ambassadors were sent into Spain, to request the said Simon to come into
Ireland, to be their King. He knowing by grave aduisement the intent of the
Ambassadors, prouid^d a great Fleet of Ships with all things necessary, and
finally by prosperous winds arrived in Ireland, where he was solemnly
received, and crowned in the chair of Marble, which he brought out of Spain,
esteemed as a most rich jewel in those days; from the beginning of the world
3314. From the flood of Noah 1658. From the building of Rome 102. Before the
birth of Christ 651. He reigned with great felicity peaceably forty years,
being specially counseled by the aforesaid Thanaus, to whom he gave sundry
lands, lying in the South part of Ireland, beside the river Birsus, which lands
are now called Dowdall, where he dwelt with the people he brought with him out
of the famous city Brigance, now called Compostella. They were called
Brigandes; of whom after by process of time descended many valiant and noble
men, who came with Fergusius the first King in Scotland, by whom all the lands
now called Galloway, were then called Brigance, whose inhabitants were ever
full of manhood and strongest enemies against Romans, Britains, and Pickes:
Simon deceased, his son FANDVF succeeded King: after Fanduf succeeded ETHION:
after Ethion succeeded GLAVCVS: after Glaucus succeeded NATHASIL: after
Nathasil succeeded Rothesay.

ROTHESAY was the first King that brought Scots with him into Albion. The first
Isle that he inhabited he called after his own name Rothesay, the remanent
Isles were called Hebredes: after Hiber the eldest son of Gathelus. Rothesay
hearing the death of his father Nathasil, returned into Ireland, and was there
crowned King. The year that Scots were brought out of Ireland into Albion, was
from the Empire of Simon Brek in Ireland 216. years: from the beginning of the
world 3530. The Scots spread in sundry parts of Albion, lying far North, and
inhabited many Isles. The first part that they took possession of was named
Ardgael, from Gathelus, which now is called Ardgile. They being divided into
sundry Tribes, elected certain Captains to every Tribe, to govern them both
in peace and war, having the name of their Captain in great reverence,
swearing by their names; which custom was long observed in those Isles and the
high lands. Then after about 150. years, a banished people named Pickes, came
forth of Denmark to search a dwelling place, and after they were inhibited to
land in France, Britain, and Ireland. They landed in Albion, first in Orknay,
of old called the old Realm of the Pickes. The Seas between Orknay and
Caithnes is called Pentland Firth, and the lands now called Loutheane (was of
old called Pentland) after the name of the Pickes. Then after they came into
Caithnes, Ros, Murray, Merms, Angus, Fiffe and Loutheaue, and expelled all the
old inhabitants. They were a Civil people right ingenuous andcrafty both in
peace and wars. After their planting in the aforesaid parts, they elected a
King to govern them, and hold them in justice, and made great policy in
building of munitions, towns, and Castles. And because they knew all people,
without issue to succeed, should perish, they sent their Ambassadors to the
Scots, to have their daughters in marriage, showing (though they were of
strange blood) they should not be so smally regarded, seeing they with no less
prudence then manhood have sustained incredible dangers both by Sea and land.
And now lately conquered (through the benevolence of the Gods) right plenteous
lands with such peace and tranquillity, that no other people may claim them by
reason: Trusting surely (if the Gods support them) by their own industry to be
equal to any their neighbors, both in peace and war. Further if the Scots
condescended to their honorable desires, it might be they increasing together
(so strong under one blood) that they might resist the fury of their enemies
the better, when it happened them to be invaded. This Embassage was not pleasant
to the Scots at the first, thinking it unworthy to have any society or marriage
with an unknown and banished people: but by grave aduisement, and being
profoundly resolved, and finding themselves as yet not able to resist the force
of the Britains their old enemies, they determined to give their daughters to
the Pickes in marriage, and to have a band of peace with them, with conditions
that every one of them shall enjoy the lands which perteyned unto them before
the marriage, and to concur together with their whole puissance, as often as
they were invaded by enemies. Any that did offense to any of them should be
reputed as enemy to them both. And as often as the Crown of the Pictes should
come in question for lack of an heir, the King to be elected of the nearest
of the woman's blood. These conditions accepted on all sides, the Scots gave
their daughters in marriage to the Pictes. The Britains suspecting this
marriage, and dreading the increasing of this confederate people under one
blood in short time, that neither might the Britains for the time present, nor
their posterity resist the puissance of these two united people. Therefore being
minded to destroy them both, and to invade them with fraudulent sleights,
rather then with any force of battle. And sending their Ambassadorus to the
Pictes, allured the Pictes to violate their band with the Scots. By great
persuasion and crafty dealing of the Britains, the band was dissolved; and
moving occasion of battle against the Scots, commanded by general edict, no
Scots to be found in their bounds at a prefixed day, under pain of death. The
day being expired, all Scots within their bounds were killed without mercy, as
breakers of their laws. The Scots impatient to sustai^e such injuries, killed
as many of the Pictes; so there followed continual killing and murder on all
sides, not regarding affinity, blood, time, nor pl^ce. In this manner the peace
dissolved, the Pictes denounced battle to the Scots: then after followed
continual incursions and invasions on either parties. The Scots assembling in
Ardgiel, were sufficiently resolved, that the battle that they were to hold,
was not only against the Pictes, but also against the Britains. Therefore it
was agreed, to send their Ambassadors to their ancient progenitors and friends
in Ireland, to have their support and counsel in this most dangerous matter,
and for that plurality of Captains (as often occurreth) raises sedition: the
best is to elect one to have Empire above the rest, by whose manhood and
counsel, they might defend their lives and liberties, against a false and
perjured people, inuading them without any occasion. The Ambassadors being
directed to Ireland, complained of the wicked offense done by the Pictes, and
desired support.

FERQVHARDVS (then being King of the Scots in Ireland) greatly moved for the
displeasure done to his friends in Albion, sent his son.

FERGVSIVS a wise and valiant Prince, with many valiant soldiers, and to give
them the more esperance, and assurance of permanent and good fortune, he sent
with them the fatal Marble chair. Fergusius was the more pleasantly received
by the Scots of Albion, because their Commonwealth approached to great danger,
by a most perilous apparent battle. Then after a Council was called in
Ardgiel, where Fergusius made a large Oration, and acceptable Speech. Therefore
by grave consultation, they condiscended to be governed by Empire of one King,
as well in peace as in any trouble appearing against their enemies. Furthermore
to remove all suspicion of hatred (because every Tribe desired, a King of their
own lineage) they elected Fergusius, both for his noble blood, and other his
excellent virtues, to be their King: moreover he was so approved in martial
deeds and justice, that no Captain of the Tribes might be any ways compared
unto him.

FERGVSIVS the first King of Scots (in Albion, now called Scotland) son to
Ferquhard King of Ireland, was crowned in the fatal Marble Chair, which he
brought with him (by respons of the Gods) to establish his reign in Scotland.
The year from the creation of the world 3641. Before the coming of Christ
330. In the first year of the 112. Olimpiade. In the 421. year after the
building of Rome, about the beginning of the third Monarchy. When Alexander the
great vanquished Darius the last Monarch of Persia, in the reign of Chimarus
King of Britain, the King employed his whole mind to resist the injury of
this battle, moved by the Pictes; he calling all the Captains, ordained them
to be prepared with forty days provision. To pass with him, he made an
greement and concord amongst all his Nobles and Captains, commanding his
people to be obedient to their Captains, he making sacrifice to his Gods (as
the custom was) praying the Gods to take vengeance of the party that was the
first occasion of battle against other, and to grant him such felicity in his
just defense; that victory might succeed to him without any great damage of his
people. The Picts assembled an army, which many Britains concurring to their
support, appeared on either side a wicked and unnatural battle between two
confederate people, friends, fathers and sons. The Pictes came first i^o the
Scots lands; against whom with no less courage then manhood, the King with his
valiant Scots, with ancient arms displayed in form of a Banner, in which was
a ^dde Lion Rampant in a field of gold, whilst the Scots and Pictes were in
array in each others fight: the army of Britains stood in array also,
devising what way they might destroy them both, with f^me purpose when the
Scots and Pcties were vanquished, the one by the other, that the party
victorious should utterly be destroyed by their fresh army: and when both
these peoples were destroyed by this fleight, the Britains might enjoy both
their Realms in Albion, without any impediment. This subtle slight was
discoured to King Fergusius by a banished Britain, through which both the
armies moved no less by fear of enemies, then by their own proper damage,
prolonged the battle certain days. King Fergusius desiring communication
with the King of Picts, who willingly with some of his Nobles, had
communication a long time together, after long conference, and deliberate
consultation with their Counselors on both parties, and ruefull crying of the
Pictes wives, being the Scotts daughters, peace was finally concluded,
between the two confederate people, under these conditions, redress of all
injuries, being made on all parties. The Britains (mouers of this battle)
shall be reputed enemies to them both; all other charges to be at the pleasure
and will of the two Kings. And when any enemy occurred, that they and their
people should conioine together, under one mind and ordinance. This peace
being more strongly corroborate, the Kings returned home. King Fergusius in a
most dangerous battle, assisted by the Pictes, vanquished the Britains, which
time King Coyl or Chimarus (vnwatily kept by his Nobles) was killed in the land
after his name then called Coyll, now Kyle in Scotland. After this victory the
King called his whole Nobles and Subjects to a general conuention; and he
making a large and plausible Oration and speech, the Nobles and Subjects
condiscended and agreed, that King Fergusius and his posterity should possess
the Crown of Scotland; whereupon Charters and Evidences were granted to him
and his sucessors for ever.

The Kingdom of Scotland being confirmed to King Fergusius, his heirs and
successors, with deliberate counsel of his Nobles, he divided the whole lands
then inhabited by the Scots amongst his Nobles and Captains of the Tribes by
lots or cauils. The first lot chanced or fell unto Cornath, Captain and his
Tribe; the land of Caithnes, lying over against Orkeney, between Dum misbye
and the river of Thane: Secondly to Captain Lutorke the lands between the
water of Thane and Nesse, now called ROS. This Lutorke came with a band of
valiantmen, out of Ireland with King Fergusius into Albion. This land of Ros
lies in breadth from Cromarte to the water of Lochtie. In this country was
the famous Castle of Vrquhart, of which the ruinous walls remain in great
admiration: Thirdly, to Captain Warroth, the lands lying between Spey and
Neffe, from the Almaine to the Irish Seas, the people inhabitants of this part
(after their Captain) were called Wars, being seditious, they were expelled,
and the Murrayes possessed that land, and called the same land Murray land:
Fourthly, to Captain Thalis the lands of Boyne, Aynie, Bogewall, Gariot,
Formartyn, and Bowquhan. These lands were then called under one name, Thalia
by the name of their Captain: Fifthly, to Captain Martach, all the lands of
Mar, Badzenoth and Loath Quhabar. The sixth to Captain Nouance, the lands of
Lorne and Kyntier, with the high places and mountains thereof, lying from
Mar to the Irish Seas. The seventh to Atholus the lands of Athole, for he
was descended of the Scots of Spain, and came out of Spain into Ireland, and
with Fergusius he came into Scotland. The eight to Creones and Epidithes, two
Captains of the Tribes, the lands of Strabrawne and Braidawane, lying West
from Dunkeld. The ninth to Captain Argathelus, the lands of Ardgile, his
people were named Argatheles from Gathelus their first progenitour; but now
they are called men of Ardgile. The tenth to Captain Lolgonas, the lands of
Leuenox and Cliddisdale. The eleventh to Captain Silurch, the lands of
Siluria, which Region is now divided into Kyle, Carrike, and Cunningham; the
inhabitants were right ingenuous and strong. The twelfth to the Brigandes, the
lands of Brigance, now called Golloway.

King Fergusius after the dividing of these lands, he instituted laws to
repress vice; he builded the Castle of Berigone in Longhquhaber. He past the
remanent of his days in good peace with the Britains and Pictes. At the last
he was elected as Judge arbitrall to discern upon certain high Controversies,
chancing amongst his friends in Ireland. He accompanied with certain of his
Nobles, past into Ireland and pacified them of all matters, returning home, by
a very dangerous tempest perished with all his Nobles that were in his company,
upon a rock in the Sea, called after his name Craigfergus, the five and
twentieth year of his reign. In his reign was Morindus King of Britains,
and Cruthneus Camelon King of Pictes, who builded upon the water of Carron the
City of Camelon, the principal and strongest City of the Pictes, which
resisted the Romans and Britains, until that Kenneth King of Scotland (who
exiled the Pictes out of Albion) brought it unto utter subversion. This
Cruthneus Camelon builded also the town and Castle of Edinburgh, sometime
called the maiden Castle; for all the noble young women of the Pictes were
nourished, and learned in all skillful labor of their hands, until they were
ready to marry.

Fergusius departing this present life, as aforesaid a conuention was holden by
the Nobles, for election of a King. After a long disputation and reasoning, it
was concluded by plain consent of Parliament, and enacted when it happened their
King to decease, and having heirs gotten of his body, being children; the
nearest of the Kings blood, and fittest to do justice, shall possess the
Crown for his time; after his death, the Kings son shall succeed to the
crown without impediment, if he were able thereto: by the same act it was
prohibited children to be Kings. This custom endured long time, which raised
much discord in this Realm of Scotland; for the fathers brother reigning in
the minority of his Nephew, cast his chiefest business to destroy him, and
likewise the Nephew to the fathers brother for ambition of the Crown, through
which occurreth continual killing of Kings and Nobles, to the great damage of
the Realm and Common wealth.

2 FEZITHARIS brother to Fergusius, by the aforesaid act, began his reign the
year of the world 3666. before the coming of Christ 305. years, from the
beginning of the reign of Scotland 26. years: he was a good King and severe
Iusticer, and was willing to have discharged himself of the Kingdom, in
favor of Ferlegus, eldest son to his brother Fergusius; which his Nobles
would not condescend unto, because of the Statute and act of Parliament lately
made, which continued until the time of the reign of King KENETVS the third
almost 1205. years: he was killed by the aforesaid Ferlegus the fifteenth year
of his reign. Ferlegus the murderer, and all other participant with him being
banished, were fugitives among the Pictes, and finding no security of his life,
he past into Britain, where he spent the rest of his days in great misery.

3 MAINVS King Fergusius second son, succeeded in the year of the world
3680. before Christ 291. after the beginning of the reign 41. He was a noble
King, a good Iusticiar; for he exercised Justice aires, for repressing of
trespassors, and ratified the old league with Crinus King of Pictes, holding
good peace with his confederates and Britains. He died peaceably the nine and
twentieth year of his reign.

4 DORNADILLA succeeded his father Mainus in the year of the world 3709.
before Christ 262. after the beginning of the reign 70. He was a good King,
and confirmed peace with the Pictes and Britains, he delighting greatly in
hunting, races and hounds, made certain laws profitable for hunting, which
were observed many years after: he died peaceably the eight and twentieth
year of his reign.

5. NOTHATVS succeeded his brother Dornadilla, (whose son REVVTHER was a
child not able to govern by virtue of the aforesaid Statute) the year of the
world 3738. before Christ 233. after the beginning of the reign 98. He was an
auaritious cruel Tyrant: he was killed by Dowall one of his Nobles, Captain
of the Brigandes, the twentieth year of his reign.

6 REVTHERVS Dornadella his son succeeded the year of the world 3758. before
Christ 213. after the reign 118. He being young, (assisted by Dowall) raised
great contention by the persuasion of Ferquhart, Captain of Kentire and Lorne
(cosen to Nothatus the tyrant late killed) a man of subtle wit, and having
great ambition to the Crown. Between the aforesaid parties there was cruel
wars: Ferquhart being fugitive in Ireland returned being assisted with many
Irish men, with the inhabitants of Kyntire, Lorne, Ardgile, Caithnes, Murray,
and with a great army. Dowall res^ing, came with a great power (accompanied
with the young King and the King of Pictes) and many other his friends; there
was a cruel battle and killing of Chiefetaines and Nobles on both parties.
The King of Pictes with many of his Nobles pitifully killed Reutherus, the
young King pursued and taken at the Castle of Calender. By this unhappy battle
was such terrible slaughter, that neither Scots nor Pictes were left living
sufficient to inhabit their Realms, nor to withstand their enemies.
Afterward the Scots and Pictes were most cruelly invaded by the Britains, and
a great multitude killed, the rest exiled. King Reutherus and his people past
into Ireland, and the Pictes past into Orkney. King Reutherus returning from
Ireland, and the Pictes with their King Gethus returning from Orkney, they gave
battle to the King of Britains, and obtaining victory by the high and
sovereign manhood, and valiantness of the foresaid King Reuthorus, the
Britains rendered all the forts, lands, and towns pertaining to the Scots and
Pictes, with faithful promise never to invade them in time coming. This peace
being concluded, the Scots, Pictes and Britains continued in great tranquillity
many years after: the King enduring the rest of his days, had good peace, and
died the six and twentieth year of his reign.

7 RHEVDA succeeded his brother Reutherus in the year of the world 3784.
before Christ 187. after the beginning of the reign 144. He was a good King,
he caused sepultures to be made for noble and valiant men: he brought
artificers into his Realm, and instituted sundry good laws. In his time came
certain Orators, Philosophers from King Ptolomeus of Egypt, who were
pleasantly received and well entertained, because they were descended of the
Egyptians his ancient forefathers. These Orators did write and consider the
situation of the hills, mountains, valleys, rivers, locks, frithes, Isles,
towns, and forts within the Realm of Scotland, and the lands thereto
pertaining, as also to the Pictes. He reigned peaceably sixteen years, and
resigned the crown to THEREVS, son to King Reutherus.

8 THEREVS Reutherus son succeeded in the year of the world 3799. before
Christ 171. after the reign 158. He appeared in the first six months to be a
virtuous Prince; but after he became an unwise cruel tyrant. Therefore being
degraded of all honor, he was exiled. And Conan Captain of the Brigandes
elected to be governor, who governed the Realm peaceably during the exile of
Thereus, who died in the City of York in misery the twelfth year of his
reign.

9 IOSINA succeeded his brother Thereus the year of the world 3810. before
Christ 161. after the reign 170. He was a peaceable and good King, ratifying
peace with his confederates the Pictes, and also with the Britains: he was a
good Medecinar and Herbestar. In his time were brought to his presence in
Berigone. Two venerable Philosophers, pleasant of visage almost naked, being
Priests of Spain, passing from Portingall to Athens, and by unmerciful
tempest, were Ship-broken at Ros, their ship and company with Mariners all
perished, they only saved. After refreshing and good entertainment, the King
desired and demanded of them, what they understood by their science of the
nature of the ground of Scotland, after good and deliberate aduisement (so
far as they might conjecture) there was more riches and profit to be gotten
within the veins of the earth of Scotland then above; for it was given more to
the winning of Mines and metals then any production of corn. They knew this
by the influence of the heavens. Also they learned the people to worship only
God the Creator, prohibiting them to make sacrifice (as their custom then was)
to Isis and Apis, the Gods of the Egyptians, but only to make their sacrifice,
prayers, and adoration in their Temples (without any imagery) to the eternal
God, creator of heaven and earth, which the people for the most part observed
long time. King Iosina being a virtuous Prince died in peace the four and
twentieth year of his reign, and buried at Berigone.

10 FINNANVS succeeded his father Iosina the year of the world 3834. before
Christ 137. after the reign 194. a wise and virtuous King, a good Iusticiar,
with advice of his Nobles, rewarding them honorably after their deseruings,
winning the hearts of his people, ruled with great felicity, increasing in
riches: he did institute Prelates and Clerks to be in the Isle of man,
instructing Noble men's children in their youth. This virtuous King married his
son Durstius with Agafia, daughter to the King of Britains: he wan great
favor among them; he visited the King of Pictes, who was vexed with a vehement
fever in Camelon: he died there the thirtieth year of his reign, and was
brought to Berigone, and there buried among the Sepultures of his progenitors.

12 DVRSTIVS succeeded his father Finnanus the year of the world 3864. before
Christ 107. from the beginning of the reign 224. a cruel and traytercus
tyrant, killed in battle by his Nobles the ninth year of his reign.

12 EVENVS primus succeeded his brother Durstius the year of the world 3873.
before Christ 98. after the reign 133. a wise, just, and virtuous King. He was
the first that caused his Nobles and subjects to give their oath of fidelity;
he executed justice severely in all the parts of his Realm. At length there
came Ambassadors from the Pictes, showing that the Britains were in armor,
purposing to besiege their City Camelon: the King to assist his confederate
friends, came with expedition against the Britains, Scots and Pictes, went
forward with great courage: the Britains with no less audacity on the other
part, follows a very dangerous battle, with uncertain victory, until the
night severed them. The confederate Kings seeing their army broken, retired in
the night. The Britains so broken, and dispayring of new support retired in
the same manner as discomfited people; their Camp standing with their
carriage. The confederate people advertised hereof, returned and parted the
spoil by custom of arms. The King returned to Berigone, rewarded their
friends that were slain in the said battle, and others promoted to public
offices, some with riches and goods: and the rest of his days he was a severe
Iusticiar, and died in peace the nineteenth year of his reign; buried in
Dunstaffage.

13 GILLVS bastard, son to Euenus, usurped the crown, and traitorously killed
two sonns of Durstius, contending for the crown in the year of the world
3892. before Christ 79. after the reign 252. A crafty tyrant, killed in
battle by Cadellus Captain of the Brigandes; the second year of his reign
his head cut off, his body buried in Dunstaffage.

14 EVENVS secundus, Donallus son, King Finnan^s brother, succeeded in the
year of the world 3894. before Christ 77. after the beginning of the reign of
Scotland 254. A good Iusticiar, civil, virtuous and peaceable King. Cadallus
after the killing of Gillus, returning out of Ireland with his victorious army,
by rage of Tempest were almost all perished; Cadallus was truly rewarded with
many lands by the King, and comforted by him concerning his great loss of
Nobles and friends. King Euenus marrying Siora daughter of Gethus, King of
Pictes, confirmed the old band. After that he vanquished Balus King of
Orkney, who finding no way to escape, killed himself: he builded Innerlothy
and Innernes: he resigned the crown to Ederus, giving him wise and good
counsel: he died in peace the seventeenth year of his reign, buried in
Dunstaffage.

15 EDERVS Durstius sonne^, succeeded in the year of the world 3911. before
Christ 60. after the reign 271. a wise, valiant, and good King. Bredus of the
Isles (cosen to Gillus, killed as is before mentioned) made insurrection.
Shortly after the King pursuing him and his associates, they were all taken
captives, and many with the said Bredus killed. Cassibilian King of Britains,
sent his Ambassadors to the King of Scots, desiring support against Julius
Caesar the Roman Emperor, who was ready with most dreadful Ordinance to come
into Albion. The King and Nobles receiving the Ambassadors courteously,
Androgeus special. Ambassador, after a large and serious Oration, the King
and Nobles being advised, sent unto London ten thousand chosen men, under the
conduct and government of Cadallan and Dowall, Captains of the Brigandes and
Lorne. Also an army of Pictes came at the request of King Ederus. The Britains
were raised in great esperance of victory by the aid of Scots and Pictes; for
they had no little confidence in their manhood and chiualry: King Cassibilian
went forward with his whole power, against the Romans there ensued a dangerous
and doubtful battle; at the last the Romans were fugitive, and being minded
to renew the battle, Julius (hearing of the great destruction of his Ships)
changed his mind, hoisted sails in the night, and returned into France,
leaving behind them a great prey of goods, when Julius Caesar was forced to
avoid Albion. The Britains, Scots and Pictes parted the spoil gotten in his
Camp by custom of arms, rejoicing of this glorious victory. Cadallane and
Dowall, richly rewarded by Cassibilian, returned with the Scots army; at whose
coming the King was greatly rejoiced; then followed such love and kindness
between the Britains, Scots and Pictes, that it appeared them to live in
perpetual peace. The King passing to Innernes, was certainly informed by
sundry Merchants strangers, that Julius had pacified France to his Empire, and
making provision for a new army, to return into Britain, to revenge the
injuries done unto him the last year, he sends his Ambassadors to
Cassibilian, promising (if he pleased) to send ten thousand chosen men unto his
aid and support. The Britains (moved with vain arrogance) refused to have
any supply of Scots or Pictes: Julius returning into Britain, was three sundry
times put back, but at the last Cassibilian was vanquished, and his whole
valiant Captains taken or killed, and his lands made to pay three thousand
pound of silver to the Romans for tribute. Julius sends his Ambassadors to
the Scots and Pictes, offering them conditions of peace two several times.
They were resolute to remain free, not to be subject, and refusing all
conditions of peace, were willing to defend their lives and liberties. Julius
being minded to invade the Scots and Pictes, was advertised of a sudden
uproar in France; for which cause he passed into France: Murket Gildus nephew
made insurrection against the King. Therefore he sent Cadallane with armed men,
who hanged Murket with his accomplices. The King continued in good peace the rest
of his days; he died peaceably the forty eight year of his reign: buried in
Dunstaffage.

16 EVENVS tertius succeeded his father Ederus, the year of the world 3959.
before Christ 12. after the reign 319. He was a luxurious, auaritious tyrant,
retayning a hundred Concubines, and not being saciate with them, he was taken
in a battle captive, and imprisoned, and was killed by a young child the first
night, the child was executed on the morrow, the seventh year of his reign,
buried at Dunstaffage.

17 METELIANVS Ederus brothers son, succeeded the year of the world 3966.
before the coming of Christ 4. years; after the beginning of the reign of
Scotland 326. A very modest, civil and good King, peace being universally at
the birth of our Savior Christ. The Roman Emperor Augustus sent his
Ambassadors into Britain, requesting the Britains to continue peace, with
whom the King sent manyrich jewels to Augustus to be offered in their Capitol:
he wan sure amity of them, which endured long. In this time were in Rome
V^rgil, Horace, O^d, Tullius, Marcus Varro, Straba, Titus, Liuius Salustius,
with many other learned men: he died peaceably the nine and thirtieth year, of
his reign; buried in Dunstaffage.

18 CARATACVS Metellanus Sisters son succeeded in the year of the world
4005. in the year of Christ 35. after the beginning of the reign of Scotland
365. He enjoying the great treasure and riches, left by King Metellanus,
exceeded all the Kings in Albion in riches, being wise and valiant, pacifying
his Realm from all uproar and rebellion, specially in the Isles, and executing
severe justice. The Britains at this time rebelling against the Romans, sent
their Ambassadors to Caratacus, desiring support against the Romans, he first
reproching them for their wilful refusal. The Scots offering them support,
wisely counselling them to solicit the Normanes, Picards, Barteners and all
them on the Sea coast, to rebel against them, and to kill the Soldiers,
promising assistance of the Kings of Albion, with money and valiant warriors,
both by Sea and land. The Romans shortly inuading the Britains in a dangerous
battle vanquished them, and killed their King Claudius Emperor: and Vespasian
coming into Britain subdued them again, and passing into Orkney subdued the
same, and brought Ganus King of Orkney his wife and children in his triumph to
Rome. The Britains coming to York, made new insurrection, assisted by
Caratacus King of Scots, and Congestus King of Pictes, against whom Plancius
Roman Governor, and Aruiragus then King of Britains came with a great Armic.
Caratacus being elected General, there followed a cruel and dangerous
battle, with uncertain victory until the night separated them on either
parties: Plancius on the morrow seeing his great loss, specially of his
horsemen, returned to London, and Caratacus returned to York: the next year
Vespasian with many legions of Romans were sent into Britain. Aruiragus
assisting with the rest of the Britains, conuened at York threescore and five
thousand chosen men. The consederate Kings came with threescore thousand
valiant warriors: there was a terrible and cruel battle. The Albions
(notwithstanding their great valiantness, were discomfited by the prudent
government of Vespasian, the King of Pictes killed, the whole Britains being
killed except six hundred with their King. Caratacus returned with a few
number to Brigance. Vespasian wintered in York, and in the Spring besieged and
wanne Camelon, wherein was found many rich monuments and jewels, with a
precious crown of gold, set about with many precious stones of diverse colors,
with a sword with hilts of gold, which Uespasian used in all his wars, he
remaining in Camelon. Cara^s assembled a new army, against whom Plancius was
sent with a great army; a cruel battle ensued. The victory at last succeeded
to the Romans. The rest of the Scots (that escaped this sorrowful battle)
were fugitive to the mountains. King Caratacus sore wounded, was brought with
great difficulty to Dunstaffage. Vespasian sending his messengers to Caratacus,
promising (if he would be obedient to the Roman Empire) that he should remain
in honors, and be reputed and holden as a friend to the Senate, and people of
Rome; who answered that the Kingdom of Scotland was as free to him as the
Kingdom of Romans was to Caesar. Vespasian returning to Rome Caratacus
assembling a new army; the Romans encountering him with a great multitude,
there followed a cruel and terrible battle, long with uncertain victory; at
the last the Romans obtained victory. Caratacus returned to Dunstaffage.
Plancius dying at Camelon, Ostorius Scapula was sent by the Emperor in his
place, who after sundry rebellions of the Britains conquered them, he came
within the bounds of Scotland. Caratacus gathered a new army of forty thousand
valiant men; there ensued a dangerous and terrible battle, the victory
succeding at last to the Romans. Caratacus wife, his daughter and brother were
taken, himself returning to Cartamunda his stepmother, Queen of Scots (in
whom he trusted) but unworthily he was by her betrayed, and rendered to the
Romans. King Caratacus was sent with his wife, daughter and brother to Rome,
where he was greatly admired, and honorably of the Emperor entertained, and
remitted freely with his Queen, daughter, and brother to return home,
restoring all his lands again, he remaining the rest of his days in good
peace, died the twentieth year of his reign, and buried in Dunstaffage.

19 CORBREDVS primus, succeeded his brother Caratacus in the year of the world
4025. in the year of Christ 55 after the reign 385. a wife King and good
Iusticiar. He conuented his Nobles, and took counsel of Venisius, the
husband of Cartamunda his stepmother, Queen of Scots, who by erafty sleights
had taken the aforesaid Venisius her husband, and sundry of his friends, and
deteyned them prisoners, purposing to render them into the Romans hands. The
King impatient thereof, came and relieved them, commanding her to be buried
quick: after a cruel battle between the Romans and the Scots and Pictes,
peace was concluded. The Romans shall possess the lands of Britain by them
conquered, without inuading of Scots or Pictes, then after by command of Nero.
Veraneus was sent into Britain, who shortly died, Woada, sister to Corbredus
Queen of Britain, sent to her brother, complaining of her misery and
trouble, her daughters deflowred, her self shamefully beaten by unmerciful
Romans. Corbredus moved herewith, renewed the band with the Pictes, and they
raising a great army, killed all the Romans they might apprehend, and wanne
in their journey Barwicke, being then the most populous town of that Region.
In this time there came a people called Murrayes out of Almaine, with their
Captain Rodrik, put forth and expelled out of their native land, being
inhibited Original of the most ancient surname of Murrayes.
to land in France and Britain, arrived in Forth between Louthiane and Fiffe.
They were sworn enemies to the Romans, rejoicing greatly that they might have
occasion to be revenged upon their enemies; requesting the confederate Kings to
suffer them to pass foremost, in support of their people; and (if it chanced
the Romans to be vanquished) to grant them wives that they might increase
under one blood with the Scots. Their conditions were granted to the Murrayes.
The confederate King with the Murrayes went forwards, and joining with the
valiant Queen of Britains Woada, who rejoicing of her brother King Corbredus
and the King of Picts coming, after an Oration and comfottable Speech made by
her: proffering her with five thousand Ladies, armed to pass in the front of
the battle, against the unmerciful and shameful deflowrers of Virgins and
Matrons, the cruel Romans. The confederate Kings allowing her courage, past
forwards, Cattus the Roman Governor with arrayed arms came to resist them:
there followed a sharp battle: the horsemen of the Romans being vanquished,
the rest were fugitive with Cattus, sore wounded escaped and returned into
France. The Albions departed the spoil and riches of this field amongst them,
and killed the Romans in all parts where they might apprehend them: in this
battle were killed threescore and ten thousand Romans, and thirty thousand
Albions, had not Swetonius Roman Legate come hastily into Britain, with two
legions and ten thousand warriors of sundry Nations, the Albions had been
perpetually delivered of the Romans: Woada the Queen hearing of the new army
of Romans, assembled a new and great army of Britains, Scots and Pictes, and
Murrayes; there followed a bloody and terrible battle. At last the Albions
being vanquished, fourscore thousand killed: the Murrayes almost killed with
their Captain Roderik, Woada killed her self, to escape the injury of the
Romans; her two daughters were taken and brought armed to Swetonius. The
eldest daughter was married unto a noble Roman named Marius, who after was by
command of Caesar made King of Britains. Corbredus broken with this sorrowful
battle, returned with the rest of his army into Scotland, and gave to the
rest of the Murrayes (that escaped out of the field) all the lands between
Spey and Innernes, which lands were called after them Murray land: for the old
inhabitants being seditious and troublesome were partly expelled. The Murrayes
were then married unto Scottish Virgins, and remained under one blood and
friendship. Corbredus the King continued the rest of his days in peace, and
died the eighteenth year of his reign: buried in Dunstaffage.

20 DARDANVS nephew to Metellanus succeeded, being a lusty person, fair of
visage and body: he was well-beloved of the people, in the year of the world
4042. the year of Christ 72. after the reign 402. He appeared in the
beginning to be a good King; but being within three years degenerate, became
an odious tyrant, and would have traitorously caused to be slain, the two
sons of Corbredus remaining in the Isle of Man under discipline. This Tyrant
at last was killed in battle, and beheaded by his Nobles the fourth year of
his reign, without burial.

21 CORBREDVS secundus, surnamed Galdus, Corbredus primus son succeeded, an
excellent person, endowed with sundry virtues and high prerogatives, in the
year of the world 4046. the year of Christ 76. after the beginning of the
reign 406. a valiant and courageous King. He renewed many battles against the
Romans, and was often victorious: at this time arrived in Forth a company of
Almaines, named Vs^pians, banished out of their native land; for killing of a
Roman Captain and his band, they were pleasantly received, and ordained
certain lands to be inhabited by them, beside the Murrayes, for they were of
one blood. Agricola remaining in Britain eight years with his Romans, had
sundry victories against the Scots and Picts. Domitian the Emperor, envying
Agricolaes prosperous estate in Britain, sent hastily letters for him; at
whose coming to Rome he was poisoned by command of the said Domitian. GVENVS
TABELLIVS was made Governor of Britain, dissension engendered among the Romans
for the government. King Corbredus surnamed Galdus (being by his explorators)
advertised hereof, came with a new army of Scots and Pictes against the
Romans: and finally their Captain with many Romans were killed. The Scots with
the Picts following the whole day; and killing them where they might apprehend
them. The King assembling the Scotts and Pictes, parted the rich spoil of
their enemies amongst them as they had deserved. Afterward the Scots and Pictes
pursued cruelly in all parts the Romans. The Romans conuenting them, elected
Chelius to be their Governor, there followed a most dangerous battle, at last
the Romans were vanquished and pursued with continual killing unto Calidon
wood. The confederate Kings came with their armies into Brigance: the Romans
assembled themselves in most fearful ordinance, a company of Britains (sent
by Marius their King, in support of the Romans) came to the confederate Kings.
There followed a terrible and bloody battle, the Romans being vanquished and
compelled to retire to their Tents with great killing of them, defended their
Tents with great manhood, until the night approached. The Scots were vigilant
all night, and attending that their enemies should not escape; others were
making Engines to break down their Tents, and Trenches. The Romans seeing so
great preparation against them, and no way to escape the danger, sent their
Orators to the confederate Kings, most humbly entreating peace, on what
conditions pleased them. After long consultation, peace was granted. The
Romans to pass and render all lands, forts and munitions pertaining to Scots
and Pictes, with all the goods taken violently from them during the wars, and
to remain their friends at all times after. After this most valiant King
Corbredus Galdus, came to Epiake the principal City then of Scotland. The
rest of his days he continued in peace, exercising severe Justice: he died
peaceably the five and thirtieth year of his reign: buried in Dunstaffage.

22 LVCTACVS succeeded his father Corbredus Galdus in the year of the world
4080. in the year of Christ 110. after the reign 440. an odious and cruel
tyrant, killed by his Nobles the third year of his reign: buried in
Dunstaffage.

23 MOGALDVS Corbredus secundus sisters son, succeeded the year of the world
4083. the year of Christ 113. after the reign 443. a good King and victorious
in the beginning of his reign, governing his people with great justice, and
obtained a great victory against Lucius and his Romans, by the assistance of
the Pictes in Westmerland and Camber; obteyning a rich spoil of the Romans,
which they parted by law of arms. Afterward the King did degenerate into a
cruel tyrant. In his time Adrian the Emperor came into Britain, and builded
the wall of Adrian, dividing the Britains from the Scotts and Pictes a great
wall made of fuel, and earth, and turues, from the mouth of Tyne, over
against the Almaine Seas, to the flood of Eske, at the Irish Seas fourscore
miles in length: he was killed by his Nobles for his tyranny and odious life
the thirty sixth year of his reign: buried at Dunstaffage.

24 CONARVS succeeded his father Mogaldus the year of the world 4119. the
year of Christ 149. after the reign 479. a cruel tyrant, degraded and
imprisoned by his Nobles (and Ardgadus Captain of Ardgile, made Governor, a
good and severe Iusticiar) he died in prison the foureteenth year of his
reign: buried in Dunsstaffage.

25 ETHODIVS primus Mogaldus sisters son, succeeded the year of the world
4133. the year of Christ 163. after the reign 493. a good Iusticiar, who
holding sundry battles against the Roman Captains Victorine Trebellius and
Pertinax, near the wall of Adrian, and ministering good justice, oppressing
rebels, was traitorously killed by an Harper (whom he trusted) the three and
thirtieth year of his reign; buried in Dunstaffage. This Harper was most
cruelly executed.

26 SATRAEL Ethodius primus succeeded the year of the world 4165. the year of
Christ 195. after the reign 525. a cruel tyrant: he was slain by one of his
Courtiers the fourth year of his reign: buried in Dunstaffage.

27 DONALDVS primus, firstChristian King of Scotland, succeeded his brother
Satrael, in the year of the world 4169. in the year of Christ 199. from the
beginning of the reign of Scotland 529. a good and religious King (in his time
Seuerus the Emperor came into Britain) after many incursions made by the
Scots and Pictes, in abolishing the wall of Adrian. Anthonius Seuerus son
governed Britain, and builded and repaired the wall of Adrian strongly with
Towers Seuerus dying. Anthonius killing his brother Getus, was Emperor. He was
the first that coined money of gold and silver, and embraced the Christian
faith: he died in peace the eighteenth year of his reign; buried in
Dunstaffage.

28 ETHODIVS secundus Ethodius 1. son, succeeded in the year of the world
4186. the year of Christ 216. after the reign 546. anvnwise and base minded
King: the Realm prudently governed by his Nobles, he was killed by his guard
the sixteenth year of his reign, buried in Dunstaffage.

29 ATHIRCO succeeded his father Ethodius, the year of the world 4201. the
year of Christ 231. after the reign 561. a good Prince in his beginning;
afterward being degenerate, and pursued by his Nobles, for his vicious life
(killed himself) the twelfth year of his reign.

30 NATHALOCVS succeeded in the year of the world 4212. the year of Christ
242. after the reign 572. a cruel tyrant, killed by his Nobles (usurped the
crown) the eleventh year of his reign.

31 FINDOCVS Athicroes son, succeeded the year of the world 4223. the year
of Christ 253. after the reign 583. a good and valiant King: he was killed at
a hunting, by instigation of his brother Carance, and Donald Lord of the Isles.
The Traitors killers of him being tormented to death, and Carance exiled the
eleventh year of his reign, buried in Dunstaffage.

32 DONALDVS secundus, succeeded his brother Findocus the year of the world
4234. the year of Christ 264. after the reign 594. a good King: he was
wounded in battle; and being vanquished by the insurrection of Donald of the
Isles, three thousand of his army killed, and two thousand with their King
taken, the third day with melancholy died, the first year of his reign,
buried in Dunstaffage.

33 DONALDVS tertius Lord of the Isles (usurped the Crown) the year of the
world 4235. the year of Christ 265. after the reign 595. a cruel tyrant,
killed by Crathalinthus his successor (at which time there was universal
persecution of the Christians under the Empire of Decius) the twelfth year of
his reign.

34 CRATHILINTHVS Findocus son, succeeded the year of the world 4247. the year
of Christ 277. after the reign 607. a valiant good Iusticiar, and godly King.
He purged the land of superftition, planting the true Christian Religion. In
this time chanced in the hunting between Scots and Pictes discord, so hastily
that there were many killed on both parties. Carance brother to Findocus or
Carasus 77. Britain King, exiled for suspicion of his slaughter, was long in
the Romans wars, with Dioclesian Emperor, and using himself valiantly,
returned into Albion with many valiant warriors and great riches, placed his
people in Westmerland, being reconciled with the King, he at length agreed the
two long confederate kings and people. Carance assisted by the twoconfederate
Kings with a great army in three battles, coming to York, was resisted by
Quintus Bassianus, Captain of Britains, whom he killed, with many valiant
Romans. After this battle victoriously won, against the Romans, and the rich
spoil, parted according to the law of arms, Carance with his victorious army,
past to London, where he was received with great reverence, and possessed the
crown of Britain, contrary to the Empire of the Romans; reteyning in his
companytwo thousand Scots and Picts continually for a guard, he being assaulted
in battle by the Romans and Britains, was always victorious. The seventh year
of his reign in Britain he was killed by Alectus Roman Captain. King
Crathalinthus ended the rest of his days in good peace, and died the four and
twentieth year of his reign, buried at Dunstaffage.

35 FINCORMACVS Father, brother son to Crathilinthus, succeeded the year of
the world 4271. the year of Christ 301. after the reign 631. a godly valiant
King: he was a worthy promoter of Christian Religion in Scotland; at which time
Traherus Roman Captain with many legions sent by Constantinus Emperor into
Britain, to repress Octauius then King of Britains, being expelled, was
fugitive in Scotland. Traherus assembling a great Army against the King of
Scots, and Octauius King of Britains (whom the foresaid King of Scots refused
to render) being solicited friendly, and therefore sharply and proudly manaced
by the said Traherus, followed a cruel and dangerous battle; the Romans
finally vanquished, and sixteen thousand of the Romans killed, and fifteen
thousand Albions. Fincormacus and Octauius pursued until they came to York,
where the two Kings were pleasantly received by the Nobles of Britain.
Octauius restored to the Crown Fincormacus for his assistance was perpetually
confirmed with an oath to him and his successors, the lands of Westmerland and
Cumber (which Carance had granted in his time to the Scots and Pictes for the
assistance of him by King Crathilinthus against the Romans) King Fincormacus
continued the rest of his days in peace with the Britains and Pictes, and
died the seven and fortieth year of his reign, buried in Dunstaffage.

36 ROMACHVS brother, son to Crathilinthus, succeeded in the year of the
world 4318. in the year of Christ 348. after the reign 678. a cruel tyrant,
killed and beheaded by his Nobles: the third year of his reign; in whose time
Arrius began, and Ireland became Christians.

37 ANGVSIANVS Crathilinthus brother son, succeeded in the year of the world
4321. in the year of Christ 351. after the reign 681. a good and valiant
King; Nectanus King of Picts, to revenge the killing of Romans, gathered an
army against the Scots, there followed a sharp battle. The Scots being
victorious, and many of the Nobles of the Pictes killed, and their King
fugitive unto Camelon their principal City. After that the Pictes renewed
battle, and came to the wood of Calidone, where the King of Scots with a great
army joined battle, with great cruelty, both the Kings were killed, and many
of their Nobles, the third year of his reign, buried in Dunstaffage without
succession.

38 FETHEIMACHVS another brother, son to Crathilinthus succeeded in the year
of the world 4324. in the year of Christ 354. after the reign 684. He was a
good and valiant King, and victorious against the Pictes, and killed their King
in battle: he was traitorously murdered in his own chamber by two
distembling Pictes and an Harper. The third year of his reign, buried in
Dunstaffage. The murderers were apprehended and most cruelly tormented. At
this time S. Andrews Church was builded by the King of Pictes, at the request
of Saint Rewell.

39 EVGENIVS primus Fincormacus son, succeeded in the year of the world
4327. in the year of Christ 357. after the reign 687. a vasiant, just, and
good King: he was killed in battle, his brother taken, and all his Nobles
killed with fifty thousand of his army by the cruelty of the Romans,
Britains, and deceitful Pictes, and the whole nation of Scotts, exiled a long
time, the third year of his reign.

40 FERGVSIVS secundus, Erthus son to Ethodius Eugenius, the first brother,
returning into Scotland by support of Danes, Goths, and his own country men
gathered unto him out of all parts (where they were dispersed) conquered his
Realm of Scotland, out of the Romans and Pictes hands, beginning his ragne in
the year of the world 4374. in the year of Christ 404. from the beginning of
the Realm of Scotland 734. He was a wise, valiant, good and godly King, being
confederate with the Pictes: he was sundry times victorious against the
Romans: at the last he was killed in a battle by the Romans the sixteenth
year of his reign, buried in Icolukill.

41 EVGENIVS secundus, Fergusius second son, succeeded his father in the
year of the world 4390. in the year of Christ 420. from the beginning of the
reign of Scotland 750. He was a valiant and good King; in sundry battles
victorious against the Romans and Britains: at which time Maximian the Roman
Governor of Britain made insurrection against the Romans, and cruelly
invaded the land then called Armorica, and killed the most part of all the
people there, that it should not be a prey to Frenchmen their neighbors; he
brought out of Britain a great multitude of people to inhabit the same, some
authors write there came a hundred thousand men out of Britain with Conanus,
who was made King of that land, and called the same land Bartany, or little
Britain, after the Britains that came to inhabit there. Then after they sent
into Britain for women to be their wives: at whose request Vrsula (called S.
Vrsula) with eleven thousand Virgins were embarked to pass Bartany. They all
by contrary and tempestuous winds were compelled to arrive in the low
Countries, iourneying by land to Bartany, were all lamentably murdered and
killed, because they would not suffer deflowring of their bodies, but rather
offered themselves to be cruelly and unmercifully murdered and killed, after
this unhappy and cruel murder, other women and Virgins were sent in great
number into Bartany, who inhabit that land continually to this day. Britain
being desolate of Roman support, was occasion that the confederate Kings
invaded them after so hardly: for the valiant Graham, who was descended of an
ancient house of Denmark, and borne of a noble Lady of the same country,
married with a Scots noble man, that was exiled out of Scotland with Ethodius
(brother to King Eugenius before rehearsed, killed in battle by Romans and
Pictes. This Graham married a Virgin of the blood royal of Denmark, to whom
she bare a daughter of excellent beauty, who was married to Fergusius the
second King of Scots: of him descended the ancient surname of Grahams: he was
a great enemy to the Romans; for he destroyed to the The original of the
noble surname of the Grahams.
ground the wall of Abircorne, called then after Grahams Dykes, and past and
all utterly abolished the wall of Adrian over against the Irish Seas. The
confederate Kings accompanied with valiant Graham, past with fire and sword
through all the bounds between Tyne and Humber: there followed a most dangerous
battle, in the which were killed fifteen thousand Britains, with the most of
the Princes and Nobles of Britain, and four thousand Scots, and the whole
Romans being exiled out of Britain by the confederate Kings; and peace being
concluded between the confederate Kings and the Britains, all the lands lying
beyond Humber shall remain perpetually under the Empire of the confederate
Kings, and presently to be paid threescore thousand pound to their men of
war, and twenty thousand pound yearly to the confederate Kings: and for
observing hereof, the Britains delivered one hundred pledges, being within age
of thirty years, at the will of the confederate Kings. In the seventh year of
the reign of Eugenius second King of Scotts, Britain was delivered from
Roman tribute 496. years after that Julius Caesar began the first tribute.
Eugenius increased in riches and policy, his Realm with continual peace. In
the same time the Britains falling at great diversity, between the Nobles and
Commons there were many of both parties miserably killed, he died in peace the
one and thirtieth year of his reign; buried in Icolmkill.

42 DONGARDVS succeeded his brother Eugenius the year of the world 4421. the
year of Christ 451. after the reign 781 a godly, wise, and valiant King, in a
dangerous and cruel battle between Constantine, new elected King of
Britains, wherein were killed sixteen thousand Britains and fourteen
thousand Scots and Pictes; the victory falling to the confederates, the King of
Scotts valiantly fighting, was killed the fifth year of his reign; and buried
in Icolmkil, which was the burial for the Kings until King Malonus Camors
days.

43 CONSTANTINVS primus, succeeded to his brother Dongardus the year of the
world 4427. in the year of Christ 457. from the beginning of the reign 787 a
vicious and odious King killed by one of his nobles, whose daughter he had
defloured the 22. year of his vnwort hy reign.

44 CONGALLVS Dongardus son succeeded in the year of the world 4449. the
year of Christ 479. after the reign 809. a valiant King, he vanquished the
Britains in a cruel and dangerous battle, wherein were killed 20000
Britains with many nobles, with GVYTELL Prince of Wales, VORTIGERN usurping
the Crown of Britain, sent into Almaine to fee Warriors against the
confederate Kings, at which time came into Britain Hengest and Horsus
brethren with 10000. Saxons, immediately the Britains and Saxons past The
coming in of the Saxans in Britain.
with arrayed battle to Humber, before the confederate Kings were admonished
of their coming, killing in all parts, without mercy where they came. The King
of Picts assembled his army and joined battle (without support of the King of
Scots,) where he was vanquished by the Saxons and Britains. The Saxons proud
of this victory, and being resolved to conquer the Kingdom of Britain, past
further. Against them came King Congalus with a great army, with the Picts
there followed a cruel battle, with uncertain victory, at last the
Britains (that fought in the right wing, against the Scots) being fugitive,
there chanced a mighty shower of hail with great darkness: Hengist by sound
of Trumpet gathered his people to his Standard. The Scotts and Pictes (hoping
their enemies to be vanquished) followed on the Bir^taines without array.
Hengist the Britains vanquished and the confederate people without order
killing and spoiling, he came with his Saxons in arrayed battle, and killed
all the confederates that might be overtaken. This battle was right
sorrowful to the confederate people, and not pleasant to their enemies, for
the most part of the army of Britains were killed, Hengist obteyning new
support out of Saxony, the next Summer came with Vortimer King Vortigerus
son, with a great army: there followed a cruel and long battle, valiantly
debated on all parts, with sundry chances; for many Scots and Britains being
killed Congallus evil wounded, was brought out of the field. Long time then
after Ambrosius (when he had vanquished Uortigern) and being crowned King of
Britain, confederate with the Scots and Pictes, he assisted by them, and
killed with his own hands Hengist, and exiled the rest of the Saxons. King
Congallus (holding good pcace with Britains and Pictes, vexed with long
infirmity) died peace ably the two and twentieth year of his reign, and buried
in Icolmkill.

45 CORANVS succeeded his brother Congallus in the year of the world 4471. the
year of Christ 501. after the reign 831. a good King and severe Iusticiar. In
this time arrived in Britain Occa and Passentius, sons of Hengist, with a
great multitude of valiant soldiers (assisted by the Princes of Almaine,
against whom came King Ambrosius. There followed a doubtful and dangerous
battle; the victory enclining to Ambrosius, yet very unpleasant; for at the
same time there were many Britains killed. Nevertheless they parted the
spoil of Saxons by right of arms. Occa being advertised of the coming of the
confederate Kings to assist Ambrosius, sent his brother Passentius to bring
greater support out of Almaine, by contrary winds he arrived in Ireland, where
he gathered a great number of hired warriors, and returned into Britain. Occa
persuaded one Coppa a fained mediciner to poison King Ambrosius; the
confederate Kings coming with a strong army to assist Ambrosius, were
advertised of his death: therefore they not knowing who was friend or foe; and
being uncertain how he died, they returned home: Arthurus being King of
Britains, assisted by the Scots and Pictes, obtained sundry victories against
the Saxons. The confederate Nobles abode certain days in London. And being
richly rewarded by King Arthurus, returned home. The Realm of Scotland was
governed in great felicity and justice by King Coranus. Then after certain
Traitors (assisted by Donald Captain of Athole) murdered the King in his
chamber the four and thirtieth year of his reign, in the sixteenth year of
the reign of King Arthurus, and in the twentieth year of Justinian Emperor,
the year of Christ 535. He was buried at Icolmkil.

46 EVGENIVS tertius Congallus first son, succeeded in the year of the world
4505. in the year of Christ 535. after the reign 865. a wise godly King, and
good Iusticiar: he continued in good peace all his days, and died the three
and twentieth year of his reign, and buried at Icolmkill.

47. CONGALLVS secundus, succeeded his brother Eugenius the year of the world
4528. the year of Christ 558. after the reign 888. a good, just, and godly
Prince: he instituted many good laws concerning Churches and Churchmen: he
died in peace the eleventh year of his reign, buried in Icolmkill; in whose
time was S. Colme and S. Mungo.

48 KINNATELLVS succeeded his brother Congallus, the year of the world 4539.
the year of Christ 569 after the reign 899. a good and godly King: he died
in peace the first year of his reign, and buried at Icolmkill.

49 AIDANVS Coranus son, succeeded in the year of the world 4540. the year
of Christ 570. after the beginning of the reign of Scotland 900. He was a
valiant and good King, and severe Iusticiar: he confederated with the Britains
against the Saxons and Pictes: there followed sundry battles; at last the
Britains and Scotts came into Northumberland against the Saxons, and Pictes;
and vanquished them in a dangerous battle; the tenth part of the spoyie
obtained in the field was dedicated to the Churches of Scotland, and the
Banners or Ensigns gotten at that time, sent to Icolmkill: he died in peace
the five and thirtieth year of his reign, buried in Icolmkill.

50 KENNETHVS primus, Congallus second son, succeeded in the year of the
world 4575. the year of Christ 605. after the reign 935. a good and peaceable
Prince. He died the first year of his reign, and was buried in Icolmkill.

51 EVGENIVS quartus Aidanus son, succeeded in the year of the world 4576.
the ye^re of Christ 606. after the reign 936. He was a godly and good
Iusticiar, and instituted many godly and good laws for the Commonwealth of
his subjects: he reigned peaceably, and died in peace the fifteenth year of
his reign; buried in Icolmkill.

52 FERCHARDVS primus, succeeded his father Eugenius, the year of the world
4591. the year of Christ 621. after the reign 951. a vicious Tyrant, degraded
by his Nobles, and imprisoned: he killed himself in prison the eleventh year
of his reign.

53 DONALDVS quartus succeeded his father Ferchardus the year of the world
4602. the year of Christ 632. after the reign 962. a good and religious King.
holding peace, with his neighbors, being at fishing with his servants for
pastime, he perished in Lothay the foureteenth year of his reign, his body
being found, was buried in Icolmkill.

54 FERCHARDVS secundus succeeded his brother Donaldus, in the year of the
world 4616. in the year of Christ 646. after the reign 976. an auaritious and
vicious tyrant, bitten by a Wolf in hunting, whereof ensued a dangerous fever,
being penitent of his evil life. He died the eighteenth year of his reign,
buried at Icolmkill.

55 MALDVINVS Donaldus son, succeeded in the year of the world 4634. in the
year of Christ 664. after the reign 994. He was a godly and wise King, and a
severe Iusticiar, holding good peace with his neighbors. He was strangled by
his wife in the night by suspicion of Adultery the twenty year of his reign,
buried in Icolmkill, on the morrow his wife was taken with her Accomplices, and
burned to death.

56 EVGENIVS quintus, Malduinus brother Son succeeded in the year of the
world 4654 in the year of Christ 684 after the reign 1014. he was a valiant
and good King, he obtained a great victory against Edfreid King of
Northumberland, being killed with 10000 Saxons, and Bredius King of Pictes
fugitive, he dyed the fourth year of his reign, and buried in Icolmkill.

57 EVGENIVS sixtus Ferchardus secundus son, succeeded the year of the world
4658 the year of Christ 688 after the reign 1018 a good religious and
peaceable King, he died in peace the 9. year of his reign. Buried in
Icolmkill.

58 AMBERKELETHVS succeeded in the year of the world 4667. the year of Christ
697 after the reign 1027 an auaritious evil King, killed by a shot of an
Arro^. The second year of his reign, buried in Icolmkill.

59 EVGENIVS septimus succeeded his brother Amberkelethus, in the year of the
world 4669. in the year of Christ 699. after the reign 1029 A good King,
contracting peace with the King of Pictes then called Garnard, married his
daughter Spontana, who being with child, in the next year, was murdered in
her bed instead of the King, by two brethren of Athole (who had conspired the
Kings death.) The murderers at length were apprehended, and cruelly put to
death. He continued a religions and virtuous King, he endewed sundry Churches
liberally, holding good peace with his neighbors, died in peace the 16 year
of his reign, buried in Icolmkill.

60 MORDACVS son to Amberkelethus, succeeded in the year of the world 4685
in the year of Christ 715 after the reign 1045 an humble and liberal Prince,
he caused peace to be made in all Britain, amongst the Britains, Saxons,
Scots and Pictes, he repaired many decayed Churches, and builded Quhitthorne.
In his time was Saint Beda, he died peaceably the 16. year of his reign,
buried in Icolmkill.

61 ETFINVS Eugenius seventh Son succeeded in the year of the world 4700. in
the year of Christ 730. after the reign 1060. a Godly wise King, and severe
Iusticiar, holding his Realm in good peace, his people increasing in riches
and religion, he being aged elected four Regents. The Thaues of Ardgiele,
Athole, Galloway and Murray to do Justice to his subjects, which was not
observed, he died in peace the 31. year of his reign, buried at Icolmkill.

62 EVGENIVS Octauus Mordacus Son succeeded in the year of the world 4731.
in the year of Christ 761. after the reign 1091. a good King and severe
Iusticiar in the beginning, for he executed to death Donald the tyrant, Lord of
the Isles, and the Earl of Galloway for assenting to his vices, then after he
being degenerate unto all abominable vices, he was killed by his nobles, the
third year of his reign, and buried in Icolmkill, his familiars and servants
asisting to his vicious life, were all hanged upon Gibets, to the great
contentment of his whole subjects.

63 FERGVSIVS tertius Etfinus son succeeded in the year of the world 4734.
in the year of Christ 764. after the reign 1094. he married Ethtolia daughter
to the King of Pictes, he was a leacherous adulterer, and being admonished
continued still in whoredom, at last he was murdered by his wife, and sundry
of his familiar servants, who being sharply therefore accused, his wife hearing
thereof, came into judgment and relieved those innocent men, confessing the
fact, and imediately stabbing her self to the heart with a dagger, died in
presence of the whole people. The King was buried in Icolmkill the third year
of his reign.

64 SOLVATHIVS Eugenius eight son, succeeded in the year of the world 4737.
in the year of Christ 767. after the reign 1097. a noble valiant King, he
married the King of Britains daughter, she bare to him two sons and one
daughter. He being troubled with the Gow^e governed his people, by his
Captains and commanders, severely executing justice, and subduing sundry
Rebels, especially Banus Captain of the Isle of Tire, who assembled a great
company of Rebels and calling himself King. He died peaceably of the Gowt, the
20. year of his reign, buried in Icolmkill.

65 ACHAIVS Etfinus second son began his reign in the year of the world
4757. in the year of Christ 787. after the beginning of the reign of Scotland
1117. a good Godly and peaceable King, he pacified insurrection both in
Scotland, and Ireland, he contracted the band of amity with Charles the great,
King of France and Emperor of Germanye, which band has continued inuiolably
The beginning of the League with France.
observed unto this present time. He married the foresaid Charles the great his
daughter, who bare to him three sons and one daughter. The amity and
confederation of Frenchmen and Scotts, to be made for ever both for the people
present and their successors, and for corroborating of the said band. King
Achaius sent his brother GVIILIAM with sundry nobles into France with 4000.
valiant warriors to assist the foresaid Charles in his wars, in any part he
pleased to pass against the enemies of the Christian faith, at which time the
Arms of the Kings of Scotland, were the red Lion Rampant in a field of gold,
there was augmented a double treasour with contrary Lillies or flower-deluce
including the Lion on all parts: Guilliam, Achaius brother assisting Charles in
his wars with his valiant Scots, purchased great honor, and being so beloved
and holden in great estimation among the Princes of France, that he was called
the Knight without reproach, and purchased great riches and lands, he prospered
greatly in all his wars and vanquished sundry nations, rebelling against the
Emperor, he obtained great honors, the time that King Charles restored Pope
Leo the third to his seat, after that he was put out of Rome by injury of the
Romans, he conquered great honors, when Charles passing thorough Tuskany,
restored the City of Florence to their ancient honors, after it was
destroyed by the Goths, these and many other honorable acts were performed by
Scottish Guilliam, howbeit they were done under the name of Charles Emperor,
for he remained not long in Italy, but left the charge to Guilliam, who did all
things with such providence, that he augmented the dominion of Florence
greatly. The Florentine in recompense of Guilliams humanity toward them,
ordained solemn plays, to be made in their City, in which a Lion is crowned
with sundry ceremonies, they commanded also quick Lions to be yearly
nourished upon the common purse, because the Lion was the arms of Scottish
Guilliam. This is yet observed in perpetual memory. Guilliam after infinite
travails taken with Charles the great, for the defense of Christian faith grew
in age, and because he had no succession of his body (for he was all his days
given to chiualry) he made Christ his heir, and founded many Abbaies in Italy,
Almayn, and Germany, liberally distributing unto them rich rents and lands,
and ordained that Scottishmen only should be Abbots, to the same Abbeyes. In
witness hereof are many Abbeys in Almaine and Germany nothing changed from
the first institution. At coming first of Scottish Guilliam there came two
learned Clarks with him from Scotland, holden in great honor by the Emperor
for their singular learning, they obtained a place in Paris which was given to
them with certain lands, to sustain their estate, and to instruct the noble
men's children of France, in sundry sciences. To these men came such confluence
of people out of all parts, desiring learning, that in short time by their
exact diligence in erudition of young children, the City of Paris was made a
solemn University of resolute men in all science. The Emperor Charles having
great delectation that learning began to flourish in his realm, by the great
industry of those two Scottish men, commanded that Clement should remain as
principal regent of Paris: And John his Colleague to pass to Pauy, a town of
Lumbardy for increasing of learning there. This small beginning was the
origenall of the famous Vniuesitie of Paris: King Achaius, continuing in good
peace, the Roman Empire was divided, for Emperor Charles the first Emperor
of Germans was Emperor of the west and Constantiue Emperor of the East:
Achaius married Fergusiane sister to Hungus King of Pictes who bare to him one
son called Alpine, who after succeeded to be King of Scotland and right
inheritour to the King of Pictes. King Achaius being aged died in peace, the
32. year of his reign, buried in Icolmkill.

66 CONGALLVS Achaius cosen germane, began his reign the year of the world
4789. in the year of Christ 819. after the reign 1149. a good and peaceable
King. He died in peace the fifth year of his reign, buried at Icolmkill.

67 DONGALLVS Saluathius son, began his reign the year of the world 4794.
the year of Christ 824. after the reign 1154. a valiant and good King,
sending his Ambassadors to the Pictes after the death of DORSTOLOGVS their
King, killed by his brother Eganus, who marrying his brothers wife BRENNA,
daughter to the King of Marches; who after murdered the said Eganus in his
bed (notwithstanding his armed Guard) to revenge the murder of her first
husband. The Scots Ambassadors at command and in the name of ALPINVS King
Achaius son, begotten betwixt him and Fergusian, sister to Hungus late King
of Pictes. The two brethren aforesaid being murdered, without succession, the
right and title of the Crown of Pictes, succeeded by the law of God and man to
the aforesaid Alpinus. Therefore desiring the Pictes to accept him as their
natural Prince, both of Scotland and Picts land: which they refusing, elected
FEREDECH to be their King. The Scots Ambassadors denounced battle to the
Pictes. King DONGALLVS preparing a great army to pass against the Pictes,
perished in a Boat passing over the water of Spey, the seventh year of his
reign, buried in Icolmkill.

68 ALPINVS Achaius son, began his reign the year of the world 4801. the
year of Christ 831. after the reign 1161. a valiant and good King, being
right heir to the Crown of Pictes, in a dangerous and cruel battle, killed
Feredech their King: then after the Pictes elected BRVDVS his son King, who
was killed the first year by sedition among the Pictes. His brother KENNETH
was made King, who coming with an Army against the Scots, rent off his coat
armor, and was fugitive to the mountains, where he was shamefully killed by
a Countryman (not known who he was). The Pictes immediately elected a fierce
and valiant Prince BRVDVS, to be their King; who directing Ambassadors to
Alpinus, desiring peace, all matters to be redressed, and the old band to be
renewed. King Alpinus answered that he would make no peace until the crown of
Pictes were delivered unto him as righteous inheritor. Brudus raised a great
army, and came over the bridge of Dunkeld to Angusse. The night before the
battle he caused all the carriage men and women (that came with his army) to
stand in arrayed battle with linen shirts above their clothes, with such
weapons and armor as they might furnish for the time. This done, he ordained
an hundred horsemen, to govern them, without any noise or din in the next
wood; commanding none of them to come in sight until the battles were joined.

King Alpinus was at this time in a Castle, which was situate on a hill, not
far from Dundee, and beheld the Army of Pictes, marching forwards,
incontinent he arrayed his Scots, then the battles joined with great slaughter
on all parts. Immediately the carriage men and women before rehearsed, came
moving forwards upon the back of the Scots; who believing that a fresh army
of Pictes were to come against them (not looked for) at the last the Scotts
were fugitive: for this hidden slight before rehearsed, was the discomfiture
of the Scots army. The Pictes followed with cruel killing of all they might
overtake. In this battle was King Alpinus taken and beheaded. The place where
he was beheaded, is called Pasalpin, that is, the head of Alpin; his body was
buried at Icolmkill, the third year of his reign. After this great victory
obtained against the Scots, Bredus King of the Pictes returned to Camelon, and
conuocated a Council, making their oaths never to desist from battle, until
they had utterly destroyed the Scots, and made a Statute, what ever he was that
labored to have peace with the Scots, he should be beheaded. Some of the wise
Pictes, not allowing their oaths and Statutes, counseled to use victory with
measure (who were exiled) and came into Scotland.

69 KENNETHVS secundus (surnamed the great) succeeded his father Alpine the
year of the world 4804. in the year of Christ 834. after the beginning of the
Realm of Scotland 1164. a good and valiant King: he married the Lord of the
Isles daughter, who bare to him three sons. The Pictes coming against the
Scots, they contended amongst themselves for a thing of naught: thus was their
army divided, and many slain (until night severed them) King Brudus could
not pacify them; therefore he with the rest of his army past home; and he
shortly after died for displeasure. DONSKEN his brother was elected King, and
redressed all injuries that he might. Three years continued sundry incursions
on both parts. King Kenneth settling his wits to defend his Realm, putting
strong soldiers in all forts, adjoining to the borders of the Picts, and
commanded his people to be daily exercised in chiualry, to be ready against
every trouble that might occur. In the fourth year King Kenneth made a
conuention of his Nobles, consulting how he might revenge his fathers
slaughter, and obtain the crown of Pictes (rightfully appertayning unto him).
The season of the year being expedient to raise their army, the Nobles not
consenting thereunto for the great slaughter lately made on their King and
Nobles; therefore the King conuenting all his Nobles, persuading them that he
had greater matters to propound. By solemn banquet within his Palace, he
royally entertayning them, until dark night: after they were brought to
several chambers within the Palace: and when they were in profound sleep, the
King caused sundry men to pass to every several bed (where the Nobles did
lie) cladde with fish skins, having in their hands a Clubbe of Muscane tree,
which with the fish skins in the dark did show a marvelous glaunce and
light all at one time; each one holding in the other hands a bugle horn, and
speaking through the horn (appearing to be no mortal man's voice) did show
they were Angels sent by God to the Princes and Nobles of Scotland, to cause
them to obey the desires of the King; for his desire was so just and right,
that the Pictes for repulse thereof shall be brought to such extermination,
that no puisance nor wisdom of man can resist: their speeches ended, they
obscured their clubbe and skins under their clothes; their light vanishing
at one time. The Nobles seeing this uncouth vision, were astonished, and took
little rest that night: on the morrow at their conuention, each one declaring
their visions, (all being at one time) concluded firmly the same to be no
fantasy, but an heavenly vision; assuring them of victory and felicity,
revealing the same to the King, who assured them that the same vision appeared
to him the samehoure (howbeit he would not first reveal it) least his Nobles
should esteem him glorious. By general Statute all able persons were
commanded sufficiently prepared to meet the King on an appointed day. In two
battles the King being victorious against the Pictes, to their utter
extermination, King Donsken and all his nobles being killed, his sword and coat
armor, were sent to Icolmkill in perpetual memory. The City of Camelon after
long assault, was utterly destroyed, and the Pictes, men, wives and children
killed, after they had reigned in Albion 1181. years. King Kenneth instituted
many good laws, and brought the fatal chair from Ardgiel to Scone, adding
the Realm of Pictes to his Dominion. This victorious King died the twentieth
year of his reign, buried in Icolmkill.

70 DONALDVS quintus, Kennethus brother began his reign in the year of the
world 4824. in the year of Christ 854. after the reign 1184. a vicious and
odious King; his people made effeminate by his vices and sensual pleasures;
his Nobles admonishing him to reform his evil life; he continuing still
without reformation. The Pictes that were fugitive amongst the Englishmen,
requesting Osbraed and Ella, two great Princes of England, to move wars
against the Scots: these two Princes, with Englishmen, Britains, and Pictes,
came into the wars, where King Donaldus vanquished them in a great battle at
Iedbrugh. Donald right insolent after this victory, came to the water of Tweed
with his Army; and finding two ships laden with wines and victuals, which were
taken and parted amongst his warriors. King Donald was given to such voracity
and lust of his womb (the whole Camp using the same) and being full of
Tauernes, Brothels and whores, followed dicing and carding, with contention and
killing one another. King Osbraed being advertised hereof, preparing a new
army, came suddenly on the Scots, and killed twenty thousand, being without
armor, full of wine and sleep. And King Donald was taken in manner aforesaid,
and led through the country in derision to all people. At which time King
Osbraed conquered great lands in Scotland, assisted by Britains; so that
Striuiling bridge was made marches to Scots, Britains, and Englishmen. King
Osbred coined money in the Castle of Striuiling (by whom the Striuiling money
had first beginning). King Donald being ransomed, returned into Scotland,
continuing in his vicious and abominable life. He was taken by his Nobles, and
imprisoned; where he desperately killed himself the fifth year of his reign,
buried in Icolmkill.

71 CONSTANTINVS secundus Kennethus son, began his reign in the year of the
world 4829. the year of Christ 859. after the reign 1189. a valiant King: he
married the Prince of Wales his daughter: she bare to him two sons and one
daughter. He instituted sundry good laws for Churchmen, and repressed all
vicious vices engendered amongst his subjects by Donald the ^yrant, his
predecessor; in whose time Hungar and Hubba with a great Fleet of Danes
landing in Fiffe, used great cruelty; a great number of religious persons being
fugitive in the Isle of May, with Adrian their Bishop, were all cruelly
tormented and killed by the unmerciful Danes. Constantine came with a great
army against Hubba, and vanquished him. The Scots being proud of this
victory, and neglecting themselves, there followed a cruel and desperate
battle: at last the Scots were vanquished, and King Constantine with his
Nobles, and ten thousand of his army, killed in the fifteenth year of his
reign; buried in Icolmkill.

72 ETHVS surnamed the Swift, Constantinus secundus fonne, began his reign the
year of the world 4844. the year of Christ 874. after the reign 1204. a
luxurious Prince, taken by his Nobles and imprisoned; where he died the third
day of melancholy the second year of his reign and buried in Icolmkill.

73 GREGORIVS magnus, Dongallus son, began his reign in the year of the
world 4846. the year of Christ 876. after the beginning of the reign of
Scotland 1206. He was but two months old when his father perished in the
water of Spey, a valiant and greatly renowned Prince in ^ll parts: he
instituted good laws for his subjects; and being very religious, ordained good
laws for Churches and Churchmen, and that all Kings his successors at their
coronation, should make their oath to defend the Christian Religion. He
obtained great victory against Danes and Britains: and recovering all his lands
lost in King Donalds time, enlarged his bounds with Northumberland, Cumber and
Westmerland; and being confederate with Alurede King of England, the foresaid
lands to remain perpetually to be possessed by the Scots.

Then after the King to repress Irishmen, that were come into Scotland, who
had robbed the people, and made sundry incursions, he followed with a great
army; and landing in Ireland, vanquished Brennius and Cornelius, two Princes
of Ireland with the whole Nobles of Ireland, and vanqu^shed sundry towns, and
besieged Dublin with a strong siege, where their young Prince Duncane was, to
whom the Crown of Ireland appertained: at last the Town was rendered (and the
King made Protector during the Princes minority) with all the fortes, and
threescore pledges. The King returning with his victorious army, and the
pledges of the Nobles of Ireland; and holding good peace the rest of his days,
he died in peace the eighteenth year of his reign, buried in Icolmkill: he
builded thecitie of Aberdene.

74 DONALDVS sixtus son to Constantinus secundus, began his reign in the
year of the world 4864. in the year of Christ 894. after the reign 1234. a
valiant Prince and godly: he punished with great severity the blasphemers of
the name of God: he married the King of Britains daughter; she bare to him one
son and a daughter. At this time ROVVLAND King of Denmark, gathered or
conuened a great multitude of Danes out of England, Beginning of the Normanes.
Norway, Swed^icke, and Denmark; and pastthrough France, committing great
cruelty upon the people there. And because CHARLES the great then Emperor, was
implicat with frequent wars in Italy, against the Sarazens. The Danes raged
with such open cruelty, that great bonds of France appeared to come under their
Dominion. Emperor Charles after his return from Italy, came with a great
army to resist the Danes, and they (nothing afraid) went forward to meet him
in their awful manner. The Princes of France, knowing the great ferocity of
the Danes, proved and exercised in all parts where they were assailed; and
seeing them by frequent victory so insolent, that but by great slaughter they
might not be vanquished, persuaded the Emperor Charles to make peace with the
said Rowland, that their Realm should not be in ieopardy or put to extreme
danger, through the wers both in Italy and France. Peace was corroborate and
contracted with the Danes on this manner: The Emperor Charles his daughter
shall be given in marriage to Rowland, and he with all the Danes, shall
receive the Christian faith, and in the name of Dowry, shall have all the
lands which were named Newstria, lying betwixt Deip, Picardy, Paris, and
Bartany. These lands were then after Rowland called Normandy. Rowland made
King of Normandy by receipt of Baptism, was named Robert, and ordained to pay
for the said lands one yearly tribute to the aforesaid Charles and his
posterity, to signify that the said lands were not conquered, but only given
from the Crown of France in marriage. The year that the Normans began to
reign in Normandy, was from the Incarnation of Christ 886. years. The valiant
deeds done by the Danes, in sundry parts of the world was in great admiration
to all people. Rowland called Robert begat on the Emperor Charles his
daughter. WILLIAM who succeeded after his father. To William succeeded RICHARD
the first, to him succeeded RICHARD the second, who had two Sons ROBERT and
GVSTARD: Robert begat WILLIAM the bastard, Duke of Normandy, who conquered
England, and vanquished both Englishmen and Danes, and possessed the crown
thereof. And Gustard past into Italy, and made many and cruel invasions in
Cicill Calabre and Naples. In this time the Murrayes and Rosses inuading each
other with cruel killing 2000. men were killed on either parties, the King
came upon them with a great army, and punished the principal mouers of this
trouble to the death, he dyed in peace the 11. year of his reign: and buried
in Icolmkill.

75 CONSTANTINVS tertius Ethus son began to reign the year of the world
4874. in the year of Christ 905. after the reign 1245. a valiant prince, not
fortunate in Wars, he married the Prince of Wales his daughter: she bare to
him one son, being vexed with Wars in the time of King Edward and
Athelstane his bastard son, he became a Chanon in Saint Andrews and died the
40. year of his reign, buried in Icolmkill.

76. MILCOLVMBVS primus Donaldus son began his reign in the year of the
world 4913. in the year of Christ 943. after the reign 1283. a valiant Prince
and good Iusticiar, he married the Lord of Twylths daughter: she bare to him
two sons and one daughter. A confederacy was made between England and
Scotland, that Cumber and Westmerland shall be perpetually annexed to the Prince
of Scotland reigning for the time, to be holden in fee of the Kings of England.
By virtue whereof Indulfus son to Constantine the third, (as Prince of
Scotland,) took possession both of Cumber and Westmerland. The King passing
the rest of his days in peace and severe Justice, which caused a conspiracy in
Murrayland, where this noble King was traitorously killed, the 9. year of his
reign, buried in Icolmkill. The murderers and their assistants all
apprehended, were cruelly tormented and put to death.

77. INDVLFVS Constantinus tertius son, began his reign in the year of the
world 4922. in the year of Christ 952. after the reign 1282. a noble valiant
Prince. He vanquished in battle Hagon Prince of Norwaye and Helricke Prince
of Denmark, and was killed by a Stratageme of War, the 9. year of his
reign, buried in Icolmkill.

78 DVFFVS Milcolumbus son began his reign the year of the world 4931. the
year of Christ 9^1. after the ragin 1291. a good Prince and severe Iusticiar.
He was traitorously murdered by one Donalde Captain of Forres in Murrayland,
and his wife was buried secretly under a bridge at Kinlus. The murderers being
apprehended were severely executed and put to death the 5. year of his reign,
and buried in Icolmkill.

79 CVLENVS Indulfus son began his reign the year of the world 4936. the
year of Christ 966. after the reign 1296. he was married to the King of
Britains daughter, a vicious Prince killed by Rodardus a noble man at Mesfen,
whose daughter he had defloured, the 4. year of his reign, and buried in
Icolmkill.

80 KENNETHVS tertius Duffus brother began his reign in the year of the world
4940. in the year of Christ 970. after the reign 1300. one valiant and wise
Prince and severe Iusticiar, for one time he caused 500. notable thieves to be
hanged on gibbets, and inhibited their bodies to be taken down, beside the
Castle of Bertha to give example to others. The Danes with a great Fleet of
ships arrived in the mouth of Taye, and destroyed the town of Mountrose,
killing all the people and demolishing the walls, wasting the whole country
coming thorough Angus, with great cruelty, and laying a strong siege to the
Castle of Bertha. The King came with a great army, there followed a dangerous
and cruel battle, with uncertain victory, valiantly defended on both
parties. At the last one Hay with his two sons, enforcing the Scots that
were fugitive, to return, and by their valiant courage renewing battle, the
Danes were vanquished and fugitive, the most part of them being slain. The
King enriched Hay and his sons, giving them a great part of the spoil of
the Danes, with as much land as a Falcon flew over, of one man's hand until she
lighted, called the Falcons stone. So he obtained the whole lands between Tay
and Arrole, six miles of length and four of breadth. This was the beginning
of the noble and ancient surname of Hayes decorate Original of the noble
surname of Hayes.
with great honors, riches, and lands, valiant defendours of the realm of
Scotland: This noble King, (so long decorate with Justice,) the blind and
immoderate affection (that he had to his son) was occasion that he killed by
poison Malcolme Prince of Scotland, and Lord of Cumber and Westmerland. He
abrogated the old laws concerning the Kings, and instituted. The King being
deceased, his eldest son or Nephew notwithstanding what age soever he were
of, and though he were borne after his fathers death, shall succeed to the
crown.

The Nephew borne on the Kings son shall be preferred before the Nephew gotten
on the Kings daughter, and the Nephew gotten by the Kings brother shall be
preferred before the Nephew gotten on his sister: These laws to be observed
amongst all other nobles in succession of their heritage.

When the King is young, one noble man of great prudence and authority, shall be
chosen governor of the Realm until the King come to age of fourteen years,
and then the King to govern his Realm by his own authority.

All other inheritours shall succeed to their fathers heritage after the
expiration of one and twenty years, and within that time they shall be governed
by curatours or guardians, and until those years be outrunne, they shall not
be admitted to claim their heritage: He proclaimed his son Malcolme Prince
of Scotland and Lord of Cumber and Westmerland. Once when the King was lying in
his bed, he heard a voice saying, O Kenneth believe not, that the cursed
killing of Prince Malcolme is hid from God (O thou unhappy tyrant which for
desire of the crown) have killed an innocent, inuading thy neighbor with
treasonable murder, which thou would have punished with most rigor, if it
had bin done by any other person then thy self. Therefore thou have incurred
such hatred of God, that thou and thy son shall be suddenly killed, for thy
nobles are conspired against thee. The King was greatly affrayde of this voice,
and being very penitent, confessing his offense to a Bishop, who comforting
him, he did sundry good works, appertaining to a Christian Prince. At the last
King Kenneth coming to the Castle of FETHERCARN was (as appeared) thankfully
received by FENELLA Lady thereof, where in the middle of the Castle most
curiously wrought was an Image of brass, the similitude of the King, with a
golden apple in his hand. The King perceiving the same (suspecting no treason)
counseled by the said Lady being alone in the tower, the Castle being
apparelled with rich Tapestries of gold and silk ouerlayed or thicked with
copper. The King taking the apple with violence out of the hand of the Image,
immediately the titups of the Crossbowes were thrown up (being made with such
engyne) one of them shot the King thorough the body. The Lady was fugitive.
There he died the 24. year of his reign, buried in Icolmkill.

81 CONSTANTINVS quartus surnamed Caluus. Culenus son began to reign
(usurping the crown) in the year of the world 4964. in the year of Christ
994 after the reign 1324. he was killed in battle at the town of Crawmond in
Louthaine, the second year of his reign, buried in Icolmkill.

82 GRIMVS Duffus son began his reign in the year of the world 4966. in the
year of Christ 996. after the reign 1326. (a vicious usurper of the crown)
killed in battle by Malcolme his successor the eight year of his reign,
buried in Icolmkill.

83 MILCOLVMBVS secundus Kennethus third son began his reign the year of
the world 4974. in the year of Christ 1004. after the reign 1334. a valiant
and wise King, he was often victorious against the Danes. In his time began
the ancient noble name of KEITH, whose house is decorated with great honors,
being Marshall Original of the noble surnames of Keith.
of Scotland. The King repaired and enlarged the Cit^y of Aberdene then called
Murthlacke, he was killed by conspiracy of some of his nobles in the Castle of
Glammess. The 30. year of his reign he married the Duke of Normandies
daughter, who bare to him three sons and two daughters, buried in Icolmkill.
The murderers fugitive in the night, chanced into the Loch or Poole of
Forfarr, being frozen over, covered with snow, were all drowned therein, by
the righteous judgment of God.

84 DVNCANVS primus Malcolme second daughter Beatrix her son, began to reign
in the year of the world 5004. in the year of Christ 1034. after the reign
1364. a good and modest Prince. In his time was THANE or Earl of Lochquhaber
Banquho. Of whom are descended the ancient and royal name of STEVVARTS. He
Original of the royal and ancient name of Stewarts.
was traitorously killed by Makbeth the 6. year of his reign, buried in
Icolmkill.

85 MACBETHVS (Dowoda Malcolme second daughters son) began to reign in the
year of the world 5010. in the year of Christ 1040. after the reign 1370. in
the beginning he was a valiant Prince, and severe Iusticiar instituting many
good laws, at last by illusion of Witches and Sorcerers, he became a cruel
tyrant and oppressor, at last killed in a battle, vanquished by his successor
King Malcolme Cammore, and killed by Makduff Thane or Earl of Fiffe the 17.
year of his reign, buried in Icolmkill.

86 M^LCOLVMBVS surnamed Cammore, Duncane the first his son began to reign in
the year of the world 5027 in the year of Christ 1057. after the reign of
Scotland 1387. he was a religious and valiant King, he rewarded his nobles with
lands and offices, and commanded that the lands and offices should be called
after their names, he created many Earls, Lords, Barons, and Knights. They
First Earls.
that were called Thanes as Fiff, Menteith, Athole, Lenex, Murray, Caythnes,
Ros, Angusse, were made Earls: many new surnames came in at this time as
Calder, Lokart, Gordoun, Seytonne, Lawder, Wauane, Meldrome, Schaw, Original
of Surnames, the time of the conquest.
Liermond Liberton Struchquhan, Cargill, Rettray Dondas, Cock^urne, Mirtoun,
Me^es, Abercrummy, Listye, names of offices Steward, Du^ard, Bannerman. At this
time William Duke of Normandy conquered England holding battle with King
Harold, and killed him in the year of Christ 1066. Edgar within age rightful
heir of England, seeing the crown conquered, was desperate to succeed any way
to the government. To eschew all apparent d^unger he took shipping with
purpose to return with his mother and sisters into Vngerland, by contrary
winds he arrived in Forth in a part called the Queens Ferrey. King Malcolme
was at that time in Dunfermling, he came and tenderly received the said Edgar
with his mother and sisters, and married Margaret eldest sister to the said
Edgar, William the conqueror hearing of his marriage, exiled all the friends
of the said Edgar, wherefore they came into Scotland, many people to King
Malcolme whom he received and gave them lands as their surnames, Lyndesay
Vaus, Ramsay, Lowuell, Towers, Preston, Sandlandes, Bisart, Sowles, Wardlaw,
Maxwell and sundry surnames, came out of Vngerland to Queen Margaret as
Creitchton Fotheringham, Giffard Melwill, Borthuike out of Fra^nce came into
Scotland Fraiseir, Scincler, Boswell, Moutray, Montgomery, Cambell* Boys,
Beton, Taylifer and Bothwell. In King Malcolmes time was the Recrosse erected,
with the King of Englands Image on the one side, and the King of Sotlands on
the other, this stone cross (was march between the two Realms, standing in
the middle of Stan-moore; Queen Margaret foresaid daughter to Edward, surnamed
the Outlaw, son to Edward Ironside, King of England, a very religious Queen,
after called S. Margaret, who bear unto King Malcolme six sons; Edward the
Prince, Edmund, Etheldred, Edgar, Alexander and David, and two daughters,
Matilda or Mawde; surnamed Bona, wife to Henry the fourth, surnamed Beauclerke,
King of England, of whose virtues are extant an Epigram. Prosperit ie rejoiced
her not, to her grief was no pain,
Prosperity affrayed her als, affliction was her gain,
Her beauty was no cause of fall, in Royal state nor pride,
Humbly alone in dignity, in beauty only good.
She founded the Church of Carliel. The other daughter was married to Eustatius
Earl of Bolloigne: King Malcolme builded the Church of Durham and Dunfermling.
He was killed at the siege of Anwike, by one Robert Mowbray, who unarmed upon
a light horse, came out of the Castle of Anwike, with a Lance in his hand, the
keys of the Castle upon the point of the Lance, King Malcolme looking
earnestly thereunto, the aforesaid Robert Mowbray ran the King through the left
eye, and ran hastily into the next wood. King William changed the name of this
valiant Knight, calling him Percey, of whom are descended the Earls of
Northumberland. King Malcolme Original of the Perceyes.
died the six and thirtieth year of his reign, and his son Prince Edward,
both buried in Dunfermling.

87 DONALDVS septimus, Malcolme Cammore his brother (usurped the Crown)
surnamed Bane, began to reign in the year of the world 5063. in the year
of Christ 1093. after the reign 1423. He was expelled by Duncane, bastard to
Malcolme, the first year of his reign.

88 DVNCANVS secundas bastard aforesaid (usurped the Crown) killed by
Mak-pender Thane of Mernis, by procurement of Donald the seventh, who after was
crowned. He gave the North and West Isles to the King of Norway, to have his
assistance to recover the crown: he was taken captive by his Nobles, and his
eyes put out: he died miserably in prison the third year of his second reign,
buried in Dunfermling.

89 EDGARVS Malcolme Cammors son, began to reign in the year of the world
5068. in the year of Christ 1098. after the reign 1428. a good and religious
King, the first anointed King: he builded the Priory of Coldingham, and died
peaceably the ninth year of his reign, buried at Dunfermling without
succession.

90 ALEXANDER the first, surnamed Fierce, succeeded his brother the year of
the world 5077. in the year of Christ 1107. after the reign 1437. a good and
valiant King: he builded the Abbeyes of Scone and Saintcolms Inch; he married
Sibilla, daughter to William Duke of Normandy, the seventeenth year of his
reign, he died in peace, buried in Dunfermling.

91 DAVID. primus, King Malcolms third youngest son, began his reign the
year of the world 5094. the year of Christ 1124. after the beginning of the
reign of Scotland 1454. a good, valiant, and very religious King: he builded
many Abbeyes, as Holy-rood-house, Kelso, Iedborugh, Melrose, Newbottell,
Holmcultrane, Dundranane, Cambuskenneth, Kinlosse, Dunfermling, Holme in
Cumber, two Nunneries, one at Carliel, the other at north Berwick; he founded
two Abbeyes, besides new Castle, the one of S. Benedicts order, the other of
white Monks: he founded 4. Bishoprics, Ros, Breichin, Dunkeld and Dunblane;
ordeyning them great lands, rents and possessions, al out of the patrimony of
the crown. King David of Scotland in his time possessed Northumberland, Cumber,
Huntington and Westmerland; he married the inheritrix of the aforesaid lands
called Mawde, daughter to the Earl of Northumberland, and Iuditha daughters
daughterto William the Conqueror King of England. In the time of King Stephen
of England he repaired the town of Carliel with new walls: his son Prince
Henry died with great lamentation of the whole Realm, having three sons and
three daughters. King David caused Malcolme, (eldest son unto Prince Henry
late deceased) to be declared Prince of Scotland. After that he past into
Northumberland, and made William his second Nephew Earl thereof; after he went
to Carliel, where he made Henry (the Empress her son Prince of England)
Knight, taking his oath he should never take Northumberland, Cumber,
Westmerland and Huntington from the Empire of Scotland: afterward this
victorious and religious King David died in peace, being greatly honored and
beloved of his subjects and neighbors, the nine and twentieth year of his
reign: he died in Carliel, and buried in Dunfermling.

MILCOLVMBVS quartus (surnamed the Maiden) nephew to King David, began his
reign in the year of the world 5123. in the year of Christ 1153. after the
reign 1483. a good and mild Prince: he builded Cowper Abbey in Anguisse, and
subdued sundry rebellions, died at Iedbourgh, buried at Dunfermling the twelfth
year of his reign.

93 GVILIELMVS (surnamed the Lion) succeeded his brother Malcolme, in the year
of the world 5135 in the year of Christ 1165. after the reign 1495. (a good
and valiant King unfortunate) he married Emigerda, daughter to the Earl of
Bewmont, who bear to him two sons and two daughters: he builded the Abbey of
Abirbrothoke, she builded the Abbey of Bamerinoch, after that the Castle of
Bertha was demolished by inundation of waters (King Guilliam narrowly escaping
with his wife and children) his young son and nurse perished, and sundry
others: he founded and builded the town called Perth, and granted sundry
great privileges thereunto, now called S. John's town. The King continuing in
peace died the nine and fortieth year of his reign, buried in Abirbrothoke.

94 ALEXANDER 2. succeeded his father in the year of the world 5184. in the
year of Christ 1214. after the reign 1544. a valiant and good King, and
severe iusticiar: he pacified all rebellion in his Realm; he agreed with King
Henry of England, and married his sister, reteyning Northumberland,
Westmerland, Cumber and Huntington, and King Alexanders two sisters were
married unto two great Princes of England. He past into France, and renewed the
ancient band: in the mean time Jane his Queen died without any succession.
The next year he married at Roxbourgh Mary daughter to Ingelram, Earl of
Coucey in France, of great beauty, who bare to him a son, Alexander who
succeeded after him: he died in peace the five and thirtieth year of his
reign, buried in Melrosse.

95 ALEXANDER tertius, succeeded his father in the year of the world 5219. in
the year of Christ 1249. after the reign 1579. a good young Prince, being at
his coronation nine years of age. After that the Kings of England and
Scotland, with their Nobles conuened in York, where king Henry the third of
Englands daughter Margaret, was married to King Alexander of Scotland. Enduring
his tender age the Realm of Scotland was well governed by his Nobles; be
coming to perfect age, willing to execute justice, summoned the Earls of
Mentieth, Athole and Buchquhane, and the Lord of Strabogy, which were all of
the name of Comminges, and for non comperance denounced them rebels. They with
their assistance being a great number, because there was of the same name (by
the aforesaid Lords) thirty Knights and landed men. They imprisoned the King in
Striueling a certain space. King Acho of Norway came into the Isles with many
Danes. King Alexander to resist him came with a great army; there followed a
cruel and dangerous battle, long with uncertain victory, at last the Danes
being vanquished, and four and twenty thousand of them killed, Acho was
fugitive to his Ships: his whole Navy by tempestuous storm being spoiled
(returned with four Ships left of his whole Fleet into Norway). Then after
his son Magnus renouncing all title to the Isles, contracted his son Hanigo
(to be married with King Alexanders daughter one year of age) at their both
perfect age. At this time Alexander Earl of Carrike past to the holy land,
having a daughter Martha, who succeeding in his heritage, who married a
Nobleman Robert Bruce, son and heir to Robert Bruce Lord of Anandale in
Scotland, and Lord of Cleueland in England. This Martha aforesaid inheritrix of
Carike, in the third year bear the Noble and invincible Champion, Robert
Bruce King of Scotland: Margaret sister to King Henry the third of England,
bear to King Alexander two sons, Prince Alexander and David, one daughter
Margaret, married unto Hanigo Magnus son, King of Norway, who bear to him
Margaret called the Maiden of Norway. In this time died David King Alexanders
second son. Alexander the Prince was married at Roxburge, unto the Earl of
Flanders daughter, whereat many of the Nobles of Scotland and England were
present for thetime. The third year after Prince Alexander died at Lundors the
twentieth year of his age, to the great lamentation of the whole Realm; for
in him failed the whole succession of King Alexander the third (except the
Maiden of Norway) who was begotten on his daughter Margaret before rehearsed.
King Alexander by counsel of his Nobles (after the death of his first Queen)
married Ioleta the Earl of Drux daughter in France, by whom he had no
succession. He builded the Cross Church of Peblis. He died of a fall off his
horse, over the west craig at Kingorne, the seven and thirtieth year of his
reign, buried in Dunfermling. The day before the Kings death, the Earl of
March demanded of one Thomas Rymour, what wether should be the morrow? Thomas
answered, that on the morrow before noone there shall blow the greatest wind
that ever was heard in Scotland: on the morrow being almost noone (the air
appearing calm) the Earl sent for the said Thomas, and reproving him, said,
There was no appearance. Thomas answering, yet noone is not past, immediately
comes a Post, and shows that the King was fallen and killed. Then Thomas
said to the Earl, that is the wind that shall blow, to the great calamity of
all Scotland. After the death of King Alexander the third, the Realm was
governed by six Regents; for the South side of Forth, Robert Archbishop of
Glasgiue, John Coming, and John the great Steward of Scotland. For the North
side of Forth William Frester Archbishop of Saint Andrews. Makduffe Earl of
Fif^e, John Coming Earl of Buchquha^e: they governed the space of seven
years. During which time Edward the first King of England sent his Ambassadors
into Scotland, for marriage of the Maiden of Norway aforesaid. The Nobles of
S^land being agreed in all points, with the said King Edward (surnamed
Longshankes) the Ambassadors of Scotland directed to bring the maiden of
Norway, the right inheritrix of Scotland with them: before their arriving she
was departed this present life, by means whereof great contention arose
between Robert Bruise and John Balioll, the deciding of the said matter was by
the Nobles of Scotland (unwisely) referred to King Edward.

96 JOHANNES BALLIOLVS was preferred before Robert Bruise, by King Edward,
surnamed Longshanke, who being elected Judge in the foresaid controversy,
admitting him King, with condition that the said Baliol should acknowledge him
for his superior: which condition (refused by Rob^rt Bruise) he as an
auaritious unworthy man received, began to reign in the year of the world
5263. in the year of Christ 1293. after the reign 1923. a vain glorious man,
little respecting the good of his country, in the fourth year he was expelled
by the aforesaid King Edward into France, where he died long after in exile,
Scotland being without King or governor the space of nine years: during which
time King Edward cruelly oppressed the land, destroyed the whole ancient
monuments, and shed much innocent blood. About this time William Wallace,
son to Sir Andrew Wallace of Cragy Knight, of huge stature and marvelous
strength of body, with good knowledge and skill in Warlike enterprises;
hereunto such hardiness of stomach, in attempting all manner of dangerous
exploits, that his match was not any where lightly to be found: he bare inward
hate against the English Nation, when the fame of his worthy acts were
notified, many Nobles and Commons were ready to assist him: therefore he was
chosen Governor under the Baliol, to deliver the Realm from bondage of
England. At this time many Abbeyes and spiritual Benefices were in Englishmens
hand, which he by commission of the Archbishop of S. Andrew, avoided and put
forth of all parts, and receiving the whole army that was under the conduct
of John Cuning Earl of Bucquhan; he conquered many Castles, Fortes and
strengths out of English men's hands, King Edward being in France, hearing
hereof, sent his Lieutenant Hugh Crassingham with a great army into Scotland,
where William VVallace encountering him at Striueling bridge, killed the said
Crassingham, with the most part of his army, many being drowned, and few
escaping away with life: great dearth being in Scotland, he gathered a mighty
army, and past into Northumberland, wasting and spoiling the country to
Newcastle; for he with his army remained in England, almost the whole Winter
from the feast of All Saints, until Candlemas, living upon the spoil of
Englishmens goods. King Edward being in France, hearing the deeds of
VVallace, sent his Ambassador, so^e menacing him that had invaded his Realm,
which he durst not have done, if he had been at home. VVallace answered, that
he had taken the advantage, as he had done in the wrongful Conquest of
Scotland (he being chosen by the Nobles as indifferent Judge, and further sent
word unto King Edward, that (if God fortunate him to live) he purposed to hold
his Easter in England: and coming with an army of thirty thousand valiant men
into England at the appointed time, King Edward was ready with an army of
threescore thousand upon Stains Moore to give them battle. Being ready to
join, the Englishmen drew back, having at that time no lust to fight, as
appeared: the Scots seeing them draw back would have followed, but VVallace
fearing deceit, stayed them and returned (with infinite spoil and booties
gotten in that journey) into Scotland. King Edward being advertised that
VVallace was greatly envied by the Cunings, and Robert la Bruise, raised a great
army, and came to Falkirke, and VVallace not knowing of any deceit, raised a
great army to resist being in sight of Englishmen, there began a great
contention for the leading of the Vantguard, and by their own misgouernance,
many Noblemen were killed, Robert Bruise was against the Scottishmen that day.
Shortly then after VVallace came, and renounced in Perth the Government, and
also refused great and large offers of King Edward, to be his subject, and true
man: John Cuning and Simon Froser being admitted Governors, King Edward sent a
great army to Perth, subduing the country. The aforesaid Governors raised an
army of eight thousand valiant men. King Edward sent with Ralph Comfray thirty
thousand men, dividing them in three armies, to pass in three sundry parts
through the country and to meet at Rosling. The Governors aforesaid,
encountering with the first ten thousand defeated them, and so at three sundry
times in one day the Scots obtained the victory: King Edward impatient hereof,
gathered a mighty army of sundry nations, and subdued with great cruelty the
most part of the Scottish nation. About this time was Willam Wallace
traitorously betrayed by Sir John Menteith at Glascoe, and delivered King to
Edward, and being brought to London, was cruelly executed in Smithfield.

King Edward accusing Robert Bruise of a contract made betwixt him and John
Cumyng, and he straightly denying the same was advertised by the Earl of
Gloucester, of the kings displeasure, causing a Smith to shoe his horses
backward in the Winter, the ground being covered with snow he came into
Scotland, howbeit he was sharply pursued, and mee^ng with his brother and some
friends, and being advertised that the Cumyng was in the Friars at Dumfreis.
After hard commoning, he suddenly killed him, wherethrough he purchased many
enemies, both English men and Scottish men, and was hardly pursued (especially
by the Cumyngs being then very potent and rich, and a great number of them.

97 ROBERTUS BRVSS^VS (son to Isabell King Williams brothers daughter) began
his reign in the year of the world 5276. in the year of Christ 1306 after
the beginning of the reign of Scotland 1636. a valiant king, good and wise (in
his beginning subject to great affliction and persecution. At last being
assisted by James Dowglasse) cosen to William Lamberto^ Archbishop of Saint
Andrews) took all his gold and horses, with sundry young valiant men of his
opinion, who remained with the said King Robert, both in wars and peace to
the end of his life. Of this James Dowglasse descended the valiant and illuster
surname of Dowglasse the sure target, and defense of Scotland, as in old verse
shows. Original of the ancient, noble, and vali^nt surname of Dowglasse.
So many good as of the Dowglasse has been,
Of one surname was never in Scotland seen.


King Robert having van quishet king Edward the second of Carnaruen being of
sundry Nations to horse and foot three hundredth thousand warriors, and King
Robert not above thirty thousand old, well exercised valiant men at the
battle of Bannockburne, delivered Scotland free from all servitude of England:
All Englishmen being expelled out of the land. He married first Isabel
daughter to the Earl of Mar, who bare to him Margery, married to Walter the
great Steward of Scotland, after her death he married the daughter of Haymerus
de Burck Earl of Haltouia or Hulster in Ireland, who bare to him David the
Prince, Margaret Countess of Sudderland, and Mawde that died young. John
Balioll transferred his right of the Crown of Scotland unto King Robert and
his heirs. In this time Hanton an Englishman) for the killing of one Spencer
came into Scotland, and was courteously received by King Robert, and rewarded
him with the lands of Cadyowe, whose posterity is spread in great number, now
called Hamiltons endowed with great honor and riches. King Robert died at
Cardrose the 24. year of his reign, buried in Dumfermling.

After this time Sir James Dowglasse (as most worthy champion) was chosen by
the Nobles to pass with king Roberts heart to Jerusalem, and there to cause to
bury the same within the temple beside the Sepulcher of our Lord, conform to
the said kings direction, because he had avouched or vowed, till he had past
with a great army in defense of the Christian faith against the Turks and
Saracens (if he had not been hindered or stayed by wars at home) and now
prevented by death.

Sir James Dowglasse willingly obeyed, as he that most faithfully had served
King Robert in his life time, and enclosing the heart in a case of gold,
enbalmed with sweet spices, and precious ointments, accompanied with Sir
William Sinclair, and Sir Robert Logane, with many other noble and valiant men,
past and buried the said heart with great reverence and solemnity at the place
appointed. Therefore the Douglas buries the bloody heart in their arms or Coat.

There after Sir James Dowglasse with his noble and valiant men accompanied
with other Christian Princes then present: Many times obtained great victory
against the Turks and Sarazens. So that by his often victories he purchased
great honors of the Christian name. Purposing to return home, by tempestuous
winds, was compelled to land in Spain upon the borders of Granad, where he
assisting the King of Aragon in his wars against the Sarazens, obtaining
great victories. At last (being negligent of himself) was enclosed with one
ambushment purposely lead for him by the Sarazens, he and his most valiantly
defending were vanquished and killed with all his Nobles and valiant men.

Thus ended the Noble and valiant Dowglasse, one of the most worthy and
renowned knights that was in his days. It is chronicled that he was victorious
against the Turks and Sarazens, thirteen times, and against others his enemies
in battle fifty seven times in memory of the Dowglasse, in our time there was
a port or gate in Danskin called the Douglas port. Now reedified sumptuously
(called the Hochindure) the high port, also there are sundry Earls in the
Eastern parts of that name, and specially one was called Grave or Earl
Scotus, a great Nicromancer, his title was Ieronimus Scotus, Grave or Earl of
Dowglasse, his brethren dwell in Italy.

98 DAVID BRVSSIVS succeeded his father the year of the world 5300. in the
year of Christ 1330. after the reign 1660. a good Prince subject to much
affliction in his youth, being first after the death of Earl Thomas Ranulph
his Regent, forced for his preservation to pass into France, and returning
home at the battle of Durham, was taken and detained prisoner in England
twelve years, after he was at liberty, he married the foresaid Jane, daughter
to Edward the second, king of England, after her death he married Margaret Logy
daughter to Sir John Logy Knight, and died at Edenbourgh without succession,
the fortieth year of his Reign, buried in Hollyrood house.

99 EDVVARDVS BALLIOLVS, son to John Balioll, assisted by King Edward the
third, usurped the Crown the year of the world 5302. in the year of Christ
1332. after the reign 1662. he was expelled by King David's Regents, and King
David established.

100 ROBERTUS STVARTVS, the first King of the Stewarts, son to Walter the
great Steward, and Margery Bruce, king Robert Bruce his daughter, succeeded his
mothers brother in the year of the world, 5^41. in the year of Christ 1371.
after the beginning of the reign of Scotland 1701. a good, valiant, and
victorious king, he married Eufame, daughter to Hugh Earl of R^sse, who bare
to him, David Earl of Straitherne. VValer Earl of Athole, and Alexander Earl
of Buchq^ham, Lord Badyenoch, after her death for the affection he bare to his
children begotten before his marriage, he married Elizabeth Mure, daughter to
Sir Adam Mure Knight; who had borne to him John, after called Robert the third,
Earl of Carricke, and Robert Earl of Fiffe, and Menteth and Eufame, wife to
James Earl of Dowglasse, he died at Dundonald, and buried at Scone the
nineteenth year of his reign.

101 ROBERTUS tertius (surnamed John Fernyar) succ^eded his father, in the
year of the world 5360. in the year of Christ 1390. after the reign 1720. He
was a modest and peaceable Prince: he married Annabill Drummond, daughter to
the Knight of Stobhall, who bare to him David the Prince, Duke of Rothsay, who
died in prison in Falkland, by procurement of Robert Duke of Albany (who
aspired to the Crown) and James his second son, taken prisoner in his
journey into France, and deteyned by Englishmen the space of eighteen years.
King Robert died of displeasure (when he heard his one son deceased in
Falkland, and the other son taken prisoner the sixteenth year of his reign,
buried in Paslay.

Robert Duke of Albany, Earl of Fiffe and Mentieth, governed Scotland the
year of the world 5376. in the year of Christ 1406. after the reign 1736.
James the first being captive in England, a noble and valiant Prince: he died
the fourteenth year of his government, Duke Murdo Earl of Fiffe and Mentieth,
was made Governor four years, James the first returning home from
captivity, caused the said Murdo and his son to be executed for oppression
of his subjects.

102 IACOBVS primus began his reign the year of the world 5394. in the year
of Christ 1424. after the beginning of the reign of Scotland 1754. a godly,
wise, learned and virtuous Prince, and a severe iusticiar; he married Jane
daughter to the Duke of Somerset, Marquess Dorset, son to John of Gaunt,
third son to Edward the third, the victorious King of England; who did bear
to him two sons twins, Alexander who died shortly, and James the second,
who succeeded his father, and six daughters; Margaret wife to Jews the
eleventh Dolphin, then after King of France, Elizabeth Duchess of Britain,
Jane Countess of Huntley, Elenor Duchess of Austria, Mary wife to the Lord
Camphier, and Annabella: he was killed at Perth traitorously, by Walter Earl
of Athole. Robert Grahame and their accomplices, who were all apprehended and
cruelly tormented to death the thirteenth year of his reign, after his
deliverance out of England, and the one and thirtieth year after the death of
his father, buried in the Charterhouse of Perth, which he founded.

103 IACOBVS secundus succeeded his father in the year of the world 5407. in
the year of Christ 1437. after the reign 1767. (a Prince subject to great
troubles in his youth) he married Margaret daughter to Arnold Duke of Gilder,
sisters daughter to Charles, surnamed Audax, the last Duke of Burgundy, who
bare to him James 3. Alexander Duke of Albany; he married the Earl of
Orkneyes daughter, and begat on her Alexander Bishop of Murray: he parting
with her, married in France the Countess of Boloine, and begat on her John
Stewart Duke of Albany, who was many years governor of Scotland. The third
son John was Earl of Mar, died in the Canon-gate without succession: the
first daughter married one Thomas Boyd Earl of Arran, after his death married
the Lord Hammilton; and by that way the house of Hammilton is decorated by the
Kings blood. This King was killed at the siege of Roxebourgh the four and
twentieth year of his reign, buried at Holy-rood-house.

104 IACOBVS tertius succeeded his father in the year of the world 5430. in
the year of Christ 1460. after the reign 1790. a good Prince (corrupted with
wicked Courtiers) he married Margaret, daughter to the king of Denmark
(surnamed Dives) and king of Norway, who in his favor renounced all title that
he had any manner of way to Orkney, Schetland and the Isles for ever, who bare
to him James the fourth, Alexander Bishop of S. Andrews and Duke of Albany,
and John Earl of Mar. They died both without succession; he made peace with
King Henry of England, who (like a liberal Prince) for the favor he had
received in Scotland, restored the town of Berwicke to the King. Thomas
Cochrane and William Rogers (his perverse Courtiers) were hanged at the bridge
of Lawder. The King was killed at Bannockburne the nine and twentieth year of
his reign, buried at Cambuskenneth.

105 IACOBVS quartus succeeded his father in the year of the world 5459. in
the year of Christ 1489. after the reign 1819. a noble and courageous Prince,
both wise and godly: he made peace with England, and married Margaret, eldest
daughter to Henry the seventh King of England, and Elizabeth, daughter to
Edward the fourth, in whose persons the cruel wars between the houses of
Lancaster and York were pacified, the foresaid Margaret bare to him James the
fifth: he was killed at Flowdon in battle the five and twentieth year of his
reign, buried at Holy-rood-house.

106 IACOBVS quintus succeeded his father in the year of the world 5484. in the
year of Christ 1514. after the beginning of the reign of Scotland 1844. a
wise valiant Prince, and severe Iusticiar: he married Magdalen daughter to the
King of France, who died shortly after; he married Mary of Lorraine, Duchess
of Longeuile, daughter to Claude Duke of Guise, who bare to him two sons and
one daughter Marie: he died of displeasure at Falkland, the nine and twentieth
year of his reign, buried at Holy-rood-house.

107 MARIA succeeded her father in the year of the world 5513. in the year of
Christ 1543. after the beginning of the reign of Scotland 1873. (a Princess
virtuously inclined) she married Francis Dolphin, after King of France; after
whose death she returned into Scotland, and married Henry Stewart Duke of
Albany, etc. Lord Darley, a comely Prince, son to Matthew Earl of Lennox
(pronepnoy to Henry the seventh King of England) to whom she bare Charles:
James the sixth now our most gracious sovereign king, afterward coming into
England, was received with greathumanity, and after she was captive, at length
put to death the eighth of February. 1586.

108 CAROLVS IACOBVS sixtus, succeeded to his mother in the year of the world
5537. in the year of Christ 1567. after the beginning of the reign of
Scotland 1897. a godly learned Prince, endued with singular knowledge, and a
sincere professor of the Gospel: he married Anna daughter to Frederick the
second, King of Denmark and Norway; and Sophia only daughter to Ulricus Duke
of Meckleburgh, our most gracious Queen, who has borne the royal and
hopeful Prince, Henry Frederikc Prince of Wales, Duke of Rothsay and
Cornwall, Earl Palatin of Chester, great Steward of Scotland, and Earl of
Carect, the nineteenth of February, 1593. in the Castle of Striueling;
Elizabeth the nineteenth of August 1596. Charles Duke of York and Albany,
Earl of Rosse, the nineteenth of November 1600. His Majesty is now King of
great Britain, France and Ireland, defender of the faith. The Lord of his
great mercy, for Christ his sake, increase all royal virtues in his Highness,
that he may remain a comfort unto Christ's Church, within his Majesty's
Dominions.

To the Author.
THe Roman Tullie, Rose of all that race,
Of facund Mercurs; boldly vnaffrayde
In Milos fence, to Clodius deface
This sacred sentence in the Senate said:
Naught only for our selves we are borne to toil,
But for our friends, and for our native soil.
Thou wisely weighed hes these words I find,
Thou cairs to clear thy country from obscure,
To please thy friends, thou fram'st thy wit and mind,
And by thy light thy countries light is pure:
She brought thee forth to light, thou takes like pain,
Who made thee see, to make her shine again.
W. T.

A TRVE DESCRIPTION AND DIVISION OF THE WHOLE REALM OF SCOTLAND, of the
situation, distance, and commodity in every part thereof, and of the
principal Cities, Towns, Abbeyes, Palaces, Forts, Castles, Towers, and Rivers.
SCOTLAND is divided from England by certain Marches, from the East Sea,
called the Scottish Sea, to the West Seas, called the Ireland Sea, from the
mouth of Tweed, up the same river, till it come betwixt Work and Hadden, where
the March leaves the river, and passing South-west by dearne ways, known
only to the inhabitants of that country, till it come to Redden-Burne, or
Water; and so up the said Burn, while it come to the height of the Fellis of
Cheuiot, and so west by the tops of the Fellis, 'till a March ditch (called
the Meir ditch) and so endlong in the Meir ditch, till it fall in the river of
Carshope, and down Carshope while it fall in Liddail, and down Liddail while
Eske and Liddail meet, and taking Aiffe at the north side of Eske, goes
endlong a ditch, while it come to the river of Sarke, and so down Sarke while
it fall in Sulwait, where the waters of Annan, and Nith, running severally in
Sulway, all in one channel in the Irish Sea: makes plenty of fishes: also by
^owing and ebbing of furious tides, made through many lands ends, and partly by
inundation of the said waters, there is very dangerous quick sands, called
Sulway sands, that no man may pass safely over them without peril (except
they have one accustomed guide) because of sinking holes that are frequent in
them, being every tide ouerflowed with the Sea. The travelers take their
journey through them at a low or ebb water: if any man or horse fall in, his
fellow travelers casting their clokes or other clothes about that part where
he sinkes in, and so running often about, the sand swells up in a height, and so
vomits out that which is fallen in the sinking hole. Upon the banckes of Sulway
in June and July, the country people gather up the sand within the
flood-marke, bringing it to land, and laying it in great heaps. There after
taking the salt spring water, and casting it upon the sand (with a certain
device) causing the water to run through the sand to a hollow pit, purposely
made to receive the water: which water being boiled in a little vessel of
lead, there is made thereof good white salt, and sometimes gray salt, after the
temperance of the weather. This part is called the salt ^oats.

The reason of the variation of the foresaid Marches was, upon diverse debates
and controversies, arising betwixt the borderers of both the Realms; which
being referred to the arbitr^ment of sundry Commissioners, of both the Nations,
were set down according to the power of the parties. Thus the Marches being set
forth particularly, beginning at the Mers, wherein at the mouth of Tweede
stands the ancient and martial town of Barwicke, and strong Castle, well
walled and strengthened: the chief town of the Mers, the Scottish Sea on the
East. Next is the town of Haymouth, with the Castles of Aytowne, Hutonhall,
Mander^own, Cockburne, Easter and Wester Nisbets, with Wedderlie, the town and
Abbey of Coldingham by the Sea. South-west from Barwicke lies the town of
Duns, the town of Langton with the Castle, the Abbeyes of Coldstreame and
Ecklis demolished, the Castles of Craighame, the Earl of Homes principal
Residence, and Wedderburne, the very strong Castle of Fastcastle. The rivers in
the Mers are Ei, Whittitur, Blakitur, and Ednem water. This country is
plenteous and abundant in all things necessary for the use of man.

West from the Mers lies Tewiotdail, Liddisdail, Ewisdail, Eskdail,
Wauchopdail, and Annandail, taking their names from T^ot, Liddil, Ews, Eske,
Wauchope, and Annan, running seueraily through the said Dailes. In Tewiotdail
lies the ancient strong Castle of Roxbourgh demolished. The Castle of Cesfurd,
the Lord of Roxbourgh special Residence: the Castles of Little-deane, and
Makerstowne, Tewiotdail.
the ancient town and Abbey of Kelso, with the Castle of Flures, the town
and Abbey of Iedbourgh, the Castles of Bown-iedburgh, Hunthill, Hu^delie,
Crailing, and Edyarstowne, with many other stone strong houses, tedious to
describe, the Town and Abbey of Melrose, the Town and Abbey of Driburgh, the
Town of Hawicke, the Castles of Kaiwers and Branxholme, the Lord of Balcleuchs
special Residence. The Rivers in Tewiotdail are Tiot, Tweed, Kail, Auchnom,
Ied, Rewl, Slitricke, Borthuike and Eall.

In Liddisdail is the ancient Castle of Harmetage: The Castles of
Prickinhauch, Mangerstowne and Whittow Liddisdail.
In Eskdail is the Castle of Langhome. Eskdail.


In Annundaile is the Castle of Lochmabane, environed with a number of Loches,
replenished with diverse goodly fishes. The Lord Maxwels special residence. The
towns of Annandaile are, the town of Annanwich, a strong demolished Castle,
the town of Lochmabane, Annandail.
the town of Moffat, the Castles of Bonschaw, Newby Bred-kirk, Hoddon,
Howmanis, and Hoddamstans, next stands the watch tower of Repentance. The
Castles of Loch-house, Loch-wood, Speldings, Ros, and Kirk-Michael. The rivers
in Annandaile are Annan, Sark, Kirtill milk, Ey, Kinnill, Ewan, and Moffat, a
fertile country, and good for pastoring: West from Annandaile lies
Niddisdaile, taking the name from the water of Nith, where stands the town and
Castle of Dumfreis with a pleasant bridge of large fine stones, the town and
castle of Sanquhar. The Lord Sanquhars special residence the town of Disdeare,
the College of Lincluden, the Abbey of Haliwode. In Niddisdaile are diverse
ancient houses, and Castles demolished: And yet standing, the strong Castle of
Carlauerock, the ancient Castle of Drumlainrig, and Disdeir, the ancient Castle
of Mortoun demolished, the Castles of Closburn, the Castle of Torthorrall, the
Lord of Torthorrails, principal residence, the Castles of Muswell and
Glencarne. North from Niddisdaile a little inclining to the East lies
Cliddisdaile.

Cliddisdaile taking the name from the river Clyde beginning at Crawfurd moore,
wherein lies Crawfert-Iohn, Dowglasdale, Ewendaile; Carne-wath moore, Bodwell
moore, the towns of Cliddisdaile are Lanarke, Hamilton town and Palice. The
Marquess of Hamiltons special residence with the Castle demolished, Boithwell
with the College. The City and Castle of Glasgow, the Archbishop seat, very
populous with a sumptuous Cathedral Church containing a lower and over Church,
covered with lead, also a flourishing University in liberal sciences and
Theology: adiacient to this City is a large stone bridge over the river Clide,
wherein falls diverse other the rivers as Ewen, Dowglasse^, Lismehago, there is
an Abbey of the same name, the water of Ewan, the water of Cadder, the two
Maidens, and Cutter water. In Cliddisdaile is the Castle of Crawfurde, the
ancient Castle of Dowglasse, the Earl of Anguish principal residence. The
Castles of Crawfurd-Iohn, Lamington, Couthley, the strong Castle of Draffan.
This country is plentiful of all necessaries. In the over ward of
Cliddisdaile, there is a hill or mount where ou^ springs three rivers, Tweed
running in the Scottish Sea, Ann^n in the Irish Sea, and Clide in the great
Ocean, South-East from Cliddisdaile lies, Tweddaile, named so from Tweed, the
special town is Peblis with a religious house called the Crose Church, and
the Castle of Drochellis, with the strong Castle of Neid^eth, the Lord Z^steris
residence. The Castles of Traquhair, Grisum, Ormstoun, Horsburge, Dawicke,
Dremmelger, Smithfield, Cringeltie, and Dearn-hall. The waters of Tweddaile are
Tweede, Quair, Mamier, Higger, Tarffe, Line Peblis water, and Lithnops. This
country is good for pasturing.

East from Tweddaile lies Heriot moore, Galla water, and Lauderdaile, with the
town and Castle of Lauder, taking the name from the water of Lidder, there
being pendicles of other Shieres, I omit particularly to describe them, South
from Tweddaile lies forest Shyre, ^he special town is Sel-kirk, three miles
distant therefrom is the old Castle of Neuwark. There is two goodly Rivers,
Zara, and Ethrik, both falling in Tweede, Zara comes out of a great Loath
called the Loath of the Lowis, wherein is abundance of fishes, this country is
also good for pasturing.

Lothian, taking the name from Loath King of the Pi^s is divided from the Mers,
by one part called the Easter piece, and by Lammer-mure on the South from
Tweddaile on the Southwest. In East Lothian are the Castles of Dunglasse,
Innerwick, Broxmouth, and Spot, Stanypeth, Waigtoun, Whittingham, Nunraw,
Harmostoun, Saltoun, Kieto, Winttoun; Ormestoun, the towns in Lothian are
Dumbarre, with a stong Castle demolished the towns of Tuningham, and North
Barwicke with an Abbey, Dirltoun and Castle, Fentoun town and Castle, Seitoun
town and Palace. The Earl of Winton special residence, the strong hold and
Castle of Tamtalloun, the town of Aber-Lady. Haddingtun town and Abbey, the
Castle of Lethingtoun, the Lord Thirlstans special residence, the the castle
of Creichtoun, Sowtray Abbey, the town of Prestoun with the castle, the town
of Prestoun pannes, the towns of Tranent, Mussilburgh, and Enneresk. The town
of Dalkenh with the castle, the Earl of Mortons special residence, the town
of New-botlie, with the Abbey: The Earl Lothians residence, the town of Letth
a commodious haven for ships, and the Sea port of Edinburgh right well shipped.

Edinburgh, the special and headburgh in Scotland, chief Justice seat of the
Realm, strongelie builded with stone. The most part of the houses are five,
six, or seven Edinburgh.
stories high, wherein is a goodly University, flourishing in all sciences, for
instruction of the youth; fortified on the West, with a most strong Castle
builded upon a high rock, kept by the Kings Captains, which Castle commands the
said burgh, called of old the Maiden Castle, founded by Cruthneus Camelon, the
first King of Picts. Before the birth of our Savior 330 years: Circuit upon
the East, South and West with a stone wall, and upon the North strengthened with
a Loch. It is also decored with the kings Palace, and Abbey of Holy Rood-house
upon the East part: within seven miles to this burgh, upon the East, South and
West parts, and within two miles upon the North part, there is of Noble and
Gentlemen's Palaces, Castles and strong builded Towers and stone houses (not as
yet nominated) above an hundredth. Also the town of Cramond, lying upon Almond.
The rivers in Lothiane, are Tene, Ask, the river of Leith, the water of
Almond, Lothiane is very plenteous and right abundant in all things necessary
for the use and sustentation of man.

Next East Lothian lies in West Lothian, the Shirifdome of Linlithgow, with the
town of Linlithgow, and the West-Lothian.
most pleasant Kings Palace, with a very commodious Park and Loch under the
Palace wall. Not far distant Linlithgow.
is the strong Fortress and Castle of Blackness, environed with the Sea. The
ancient demolished Castle of Abercorne, the town of the Queens ferry. The
Castles of Dundas, Barnbugall, Cragiehall, Didestowne, Newlistowne, the town
of Kirklistown, the Castles of Neddrie, Cadder, Torphican, Kinneil, the town
of Bareston Nes.

Auenne water, whereon there is a stone bridge, deuides Sterling shire from
west Lothean at the South: the Firth or Forth at the East; which Firth piece
and prede becommes narrow, till it grow to the quantity of a reasonable River,
nearer unto Striueling bridge. There is but one water worthy to make account
of, that runs through it, named Carron. There are two little earthen knols,
builded as may appear, by men, (being ancient monuments) called Duini pacis,
that is, the knols of peace. Two miles downward upon the same water, there is a
round building without lime, made of hard stone, in such sort that one part of
the uppermost stones i^denied with the stone that lies directly under it; so
that the whole work, by this conjunction mutual, and burden of the stones,
uphold it self; growing narrow by little and little from the ground to the
head, where it is open like a Doue-coat. The common people call it Anthurs
Oven. Upon Carson was situate the famous City of Camelon, chief city of the
Pictes, founded by Cruthneus Camelon, before the birth of Christ three hundred
and thirty years, destroyed and abolished by King Kenneth the great, about the
year of Christ 846. In this country is the Abbey of Manwell; the Castles of
Haning, Powerile, and Cummernald, the Earl of Wigtowns Residence, with the
wood, the ^ore wood, and tore wood side, the town of Falkirk, the Castles of
Kers, and Calender, the Earl of Linlithgow Residence. The Castles of Donipace,
Harbertshire, west Quarter, Arth, Poffowles, Carnoke, Bruise Castle, the Palace
of Elphigstowne, the Lord Elphingstones residence, the Castles and Towers of
Easter and Wester Polmais, and Chattrishall. the ancient town, with the most
strong fortiesse and Castle, and sumptuous Palace of Striueling, builded upon a
high rock, with a pleasant and commodious Park under the Castle wall. In this
shire is the Castles and Towers of Towch, Gargunnok, Broich, Lekke, Dundaffe,
Kilsyith, Manners, and Powes. Beyond the bridge of Striueling lies the Abbey of
Cambus, Kinneth, with the Castle, the Town and Castle of Alloway, the Town
and Castle of Clackmannan, the Castles of Tulliallan and Sawchy, Blair,
Valeyfeild, Kinnedder, Aikinhed, Menstre, the town and Abbey of Culrosh, with
the new builded Palace. Next adjacent to Striueling shire lies Lennox, divided
from the Barony of Renfrew, by Clyde: from Glasgow, by the water of Heluin, at
the foot of the hills of Grangebean, Loch-lomond runs down a low valley
four and twenty miles of length, and eight of breadth, having more then twenty
four Islands within the same.

This Lo^ besides abundance of other fishes, has a kind of fish of the own,
named Pollac, very pleasant to eat: the water of Leuin runs out of
Loch-lomond Southward, which water has given the name to the country, running
so strong, that no man (without danger) may pass the same. Lenin enters into
Clyde, near to the most strong and invincible fortress and Castle of
Dumbarton, standing upon very high Rocks, with abundance of fresh water
springs, one spring being in Summer wholesome cold, and in winter sweet, warm:
no rock nor hill, being within more as a mile to the foresaid strength and
Castle. Next adjacent is the town of Dunbarton, pleasantly situate upon the
River of Leuin, the principal town in the Duchy of Lennox; within the which
there is many strong Castles, Towers and stone houses, as the Castles and
Towers of Kirkmichael, Rosdo, Tarbat, Arnecaple, Kilmahow, Ardeth,
Kilmarannoch, Buquhannane, Drummakeil, Cragiuarne, Ballindalloch, Kilcroch,
Balglas, Fentrie, Duntreith, Craigbarnut, Clorct Woodhed, Cochnoch,
Balquhannaran, Drumry, Dunglas with sundry others tedious to declare.

The Duke of Lennox is superior to the most part of the Gentlemen inhabitants
in this country, and many in the Barony. Next lies the Barony of Renfrew,
taking the name from the town of Renfrew, wherein the Session of Justice is
kept to the Country. It is divided in the midst by two waters, both called
Carth. The town of Paislay pleasantly situate upon the river Carth, with the
Abbey thereof, the Earl of Abircornes special Residence, with most pleasant
Orchards and Gardens. In this country lies the Castle of Sempil, the Lord
Sempils special Residence, with the Castles and Towers of Crukstone, Marns,
Cathcart, Hag, upper Pollok and nether Polloke, Hakket, the Lord Ros residence.
Cardonald the Lord of Blantyrs residence, Blackhall, Caldwel, Stanelie,
Ellerslie, Ihonstown, Waterstowne, Ramfuley, Dochail, Raalstowne, Biltries,
Craganis, Housloun, Barrrochane, Dargewell, Blackstoun, Selwiland, Walkinshaw,
Inchchenna^, Arskin, Bishoptoun Boghall, Funlastown, New work, Grinoke,
Ardgowan, Glengarnoch, Kilburne, and Lady-land, with many others, strong stone
houses tedious to rehearse. These countries aforesaid are plenteous in corns
bestiall and fishings. Next lies Cuningham, divided from Kyle, by the water of
Vrwine: at the foot thereof is situate the town of Vrwine, a goodly Merchant
town, with a strong stone bridge. The town of Kilmarnocke, the town and
castle of Kilmaris, the Earl of Glencarnes residence, the town and castle of
Newmils, the town of Salt Coats, where great store of white Salt is made, the
town of Largs, the town and Abbey of Kilwinning, the Castle of Deane the Lord
Boyds reside^ce, the Castle and Palace of Lowdon the Lord Lowdons special
residence, the castles of Eglintowne, Kirelaw, Ardrossin, the Earl of
Eglingtowns residence, Cuningham-head, Blair, Robertland, Gyffin, Eastwood,
Calwel, Rowallen, Law, Fairly, Kelburne, Arneil, Knock, Skelmurly. In the town
of Vrwine the Judge Ordinary holds justice. Kyle and Cuningham were called of
old Silu^a. Their countries are fertile in corns and bestiall. Next lies
Kyle, divided from Carricke, by the water down, which descends out of
Loch-downe, wherein there is a strong tower builded upon an Isle. This water
runs West in the Firth of Clyde, in the midst of Kyle runs the water of
Air, which diuides Kyle in Kings Kyle, and Kyle Stewart, a part of the Princes
principality. At the mouth of the water, on the South side is situate the
ancient Merchant town of Air, taking the name from the water, the principal
Bourgh of the whole Shire, pleasantly builded in a plain field, hard on the
Sea, very populous, and well shipped, with fair stone houses, most covered
with blew sklate, with a large stone bridge, passing to the new town of Air,
with a castle and Palace. The town and castle of Machling, the town and castle
of Cumnoke, the town of Preseike, the justice seat of Kyle Stewart, the
towns of Gastown and Ricardtown, the castles of Dundonald, Sundrum, the Lord
of Cathearts residence. The Castles of Ochiltrie, with the town, the Lord
Ochiltres residence. The castles of Caprintown, Gaitgirth, Cragie, Entirkign,
Gastown, Sesnocke, Carnal, Bar, Loc^oreis, Terringean Cars, Drongane, Sorne,
Dregornie, Sornbeg, Monton, Afflecke and Barskymmyn, the Loch of Martuane, with
a strong tower. Loch fergus, with an Isle, with many growing trees, where great
plenty of Herons resort, with the Loch of Feal: there is a decayed Monastry in
it. The Rivers in Kyle are Air, Luggar, Feal and Sesnocke, Luggar and Feal
runs in the water of Air, and so in the Firth of Clyde. The water of Sesnocke
runs in the water of Vruing, and so in Clyde. This country abounds in strong
and valiant men, where was borne the most renowned and valiant Champion William
Wallace, in the Barony called Ricardtown, then his fathers Style, thereafter of
Craigy and Ricardtowne. Five miles from Air is a place called Coels field,
where the King of Britons called Coell was killed, by the Scots and Pictes,
upon the water of Dewne. This country is plenteous of bestiall, reasonably
corned with abundance of Corns.

Next Kyle lies Carrick, bordering with Galloway, under Lochrean, of old called
Loch-calpin, declyning while it come to Clydis-firth: in Carricke are two
goodly waters, plenteous of fishes, the water of Stinchar, at the foot thereof
stands the town of Ballintrea; where is great plenty of Herrings and other
fishes, the castles of Arstinchar, Craigneil, builded upon a strong rock with
the castle of Knockdolean. Upon the water of Girwane are the castles of
Bargany, Blairquhan, Dalwharran, Cassils, Dunure, the Earl of Cassilis
residence. The castles of the Koe, Ardmillanx, Careltowne, Killoquhan,
Baltessane, Keirs, Auchendrane, the abbey of Corsraguel. There was a goodly
Merchant town, of old called Carrike, founded by Caratake King of Scots,
whereof remains nothing: the principal town is now Mayeboll, where the Judge
ordinary holds justice. Next adjacent with Carricke lies Galloway, of old
called Brigantia, bordering with Niddisdail, almost declyning to the South; the
shire whereof enclosed, all the rest of that side of Scotland is more
plentiful store of bestiall Thane corns. The waters of Galloway are Ure, Dee,
Terfe, Fleit, Kenne, Cree, and Loss; which run all in the Ireland Sea. There
is almost no great hills in Galloway, but it is full of craggie knols: the
waters gathering together in the valleys betwixt those knols, make almost
innumerable Loches; from whence the first flood that comes before the autumnall
Equinoctial, causes such abundance of waters to run, that there come forth of
the said Loches incredible number of Eeles, and are taken by the countrymen in
wand creeles, who salting them, obtain no small gain thereby. The farthest
part of that side is the head, called Nouantum, under the which there is a
haven at the mouth of the water of Lossie named Rerigonins. In the other side
of Galloway, over against this haven from Clyddis-forth, there enters another
haven named commonly Lochryen, or Vidogora: all that lies betwixt those two
havens, the country people call the Rynes, that is, the point of Galloway:
Also Nouantum, the M^le, that is, the Beck, In Galloway are the towns of
Kirkcubright well situate for a merchant town a good Harbery, with a Castle
Whithorne is the Bishops seat there. Wigtoun a goodly Market town, the town of
Innermessane, Minigooff, and Saint John's Clachane. The Abbey of new Abbey
Glenluse, Sall-Syde, Dundrenan, and Tongland, the Castles of the Treaue,
Barcloy, Hillis, Orchartoun, Bomby in Lochfergus, Cumpstoun, Cardenes,
Wreythis, Kenmure, Kirkgunze. The great strength and Castle of Crowgiltoun,
builded on a rock hard on the Sea, the Castles of Garleis, Large, the great
Castle of Clare, the Castles of Dunskaye, Corsell, Lochnee, the Loches of
Galloway are Ruhinfranco, Carlingwork, Myretoun which never freezes, for any
frost that chances.

The westmost of the hills of Grangebean make the border of Lennox, the hills
are cutted by a little bosom of the Sea named for the shortness thereof
Gerloch at the entry thereof stands the Castle of Roseneth, beyond this Loch
there is a greater Loch named from the water that runs in it Lochlowng, this
water is the March between Lennox and Cowall, this Cowall, Argyle, and
Knapdall altogether called Argyle are divided in many parts by many narrow
creekes that run out of the firth of Clyde into them. In Cowall is the Castle
and town of Dunnone, where is the Bishop of Argyle his seat, there is one
most notable Loch called Loch fine, which is in length threescore miles: upon
Lochfyne is situate the Castle Palace and town of Inraray, the principal
residence of the Earl of Argyle: Also does the Sheriff of Argyle keep his
Courts of Justice, this Loch is most plentiful of Herings and all other
fishes: On this Loch are situate diverse Castles and Gentlemen's places, as
Castle Lauchlane, the Otter and Dunetrewne in Knapdall is Loghaw, and therein a
little I Will where there is a strong Castle of the same name, there is also the
Castle of Tarbat. In Argyle is the strong Castle of Carriek, builded upon a
rock, within Loch goyle, there is also the College of Kilmun, the water of
Awe runs out of Loch-how, and is the only water of all that country that
do run in the Dewcalidon Sea. South and by West from Knapdall lies Kantere:
The head land of the country right over against Ireland, divided by the sea,
of the breath of sixteen miles only. In Kantere is the Castles of Dunauerty,
and Sadell, the town and Castle of Kilkerraine, situate in the Loch of the
same name Kantere is more long then broad, joining to Knapdal by so narrow a
throat about one mile of breadth, which ground is sandy, and lies so plain
and low that Mariners drawing along, their vessels as galleys and boats
through it makes their journey a great deal shorter then to pass about
Kintire which is the common passage Lorne lies next, and Contaygne with Argyla
on the back thereof where stands the most ancient Castle of Dunestaffage, in
which were the Kings of Scotland in old times crowned, where also the Marble
fatal Chair remained more then one thousand years. In Lorne are also the
Castles of Carnacery, and that of Makdules built upon a right rockie mountain.
The country of Argyle, Knapdall and Cowell do abound of bestiall, kye, sheep
and great store of venison, and abundant in fishes. Lorne marches still with
Argyle until it come to Haber, or rather Loch-haber: A plain country not
unfruitful. The country where the hills of Grangebean are, most easy to be
traveled, named broad Alben, that is to say, the highest part of Scotland. And
the highest part ^of broad-Albin is called Drumalbin, that is the back of
Scotland so termed. For forth of the back waters do run in both the seas.
Some to the North, and some South. Habre or rather Lochaber marches with
Badzenoch, which has as it were a back running out through the midst of it,
which spouts forth waters in both the seas, Lochaber marching with Badzenoch,
tending by little and little toward the Deucalidon sea, a country abundant in
corns and great plenty of fishes, for besides the abundance of fresh water
fishes produced by a great number ot waters, the Sea runs within the
country, in a long channel, and being narrow at the mouth, the water kept in
betwixt two high banks, and spreading wide inward, makes the form of a
Stanke, or rather of a Loch, a place where ships may lie sure as in a haven
adjacent with Calkmananshire, lies Fyffe, beginning at the town of
Torre-burne, with the castles of Torre, Cromby, Pickfirran, Pictincreiff, the
town of Dumfermling and Abbey thereof, founded by King David the first, the
Kings of Scotland were buried there a long time, the Palace thereof now
repaired by the Queens Majesty's command, and charges where the Earl of
Dumfermling Chancellor of Scotland has his residence. The town of Lymkellis
with the castle of Rossynh, the town of the Queens ferry upon the North. In
the middle of Forth, upon a rock is the fortress and decayed castle of
Inchgaruy. By East lies in the same water Saint Colmis Inch, with a demolished
Abbey, abundant with conies, and good pasturing for sheep. Next in the mid
Firth lies Inchkeith with a demolished Fortress fertile of conies, and good
for pasturing of sheep. East from Inchkeith, within Forth lies a very high and
big Rock environed with the Sea; called the Basse, invincible having upon the
top a fresh spring where the Solane geese repaires much, and are very
profitable to the owner of the said strength. Next the Basse in the mouth of
Forth lies the I Will of May a mile long, and three quarters of a mile in breadth,
there was a religious house, with many fresh water springs, with a fresh Loch
abundant with Eeles: This I Will is a goodly refuge for sailors in time of
tempest. By East the I Will of May twelve miles from all land in the German seas,
lies a great hidden rock called Inchcape, very dangerous for nauigators,
because it is ouerflowed every tide. It is reported in old times upon the said
rock, there was a Bell fixed upon a tree or timber, which rang continually,
being moved by the Sea, giving notice to the sailors of the danger. This Bell
or Clock was put there, and maintained by the Abbot of Aber-brothok, and being
taken down by a Sea Pirote, who a year thereafter perished upon the same
rock with ship and goods in the righteous judgment of God. Returning to the
ancient town of Innerkething, adjoining thereto is the most comfortable and
safe refuge for sailors in time of storm, called Saint Margarets hope. The
castles of Dunnybirsill, Dalgatie, and Fordell, the town and castle of
Aberdour, the Loch of Cowstoun, the castle of Orterstoun, the town of
Brunt-Iland, with the castle, the castles of Balmuto, Balwery, Hal-randes, and
Raith. The town and castle of Kingrne, the castles of Seyfield, and
Abbots-hall: the town of Kirkealdy, the castles of Bogy and Rauens-houch, the
Lord Sinclairis special residence, town of Dysart, the town of VVesterwemis
and the castle, the castle of Easterwemis, the Lord Colweil chief residence,
the towns of Buckhauen, and Lewynis mouth, so named from the river of Lewin
out which comes of Loch-Lewin, the town of Kenneway, the castles of Dury,
Lundy and Largow, with the town thereof, the castles of Rires, Bulchares, and
Kinnochar, with the Loch thereof, the town of Earls ferry, the castles of
Kelly and Ardrosse, town of Eliot. The town and castles of Saint Monanes,
Carnbie, and Balkaskie, the town and Abbey of Pictonweme, the Lord of
Pictonwemes residence, the towns of Anstruther with the castle, the castles of
Bofy, Pitterthy, the towns of Innergelly, and Siluer-dikes: the castles of
Erdry, third part, West-Berns, the town of Craile, with the Prouestry and
demolished castle, the castles and towers of Balcomy, Wormestoun, Randerstoun,
Newhall, Camno, Kipper, Pitmille, Kinkell, Strawithy, Lamberletham, Lachochar.
The City of Sanctandros, the Metropolitan and Archbishops Seat, with a strong
Castle and Abbey decored with three Universities for learning in all sciences.
In old time the Churches in this City most curionsly and sumptuously builded,
and now decayed from this City West upon the water of Eddin lies the Castles
of Nydy, Rumgary, Dairsey, Blebo. The town of Cowper, the chief Justice
seat, the Castle of Corstoun, the Castle of Struther, the Lord Lendsayes
principal residence, the Castles of Inglishtarwet, Craighall, Bruntoun,
Balgony, the town of Merkinsche, the town of Falkland with the kings Palace,
with a pleasant park abundant, with Deares and other wild beasts. The town
Stramiglo with the Castle, the Loch of Rossy, with the Tower thereof
Hill-Carney and Nachtoun. The two promontories called the Loumonds, the town
of Leslie with the Castle, the Castles of Straith-Endrie, and Arnat, the Loch
of Inchgaw, with the Castle within, the Castles of Dowhill, Killerny, Ady,
Cleisch, the Loch of Loch-lewin with a strong Castle, abundant in all fresh
fishes, with the New-house adjacent thereto, the Castle of Burley, the Lord
Burleyes residence, the Castle of Balluaird, the town of Newbrough, the Abbey
of Lundors, the Lord of Lundors residence. The Castle of Bambreich, the Earl
of Routhous special residence. The Abbey of Balmerinoch, The Castles of
Collarny, Fern, Perbroth, Mordocarny, Maquhany, Forret, Kynneir, the town of
Lucers, with the Castle, the Castles of Earleshall, Colluthy, the towns of
East and West Ferreis, the rivers in Fyiff are Lewin, Eddin, Ore, Lochty, the
two Quichis, the waters of Largo, Kendlie, and Stramiglo.

This country is abundant in corns, fruits bestiall, and all sort of fishes,
with abundance of coal and salt: and all the aforesaid Sea towns, very
populous and well shipped. Straitherne taking name from Erne, which runs out
of Locherne. The principal country of Perth-shire is divided on the South from
part of Fiffe, Kinroshire and Clakmananshire by the Ochel hills, the tops of
the hills serving for march: for as the water springs do fall toward the
North, they belong to Straithern, and as they fall toward the South they
appertain to Kinroshire, Culroshire, and Clakmananshire, by ambition divided:
in old times all their three shires were under the jurisdiction of Perth. The
Stewartrie of Mentieth, liand in Perth shire, wherein lies the Abbey of
Inch-mahomo with the castles and towers of Cardrose, Archopple, Balinton,
Quolze, Burnbanke, Row, Keir, Knockhill, Calendar, Leny, Cambusmore, Torre and
Lainricke, lying upon Teith water, giving the name to Montieth. The strong Fort
and castle of Down. Nowtowne, Argatie and Kirk-bryd, the Earl of Monteiths
residence. Next lies in Perthshire, the city of Dumblane, the Bishop of
Dumblans residence, the castles and towers of Kippinrose, Cromlix, Buttergasse
and castle Campbell. Returning to the town of Abirnethy, sometime the
Metropolitan city of the Pictes, liand in Straithern, marching with Fiffe,
where the Earl of Angusse has there Sepulchers. By Mugdrum and Balgony
runs the river of Erne in Tay, which is the greatest river in Scotland. At
the foot of the Ochellis lies the castles and towers of Craigpotte, and
Knight-potte, Fordel, Ardrose Balmanno, Exmagirdle and Forgon, where the water
of Meth flowed from the Ochellis, giving name to the castle of Innermeth, the
Lord of Innermeths residence. The castles and Towers of Condie, Keltie,
Garuoke, Duncrub, Newtowne, Glenaigles, the town of Doning and Auchtirardour,
the castle of Kincardin, the Earl of Montroze special residence, the castles
of nether Gaske and Tullibardin, the Earl of Tullibardin special residence,
the castles and towers of Aurchtermachonie, Orchell, Pannels, Ardoch, Braikoch
and Craigrossie. The castle of Drymmen, the Earl of Perths residence: the
castles and towers of Balloch, Petkellany, and Boreland.

Betwixt Erne and Tay lies Easter and Wester Rindes: the castles and towers of
Fingaske, Kinmonth, Elcho Abbey and castle, Easter and Wester Montcreiffis,
Malar, Petthewles, Balhoussie: the ancient bourgh of Perth, pleasantly situate
upon the river of Tay, betwixt two commodious green fields or Inches, founded
by King William, surnamed the Lion, after the abolishing of the castle of
Bertha by inundation of waters, about the year of Christ 1210. the King giving
great and ample privileges to the said burgh, decored with a large and long
stone bridge over Tay, of eleven Arches, partly decayed, and now reedifying;
having reasonable commodities for shipping, with goodly fishings, of old
decored with sundry Monasteries, and specially the Charterhouse now demolished.
The strong castle of Dupplin, the Lord Oliphants special residence: the
castles of Huntingtore (of old called Ruthwen) the castles and towers of
Methwen, Bachilton, Logyalmond, Cultmalindis, Tibbermure, Tibbermallow,
Keillour, Gorthy, Trewn and Strowane, the town of Fowlis, the castles and
towers of Cultoquhay. Abircarny, Inchbreky, Monyuard, Carriwechter, Fordee,
Comrre, Williamstowne and Durndone, with the town of Creiffe, Octhirtyre and
Milnabe: the abbey of Incheffrey, the Lord of Incheffreyes residence,
Innerpeffry, the Lord of Mathertyes special dwelling. Betwixt Almond and Tay
lies the Stormond of Straitherne, wherein is the castles and towers of
Strathurd upper Ba^chels, Inchstrewy, Ochtirgewin, Arlywicht Tullibeltane,
Innernytie, Inchstuthil, Murthlie, the ancient demolished castle of Kinclewin,
where the water of Ila runs in Tay. In their countries are the rivers of
Farg, Meth, Erne, Vrdachy, Schiochy, and Lochtre, falling in Almond, where Lous
work made of stone, receives a great channel of water, passing to Perth,
whereon stands many mils, and filling the ditches to Spey tower, the rest of
Perth is compassed with a stone wall. The city of Dunkeld the Bishops seat
situate upon Tay, with little Dunkeld, the water of Brane falls in Tay, giving
the name to Straitbrane, wherein is the castle of Trocharry: adjacent to
Dunkeld lies the castles and towers of Rotmell, Carny, Cluny, Loch and castle
Gowrdy, Mekilhour, Lethandy, Glesclun, Drumlochy, Gormoke, Blair, Ardblair,
Craighall, Rettray and Forde.

In Straithardell, named from the water of Ardell, lies the castles and towers
of Morkley, Assintulle, and Innerthrosky: in Athole liand in Perthshire, is the
great and strong castle of Blair, the Earl of Atholes special residence; the
castles and towers of Strowane, Ballachan, Balladmyn, the old demolished
castle of Muling, the old demolished castle of Logyrait, where the water of
Tynmell, flowers in Tay, the Castles of Garntully, the strong fortress of
Garth upon a great rock, the Castles of Weme, Balloch, Finlarge, Glanurquhar,
Lawers, and Miggerny in Glenlyon where the water of Lion runs in Tay. The
water of Tay comes forth of Lochtay, in Broad-Albin, which Loch is four and
twenty miles of length. There is other countries (as Rannoch, Balquhidder)
lying betwixt Athole, Argyle, Lorne and Lochaber unknown to the Author.
Returning to Gowry, and the rest of Perthshire lying betwix Tay and Angusse,
where lies the Castles and Towers of Stobhall, Campsey, Byrs, Petcur, Ruthwens,
Banff, Camno, Balgillo, Moncur, Inchstur, the ancient and renowned Abbey of
Scone, where the kings of Scotland were crowned, from the exterminion of the
Picts, unto the time of King Robert Bruise, at which time the fatal Marble
chair was transported to Westminster by Edward the first (surnamed Longshanks)
King of England. This Abbey was sumptuously builded, now wholly decayed: a part
whereof is reedified, and pleasantly repaired by the Lord of Scone, being his
special residence: The Castles and towers of Poknyll, Pitsindy, Balthiok,
Rait, Kilspindie, Fingask, Kynnarde, Meginshe, Murey, Hill, Petfour, the town
and Palace of Arroll, the Earl of Arrols residence, Leyis, Inchmartine,
Monorgund, Huntley and Innergowry.

These countries (all in Perthshire) are right plenteous and abundant in all
kind of corns, bestiall, and all sort of fishes, and all other necessaries for
the sustentation of man, and Athole abounds in all kind of wild beasts and
fowls with wild horses.

Next adjacent to Gowry lies Angusse, beginning at the bridge of Innergowry,
with the Castle of Fowls, the Lord Grayes residence, the Castles of Balfour,
Lundy, and Dinnun. The town of Kethens, the town and Abbey of Copar, the
Castle of Newtyle, the town and Castle of Glammis, the Lord Glammis special
residence. The town of Killy-mure, the Castles and Towers of Lowry, Brigtoun,
Thorntoun, Innerrichtie, Kilkaudrum and Quich, Clouoy, with parks and woods,
Innerquharitie, and Quich, Glen-Ilay, Wain, Dysart, Rossie, the Castle of
Fyn-heauin, the Earl of Crawfurds special residence. The Castles and Towers
of Melgund, Flemyngtoun, Woodwre, Bannabreich, old Bar, with the Park
Carrestoun and Balhall, the City and Castle of Brechin the Bishops residence.
The Castles and Towers of Dun, Craig, Edzell, Balzordy, and Newtoun. The town
or brugh of Dunde, strongly builded with stone houses, right populous, and
industrious with good shipping, and a commodious haven: a pleasant Church with
a right high stone steeple, the castles of Duddope and Autherhouse, the Earl
of Buquhans special residence. The Castles and towers of Strickmartin, Clawers,
Mayns, wester Ogyll, Ballumby, and Claypottes, the strong fortress and Castle
of Bruchty, upon a rock environed with the Sea. The towns of north Ferrey,
and Monyfuth, the Castles and towns of Auchinleck, Easter and Wester Powreis,
Glen, Drumkilbo, and Teling, The town of Forfarre with a demolished Castle,
with a Loch and an I Will therein with a Tower, Cassie, Logymegle, Barnzstaird,
Innerkelour, the demolished Abbey of Resenneth, with a Loch, and the Loch of
Reskobow, the Castles and Towers of Woodend, Balmeshannoch, Hakerstoun;
Balmady, with a Loch Balgayis demolished, the Castles and Towers of Turings,
Carsegowny, Guthrie, Garne, Fernell, and Boshane: The Lord Ogilbies special
residence, the towns of Bar, and Panbryde; the Castles of Duniken, Pammure;
and Kelly, the town and ancient Abbey of Abirtrothok; with the Castle, the
Castle of Lethame, and Ethy; where a Falcon engendes yearly upon a high rock
past memory of man. The Castles and Towers of Enblackmond, Callistoun, Bisack,
Ardbeky, and the red Castle, the Castles and Towers of Dunnenald, Vsum, Craig,
Bonytoun and Kinnarde.

The ancient town of Mont-Rosse, with a commodious harbery for shipping, and
well shipped, this town is all builded with stone, and populous, abundant
with all kind of fishes: the town and Castle of old Mount-Rosse, and the
Castle of Westerbracky. The rivers in Anglusse are the water of Innergowery
dividing Gowry from Angusse: The rivers of Dichty, Carbat, Ila, Brothat Lunnen,
North and South Askis. This country of Angusse is plentiful and abundant in
all kind of corns great store of bestiall, with all sort of fishes withal
other commodities necessary for man.

Next adjacent to Angus is the Mernis, where are the towns Kincardin, Fordoun,
and Beruy, Cowey and Stanehyue, Galguein, with the Castles of Halgrein and
Lowristoun, the most strong Castle of Dunotter, with many pleasant buildings
within the same, situate upon a Rock, environed with the Ocean sea, and well
furnished with Ordinance and all warlike provision for defense, the Earl
Martial his residence, with the Castle Fatteresso, there is also the Castles
of Glenberuy, Puttarrow, Arbuthnet, Thornntoun, Balbegenat, Hakertoun, Morphie,
Benholme, Allardes and Matters. This country is plentious of Beer, and wheat,
abounding in bestiall and fishes: The Barrons and Gentlemen deteste contention
in law, remitting and submitting always their actions debatable, to amicable
arbitrements among themselves.

North from the Mernis is the mouth of the water of Dee, where is situate the
ancient burgh and, merchant town of Abirdene, well builded and renowned for the
Salmondfishing thereof, well shipped, it has a flourishing Vniueruersitie for
instruction of the youth, a pleasant bridge builded of stones, at the mouth of
the river Done, is situate the old City of Aberdone, which is the Bishops
seat, where also is a goodly College for learning in sciences specially in
Philosophy.

Between Dee and Done begins the country of Mar, growing always wider and
wider till it be threescore miles length and comes to Badezenoch. In Mar is the
town of Kinkardin of Neil, the Castles of Drum, Leyes, Skein, Monimusk,
Halforrest, the town of Kyntor, the Castles of Abirgeldy, Lenturke, Corsse,
Aslun, Kyndrymme, Innerbuchat, Cluny, Corsinda, Muchall, Cragywar, Torry and
Cowgarth, Klenkindy, Buchholly, and New. Lochaber, Badzenoch and Mar,
comprehends the breadth of Scotland between the two Seas.

Next Mar upon the North lies the Gareoch, wherein is the town of Innerwry.
The Castles of Balquhan, Fethernere, Caskybane, Auchenhuiff, Meldrum, Pitcaple,
Pittodrie, Harthill, not far distant is the most high mountain of Bannachy,
the highest mountain in the North for sailors, coming from the Easter seas,
takes up land first by this mountain. The Castles of Lesly and Wardens, the
ancient Castle of Dinnedure upon a high mountain called the Golden Mountain,
by reason of the sheep that pastures thereupon: Their teeth are so
extraordinary yealow, as if they were colored with gold, there is also the
Castle of Drumminor, the Lord Forbes residence. Next Gareoch upon the
North-East lies Bucquhan, wherein is situate the town of Newburgh, upon the
water of Itham, abundant in Salmond and other fishes, the towns of Peterhead
and Frisselburgh, the Castles of Fophern, Asselmond, Arnage, Tochone, Kelly,
Straloch, Vdney, and upon the North-East side thereof there is a rock where are
found sundry well colored stones of diverse hewes, very pleasant, some quadrant
pointed, and transparant, resembling much the oriental Diamond for they are
proved to be better then either the Virginean or the Bohemian Diamond. The time
of the coming of Hengistus in Britain, there came with him one Noble The
original of the name of Wdny.
Germane Prince called Woden, about the year of Christ 477. (as writes
Pomarius) who adjoining their forces with Vortiger, then King of the Britain,
against the Scots and Picts, continuing in their fury were called Vodenay,
conform to the old Saxon language (as writes Olaus magnus, Beda and
Vliterpius) of whom by long progression and abbreuiation of speech is descended
the ancient name of Vdny. There are also the Castles of Pitmedden, Had,
Gicht, Fywie, the ancient Castle of Slanes, watterton, Enderrugy, with the
strong Castle of the Craig of Enderrugy, The Castles of Fillorth, Pitsligo,
Feddreth, Towy, Balquhaly, Dalgatie, the tower of Torrey, and the Castle of
Mures. This country stretches farthest in the Germane seas of all the
countries of Scotland fertile in store, and corns: And in it self sufficient
in all other commodities necessary for the country, there is abundance of
Salmon and other fishes taken in all the waters thereof, except the water of
Rattry, whereunto this day there was never any Salmon seen. Next Buehquhan
upon the North lies Boyne, and Enze in Boyne. In Boyne is the town of Bamst,
and Castle thereof, situate upon the river of Diuern, there is also the Castles
of Boyne, Findetar, and Bogygieht, with the town of Culane, situate upon the
sea coast. Next lies the lands of Straithbogy, where is the Castle and Palace
of Straithbogy, the special residence of the Marquess of Huntley, the Castles
of Fendrough, Pitlurge, Carnbarrow, Rothemay, the Lord Saltouns chief
residence, Kinnardi, Crombie, Achindore, Lesmore, Balwany, Blarsindy, Drymmyn,
Dusky, Ballindalloch, Balla Castle and Aikenway, these foresaid countries are
plenteous in corns, bestiall, and in fishings.

Next upon the North is the water Spey, abundant in Salmond and all new fishes,
Endlong Spey lies Murrey-Land, wherein is situate the City of Elgyn upon the
water of Lossy, the Bishop of Murreyes seat and special residence, with a
Church most curiously and sumptuously builded, which now in part decays. In
Murrey are many strong Castles and other strong houses, as the Castles of
Blairy, Monynesse, the ancient strong Castle of Vrquhart, the Castles of Spynay
with a pleasant Loch abounding in fishes, the Castles of Innes and Duffus, the
Castle and town of Forres, the great Castle of Tornuaye, the principal
residence of the Earl of Murrey: The Castles of Cadall and Kilrauicke with
diverse Gentlemen's strong stone houses adjacent about the town of old Erne. In
Murrey are two famous Abbeyes, Pluscardy, and Kinlus, the Castle of Louat the
Lord Louats residence. There is also the most ancient town of Innernes, and
the strong Castles thereof situate on the water of Naes, which descends from a
Loch, named Loch Naes thirty four miles in length: this water of Naes is
always warm, and never freezeth, in such sort as in winter time, ye falling
into it is dissolved by the heat thereof: West from Lochnes, there lies eight
miles of continent ground: And that small piece is the only impediment that
the Seas join not, and make the remanent of Scotland an Island: for all the
land that lies betwixt the strait and the Deucalidon Sea, is cut by creekes
and Loches of salt water running into the land.

From the mouth of Naesse, where it enters in the Germane Sea, North lies
Rosse, shooting in the Sea in great Promontories or heads. The country of
Rosse is of greater Rosse.
length nor breadth, extending from the Germane to the Deucalidon Sea, where it
rises in craggy and wild hills, and yet in the plain fields thereof, there is
as great fertility of corn as in any other part of Scotland. There is in
Rosse pleasant dales with waters, and Loches full of fishes, specially
Lochbroome: It is broad at the Deucalidon sea, and grows narrow by little and
little turning Southward from the other shore, the Germane Sea (winning the
self an entry betwixt high clintes) runs within the land in a wide bosom,
and makes an healthful port and sure refuge against all tempests and storms:
the entry of it is easy, and within it is a very sure haven, against all
injuries of Sea, and a haven for great nauies of ships. Lochbroome is abundant
of Salmond and all other fishes. The towns in Rosse are the City of the
Channory, the Bishops seat with a strong Castle, the town of Rosemarky, the
Castles of Read-castle, Dingwall, the Abbey of Bewly, the castles of Cromarty,
Miltoun, Fowlis, Ballingoun, the town of Taken, the Castles of Catboll, Torbat,
Loselun, and Kayne with many others, the waters in Rosse are Cromarty, the
water Taken, the water of Naes: Also Mountains of Allabaster and hills of white
marble, there is many other parts in Rosse too longsome, to describe. Next
Rosse lies Sutterland, the special town is D^norch with a strong Castle: the
Castls of Skibow, Pulrossy, Skelbo, Clyne, Dunrobene, the Earl of Sutherlands
residence, with goodly Orchards, where grows good Saphron: the rivers are
Sutherland.
Ferryhuns, Brora Helmsdeaill, abundant in Salmond and other fishes, and good
store of bestial, there is also hills of white Marble, with salt and coal.
Next Sutherland lies Stranauern.
Stranauern, the castle of Far, where the lord of Makky has his special
residence: The Castles of Tunge, this country and Stratleigh, with sundry
Islands, as Ship-Iland, Hyp-Iland Marten-Iland, Conne-Iland are unknown to the
Author. Next lies Caithnes, where it marches with Stranauerne is the furthest
North country of all Scotland: and those two draw the breadth of Scotland in a
narrow front. In the^ are three Promontories or heads: the highest whereof is in
Stranauern, called Orcas, or Taruidum, the other two not so high are in
Caithnes, Veruedrum now named Hoya: and B^rebrum now called Dunsby, at the foot
of this hill there is a pretty haven for them that travel from Orknay by Sea,
there is mountains called Ordhead, Hoburnhead, Made^s Pape, the Castle of
Berydale, with a river abundant in Salmond and other fishes. The Castle of
Dumbeth with a goodly river, with the towns of Wcik and Thirso, with Ichone a
river. The Castle of Gerniggo, the Earl of Caithnes special residence. The
Castles of Akergile, Keis Pressik, old Weik, Ormly, Skrabstar, Dunray, Brawl,
and May, Dunnethead isa hill of Marble, the rivers are the river of Berridale,
Dunberth, Weik, Thirso Fors. This country is abundant in corns, bes^all,
Salmond, and all other fishes.

Of the Isles of Scotland in general.
NOw refleth it to speak somewhat of the Isles, they are divided (which as it
were Crown Scotland) in three classes or ranks, the West Isles, Orknay Isles,
and Shetland Isles, the west Isles lie in the Deucalidon sea, from Ireland almost
to Orkenay upon the west side of Scotland, they are called Hebrides, and by
some Aebudae: They are scattered into the Deucalidon sea, to the number of
three hundredth and above: Of old the kings of Scotland kept these Isles in their
possession, until the time of Donald brother to King Malcolme the third, who
gave them to the King of Norway, upon condition that he should assist him, in
usurping of the Kingdom of Scotland, against law and reason. The Danes and
Norway people kept possession of them for the space of 160. years: and then
King Alexander the third, ouercomming the Danes and Norway men in a great
battle, thrust them out of the Isles: yet afterward they attempted to recover
their liberty, partly, trusting to their own strength; and partly, moved by
seditions in the maine land of this Country, creating Kings of themselves, as
not long ago, John (of the house of Clandonald) did usurp the name of King, as
others had done before. In food, raiment, and all things pertaining to their
family, they use the ancient frugalitie of the Scots.

Their bankets are hunting and fishing. They sees their flesh in the tripe, or
else in the skin of the beast, filling the same full of water. Now and then
in hunting, they strain out the blood, and eat the flesh raw. Their drink is
the broth of sodden flesh. They love very well the drink made of whey, and
kept certain years, drinking the same at feasts: It is named by them,
Blandium. The most p^rt of them drink water. Their custom is to ^ake their
bread of Oats and Barley, (which are the only kinds of grain that grow in
those parts:) Experience (with time has taught the^ to make it in such sort,
that it is not vnplea sant to eat. They take a little of it in the morning, and
so passing to the hunting, or any other business, content themselves
therewith, without any other kind of meat til even.

They delight in marled clothes, specially, that have long stripes of sundry
colors: They love chiefly purple and blew. Their predecessors used short
mantles or plaids of diverse colors, sundry ways divided: and amongst some,
the same custom is observed to this day: but for the most part now, they are
brown, most near to the color of the Hadder: to the effect, when they lie
amongst the Hadder, the bright color of their plaids shall not bewray them:
with the which, rather colored, then clad, they suffer the most cruel
tempests that blow in the open field, in such sort, that under a wrythe of
Snow, they sleep sound. In their houses also, they lie upon the ground, laying
betwixt them and it, Brakens, or Hadder, the roots thereof down, and the tops
up, so prett^ily laid together that they are as soft as feather-beds, and much
more wholesome: for the tops themselves are dry of nature, whereby it dries the
weak humors, and restores again the strength of the sinews troubled before,
and that so eu^dently, that they, who at evening go to rest sore and weary,
rise in the morning whole and able. As none of these people care for
feather-beds and bedding, so take they greatest pleasure in rudeness and
hardness. If for their own commodity, or upon necessity, they travel to any
other Country, they reject the feather-beds and bedding of their Host. They
wrap themselves in their own plaids, so taking their rest: careful indeed,
lest that barbarous delicacy of the maine Land (as they term it) corrupt
their natural and Country hardness.

Their armor wherewith they cover their bodies in time of war, is an Iron
Bonnet, and an Habbergion, side almost even to their heels. Their weapons
against their enemies, are bows and arrows. The arrows are for the most part
hooked, with a barble on either side, which once entered within the body,
cannot be drawn forth again, unless the wound be made wider. Some of them
fight with broad swords and axes. In place of a drum they use a bag-pipe. They
delight much in music, but chiefly in Harpes and Clairschoes of their own
fashion. The strings of the Clairschoes are made of brasse-wire, and the
strings of the Harpes, of sinews: which strings, they strike either with their
nails, growing long; or else with an Instrument appointed for that use. They
take great pleasure to deck their Harpes and Clairschoes with silver and
precious stones: and poor ones, that cannot attain hereunto, deck them with
Cristall. They sing verses prettily compounded, containing (for the most part)
praises of valiant men. There is not almost any other argument, whereof their
rimes entreat. They speak the ancient language, altered a little.

FINIS.
A SHORT DESCRIPTION OF THE Western Isles of Scotland, lying in the Deucalidon
Sea, being above 300. ALSO THE ISLES IN ORKENAY, and Schetland or Hethland.
THE first is the I Will of Man, of old called I Will of Man, pertaining now to
England.
Dubonia, there was a Town in it named Sodor^, the Bishop of the Isles seat. It
lies almost midway betwixt Ireland and Cumber in England, and Galloway in
Scotland, 24. miles in length, and 18. in breadth. Next unto Man is Ailsay, into
the Firth of Clyde, with a Castle therein, an hard high Craig on all sides,
except at one entry, unmanured. There comes a great number of Boats there to
fish ^eeling. There are many Comes, and Solayne Geese in it. It lies betwixt
Ireland upon the Northwest, Carrik upon the Northeast, and Kyntire upon the
Southeast. 24. miles from Ailsay, lies Arrane, almost direct North, 24. miles
of length, Arrane.
and 16. of breadth. The whole Island rises in high and wild Mountains, manured
only upon the Sea side, where the ground is lowest. The Sea runs in, and
makes a well large Creek into it: the entryes whereof are closed by the Island
Molas: A very sure Haven for Ships: and in the waters, which are always
calm, is great abundance of Fish, that sundry times the country people taking
more then may sustain them for a day, they cast the (...) ^ne in the Sea, as
it were in a Sta^ke. Next (...) I Will Flada, fertile of Conyes. Further in it is
situate the ^se of B^ within the Firth of Clyde, eight miles in length, and
four in breadth, from Arrane eight miles, Southeast, and from Argyill,
Southwest, half a mile. Cwnnyngham lies, by East of it, (...) m^es. It is a
low Country, commodious for Corn and store, with a Town of the same name,
and the old Castle of Rosa; with another An ancient Castle Rosa.
Castle in the midst of it, named Cames. The I Will M^rnoca, a mile of length,
and half a mile of breadth, lies low, Southwestwards, well manured and fertile.
Within the Firth of Clyde lies little Cambra, fertile of Fallow Dear: And
great Cambra fertile of Corns. From the Mule of Kyntire, little more then a
mile, is Porticosa Auona, getting that name from the Creek of water, the kept
the Danes Navy there, at what ^e they had the Isles in their hands. Northwest
from the Mule, over against the Coast of Ireland, lies Rachuda. And from
Kyntire, four miles, is the I Will Caraia: and not far from thence Gigaia, six
miles of length, and a mile and a half of breadth. Twelve miles from Gigaia
lies Iura, four Iura.
and twenty miles of length. The Shore side of Iura is well manured: and the
inward part of the Country is ^led with Wood, full of Dear of sundry kinds.
Two miles from Iura lies Scarba, four miles in length, and a mile in breadth.
The tide of the Sea, betwixt this I Will and Iura, is so violent, that it is not
possible to pass it, e^ther by sa^le or a^re, except at certain times. At the
bache of this I Will, is the I Will Ballach, Ge^istaria, Gearastilla, Longaia, The
two Fidlais, The three Barbais, Culbremna, D^num, Co^p, Cuparia, (...),
Vikerana, Vitulina, Lumga, Scila, Scana. These three last Islands are fertile of
Corn and store, pertaining to the Earls of Argyle. Next unto them is Sklata:
named from a Sklait quarry, that is in it.

Then Naguigosa, and Eisda^a, and Skennia, and the I Will Thiania, Vderga, and the
Kings Island: then Duffa, that is black^: and the Island of the Church, (...)
Triaracha: and then the Island Ardu^, Humlis, Viridis, and Ericea. Item,
Arboraria, Capraria, Cunicularia, and the I Will named, The I Will of Idle men: and
Abridita, and Li^mora, where sometimes was the Bishops seat of Argyle, eight
miles in length, and two in breadth. In this I Will are Mines of Metals, with
other good commodityes. Then Ouilia, the Island Traiecte, the Island Garna, the
Island of the Stane, Gressa, and the great Island Ardiescara, Mus^dilla, and
Bernera, sometime called, The holy Girth, notable by the Tree Taxus, that
grows in it. Mo^ochasgia, Taxus like the Fir^e tree, the fruit thereof is
venomous. Yla.
Drinacha, full of Thorns and Bourtree, ouercouered with the ruins of old
houses. Wricht^un, fertile of Wood. Item, Ransa, Kernera. The greatest Island,
next unto Iura, Westward, is Yla, four and twenty miles in length, and
sixeteene of breadth, extended from the South to the North, abundant in store,
Corns, Dear, and Lead: there is a fresh water in it, called, Lai^; and a
Creek of salt water; and therein are many Islands. There is also a fresh water
Loch, wherein stands the Island, named, Falingania, sometime the chief seat of
all the Isles Men. There the Governor of the Isles, usurping the name of a King,
was wont to dwell. Near unto this Island, and somewhat less then it, is the
round Island, taking the name from Counsel: for therein was the Justice seat,
and fourteen of the most worthy of the Country, did minister Justice unto
all the rest, continually, and entreated of the weighty affairs of the Realm,
in Counsel, whose great equity and discretion kept peace both at home and
abroad: and with peace, was the companion of peace, abundance of all things.
Betwixt Ila and Iura, lies a little Island, taking the name from a Cairne of
stones. At the south of Ila, doel ye Colurna, Muluoris, Ossuna, Brigidana,
Corskera, The low Island, ^mersga, Beathia, Texa, Ouicularia, Noasiga, Vinarda,
Caua, Tarsheria, The great Island Auchnarra, The Island made like a Man, The
Island Island like a Man.
of John S^badis. At the west corner of Il^ Iyes Ouersa, whereth^ Sea is most
tempostuous, and at certain hours ^gable. The Merchants Island: and South
westwards from it, Vs^brasta, Tanasta, and Nefa. The Weauers Island. The weauers
Island.
8. miles from Ila, somewhat North, lies Ornansa. Next unto it the Swines
Island. Half a mile from Ornansa, Col^ansa. North from Col^ansa, lies the Mule,
20. miles from Ila. The Mule.
This I Will is 24. miles of length, and as much in breadth, fruitful of Corns:
there are many Woods in it, and many Herds of Dear, and a good Haven for
Ships: there are in it two waters well spread of Salmond Fishes, and some
stripes not empty thereof. There are also two Loches in it, and in every one an
Island, and in every Island a Tower. The Sea running in this Island at 4. sundry
parts, makes 4. salt water Loches therein, all 4. abounding in Herring. To the
Northwest lies Columbaria, or the Dowe Island: to the Southeast, Era: both the
one and the other profitable for Bea^iall, Cor^, and for fishings. From this
Island lies the Island of Sanctcolm^, two miles of length, and more then a mile
of breadth, fertile of all things, renowned by the ancient Monuments of the
Country. There were two Abbeyes in this Island, and a Court or a Parish Church,
with many Chapels, builded of the liberality of the Kings of Scotland, and
Governors of the Isles. There is as yet remaining amongst the old Ruins, a
Burial place, or Churchyard, Burial places of the Kings of Scotland.
common to all the Noble Families of the West Isles, wherein there are three
Tombs higher then the rest, distant one from another a little space, and three
little Houses, situated to the East, builded severally upon the three Tombs:
upon the West side are stones graven, which stand in the midst, bearing this
title, The Tombs of the Kings of Scotland. It is said, there were 48. Kings of
Scotland buried there. The Tomb upon the rightside has this inscription:
Kings of Ireland.
The Tombs of the Kings of Ireland. It is recorded, that there were four
Kings of Ireland buried there. Upon the left side it has this inscription: The
Tombs of the Kings of Norway. The report is, that there were 8. Kings Kings of
Norway.
of that Nation ^uryed there. The notable houses of the Isles have their T^nbes
in the rest of the Churchyard, severally by themselves. About this Island, and
^re unto it, there are s^e Islands, right fruitful, given by the ancient Kings
of Scotland, and Governors of the Isles, to the Abbey of Sanctcolme. So^ is a
very profitable ground for sheep, but the chief commodityes of it consist in
Sea Fowls that build there^t, specially of their Eggs. Next unto it is the
I Will of Women: then Rudana. Near unto it Be^nira; and from that Skennia, half
a mile distant from the Mule. The Sea sides of it abo^ in C^es. Five miles
hence lies From. All their Isles are subject to Sanctcolmes Abbey. Two miles
from Fresa lies V^lua, five miles of length, fruitful of Corn and shore,
with a commodious Haven for Galleys or ^ates.

Upon the South side of it lies Toluansa, with a Wood of Nut^s, reas^able
fruitful. About three hundred paces from this Island lies Gomatra, two miles
long, and one mile bro^d, extending from the North to the South. From Go^,
four miles Southward, lie two S^affae, both full of ^ing places. From thence,
four miles Southeast, lie the two Ke^burgae, the more and the less, enui^oned
with such sho^e, high, and furious fide, that by their own natural de^
(supported somewhat by the industry of man) they are altogether invincible.
One mile from them lies an Island, the whole earth is blac^e, whereof the people
make Peat^ for their (...). Next lies Longa, two miles of length, and B^cha
half as much. From Bacha six miles lies Tiria, eight miles in length, and
three in breadth, most fertile of all the Ihon^s, it (...) in store, Corns,
Fishings, and Sea to wie^. In this ^and, there is a fresh water Lorh, and
therein an old Castle, with a good haven for Boats. From this Island two miles
lies Sunna, and from Sunna as far lies Colla, 12. miles of length, and 2.
miles of breadth: a fertile Island. Not far from it is Culsa, almost full of
wood: and then two Islands, named Mekle Viridis, and Little Viridis. Item, other
two of the same names. Ouer-against the Mules head, and not far from it lie
two Islands, named Glassae, and then Arden-Eider, that is, the high land of the
Rider. Then Luparia, or the Woolfe Island: and after it a great I Will, lying north
from Colla, extending East and West. Then Ruma, 16. miles in length, and 6. in
breadth: the Sea-Fowles lay there Eggs here and there in the ground: in the
midst of Spring time when the Eggs are laid, any man may take of them. In the
high Rocks the Solayne Geese are taken in abundance. From this Island, four
miles North-East-ward lies the Horse Island. From it half a mile, The Horse
Island. Swine Island.
Swine Island, fruitful enough in all things necessary: the Falcon builded in
it, with a good Haven. Not far from it, lies Canna and Egga, fertile enough.
In Egga are Solayne G^ese. Soabrittella profitable for hunting. From this Island
is the I Will of Sky, the greatest of all the Islands that are about Scotland,
lying North and South 40. miles in length, and 8. miles broad in some places,
and in other places 12. miles, rising in Hills, in sundry places full of Woods
and Pastorage: The ground thereof fertile in corn and store: and besides all
other kinds of bestiall, fruitful of Mares, for breeding of Horse: it has five
great Rivers rich in Salmond, and many little waters, plenty of Salmond and
other Fishes. The Sea running in the land on all sides, make many Salt waters:
Three principal, and 13. others: all rich in Herring. There is in it a fresh
water Loch, and ^e Castles. About the Sky, lie little Islands, scattered here
and there. Oronsa, fertile in Corn and store. Cunicularia, full of Bushes and
Connyes. next is Paba. 8. miles from Paba Southwest, lies Scalpa, which
(besides sundry other commodities) has woods full of troops of Dear. Betwixt
the mouth of Zochcarron and Raorsa, lies Crulinga, 7. miles of length, and two
of breadth: there is a sure Haven in it for ships: There are in it also woods
full of Bucke and Dear.

Half a mile from Crulinga is Rona, full of wood and hadder, with a good Haven
in the innermost Lorh thereof: in the mouth of the same Lorh, is an Island of
the same Name, called Ger-loch. From Rona six miles Northward, lies Flada: Two
miles from Flada, Euilmena. Upon the South side of Sky, lies Oronsa, and a
mile from it, Knya, Pabra, and great Bina: and then five little Islands. Next
unto them is Isa, fertile in Corns. Beside it is Ouia; then Askerma, and
Lindell^. 8. miles from Sky Southward, lies Linga and Gigarmena, Benera,
Megala, Pana, Flada, Scarpa, Veruecum, Sandara, Vatersa, which by many other
good commodityes, has a Haven commodious for a number of great Ships,
whereinto Fishermen of all Countries about, conuene certain times of the year
ordinarily. These last nine Islands are subject to the Bishop of the Isles. Two
miles from Vatersa is Barra, running from the Northwest, to the Southeast,
seven miles in length, fruitful of corns, and abundant in Fish: there
runs in it a Lorh, with a narrow throat, growing round and wide within: in
it there is an Inche, and therein a strong Castle. Upon the Northside of Barra,
there rises an Hill full of Herbs, from the foot to the head, upon the top
whereof, is a fresh water Well: The spring that runs from this Well, to the
next Sea, caryes with it little things, like as they were quick, but having
the shape of no beast, which appear (although obscurely) in some respect, to
represent the fish that is commonly called, Cockles: The people that dwell
there, call the part of the shore whereunto these things are carried, The great
Sands: because yt when the Sea ebbes, there appears nothing but dry Sands, the
space of a mile. Out of these Sands the people dig out great Cockles, which the
Neighbors about judge, either to grow (as it were) of that seed that the
springs do bring from the well, or else (indeed) to grow in that Sea. Betwixt
Barra and Wist lie these Islands: Oronsa, Onia, Hakerseta, Garnlanga, Flada,
great Buya, little Buya, Haya, Hell S^, Gigaia, Lingaia, Foraia, Fudaia,
Erisoaia. From these Islands Vistus lies Northward, 34. miles of length, and 6.
of breadth. The tide of the Sea, running in two places of this I Will, causes it
to appear three Islands, but when the tide is out, it becomes all one Island.
In it are many fresh water Loches, specially one, three miles long. The Sea
has worn in upon the Land, and made it self a passage to this Loch, and can
never be holden out, albeit the Inhabitants have made a wall of 60. foot
broad, to that effect. The water enters in amongst the stones, that are
builded up together, and leaves behind it, at the ebb, many Sea Fishes. There
is a Fish in it like to the Salmond in all things, except, that with the white
womb, it has a black back, and wants scales. In this Island are many fresh
water Loches, sundry Caves, covered with Hadder. In it are five Churches. Eight
miles West from it lies Hel^ther Vetularum, pertaining to the Nuns of the I Will
of Ione. A little further North rises Haneskera: about this Island, at certain
times of the year, are many Sealches, they are taken by the Country men.
Southwest, almost 60. miles, lies Hirta, fertile in Corns and store, and
specially in Sheep, greater then any other Sheep, in any other Islands. About
the 17. day of June, the Lord of this Island sends his Chamberlayne to gather
his duties, and with him a Minister, who baptizeth all the Children that are
borne the year preceding: and if the Minister come not, every man baptizeth
his own Child. This Hirtha is the last and farthest I Will in Albion: so that
betwixt the I Will of Man, being the first I Will in Albion, and this I Will, there is
377. miles. Returning to Wistus, from the north point thereof, is the Island
Velaia, two miles long, and one mile of breadth. Betwixt this point, and the
Island (...), lies Soa, Stroma, Pabaia, Barneraia, E^saia, Keligira, little
Saga, great Saga, Harmodra, Scaria, Grialinga, Cillinsa, Hea, Hoia, little Soa,
great Soa, Isa, great Seuna, little Seuna, Taransa, Slegana, Tuemon. All these
Islands are fruitful of Corns and store.

Above Horea, is Scarpa. And half a mile toward the West Equinoctial, from
the Lewis, lys seven little Islands, named Flananae, some holy place (in old
times) of girth or refuge, rising up in hill^s full of Herbs. Further, North,
in the same rank, lies Garn-Ellan, that is, she hard I Will, Lamba, Flada,
Kellasa, little Bernera, great Bernera, Kirta, great Bina, little Bina, Vexaia,
Pabaia, great Sigrama, Cunicularia, plenty of Conyes, little Sigrama. The Island
of the Pigmeis, Island of Pigmeis.
wherein there is a Church, in which the Pigmeis were buried, (as they that are
neighbors to this Island believe.) Sundry strangers, digging deeply in the
ground, sometimes have found, and yet to this day do find very little round
heads, and other little bones of man's body, which seems to approve the truth
and appearance of the common brute. In the Northeast side of the Island Leogus,
there are 2. Loches, running forth of the Sea, named, The North and South
Loches, wherein at all times of the year, there is abundance of Fish, for all
men that list to take them. From the same side of the Loch, somewhat more
Southerly, lies Fabilla, Adams Island, The Lamb Island. Item, Hulmetia,
Viccoilla, Hana, Rera, Laxa, Era, The Dowe Island, Tora, Affurta, Scalpa, Flada,
Senta: at the East side thereof, there is a passage under the earth, vaulted
above a flight shoot of length, into the which, little Boats may either sail
or row, for eschewing of the violent tide. Somewhat Eastwards lies an Island,
named, Old Castle, a room strong of nature, and plenty of Corns, Fish, and
Eggs, of Sea Fowls, to nourish the Inhabitants. At that side where Lochbrien
enters, is situate the Island Ew. More Northerly lies the Island Grumorta: both
these Islands full of Wood. The Island, named, The Priests Island, lies the same
way, profitable for pastorage of Sheep, and full of Sea Fowls. Next unto it
is Afulla, and great Habrera: then little Habrera: and near unto it, The Horse
I Will; and then Marta Ika. These last mentioned Islands lie all before the entry
of Lochbrie^: and from them, North, lie Hary, and Lewis, 16. miles of length,
and 16. of breadth: Lewis.
These 3. make an Island, which is not divided by any Haven (...) Port of the
Sea, but by the several Lordships of the heritours thereof. The South part is
named, Haray: in it sometime was the Abbey Roadilla, builded by Maccleude
Har^is, a Country fertile enough in Corns, and good Pastorage, with a high
Hill, ouercouered with grass, to the very top: many Sheep are seen feeding
there masterlesse, pertaining peculiarly to no man; for there is neither
Woolfe, Fox, or Serpent seen there: albeit, betwixt that and Lewis, there be
great Woods full of Dear. In that part of the Island is a Water, well stored of
Salmond, and other Fishes: Upon the North-side it is well manured: Upon the Sea
side there are four Churches, one Castle, 7. great running Waters, and 12.
less: all plentiful of Salmond, and other Fishes. The Sea enters in the Land
in diverse parts, making sundry salt water Loches, all plentiful of Herring,
with abundance of Sheep.

In this Country is great abundance of Barley. In this Island is such abundance
of Whales taken (as aged men report) their tenth will extend to 27. Whales:
also a great Cave, wherein the Sea at a low water abides two faddome high, and
at a full Sea, four faddome deep. People of all sort and ages sit upon the
Rocks thereof, with hook and line, taking great multitude of all kind of
Fishes.

Southeast from Lewis, almost 60. miles, there is a fertile Island, low and
plain, ^alled, Rona, well manured: Rona.
the Lord of the ground limits certain number of Households to occupy it,
appoynting for every Household, few or many, Sheep, according to his pleasure,
whereon they may easily live and pay his rent. In this Island is a Chapel,
dedicated to Saint Ronan, wherein (as aged men report) there is always a
Spade, wherewith, when any is dead, A marvel.
they find the place of his grave marked. Besides other Fishes in this Island,
is great plenty of Whales. Sixeteene miles from Rona, West, lies Suilkeraia, a
mile of length: but in it grows no kind of Herb, not so much as Hadder. Sea
Fowls lay Eggs there, and do hatch. They of Leogus, next neighbors unto it,
get great profit thereby. In that Island is seen a rare kind of Foul, unknown
to other Countries, called, Colca, little less then a Colca, (...) foul un
known.
Goose: they come in the Spring time, and every year hatch and nourish their
Young ones. They cast their Feathers, which have no stalk, like unto down.

Now follow the Isles of Orknay, (of old called, The Orknay.
Realm of the Picts) lying scattered, partly in the Deucalidon Sea, partly in
the Germane Seas. The common people to this day are very careful to keep the
ancient frugality of their Predecessors, and in that respect they continue in
good health, for the most part, both in mind and body, so that few dye of
sickness, but all for age.

They have Barley and Oats, whereof they make both bread and drink.

They have sufficient ^ore of quick goods, Neat, Sheep, and Goats, great
plenty of Milk, Cheese, and Butter.

They have innumerable Sea Fowls, whereof (and of Fish, for the most part)
they make their common food.

There is no Uenemous Beast in Orknay.

There is is no kind of Tree, except Hadder.

They have an old Cup, amongst them, called, Saint Saint Magnus Cup.
Magnus Cup, the first man that brought the Christian Religion in that Country.

There are about 33. Islands in Orknay: whereof 13. are inhabited: the remnant
are reserved for nourishing of Cattle.

The greatest I Will is named, Pomona. The firm land, thirty miles of length,
sufficiently inhabited.

It has 12. Country Parish Churches, and one Town, called Kirkwaa. Kirkwaa.


In this Town there are two Towers, builded not far the one from the other.
One of them appertaynes to the King, the other appertaynes to the Bishop.

Betwixt these 2. Towers stands one Church, very magnifique: betwixt the Church
and the Towers, on either side, are sundry goodly buildings, which the
Inhabitants name, The Kings Town, and, The Bishops Town. The whole Island
runs out in Promontories or heads, the Sea running in, and makes sure Havens
for ships, and Harbors for Boats. In 6. sundry places of this I Will, there are
Mines of good Lead and Tin, as is to be found in any part of Britayne. This
Island is distant from Caithnes about 24. miles, divided by the Picts Sea. In
this Sea are diverse Islands, scattered here and there: of whom, Stroma, lying 4.
miles from Caithnes, is one, very fruitful: the Earls of Caithnes being Lords
thereof. Northward lies South Ranalsa, 5. miles long, with a commodious Haven;
with 2. little Islands, or Holmes, good for Pastorage. Toward the North lies
Burra, Suna, Flata, Fara, Hoia, and Wales.

In these Islands are the highest Hills, that are in all Orknay. Hoia, and
Walls, are 10. miles of length, distant from Ranalsay, eight miles, and more
then twenty from Dunkirke in Caithnes. North is the I Will Granisa, and Cobesa.
Siapinsa, turning somewhat East, lies, two miles from Kirkwaa, even oueragaynst
it, six miles of length. Right West from Siapinsa are Garsa, and Eglisa, 4.
miles of length. In this Island, they say, Saint Magnus is buried. Next, and
somewhat nearer the continent land, is Rusa, four miles of length, and three
miles of breadth, well peopled. Westward lies the Island Broca. Some Islands lie
to the North, as Stronza, next Linga, five miles of length, and two of breadth.

Haa, five miles of length, and two of breadth. By East lies Fara. And North
from Fara, lies Wastra, running out in the Sea, in Promontories or heads. Above
Stronza, at the East end of Etha, lies Sanda, Northward, 10. miles of length,
and four of breadth, most fertile of Corns of all the Isles of Orknay; but it
has no kind of fire within it, making exchange of Corns for Peats. Beyond
Sanda, lies, North, Ranalsaa, 2. miles of length, and two of breadth. Upon the
South si^e of Pomona lies Rusa, 6. miles of length: and from it Eastward
Eglisa: South Veragersa: and not far from it Westraa; from which, Hethland is
distant 80. miles; and Papastronza lies 80. miles from Hethland. In the midway
betwixt lies Fara, that is, the ^yre Island, standing in the sight of Orknay,
and Hethland both: it rises in three Promontories or heads, and shore Craig
round about, without any kind of entrance, except at the Southeast, where it
grows little lower; making a sure Harboro^ for small Boats. Next is the
greatest I Will of all Hethland, named, Hethland.
The Mayne-land, 16. miles of length: There are sundry Promontories or heads in
it, specially two, one long and small, which runs North: the other broader,
in some part, 16. miles, runs Northeast, inhabited upon the Sea coast. There
is good Fishing in all these parts; the peoples commodity standing most by the
Sea. Ten miles North lies Zeall, 20. miles of length, and 8. miles of breadth:
the Bremes Merchants do bring all wares needful. Betwixt this Island and the
Mayne-land, lie Linga, Orna, Bigga, Sanctferri. Two miles Northward lies Vnsta,
more then 20. miles of length, and six miles of breadth, a pleasant Country
and plain. Via and Vra, are betwixt Vnsta and Zeall. Skenna and Burna, lie
Westward from Vnsta, Balta, Hunega, Forlora, seven miles long: and seven miles
Eastward from Vnsta, Mecla, with the three Islands of east Skennia, ^hualsa,
Nostwad^, Brasa, and Musa: upon the West side lie West Sche^niae, Rorira,
little Papa, Veneda, great Papa, Valla, Trondar, Burra, great Haura, little
Haura, and many other Holmes, lying scattered amongst them. The Hethlandish men
use the same kind of food that the Orkney man use, but that they are more
scarce in house keeping. In this Island no kind of She Beast will live 24.
hours together, except Ky, Ewes, Conyes, and such like beasts, as may be
eaten. The people are apparelled after the Almayne fa^ion, and according to
their substance, not unseemly. Their commodity consists in course Cloth,
which they sell to Norway men, with Fish, Oil, and Butter. They fish in little
Cockboates, bought from Norway men that make them: they salt some of the Fish
that they take, and some of them they dry in the wind. They sell th^se Wares,
and pay their Masters with the silver thereof.

Of the great plenty of Hares, Red Dear, and other wild Beasts in Scotland. Of
the strange propertyes of sundry Scottish Dogs: And of the nature of Salmond.
Having made this special description of the Realm of Scotland: Now touching
some things concerning the same in general. In ye Fields, and in all places of
the Country, (except the parts where continual habitation of people makes
impediment) there is great abundance of Hares, Red Dear, Fallow Dear, Roes,
Wild Horses, Wolves, and Foxes, and specially in the High Countries of Athole,
Argyle, Lorne, Loch-aber, Mar, and Badzenoch, where is sundry times seen
1500. Red Dear, being hunted all together. These Wild Horses are not gotten
but by great slight and policy: for Wild Horses.
in the Winter season the Inhabitants turn certain tame Horses and Mares
amongst them, wherewith in the end they grow so familiar, that they afterward
go with them to and fro; and finally, home into their Masters Yards, where they
be taken, and soon broken to their hands, the Owners obtaining great profit
thereby. The W^lues are most fierce and Wolves.
noisome unto the Herds, and Flocks, in all parts of Scotland. Foxes do much
mischief in all steads, chiefly in the Mountains, where they be hardly
hunted: howbeit, Foxes.
Art has devised a mean to prevent their malice, and to preserve the Poultry
in some part: and especially in Glenmoores every house nourishes a young Fox,
and then killing the same, they mix the flesh thereof amongst such meat as
they give unto the Fowls, and other little bestiall: And by this means, so
many Fowls or Cattle as eat hereof, are safely preserved from the danger of
the Fox, by the space of almost two months after, so that they may wander
whither they will: for the Foxes smelling the flesh of their fellows, yet in
their crops, will in no ways meddle with them, but eschew and know such a one,
although it were among a hundred of other. In Scotland are Dogs of marvelous
condition, above the nature of other Dogs. The first is, a Hound of Three sort
of Dogs.
great swiftnes, hardines, and strength, fierce and cruel upon all wild beasts,
and eger against Thieues, that offer their masters any violence. The second is
a Rach or Hound, very exquisite in following the foot (which is called
drawing) whether it be of man or beast, yea he will pursue any manner of foul,
and find out whatsoever fish, haunting the land, or lurking amongst the Rocks,
specially the Otter, by that excellent sent Otter.
of smelling, wherewith he is indewed.

The third sort is no greater then the aforesaid Raches, in color for the most
part red, with black spots, or else black Sleuthhound.
and full of red marks: These are so skillful (being used by practice) that
they will pursue a Thief, or thiefe-stollen Goods, in most precize manner, and
finding the trespasser, with great audacity they will make a race upon him, or
if he take the water for his safeguard, he shrinketh not to follow him: and
entering and issuing at the same places where the party went in and out, he
never cease to range, till he has noysed his footing, and be come to the
place, wherein the Thief is shrouded or hid. These Dogs are called
Sleuthhounds: There was a Law amongst the borderers of England and Scotland,
that whosoever denied entrance to such a Hound, in pursuit mads after Fellons
and stolen goods, should be holden as accessory unto the theft, or taken for
the self same Thief.

Of Fowls, such as (I mean) live by prey, there are sundry sorts in Scotland,
as Eagles, Falcons, Go^hawks, Sparhawks, Marlions, and such like: but of water
Fowls there is so great store, that the report thereof may seem to exceed
all credit. There are other kinds of Fowls, the like are rare to be seen, as
the Capercaily, greater in body then the Raven, Capercaily. Moore Cock. Black
Cock.
living only by the rindes and barks of trees. There are also many Moore
Cocks and Hens, which abstayning from corn, do ^eede only upon Hadder
crops. These two are very delicate in eating: the third is reddish, black of
color, in quantity comparable to the Pheasant, and no less delicious in taste
and savor at the table, called The black or wild Cocks.

Salmond is more plentiful in Scotland, then in any other Salmond
Region of the world: in Harvest time they come from the Seas, up in small
Rivers, where the waters are most shallow, and there the Male and Female,
rubbing their bellies, or wombs, one against the other, they shed their Spawne,
which forthwith they cover with sand and gravel, and so depart away: from
henceforth they are gaunt and ^lender, and in appearance so lean, appearing
naught else but skin and bone: and therefore out of use and season to be eaten.
Some say, if they touch any their full fellows, during the time of their
leanenesse, the same side which they touched will likewise become lean.

The foresaid Spawne and milt, being hidden in the sand, (as you have heard) in
the next ^pring does yield great numbers of little Fry, so nesh and tender for
a long time, that till they come to be so great as a man's finger (if you catch
any of them) they melt away, as it were gelly or a blob of water: from
henceforth they go to the Sea, where within 20. days, they grow to a
reasonable greatness, and then returning to the place of their generation,
they show a notable spectacle to be con^idered. There are many Lin^es or
p^oles, which being in some places among the Rocks, very shallow about, and
deep beneath, with the fall of the water, and thereto the Salmond not able to
pierce through the channel, either for swiftness of the course, or depth of
the descent, he goes so n^re unto the side of the Rock or Damme as he may,
and there aduenturing to leap over, and up into the Linne, if he leap well at
the first, he obtayneth his desire, if not, he assayeth e^soones the second or
third time, till he return to his country. A great Fish, able to swim
against the stream: such as assay often to leap, and cannot get over, do
bruise themselves, and become meazelled: others that happen to fall upon dry
land (a thing often seen) are taken by the people (watching their time:) some
in Cawdrons of hot water, with fire under them, sit upon shallow or dry places,
in hope to catch the fattest, by reason of their weight, that do leap short.
The taste of these are esteemed most delicate, and their prices commonly great.
In Scotland it is straightly inhibited to take any Salmond from the 8. of
September, until the 15. of November. Finally, there is no man yt knows
readily whereon this Fish lives, for never was any thing yet found in their
bellyes, other then a thick s^ymy humor. In the Deserts and wild places of
Scotland, there grows an Herb of it self, called, Hadder or Hather, very
delicate for Hadde^.
all kind of Cattle to feed upon; and also for diverse Fowls, but Bees
especially: this Herb, in June, yields a purple flower, as sweet as hunny,
whereof the Picts, in times past, did make a pleasant drink, and very
wholesome for the body: but since their time, the manner of the making hereof is
perished in the subuersi^n of the Picts, neither showed they ever the learning
hereof to any but to their own Nation.

There is no part of Scotland so unprofitable (if it were skilfully searched)
but it produces either Iron or some other kind of Metal, as may be proved
through all the Isles of Scotland.

A memorial of the most rare and wonderful things of Scotland.
AMong many commodityes, that Scotland has common with other Nations, it is
beautified with some rare gifts in it self, wonderful to consider: as for
example.

In Orknay, the Ewes are of such fecundity, that at every Lambing time, they
produce, at least, two, and ordinary three. There be neither venomous nor
ravenous Beasts bred there, nor do live there, although they were tr^ported
thither.

In Schetland, the Isles called, ^hulae, at the entering of the Sun in Cancer,
the space of 20. days, there appears no night at all. Among the Rocks grows
the delectable Lambre, called, Succinum, with great resort of the Mertrik, for
costly Furrings. In the West, and Northwest of Scotland, there is a great
repayring of the Erne, of a marvelous nature; The Erne.
the people are very curious to catch him, and punze his wings, that he fly
not: he is of a huge quantity, and a ravenous kind, as the Hawks, and the same
quality: they do give him such sort of meat, in great quantity at once, that he
lives contented there with 14. 16. or 20. days, and some of them a month:
their Feathers are good for garnishing of Arrows, for they receive no rain
nor water, but remain always of a durable estate, and incorruptible: the
people do use them either when they be a hunting, or at wars. In the most of
the Rivers in Scotland, beside the marvelous plenty of Salmond, and other
Fishes gotten there, is a Shell Fish, called, The Horse-mussell, of a great
quantity; wherein are engendered innumerable fair, beautiful, and d^lectable
Pearls, Pearls.
convenient for the pleasure of man, and profitable for the use of Physic:
and some of them so fair and polished, that they may be equal to any
Oriental Pearls. And generally, by the providence of Almighty God, when
dearth and scarcity of victuals are in the land, then the Fishes are most
plentifully taken, for the support of the people. In Galloway, the one half of
Loch Mirton, does never freese. By Innernes, the Lochmirton. Lochnes
Loch; called, Lochnes, and the River flowing from thence into the Sea, does
never freese but on the contrary, in the coldest days of winter, the Loch and
River do both smoke and reeke, signifying unto us, that there is a Mine of
Brimstone under it, of a hot quality. In Carrik are Kyne and Oxen, delicious
to (...), but their ^esse is of a wonderful temperature: all other ^estable
Beasts fatness, with the cold air does congeale: by the contrary, the fatnes
of these Beasts is perpetually liquid, like Oil.

The Woo and Park of Commernauld is replenished with Kyne and Oxen, and those,
at all times, to this day, White Kyne and Oxen.
have been wild, and of a wonderful whitenes, that there was never among all
yt huge number there, so much as the smallest black spot found to be upon one
of their sainnes, horns, or cl^e. In Kyle is a Rock, of the height of 12.
foot, and as much of breadth, called, The deaf Craig: for although a Deaf
Craig.
man should cryneuer so loud to his fellow, from the one side to the other,
he is not heard, although he would make the noise of a Gunne. In the Country
of Stratherne, upon the water of Farg, by Bal^ard, there is a Stone, called,
The Rockand Stone.
Rock and Stone, of a reasonable bigness, that if a man will push it with the
least motion of his finger, it will move very lightly, but if he shall
address his whole force, he profits nothing: which mooues many people to be
wonderful merry, when they consider such contrariety.

In Lennox is a great Loch, called Loch-lowmond, 24. Lochlowmo^d
miles in length, and in breadth 8. miles, containing the number of 30. Isles: In
this Loch is observed 3. wonderful things: The one is Fishes, very delectable
to eat, yt have no fynnes to move themselves withal, as other Fishes do. The
second, tempestuous. Waves and Su^ges of the water, perpetually raging, without
winds, and that in the time of greatest calmes, in the fair pleasant time of
Su^^r, when the air is quiet. The third is, one of these Isles, that is not
corroborat, nor united to the ground, but have been perpetually loose: and
although it be fertile of good grass, and replenished with Neat, yet it moves
by ye waves of the water; and is transported, sometimes toward one point, and
other whiles toward another.

In Argyle is a Stone found in diverse parts, the which laid under Straw or
Stubble, does consume them to fire, by the great heat that it collects there.

In Buquhan, at the demolished Castle of Sl^, is a Ca^, from the top whereof
^illes water, which in short time does congeale to hard white stones: the Cave
is always emptied.

In Louthian, 2. miles from Edinburgh, Southward, is a Well spring, called,
Saint Katherins Well, flowing perpetually, S. Katherins well.
with a kind of black famesse or Oil, above the water, proceeding (as is
thought) of the Parret Coal, being frequent in these parts: this fatnes is of
a marvelous nature: for as the Coal, whereof it proceeds, is sudden to
conceive fire or flame, so is this Oil of a sudden operation to heal all salt
scabs and humors, that trouble the outward skin of man: commonly the head
and hands are quickly healed by this Oil: it renders a marvelous sweet smell.
At Abridene is a Well, The Well at Abridene.
of marnelous good quality to dissolve ye Stone, to expel Sand from ye Rey^es
and Bladder, and good for the Colic, being drunk in the month of July, and
a few days of August. Little inferior to the renomed water of the Spaw in
Almaine. In the North Seas of Scotland are great Clog^ of Timber sound, in the
which are maruelously engendered a sort of Geese, called, Clayk Geese, and do
hang by the beak, till they be of perfection, Clayk Geese.
often times sound, and kept in admiration of their rare generation. At
Dumbartan, directly under the Castle, at the mouth of the River of Clyde, as it
enters in ye Sea, there are a number of Clayk Geese, black of color, which in
the night Black Clayk Geese.
time do gather great quantity of the crops of the grass, growing upon the
land, and carry the same to the Sea: then assembling in a round, and with a
wondrous curiostly, do offer every one his own portion to the Sea flood, and
there attend upon the flowing of the tide, till the grass be purified from ye
fresh taste, and turned to the salt: and left any part thereof should escape,
they labor to hold it in with their nebs: thereaster orderly every Foul eats
his portion: and this custom they observe perpetually. They are very fat and
delicious to be eaten.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page (...). lin. (...). word^, for wierds. p. 42. l. 35. Malonus, Malcolme. p.
66. l. 35. buries, bears. p. 77. l. 10. Higger, Bigger. Ibid. l. ^5. piece,
p^. p. 7^. l. (...). T^, Ty^ p. 87. l. 17. hal-^ds, halyards. Ibid. l. 31. and
32. Pictonweme. Pittinweme. Ibid, l. (...). bufy, bufy. p. 88. l. (...).
Kipper, Kippo. p. 92. l. (...). Po^yll, Po^yll. p. ^6. l. 1^. new, other.

(...). Page 5. (...). 2^. Rocira, (...) Ro^ia. Ibid. (...). 2^. Trondar, for
Trondra.

Printed at London by Simon S^afford.


