THE CA^^^NTERS RVLE, Or, A BOOK SHOWING MANY (...) ways, truly to measure
ordinary Timber, and other extraordinary sollids, or Timber: WITH A DETECTION
OF SUNDRY great errors, generally committed by Carpenters and others in
measuring of Timber; tending much to the buyers great loss.

PVBLISH^^ ESPECIALLY FOR THE GOOD of the (...) Carpenters in London, and
others also; and is very (...) for Masons, Shipwrights, Ioyners, and (...) to
measure Timber and Board, and (...) other superficies and sollids.

By R^HARD MORE Carpenter.



AT LONDON Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON. 1602.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL SIR HENRY BILLINGSLEY Knight, Alderman of the City
of London.
RIght worshipful, when I had often considered the great errors, and by error
the great loss coming to this City, in measuring of Timber after the common
ways; and had long expected some man's endeavor for redress, but saw none: I
was in a sort provoked (though the unfittest of a number) to attempt this
thing. And because it is not otherwise likely, but that I in this case, shall
have many opposers: I have therefore emboldned my self, humbly to desire your
worships protection: craving also your favorable acceptance, of this my poor
labor; that so it may be the better accepted for the common good.

Neither is my desire, only to entreat your worships favor and protection,
but also to testify my dutiful thankfulness for your great pains and no small
cost, in publishing in our English (...) Euclide^ Elements of Geometry. A
book, from which (...) well may, so my self needs must confess, that I have
received all that little insight in Geometry, which I have attained unto. Yea
such is that book (as I may well say) that if men's tongues should be silent,
yet their actions would not spare, plainly to declare the worthiness thereof, to
the praise of your labors. And thus in all duty, craving your worships
protection of (...) small fruit of your own labors; craving also pardon for
my boldness, I humbly take my leave: desiring God to bless and keep you in
all good estate, to the glory of his name, the benefit of the Commonwealth,
and the good of your self, in this life and the next.

Your Worships (...) all duty RICHARD MORE.

TO THE WORSHIPFVL, THE MASTER, WARDENS, AND Assistants of the Company of
Carpenters of the City of London: And to all other the courteous Readers.
AFter I had long considered, and that not without some grief, the great loss
that comes to those of my Company and others, by errors ordinarily committed
in measuring of timber; I did often think with my self what might be the
readiest course to redress them. One while I thought to have declared to you
the Master and Wardens, what errors I had observed in our ordinary measure,
and so to have desired you in all duty to have provided a remedy. But when I
perceived, that custom had caused error to be received as a truth, and that
therefore men would not forsake them, unless they were plainly convinced to
have erred: And when I did also see, that most men are very ignorant in true
measure, though they seem and profess to know much therein; and did also
remember that not only Carpenters in this City do in this sort err, but also
Carpenters elsewhere, as also Shipwrights and others, and that throughout the
whole land, for the most part: then this course seemed to me to be too private,
and such as was like to do but little good. The best course that I could
think upon, was, to publish some book, wherein not only true measure should
be set down, but also the common errors plainly laid open to the capacity of
the simplest; that so all men might take knowledge thereof.

My self I knew to be very unfit for this work, both because of mine
inabilitie, as also by reason of some exceptions that diverse might take against
me, to their own hindrance and my discouragement. But when I saw none
addressed hereunto then (remembering the saying of a Heathen, that men are (...)
for themselves, but for their Country) I did set aside all lets, and both
boldly and rudely have put out this my simple book, in manner as you see.

The book I have divided into three parts. In the first part I declare the
errors most commonly committed, and taken for truth, in measuring of timber. In
the second part I show how ordinary timber may be measured, both by sundry
plain ways, as also by ways more artificial. And in the third part I show,
how extraordinary timber and sollid forms may be measured.

The errors ordinarily committed in measuring timber, are many. But of them
all, especially two, brings loss to the buyer. The first is by buying of
waynie timber and measuring it as square. The other is by taking half the
breadth and thicknes of a piece being added together, for the square thereof.

These errors are such, as bring apparent damage: and therefore they are not
to be respected lightly. I would they might not be said to be a great cause,
if not of the overthrow, yet of the impairing of some men's estates.

For as for wainie timber, who knows not, that as it is often measured and
hewed, a load and a half will not go so far in use, as a load of good
timber being well hewed and justly measured.

And as for haluing the sum of the two sides for the square, the damage
hereby is exceeding much; not only to those that buy much Timber at the first
hand, but also, and that especially (which is the more pity) to the poorer
sort that buy at the second hand. For my self have abated of that which
workmen themselves have measured a piece unto by the foresaid false way, after
3, 4, 5, yea 6 foot of timber in 20: and yet I have given them no more then
their measure.

I cannot stand to amplify these errors in this place: they are more fully set
down in the book it self. By which (if they be well weighed and considered
upon) it will plainly appear to be true as I have said, namely, that there
comes great loss by the ordinary measuring of timber.

Now seeing the case so stands, my desire and request is, even to every man,
but especially to you the Master, Wardens, and Assistants of our Company; that
you would put your helping hand to reform these errors. Many reasons might be
alleged to induce you hereunto, but for some reasons best known to my self,
I omit them all, not doubting of your care and regard hereunto.

I have heard some men wish, that we had an act of Parliament procured for
redress of false measure. But truly that seems to be the law of our land
already, though not the statute law: for the law intends that the buyer
should have that which he buyeth. And when we buy a load of timber, do we not
intend that we have bought 50. foot of sollid timber, every foot being full
12. inches every way, that is, in length, breadth and thicknes? Why then may we
not require so much for a load, and why is not the seller bound to deliver it?
And if a man that buyeth twenty bushels of wheat, will not take ninteene; or
if he buy a yard of cloth, he will not take three quarters: Then why should we
(buying a load of timber) take 40. foot for it, yea and less too (as often
times it falls out) whereas we should have 50. foot.

I know that many men will object many things; and it is not for me at this
time to refute them. Only whereas some may say, that what is wanting in the
measure, is allowed in the price. I answer: 1. That is not always. 2. But
where allowance is made, it is not according to the value of the loss coming
by the false measure. 3. Again, it is a preposterous course, to raise or let
fall a price by altering of a set measure to an uncertainty, whereas we use in
all trades to raise or let fall the price according to the goodness or badnes of
the wares, keeping still the same measure for them both. And surely herein we
are but deceived: For often times we have twelve pence bated in the price of a
load, and lose four or five shillings in the measure thereof.

Therefore let us either have just measure, if we buy by measure; or else let us
buy it by guess. For it is a shame to pretend to measure truly, and yet do
nothing less.

As touching my self, I desire that my endeavor may be favorably accepted:
for I write with no other mind then as tendering my Companies good. If any thing
that I have said, be impugned as false, I will be ready whenever you will
call me, to prove my affirmations. If any man of knowledge shall except against
me, for my rude writing and gross demonstrations: I pray them to understand,
that I writ not for them, but for the simple; and therefore I demonstrate
grossly, not being well able to do better: Also, that I am not a scholar but
a Carpenter, and therefore could not but write rudely. Unto such also I do
further say, that my desire is, that they would take knowledge, that this has
been one cause of my writing, even to provoke them (seeing our present error
and loss, with which peradventure they were not so well acquainted as my
self) to take some pains to reform the same, in better sort then either I
have or can do.

While this book was in printing I came to the sight of a Ruler, sometimes
invented by one Master Bedwel; which as it is easy, so it is most speedy, and
not less certain (being truly made) for the measuring of timber and board;
which I expect and hope will be shortly published for the common good. But I
will not trouble you with more words. Only let me put you in mind of this one
thing: That in as much as nothing is more fit for Carpenters to make them
ready, not only in measure but also in other things, then Geometry: that
therefore such as are of reasonable capacity, would spend some part of their
spare times to study the same, in some measure at the least. For your
furtherance herein, there are especial good helps, both by the Lecture at
Gresham College every Thursday in the Term times (if you were but a little
entered) as also by Euclides Elements of Geometry, which the right Worshipful
Sir Henry Billingsley Knight, to the great good of the Commonwealth, though to
his own great travel and charge, has translated and published in our English
tongue. But I am over tedious: I pray you accept of this my poor endeavor, as
a fruit of my hearty good will to my Company, and others whom it may
concern. If it take none effect, I shall be sorry: but if it do any good, I
have enough for my labor.

RICHARD MORE.

THE FIRST PART OF THE CARPENTERS RVLE, showing diverse gross errors,
generally committed by Carpenters and others in measuring of Timber, arising
from the Rule, and the use thereof.
CHAPTER. 1. The error in the Rules, and the reason thereof.
THose that endeavor to amend things amiss, must first of all labor to prove
the faults, especially when the parties deceived, are not yet persuaded, that
they are out of the way. And because men little regard to return unto the
right, when they do not perceive that they are far in the wrong: I have
therefore thought good to spend this first part of my book, in showing and
declaring, that great error is to too ordinarily committed (by the most part of
Carpenters and others in and about London, and elsewhere) in measuring of
timber.

These errors do arise, either by means of the Rule or Ruler, with which they
measure Timber; or else by the misapplying or using thereof. I mean, the
ordinary way of measuring Timber is very erroneous. But first of the faults to
be observed in the Ruler it self.

The ordinary Rule which Carpenters, Shipwrights, and others do use to
measure Timber withal, was invented and published by Master Leonard Digger.
Digges Tectonicon.
Now those Rules that agree with that book are so true, as that I deem them
ouercurious that except against them; and they will serve truly to measure
Timber withal. But the most which have that kind of measure on them which
Master Digges describes, are very false. I mean, those divisions or strikes
which are set on them for measuring of Board and Timber, are not in their right
places.

And as those strikes and diuissons agree not with the truth, so upon diverse
Rules you shall find them to disagree one from another: Yea hardly shall you
see two Rules that do every where agree. Neither is this error insensible, and
so not to be respected; but apparently gross, and therefore not to be
tolerated. For my self have seen some Rules that in some of their divisions
have erred from the truth and from one another, after the rate of six foot in
an hundredth of Board, and after four foot in a lode of Timber. Neither is
this error rare and in some alone, but so general, as that if a man would
examine them, he should be forced to say, that true Rules are very scant.

If I were demanded the cause of this fault or error in the Rule, I should
answer, that in mine opinion it arises hence. Many will take upon them to make
Rules, who have not Master Digges his book to make them by; or if they have
it, understand it not, neither the ground from whence the Rule is made, by
which they might examine the Rules which they make: which ground is set down
in the eleventh and twelfth chapters of the second part of this book. But
ordinarily men make them one by another, whereof has grown the former error.

Thus much for the Rule. Now should follow to show the errors in measuring
Board and Planke: But because I have observed no maine error in measuring of
ordinary planke or Board (though great fault in buying of waynie Board, and
measuring it as square) which I speak of in the next chapter following. I will
therefore say nothing thereof now, but pass to errors in measuring of Timber.

CHAP. 2. The great loss that comes in buying of timber and Board that is
wainie, and measuring it as square.
EVery man that buyeth Board or Timber, intends to have for a foot as
follows, that is to say, in Board twelve inches in length; and twelve in
breadth; and in timber, twelve inches in length, twelve in breadth and twelve in
thicknes. But who so buyeth Timber or Board that is waynie, and takes it as if
it were not waynie, has not his measure for his money, but far less. This
is a great fault, and general throughout the whole company, and amongst
others also; yea and apparently known and noted by every man, and yet not
amended nor endeavored to be amended by any.

This fault in Board seems to come from carelessness, and in Timber (as I
take it) it did first grow from ignorance. For when men knew not now to measure
a waynie piece of Timber, nor bow to deduct the waynes, having measured it as
not waynie; then they did carelessly ouerpasse this thing as a necessary evil,
or as an inconvenience that could not be avoided.

But it may be said, that there is allowance in the price. I answer, what is
it in a load of Timber or in a persell of Board to have twelve pence abated in
the price, and to lose four or five shillings in the measure. This is to get
in the hundredth and lose in the Shire.

And besides this loss that comes by waynie Timber, there is also another
great loss thereby not to be forgotten. You know that when the Timber is very
waynie, we are compelled to hew away a great part of it, after it is sawed to
bring it to some reasonable squarenes fit for use. If then you shall put this
loss to the other, you shall find, that it is no small damage that comes by
buying of waynie timber. And therefore there should be an extraordinary care
and respect had to the measure, that we lose not by it, seeing so great loss
comes by the stuff it self.

My desire therefore is, that as other faults; so this may be amended. Not that
I would have Timber hewed dye square, for that were a spoil of much good
Timber: nor that I would have girt measure used, for that (in this kind) is
very false, as appears afterward: But I would have the want or wainynesse
deducted or taken out of the whole piece; which how it may be don, is showed in
the second part of this book, Chapter 5.

CHAP. 3. That it is very false, to take for the square of a piece of Timber,
the half of the breadth and thicknes, added together: by which square, should
be found the length of a foot in that piece.
IT is a common practice, and that of old, that who so of the ordinary and
common sort of men, do measure Timber, they take this course. First they ad or
put together the breadth and thickness of the piece of Timber to be measured;
then they take the half thereof for the square of the same piece; and then
according to that square, they give the length of a foot by the Rule. As for
example, if the piece be ten inches one way, and fourteen inches the other
way, they ad together ten and fourteen, which make twenty four; the half of
twenty four is twelve, which (say they) is the square of this piece of
Timber; which is very false. And yet this course is so generally received, and
so commonly reputed and taken for good, as that he shall be thought ouercurious
of some, that shall but except against it. Howbeit if you will but mark that
which follows, you shall plainly see that it is an error, and that a great
one.

Suppose therefore that this figure or picture marked with the letter A. were a
piece of Timber, having for his length diagram four foot: for his thicknes
six inches: and for the breadth eighteen inches. Now this piece of Timber is
indeed but three foot of Timber, where as by the former way it is four
foot: For eighteen inches and six make twenty four, the half whereof is
twelve.

Now to prove and demonstrate the error, behold the figure marked with the
letter B. diagram which suppose to be the end of that piece of Timber only,
having (as you may see) for the breadth eighteen inches; and for the thicknes
six inches. Then cut off by the pricked line, twelve inches from the breadth,
being eighteen inches; which twelve inches, is supposed to be the side of the
square of the said piece. This done, there remains six inches, which
remaynder, suppose to be laid unto the lower side of the figure B. and then
there does appear a defect, or want of a piece, of six inches square. For
howsoever the remainder has six inches breadth, which being laid to six, the
breadth of the whole figure, it makes twelve; yet having but six inches for
the length also, it wants six of twelve to which it is applied. As by the
beholding of the figure it does plainly appear.

Thus then appears the error. If you will know the greatness thereof, you
shall understand, that in the former example, and so in all Timber that have
like differences of sides as that piece has, there is loss always to the
buyer, a quarter of that which he buyeth, or one load of Timber in four. If
the difference of the sides be smaller, then is the loss smaller: but if it be
greater, then is the loss greater. And in general take this for a rule. That
there is lost by this kind of false measuring, a square piece of Timber, as
long as the whole piece to be measured, and as broad and thick as half the
difference of the two sides of the said piece of Timber to be measured. As for
example, let the sides be ten and fourteen, then their difference is four
(for fourteen is more then ten, by four) now the half of four is two, which
two is the side of the said lost square piece of Timber throughout the piece.

Now seeing this error of taking half the sum of the sides for the square, is
very manifest; and seeing also it is an error tending to the great loss of the
buyer, yea to the loss of three load in four, and more also as the
differences may be: Therefore I desire that none would follow that corrupt
custom, and most false way; but suffer themselves to be better instructed, in
more righter ways. Which if they refuse to do, and shall buy much Timber
after that rate, their purses are like to pay for it.

But some may say unto me, this fault is by diverse discerned, and a redress
not altogether unthought of. I grant, many do see it, and do endeavor to
reform it thus. If a piece of Timber be eighteen inches one way, and six
inches the other way, they imagine it to consist of three squares of six
inches a piece (as indeed it does) the which they measure severally, and then
add al their contents together, which they take for the measure of the whole
piece.

This is true both in this example, and in all others that will fall out in any
number of just squares. But when the sides of the Timber to be measured, have
not this answereablenes in them, as nine inches one way and fourteen the other
way; or seven and ninteene, or such like: then they are to seek. For when
they have taken the thicknes out of the breadth as often as they may, then is
the remainder vnsquare: In measuring whereof, they fail and err, as a
foresaid; and yet they profess, not to regard it. For (say they) if the
difference of the sides be not past three or four inches, that piece may be
measured according to the said erroneous way, and no great loss happen
thereby. But what the loss is, I have showed before, which although it seem
but small, yet in time it arises to no small matter.

CHAP. 4. The error in measuring of timber not hewed square but beuell.
THough this error be not of any great moment, because Timber hewed beuell or
skew, comes not often to be measured: yet because sometimes there is such
Timber to be sold, I would not have workmen to be ignorant, that it is an
apparent error to measure it, as if it were hewed square.

When the corners of the Timber are hewed vnsquare; I do not mean waynie; for
of that I have spoken before in the second chapter: but when it is hewed beuell
or diamond wise (as sometimes it is by the carelessness or unskillfulness of the
hewer) then to take the square of such Timber, according to the breadth of the
sides thereof, is untrue; for the sides are longer then if it were square, and
so gives the piece to be bigger then it is.

How great this error is, I stand not to show at this time: Only note that it
does increase and decrease according as the corners of the Timber do swerve
from square. But how such Timber is to be measured, see in the third part,
Chapter she sixth.

CHAP. 5. The error in the ordinary measuring of round Timber.
THe former errors do always bring loss to the buyer, but these that follow
do always bring loss to the seller. And though such round Timber comes not
often to be measured here in London (the worse for the buyer) yet would I have
Carpenters know the error which is used in measuring the same; which is this.

They girt the Timber round about with a line or thread, and then take one
quarter thereof for the square (as we call it) of the piece to be measured, and
so find out (as they think) the length of a foot in that piece of Timber or
tree.

This is a gross error, and yields not the content of the piece or tree, by
one fifth part of it and more.

I will not stand to demonstrate this or any thing else in this book
geometrically, because it is beyond the common capacity. But yet you diagram
may perceive the greatness of this error, only by beholding this figure A.
where I have made a square with pricks, in the circle: the four fides of
which square are equal to the length of the circumference or ring of the
circle, which circle you must imagine to be the end of a round piece of Timber
to be measured. Now this square, every man can perceive to be less then the
circle, though he cannot tell how much.

But how round Timber is to be measured is taught in the sixth chapter of the
second part, and in the ninth chapter of the third part of this book: which
when you have learned and tried, then you will tell your self, that in
measuring round Timber after the former way, is very erroneous and intolerable.

CHAP. 5. Error in measuring of Timber not fully round, but somewhat flat
called Ouall fashion.
THose that do their work but by guess, do not stick at small differences;
and therefore they measure by one and the same way, both that Timber that is
perfectly round, and that also which is somewhat diagram flat, called Duall
fashion, as is the figure marked with the letter B. I showed in the last
chapter, that it was false to measure a circle by taking it to be equal to a
square, whose four sides are equal to the circumference or ring of the
circle. And to measure Duall fashion, or that which is not perfectly round but
somewhat flat, by the same way, is also false. Only herein is the difference,
that in measuring a circle by the said false way, the error in all circles is
always alike; but in Ouals the error varies. For the flatter they be the less
is the error, until it be so flat, that it be equal to the square, whose
four sides are equal to the ring or circumference: and after that, the
flatter they be, they are still the lesser, and always lesser then the said
square.

So that to measure Ouals by the former way, is so uncertain, that you may
have peradventure more then you should, and peradventure less then you should
by a fifth part, a fourth part, a third part, and so forth. But because
(ordinarily) trees or Timber that are Duall fashion, do not much vary from a
round: Therefore the loss is always to the seller, being measured as a
foresaid.

Here I had purposed to have somewhat digressed from my general purpose, and
to have showed the great loss that comes by buying of fagots that are bound
flat: But the Statute for fuel in the last Parliament has prevented me:
Where it is enacted, that bands of fagots shall be Round. But yet because I
fear al men understand not what is meant by the word Round, or if they do, yet
they will not regard to redress it: I pray you therefore take knowledge, that
where as men do commonly buy the flattest fagots for the greatest, they are
deceived; for indeed they are less then the round by far; and evermore the
flatter they are, the lesser they are. And to speak no more then my self have
tried; I have taken four fagots (indeed of the flattest) and have put the
wood of them all into three of their own bands without strayning. Lo then the
great loss that comes to folk by this error. That which I say of fagots I
intend also to be spoken of billets: For the flatter they are, the lesser they
are, being no more in compass then the statute requires.

I need not stand to demonstrate that this is an error, if I were persuaded
you understood that which is said before of Ouals. But for farther proof, take
a quarte pot of peuter that is round, and make it more flat by crushing in the
sides thereof; and you shall find that it will not hold a quart of water as
before it did, and yet the compass of the pot is as much as it was before. You
may also prove the same by a Board thus. The faggot band ought to be by the
Statute twenty four inches about: So then a Boordes end of a foot broad will
hardly go into one of those bands; but if you cleave that Boordes end into a
dosen or more pieces; you shall well perceive that you may put four and more
of such Boordes being so clest, into that band being round. This have I
written, not carpingly, but as desierous that the buyers would not deceive
themselves by their eye, neither that they should be deceived by others.

CHAP. 7. The error in measuring timber that is waynie.
I Told you before in the second chapter, that there comes great loss to
Carpenters in buying of waynie Timber after the ordinary way: But here I show
the loss that comes (indeed not to the buyer but the seller) in measuring of
waynie Timber.

It has been used (as I am informed) that if Timber were waynie, the buyer
would measure it as by girting it about, and taking one quarter of the comqasse
for the square, as in the case of round Timber before showed, chapter the
sixth. But it seems to me, that the seller grew weary of this way, so that
in my time to my knowledge, it has not been used in or about this City.

To prove this course to be diagram erroneous, behold the figure A. the which
suppose to be the end of a piece of Timber that is waynie or canted into eight
equal cants of five inches a piece: Or, the figure is a figure of eight equal
sides, whereof every one is five inches. Now girt this piece about, and it will
come to forty inches, the quarter whereof is ten inches, for the square of
that canted piece. According to these ten inches, I have made a square within
the canted piece by certain pricked lines: By the very beholding whereof you
may see that the canted piece is bigger then the said square of pricked lines
is, and so that loss comes to the seller.

How much this loss is, does not appear by this demonstration. But in this
figure (if you will take my word) there is lost a sixth part full. But I had
rather you would try the loss your selves, by the rule taught in the fifth
chapter of the second part of this book, then to believe me in this case.

CHAP. 8. That in measuring of Timber that is taper grown, it is false to take
the square of the middle thereof, and so to give up the content by the common
Rule.
IT is so usual a thing in measuring of Timber that is taper grown, or
narrower at one end then at another, to take the square of the middle of the
piece, and so to measure it by the common Rule; as that I shall be not only
not believed, but also reputed to have apparently erred in affirming the
contrary: for it will be said, that that which it has too much in the greater
half, it wants in the lesser half. Indeed this is true in Boords or other
superficies that taper, whose sides are straight: but in a solid or piece of
Timber it is simply false.

How to demonstrate the error on a paper, so as that it may be easily
conceived, is very hard: but in a solid it may plainly be declared to the
understanding of the simplest.

If a Pyramid (that is, a pyked piece of Timber, sharp at one end, like a
pyked steeple) were so measured, there would be lost very much. And always the
lesser the piece does taper, the lesser is the loss. In general, there is
lost, (by certain pyramides) a piece of Timber whose length is the sixth part
of the length of the whole piece, and whose end or base is contained under
half the difference of the sides of both the ends of such a tapered piece:
that is, take for the breadth of the lost piece, half the difference of the
breadth of both ends; and for the thicknes of the lost piece, half the
difference of the thicknes of both ends. As for example, if the piece be
twenty inches broad and sixteen inches thick at one end, and fifteen inches
broad, and twelve inches thick at the other end, and twenty four foot long:
then the last piece is four foot long, two inches and a half broad, and two
inches thick: for two and a half is the half of five, which is the difference
of the breadth of both ends; and two is the half of four, which is the
difference of the thicknes of both ends.

The loss that comes by this error is to the seller: and yet in truth it is
such as yields no profit to the buyer. For we lose more by such Timber, being
employed to any ordinary use, then that advantage by the measure does come
unto. But yet I would not have workmen to take that way for a true measure
which is false; neither to be ignorant how such Timber is to be measured, if
occasion do offer, or if men shall require it.

In the second and third part of this book, where I show how to measure
Timber, I will show how tapered Timber may be measured: from which I will no
longer detain you, taking that to be sufficient which I have written already,
to show the grossest of the errors, generally committed by Carpenters and
others, in measuring of Timber.

The end of the first part.
THE SECOND PART OF THE CARPENTERS RVLE, Wherein is set down sundry plain
ways, truly to measure ordinary Timber, and Board.
CHAPTER. 1. How Boords and planks are ordinarily measured.
IN the former part of this book, I told you that I had not observed any maine
error in measuring of ordinary Board and planke, though great fault in buying
of wainie board and planke, and measuring it as square: And therefore it shall
not be needful to invent or set down any new ways of measuring of them:
only it shall suffice to repeat the ways already in use ordinarily, which
are three. Of which, the first is troublesome, and therefore rather to be
known for variety, then used in measuring. The second is true, but longer in
doing then the third; and therefore I would advise the third to be followed and
used. Only look that your Rule be truly made, and that diligence be used in
measuring therewith: else there will follow error of necessity, be the ways
to measure by, never so exact. The first way to measure board.


The first way let be this. And first note that for this purpose, I call an
ynch that which is an inch broad and twelve inches long, of which inches,
twelve do make a foot. Now if the Board to be measured be under a foot in
breadth, then reckon how many times twelve of the said inches you can have in
the whole Board, and so many foot is there in it. If the Board be just a foot
broad, then it contains so many foot as it is feet in length. But if it be
more then a foot broad; then measure it as a foresaid as if it were two
Boords, the one of a foot broad, the other so broad as the odd inches
remaining: then add their contents together for the content of the whole board.

This rule, to them that understand it, may be fitlier set down in other words
thus. Multiply the number of inches in the breadth, by the number of feet in
the length: then divide the product by twelve, and the quotient shows the
number of feet in the board.

The second way is thus, Measure the length of the board: The second way to
measure board.
Then (if the same board be under a foot broad) draw or set the breadth
thereof so many times on the board, as it co^ntayneth feet in length, and
there make a prick: And then so many foot as there are from the beginning to
that prick, so many foot does the board contain.

And if the board be above a foot broad, then you may take out the even
feet, and measure the remainder as aforesaid; and then add both those
together for the content of the whole.

The third way, is this. Take the breadth of the board; The third way to
measure board.
then find by the Rule what length, makes a foot, at that breadth; and then
see how many times that length is in the board, and so many foot are in it.
These I stand not upon, because they are well enough known to all men.

CHAP. 2. How to measure Timber by a certain way called Drawght-measure.
THis way may fall out so tedious, as that I would not have troubled either my
self to write it, or you to read it, had it not been that I would not have
you ignorant of that way which some do use in some places of this Land. The
way is thus.

Suppose this figure AB to be a piece of Timber being in length four foot, in
breadth nine inches, and in thicknes four inches. Now take the breadth or
thicknes, which you will (but here let it be the breadth nine inches) and note
what that wants of a foot, which is three inches. These three inches set on,
or draw along the figure or piece of Timber four times, that is, so many
times are there is feet in the length of the piece, beginning at one end,
which let be here the end A; and where that ends make a prick, which let be
the pricked line next unto the end A: And this is the diagram first work. The
second follows. Then must you measure how many foot it is from that prick
unto the end B, which in this erample is three foot. Then note what the other
side of the piece, which was four inches, does want of a foot, which is eight
inches. These eight inches draw along the piece three times beginning at the
end B, that is, so many times as there is feet from the said first prick to
the end B; and where that ends make the second prick, which let be the
pricked line next to the end B. Then the space between these two pricked lines
shows the content of the piece of Timber; (which space in this example is
twelve inches: So that this piece is one foot of Timber.) My meaning is, the
piece of Timber to be measured, is so many foot as the space between those
two pricks is feet in length. And if there fall out any odd inches in that
space, they are so many twelfth parts of a foot, as there be inches; so that
six inches is half a foot, and three inches a quarter of a foot, and nine
inches three quarters of a foot, and so forth.

This rule aforesaid will hold true for any Timber that is under a foot
square. But if it be above a foot square, and not above two foot square; then
must you imagine that one quarter thereof is to be measured (and therefore take
but half of each of the two sides) and when you have so cast it up as if it
were but a quarter, accoumpt four times so much for the content of the whole
piece.

But if the piece of Timber be above two foot square, and not above four
foot square; then may you imagine that a sixteenth part thereof is to be
measured. Which done, accoumpt sixteen times so much for the content of the
whole piece: now to take the sixteenth part, you may take a quarter of the
breadth, and a quarter of the thicknes.

But this kind of measure if it fall out in a piece of Timber above a foot
square is so tedious, as that I do wonder any man would content himself with
it. And yet because I have set it down, take one note more, which is this. If
the piece to be measured have any od inches in the length, either at the first
or second working: then must you, having drawn the want so many times as there
is feet in length, add thereunto such part of the want, as the od measure of
the length is part of a foot. And thus much of Drawghtmeasure.

CHAP. 3. How Timber may be measured by Board measure only.
WHen I considered the readiness of many men in measuring of board by one of the
three former ways, and how speedily they will cast up the whole stock having
measured one board, by the observing of skores, tens, and fiues therein; and
withal considering the great error that those men run into in measuring of
Timber: This moved me to think of some course, how these men that are so
expert in measuring of board, might by the same way measure any square piece of
Timber.

This way, though it be true, yet it is troublesome; and therefore I would wish
them rather to use some of the ways following: But if their readiness in
casting up a stock of boords shall cause them to accept of this way, I will
not be their let. Now the way is this.

Suppose the piece of Timber (to be measured) to be a stock of boordes,
consisting of so many boordes as there be inches in the thicknes of the piece.
Then measure one of those supposed boordes: that done, cast up the whole
stock. Now this being performed, you are to know that every twelve foot of
board is a foot of Timber, as every man may perceive; and six foot of board
is half a foot of Timber; and three foot, is a quarter of a foot of timber.
Also, every threeskore foot of board is five foot of Timber, and so,
sixeskore foot of board is ten foot of Timber, nineskore foot of board is
fifteen foot of Timber, twelueskore is twenty foot, fifteeneskore or three
hundredth, is twenty and five foot, six hundredth foot of board is fifty
foot of Timber, and so forth. Now if this be observed, it is easy for any
man to cast up the content of any ordinary piece of Timber truly.

There is farther to be noted, that if there be any od half inches in the
thicknes of the piece to be measured, that then it be accoumpted as half of
one of the supposed boordes of the stock: And if there be a quarter of one
inch, then it is a quarter of a board: And if there be an od three quarters of
an inch, it is three quarters of a board; and if there be any other od part of
an inch, it is the same part of a board, and must be counted with the whole
stock.

This way is so plain that it needs no example. I suppose the simplest may
understand it, and therefore I will say no more of it: Only this you may
observe, that you may measure the piece, by imagining it to be divided into two
inch, three inch, or four inch planke; so that you search out how many foot
of such planke is contained in a foot of Timber.

CHAP. 4. How Timber may be measured after the ordinary way, by deducting the
lost square.
IT was observed in the third chapter of the first part of this book, that
when any piece of Timber is measured after the most common way, which is by
adding the breadth and thicknes together, and taking the half thereof for the
square of the piece, etc. that then there is always lost a square piece of
Timber of the whole length of the piece to be measured, whose square is half
the difference of the two sides of the piece. Now by observing of this lost
square, any ordinary piece of Timber may be truly measured as follows.

Measure the piece, by taking for the square thereof, the half of the sum or
total of the two sides, as is aforesaid, and as is usually accustomed. This
done, note the difference of the two sides: then take the half of that
difference for the side of the lost square, which is all the length of the
piece. Then measure that supposed or lost square, and what it amounts unto,
deduct out of the measure of the whole piece being measured after the said
common way, and the remainder is the true content of the piece.

As for example, suppose the figure A to be a piece of Timber, having for the
length four foot, for the breadth eighteen diagram inches, and for the
thicknes six inches. This being measured after the most common way is four
foot of Timber, and so let it be measured. Then note the difference of the two
sides, which is twelve inches (for eighteen is more then six by twelve.) Then
take the half of twelve, which is six; this six is the side of the lost
square. Now measure that square of six inches being as long as the piece to be
measured (which is four foot) and you shall find it to be a foot of Timber.
This foot deduct out of the content of the piece as it was before measured
after the common way, and there will remain three foot, which three foot is
the true content of that piece marked with the letter A.

And because the lost square may have in it an odd half inch, as some times
it has, as three inches and ahalfe or such like: I have therefore added unto
the common rule, what length makes a foot of Timber from an inch to ten
inches, noting still every half inch: As you may behold in the table of Timber
measure hereafter following in the latter end of this second part. For to take
half the difference betwixt the two next adjoining numbers of inches added to
the lesser of them (as commonly men do) is not true: As for example; at an
inch square one hundred forty four foot in length makes a foot of timber:
at two inches, thirty six foot does it: so that if the half betwixt thirty
six and one hundred and forty four were taken and added to thirty six for
the length of a foot at an inch and a half square, it would be nintie foot,
whereas in truth it is but sixty four foot: so in this example it erreth
twenty six foot in length of a piece of Timber of an inch and a half
square. And how so ever it be not so much in other numbers above two inches
square, yet it always erreth more or less.

CHAP. 5. How wainie or canted Timber may be measured.
ALthough there be diverse ways to measure wainie or canted Timber, yet I will
observe only this one plain way. Measure then the piece as if it were not
wainie, out of which deduct the waines, and the remainder is the true content
of the piece.

How to deduct the waines is better taught by an example then by a precept: and
therefore suppose the figure A were the end of a piece of Timber of ten inches
square, having one corner thereof wainie: this piece measure as if it were not
wainie. That done, measure what the waine is either way from the corners, which
I call the wants, because the piece diagram wants so much of square; which
want in this example is four inches either way, as you may see by the two
pricked lines with the figure of four standing by either of them. This measure
as if it were a piece of Timber of four inches either way, and as long as the
whole piece. That done take half the content thereof; the which half deduct
out of the measure of the whole piece as it was before measured; and the
remainder will be the true content thereof. And as you do with this corner, so
must you do with the rest, if they be wainie also.

And here I would have you note, that where I bid the half of the content of
the said square to be deducted, that the reason hereof is, for that in
Geometry, all paralletograms and parallelipipidons, are divided into two equal
parts by their diameters, as it is demonstrated in Euclide, book, 1.
proposition 34. and book 11. proposition 18. That is to say in playner terms
for our purpose, a board or a piece of Timber which have their opposite or
contrary sides equally distant, being cut into two pieces by a straight line
passing by the opposite corners, as you may see in the figure B, I say, that
board or piece of Timber, is cut into two equal parts. So that it is manifest
by this, diagram that the said waine is half so much as the piece whose sides
are equal to the said wants.

CHAP. 6. How round Timber may be measured.
I Told you before, that I would not trouble you with Geometrical works. And
howsoever I do hereafter set down some more artificial ways to measure by,
yet my indeauor especially is to correct the common errors by that knowledge
which most men have already: and therefore you may measure round Timber
plainly in this sort. Girt the piece about with a line or thread: then take a
quarter thereof for the square of that piece, (though indeed it be not the
square) and so measure it after the common way. But now, note that which I told
you in the first part of this book, namely that this piece is more then it is
thus measured to be. See a more exact way in the third part of this book, chap.
the 10.
And therefore to find the true content, add to that which you have measured
the piece to be, a quarter thereof, and also after the rate of a foot in a
load, and then the total will show the content of the piece, though not
exactly, yet so near, as that the loss will not bring any damage to any man,
that is worth looking after.

Take an example for more plainnes. Suppose the tree being measured after the
former way to contain twenty foot: then must you add thereto a quarter
thereof which is 5, and that makes 25 foot. Then add to that, half a foot,
which is after a foot in a load, and the content of the piece will amount to
25 foot and a half.

And here is to be noted, that if the piece be not exactly round, that then
this measure will not hold, as was showed in the seventh Chapter of the former
part of this book. But how such Timber is to be measured, see in the latter
end of the eleventh Chapter of the third part.

CHAP. 7. How Timber may be measured by Arithmeticke.
THough the former ways for measuring of Timber be sufficient, yet because
variety gives pleasure, and these that follow admit of less error in the
working then some of the former, I have therefore thought good to set them
down as follows. And if any man shall object that I spend this labor in
vain, because Carpenters commonly have not Arithmetic. I answer, that some
have more knowledge therein, then they know how to apply to the present
purpose; for whom chiefly I have written this chapter and some others
following: as also I could wish that others which have not, would learn; which
they may do by books which are extant: or at least forbear to be common
Rulemakers, until they have knowledge therein, or well understand the tables
which are for that purpose.

Here first I should have showed how to measure board by Arithmeticke: but
because it little differs from measuring of paralellograms, I will therefore
refer it to the third part of this book, where it is taught how to measure
them.

Now to measure Timber by Arithmeticke, do thus. Reduce the length of the
piece to be measured into inches, by multiplying the number of feet therein
contained by twelve. Then multiply the breadth by the thicknes, and the
product or sum thereof multiply by the length, being also reduced into
inches, as aforesaid. Then divide that product or of come by 1728 (which is the
number of inches in a foot of timber) and the quotient will give you the
number of feet contained in that piece of timber.

Here it shall not be unnecessary to give two examples; the one where the
lengeth, breadth and thicknes are even inches; and the other, where they have
odd parts of an inch.

Suppose the piece of timber to be measured to be nine foot in length,
eighteen inches in breadth, and six inches in thicknes. Now multiply nine
foot the length by twelve, and that yields 108. inches, which being multiplied
by 18. the breadth, makes 1944. and that being multiplied by six the thicknes,
yields 11664. which is the content of the whole piece in inches. Then divide
this 11664. by 1728. and the quotient will be six foot and 1296/1728 parts of
a foot, which being reduced to his lowest denomination, is of a foot. So that
the whole piece is six foot and three quarters. And if you would know how
many quarters of a foot is in any such fraction, you may divide it by 432 the
number of inches in a quarter of a foot of timber, and the quotient will tell
you. But suppose the piece have in the breadth or thicknes, an od quarter, or
half, or three quarters of an inch: then reduce the length, breadth and
thicknes into quarters of inches: after that, multiply them being so reduced
one into another, that is, the length by the breadth, and that of come or
product by the thicknes. Then divide that total by 110592 (which is the number
of quarters of inches contained in a foot of timber) and the quotient will
show you how many foot is contained in the piece. As for example, let the
piece be 20 foot long, 8 inches and a half broad, and 11 inches and three
quarters thick: First I reduce 20 foot the length into quarters of inches by
multiplying 20 by 12, which is 240, which brings 20 foot into inches: then I
multiply that 240 by 4, to bring them into quarters of inches, which is 960.
Secondly, reduce 8 inches and a half the breadth, into quarters of inches,
which is 34. Thirdly, reduce 11. inches and three quarters the thicknes into
quarters of inches, which is 47. Then multiply 960, and 34, and 47, together,
and they make 1534080. Lastly, divide these by 110592, and the quotient will be
13, and 96384 odd quarters of inches: which being divided by 27648, the number
of quarters of an inch in a quarter Note here that I mean not by a quarter of a
foot, a square of 3. inches, which is a quarter of a foot one way: but the
fourth part of a square foot of timber.
of a foot of timber, the quotient will be three quarters of a foot, and
somewhat more, but it is not to be regarded in a whole piece of timber: so that
the content of the piece is 13 foot, three quarters of a foot and somewhat
more. This is more tedious to teach then to practice. Behold the work on the
other side of the leaf.

^

Note, that where there is no odd parts of an inch in the breadth or thicknes,
then you may more briefly cast up the content thus: Multiply the number of
inches in the breadth by the number of inches in the thicknes, and the product
thereof multiply by the number of feet in the length. Then divide that total
by 144, and the quotient will give the content of the piece in feet. As in the
first example behold.

^

CHAP. 8. A second way how Timber may be measured by Arithmetic.
MVltiplie the breadth in the thicknes, and by the product or ofcome thereof
divide 1728, and the quotient will show you how much in length makes a foot
of that piece; according to which you must measure the whole piece. And if
there be any odd quarters, or half inches in the breadth or thicknes, then
reduce the two sides into quarters of inches, as is taught in the last Chapter.
Then having reduced them, multiply the breadth by the thicknes, and by their
product divide 27648. and the quotient shows you the length of the foot in
inches, which you may bring into feet by dividing them by 12. Behold an
example of either kind in the work following.

Example 1. ^

Example 2. ^

And if you would know how many quarters of an inch any fraction of an inch
does contain: or for example, how many quarters of an inch either of the said
fractions of 160/224 and 382/1598 do amount unto, you need but divide their
numerators by a quarter of their denominators, or the product of the numerator
being multiplied by 4, by all their denominators, and either quotient is your
desire.

CHAP. 9. How Timber of unequal sides, may, by Arithmetic, be brought into a
square, and so measured by the common way.
MAster Digs in his Tectonicon made a Table of Squares, or a table to show the
squares of any ordinary piece of timber of unequal sides, that so they might
thereby truly measure the piece according to the Rule. Herein Master Digs took
great pains, worthy to be commended. But men being loath to carry a table in
their pockets for trouble (as it seems unto me) did altogether leave it, and
framed to themselves the said false way of haluing ye sum of the two sides
for the square, which turned to the great loss of the buyers. Now my desire
is, that seeing men will not use that Table because of trouble, that they would
learn to carry the ground thereof in their heads, which is contained in this
Chapter. Wherein though there be some greater measure of Arithmetic required
then in the former, namely extraction of the square root, yet the fruit of
that kind of Arithmetic will repay any man's travail, that either has, or
will take pains to learn it.

But to perform the question, do thus: Multiply the breadth and thicknes of
the piece together. Then take the square root of the product thereof, which
square root is (as we call it) the square of that piece, Then having the
square given, you are not ignorant how to measure the piece by the rule. As for
example: if the piece be 16 inches broad and 4 inches thick: you must
multiply 16 by 4, which makes 64. the square root whereof is 8 (for 8 times 8
is 64.) Therefore 8 is the square of that piece, and not 10 as your common way
tells you.

If the root cannot be exactly extracted, as oftentimes it cannot, take the
nearest that you can, and which you shall think requisite, by such ways as are
already extant in diverse authors.

CHAP. 10. A second way to find the square of an unequal sided piece of
Timber, namely, by the Scale and compass.
BEcause this way is more easy and speedy then the former, and that which may
also be done by those that have no Arithmeticke: therefore I have added this
unto the other.

What is meant by the compass, that is, a pair of compasses, all men know:
but what is meant by the term Scale, many peradventure are ignorant of:
therefore it shall not be unnecessary to describe it, as in this manner.

A Scale is any line (and in ordinary matters, any right line) divided into
any number of equal parts, be they great ter or lesser, wider or narrower, of
the distance of an inch-halfe ynch, quarter, half quarter, or any other
distance greater or lesser. This line thus divided, is, I say, called a Scale;
whereof every part or division may stand for a mile, a rod, a yard, a foot, an
inch, or any other kind of measure what you will, or have use of.

But to the matter. On the backe-side of the Rule (as we call it) there is (you
know) a void room or place, about the middell thereof. Now in this void
place, draw a line, as near to the edge of the Rule as conveniently you can,
some six or seven inches long, as here I have drawn the line AB. Then from
it, (and not from the edge of the Rule) and at the bottom of it, draw another
line thwart or cross the Rule, which shall stand square or perpendicular to
the former line, as is this line BC. Then must these two lines of AB and BC be
divided into quarters of inches, beginning from the angle or corner at B: and
every one of those quarters of inches, divide into four equal portions or
divisions, as here I have divided them.

Here I pray you note once for all, that I call all those quarters of inches,
Parts of the Scale: every one of which parts in this matter, is, or stands
for an inch; and half a part is half an inch; a quarter of a part is a
quarter of an inch; three quarters of a part is three quarters of an inch, and
so forth. This done, your Scale is prepared.

diagram of ruler

Now to find the square of any piece of Timber: first add the breadth and
thicknes together. That done, note the half thereof: Or, (which is all one)
note what either of the two sides does differ from the said half of the sum of
both sides.
note also what is half the difference of the two sides of the piece. Then
reckoning how many inches and what od quarters of an inch there is in the said
half of both the sides added together, you must open your conpasses (being
small or sharp in the points) to so many parts and such od quarters of a part
in the Scale. That don, set one foot of the compasses being so opened, upon
the line BC, so many parts and od quarters of a part from B, as there be inches
and od quarters of an inch in half the difference of the sides: And extend the
other foot of the compass upon the line AB, and note where it cuts it, or
lights upon it. Now I say, that so many parts and od quarters of a part of the
said line AB, as are from B to the place where the compasses did cut or light,
so many inches and od quarters of an inch is there in the square of the piece.

This is far sooner wrought then spoken, and is better explained by an example,
then taught by a rule. Therefore suppose the piece to be measured, be 7 inches
one way, and 11 inches and a half the other way. First I add 7 to 11, which
makes 18. Then I note the half thereof, which is 9. I note also half the
difference of the two sides, which is two and. Lastly I open my compasses as
wide as nine parts and one quarter of a part, and set one foot at D, which is
two parts and from B, and I extend the other foot to the line AB, and it cuts
or lights at the point E. Then I say that the square of that piece, is very
near nine inches, because there are from B to Calmost nine parts.

And here note, Note.
that whereas I suppose the Scale to be quarters of inches, you may make them
to be half quarters of inches. And truly where the lines AB or BC will not
admit or receive all the inches they should (which yet I think will rarely
happen) then you must take for your Scale, half quarters of inches, and so
proceed (as is before showed) as if it were of quarters of inches.

Note also that this Scale may as fitly be made on your squire; or else on the
foreside of the Rule, taking for the line AB, the line next to the edge of the
Rule, as it is commonly divided into quarters of inches, without any
subdiuisions into four, for you may well enough guess at them without any
error to be respected: take also for the line BC, any one of the thwart strokes
which serves to divide the Rule into inches (for I suppose them to stand square
to the said other line;) which thwart stroke you must also divide into quarters
of inches, as before is taught. And thus if one of the thwart strokes should be
worn out with pricking (which will not be in short time, if you work lightly
and with small pointed compasses) then you may take another of the thwart
strokes, and divide it into quarters, and so proceed as before.

CHAP. 11. How that measure which is called boordmeasure is gathered.
BOord-measure, or the table of boord-measure, is nothing else but that which
shows the length of a foot of board or planke, at any breadth: though
commonly we gather this measure, but for every breadth from one inch to thirty
six inches, and so set them down in order, as in the table of boord-measure
following, which is from one to thirty. Now you may find the length of a
foot at any breadth thus. Divide one hundred forty sour (which is the number
of inches in a foot of board) by ye breadth that given, and the quotient will
show you how many inches makes a foot in length at that breadth. As for
example. Divide one hundrech forty four by the breadth fourteen, and the
quotient will be 10 4/14 or 2/7, that is, the length of a foot at 14 inches
broad, is 10 inches and two seven parts of an inch. So divide 144 by the
breadth 4, and the quotient will give you 36 inches for the length of a foot
at that breadth of 4 inches. This 36 divided by 12, will give you in the
quotient the number of feet therein, which is just three.

But if you will gather your table of boord-measure, for boordes that have odd
quarters of an inch in their breadth: then divide 576 (which is the number of
quarters in a foot of board) by the number of quarters of inches in the
breadth, and the quotient will give you in inches, the length of a foot. As
for example, let the breadth be 7 inches and a half: This is in all 30
quarters of an inch. By this 30 I divide 576, and the quotient is 19 6/30 or,
that is, the length of a foot is 19 inches and a fifth part of an inch.

CHAP. 12. How that measure which is called Timbermeasure is gathered.
TImber-measure, or the Table of Timber-measure, is that which gives the
length of a foot of Timber at any square. But our ordinary Timber-measure is
gathered, only from the square of one inch to the square of 36 inches. It is
thus gathered. Multiply the number of inches in every square, by it self: then
by the ofcome or product, divide 1728 (which is the number of inches contained
in a foot of Timber) and the quotient will give you in inches, the length of a
foot of Timber at that square. As for example: let the square be 18. This 18
multiplied in it self, makes 324: by which, divide 1728, and the quotient will
be 5 108/324 or, that is, the length of a foot, is 5 inches and one third part
of an inch.

But if you will gather your table of Timber-measure, for squares that have
odd halfes or quarters of an inch; then multiply the number of quarters of
inches in the square, by it self; and by the product or ofcome thereof, divide
27648 (which is one fourth part of the quarters of inches contained in a foot)
and the quotient will give you the length of a foot in inches: which you may
reduce into feet, by dividing them by 12. As for example: let the square be 16
and. First I bring them into quarters, which is 67. This 67 I multiply in it
self, and it makes 4489. By this 4489 I do divide 27648, and the quotient
will be 6 714/4489 which is 6 inches, and some what more then a sixth part of an
inch.

The Table of Boord-measure.
THough Master Digges in his said Tectonicon, has set down two Tables, the
one for boord-measure, and the other for Timber-measure: yet because those that
here follow, do differ, both in matter and form; I have therefore set them
down, with this explication of them ensuing.

But first note; that whereas Master Digges in both Tables, has proceeded from
one inch to 36 inches: I have gone no farther then to 30 inches: and indeed it
were no great matter, if they went but to 24 inches. For when the breadth of
board, or the square of Timber, do exceed 24 inches, but especially 30
inches; then they give so little for the length of a foot, as that the often
drawing of that length upon the board or Timber, cannot but breed apparent
error, except great heed be taken. Therefore for your board, if it exceed 30
inches in breadth, you may measure it as if it were half so broad, and count
every foot for two foot. And as for your Timber, if the square thereof
exceed 30 inches, or rather 24 inches; then measure it as if it were half
that square (as for example, if the square be 32 inches, then accoumpt it as 16
inches) and then accoumpt every foot for four foot.

Note also that I have left out of this Table of boord-measure (of that which
Master Digges has set down in his Table) what makes a foot at any number of
inches and an od quarter or three quarters of an inch, both because they are
not, neither can conveniently be set on the Rule, as also for that no loss of
any moment comes by gessing at them. And therefore I have contented my self to
set down only inches and half inches. But if any man like to observe justly
what makes a foot of board at any number of inches, and a quarter of an inch
or three quarters of an inch, then either he may repair to Master Digges his
Table, or else let him find it out by the way taught in the eleventh chapter
of this second part. But to return to the meaning of this Table of
boord-measure.

In the row AB, is set down one under another, the breadth of boords from one
inch to 30 inches, as you may plainly perceive by looking on it. Every one of
these numbers from one to 30, I will call a Breadth. In the colum under the
letter C, is set down against every breadth, the number of feet, inches, and
parts of an inch, that make a foot in length at that breadth. (The feet in
either of the colums, stand in the narrow row, at the left side, and the inches
and parts of an inch in A C D 1 12 8 2 6 4 9 3 4 3 5 1/7 4 3 2 8 5 2 4 2 2 2/11
6 2 1 10: 1/7 7 1 8 4/7 1 7 8 1 6 1 4 16/17 9 1 4 1 3 3/19 10 1 2 1 2 11 1 1
1/11 1: 12 1 11: 13 11 1/13 10 14 10 2/7 9: 15 9 9: 2/7 16 9 8: 17 8 8: 18 8 7:
19 7: 4/7 7: 20 7 7 1/41 21 6 6/7 6: 5/7 22 6: 6: 23 6: 6: 24 6 5: 25 5: 5
11/17 26 5: 5: 3/7 27 5 5: 2/9 28 5: 1/7 5 1/10 29 5 4 30 4 4: 5/7 the brother
row at the right side thereof. Note also, that where as you see in the
fractions, sometimes one prick, sometimes two pricks, that when one prick
stands before the fractions it signifies a littellesse; and two pricks a
little more.)

Now if that the breadth of the board be a certain number of inches and one
half inch, then is the length of a foot over against those number of inches,
in the colum under D.

But because an example will give more light then many words otherwise:
Therefore suppose the board to be 11 inches broad: then find 11 in the row
AB, and over against it in the colum C you shall see 1.1 and 1/11, which is one
foot, one inch, and one eleventh part of an inch.

But if the board were 11 inches and broad: then seek the length of a foot
over against that 11, in the colum D, and it is 12 inches and. So if the
breadth of the board were 25 inches and: look for 25 in the row AB, and over
against it in the colum D, you shall see five inches and five seventh parts of
an inch. And let this suffice for the Table of boord-measure.

The Table of Timber-measure.
IN the row AB is set down the squares of Timber from one inch to 30 inches.
Over against every one of these, in the colum under C, is set down the length
of a foot, in feet and inches, and parts of an inch. The feet are set down
in the row at the left hand of this columas far as the squares do yield a
foot, and the inches and parts of an inch are set down in the row toward the
left hand of the same colum.

But if the squares of the piece of timber be any number of inches between 1
and 10, and an od half inch more: then over against those number of inches in
the colum under D, you shall find the length of a foot, in feet, inches and
parts of an inch: the feet standing (as in the other colum) in the row at the
left side thereof, and the inches and parts of an inch, in the row at the right
side. The reason why I added those half inches from 1 to 10, is, because in
measuring of Timber by deducting the lost square, as is set down in the fourth
chapter of this second part of this book, you shall have occasion often times to
seek out the length of a foot for a square of one inch and a half, two
inches and, three inches and, and so forth to ten inches.

Here farther it is to be noted, that whereas you shall find for the most part
before the numerafor of the fractions, sometimes one prick, sometimes two
pricks: that one prick does signify somewhat less, and two pricks does
signify somewhat more. This I have noted, as Master Digges has also don,
though it matters not whether such more or less, were observed or not, seeing
no sensible error comes by omitting them.

A C D 1 144 64 2 36 23 3 16 11 9 1/16 4 9 7 1 5 5 9 3/25 4 9: 6 4 3 4: 8/9 7 2
11: 2/7 2 4: 8 2 3 1 11: 12/13 9 1 9 1 7 1/7 10 1 5: 2/7 11 1 2: 2/7 12 1 13
10: 14 8: 13/16 15 7: 16 6 17 6 18 5 19 4: 25/32 20 4: 5/16 21 3: 11/12 22 3:
4/7 23 3: 24 3 25 2: 26 2: 9/16 27 2: 28 2: 29 2: 1/16 30 1: 11/12

An example or two in this case shall not be unnecessary. If the square of the
piece given be five inches, find five in the row AB, and over against it in
the colum of C, you shall find five foot nine inches and three twenty five
parts of an inch. If the square given be thirteen, then over against thirteen
you shall find on the right side of the colum C, 10: which is 10 inches and
somewhat more then one fifth part of an inch, if the square given be six inches
and a half: then over against six, you shall find the colum D for the length
of a foot, three foot four inches and somewhat less then eight ninth parts
of an inch: more examples needs not. Enough has been said to any that is but
of mean capacity and desirous to learn.

The end of the second part.
THE THIRD PART OF THE CARPENTERS RVLE, Containing sundry true ways to
measure superficies and sollids, or (as we call them) Boords and Timber, of
extraordinary forms.
CHAPTER. 1. The meaning of certain terms of Geometry generally used in
this third part.
WHen I had written the former part of this book concerning measuring of
ordinary Timber and Board, and did consider, that besides the pleasure, there
would come some good to Carpenters, if they could also measure extraordinary
fourmes: I have therefore thought good to add this part unto the other two.
True it is, that Master Digs in his Tectonicon has not been silent of the most
of these things. But because he applies them to measuring of land, few or none
do think that they belong also to measuring of Timber: and therefore my
labor I hope is not unnecessary, though I should but have repeated the same
thing and apply them to our use, without adding any other thing.

I have known some that would buy whole frames ready wrought by measure: but
sure I am that no Carpenter could have measured it for them, without the
knowledge of that which is written hereafter.

And because I shall have occasion to use many terms of Geometry, by which I
may with more ease deliver, and you with more plainnes perceive my mind in
these things: I have therefore set down the meaning, as plainly as I can, of
some Geometrical terms, which most serve for our present purpose. And in
this Chapter I explain only those terms that generally I use throughout
this whole part, and which do not properly belong to any one chapter. The rest
I will declare in the beginning of every chapter, as the matter thereof gives
occasion. But to the matter.

1. An Angle is nothing else but a corner, made by the meeting of two lines (for
I speak not of sollid Angles).

2. A right Angle (which we call a squire or a square Angle) is that whose two
lines comprehending or making the Angle, stand perpendicular or plumbe the one
to ye other.

3. An oblique Angle (which we call beuell or skew) is every angle not being a
right angle, whether it be greater or less, or (as we say) whether it spread
or clitch.

4. A Superficies, is that which has only length and breadth, and no thicknes
at all. Here note, that whereas we call boords, superficies, and Timber
sollids, it is not because a board is not a sollid (for it has length, breadth
and thicknes) but because we respect not (in measuring of them) but only their
length and breadth.

5. A Sollid (or a body) is that which has length, breadth, and thicknes.

6. Parallels are those lines, superficies, or sollids, that differ every where
alike, or are not nearer together in one place then in another.

7. A Figure, is any kind of superficies or sollid that is bounded about, as
Triangles, Squares, Circles, Globes, Cones, Prismes, and the rest.

8. The Base of a Figure, is any side (as we may say) thereof, upon which it
may be supposed to stand. Or if you take any side of a figure for the ground or
bottom or lower part thereof, that same is the Base.

9. The height of a figure, is the length of a Perpendicular or plumme line
falling from the top thereof, to the base, ground, or bottom thereof. And
whether this Perpendicular or plum line fall within or without the figure, it
makes no matter, so as it be neither higher nor lower then the base or bottom.

CHAP. 2. How to raise and let fall a Perpendicular.
A Perpendicular line is that which stands plumme upright upon another, leaning
neither the one way nor the other. A Perpendicular is said to be raised, when a
point is given in a line, from which it must rise. It is said to be let fall,
when a point is given above the line, from which it must fall.

Now besides that you may both raise and let fall a Perpendicular by a squire
or square: there are many ways Geometrically to do both the one and the
other. And because there is especial use in this third part, of letting fall a
perpendicular or plumme line from a point given, as also from an angle in a
figure to the base: I would not have men ignorant how to do the same without a
squire, which is not always at hand, when a rule and pair of compasses are.
And yet I will set down only one way of many, to avoid tediousnes, which is
thus.

diagram

Let the point given be A, the line given BC. Open the Co^passes to any
distance convenient, and setting one foot in the point A, make an arc or
piece of a Circle with the other foot, till it cut the line BC twice. Those
two places of cutting we call Intersections, and are here in this example at B
and C. Then find the middle between those two Intersections, and from that
middle draw a line to the point A (which is the point given) and that line shall
be perpendicular or plumbe from the point A to the line B C, as was required.

CHAP. 3. Of a Triangle and a Prisme, what they are, and how they be measured.
TRiangles are made of straight lines, or crooked lines, or of both together.
But I speak only of right lined Triangles, which are thus defined. A Triangle
is that which is comprehended of three right lines, as is the figure marked
with A. diagram

Triangles are diverse, both in respect of their sides and angles, and may be
measured diverse ways: But let this one way serve for all. Multiply half of
the base by all the height or perpendicular: Or (which is all one) multiply
all the base by half the height or perpendicular; and either of the products
gives the content of the Triangle.

Here I pray you remember what I mean by the base and height or altitude,
according as was she wed in the former Chapter. In this figure you may suppose
the longest line to be the base, and then the pricked line is the height or
perpendicular.

Now note, that a Prisme is that whose two opposite plains or ends be equal,
like, and parallel, the other sides being parallelograms, that is, figures
whose opposite sides are equal, and whose angles be all right angles. So that
every piece of timber may be called a Prisme, not being brother at one end then
at another, of what fashion soever it be, whether the base or end thereof be of
three sides, as cants; or of four, five, six, or more sides, as other timber;
and whether the sides be of equal length or of unequal.

How to measure any Prisme or piece of timber of whatsoever form or fashion
the base or end thereof is; you need but multiply the content of the base or
end by the altitude or height, or (as we call it) the length of the piece, and
the product gives the content thereof.

This might serve once for all, as sufficient to measure sollids or timber,
whose bases or ends are like and equal: so that it needed not but to teach how
to measure every kind of base, as Triangles, Quadrangles, etc. But yet for
plainnes sake, I will give examples of every form, with some variety of
measuring them, when I speak of measuring plain figures as being their bases.

1. Therefore if the base of your Prisme or piece of timber were the said
figure A, multiplte the content of the Triangle A by the length of the piece,
and the product gives the content thereof.

2. Or else you may measure that Prisme or piece of timber thus: Take the whole
perpendicular, and suppose it to be one side of a squared piece of timber (as
we call it) and take half the base for the other side: and so measure it by
any of the ways taught in the second part of this book.

This being understood which is here written, the use hereof is very general.
For besides that the Carpenter may measure hereby any canted piece of timber,
as steps for stairs, and canted railes, and such like: the plaisterer also,
who often works by the yard, may hereby measure gableends, and such like
fourmes. The Glasier has likewise use hereof: and also it may stand the Mason
often in stead.

CHAP. 4. What a Parallelogram is, and how it is measured.
A Parallelogram is a figure whose opposite sides are equal, Note that whereas
I say all right angles, it is but to distinguish betwixt this figure, and the
two next following, for they are Parallelograms also.
and whose angles or corners are all right or square angles: such as is the
figure B.

diagram

It is measured thus: Multiply the length by the breadth, and the product or
ofcome gives the content.

The prisme or piece of timber whose bases or ends are parallelograms, as is
the said figure B, you may measure thus: Multiply the content of the base by
the length, and the product yields the sollid content, as is taught in the
seventh Chapter of the second part of this book.

CHAP. 5. What a Rombus is, and how it is measured.
A Rombus, other wise called a Diamond form, is a figure of four equal sides
and oblique angles: Or, the sides are all of one length, and none of the angles
are square, such as is the figure B.

The measure of a Rombus is thus. Multiply the length of one of the sides, by
the perpendicular plumme line, drawn from that side to the opposite side,
which in this figure is the pricked line, and the product yields the content.

diagram

1. The prisme or piece of timber whose bases are a Rombus, is measured thus.
Multiply the content of the base or end by the length, and the product gives
your desire.

2. Or else (as in the third Chapter of this part) take all the perpendicular
for one side of a squared piece, and one side of the figure B for the other
side of the squared piece, and so measure it by any of the ways taught in the
second part of this book.

CHAP. 6. What a Romboides is, and how it is measured.
A Romboides (called a Diamond-like figure) is that whose opposite sides and
opposite angles are equal. But all the sides are not equal, neither is any of
the angles right: such is this figure C.

The measure differs nothing from the measuring of a Rombus in the former
Chapter, and might well have bin soyned together: so that he that can measure
one can measure both. But to the former ways you may add this, if you please.
First divide it into two Triangles, as here this figure is by the pricked line.
Then measure one of those Triangles by the way set down in the third Chapter
of this part: the double whereof is the content of this figure. The like is
also to be done with a Rombus or a Parallelogram.

diagram

The Prisme or piece of timber whose bases are a Romboides, is measured as a
piece whose base is a Rombus, as in the former Chapter. But if you measure the
base or end by two Triangles, as in this Chapter, then take as for the sides of
a squared piece of timber, all the perpendicular of one of the Triangles, and
all the base of the same Triangle, and so measure it by any of the ways taught
in the second part.

CHAP. 7. What a Trapezium is, and how it is measured.
A Trapezium is a figure of four sides, not having all the sides and angles
equal, as is the figure D.

It is measured thus. First divide it into two Triangles, by drawing a line
from one angle to the opposite angle; as here the figure D is divided by the
pricked line. Then measure by the way taught in the third Chap. of this 3. part,
both those triangles, severally: and add both their contents for the content
of the whole Trapezium.

diagram

1. The prisme or piece of timber, whose end or base is a trapezium, as the
trapezium D, may be thus measured. Multiply the content of the base or end, by
the length of the piece, and the product gives the content thereof.

2. Or else, take the square root of the content of the hase or end D; and so
measure it by any of the wases taught in the second part.

3. Orels, suppose the piece to be cut into two Cants, according as the base or
end thereof D is divided. Then measure both those Cants, by the way taught in
the third chapter of this part, and take the sum of those two Cants for the
content of the whole piece.

CHAP. 8. What a regular mani-sided figure is, and how it is measured.
A Mani-sided figure, is that which has more sides then four. They are either
regular or irregular. A regular mani-sided figure is that whose sides and
angles are al equal, as is this figure marked with A.

diagram

An irregular, is that whose sides or angles are unequal.

A regular mani-sided figure is thus measured. First draw a perpendicular from
the center of the figure to the middle of one of yt sides, as is the short
pricked line in the said figure A. Then seek the length or compass about of
all the sides: the half whereof you must multiply by the length of the said
perpendicular, and the product gives the content of the figure.

Now the center of a regular mani-sided figure is thus found: Raise a
perpendicular upon the middle of any two of the sides not being directly
opposite, and where they intersect or cut one another, there is the center of
the figure.

By this may you find the center of a Circle, or of any piece of a circle,
namely, if you draw any two right lines, either equal or unequal, in the
circle or piece of the circle, and from their middles do raise perpendiculars:
I say, the meeting of those perpendiculars, is the center of the circle or
piece of a circle.

But if the figure have an even number of sides, as 6, 8, 10, and so forth;
then you need but draw a line from any two opposite angles, and another line
from any two other opposite angles: and where those two lines do cut, there is
the center of the figure. Thus have I drawn the two long pricked lines to find
the center of this figure A.

1. The prisme or piece of timber whereof the figure A, or any other regular
mani-sided figure is the base or end, is measured by multiplying the content of
the base by the length of the piece, and the product gives the sollid content.

2. Or else, take the half of all the sides or compass about as for one side
of a squared piece of timber, and the said perpendicular for the other side,
and so measure it by any of the ways taught in the second part.

CHAP. 9. How irregular mani-sided figures are measured.
IRregular mani-sided figures, as also regular manisided figures, may be thus
measured. Divide the figure into triangles, as here I have divided the figure B
by certain pricked lines. Then measure each triangle by it self, as is taught in
the third Chapter of this part, and add the contents of all the Triangles
together; and their sum or total is the content of the figure.

1. The prisme or piece of timber, whose base or end is the figure B, or any
other unequal mani-sided figure, is measured by multiplying the content of the
base or end in the length of the piece, and the product gives the sollid
content.

diagram

2. Or else, take the square root of the number of inches in the content of the
base, and so measure it by any of the ways taught in the second part of this
book.

3. And because for the measuring of enery sort of timber I have used to set
down some way by which it may be done without Arithmeticke: Therefore for a
third way; as every triangle in the figure B is measured, so measure so many
sollids whereof the triangles be the bases, and whose lengths are yt length of
the irregular piece of timber, as is taught in the third Chapter of this third
part; and then add all their contents for the content of the whole piece.

CHAP. 10. What a Circle, a Semicircle, and a Sector are, and how they be
measured.
1. A Circle is a figure, plain and round.

diagram

2. The round line ye makes the Circle is called the Circumference.

3. The point in the middle of the circle is called yt Center.

4. The line (and indeed every line) passing by the Center to both sides of
the Circumference, is called the Diameter, as yt black line in this circle C.

5. Half the Diameter, and indeed every line passing from the Center to the
Circumference, is called the Semidiameter.

6. Al lines in the Circle (except the Diameter) which are drawn from side to
side, are called Cords. Such is the pricked line in the circle C.

7. The Diameter cuts the circle into two equal parts; each of which parts is
called a Semicircle.

8. A cord cuts the circle into two unequal parts; each of which parts is
called a Section of a Circle. The one is called the greater section, because it
is greater then yt Semicircle. The other is called the lesser section, because
it is less then the semicircle.

9 A Sector is any part of a circle, either greater or lesser then a
semicircle, contained under two semidiameters meeting in the center, and a
piece of the circumference.

10 Note that the circumference of a circle is triple the diameter, and almost
one seventh part more. But we count it as just triple and one seventh part,
or as 22 is to 7. Therefore to find the circumference, the diameter being
known; multiply your diameter by 22. and divide the product by 7, and the
quotient she was you the circumference.

Now to measure a circle do thus. To measure a Circle.
Multiply half the diameter by half the circumference; or all the diameter
by a quarter of the circumference; or all the circumference by a quarter of the
diameter; and any of the products gives the content of the circle.

The Semicircle is thus measured. To measure a Semicircle.
Multiply half the diameter in half the arc or arch thereof; or all the
diameter in a quarter of the arc thereof, etc. And either of the products
gives the content of the semicircle.

A Sector is measured as a semicircle, To measure a Sector.
namely by Multiplying half the semidiameter in half the arc or arch
thereof, etc. the product whereof is the content of the sector.

1 The sollid or piece of Timber whose end or base is a circle, a semicircle,
or a sector, may be thus measured. Multiply the content of the base or end in
the length of the piece, and the product gives the sollid content.

2 Or, take the semidiameter for one side of a squared piece of Timber, and
half the arc (be it of a circle, semicircle or sector) for the other side,
and so measure it by any of the ways taught in the second part.

Here it were not unnecessary to show how to find the quantity of an arc or
piece of a circle. But of the diverse ways that are found, you may use this.
First having taken the length of your semidiameter in any measure, which let be
for more conueniencie in For the greater measure the greater error in this
kind of work.
inches, then open your compasses to an inch, and see how many of them is
contained in your arc.

CHAP. 11. How to measure Sections of a Circle.
I Told you in the last chapter that there be two sorts of sections, a greater
which is more then a semicircle; and a lesser, which is not so much as a
semicircle. They are measured diuersely.

A greater section is thus measured, To measure a greater Section.
draw two semidiameters from either end of the arc to the center, as the two
pricked lines in the figure A. Then Multiply half the arc in the semidiameter,
and to the product thereof add the content of the said triangle, made of the
cord and the two semidiameters, and the total will be the content of the whole
section.

diagram

The sollid or piece of Timber, whose base is the figure A or any greater
section of a circle, is found as before is often said, by multiplying the content
of the base in the length of the piece.

Or take half the arc as one side of a squared piece of Timber, and the
semidiameter as the other side, and so measure it by any of the ways in the
second part: then add thereunto the content of the sollid, whereof the
triangle before named is the base, and the total will be the content of the
sollid, whose end is the said section.

A lesser section is thus measured. To measure a lesser section.
Draw two semidiameters from either end of the arc unto the center of the
Circle, whereof this section is a part, as be the two pricked lines without this
figure B. Then multiply half the arc in the semidiameter; and out of the
product thereof, diagram take the content of the triangle made of the cord and
the two semidiameters, and the remainder will be the content of the lesser
section B.

The sollid or piece of timber, whose base or end is the figure B, or any
lesser section of a circle, may be measured as before is taught, by multiplying
the content of the figure in the length of the sollid.

Or else, take half the arc as one side of a squared piece of timber, and the
semidiameter for the other side, and so measure it by the ways in the second
part of this book. Then deduct out of the content thereof, the content of the
sollid or piece of timber, whereof the triangle made of the cord and the two
semidiameters, is the base or end: and the remainder is the content of the
sollid, made upon the said lesser section B.

In the 6. chapter of the second part of this book, To measure an Ouall.
I told you that I would show you in the end of this Chapter, how to measure an
Ouall: which in a word is thus. First find (by that which is taught in the 8.
Chapter of this part) the four centers of the four arkes or pieces of
circles, whereof the Ouall is made (for every Ouall is made, by joining
together four several arkes or pieces of circles, whereof those at the two
ends are equal, and those at the two sides are also equal). Then having found
those arkes, draw their cord under them: so shall you see the whole Ouall to
be divided into four lesser sections of a circle and a parallelogram. Therefore
measure all those four sections, as before is taught in this Chapter; and
measure also the parallelogram, by the way taught in the third Chapter of this
third part: and the content of them all (that is, of those four sections and
the parailelogram) is the content of the Ouall.

Nete, that when you have measured one section at the end of the Ouall, you
have also the content of the other section at the other end (because they are
equal): Therefore you need but to double the one, and so you have the content
of them both. In like sort may you do with the sections at the sides, that is;
having measured the one, do but double it for the content of them both.

If a piece of timber were Ouall fashion, that is, had his base or end like an
Ouall: then it may be measured by multiplying the content of the base by the
altitude or length of the piece, as has been often mentioned.

Note further, that by this which is here taught, and by that which is before
written of triangles and mani-sided figures, you may measure any kind of
figure, either plain or sollid, that is made of straight lines and circular
lines together, if you do but use diligence, and divide or imagine a division
of the whole figure into his proper sections and other figures as becomes;
and so measure those sections and other figures severally, and the^ add their
contents together.

CHAP. 12. What a Pyramid is, and how it is measured.
A Pyramid is a sollid figure, contained under many plain superficies set upon
one plain superficies, and gathered together into one point, as this pyramid
A, Pyramids are diverse according as their bases be diverse, as of 3, 4, 5, or
more sides, as is at large showed in the 10. definition of the 11. book of
Euclides Elements of Geometry.

But of what sorts soever the pyramids be, To measure the sollid content of a
Pyramid.
they are measured by one rule, which is thus: Multiply the altitude or height
by the third part of the content of the base: or contrarily, multiply the
content of the base by the third part of the altitude or height, and either of
the products is the content sollid of the pyramid.

Here note, that the altitude or height is not the length of the side of the
pyramid, but (as I told you in the first chapter of this third part) it is the
length of the perpendicular or plumme line, falling from the point or top
thereof, to the base or bottom.

diagram

But if you would measure the superficies or outside of a pyramid: To measure
the superficial content of a Pyramid.
then (in so much as all the sides are triangles) measure every triangle by it
self, and to all their contents add the content of the base, and the total
or sum is the superficial content of the pyramid.

CHAP. 13. How to measure parts of a pyramid, or timber that is taper grown.
IF a part of a pyramid do taper much, you may lay it on a paper by a scale,
and make it out to a perfect pyramid. Having so done, measure the whole
pyramid. Measure also that part thereof which was added; which substract or
take from the content of the whole pyramid, and the remainder gives the content
of the piece of a pyramid. This way is not convenient in ordinary tapered
timber, and therefore take rather the way here following.

You know that in the last chapter of the first part of this book, I told you,
that if a tapered piece were measured by the square of the middle, there was
lost to the seller a piece of timber, whose length is the sixth part of the
length of the whole piece; and which has for his breadth, half the difference
of the breadth of both ends; and for his thicknes, half the difference of the
thicknes of both ends. Therefore having measured the piece by the square of the
middle, deduct the said lost piece, and the remainder is the content of the
tapered piece. This lost piece you may measure (and so deduct) thus. Take the
half of the difference of the breadth of both ends of the tapered piece, for
the breadth of your lost piece; and half the difference of the thicknes of
both ends, for the thicknes of the lost piece: and with that breadth and
thicknes measure it according to the length; which (as I said) is the sixth part
of the length of the whole piece. And note, that by the length, I mean not the
side of the tapered piece, but the plumme or height thereof.

CHAP. 14. What a Cone is, and how it is measured.
A Cone is a round pyramid (as it were) which has for the base a Circle, as is
this figure. It is largely described in the 18. definition of the 11. book of
Euclides Elements. To measure the sollid content of a Cone.


The sollid content of a Cone is thus measured: Multiply the content of the
base in ye third part of the height, and the product is the sollid content of
the Cone. To measure the superficial content of a Cone.


The superficial content of a Cone is thus found. Multiply half the circuit
or compass of the base, diagram by all the side, and the product is the
superficial content of the spire; to which if you add the content of the
base, the total will be the superficial content of the whole Cone.

Note here again, that the side of the Cone is not the height, plumme or
perpendicular line from the top to the base, but the length of the ridge or
sloping of the Cone.

There are many other kinds of plains and sollids, but I may not stand to
write of them. If any man, either for pleasure or profit, shall desire to know
them, or their measure, let him look into Euclides Elements, Master Digs his
Pantametria, Master Lucars Solace, and other good books of Geometry, which are
extant in English.

FINIS.

