HONORS ACADEMIE. OR THE FAMOVS PASTORAL, of the fair Shepherdess,
IVLIETTA.

A work admirable, and rare, Sententious and grave: and no less profitable,
then pleasant to pervse.

Wherein are many notable Discourses, as well Philosophical, as Divine: Most
part of the Seven Liberal Sciences, being comprehended therein: with diverse
Comicall, and Tragical Histories, in Prose, and Verse, of all sorts.

Done into English, by R. T. Gentleman.

printer's device of Thomas Creed BELLVM HIT AVARITIA CONTRA



Imprinted at London by Thomas Creed, 1610.

TO THE TRVLIE HONORABLE, AS WELL FOR VERTVE, AS NOBILITY, THE LADY ANNE
HERNE: Wife to that worthy and gene rous Gentleman, Sir EDWARD HERNE, of the
thrice Ancient and Noble ORDER of the BATHE, KNIGHT.
BOund by desert, not meriting the same,
Words (still) to give for deeds, does make me shame.
Yet (Beauteous) pardon, since the pouer Man
Gives, (though not what he should) yet what he can.
Thanks yield I you, (the pay of younger Brother)
Let Heirs be frank, and not their Riches smother.
What you request, I wish you would command,
For so my duty to your Virtue's paund.
Vouchsafe this modest Book, fraught full of wit,
A subject chaste, a Lady chaste does fit.
Then, honored ANNE, grace HONORS ACADEMIE,
Since HONOR honoreth you, as much as any.
Your Eglets high Conceit, too well does know,
My Swallow MUSE, flies (for your pitch) too low.
This stuff is SHEPHARDS GRAY, spunne course and plain,
Unless that you this work, (to grace) shall daigne.
But as your outward shape is lovely fair,
So inwardly, you'ar Courteous, Debonaire.
Your disposition mild, all faults will cover,
And (as unseen) you gently them do smother.
My hope is then, that you will sweetly look,
With your all-pleasing Eye, upon this Book.
Resolu'de whereon, your Votarie I rest,
Live happy, since many through you are blessed.
The Phoenix fair, sprung from your Ashes sweet,
As you, so her, in dutious sort I greet.
Ever devoted unto your matchless Virtues, Robert Tofte.

TO THE CVRTEOVS AND JUDICIOUS READER, AND TO NONE OTHER.
PArdon to crave of Sottish MVLTITVDE,
That saucie giddie-headed Monster rude.
Who knows not when ought well is, or amiss,
Of shallowe shickle Brain, a token is.
I Will not so much, as (wind to beg it) spend,
None grosely more, then Find-faults do offend.
A golden Calse, I cannot worship, I,
An Ape in purple, Ass in skarlet Die.
My Muse (as yet) I never Merchant made,
Who fells ^^s wit for Gold, is LEARNINGS JADE.
My Scope is fair, and virtuous is my Feeld,
Then pleasure great, this subject needs must yield.
Nor I, of any, fear to be disgrac're,
As is my Muse, so is my Mistress chaste.
No word obscene, ^o phrase lascivious,
You (here) shall read, to tainte a Virgins blush.
Hence (Envy) then, go get thee down to hell,
My Sunn's so oright, all mist^ it does expel.
(LEARNED) to you, my Book, and self I yield,
Against those Gorgons, hold forth Pallas Shield.
Chiefly against an other worser Crew,
(Oh pardon passion, when it speaks true)
Against such idle Thieves, as do purloyne,
From others Minte, what is none of their own Coin.
These buz about, like Drones, and Beetles blind,
Whilst (in them) Hunnie none, but gaul you find.
Against these Cheaters, and their shifting Rout,
Vouchsafe your Cristall Shield for to hold out.
Ye, royal Marchants-like, in The Ocean deep,
Of endless Knowledge, venture, wealth to seek.
Nor fear you (when you utter it at home)
Those barbarous BROKERS, that each where do rome.
And do their force (though weak God knows) advance,
Conducted by their blind guide Ignorance.
Base Ignorance, the Foe most capital,
To Wisdom, Learning, and good Manners all:
Oh do but you, in your RIALTO rich,
Of CVRTESIE, (nor is this Favor mich.)
Give out, this Trash of mine, is like (no Like's the same)
Your precious Wares, and I, shall malice shame.
Do you (but once) commend this my poor wealth,
And MOMVS strait (for grief) will hang himself.
Yours evermore, R. T.

THE PRINTER TO THE READERS IN GENERAL.
GEntle Readers, briefly and ingeniouslie (in a word) thus. This Book has
been kept from the Translator hereof a long time, since when (until it was
in a manner thoroughly Printed) he never had sight of it, and therefore could
not possibly pervse it over, as his desire was, meaning to have corrected,
what you perhaps may find amiss. Some faults (no doubt there be) especially
in the Verses, and to speak truth, how could it be otherwise, when he wrote
all this Volume, (as it were) Cursorily, and in have: Never having so much
leisure, as to ouer-looke one leaf, after he had scribbled out the same. It
therefore must needs be little better then a confused Chaos, Rudis indigestaque
Moles, not much unlike the Bears ugly whelpe, before it be licked over by the
dambe.

But there is no remedy now, but patience, he can be but sorry for the same.
And yet to speak indifferently, the errors herein committed, are not so
gross and so many, but that they may be easily let slip, and pass unespied:
and this is the petition, which I am bold to put up unto you; which if my
Fortune be so good, as it may pass, and be granted amongst you, you shall
animate the Gentleman hence-forward, to be more careful to please you, and
bind me in double bands with him, to labor hereafter, in what I may, to make
some better satisfaction, for this your kind patience toward us both. And so
I rest,

Always yours to by poor power, T. C.

THE FIRST PART OF IVLIETTAS PASTORALLS.
A MOST EXQVISITE PIECE OF WORK, wherein are set down, diverse excellent
Discourses, as well Moral, as Philosophical: Intermixed with many Histories,
both pleasant and Tragical: set forth in sundry sorts of verses fitting the
Humor of every one whatsoever.
AFTER so many strange cruelties, inflicted upon the wretched Shepherd A RCAS,
by vnpitifull Fortune, in the end, he found himself all alone, in the midst
of a most fearful desert, being a place, agreeable to his grief, and not a
little fit for his sharp and stinging misery. Horror, in steed of light, made
there her abode, neither did any other comfortable Beam of pleasure shine
there, then such as ioylesse solitarines draws from pining sorrow. No
cheerful Sun in this place used to cast forth his gladsome rays, it being
the ordinary abiding of the black daughters of fatal death. The chiefest
riches, the poor Shepherd found there, was Bushes, Thorns, Brambles, and
Briers, hard flintie Rocks, and huge senseless stones. No other creatures
entertained he for his Guests, but brute Beasts, withdrawing himself from the
company of men, as if they had bin devils. Thousands of Rocks, of which, some
being eaten with time, other some blasted with lightning, and some set out with
sharp pointed Thorns, kept him as a Bulwark, safe on the one side, and the
periurde waters of the changing Sea, growing white with stormy Billows,
preserved him secure on the other. There sometimes was the melancolike abode of
still sleep, there the resting place of pale death, and there the lodge of
such Spirits, as like vacabonds, wandered up and down the world, being worthily
punished by the great and just Gods. Many ghastly Caves, were (there) to be
found, but so horrible were they, as the only sight of them brought trembling
fear to the minds, and sudden amazement to the eyes of such as should behold
them. No running Fountain was there that gave forth cristall water; no
shadowing grove, to keep men from parching heat; nor any green coolie grass
with fair colored flowers, to delight the senses: only in this uncouth
wilderness, did soiourne such sad, and old angry men, as by there nightly
Charms forced the Spirits of the earth to obey their wills and to be at their
command. In steed of Nightingale and Lark, was there found the Scritching Owl
and night Raven, with such other dismal Birds, whose flight, nature, and
cry, did serve for sinister prophesies unto the miserable Inhabitants thereof.
All thrice woeful and lamentable dwelling, in comparison of the joyful woods
of Arcadia, the first witnesses of the chaste Loves of this disastred Shepherd:
and yet fortunate enough for him, seeing, that he being deprived of all his
wished for hopes, soughtby many pitiless Accidents, to end his loathed life.
Those fair and goodly troops of Shepherds, and Shepheardesses, which were
wont heretofore to be a comfort unto him, were now most pitifully taken from
his sight. There the learned Iul^tta was not to be found, neither there could
his dear friend Philas be heard of, who, with others were wont most sweetly to
record and sing of their ouerhard fortunes in their loyal Loves. O poor
Shepherd, if solitarines may bring to the malecontented, any delight at all,
no doubt but then, thou do participate with the same; for amongst millions
of sauadge beasts, thou live alone; amongst thousands of ghastly rocks, and
amongst infinites of deserts, without any clear light, or cheareful Sun: And
yet the sharp feeling of his inward griefs, overcame and drowned the sad
apprehension of this solitary seat: A Similie.
no otherwise, then great and desperate mischances, slake, and quench those
that are little: or as most violent diseases, hinder the feeling of such as are
less unrecoverable. Not smally fortunate did he think himself, to have found
this unlucky R^ceptakle, making unto himself a false joy of that sower
Subject, which was the ca^se of heause sorrow unto others. And herein might he
witness full well, that in respect of the ^ll that happens in Love, all
other evils are right pleasures, and that, that only torment, brought with it
a certain sure knowledge of misfortunes unto men. O how easy a matter is it
to resist all worldly troubles, and to pass through the pikes of the same But
how hard or rather impossible a thing is it, to vanquish and overcome love? A
Sentence.
Of all the fanites that wise men commit, none is more excusable, then such as
Love forces then, to do. Who was more learned then Plato, who more inditiall
then Aristotle, who more godly then Da^ad, who more wise then Solomon, and who
more strong then Sampson? Surely none: and yet never have any bin more overcome
by love, then they, of which Tirants slau^sh yoke, this poor Shepherd also
had felt the heavy burden. His rare constancy bare patiently the loss of
his goods, took gently his banishment from his country, endured quietly the
cruelty of time, and brooked wisely, the injuries of the envious; but unto
this Love, it yielded quickly, and as it were without constraint. Thrice
blessed was he, in that be knew how to make choice of so beauteous and rare
Subjects, but yet quadruple unfortunate, for that he could not reap the sweet
fruits of the same in this world. A Sentence.
The remembrance of things lost, is forgotten through length of time, the pain
of deadliest sicknesses, is appeased by Physic, and the deepest conceited
sorrow, wears away with often sighing; but alas, his love was always living,
without end, and without truce, as a substance everlasting. Too, too cruel
was that star, that shonne at his birth, but far more remorslesse, the care
and grief of his continual vexed life. And in respect of him, happy are all
other whatsoever, who are tormented with the loss of their kind friends,
dear country, loving families and acquaintance, all which though they be much
grievous to support and suffer, yet are they not to be compared in rigor, unto
the least passion of Love; for the Soul finds in them, some one comfort or
other, and the body some ease of grief, or (at the least) an end of all: but
in the pangs of Love, neither the one nor the other are ever out of trouble.
Wretched then is the man that leueth, therefore, wretched this Shepherd, and
yet more happy then such contented persons, who live always fearing death:
whereas, the approach of the same, was the only haven and heaven of his
unhappiness, Such, and so great was the extremities of his woes, as it hindered
him, to mark or conceive the fearefulnes of this desert, and to apprehend the
horror of so frightfull a dwelling. He thinks of nothing less, then of the
horriblenes of the same. Such condemned Souls, as are drawn unto the place of
execution, dream not of any thing else, then of the bitter death they go to
suffer. Eue^ so, sought not he any other journey in this wilderness, then such
as his passion led him on to take, his eyes not being employed in any office at
all, whilst he himself seemed to be both deaf, blind, and dumme. O sage and
prudent Poets, who to express the nature and effects of Love most properly,
feign Lovers to have bin changed into insensible shapes: for certainly, they
are but Stones, Trees, and Rocks, in their actions and behavior, although they
retain and keep with them a humane shape. A long time did this miserable
Shepherd walk thus, without knowing which way he went, until at the last for
very wearines, he was forced to rest himself at the foot of a mighty high
Rock. There, being set upon the ground, his arms a cross, his eyes lifted
up, his lips close shut together, leaning his head upon the stone, which hung
on the one side, he seemed as if he had bin another very Rock; for, as a
Rock, so were his gestures, moue-lesse, his spirits gone, and all the parts
of his body without force and vigor. And to say the truth indeed, how could
he once stir, if his Soul being the life of his body, was as then absent,
and at that time retired into the bosom of his fair Mistress? Thus sat he
senseless a great while, with a heavy settled countenance, until at last,
looking down low with his eyes, he espied certain verses to be carved most
curiously within the Rock, which made him resemble the Hunter, A Similie.
who dispairing of his Prey, and having (as it were) quite forgotten the same,
upon the soden spieth his game, which forces him to begin a fresh the pursuit
thereof, and so follows the chase again. O how great power has our desire
over our Souls, that it is of force presently to revive our senses, to awaken
our thoughts, to pluck up our Spirits, and to change and alter our
countenances! The great longing he had to read that large writing, awaked him
out of his dream, recalled home his former wits, and brought him again to be a
right man. He turned his eyes too and fro, busying himsefe, about the reading
of those lines, but little pleasure conceived he of the same, because he could
not understand them, by reason they were carved in letters of Arabia, which
made him fret and fume; Not unlike unto one, who seeking to pass over a River,
A Comparison.
cannot find the lowest and shallow est place through which he might wade most
safest; so as, being in great collar against Nature, he burst out into these
speeches. Ah cruel Stepdame, when will thou be glutted with the miseries of
mortal men? At too high a rate do thou sell that little advantage and
benefit, which they have over other living creatures. To what end serves it
them to be more perfect then beasts, if this perfection, takes from them
their most desired rest? and what profit is it for one to be rich, if that
treasure of his, engenders travail, and care, which most cruelly wears away
his life? Far happier by ods are the brute beasts, for ignorance takes
away from them the apprehension of misfortunes, the thought of riches, and the
sorrow that is incident unto this life: whereas the mind of man, is tossed too
and fro, not only with unquietness of such things as are present, but also for
such as are before passed, and are yet to come: yea (and that in such strange
wise, as man is thought to be still miserable, excepting only, in that small
time, wherein he is freed and released from those mortal cares and knawing
Corsiues. Alack, A Similie.
alack, as with the tree, the rind grows, and sprowteth up, the one not
being able to continue without the other; so with Man, is carefulnes engendered,
which as a most unfortunate evil Angel, follows him in all his actions he
takes in hand. Who is he, that ever has bin living without the feeling of
grief or sorrow, or without the taste of vexation and unquietness? The mornings
hour frames and plotteth one misery or other against the evening, as the
extreme rage of ardent heat makes a storm, or tempest, which halleth fire
and water together. For one taste of pleasure which he enjoys, a thousand
desires of death seize on his spirits, to the end he might quench all his
heavy disasters, by such a speedy means: for more happier are senseless
creatures, then they, whose bodies are only put to travail, and not their
minds at all: and in respect of the unfortunate plagues of this life, a thrice
blessed companion is death, who ought to be counted a remedy and help, rather
then any pain, or trouble. And therefore thrice happy indeed, are you most
valiant Spirits, who of your own brave courages, have dared to shorten by
violence the miseries of your loathed lives, thereby to abridge and cut off the
multitude of sorrows belonging unto the same. Unkind Nature, what gifts do
thou prodigally bestow upon man, but bitter wailings and salt tears? No
sooner are we borne, but tears come forth with us, following us in all the
course of our lives, and not leaving us until our latest death. Of earth do
thou frame our bodies, and to earth do thou turn the same again; And yet
alas, not before thou have made us to take the aslay of many miserable
calamities. Neither have thou made rightly perfect any one man, there being
always in his life, one fault, or another; for seldom or never find we an
excellent and quick Spirit, in a well shaped and comely body, nor an exquisite
well made body to contain in the same a rare and admirable mind. But it is
no wonder at all, that those, who are thy Subjects, children, and vassals, want
their perfection, when thou thine own self, A Similie.
have failed and do come behind of the same. Hardly can the people of a
cruel king, be brought to be gentle and mild, and as hardly can men thy
creatures attain to come to be perfect, when thou thy self, on whom they
depend, art naturally full of defects and wants. I pray thee tell me, what
charges had it bin unto thee, if thou had given unto every one an insight and
skill in foreign languages? and why do thou deprive so many minds
desirous of knowledge in all things, for want of understanding strange tongues,
in which thou give a plain testimome, either of thine own imperfection, or
else of thy overmuch cruelty? if thou art imperfect, then can nothing, that is
fair, excellent, or perfect, be found amongst us: for of the seeds of
thistles, can never corn spring: and if thou be cruel, then miserable is the
estate of man, to be governed and subiugated under the yoke of such a bloody
and inhumane Stepmother. Both which vices (I doubt not) but abound in thee;
Certainly thou art imperfect, rendering so many bodies empty and void of all
perfection, as Monsters, fashioned without form; And cruel thou art, making
men more wretched, or rather farreworse, then rude and sauadge beasts. Thus
exclaimed the poor Pilgrim, mad for anger that he could not understand that
strange writing. And as a small matter of loss brings more damage unto him,
who comes from going about a far greater, whilst the same is a doing, and
feels the cross thereof, to be more then if the said little mischance had
happened whilst he was in prosperity; So this petty despite galled the
Shepherd more, by reason he was as the^ plunged in a bottomless pit of
disco^tentments, the^ if it had chanced when he had lived most at ease and
pleasure. But now, as he was laying himself down to make his prayers unto the
morning sleep, to charm and close up his eyes and travail for a while, he
might perceive on the sudden a certain aged man, standing hard behind him.
This good old Father, had a long beard, as white as snow, his hair of his
head was hoarie and graie, his forehead wrinkled, his face furrowed, his eyes
sunk in his head, his lips great and black, his eyebrows thick as
bristles, his hands riueled, and nothing but skin and bone, his apparel a
bears case, his feet bare and naked, having in his right hand a staff, and
in his left a book. The complaint of the Shepherd had, he heard, and he being
one that was assisted and helped by the benefit of Nature, in the charms and
enchantments which he used, was not a little moved to hear her so sharply
blamed. Whereupon he resolved to take her cause in hand, and as a friendly
counselor to plead in her behalf, insomuch as without once saluting or
greeting the discontented Arcas, in a friendly manner he thus began to answer
him. Alas poor silly soul, to what end do thou show thy self to be like
unto the fire, that burns that that nourishes her, or to the viper that
knaweth her mother in pieces, or to the ungrateful churl, that murdereth his
best benefactor? Dare thou so impudently speak again st her, that is the
Mother, the Queen, and the Nurse of all things? Most mortal enemy of the
Gods, who acknowledge her for their vaiuersall Mother, whom thou blamest, with
so great blasphemy. Who gives their essence and Being, unto living creatures,
but she? who makes them to live, and move but she? Should not this great
obscure Caos, (but for her) turn again into his confused form, and the
Elements be confusedly mingled one with another? Who has given Soul and life
unto man, but she? When the expert Physician has done all he can to the
uttermost of his Art, to heal the sick patients; if he then casts away his
medicine, and refuses wilfully his own health, is it the Doctors fault if he
be taken away by death? If thou have received both a soul and sufficient vigor
and force of Nature, and for default of using the same wisely, ill fortune has
seized and taken hold upon thee: can thou justly lay the cause of thy mishap
upon Nature? O fool as thou art, know thou, that our Spirits and our bodies
have received all perfection that may be, and the very best of every virtue
that is in any other living creature, A Sentence.
is bestowed upon us. Unto a wise man nothing is impossible, neither can the
stars themselves prevail ought against him. But if he will needs lose
himself, if he will employ his good gifts, against his own self, as the
surious man, who wounds his heart with his ownesword, can the blame thereof
be attributed unto Nature? That vassal that has received all good and kind
entertainment and usage of his Lord, and yet afterward will fail of his
duetic, A Similie.
does he bring his Master to be guilty of his offense, or can he make him to
be the Author of this his so gross tollie? I think not. If so, why have thou
then suffered thy self so foolishly to be deceived, cheated, and deprived of
that force, and virtue, that Nature has lent thee, laying upon her, all the
blame for the loss of the same? Thou affirmest that man is miserable, and
therefore little beholding unto Nature, but upon what Foundation, upon what
Rock, or upon what sure ground can thou prove her to be the cause of his
misery? Does he want any thing that is convenient and fit for him? has he not
the form and shape of the Gods? Is not his Soul divine? and does it not
participate with wisdom, knowledge, and understanding? and if thou will not
allow, Wisdom, Knowledge, and Science, to be in the number of the best
things, then do thou deface every virtue, and by this means thou make men,
to be no better then brute and senseless beasts. But knowledge (say thou)
brings unto man, care, and vexation of mind, which like a worm, eats and
knaweth him continually, and (yet) does the same understanding, make him to
approach nigh unto the Gods, bringing him to be far more perfect, then when
he knew nothing. O what an unspeakable joy does he conceive in his soul, when
he is once able to attain unto the discovery of those admirable effects of
God? being able through his knowledge to prevent such mischiefs as are at
hand, and to deliver others from present shipwracks of imminent misfortunes?
Thou addest, that these things increase and engender sad thoughts in his mind:
but what pain, what grief, what molestation, or trouble, is there found (be
it never so sharp and stinging) which can once counteruaile, or compare, with
the ambrosiall sweetness of that renowned glory, which that man swalloweth down
along time, who rightly and perfectly does but judge and conceive of celestial
actions, and by his prudencie and skill, makes himself most profitable and
necessary unto his commonwealth? All those other bad conceits, pass and
vanish away, as a sudden storm, but most durable and for everlasting, is that
glory, which man builds and establishes upon the rockie ground of never
failing virtue. Great Hercules, (as now, An example.
) feels no more the pain of all those hugie labors which he once endured in
this world, for that is dead and gone, but his glorious renown, his worthy
name and fame endures still, and shall for evermore. But thou castest thine
eyes, upon such things only as are present, which are flitting and not
durable, fortifying thy complaint upon a vain and light shadow, without
bethinking thee once of that substance of Eternity, that is to come hereafter.
A Sentence.
True glory is never gotten but by great labor and travail; and virtue best
shines through deadliest dangers, as the Sun shows clearest, amongst the
darkest clouds. Had thou but any high courage in thee, or were thou bravely
pricked forward with the spur of honor, thou would never regard so much as
thou do this present time, but would rather have respect to what is like to
come hereafter; for right wretched is he, that with his dying body encloseth
and burieth his name, his glory, and all his exploytes, all within one obscure
tomb. Blame not Nature then, who has made man perfect in all parts and
compliments, and has given him the direct means to enter into the right way
which leads him unto the place of Eternity. And if thou can not understand
these Ar^bique letters, the fault is thine own, and not Natures, who has
given thee a mind to conceive, and a tongue, to learn to practice and speak.
But there is no reason, that without labor and taking of pain, we should come
to purchase our desires, since through this travail, the perfection of Nature
is the better known, producing many fair effects within our souls, first
formed and invented by her, which without industry would remain quite
extinguished, and of no force, not unlike unto senseless stones. The Shepherd
wakened with this biting discourse, began to take heart at grass, replying
upon the old man in this sort. Whatsoever thou art, that show thy self so
charitable and devout, in thy deuoyre and duty toward Nature, christning her
with the name of perfect; I must needs tell thee, thou art wonderful wide
from the truth, and not a little deceived in this matter; For if such
perfection were found in her (as thou speak) why then does she not make
every man perfect alike? whereas (quite contrary) from some, she takes away
their health, through long and strange Maladies, which by her own name, are
termed natural; from others, she curtalleth and loppeth off their best
members, whereby they grow deformed and misshapen; some others she abridgeth,
and takes away from them their right wits, and senses, making them become
innocents, and fools; and from others again, she withdraws her liberal
hand of plenty, forcing them to live in great want and beggerie. Now what
perfection is here found in these so diverse contrary effects? for of that
thing which is perfect, nothing can proceed but what is perfect, like unto it
self; As it happens amongst Lions and Lionesses, which always resemble one
another: but from Nature, diverse effects do happen imperfect, and therefore is
not she her self perfect. Now, badly (quoth the old man) herein do you
conclude, for both Nature her self is perfect, and so are her works also.
Perfect are her works, in that she does distribute unto every one, that which
she knows to be most necessary for him. Some does she cause to be sick, to
the end she may smoother and kill the force and power of such vices, as they
have over greedily swallowed down. From others she takes away their right
wits and memory, to make them forget the conceit and thought of high and
aspiring designs, and to bring them to think of base and low matters; upon
the conservation of which, depends the estate and safety of their Superious:
and from others, she keeps back her treasures, to the end she might
acquaint them with the ordinary labor and tillage of the earth; which
rendereth a most sacred and diume testimony of her perfection, without which,
the most worthiest Spirits, addicted wholly unto glory, should be constrained
to forsake and yield their bodies unto death, as being famished for want of
sustenance: and as her perfection is exquisite, so is her puissance
incomprehensible, and the effects of the same most admirable; so as who
solloweth her steps always orderly, shall never grosely err, nor offend
shamefully. And yet (replied the Shepherd) diverse that have offended, erring
through Nature, have by Art much amended their defects: whereas never has
there bin knonwe any one that has bin found to be perfect, through the benefit
of Nature: As we see the Sages and wise men, (that lived heretofore in the old
world,) spent many years to correct, by knowledge and experience, the defaults
of lame Nature. But that knowledge (answered the old man) proceeded from the
self same Nature, in such wise, as she is not to be blamed at all for the
same, nor to be thought any thing the more imperfect for it; seeing that as she
was the cause of that ill, so she brought a remedy for the same; and that so
wholesome a one, as the wound being once cured, A Similie.
the whole body ever after was the better, being clear purged of all his
defects. Not unlike unto the body of man, which being purified, through a
comfortable potion, is not only freed of that disease which as then infected
him, but ever after is the better in health for that wholesome Physic. We see
that sometimes the Surgion makes incision, and cutteth off flesh, to the end
the whole body may be the more healthful and sound: so this experieece which
Nature has bestowed upon man, is so perfect and necessary, as he may judge
himself to be right happy, to have found some such small defect of Nature in
himself, since they have bin of force to learn him how to help himself, and
how to use this excellent knowledge unto his great advantage, which not only
cleanses him from his faults present, but from such likewise as are to come
hereafter. What is that you said (answered Arcas) as though there be not many
faults and imperfections of Nature, and those of so high a quality, as no
experience nor skill, be it never so great, can ever amend them, or once be
able to do good of them: how many incurable diseases are there that no
Physic can help them? and how many cruel and desperate inconveniences, that
no Art can withstand them? No, no: Nature her self can never deliver unto man
any one knowledge sufficient, (no, although we would grant that wisdom
proceeded from her, as it does not) which were of force and power enough to
amend and correct her own faults, and imperfections. I will demand but this
one question of you, whether you think there be any natural prudence, or
foresight strong enough, to help that sickness which proceeds from Love? and
whether Lovers have not good reason, justly to complain of Nature, who without
any succor or help, halleth the^so cruelly unto such inexpiable miseries? Nay
then (quoth the old man) if you come to encounter against me, with the power of
Love, I must needs have the field, and yield the prize unto you. For I my
self, although I have drawn thousands of treasures from Nature, all which are
sufficient proofs of her beautifulnes, of her power and virtue; yet could I
never find by her means any remedy against this incurable disease. Incurable,
may I call it, since it has made me to abandon the world, to live this
solitary kind of life, whereby I might beguile my unsupportable pains, and
so (in the end) find death the only right Sovereign cordial and help to
ease and end this hellish disease. And if the selfsame accident, has brought
thee hither to be a companion unto me in my miseries: I shall be very willing
to discourse unto thee, the disastred adventures of my Love; and as gladly
every way to understand the hapless course of thine own. It is the only
thing I most desire (replied Arcas) although I doubt shrodely, that the memory
of my bitter troubles, will hardly afford me free utterance of speech, to
recite and repeat at full, the discourse of mine infinite misfortunes; and, I
fear me, least the sad remembrance of my renewed griefs, will interrupt and
break the slender thread of my feeble voice. But before I begin, let me
entreat you to expound and to enterpret unto me, these Arabique verses, and the
substance of the same. Withal my heart answered the old man, but first let us
take our places for our more ease, under the shade of this coolie rock, that
the fair colored green of these sight pleasing odoriferous herbs, may be
partakers of so lamentable an History. Whereupon, the old man (with Arcas) sat
him down, where he thought fittest for himself, when having now already cast
his eyes upon the Caracters, ready to report them in the French language) a
sad accent of a heavy voice, caused him (on the soden) to stop, and be silent:
not unlike that Merchant, who travailing on the way to go his voyage, A
Comparison.
suddenly turns back, leaving his company, with whom (before) he had
iournied, being given by the way as he passed to understand, of the too too
untimely death of his dear and loving Spouse. This voice ravished the souls
of both our Pilgrims, reviving a fresh memory of their loves within their
hearts, took away from them all other thoughs, the better to make them dream
of their passions, and brought them into their former estates of their Loves,
in which they were at the first. And this following, was the Song, which that
sweet breast breathed forth most sweetly, accompanied with thousands of deep
and profound sighs.

WHen will thou weary be, of sighing forth my pains,
Poor heavy heart? whose tears extinguished have thy heat
Why does not this strange fire, which fills all my veins,
My grief consume (my coarse consuming) though it is great?
With care and cries, to feed my soul, is my desire,
No hope to heal my wounds within me bide:
Alas I curse my self, yet honor I the fire,
See then how far, Love draws me on from Reason wide.
Thrice happy Nature, of each mortal man in this,
For they (in dying) of their ils, an end do gain:
But Spirits divine cannot; Divine their essence is,
Venus immortal was, immortal was her pain.
What said I? No. LOVE cannot die through deaths despire,
For in the soul he lives, and soul can never die:
On earth below, no creature is that takes in Love delight,
And Jove (himself) his awful power has felt on hie.
Woe is me in this strange sort, I perish (languishing,)
I wish for death, yet how to perish do not know:
Wretched that wight, whose burning griefs aie does him wring.
Nor can them quench, nor die, to rid himself from woe.
But since, I to this mischief am predestined,
Nor can death, to remorse, or pity nothing move:
Of Gods i will crave, I may be metamorphosed
Into those hapless Birds, that still bewail their Love.
Thus sung the troubled Nymph Orithia, amorous of the foresaid ARCAS; who
passing on her way, sweetly held on her dulcet tune: but she being gone, the
old man once more began to report what he before intended, reaccounting this
History following.

Most unjust law of partial LOVE, The lamentable Tragedy of chaste Floretta,
and kind Plaindor.
which with thy malice sly,
Thousands of faults with justice veil, do hide maliciously.
Thou that thy traitorous self, do feign, to be asacred thing,
And by a colored greement, thousands unto death do bring.
Most cruel law of loathed LOVE, that under friendships show,
Do paint thy bloody Massakers, and makst them holy go.
Thou that with vain allurements fond, and with fair smiling gloss,
So many faithful Lovers in their fatal tombs do close.
Who cuttest off so soon of men on earth the vital thread,
Of such as for their loyalty, and faiths, are honored.
Who (fiend-like) suckst their blood, and as if thou still destned were
To plague the world; the flesh of these poor murthred souls do tear.
Have thou then this fair worthy Brace of constant Lovers slain?
Whose memory still flourishing for ever shall remain.
Have thou them stifled through mischance, without remorse or ruth?
Their flowring years, their days, their years, in prime of their green
youth.
Ah too too cruel law of thine, and happy thrice our life,
If that it were not subject to thy ouer-ragings rife.
But what is he can live exempt, from these thy amorous laws?
When every puissant God what ere, this yoke as forced draws.
Then who can Love command, when Jove himself full oftentime,
By him has roughly bin controld, although his powers, divine?
And yet some comfort small it is to us, though little gain,
The Gods to have companions with us, in this our pain.
Then read this more then woeful verse, believe it as your Creed,
True Herolds of a message such, as hearts to hear will bleed.
Though in this uncouth desert cold, LOVES hateful enemy,
Death keeps his abode and court, and sleep does here abie.
Where horror does inhabit still, and fat all sisters three,
Who to untwist our thread of life, most willingly agree.
Where hundred thousand hugie Rocks, sore bruisde with thunders might,
And torn through long continuance, of times injurious spite.
Are to this place chief ornaments; though many a hollow cave,
And deepelesse ditches, soundlesse pitts, as glories chief it have.
Although in steed of corn, with thorns and brambles it be sown,
And with the chillie spring of Isie waters it is ore-flowen.
Although it be environed, with monsterous hedges thick,
Of blood drawing brambles, and although wild beasts abound in it.
And that the sweelling periurde sea, most fearful to our eyes,
The same does compass round about, with foam which thick does rise.
So as no one delight at all (though little) does appear,
Or seems that ever Venus sowed her seed immortal here.
That never here for to repose, did rest the beauteous sun,
When he his daily course, in course, with Majesty had run.
In brief, although this Island be, of gastfull lands the worst,
Where only damnd despair does seek for to abide accursed.
Yet liude there (here) not long ago) a lovely Shepherd fair,
Whom cruel Love, did vex and gripe, more then with monstrous care.
A Shepherd sweet in every point he was, and complete right,
But that too soon his tender years cut off, were through despite.
A perfect Shepherd fair he was, his mind and valor such,
As all the rest of Swains that liude in woods, he past, by much.
The spoyl^^ of (...) Bears, the rough sharp skin of tusked Bores,
O^ Lions sell and greedy Woolues, hang up, upon his doors.
Strange hidious Serpents ugly heads, and Griffons Tallent claws,
Sharp poisonous teeth of Dragons huge, with their most ugly paws.
About the little closing walls of his small house was set,
As honorable witness of his valor more then great.
Those were his hangings rich, and these his pictures set in gold,
Which intermixed in sundry sort, you still might fresh behold.
A Sentence.
No such brave furniture as is a deadly enemies spoil,
'Whose color nere is marde with dust, nor length of time can foil.
'So is the battered harness rich won from our vanquished foe,
'Which hung upon our walls more fair, then gold does make them show.
'For with the same the honor of the owners victory
'Is there enstald and registered, nor can it ever die.
Thus, then this gallant Shepherd fair, not little to his fame,
Adornd his house with sauadge spoil, which he abroad had slain.
His armor, was his bow, his clubbe, his She pheards wreathed hook,
For harneis he of musket proof, a leathren brestplate took.
Yet nothing couldore-cme, his more then usual common power,
Still from the chase, and fighting he returned conqueror.
Thrice happy, fortunate was his first bringing up and birth,
Not any gifts more excellent, Nature gave on this earth.
Valiant he was, and strong in limbs, well made and trim withal,
So fair as every Shepherdess in love with him did fall.
Blessed therefore was he in his first green youth as he deserved,
Whom honor did accompany, whom fortune always served.
Thrice happy he, in his young years, till it was his lucklesse sat,
That dismal Love, his reason and his sense did captiuate.
For then he lost his wonted force, and courage every ways,
And of his more then brave exployts, the memorable praise.
He only studied then alone, to nourish his sad grief,
To sighthe his secret sorrows forth, and wail without relief.
An Inuectiue against Love.
O more then cursed caitife Love, thou wisedoms do annoy,
Debashest reason sound from mind, and valor do destroy.
Wise men, thou make worse then fools, and makst them only fit
To hurt themselves, whilst obstinate, they stand well pleased in it.
No pleasing object likes their eyes, but what does threat them ill,
What evil is, that love they best, their ruin fostring still.
They blow the glowing coals, that burns them with ore what desire,
As does the foolish sly, that spoils himself within the fi^e.
Poor souls bewitched a thousand times, each man in careful wise,
Does seek to shun what may him hurt, and from the same he flies.
Each one does deadly poison hate, which does abridge his life,
And being pained, strait does hunt with speed for succor rife.
The true disposition of a right Lover.
Only, the perverse Lover does all hope of help refuse,
He likes his pining grief, and what does hurt him still does choose.
He blessed himself accounts that, not heald is his disease,
His sickness he does honor, and to die it does him please.
Hard fortune, is this to him, yet his haps far harder more,
He waileth his mischance, and yet, his grief he does adore.
His woes nere die, but still revive; Then happier live you fair,
You that be dead, in better case, then Lovers plag'd, you are.
LOVE then our Shepherds courage stout, did weaken with his rage,
And reapt the sprouting fruit, scarce ripe, of his first happy age.
Ravished his senses, and to thousand dangerous harms him drew,
And after these disasters all, most cruelly him slew.
This Shepherd, Plaindor called was, no creature like to him
For force of arm s for beauteous shape, or virtues, half so trim.
But hear I pray, how Cupid proud, in most malicious wise,
Transformes himself to poison strong for to deceive our eyes.
Who though he seems unto us as courteous, meek and kind,
Yet but a poisoned wine (though sweet in taste) you shall him find.
Which we no sooner drink, but that it does us mickle harm,
Bereaues us of our vital spirits, and does our Reason charm.
This deadly draft who does but taste, to die is certain sure,
And yet before his death longtime, he must strange griefs endure.
Hara by this darkesome desert sad, there was a place most dainty,
Where Autumn, in his season brought forth fruits, great store and plenti^,
Rich was it of all worldly things, but yet amongst the rest,
For richest good, a Damsel fair surpassing, it possessed.
Most famous (for this beauteous maid) was registered this place,
Though at that time few men had had the hap to see her face.
Her stature tall, made her in show like to a Princely Queen,
Rather then one that in the woods and groves brought up had been.
Her flaxen hair which calmi^ winds did gently blow full soft, A description
of a beautiful maid.

Hung dangling down, more fine then gold, in thousand curlings wrought.
Often (when she any leisure had) she twisted in the shade
Those hairs as nets, which m^ry souls (to bow unto her,) made.
Her forhead of fair Iuorie, was, even, pure, and large,
No furrow there (d^grace to form) the flesh dia frowning charge.
No bending wrinkle there was seen, nor painting to deface,
The snowy whitenes, which is used to make more fair the face.
Her eyebrowes, purest Ebonie, kept their proportion right,
No pl^asing show so prettily, the fancy did delight.
Sweet shadows for her sphere-like eyes which with their twincklings calm,
From sunn^^ beams did them defend, which burned ouerwarme.
Her diamond sparkling ^y^s were such, and did so brightly shine,
As those two lamps ^h^ Sun and Moon most glorious and divine.
Her piercing glaunces full of power, like to swift lightning were,
When as the slash inslam'd from heaven, it self on the earth both bear.
So rolde they in her head, as greatest hearts they forct decay,
And valiant spirits of men as slaves did bring unto their bay.
Dan Cupids darts they were, with which he used men to cross,
Who being vassels made most bate, did glory in their loss.
Dire Comets were they, like to such that danger do portend,
And such were hers, for death they gave to her and to her friend.
Yet they of shame fastn^s did show to be the bashful Call,
Where chaste delight did d^^ly use for his disport to dwell.
Her pure vermilion sh^^ts, when she did smile had force and power,
To show more perfect fair by odds then daintiest gilliflower.
How sweet and cruel wast at once to touch so holy thing?
What mortal grief was it that took (but once asay) to him?
Poor Plaindor can true witness be, one kiss unto his cost,
Was cause that he his precious life, and all his good days lost.
Her ch^rrie lips, did closely hid^, right Grient Pearl of Inde,
No precious ^^^lls h^lfe so rich, you in that land can find.
From which P^rcul^^s vaiul^s, a pleasing sent did come,
More sweet then Musk, more dainty sarre then rightest Sinamum.
Her lovely cheeks (Su^nes blemish) were as Alablaster fair,
Whose roseall color mixed with cream, did show beyond compare.
Her dimpled chinne was full and round; her breast the milkie way,
Where Cupid, (when that he was hot,) a bathing often lay.
Two Apples fair thereby was seen, as sprung from paradise,
The Graces, in that garden used to sport in wanton-wise.
Her matchless hand was long and strait; her fingers white and small,
The mountain snow refined, to them, was nothing white at all.
Such was this peerlesse virgins fair, and she FLORETTA hight,
Blessed perfectly, but only that bad destnie ded her spite.
One day as in the warming sun, with mickle curious care,
She did divide and tide in knots, her shining bright gold hair.
The hearts of worthiest Demigods, here on the earth to trap,
As Plaindor came from woods, to view her (thus,) it was his hard hap.
And being weary, thought a while to rest him by her side,
But this reposing afterward be dearly did abide.
For vading pleasure over small, he too too dear did pay,
But it was his fortune bad, and down along by her, he lay.
Where he such poison sucked, as it was, within a while his bane,
And where he rest did think to find, he found recurelesse pain.
Thrice happy he, had he not laid himself upon that green,
Or if that forward he had gone, or, her he had not seen.
For though his weary coarse did rest, his mind did travail sore,
Whilst his bewitched eyes, apace down swallowed venim store.
His gazing eyes n^re from her face, one jot at all did stir,
His eyes made only to behold, and gaze on none but her.
He marks with more then curious view, her for head and her cheek,
Her hair, her breast, and other parts which he too well did leeke.
So rests atteniuely and still, leaping as it were for joy
The conqueror proud, when he beholds his prey which him did noy.
So stands still the greedy Jew, to mark with heedfull eye
Such precious lewells, passing rare, which he does long to buy.
Then, then, the hapless Shepherd (first) perceived the flame begin,
To spread along his heart, and to consume his soul within.
He then perceived, of liberty he was deprived and sense,
By those bright beams of that strange glittering beauties excellence.
Then of his ill, the silly wretch, had knowledge at that hour,
Yet to resist, or to withstand the same, he had no power.
He felt his captive heart attacht, and roughly raught away,
And yet for all this would he not, make of the same a stay.
All means of help he banished thence, and yet he felt the grief,
He saw, he was as one undone, yet would not seek relief.
He was in prison, yet he did refuse his liberty,
He found his error, yet not once (Peccauie) would he cry.
He never sought to drive from him, this ill iueuitable,
Though, through the same, he found himself (for ever) miserable.
Cruel effects of Love; such Lovers, as quite senseless be,
Cannot avoid their hurt, although with eyes they do it see.
So in Florettas beauteous eyes, Plaindor now captiuate,
Where he should have resisted, is proud of his lost estate.
He counts himself thrice fortunate, that he thus vanquished is,
By so divine a beauty, which he vows his chiefest bliss.
He, this his hurt does better love, then all his former health,
His bondage, fore his liberty, he does prefer and wealth.
Ah Lovers more then wretched right, worse, hundred times then hell
Is your estates, and worse then death, (were it but death it were well).
To the enemy of your sweet lives, your selves you do deuote,
Your hangman you do honor still, who seeks to cut your throat.
You are not able once to shun, to hate or to detest,
That which does make you languish, and you, tortureth with unrest.
You love, what works your miseries, and beauty (chiefest sore,
To peaceful minds of worthiest men) as Gods you adore.
Each one (excepting Lovers) wronged, reuengement seeks by law,
Defends himself, and (being hurt) upon his foe does draw.
Each one (except the Lover) wars, against his Enemy makes,
Has reason to detest him, and against him vantage takes.
He only yields himself as slave, unto his own distress,
He honoreth his tormentor fierce; his prison he does bless.
Who remedy does seek for him, him he accounts no friend,
He rather hates him mortally, as if he were a fiende.
But were not Lovers obstinate, Good counsel unto Lovers.
did reason rule their mind,
Thus perverse still against their own good, they would not be unkind.
And thus does Plaindor now quite change, from his first happy state,
That beauty, worshipping, which he ought rather for to hate.
As sensual beast bereft of sense, his heart he offers free,
To her who seeks for to abridge his joyful liberty.
As sacred, her, he does account, and holds her for a Saint,
Who is the motive of his moan, and subject of his plaint.
With great devotion dotarde like, he vows to reverence
That, which unto his life does seek to offer violence.
Thus from a man unto a beast, he is transformed right,
Whilst he does seek to gain by loss, and Love, which he should spite.
Yet only in this thing, his luck was not ore passing bad,
Since one, to bear him company, he in his sorrow had.
Floretta felt somewhat the darts of Love, though not so keen,
Which justly seemed divided right, these two young souls between.
A little she did feel the heat, of this hot amorous fire,
Which in the loyal Shepherds heart was kindled through desire.
His personage, and valor now, her liberty had won,
And as she, him, before, so now, he, her, had overcome.
Her mild behavior showed the same; her color, and her grace,
And her two eyes which still were sixth upon his manly face.
Which ravished with selfe-like Love, like to a mirror true,
The one the others heavy case beheld, and sad did view.
The stealing glaunces which they both cast forth alike did show,
That in one selfsame Sea of Love their hearts were dround with woe.
Their uncouth heates, their scalding sighs, their amorous soundings sweet,
Foretold that of one selfsame cup, they both had drunken deep.
Shame only then withheld their tongues from silence to untie,
And fear, least one, the others suit, unkindly should deny.
Both knew they lou'de, yet, both did doubt, least they not loved were,
They only thought upon that Love, which both did willing bear.
No signs between them yet had force (although) enough were showen,)
To make the truth of both their minds unto their souls be known.
Floretta building on her beauty fair, thought Plaindor lou'de,
And that to yield himself her thrall, he casily might be mou'de.
Her greatest doubt was, least he should not constant be, nor true,
But in the end would give her over, and cause her so to rue.
Plaindor, again could not persuade, himself so blessed to be.
As for to be beloved of her, he thought she nere would gree.
He not so much, as think so, durst, but rather did despair,
Ere to enjoy the thing he held, so dear, and thought so rare.
He durst not oncedesire't, for fear, least being the same denide,
He therefore should the greater grief, in his success have tried.
Yet in the end this Shepheah poor, quite wearied with his pain,
Took heart at grass, though little lif within m did remain.
His eyes fixed on the ground full sad, his eyelidds closed tho,
And in his gesture many sighs forct from him too and fro.
His ^^^mbling soul full of pale dread, tears trickling down ore warm,
His mind^ t^rmented diuersely with many a fierce alarm.
His bl^^^ing heart pressed down with woe, which throbd and sobd through fear.
And against all hope of future good, in combat as it were.
His arms a cross in woeful wise, (unarmed he alone;
Thus to Floretta in few words, his case he does bemone.
Divine and rarest beauty; if the Gods have heretofore
Bin as I am of liberty, depriude, and which is more,
L^ft their chief rest, whilst in themselves they bare as open sign,
Such earthly beauty, as did seem more like themselves divine.
Leaving the heavens, their darts and fires, their fortunes for to prove,
Disdaining naught as soldiers brave, to march in Camp of Love.
If that their souls were scorched with this Archers fire so whot,
As for their wounds to find some salve, to seek they shamed not.
If they, as I felt thousand plagues, for loving as I do,
DEAR, then, that I endure the like, let not be strange to you.
Each seeks the steps of these great Gods to follow, and though he,
Do somewhat err in following them, yet ought he pardoned be.
My heart (as theirs) I wounded find, with darts most mortally,
Which thou against me discharged have from thy commanding eye.
The self same fire that was in them, is seazde upon my soul,
From sparkels now, it is grown to flames, and lord-like does control.
Burnt are my senses all, my powers consumed unto naught,
My reason is enchaunted sore, and I to ruin brought.
If thee I see, I die, If not, I then do pine a way,
Thus by no means my sickness strange, I swage can or allay.
To quench this raging fire, I done have what I can, alas,
But twill not be, although I would, I cannot bring't to pass.
This only now remains for me, my life is in thy hand,
If I shall live, or die, the power as now, within thee stands.
By thee alone I hold this life, for thee I die as now,
That hope I have thou nourishest, my fear engendrest thou.
Sweet then take pity of this Love, like Caos so confuse,
And grant my hearts request, who there his advocate does choose.
Mine, is it not any more, thine eyes from me the same did take,
Then being thine do pity it, and much of it do make.
Destroy not what is in thy power, but rather it preserve,
In man, great wisdom it is, what is his own, for to conserve.
I crave not that thou me my captive heart again restore,
To live with so brave conqueror as thou, it is happier more.
My wills (if any interest, longes to me in the same,)
(As much I doubt since it I lost, no more I may it claim.)
It still within thy lovely bands, as prisoner true be bound,
Nor in my breast his wonted place no more henceforth be found.
Then since it is thine own, and that an amorous sweet desire,
To have respect unto his health and life does thee require.
Unless thou on his fortune hard, do take some kind remorse,
In thy chaste amities pure heat, he needs must die of force.
Ah then relent, be pitiful, in favorable wise,
And daine for to accept from him, this dutious sacrifice.
For what can I offer more dear to thee, then my dear heart,
Which nere would yield to Love before, he felt this bitter smart.
Which scornd his utmost force, and laws did utterly reject,
And of his manly stomach stout, did show full many effect.
Then of so brave a vanquished Foe, ore-come by beauty thine,
Take pity, and him gently use, in this his captive time.
Such gallant soldiers as be took in field by chance of war, A Similie.

Be much respected; kindly used, and honored much they are.
And whilst as prisoners they remain, and till their ransom come,
All friendly courtesy to them in loving sort is done.
Then to my humble heart (fair Dame) who thee does honor dear,
Not cruel be, as if thy foe whom thou should hate, he were.
Ah gently use him, or without thus suffering him to lie
Still languishing, give verdit strait, and he shall willing die.
For if thy grace he may not gain, he cannot live on earth,
Whose wounds are deadly, happy he, if ease he finds by death. A Sentence.

Speak then Floretta fair to me, nor by thine answer sower,
Be thou the cruel cause to force me leave my life this hour.
SWEET speak, for by their Oracles, contented are the Gods
To answer men, yet greater far then men they are by ods.
So said the Shepherd, who in fear the summons did attend,
Offortune good or bad, if he should live, or life should end.
Like to the guilty criminal, who is of hope deprived, A Comparision.

Whilst judgment with great terror he expects to be disliu'd.
His heart did paint full sore and fast, his face for fear did sweat,
Mistrust did show in his sad eyes; fear in his soul was set.
Disgrace and shame to be denide, his body gauld throughout,
Who does attend for what he longes, and languisheth in doubt.
Thus wandered too and fro his vital spirits in this state,
Whilst that his life did seem to him as over desperate.
Tide was his tongue, and now it irke him that he ought had said,
Wishing that he his secret wound to her had not bewraide.
So does a brave and gallant mind, by famine forct to beg
Repent him, after that an alms, demanded thus he had.
But at the last, the Shepherdess dissolved these doubts confuse,
Chearing somewhat the Shepherd, by these words which she did use.
The time has bin, that Venus (though Loves mothers she) has loved,
Whilst self same plagues which she inflicts, on others she has proved.
Great Jove, the President and chief, of all the Gods above,
Did think it no disparagement at all to be in love.
Both Gods and Goddess have loved, then why should I be blamed,
Since but with selfsame spot I am (as they have all bin) staind.
Jove, life has given unto us, that we should follow him,
To err as Gods, A Sentence.
is no offense, so praise, not blame, we win.
Then may I without scandal love, as they before have done,
So as my love in chastest path of loyalty do come.
With such love (Plaindor) thee I like, and hope this love so strong,
Shall be of force thy constancy to make endure more long.
I love thee; yet no power thou have ore body mine at all,
If once presume vnmodestly, A Sentence.
ought to request thou shall.
For no love is that love indeed, but rather furious rage,
That seeks our honor with disgrace, or infamy t'engage.
Then I will love thee, yet of me, thy self naught else assure
But my chaste faith, which i will reserve to thee unspotted pure.
Until that happy time shall chance to hap to us at last,
When we by sacred marriage rights, may coupled be more fast.
And with this Plaindor, be content, for what more can require,
Then of my love to be assured, which is thy chief desire.
The loyal wish of Lovers true, is love reciprocal,
For where good meaning is and plain, there, none is mocked at all.
But for to (...) for pl^^^ure send alone, in sensual wise,
Is brutish, (...) to be^st^s who show all reason to despise.
Did I but thinks (Shepherd) thy Love, not sober were, or chaste,
Or that within thy breast bla^k thoughts (stain to my state) were plast.
That from thy heart all honor thou and credit did reject,
And more of (...) (m^^t ^nlike) then virtue did respect,
Assure thy self I will ^r^u^ng myself on thee, so sore,
As for thy boldness thou should di^, although I did therefore.
And I soon p^^ish would my (...) for that I was so vain,
To love a friend, so small of worth a my chaste mind to stain.
My blood shed by my hands should wash my fault and error baed,
Since I to maker hoyce of my Love, no better foresight had.
Floretta, nere shall live to morn, by taking such disgrace,
Floretta, sooner flourish shall by death, which i will embrace.
Then Plaindor, live, and think thy self, thrice happy for to be,
Since of a virtuous Love, thy self assured thou do see.
M^a^^ time, look to thy self, (attending that same blessed day,
The haru^st of our ^hastest Love, when Hymen gather may.)
To die, or say ought that unto discredit mine may turn,
For which death purging me, too late, thou then for me shall mourn.
He, that is wise, seeks to be Lord ore his affections,
And he a conqueror is right, that conquers his passions.
Be thou such one (dear friend) for who with prudencie does cope,
Finds his desires soon ri^in dare, and nourished his hope.
Thus wisely spoke Floretta fair whose golden speech so grave,
Made Plaindor in his entrails hot, a greater burning have.
Her sage discretion he admires her faith he does adore,
As sacred, he does honor her, and likes her chaste love more.
He could not ^^st, nor rightly give a guess, which did surmount,
Of these two so ^re qualities in her, if so great count.
Her beauty fair, or wisdom grave, which most did her advance,
He was with them so ravished and out of countenance.
For heavenly Al^^rs we d^e use, to virtue to erect,
And so, cause beauty conquereth men's spirits, we respect.
Each of these twain, (...) by themselves, or, by themselves divided,
By men are raisde to highest rate, and as divine are praised.
But in one body, when alone this Twinne of virtue light,
That coarse the beauty of the Gods, as then resembles right.
It Is heavenly, then, as they, and for to Love does willing draw
The hardest hearts, and senselest Rocks of Epyr with great awe.
With this rich Jewel precious, is Plaindor ravished,
And without stirring, thinks that he up to the heavens is fled.
Immortal, and most i^ finit his glory he does think,
More then the Gods themselves which do of flowing Nectar drink.
His heart in pleasures sea swimmes fast, as he himself requires,
His soul does melt through sweet conceit, in flames of his desires.
His joy does keep^ him tongue tide, and he thinks he dreams as tho,
Whilst in his mind, he diverse thoughts does canuas too and fro.
What he does see, he credits not, nor can he easily deem,
That so rare beauty once will daine of him for to esteem.
He stands amazde like to that Prince from captive bonds vnthrald,
Who is from prison took to Throne, and there, anew enstald.
He thought Floretta, flower of all, would nere have stoopt so base,
Nor that she ere meant him to write in Checkroll of her grace.
Sad sorrow often the constancy of man does much annoy,
And good things unexpected, quite confound the mind with joy.
Thrice happy who the Center keep, nor nere exceed the mean,
Where neither good nor bad does them torment with such extreme.
Plaindor, then wakt out of his tra^se, with lovely discreet cheer,
Million of condign thanks does give, to his Floretta dear.
Den^^tly, he his faith protests, strictly to keep to her,
And that beyond Loves sacred bonds he never means to stir;
To serve her faithfully, and that himself heel sooner slaie,
Then to commit what should offend her humor any way.
Fair flower, quoth he, light of my life, do not me doubt at all,
Thy will a Ln^, thy word, command, be unto me still shall.
Thy wish my chief desire I Will hold, thy glory shall be mine,
Thou wholly shall be unto me, and my soul only thine.
I never will forget my self, and when I first offend
Against thy dainty self, I pray my life have shameful end.
When, as unconstant wavering wight, I shall like Haggard range,
Of all the hellish torments fierce, then let me have the change.
Most wicked I, and most unfit to live upon the earth,
If when thou life to me have given, I should thee quite with death.
'A sowler fault cannot be named, nor that deserves more shame, A Sentence.

'Then th'ungrate L^uer, when he is unthankful to his dame.
'For there is no evil that so much craves succors speedy need,
'Then that which Lovers does molest, and makes their hearts to bleed.
'Nor is there any cruel pain, as is the loving grief,
'For Love consumes both soul and coarse, unless it find relief.
Then (Lady) as thou merciful have bin thus unto me,
So I my service dutiful, for die assure to thee.
And if my fortune chance to prove (by envious destenie set)
That I my self by doing what indecent is forget)
My blood shall wash my fault away, and rather this offense
Shall end my life, then periurde like with fault I will dispense.
Do so (replide) Ploretta, and thou soon shall see the day,
When as our Loves shall happy preouc, though now they us delay.
But chiefly have regard (boue all) that thou the cause be not,
That my chaste meaning through thy fault be staind with vicious blot.
For should this ill chance hap, thou then (as I before said) soon,
Shall seem (slain by mine own hands) to sleep within my Tomb.
Thus did these Lovers twain, themselves, one the other often conjure,
And thus between themselves, their faithes (in secret) did assure.
As whilom was Dan Paris, An example.
with forsooks Enone seen,
To plight their Loves most covertly amongst the leaves so green,
But after they had to idea while, with many a pleasing word,
After a thousand p^stimes as the year did then afford;
With thousand lovely glaunces quick^, one to the other cast,
Which forced the amorus fire within their entrails burn more fast.
After a thousand petite Oaths with sports before nere found,
To see, if of their fancies fi^t a like were not the ground.
After a thousand sugared smiles, and toyings delicate,
Which more the minds of Lovers true does rightly recreate.
After a thousand small disd^^nes. (...)d for the nonce,
And discontents, proved m^ri^^^ts, between these Doue-like ones.
By which, from cinders, unto flames, there heat did more increase,
By reason of this w^nton war, and amorous angry peace.
After much woing (but no doing) the evening being come,
And that the S^re of Ph^e^on, his course that day had run;
At last, Plaindor, nigh surfeiting, with joy and mere content,
Kissed her fair hand with much ado, yet prettily was shent.
That done, (though loath) he bids adue unto his Lady bright,
Being angry not a little, that so soon was come the night.
And laden richly thus with hope of her, whom he loved best,
He home does go, where quietly he takes his wished rest.
O rare beginning, fair commencement of two Loves so chaste,
O happy couple, whilst their days so luckily were gract.
O blessed Lovers, if against your fortunes, heavens rage
Not trauerst had to ruin you, in your best youthful age.
But when we think (puffed up with hope) that we do fly aloft,
Then soonest clipped are our wings, by angry stars full often.
Then jealous of our glory, they do seek us to destroy,
Thinking, they gain chief victory when us they can annoy.
Thus, these two Lovers unto dire misfortune destined,
By cruel Fates, in midst of their joys were ruined.
Yet hear this woeful tale of them, and you will justly say,
That nothing long in this vain world, continues at one stay.
Because Plaindor, for propernes, and strength, others did pass,
He of another Shepherdess, extremely liked was.
His two black eyes, made her eyes show, how nigh she was to death,
Her color for the love of him, was like the fall of leaf.
She fancied none but him alone, he was her only treasure.
And that she was thus thrald for him, she counted it a pleasure.
But Plaindor, never thought on her, nor, for her ought did care,
Already all his Rest was up, to like none but his FAIR.
He had no leisure for to judge, if she did love or no,
So much for fair Floretta, did his strange affection grow.
And so should be true Love indeed, where two, should be but one,
A loyal Lover should but serve his mistress, sole alone.
For never has it yet bin seen, that constant amity
Would ere digest, that in the midst it should divided be.
This caused Plaindor not to love, this wretched maiden poor,
Who for his sake, perplexed was, and well nie at deaths door.
Thus languishing, she follows him, with pale and pitteous look,
Still seeking for to take that course which she should have forsook.
She follows him in Quest, and still she after him does trace,
Like to the Blood-hound good, the dear that follows with great pace.
Whilst he (good soul) full little thought that she ought to him meant,
He, on his own affection, so earnestly was bent.
Nor could he scarce endure to hear her speak, or talk to him,
Nor once to look on her, although she proper was and trim.
None but Florettas stainlesse shape, as beautiful he deemed,
All other favors whatsoere, as Maskes unto him seemed.
His souls sole joy, and life's delight, she was, and chief repose,
She was his first choice, and the last, that he through fancy chose.
Yet in the end, this pleasure, which him liked so, him deceived,
For she whom he did thus contemn, at last his love perceived.
Seeing her self disdaind so often by him, now grown so quaint,
She doubted lest (whom he did serve) he had some other Saint.
Which was the cause that hindered her, his favor to obtain,
Resolving with her self to seek, till she had found the same.
Imagining (but to no end) by some devise herein
To wade so far, as at the last, she Plaindors grace would win.
But it was the ruin of the one, and the others overthrow,
By too too soon untimely death, as I to you will show.
Plaindor expecting still the hour, when storms should once be past,
To re^pe with joy (what he had sown with sorrow) at the last.
Building upon Florettos faith, as on a rockie shelfe,
Whom he more then the better part accounted of himself;
Did yield his heart into her hands, in most obsequious wise,
Breathing by her sweet breath, and taking life by her bright eyes.
So as that hour he saw her not, he found himself to die,
For then, the Lovers cheered, when as his Mistress he is by.
Sometimes he would be with her, in the thick and muddie shade,
Sometime sit with her by some spring, which pretty murmuring made.
And there while by fountain cool, the heat from them to keep,
Or in some grove be tapistred, with flowers surpassing sweet.
Then, in some Bower, by Nature framed, where they did often use,
Upon the gr^sse in steed of beds, their lodgings for to choose.
Or (for to see the wanton fish) about some cristall poole,
Or by some Isie river clear, the mor themselves to cool.
Or in some hodow Rock, the heat of scorching sun t'auoid,
Whose sparkling beams their tender flesh, too much often times annoid.
Or in some fresh and low deep Cave, environed about,
Like Baricados made for fence) with brier sweet throughout.
In such like place as these they used, without suspect always,
In this same sort, to spend of their green youth full many days.
Devising many a loving toy, as harmless wantons do,
Which honor does permit, whilst they their honor, honor toe.
One while they merry Rundelaies together both do sing,
And with their cheerful chaunting, make the woods throughout to ring.
An other while with blushing cheeks, like to two Turtle Doves,
One does unto the other tell, their first chaste modest Loves.
Then one the others beauty does commend, and then again
They praise their plighted constancy, exempt and free from stain.
And now, they pretty Babies look, one, in the others eyes,
Whilst love, new subjects still of sport, to please them does devise.
For bearing always, nerethelesse, by proffer, or by show,
Once to attempt, what any way might to dishonor grow.
Whilst they poor souls, bare burning coals, yet quench them durst they not,
Lest their good fame they should abuse, and their pure honor, spot.
This made them sound through hope, and sigh for want of their desire,
Not daring reap their loves sweet fruits, as much they did require.
They wish and yet are wide from it; feign, if they durst, they would,
They will not do (through virtue) what they think in sense they should.
Sweet thoughts they have, they sweat for hope, and yet they die through grief.
They have at hand the remedy, yet will not take relief.
Half dead, half live, they gasping stand, disiesting this sower drench,
Whilst water in their hands they have, this fire yet will not quench.
Bright mirrours of rare modesty, crowned glory you have won,
That having time and place so fit, your passions did overcome.
And now they fell to their repast, which was of sauadge Bore,
Which Plaindor had in hunting slain, with cheese and fruit good store.
In steed of dainty wine full strong, to drink glad were they than,
The water of a river clear, which from a Rock forth ran.
But their chief food and daintiest meat, were lovely glaunces cast,
Which from their eyes like swiftest shafts, were shot and darted fast.
Thrice blessed they; A Sentence.
No fortune like, ^ although they feel some smart,
'To such true Lovers, as in bodies twain, have but one heart.
'The wealth of all this hugie world, not worth the half of this,
'None, (lest they have experience had) can comprehend such bliss.
'But as we see, the sun often times, through over sweltrie heat,
Changing the weather fair, great storms, and thundercraks does threat;
So likewise we do find full often, that of most precious things
Some great misfortune grows, which us to our destructions brings.
For every thing is framed so, and in such fashioned guise,
That what is good, here on the earth, does find his contraries.
Of perfect Elements of diverse natures, here vnnam'de,
Are bodies formde and fashioned, and living Creatures framde.
The heat engenders chillie cold, cold water, Thunders crack,
War, Concord, Concord Peace, and Peace War, where all goes to wrack.
So, of the pleasant sweet success, of Lovers these, did come
That which did breed their dismal ends, and laid them in their Tomb.
The Shepherdess, which Plaindor loved, disdaining in her mind,
To be disdaind, and reap repulse, where she thought Love to find;
Did dog him as an envious Spy, that no way he could walk,
In wood, nor grove, but after him, full slily she would stalk.
And one day (by ill luck) it was, her fortune to epsy,
How (with Floretta) he a Cave did enter secretly.
Which, when she saw, her love she cursed, the author of her strise,
She band the day of her sad birth, detesting sore her life.
She saw her labor all was lost, her time was spent in vain,
And there withal she well perceived, recurelesse was her pain.
Yet, thought she, she would see the end, of this their Love so chaste,
And their discourse to hear, herself close in a bush, she placed.
Who, thinking they were (then) alone, for so they made account,
The One toying with the other stood, as was their usual wont.
And after many lovely tricks, Love from their eyes did thrill
So many Darts, hitting their souls, more heat increasing still.
That Plaindor, being ouerchaft with this fierce amorous rage,
His lips upon the cheeks and mouth, of his fair Saint did gage.
Now, of himself not master, he, her in his arms does take,
And thousand times did kiss her, though resistance she did make.
As hard it is for him that dies through thyrst, and want of drink, A Similie.

For to abstain, when he draws nigh, the Cristall rivers brinke.
So, it is as insupportable, for any Lover much
To be in presence of the Dame he loves, and her not touch.
When he has Fortune time, and place, the leisure and the mean,
He cannot hold, his blood's so hot, his heat is so extreme.
When he is near his health, his health to have, he needs must seek,
When he sees what he longs for, he needs the same must like.
(...) were he senseless as a stone, and liuelesse as a block,
Like to a lump of heavy earth, and worse then flintie rock.
So Plaindor takes his pleasure then, forgetful of his oath,
Whilst he, her lips with kisses seals, respecting naught his troth.
But weladay; those kisses sweet, to poison sower did turn,
And was the cause, that to his death, they forced him for to mourn.
Floretta chaft apace, that he, thus on her lips had seasde,
But Plaindor, this her rage, at last, in sugred-wise appeasde.
The sneaking Shepherdess, the while, withdrawn her self now had
Out from her hole, where she did see, what made her welnigh mad.
And seeing that so many kisses twixt them given had bin,
These Lovers, loved but wantonlie, she strait begun to win.
Away she goes, nor for to see the end she durst be bold,
But much astonished did depart, then frosty Ice more cold.
She is resolved to be revenged, and vexed mightily,
With sundry passions, her hot love, does turn to cruelty.
The Love of these two souls, she means to tax with foul repriefe,
And of the kissing close, to cast Floretta in the teeth.
Her Honor to accuse, and of these virtuous Lovers twain
To seek with infamy, and with reproach, their lives to stain.
O how disdain is (in her kind) more violent of force:
And what great damage has it brought to men without remorse?
O how it power has for to change the hearts of vanquishers,
And how to alter dearest Friends in mind, she her bestirs.
Mean time Floretta understands, that her Renoum's disgraced,
And that her Honor (undeserved) is wrongfullie defaced.
Her Fault, (if chaste love may be termed a Fault) this woman base
One morning fore the Sheapheards all, reprocheth to her face.
Which when Floretta heard, she vows, ore-charg'de with furious Ire,
Against her self, against her health, and life for to conspire.
No longer will she live (as now) revenged for to be,
For Honor hers, by Treason stainde, as she with grief does see.
So for to purge her self of fault, An Example.
(not faulty) nerethelesse
In ancient Time, unto her Fame, did die the chaste Lucresse.
Thus does Floretta, destined too hard, with heavy look,
Swear with her self, upon her self, Murder to execute.
Her dainty hands, she aymeth now, against her proper corse,
Her hands, which too too hasty were, to wrong, without remorse.
Ah, how much, Honor's dear unto a chaste and modest spright,
Who seeks by vice, to slander such, accursed be that Wight.
The fear of Death can never cool Desire, A Sentence.
that is resolet,
To save his good name, by his life, if he thereon be set.
Floretta, then changing her former use, from sweetest joy,
To uncouth plaint, and passions sad, surcharged with annoy.
Bewailing her disaster hard, and sighing forth her pain,
Unto a sauadge Mountains top, gets up with speed amain.
Where sprang a certain Water strange, or rather poison fell,
By which strong venim, she did mean, her woes for to expel.
This water of such nature was, as nothing could it hold,
It brake Glass, Iron, Brass, Lead, Steel, it was so deadly cold.
But she that knew the property thereof, in hoof of Ass,
Close did the same conserve, and then away from thence did pass.
And carrying it about her still (until she Plaindor found
She never left, that done, she down sits, by him on the ground.
Where she withouten show of grief, like Cignet that does sing
Before her death) these words worth Note did use, thus greeting him.
Ah Plaindor dear, dear may I say, if thy Floretta poor,
Has given thee any proof of Love, most perfect, or most sure;
If ever of her friendship kind, thou care had heretofore,
As not long since, she in thy Love, with pity thee did store.
By that same loyal love of thine, she now coniureth thee,
Permit her Honor, to revenge her on her injury.
Floretta (now) can live no more, since that she, through thy self,
Has lost her good Fame, which she priz'de above all worldly wealth.
Ah Plaindor, it is (for ever) lost, and by like lucklesse Fate,
Floretta thine, now goes the way, her life to ruinate.
Alas, how often told I thee, when first thou did me woe,
That still, mine Honor to preserve, thou should respect have due.
Mine Honor, which Florettas life, after the same does draw,
And which I justly forced am, to follow now by Law.
How we do live, here in this world, God knows is reckning small,
Nor flourish can our Names, A Sentence.
or deeds, immortally at all.
Unless our Honor, among our selves, do live immortallie,
For that alone keeps us alive, that we can never die.
But if the self same blood as yet, remains in thy heart
Of such, so many sauadge beasts, by which thou richer art;
If in the prime of thy best Age, and pride of thy youths flower,
Thou have not lost thy courage old, through Loves ore-conquering power;
Then Plaindor, I pray heartily, nay more, beseechen thee,
To live, when I am dead, and that thou will suruiuen me.
And think dear Friend, I merit not the half part of the grief
Which for my death, I know that thou will take without relief.
For I was, but a shadow plain, trans-form'd in body thine,
Besides, fairer then I, thee loves, whose beauty is divine.
Who, with affection like to thine, in fancy being set,
The thought of me, and memory, shall make thee soon forget.
So that no sooner Death shall me, from my lives chains dislinke,
As thou stalt forced be, no more on me at all to think.
Mean time, since hasty Death, does me, of all my hopes deprive,
To have for my sore wound a Salve, whilst I shall be alive;
And that (sweet Shepherd) I no more (shall now) of thee have need,
I Will thee acquaint, how much, how dear, I loved thee indeed.
Most zealous, yet more chaste, I loved, such was mine amorous flame,
My heart was thine, and in thy breast, mine own Soul did remain.
My thoughts, did wholly run on thee, my body aye was thine,
Thy will, as it were, a penalt Law, to thee, did me combine.
To please thee (not my self, (I lived, nor did I think at all,
That ere my credit had received a foil, much more a fall.
Nav more, I could have been content, that thou should tasted have,
That sweetest sweet, that Lovers seek, and still is, that they crave.
But that mine Honor did ore me, with greater puissance seize,
Then my desire, ore senses had, (as sensual) them to please.
This selfsame honor (now) although some (wrongfully) have touched,
Because it too much honored thee, and suffered thee, too much.
Demands, my body offered be, to him, my fault to purge,
And for to have it sacrifiz'de most bloody, does it urge.
And so it shall; Floretta, (then courage) take heart at grace,
And this vile blot of hateful shame, let us wipe from off our face.
For though I through this poison strong, of life deprived be,
Yet my good Fame, taxt wrongfully, it shall restore to me.
Adieu, my dearest Plaindor, but must I, my self absent
From thee? and from thy presence, needs must I alack be sent?
I, I; Ah, hellish grief, yet me my heart again restore,
That I may live below this earth, with quiet mind the more.
Ah, render me, my heart again, which I Will in pieces tear,
Nor for to see the same to die, be thou abasht with fear.
Sweet Plaindor, if that ere thou lou'dst Floretta, thou may vaunt,
Vouchsafe this one request to her, (now dying) for to grant,
Which is, me to survive, that thou, as Testis, witness may,
How wrongfully some thought (too much) my Glories pride to slay.
I call thee, for to speak the truth, of my chaste Innocence,
And to the Heavens I do appeal, who knows my true pretense.
Then (Friend) if ever in that sight of thine, this body have
Been gracious, when it dead shall be, provide for it, a grave.
Close these mine eyes, cashirde from light; shut fast this mouth so pale,
And this my Coarse, below in ground, to bury, do not fail.
(Dear, this is all I crave of thee, since now my course is run,
That kindness, is but worth small praise, that by the halues is done,
But, how now Plaindor? what? do weep? thou sigh'st amain, me think,
Nay, then thy grievous Martyrdom, I soon will ease and stint.
Lets dye, lets dye, more then high time it is, I were gone from hence,
And saying so, she swalloweth down, that hateful poisonous drench.
That done, upon the greeny grass, her self she softly throws.
And holding of her arms acrosse, her pretty mouth does close.
When lifting up her last seen eyes, she Plaindor might behold,
How he his manly breast for grief, did beat with courage bold.
Whereat she weeps afresh, so great a Corsie to her it is,
And dying now, she strives to give to him her latest kiss.
That done, she yields up the Ghost; Ah heavy spectakell,
But now the dire Catastrophe, of this sad tale, I Will tell.
When Plaindor saw his Mistres dead, with looks most furious
He draws his sword, which against himself, he bends as barbarous.
And raging like a bedlem mad, distraught of wit through wroth,
Minding himself to massacre, these words he sigheth forth.
Floretta, ah Floretta, speak, speak fairest of all Fair,
Where Is now thy faith, that did protest, of me to have such care?
Where Is now thy oaths and promises? They (now) have me deceived,
And my green youth, long fed with hope, they have of joy bereaved.
Cruel Floretta, and yet cruel, to none, except unto
Thy self, when for another fault, thy self thou did undo.
To bring me to my dismal end no way could thou devise,
But for to slaughter thus thy self, in such a monstrous guise?
O, fair, but chaster Coarse by far, what have thou done or sed,
To be, untimely, fore thy time, consorted with the dead?
And thou pure soul, within that Coarse, what sin did thou commit,
That thou so soon, from that fair Inn, away should pass and flit?
Thine Honor thou have kept vndefil'd, then if you this, do call
A fault, how then have thou offended? Else have thou not at all.
Fair beauties spotless Temple, thou do dye for mine effence.
And I, the essence of thy ill, to live seek to dispense.
Ah wretched me, and which is worse, white liuered soppe I am,
Unworthy of such calling, as to bear thy Servants name.
No, no, I needs must dye, my blood, pardon, for fault shall win,
And I will satisfaction make, for this my cruel sin.
Yet fore I die, I humbly grace, and pardon, beg of thee,
Who have the power, that this my soul, remains thus in me.
Ah pardon me, what is it I say? this pardon which I crave,
Argues my fault, more monsterous, that worse I sinned have.
I see, the Murderer I have bin, of thy fresh flowring youth,
Thy healths, chief Homicide, and foe, unto thy faith some ruth.
For me, (not for thy self) thou dyest, and shall I then be cause,
To see those eyes and mouth closed up, which Death unto them draws?
O, of all virtue, golden mean, of loyalty, bright son,
Whom as my Saint I have adored, must thou for me be undone?
O hell, O black despair, of Stars most spiteful in such wise,
To incense so many boisterous storms, against my small bark to rise;
Ay me, why died I not, when first I saw this face of hern,
Then like an exile. from all joy to be exposde and driven?
But soft, my Tongue runs too too fast, and words be naught but wind,
I know not where I am, nor am I now in my right mind.
Yet at the least, let me once bid my dearest Dame adieu,
And let me of her take my leave; Ah speak; what, will not you?
No, no, I am unworthy I, unworthy of her grace,
I not deserve, that have destroyed such favor, so suire face.
And have thou then, the heart to see, that beauty be disliu'de,
The only cause, that thou long since, of life wort not depriu'de!
And can thou breathe without her sight? thou can not I do know,
Unto Th'Elizian golden fields, thou needs with her must go.
My self, my young years cutting off, will rid me of annoy,
Since such a black tempestious storm, has shipwrackt all my joy.
I Will die, i will di^; but yet what kind of death might I invent
Cruel enough for my vile fact; me justly to torment?
Since that the fait! falst m^^de alive, through me her death has found,
To whom, more then to all the world, I was obligde and bound.
Diuinest beauty, thou, through me, do perish, and do die,
Whose chief delight was to restore, my nie lost liberty.
Plaindor, thy deaths wound has thee given, whilst he forgot himself,
To whom he owed his life and goods, and more then all his wealth.
Ah hapless man, ah lovely Nymphe, great reason sure thou have
To give m^ ore, since over thee, so small care I have pla^'te.
And misely did thou guess, that I unto thy glorious fame,
Should be small credit, rather one, that thee and thine should shame.
But woe is me, thou wrongest me, if so of me thou judge,
Since for thy sake naught to attempt, as yet I ^re did grudge.
Fair, thou shall know, that since my heart, a widower is through thee,
He can no joy what ever take, nor longer living be.
Much less, that I can like again, I am no Lover such,
If so thou think, thou art deceived, and wrongest me oremuch.
Thy servant, whilst I lived I was, dying i will be thy slave,
To make some mends for mine offense, thou ready me shall have.
I Will die, as thou have done, as one, of thy praise envious,
Because thou purchased have for me, thy rest from sorrow thus.
I will not beg, that I may touch, that pretty cherrie lip,
Whilst I am dying, I confess, my self deserve not it.
Yet gracious Goddess of my thoughs, if those thine eyes so bright,
Have not already quite forsook their wonted cl^eerfull light;
Ah then, do but once open them and Plaindor thine regard,
With one small glaunce, who now does leave his life through fortune hard.
Bright stars, your Plaindor, you shall see, loow quickly he will die,
If you so much do grace him, as to open but half an eye.
And now in leiu of recompense, for wrong that done I have,
This blood accept, my heinous crime, to purify and laue.
Sweet Lady, now at last receive this blood, this blood of mine,
And suffer my dead coarse, repose and rest it self by thine.
Thus said, with courage great, his sword, he thrusts into his side,
And being dead upon the ground, his body faint does glide.
Which with his lukewarm struaming blood, the ground did make to fa^^^
Of color, whilst it flowing ratine, and did it over all.
Floretta all this while was not stark dead, the poison strong
Was not enough, which was the cause, her life it did prolong.
Her he auie eyes she casts up, and rolleth here and there,
Whilst in her face, a show of death, half smiling does appear.
And seeing Plaindor, fallen by her, she, him does fast embrace,
And with her feeble force does wipe, the blood from off his face.
His head, with dying hand she does hold up, to ease his pain,
And having given to him a kiss, rekisseth him again.
Wherewith he gaspeth, yet once more, and thinks himself the most
Blessed, that in his Mistress arms he yields up his ghost.
Thrice happy Plaindor, fortunate, eternal is thy glory,
For thou have gained over death, a precious victory.
Thou die in the clasped arms, of fair Floretta thine,
Whilst with her eyes, thine eyes, thy face with hers do close conioyne.
She striving for to die, that she amain might thee pursue,
Whom thou do see, though against her will, thee to survive so true.
And now death had already taken her speech, nor could she speak,
Yet these few words she sighthed forth, with hollow voice most weak.
O Plaindor, sweet friend, Shepherd mine, our Loves though miserable,
To ages that hereafter come, to live shall aie be able.
Since through the virtuous paths they trod, untainted chastity
Serves unto them to be the ground, to their Eternity.
And though we now die, yet our selves, thus let us comfort rife,
Thou die form, and I for thee, am pleased to end my life.
Like faithful friends we die, the one forth' other's well apaid,
And in one Tomb our bodies both shall be enterd and laid.
Thou go (my Love) before me, and I follow thee most blithe,
As fast, as fast I can, for, thee I mean not to survive.
Yet happy we in dying thus, since (kissing) we embrace,
Which (living) we durst not attempt, for fe^re to have disgrace.
But now I come to thee; Thus said she, on the face does fall
Of her blessed Plaindor, whilst her soul, does, ^lit away withal.
Their coarses be within one grave, where the ^ do quiet sleep,
And in this Rock, unto their fame, this verse was graven deep.
ARCAS, having heard this pittio^s Tragedy, could not choose but weep,
dreaming a fresh upon his ancient Loves, when the old man, thus awaked him.
Shepherd, Shepherd, love is never satisfied, nor appeased with tears, which
is an or dinarie use with him, being always a child, as he is. In the tears
of Lovers, does he temper his Arrows, the harder to freese the hearts of their
Ladies against them. The more he finds us to wail, and want courage, the
more he does taunt and revile us: Not unlike unto that General of a field, A
Similie.
who more hostly pursues his enemies when they begin to shrink back and
recoyle, then when they ^valiantly and stoutly stand to bear out the brunt. If
Cupid has not yielded unto the tears of his Mother, much less will he be
moved at thine. True Lovers, sildome or never weep, because their heat
consumes the moisture which is within them; A Sentence.
no more then dry wood can yield forth wet water. Cease then to wail, and in
steed of these tears, take courage against this fierce enemy. If the Gods
themselves (replied the Shepherd) could not resist him, how then shall any man
be able to encounter with him? And what other thing can such miserable wretches
do, as be out of all hope, but bewail and lament their untimely misfortunes?
It is for hearts of steel, resembling blades over hardly tempred, which rather
break then bow, not to be moved with grief at all. Tears are signs of a
pitiful Nature: whereas such as are cruel, never weep, because they are
quite void of all compassion. Though Love hereat will not be moved, yet will
gentle^ hearts relent at the same. I know, he makes no account hereof,
neither do I pretend to sacrifice unto him with them, but rather with mine
own decrest blood. How wonderfully art thou deceived quoth the old man. The
Alters of Love, as those of the Gods ^ere upon the earth, never distill nor
drop with blood: for can Love, be encountered and met withal, amongst braules,
quarrels, and bloodshed? No, no: but where amity and friendship is, there does
he frequent and keep company: An excellent discourse of the mightines and
power of Love.
such only being to be counted right Lovers indeed, and worthy to enjoy Love
it self, who bear no malice, nor seek one another death. O, how sweet, and
pleasing a thing, is this kind of amity, which keeps the Gods in perfect
unity, and under whose puissance, is the hollow giving vault of heaven guided?
Men, (after the example of the Gods) by the advice of Love, first assem bled
themselves together, uniting and incorporating themselves, within Cities, and
walled Towns, leaving the sauadge wildernesses unto wild beasts, wherein,
they before did inhabit. Why then do thou offer blood unto him? O Father of
these nocturnall Deserts (answered the Shepherd) I know thou think
otherwise then thou speak. Can thou compose, and frame a gentle and mild
Nature, An example.
of nothing but murder and cruelty? How many massacres love has commenced,
Troy can witness. How many cruel griefs, and insupportable miseries are in
the hearts of Lovers Ariadne knows; And how many false Treasons, and
blasphemous periuries, Oenone feels. Why then will thou justify him, he
having these foul faults? Every body that lodges not reason within it
self, is blame-worthie. And what reason I pray you, is their found in Love? He
is a traitorous Drogerar, and a Physician of men's hearts, for some he heals
and comfort, and other-some, he vexes, kills, and tormenteth; He is
blind-folded, which is enough and sufficient proof to make thee know his
imperfections. Think not the worse of him for that (said the old man) for
Justice is united, which brooketh no comparison, in perfection, and virtue.
Love is blinded, because he should have no respect of persons, to the end,
greatest Kings may be no more exempted from his power, then the poorest
beggars. He is blind, to show, that he walks without craft or dissimulation:
for that is no true and sincere amity, where falsenes of heart lodges, and
where treason and disloyalty lurketh. If Love, (seeing clearly with his eyes)
should spare Princes and Potentates, what profit then should the poorer sort
receive through this friendship? For Love compels the rich, and haughtiest
courages, to affect and honor the poor and basest creatures, and to do them
all service possible they can; And this is the reason that Love is veiled, and
not mere folly. For he shall never be counted unwise, who without any sudden
alteration, or passion whatsoever, takes his way and course directly and
justly, without sparing great personages, who are made for the support and
help of the meanest and poorest sort of people. Yet this veil (answered
Arcas) takes away the light of knowledge, hindering him from seeing, what he
ought to do; So that as a blind man (without a guide) falls into the ditch.
Even so Cupid for want of sight, commits many thousands of gross enormities,
which being put in practice, christen him with the name of a fury, in steed of
Love. Is that right love, which alters the minds of me^, quite topsic turuie
in all their proceedings? in such wise, as one shall be forced to love her, who
hates him; and another, shall be beloved of her, whom he cannot in any wise
abide? Are not these effects, mere enmities and despights, plain rage, and
fury? If so, why then, most unworthy is Love of this name, attributed unto
him. Though Justice be veiled, yet most loyal, just, impartial, and sacred,
are her proceedings: whereas those of Love, are quite contrary. Therefore you
conclude ill, to affirm that Love is blinded, like unto Justice, which though
it be all one thing, yet is the cause different, for the one carries her veil
to a good end, and the other to a bad purpose; I report me unto the unjust
behavior of this little blind Infant. Alas poor souls (replied the old man)
what more shows the admirable puissance of God, then the diversity of
effects, proceeding from himself? what gives so much glory unto the Painter,
as the variety of fair Pictures, which he does most cunningly portray forth
and embollish? Even so, why, does Love bring forth so many and contrary
causes, but only to show himself the more wonderful? and to lay strong, the
divine foundations of his mighty power? He brings forth effects, which,
although they are all differing, yet be they always such, as are agreeable with
the diversity of the natures of man, governing every thing with a kind of
prudent policy unknown, far above our reaches. For else, it might
peradventure so fall out, that it might be more worse for him that loves to be
beloved again, then if he should be hated; the wisdom of the Gods, cannot be
comprehended within our feeble spirits. But this is the shallow conceit that
mortal men have, rather then to think that to be firm, holy, just, and good,
which the Gods themselves go about to enterprise: For it is not to be thought
otherwise, but that they who are perfect, (as the Gods themselves) and are no
way spotted or polluted with vice, can do any thing, that is unjust,
imperfect, or foolish. In respect of the Gods (answered the Shepherd) I auow,
what you affirm: yet by your leave, I deny that love may be admitted amongst
this troop. Those insolent Tyrants, who use their licentious will, in steed of
rightful Love, (whose constraining force, makes them to be feared,) although
they be puissant and mighty, yet cannot they entitle themselves with the names
of just and prudent Princes. And so, I allow of the greatness of the power of
Love, but not of his Deity. God takes no pleasure in the fall of man, his
creature, but Love seeks the same; God establishes all things in good
security, by a certain sacred order: but Love dismembreth, scatters,
separateth and breaks the peace and quietness of man, and therefore he is no
God. Most damnable persons are those who being troubled, with some
supernatural and violent power, attribute most wickedly unto the Just, Sacred,
and divine God, the furious and raging fittes of brainesicke Love. Therefore,
let us never pronounce this broad blasphemy; for so far off is Love, from
being a God, that mortal men are able to conquer and take him (as it were)
prisoner.

If this be true (replied the old Sire) who then is it, that makes thee thus
to stoop? who has yoked thee, and made thee bow thy neck unto this God? and
wherefore do not thou trample and tread upon him, he being but a man?

That Captain that is conquered by a brave victorious enemy, is worthy of
blame, but far more is he to be condemned, that suffers himself to be
led away Captive by a weak and feeble adversary. If Love be a thing of so
small worth, why then, do thou not chase him away from thee? In vain
therefore be these tears, which thou now sheddest: in vain thy complaints, and
in vain these sorrows, which thou still make. Fond is that sick body that
may help himself, and who (because as one selfe-wild, will not) suffers
himself to be infected with a disease, too weak for him, if he were willing
to strive and wrestle with the same Even so art thou fond, to languish as a
vassaile unto this God, so long a time in this manner, when (if thou will) thou
can va^quish him.

O foolish Slave, A Sentence.
that being able to free himself without danger, from servitude, yet
nevertheless, continues so, all his life! But the bragging Soldier may
always threaten, his foe being absent, against whom appearing once in sight,
he dares not once so much as draw his sword. So thou seem to contemn
Love, yet in the mean time, dare not for thy life to resist him: and being
valiant a far off, thou yeeldest at the first encountering together. But this
one thing I will tell thee, that amongst all the deadly passions, that do
ruinate and overthrow man, there is none so strong, nor violent, as this of
Love; death it self being far more sweeter then that is.

How often do we see men sing, when they are at point of death, esteeming
themselves right blessed for to die? whereas the Lover (not beloved again)
butchereth and kills himself, running headlong into all dangers, and as one
furious, loses all patience, and all good hopes to come.

Man endures resolutely, all other accidents of misfortunes, which ordinarily
happen unto him, but being plagued with Love, it rauisheth and bereaueth him,
of his virtue and valor, and of his constancy and welfare. Therefore is he
more mighty then all other things, which either descend from Heaven, or proceed
from forth the earth.

Mighty indeed, must I needs say he is, (quoth the Shepherd) yet I esteem
him but as unwise, that makes any account of unjust puissance. Without
Justice, kingdoms are but robberies, and without reason, the Gods also, are
but sinners: and therefore unworthy of that name.

If every one were just, what need should we have then, of Laws and
compulsions? Do thou make account of Love, because he is strong and
violent? why so is the Sea, tempestuous, strong, violent, rough, and of great
power: but are his waters, as wholesome, fresh, sweet, and good, as are those
of springs and lesser fountains.

Knowledge is a glory to him that possesses the same, in serving himself
wisely and discreetely, but as he makes it a refuge for vice, and a support
to such wrongs and injuries, as he puts in practice, it is his utter ruin
and overthrow. Bad force for a time, may compel to be obeyed, but it is
quickly gone, the fear thereof also, dying with the same: where contrariwise,
Justice purchased without compulsion, to Signorise, and dominere over men's
souls, is always highly honored. Nothing that is built upon rigor, can long
endure, the self-same force, driving forcibly away the first violence: but
Justice never overthrows the works of Justice, An Example.
for that they are upright and worthy of life. I confess indeed, not a little
to my grief, that I am the slave of Love, for sometimes a Prince happens to be
the vassaile of a simple and mean Captain, and in as much as men (borne to
suffer) are bondmen by Fortune, and vassels of the earth, God disposes of them
according unto his own will. But the sick patient often blames his discase,
which he feels, and imagines, to be little or nothing dangerous at all; and
yet neurethelesse, cannot he rid himself of the same, when he fainest would.

The Bear, for want of knowing his own strength, yields unto a less force,
for man is perfect in knowledge, yet because be wants the right use thereof,
he is but as a burning Candle under a bushel. And as for Love, my conceit is,
that yielding unto him, I obey the least power that is in heaven, or on earth.
And I am of an other opinion, answered the old man, for I think it can no way
turn unto discredit, to render service unto him, whom the greatest Gods
devoutly honor. The Servant ought not to scorn to attend upon him, to whom
his Master himself does belong.

The Gods (replied the Shepherd) honored Love, whilst he lent them his hand,
A Sentence.
and assisted them in their voluptuous pastimes. Profit, oftentimes is the
cause, that a man does reverence unto such a one, as he esteems to be a far
worse man then himself.

We cannot (said the old man) term that thing less then our selves, which
has power to command over us; And if we be obedient unto Love, then is he
more divine and great then we our selves are.

Indeed (replied the Shepherd) he is mightier in malice, but leaude behavior
and mischieuousnes, cannot be registered amongst the Catalogue of Famous
enterprises. Then is not he mighty, that makes men illustrious in this
point, but rather weak, and of no reckening, inas-much as puissance, with the
defect, is as dross, and base trash: and Virtue, though it be poor, is an
eternal treasure.

And yet for all this (answered the old man) the most learned erected Altars
heretofore unto him, enterprising more for his honor, then for any other
Celestial God whatsoever. And we being less wise then they, we cannot as I
guess, much fail, to follow their footsteps.

The property of gold (replied the Shepherd) is sometimes changed. Sugar, now
and then becomes bitter and sower, and the brightest day, is often darkened
with thick clouds: even so, the wisest, now and then forget themselves, yet
their faults ought not to be, as a warrant unto the posterity hereafter to
come; because, that vice, which the ministers of any virtue do commit, shall
never be allowed of by her voice, the same being as personal, and not public.
The Sages, then having erred, we must likewise needs acknowledge their
offense, which taxes them, for committing the same. Yet in the mean time
(said the old man) see how Love is here noted, to be ouer-powerfull and
mighty, seeing he forces and compels the wisest to do amiss.

Truth (quoth the Shepherd) but as out of a heapeof corn, we make choice of
our wheat, and leave the cockle: So of the actions and proceedings of most
discreet persons, we should choose the best, and leave the worst. For as they
are men, they are subject to err, and wander astray. Virtue, being always a
good president unto us, but not vice: In as much as such as follow the virtuous
shall be commended, where those that imitate the bad, shall be as much blamed
and condemned.

Well then, my good Shepherd (answered the old man) let us give over, from
arguing any further about this LOVE, and recount unto me the subject of thy
grief, and the cause of this thy strange wandering, or miserable exile, amongst
these solitary dwellings.

Ah my dear Father (replied Arcas) more dangerous is the second sickness,
then the first, it being of the self same quality, and happening not long
after; and so cruel shall I find my troubles, in imparting unto thee my
misfortunes, as I have heretofore, felt bloody, the effects of the same. Cease
therefore, to enquire of me about that, where of the remembrance alone kills
me to think thereupon: For what good can it do unto the whole, to demand of
the diseased, the cause of his sickness? and what profit will it be unto thee,
to hear me recite my drerie Fortunes? No, no, rather do I think it meetest
to conceal them, least I should provoke men, to exclaim against the Gods,
when they shall perceive how partial, and unnatural, they have been always
against me.

Woe is me, excepting my mischance, every malady, all pain, and every
sorrow, have their proper remedy. The Eternity of the Gods, is not more
sure, then my haples disaster, (still to continue) is most certain. It is far
from the nature of all other diseases, for that which heals others, wounds
me. O Heavens, what hope of health rests for that miserable wretch, who when
he has embraced all the wholesome Altars of the Gods, is yet as unfortunate, as
ever he was before? But what is violent, cannot by the course of Nature be long
permanent: And if it be so, why then am I exempted from this rule? Never was
any evil more violent then mine, and yet in the mean time, it thus continues
still extreme.

O deceitful sentence! Alack, alack, double do I feel my grief, the one, in
suffering it, and the other, in living to endure it: and yet what should let me
from murdering of mine own self, but even the selfsame charge, which the
Master gineth unto his slave, over whom he has command, both of life and
death? The only Physicians which carefully assist me in my disease, are Death
and Despair: Comfortable is the remedy of Death, but damnable is the syrup of
Despair. The one hinders the other, not unlike unto two contrary winds,
which hold and keep in, a tottering Ship in the maine Sea, it being not able
to sail, neither of the one side, nor of the other.

Thrice welcome should death be unto me, if naturally, and without despair, it
would come on the sudden, to rid me from this trouble: So thrice happy
despair, if without death, it could chase away this my more then intolerable
anguish from me.

Between these two contrary winds do I flote, not that I will deny, but
that sometimes, the Sunshine of my soul, has made mine eyes clear and
bright, but yet in such sort has it been, as the light thereof presently
after, has caused my darkness to show more ghastly, fearful, and horrible.
Ah sweetest Sun of my soul, where do thou now at this present, dart and
cast forth thy heavenly bearnes? And what happy Country is at this hour,
warmed with the gladsome Luster of thy beauteous light? In respect of the fair
continuing day, long and tedious are the nights, though short and in Summer,
unto the sickly creature, even so long and ^rksome is my darkness, in respect of
the cheerful day of thy oft-wisht for presence. Wretch that I am, I wander
without thee, in midst of the horror of a continual evening, whilst black
and gloomy shadows are always before mine eyes.

O God, if our sins inflict upon us these plagues, wherewith we are
tortured, yet at the least, when we have patiently endured them, draw us from
out this heavy yoke. The guilty person, condemned to die, conceiueth no
greater disquietnes in his mind, then to think of that kind of punishment,
which shall take away his life from him. Ah then, take him away, take him away,
I beseech you, out of this world, who can do nothing but cast forth complaints
and laments, and whose importunate voice, pestereth without intercession both
heaven and earth, calling still to mind the afflictions without number, which
he is forced overmuch to bear. But I see I must yet languish somewhat longer,
if so, what remedy, but compeld content?

Let me then languish thus, and pine away, and let mine usual sorrowful tune,
pursue my days, even unto my very grave, to the end, that so bewailing my
cross destiny, I may at last give up my wearied Ghost.

But I see dear Father, I do but trouble thee, and therefore in respect of
thee, I will give over this mournful melody, only I will recite unto thee
an answer of a certain false Ecco, who not long since decciued my hopeful
expectation. And thus it was.

ECCO Great Goddess of these woods, that in these woods art honored right,
Speak, will thou lend thine ears to one, that is in woeful plight?
With thy last sweet sound amorous, will thou my grief abate?
Importuning my Fortune hard, to me unfortunate?
O Goddess answer my complaints, which I before thee power,
And pity my outrageous pain, by sweetning of my sour.
Comfort me in my torments and my griefs, that choketh me,
With hope that from this dismal plague, I one day may be free;
To the end that I devoutly may, bless thy thrice blessed Grace,
Ah, then if thou (as now) within these hollow Rocks have place,
Answer my Cries: say, which of these two shall I prove,
To make an end of all my woes, or Death, or Love?
After so many crosses, which we force and drive,
Shall I then die, or they being dead, shall I survive?
But, shall I stilithen live, deprived of my pleasure?
In ponsiuenes thus languishing, and in displeasure.
May it be, I should be graced, with her, who does excel,
In all rare shows, so base as I, can I deserve so well?
But, in mean space, for these my griefs, I have no other scope,
But death to end them, since I live without all hope.
Alas despair encour treth still, my rising hope, and truth,
And ore me this proud power, will reign and rage sans ruth.
If so, thrice miserable is the wretched Lovers state,
And mine what can it be, but most unfortunate?
After so many brunts, borne, which in my soul breeds strife,
Which shall I call to help me then, or death, or life?
But if I under this hard law shall live most cruelly,
Who, then will pity me, whilst in these panges I lie?
If so, then still i will hope, and O ye Gods I you adjure,
Not to deceive my future hopes, nor glories mine obscure.
Ah, keep your promise unto me, and after so much grief,
Extinguish quite, the fury of my cares which beg relief.
So will I bless for evermore, your Deites most true,
And among, the most renowm'd in world sing praises still of you.
See (my good Father) the cosoning hope, that the Gods of the Forests
bestowed upon me, or rather to say more truly, abused my wretched life. O
notable false and deceitful Oracles of the Gods, as Pirrhus, and others may
well testify the same. But why should men be condemned for deceiving one
another, when they are cosoned by the Gods themselves? Long time, did I hope
well of this mine answer, but in the end I found it had deluded my conceit, by
which my sorrow increased not a little the more. Alack, if it be so, that I am
altogether unworthy of this good, why then should the Gods thus promise me the
same? He that hops for nothing, languisheth but little, but hope, deferred,
most mortally afflicts the soul. Besides, I have (long since that time)
found by experience, not smally to my cost, that the will of the Gods, is
called back, either by reason of our sins, or for our virtues sake. Because
of our sins, they deface and blot out the good intended unto us, perceiving
that our faults, make us unworthy of them: and for our virtues, they call back
their cruel executioners, finding us to be worthy of grace, for that we repent
us. And certainly, I believe they pronounced the best for me, but my default
afterward, made me unmeet to enjoy the benefit of their sentence, which they
have now raced out, and out quite in pieces, continuing still my misfortune
against me. But I commit all unto their grave and secret providence. Mean
space, hear I pray you the first borne song of my wailing Muse, since my first
arrival into this darkesome tabernacle. And thus it begins.

Since, from my sad life, taken is my clear light,
What should I live now, longer in this bad world?
Faint hearts, their deaths wail, where the brauer courage
Glad to their ends, runs.
What serves this light me, if what most mine eyes pleased,
Flies like a shadow, when I seek the substance?
LOVE, not the day, but that rare beauty seeks
Which makes him more shine.
Stars, by their Insluence, joy and grief do bring us,
Whereas that beauty which our souls does worship
Is our sweet Mistress never working us ill,
But pleasure ever.
Ah how I feel this pain for to torment me,
Being deprived of this so worthy beauty,
When that I found my liberty so dear, lost,
And from me taken.
Kept from thy fair sight, which my soul did nourish,
Think thou (sweet Lady) that I longer can live?
Being but a picture, where thy beautie's painted
For to please LOVES eye.
Like to a pale coarse do I seem, in shape, now,
Laid all along right, in a Tomb or Grave low,
Whilst to my loss, I stray like him that wanders
Dark in a Desert.
Not any pleasure in the hugie Heavens,
Can my misfortune, (nere so little) sweeten,
Lost have I her that was mine only solace.
Woe to me therefore.
I without life do live, for that I want her,
All that I have, she seazeth on, as her own.
Now my Physician I do want, I needs must
Be very sickly.
In the respect of this so lively hot flame,
Which heretofore, has burnt mine inward intrailes,
Dark seems the Sun, so gloomie are my sad thoughts,
Fit for dispairing.
But if I long must live, without her presence,
Sweet death dspatch me, let me no more linger,
For, far more blessed is the dead, then he that
Wants his fair Mistress.
See, here my first Notes, in which I have employed my voice, since my first
coming into this wilderness. But if my verse, run not smoothly, excuse I
beseech you mine invention, from whence, the discontinuance, for want of
exercise, has reft (what was best before) from her. I commend thee Son
(replied the old man) the matter whereof, not being (in my mind) altogether
unsavory. But to what purpose does the Lover sing, being disioynd, far off
from his Mistress? Songs and Dances, were appointed (long agone) to be used, in
certain solemn public Feasts, only to breed contentment and pleasure, and
not to increase sorrow, A Comparison.
as are these of Lovers. For I account that sick man but a sot, who through
bad medicines, nourishes his disease the more; and for that he will not loose
the remembrance thereof, takes a toy to continue the same still in his body.
And so I esteem that Lover but foolish, that increases his co^suming cares,
by his passionate complaints and sighing Sonnets: For such kind of fuel, does
but increase the fire: The only forgetting of grief, being that, which
delivers us from the same; Inasmuch, as those, that never think of their
hurt, are soonest freed from the apprehension and feeling of the harm it
self. (Father) answered the Shepherd) can it be, that the fettered prisoner,
(bound and laden with chains, and cast into a deep dungeon) should exempt
himself, from thinking of his hellish servitude? Or can the eyes, see any
thing that is supernatural, and yet never love it, nor once as much as think
of it? This is for brute beasts to do, and not for man, who being beautified
with the knowledge of all things, cannot escape without the apprehe^sion of
such, as are most like to him, and touch him nighest. Either he must bring
himself unto this point, in despite of his will, or else he must needs fall out
of his right wits. But we will not now dispute, whether fools, free from
apprehensions, humane, and void of sense of any evil, are to be thought more
happy, then laudable, or allowable. But we will come unto the Songs of Lovers,
which are two ways profitable unto them. The one, because of the comfort which
they bring unto their minds; the other, by reason of the pleasure, which their
Ladies take in hearing the same, who by nature are given to be greedy of
honorable praise. For although these kind of Sonnets yield forth, a heavy,
and not a joyful sound, yet in some sort, do they seem to accord, and to
have a kind of affinity, and agreement with those that sing them; as well, in
respect that they be sad and mournful, as their Masters themselves are; As
also, because they renew afresh, the memory of their sweet Mistresses. We
must then (quoth the old man) change this name of Sonet, into woeful sorrowing,
although in this wise to lament for the griefs of Lovers, does lessen the same
no more, then the pittious cries of the poor Bond-slaue does help him, in
importuning the air with his continual howlings. This Rock, which thou see
without ceasing, to weep upon the Mountain Cyrillus, does teach us, that
tears are unnecessary, and weeping without profit; for his continual tears
do no good unto him, nor his usual weeping avail him ought, which
distilleth, without any profit at all.

The ancient Sages, iested at those faint-hearted and white-liuered men, that
used to bewail their disasters, because a right courageous mind indeed, will
rather die, then be forced to weep one drop, it being in the liberty of man,
to shorten and to out off either his griefs, or his life, as best him likes.
And I again (replied the Shepherd) imagine quite contrary, esteeming it not
to be any exployt, either of honor or virtue, of courage, or Magnanimity, for
a man in misery to kill himself. For if virtue, proceeds from patience, (as
it does indeed) and that one be borne, to endure the crosses and troubles of
this world, why then will you repute him to be valorous, who for want of
constancy to endure these bitter brunts, goes about to massacre himself. The
least anguish of the heart which men feel, seems as forcible in the tempest
thereof, as the panges of death, and he that with a Magnanimious, and
courageous spirit, and by the fortitude of his actions, resists not the
violent assaults, of his inward and outward passions, can be reputed no other
but a coward, and not seemly to be registered in the Chronicles of honor. All
the actions of our mind, if not tempered and husbanded by reason, do presently
mutiny, against the faculties and noble empire of the body, forsaking their
obedience, making misery of that, was instituted for mankind: and so bearing
up their violence, against the supreme power of the soul, they combat against
virtue, under the ensign of vice, and never see the deformity of her colors,
under who^ they serve. If Cato had suruiued, valiantly encountering with his
hard fortune, opposing himself, withal the utmost of his power, against the
damage of the Roman commonwealth; Had he not bin far more commended, then
for want of courage to have slain himself so timerously as he did.

Indeed, he wrought his own happiness, as he thought, but this his happiness,
because it was hateful unto his own native country, ought rather to have bin
counted unhappiness, then any felicity at all: for where the public good is
extended, not any man there should seek his own particular quiet, but rather
most cheerfully endure the selfsame torment, with which his country is
afflicted. But, O how worthy of all praise are such, who as resolute Saylors,
show like courage and cheer, as well in adversity as in prosperity, being
every way thoroughly armed, and resolved to abide the very shocke and push of
fortune, not loosing their spirits or stomachs any thing at all, at the first
arrival of the same, but rather are the more strengthened and animated
thereby, yielding through their invincible patience, infinite rich testimonies
of a most perfect and obsolute virtue indeed? Amongst which number, well may
Lovers be admitted, who being at liberty to kill themselves (as infamous, and
degenerate minds do) and having the self same means and excuses that they
have;) yet will not perpetrate nor put in practice, so vile and horrible a
fact; to the end, they may the better show the fruits of their constancy,
and perptuall virtue, in all places wheresoever they shall chance to come. For
as he is not excuseable from blame, who because he cannot be good, therefore
gives himself to what is bad, inasmuch, as (herein) it is our parts, to force
our nature it self. No more is he to be commended, who, for that he can no
longer bandie with his afflictions, and with the painful labors of this
world, makes away his own self; because we being the creatures of God, are
bound to take part of all such sinister accidents, as it shall please him to
send upon us, without shaking off the same from us, by destroying our selves;
which the divine law forbids us to do: As that of the civil, prohibiteth
Bondslaues to fly from the hands of their Lords and Masters. A Sentence.
They therefore, are more to be commended, who suffer and sigh forth their
griefs, then those, who because they want force to resist the violence thereof,
slay themselves; For virtue shines most, amidst hard and difficult matters, no
glory at all harboring amongst base and abject spirits. What Is that you say
(answered the old man?) Tell me I pray you, is there any thing more sweet, or
deerer unto man then life? What can make him more renowned, the^ to loose that,
which he holds most dearest, to follow virtue, and to do nothing unworthy of
his own honor? And if your speech were true, then, O ye brave martial
spirits, and Captains of war, most miserable, and far from glory are you,
who for the public benefit and good, amongst thousand battles, have yielded
forth your blood and souls together. What worthy exploytes had men showed
abroad? what generous acts? what valiant deeds, and what works of Eternity?
If they had bin such diligent preseruers of their lives, when for fear of
loosing the same, they should have left behind them, millions of virtuous
stratagems, being the children of praise, and Fathers of commonwealths; in the
enterprising of which, they stand in peril of their most precious lives. A
great credit is it for a man to give over all desire of riches, of greatness,
of all pomp and estate, and to deprive himself, of all delicate and delitious
kind of living; but far greater commendation is it unto him, to abandon all
these foresaid pleasures, to follow virtue in quest, and to give over that,
which is more near unto us, then all these worldly felicities, I mean, our
sweet life; for not to be borne at all, is the greatest ill fortune, that can
commonly happen unto men: as to have life, is the sweetest and most
comfortablest thing, A Sentence.
that can be imagined. That it is happiness to be borne, and to live in this
world, I deny (said the Shepherd) for how blessed had it bin, and far better
for many a one, never to have tasted of this life at all, as by their lucklesse
ends has well appeared? Life is good, and pleasant, to such as know how to
use it well, but most miserable unto others; for the end of every action, does
crown and make perfect the same: and no man is said rightly to be fortunate,
until his death be come. What happy, good, or virtuous end, can such make,
who have always lived most ungodly, when by being so borne, they become most
wicked sinners, being continually troubled in their conscience, which like a
worm, still gnaweth their souls? whereas those that live well and justly, and
whose behavior is holy and unspotted, make most happy ends. I say therefore,
every man's birth is not happy, but rather that it is often times more miserable
unto some men, then pleasant or fortunate: for better were it for such a one
never to be at all, then to be borne, and so to loose his soul and glory, his
name and memory, through his leaude and wretched misdemenor. An example.
The Spartans (far wiser then we) were of mine advise, who made so light
account of life, as the least natural imperfection that their children brought
with them into this world, was the cause they threw them into their common
shore, or priuies, thereby taking from them their humane essence, and their
lives. How many miserable wretches shall a man find in this world, to live in
such extremity and want, as they wish they never had bin borne, desiring
nothing so much as to have their days abridged and out off, and to lie full
low in their quiet graves? Therefore to be borne, and to live in this world,
are not such precious things as you account them, but rather most grievous and
troublesome: so as a man, coming to loose the same, loses no great matter;
Virtue being his pledge for so small a loss. Neither will I deny the worthy
deeds which the virtuous bring to pass, they not standing any thing at all in
fear to loose their lives: and yet the very selfsame consideration, which
makes them esteem so little of their health, witness sufficiently enough,
that it is not prized by them at any high rate, seeing they are content to
exchange it for death. If the good Job, (before he had suffered what he did)
had ended his life, he then had been deprived of that praise, which his rare
patience, purchased unto him, An Example.
as we find in the sacred Scriptures. And yet (quoth the old man) what good
did all these complaints unto Job, which he so often repeated in his miseries,
they not being any thing lessened or assuaged by the same? And so, to begin
where we first left: What avails the miserable to lament? For more is he to
be commended, that with discretion concealeth his grief, and with mild
constancy, bears out the same, then he that makes proclamation of it by
wailing, bewraieth it by sighing, and by his condoling, makes it more apparent
every way. Not so neither (replied the Shepherd) but rather it is quite
contrary: A Sentence.
For is not that sick patient to be noted for unwise, who will not disclose
unto his Physician the cause of his disease, but persisting most obstinately,
rather to feel the pangs of death, then to declare where his grief is? And so
he, that manifests his sorrows by lamenting, receives some kind of
consolation, if not present remedy. For as the small drops of water, falling
by little and little upon the hard Rock, in time, do make it hollow; So
likewise the hearts of women, be they never so strongly armed with the splints
of Steel, and Adamant: yet in the end they will wax tender and soft, as the
hard Iron is made to bow, by the stroke of the hammer. Besides, oftentimes
the perverse Judge does Justice rightly, through very importunity, which by
no other means, he could ever have been brought to have done. It is a thing
that I have seen Lovers ordinarily put in practice; of whom the passions are
so violent, as they have not been able, nether to conceal nor to restrain
them within themselves, when they have most coueted to do the same? I my self
have made trial of this remedy, have passed this straight, ventured this
hazard, and in conclusion, have found to have done good of it. In witness
whereof, I beseech you, once more to give me the hearing of another of my
passionate Sonnets. With right good will (answered the old man) upon condition,
that thou will promise me afterward, to unwind the Bothome of thy Loves
thread. Whereupon the Shepherd began to sing in this sort.

Before my self I do disliue, hear these my plaints
O FAIR, which ravished have my sweetest liberty,
If thou before, have dainde of my religious Love;
My loyalty (after my death then honor thou.
Nor fear that Heavens, shall by my death be proud,
Because (ending my days) extinguished is my Fire,
Death only can cashere me from this wretched life,
Where, in the sacred Throne of Love, seats my pure Soul,
Whilst I do breath, whilst heart, through 1000. sorrows sobs,
It shall be servile vassaile to thy Deity.
And, among the Ghosts (being dead) thou shall my Lady be,
For in my soul, thy Beauty is caractered;
There do I see thee still, and as mine Idol chief
I Will sacrifice to thee, great store of cries, and tears:
Ah, then plight me thy faith, for to accept my vows
As late thou seemdst to rewe, at my sad heavy griefs,
Leave him to dye, to dye, who lives withouten life
Being far from thine Eyes, his chief diuinest light.
For say, (alas) wherein can I stand thee in steed,
When I am but a shadow in a withered Corse?
Spent have I all my tears, bewailing thy long absence,
In loosing thee, the Heavens have reft my vigor quite;
I nothing am become; Most wretched he that thinks
To live, deprived of that chief good his heart does nourish.
Then whilst I look my fatal day of death to see.
No voice, sounds in mine ears, but of laments and cries,
Mirth is for those are fortunate, rot for a soul
That feels more horrors strange then Limbos frightfull Ghosts,
Then welcome pining Care, and sorrow sower to me,
For with my thoughts, dispairing still, you best agree.
Thus have you heard another of my woeful ditties. O happy Arcas, if being
deprived of so sorrowful a subject of lamenting as this is, thou could
enjoy the sight of thy fair and dear Diana, as heretofore thou have done.
Alas, that the separation of the soul, from a fair body, should be far more
pleasing, then that of two loyal hearts, most stricklie chained, with the
strong bond of faithful love; for with this first dissolution the remembrance
of all grief and doller passes away, like a flash of lightening that is
suddenly come and gone. But alack, how long are the sorrows, how wearisome the
troubles, and how unsupportable the miseries that the separation of his
Mistress, brings unto the wretched Lovers? Poor Oenone, too well know thou
this to be true, who did die for very heaviness, because thou were
disioyned and withheld from thy dear Paris.

Death it self is more welcome unto Lovers, then the long absence of their
Ladies, and yet dare they not die, because they fear their displeasures: which
(when they go about to free themselves from this bondage) snatcheth the weapon
out of their hands, whilst the hope which they conceived once to behold them,
delayeth from day to day the execution of this cruel arrest of death, A
Similie.
being so profitable unto all Lovers. That traveler finds himself in great
perplexity, and is not a little pensive and angry, who after he has iournied
all the day long, by the comfortable light of the Sun, is constrained to
wander in the dark all the night after. For as the coming forth out of bad
into good, is luckie, sweet, and fortunate; so hard and troublesome is the
loss of joy, to enter from thence into misery, and as it were into the very
gates of destruction.

And as mortal me^ desist not from offering sacrifice unto the Gods, although
they be far off from their sacred presence; So my dear and divine Diana,
though my fortune has removed me far from thy beauteous sight, yet will I not
leave to dedicate all my writings unto thee, to present my sighs unto thee,
and to render thousand pittious oblations of my tears, as unto my chief
Goddess, whose I wholly am; my verses, my cries, and my complaints, shall all
be addressed unto thee. O fair Diana, in what place soever thou now displaiest
forth thy radiant beams, do not I beseech thee, despise the slender vows of
the religious votary, who living only through thee, owes unto thee, both his
labors and his life.

How wisely have the learned set down, that the only presence of the Divine
Essence, brings all contentment that may be, unto those blessed spirits that
continually behold the same, seeing the only countenance of my Mistress,
brought my soul to be happy, and satisfied mine eyes at full, with perfect
joy? I now excuse you, O ye lean and yet rich covetous churles, who content
your minds with often gazing upon your rustie old gold; because there is
nothing comparable unto that pleasure, which the sight brings unto the soul,
in respect of that thing which so much delights him.

And who then with reason may blame me to love so fair a Jewel, seeing
beauty, is found to be a gift come from God, made only to render himself the
more admirable in the eyes of the world? Who can justly find fault with that
man, that shall love a thing rare, perfect, and surpassing in perfection, such
as are ordinary and common? So likewise, who can rightly condemn men for
honoring such a one, as beauty her self, yields a most excellent
perfection, amongst those that are most perfect of all?

Then thee O Diana do I honor: thee do I love: thee do I respect: sorrowing
always for the want of thee: and whilst my vital blood shall boil within my
veins, will I worship thee: as long as my bones shall be joined unto this
flesh, will I reverence thee: as long as my soul shall be martyred within this
body, will I dutiously regard thee, bewailing thy loss, whilst I shall have
liberty to breath, and to be able to make sensible things gentle, give ear
unto my complaints. But I see (reverend Sire) that I do but weary thee, and
trouble thine ears overmuch, to importune them with these pittious discourses
of my hard fortune; now therefore will I change my note, resolving to do, what
it shall please thee to command me. Yet before we proceed any further, spare
me I pray thee, so much leisure, as to hear a Sonet of mine, which (I, being
deprived of my Lady, cast off, and quite left of mortal men, and clean for
gotten of such as have bin beholding unto me) my sad or rather colericke Muse
endited for me, whilst I wandered up and down this darkesome Forest. Read it
quoth the old man, for both thy prose, and verse, are pleasing unto me: serving
me, in steed of sweet Roses, to revive and refresh mine ancient heat: And
think not, but that thy speeches, are worthy to be harkned unto. Whereupon the
Shepherd red this Sonet following.

Beyond the Stigian Stix, has Caron reft
Thee, O divine Faith, and for company,
Friendship with thee, who must not here be left,
For faith is nothing without amity.
Alas, why let'st thy Muse live in disdain,
To thee and her (a fortune usual seen,)
Thou men beleeu'st, it is they that thee have slain,
Abusing her through oaths, as thou have bin.
Thy comforts this, thou die at this hour,
Her end was languishing, long ere she did,
A speedy death is sweet, a lingering, sower,
She starued died, by flowing plenties side.
You Mortals then, let in one Tomb remain,
Faith, Love, and Muses, since they were of prise:
For, fond is he that calls them back again,
And you not Loyal are, friendly, nor wise.
This Dittie of thine (said the old man) is pithie, and grave, but yet the
Subject thereof is somewhat displeasing unto me. For I cannot do men that
injury, as to think or imagine, that they should become enemies unto the
Muses, considering, but for them, their memories and names, should rest and lie
buried with their bodies in the selfsame grave. And although age has cooled,
and frozen in me my first Tragic fury, (Mother of all good verses); yet will
I answer thee as well as I may. Hear me then awhile. Whereupon he began thus.

If in one coffin, FAITH, LOVE, and the MUSES grave,
By earthly creatures hand, informed close do lie:
And think their deeds and name, immortal so to have,
They do abuse themselves, with ore much Surquedrie.
If FAITH no more lives, and if (hence we banish LOVE,
If MUSES, have on earth, no sacred Altars here;
Heavens then must (perish;) And the supreme Gods above
With essence their's (divine) confused must appear:
But heavens (as yet) stand firmly, Gods do reign,
And mortal men, by living on the earth below,
So, FAITH, LOVE, and the MUSES, still alive remain,
The sins of men cannot exile them unto woe.
Astormie Tempest, may the Sun, sometimes obscure,
Yet afterward, his Beams show forth more bright and grave.
See (Shepherd) quoth the old man) if this Sonnet has as yet any smacke of
this gallant heat, which en flameth youthful spirits with the hot cinders of
glory. And if my Muse, shall so much vouchsafe, as to favor me, with some
small conceit to accompany my trembling old age, which although she do not,
and that my verses be rude and ill shapen: yet of this, I am well assured, that
the Subject is both good and true. For how (O Shepherd,) can heavens and earth
continue without Love? If the Gods should fall at variance, and Love should be
driven away from them, who then, during this confused dissension, and
tempestuous hurly-burly, should guide the course of the heavens, and give order
about the government of terrestiall matters? What good rule and order, and what
upright Justice or policy, is there found in that city, An example.
wherein the Magistrates are at variance, divided into factions, and quite
discrepant in opinions? No no, Love of necessity must live amongst the Gods,
to the end he may maintain union, amity and friendship one with the other;
he giving directions as well for divine, as earthly businesses.

Father (answered the Shepherd,) this question of thine is very easily
resolved, and thou as quickly to be contented, and satsfied in this point:
There is no need at all, to have the company of Love, in the heavens, to be
as an assistance or helper, in the maintaining and governing of celestial
causes: seeing amongst us, there is but one God, whose only divine providence
alone, rules both heaven and earth, he being not disunited at all; for it is a
Substance simple, not subject unto division, and therefore has nothing to do
with Love, to bring him to agreement, seeing he can never be divided. And this
is for the ancient Paynims to discourse upon these natural reasons.

God then, A similie.
does not meddle, nor has not to deal with this Love (I mean such as is
wanton) but dearly does he affect perfect amity, inasmuch as he loves
mankind, which are his children, he demanding the selfsame love of them
again.

The Sovereign Magistrate, upon whose commandments, the government of the
whole city depends, cannot be at controversy with his Subjects about the
ordering thereof, (because they do not participate with his power) he himself
commanding alone, by his absolute will and authority.

So God, being without equal, and only perfectly puissaunt, and mighty,
cannot fall at square with any of his servants; which thing if it be so, he
then has no need of Love to make them agree together again.

Thy reason is (good replied the old man) in respect of that which belongs
unto God, but as concerning men how can they live without Love? For if a
building cannot remain firm and sure without a strong foundation, how then
may men continue without Love? which serves as a fortress, unto their rest
and pleasure, and as a chief nourishment unto their lives. For can men live
quietly, who are always quarrelling, and as it were at daggers-drawing, and
who for want of Love, are still ready to stabbe one another? What assurance of
life can that soldier promise unto himself, who most courageously goes to
the field to combat with his enemy, man to man, An example.
alone? Even so, what kind of life should men lead, one with an other, if
their quarrels should cause them try their valors with their swords,
staining the ground with the loss of their dearest blood? For into what
bottomless gulfes of misfortune and overthrow, did civil dissension for want
of Love and friendship, bring the Romans, who with their own proper weapons,
revenged the injuries and wrongs, they had done unto foreign Nations, upon
their own selves, which those barborous strangers, with all their force could
never have bin able to have done? Into what great losses and damages, did the
quarrels of the Spartaines and the Atheniaus plunge all Greece? And what
monstrous cruelty (for default of Love) did those two Theban brethren,
exercise one against the other, who with one stroke, stabbing one another, and
cast into one, and the selfsame fire (so mortal was their hatred) as the
very flame thereof divided it self, till it consumed those bodies (which
whilst they lived were divided) and sundred in disagreement always? I say
therefore, that men cannot live without amity, and that the Sonet is false in
that point: for either Love must yet be living, or else the world must perish:
mortal men must be swallowed up, and the earth be left fruitless and barraine.

Reverend Father (answered the Shepherd) I will make thee a short answer,
which is, that Friendship as thou affirmest, is most necessary, for man who
cannot live without it; no more then the fish can be without the water: which
was the reason induced me to say, that Love was dead amongst them.

For what do we see now a days, but murders, troubles, controversies,
debates, quarrels, and perverse opinions, which after the chasing away of
Amity, with the same whip, have also driven away men out of the world, being
rooted out, with continual brawling and fighting, whilst they wanted the
comfortable support of Frienship to assist them.

The golden world of our Forefathers is gone and past, and that of Iron is come
in his place: so that we may truly say; All Courtesy, all kindness, all
Justice, and all Piety, are dead and extinct, and so by the same means, the
Essence of all mortal men must needs decay and die.

The chief Governor of an Army Royal, minding to change his place, and to
remove all his Camp, sends his Marshall of the field before, A Simily.
to provide convenient lodgings for him. So earthly men, entending to change
this field of the world, have sent before them (as their Harbinger) mild
Amity, to provide better dwellings for them in another Climat.

And surely, surely, most happy art thou, that thine eyes have been kept from
the view of so many miseries, that thy tongue is seen to be exempt and free
from recounting so many mischiefs, usually lighting upon men, and that thine
ears are found to be shut close from the cries and complaints of afflicted
persons, in this most wretched Age. For amongst worldlings, fortunate now are
Fools, blessed are the blind, and rightly contented are only such as be
deaf.

I speak by experience, who most miserably every way, have found so little
commiseration and comfort, in these my calamities amongst men, as I persuade my
self verily, that Friendship lives no more amongst them.

Although thy speech (said the old man) as touching the first be found to be
true, yet cannot I believe, that the like may be proved in Faith: For I
confess, it may be that Amity peradventure, is wanting amongst men, which is
the occasion of so many dissentions, quarrels, and debates. But I think not
so of Faith, which finds room, even in the selfsame place, from whence
friendship has been driven. As amongst Wars, Battles, Combats, and
contentions. For those that Discord and want of Love force to arm themselves,
one against another, ought not for all that, to fail of their faith: inasmuch
as Faith it self is requisite, and required in an Enemy, and because without
the same, not any just War can be waged.

For it is lawful for us to hate our foe, and to persecute him with any naked
sword in our hands, but not to deceive him, with our Faith given unto him:
seeing nothing should make one to go from his solemn promise, except the
badde dealings of other men, and the treacherous wrongs, wrought against him,
by his enemies: which is of force, to make him detest and loath.

With such a Faith the ancient Romans waged battle against Phineus, whom
they advertised of the poison, which his Physician would have ministered unto
him in a Potion.

How true of his word, was Marcus Regulus, who with the price of his blood,
preserved his Faith, whole, entire, and unblemished? I hold then for a truth,
that friendship lives no more now adays amongst men, but that in his place,
war and discention govern and reign: and yet for all this, I will not
grant that Faith is also fled from hence, as the other is, seeing she is not
only necessary in time of quietness, but also profitable, during the storms
of brawling discord.

But should this mischief happen, that Faith were quite banished away by men,
yet cannot I think that God would suffer such as are the cause thereof, to
live one hour, in as much as he reserueth the punishment of Perjury, to
himself alone, and that he being the Father of Truth, the enemies thereof are
as much odious unto him, as the pride of those Giants was, which would have
scaled Heaven.

Indeed (quoth the Shepherd) I confess, that heretofore very Faith lived
amongst Wars, and warriors, and that she was heartily welcome unto those
places, from whence amity was quite exiled: but the times wax every day worse
and worse, men growing more and more in badnes, that first sacred and just
Nature of man, being daily ccorrupted, by reason of the sharpnes of vice, as
wine becomes tart and sower, with overmuch heat of Summer.

Lysimachus, An Example.
being prisoner unto a certain barbarous King, gave good trial of his Faith,
being sent home unto his Country without ransom. Loyal and faithful was
Camillus, in his wars, who sent that traitorous School master home, well
whipped unto his foes, whom he had besieged, whose City he offered to betray
unto him. But the world is now changed: In steed of the Lion, the Fox wageth
battle: whilst men (as the followers of Lysander) make use of their Faith,
studying to cozen and deceive one another.

Vice (in this age) borrows the place of Virtue, A Sentence.
receiving the selfsame vows, and Sacrifices, which before times were
offered unto that sacred Goddess, they being (by antiquity) only ordained
for her. In steed of Faith, false disloyalty makes her self to be adored:
and he is most commended, feared, and respected, that knows best, how with
subtlety to ouercom others, and has put in practice no small number of base
and treacherous effects. In times past, prisoners taken in Battle, might (upon
their promise given) retire, A discourse against vnhonotable Soldiers.
whether they best pleased, and such great courtesy received (by their
adversaries) they recompensed again, with a firm and faithful assurance of
their word, never failing to perform, as much as they had before protested.
But now upon the warrant of their Faith, they will out the throtes (if they
can) of such as have taken them: and if the same Faith has given them such
free passage, as they may have leave to retire themselves for a certain time,
yet will they never return back again, but had rather, that their promise so
pawned, should remain as prisoner, then their miserable Carcasses should come
to be in durance, never to be redeemed. Besides, men have found now adays many
kinds of shifts, to violate and break their Faiths, as some, Note.
by betraying of their masters: others, by selling such places of importance,
as are committed unto them in trust: others, by being (never) masters of their
own word: and others, faining themselves, of deadly enemies, to become sound
and dear friends; to the end, that under the color of this faith, they may
the sooner beguile such as repute most confidence in them.

We must therefore talk no more of Faith. But God who is the revenger of all
outrages, and enormities committed against him, punishes those persons with
such extreme rigor, that there is not so much as one of them exempted from
public misfortunes, whereas peace-full quietness, being the companions of Love
and of Faith, has followed after them, leaving men in a most miserable plight,
and wretched taking: For this is most certain, A Sentence.
that the wicked languish always in misery, being always in continual
fear, horror and frighting, although they be followed by none other, then
their own faults alone.

And thus you see, how Love and Faith, are quite expulsed from out the world.
Although (quoth the old man) these two goodly virtues be driven from hence,
yet see I (as yet) no sufficient subject, by reason of which the Muses should
be exiled, as thou have set down the other be: and therefore in this point thy
speech is false. For glorious renown, is a passion so sweet, and of so
pleasing a taste, that it makes herself to be wished for, not of the good and
virtuous only, but also of such as are Infidels and ungodly: For do the
leaude man never so badly, A Sentence.
yet would he willingly be commended for the same: Praise is a certain
odoriferous sent in the noses of men, and an amorous kind of thundering in
their tickling ears. Have you ever seen creature, were he never so much
corrupted with vice, that would refuse such glory as you seemed willing to
attribute unto him? A right Simily.
For as every parent thinks his own child fairest, and every workman, his
own work finest, even so every man, be he never so wicked, esteems his
deeds most just, and his actions worthy of most praise.

If therefore, both the good and the bad, hunt thus after this glory, and
strive so much for praise (although the world) at this time be inhabited only
with the wicked. And if the sacred Muses be of so great perfection of
themselves, as they give sufficient testimony every where of the same, who
then can be able to chase them away from men? For much good, can they do, for
the good, in commending their proceedings, Praise of Learning
and in animating their courages to follow the same still: And much hurt can
they do to the bad, in dispraising their actions, and in dissuading others to
leave and give over such indecent, and most unseemly fashions. In good
therefore, and in bad, the Muses ought and may always have an interest, and a
perfect continuance, as best them pleases.

Denis the Tyrant, loved Plato, and diverse learned men, have tendered,
succored, cherished and favored the Muses and Learning, and therefore do they
still live amongst them. And I am flat of another mind (replied the Shepherd)
being of opinion that the Muses have never had to do with the wicked, that
their fortunes have not been like the others, neither their carriage at any time
alike. Therefore the Muses (as things contrary unto them) hate them, finging
of none, but of the virtuous: whereas the others shun and detest the Muses,
doubting least they should reveal their vices, and reprehend their faults
overmuch.

The upright Judge hates the highway Robber, because he troubles the
quietness of the Country, of which his charge makes him the preserver: and the
fellon, hates the good Judge, because he both knows he can and ought to
punish him for his demirrits. And so is it, between the Muses, and such as are
wicked. Never has it been known, that between them, there has been found
any perfect friendship (of force sufficient to have tied their hearts strongly
together: for if the bad have at any time made any show of Love unto the Muses,
yet no sooner came they to have knowledge of their true and just, and of their
pure and liberal nature, but that suddenly, they conceived against them a
greater hatred, then if they had never been acquainted with the^. For as two
agreeable natures happening to encounter and unite themselves so strictly
together, as it is not possible for death it self to separate them asunder; So
likewise two contrary humors, co^fronting one against another, after they
perceive now much they disagree, detest and loathe one another more, then if
there had not been any habit of acquaintance between them before. For although
Denis loved Plato, yet when he understood of his plainnes, and bold franknes in
his speech, and how he abhorred all flattery, he then pursued him unto death,
sending him home again most shamefullie into Greece. So was that worthy
Philosopher Anaxagoras, hated so much of that Tyrant, as nothing could appease
and exp^at his cankred rage and fury, but only the heart blood of this grave
and prudent wise man. It is now an ordinary custom amongst men, who because
they are vicious, therefore they become adversaries unto the Muses, whose
divine and immortal pen they greatly fear. So as I may well say, that neither
Faith, neither Amity, nor the Muses, are now living amongst men.

To this, the old man began to reply (when on the sudden they might hear a
voice, which sweetly sighed forth these words following. O Love, and the Sea,
alike, and agreeable in power, which force men against their wills to take what
course they best please!

Love compels to like in despite of our own heart, and the Sea, drives
miserable wretches out of their way, half dead, and half alive, which flote
on her waves. Twice has Love made me love, contrary unto my mind, and twice
has the sea, driven me far from my iourny against my desire. But alas, which
of these twain, can any mortal creature resist? of both, I guess the sea is
best able to be encountered withal. For if the Gods tremble at the commandments
of Love, who then, can set men free and at liberty from his yoke? whereas the
labor and industry of the Mariners, the Mast, the Rudder, the Cable, and the
Ancor, may sometimes bridle the boldness of the sea, and withstand his raging
violence.

The first place into which the sea maugre my will, threw me, was, when I
arrived (being driven by the swelling surges) upon the banks of the deserts of
Arabia, where I saw that thrice renoumed Iulietta, of whom, Love on the soden,
forced me to become exceeding amorous: since which time, long have been my
pains, cruel my travels, and scalding hot my cares in this my liking, these
being the goodliest Weapons that Love has, and without which, he is never
rightly found. All these sorrows as yet remain in me, I bringing them with me
into my Ship, instead of such precious Merchandise, as the Merchant ladeth his
vessel withal, in a far and foreign Country.

But, O how sweet unto Illustrious spirits, are such travels as they endure,
to purchase glory? For that labor, do we not call any toyling at all, which
we suffer for a most beauteous thing, when with the same, we may recompense our
selves for the pains which we have taken. Sweet and kind, have I found the
sorrows, which the love I bare renowned Iulietta, has made me feel? Inasmuch
as the remembrance of her rare perfections, shadowed the thought of my griefs,
as a bright burning torch, does a little small candle. A Sentence.
For how many are there, that judge the pain more sweet and pleasing which
they endure, for the respect of some worthy subject, then the quiet repose, and
gentle rest of their own souls? How many are there to be found, which give
themselves unto great pains taking, of which (if they pleased) they might be
soon rid, by loving better that kind of life, A Similie.
then any rest at all? The Husbandman calls not that travel any labor,
which he takes to sow his ground, because he hops thereby to reap a good
Harvest. So likewise, cannot any one that loves, term his traucls any
troubles at all, if he endure the same for a worthy respect, especially hoping
to find some grace or favor in the end. The Fruits of Love are so
delightful, as the only sent of them alone, A Sentence.
without any further taste, extinguisheth, and cures the toylings, and
turmoyles of Lovers. That labor being most blessed, whereof the recompense is
ready and at hand, and not long, neither slow in coming. With Love may the
Lover be requited of his kind Lady and mistress, if she so pleases, and
therefore most happy the pains of Love. But woe is me, I talk of fortunate
Lovers, and not of my self, for without any show or sign, that my love is
cured or healed, am I returned home again, bringing nothing with me, but the
Image of my fair Saint imprinted in my soul, with thousand sorrows to
accompany the same: yet, wheresoever the cunning Painter passes, he leaves
some show of his skill, A Similie.
and every famous Poet some sign of his Muses excellency. So I, before my
departure, from forth this solitary abode, whilst the angry sea waxes calm,
and the blustering winds grow to be mild, wandering up and down and singing,
we will afterward engraue, in some Oak or other, some of my verses, as true
Testimonies of my zealous labors. To the end, that my divine Goddess may
flourish, even in the most uncouth and utmost parts of all the world. Whereupon
he sung these Verses following.

Among the cries of the dead, amidst sighs heavily groaning
Of such Ghosts as are damned, frighted with Fiends and with hags,
Long have I forced forth, the accents of my too hoarse voice,
Yet, nor the dead, nor the damned, answered have any word,
My cruel Mistress, nor the Heavens will understand me,
Ah solitary wood, answer me then, I thee pray.
Ah do receive, and mark the woeful tune of my sad Song,
And make all for to know, my clamor ore pittious.
Draw with at tractiue voice the stony Rocks for to hear me,
O groan, speak thou for me else, all, do scorn at my cries;
Thus for to sigh, and to complain (alwaie') is a hard case:
But worse it is for to see, who sighs, and cries, to be scorned.
What should I then, O ye woods, for Sacrifice to you offer,
But my laments, to you, agreeable, and very fit?
Since that you kindly daine, to answer unto my waylings,
Naught have I now left else, only my sad tongue I have.
But it is enough, too much, for such, as Cupid abuses;
For true Lovers good hap, lies in the Tombs of the dead.
Oh that (of woes weary) some great God would but exchange me,
Into some ancient Beech, or to some wild sauadge Elm;
Should not my linelesse Trunk, be welcome the^ to your Forests!
Tears should so fast from me fall, like to a crist all eye-spring,
As they your faithful plants still should make more abounding,
And of power be to force, half dying trees to reuine;
Ah most sacred Groves, (the time has bin,) in your cool shade
As one ravished for joy, I saw the heavenly face
Of my cruel Fair; the deadliest foe to my good days,
Of which, since that the stars, as jealous have me deprived,
O give me leave (so much) as I may but write with my starpe knife
Deep all about your Rocks, the stories of my dear Love.
Then will I write, how heavens have made daintily perfect,
Among thousand beauties, Juliet, more then the rest.
I will write of her chaste worth, more then rightly renowned,
What do I say? Will I write? O, no, not I, as I should.
Yet dare I write of my dire pains, the Destiny cruel,
Write will I of my hopes, looked for of me, but in vain.
I will tell how mine eyes are blind, with weeping I use still
And to death, will I leave (deaf to my plaints, that has bin
A defying challenge, for to prove that he could not
Kill me, without that he kill my miseries therewithal.
I will write, how my tears could move no more with their weeping
Those fair eyes I adore, Eyes, which I love as my soul,
Then the waves of sea do move the Rocks that do scorn them:
Rather, I write will, how into my tears there are fallen
Her leaden shafts, tipped hard with disdain, for to cool them,
And by the same, has she power, me for to wound, when she please.
Write will I, thi'll hap of my youth, the spring of my chief tide,
Of such venial faults, as by ill luck we commit:
Which when they seize on us, they end our lives most entire:
But more loud will I cry, that mine own hurts and my harms
After so many crosses, nere could make me become wise,
Cursed is the wight that is plagued, yet by his plagues nothing wise.
But yet (as, who power has ore a power of the rest,
He complains without sense, that by a God's ore come.
More for to strive, or do then we can, the laws do forbid us.
LOVE ore Gods and Kings, I Will say I take but the use,
If the cause why I have offended any do ask me,
Of great Gods and Kings, I Will say, I take but the use.
If to have thus gron'd forth my painful grief I be blamed,
If condemned I am, thus to bewray my true Love;
If I be taxt for my crying, for my plaints and my wailing,
Then for my self, thus I say; Love that does wound every man
One himself being wounded, strait complains to his Mother,
And Mars, often did grieve, when that he first was in love.
Wretched (so that they justly plain) no man may for bid them
Reason, to have to cry, till that each one does them hear,
Unto the end they may entreat all men for to help them;
He that is sick, yet scorns him that his pain can assuage,
Nere can he cured be, lest that he seek some means for his sickness.
Better it is to complain, then like a fool for to die.
Therefore my grief, to you O Deserts have I recounted,
Which since you listened too, well will I wish unto you.
That gentle Zephirus, may calmely blow on your heads still,
So will I pray for you, then for my sake do the like.
Pray that the cruel one, may take on me little pity,
So may you happy be: So may my Love be as sweet.
As he that is confined within some fodorne I Will, quite out of hope, ever to
return unto his sweet country again, is not a little moved, seeing a ship
to arrive at his shore, which by the language of the passengers, he perceives
to be of his own country. So was Arcas. much amazed, hearing one to speak of
her, who gave life unto his infant writings, whom he honored as a most
excellent and exquisite creature, and who for her virtue, was renowned
throughout all the world. And as forsaken Ariadnes being left alone, upon the
durtie shore of the Sea, ran up and down, beholding a far off in the Ocean,
any ship that seemed to bend his course toward her, to understand some good
news from her disloyal husband: even so did Arcas run here and there to
find out him, who so often pronounced the name of his dear Iulietta. Away went
he then to seek this stranger, whom ere long he found, and who, being tired
with his overmuch travail, and chillie cold, with lying so long upon the
waters, had betaken himself unto his rest, being fallen into a little slumber,
loath was he, neither durst he to awake him, when marking of him better, he
might perceive two tables to lie by him, which straight he called to mind,
remembering them to be the fair and true counterfaits of Phillis and Iulietta:
whereupon he thus spoke softly unto himself. O happy Painter, that tookest in
hand so laudable a piece of work as this is. In former ages our predecessors
did consecrate Statues to such as were valiant, by reason their countries were
beholding unto them, but unto none, more rare personages then these, could any
man give any, whom these pictures do represent. For if virtue has power to
make the virtuous live in the hearts of men, then with greater reason ought
such as those, he drawn by the cunning Painter. Ah beautiful counterfaites,
how much do you delight me, and how much is the memory of those which you
present, sweet and pleasing unto me? And now I approve and allow, that action
of his, who made so great a journey to travail to Rome, only to see that
famous Historiographer Liuie: For much pleasing unto the mind is the sight of
excellent creatures. Blessed and religious Ministers of Jehovah, who to refresh
the memory of man, (prone by nature to forget,) have judged that the pictures
of Saints (after they had merited a crown of eternal glory, for their
spotless living) were very necessary, and thought commodious unto men, to
the end they might be, not worshipped, yet be admired of every one: For if
with our seeing virtue corporally, we suffer our selves sweetly to be drawn
away by her means, then how much more should we like of her, seeing the very
faces, of such as lodge and dwell in her always.

O prudent Alexander, who did take so great delight, to see the most famous
Painters of thy time, to be busied about limming thee, with all the skill they
had, and so, happy art thou whosoever thou were, that have set thy last
draught of thy pensill, unto so fair a piece of work as this is.

Ah, would to God, I saw as lively shadowed, the fair face of my divine Diana,
for then, should I receive some ease in these my griefs, having by me the
likeness of her, whose absence, absenteth and keeps away the clear light
from my dim eyes. But where froward destiny shoots her arrows; there never
mingleth she so much as one sweet one, amongst so many sower and venomous
shafts. Seldom or never amongst any ill fortune, does there happen any good
chance: for man being driven away by the worst, and wholly possessed of the
same, as then is wide and incapable, of feeling or finding any pleasure at all,
be it never so little. Needs then must all sorts of miseries abound in me, to
the end I may have the more praise by reason of enduring the same; or else, far
more witnesses, of the anger of the heavens against me, for the more the
travail is great, the fairer is the glory, and he that does participate with
dangers, has likewise a part and share in renown. As he that without
intermission feels himself to be struck with the piercing darts of heaven,
bears in this world, the punishment of his sins. But, O how perfectly do I
see painted forth the valor, the brave grace, and the sweet Majesty of
Phillis. That statue of Scanderbeg, placed upon his Tomb, as yet is a terror
unto the Turks, who^ he so often overcame; And so goodly does this portrature
seem unto me, as me thinks (yet) I see him alive, whom it resemb leth: Being
comely, wise, and valiant, as another Roman Caesar. In the other, so lively
shadowed, by those dainty flaxen hairs, by that beauteous and large forhead,
by those diamond eyes, resembling two bright rolling spheres of heaven, by
those roseall cheeks, and those lips of Gilliflowers, by that pretty
dimpled chin, by that breast, a bank of whitest Lillies, by those small and
long hands, with that dainty slender and clean foot, with other parts
matchless by Nature, and therefore not to be mended with Art, do I behold the
divinity of that admirable beauty of peerlesse Iulietta. And therefore must I
needs say, the Painter has showed his skill to be excellent, in drawing these
our bodies. But to set down with life, the rare qualities of these two worthy
personages, nor Painter, nor Poet, nor any in the world, is able to do. Under
these two fair counterfaites, were written two Quartraines, and that of
Phillis was thus.

Brave Phillis, it is not for to save thy fame,
About these woods thy portrature we cast:
Who in the sisters of the woods lives, does disdain
All pictures, for in them his name, shall last.
Only the harmless good, most need and crave,
The shadows of the valiant sort to have.
Under that of Iulietta, was this written.

Not for to show thy beauty excellent,
Thou art most (fairest Dame, drawn lively here)
But that all might behold thee still I meant,
Since thou for rarest Thewes have not thy peer.
Glory alone, must Iuliets rightest Painter be,
Honor her pattern, Virtue, her attire to see.
These were the verses which were written under the two pictures, and he that
was Master of them, was the hard destined Philistel, the most affectionate
servant of the fair Iulietta, who being pressed upon, to return into his own
native soil, was forced much against his will, to leave her, bringing away
with her license, these two Tables, to the end he might still contemplate and
behold her, as well with the eyes of his body, as those of his soul.

And now I marvel no more of that selfe-conceited Painter, A History.
who fell in love with his own picture, or of fond Narcissus, who grew
extremely enamoured of his own shadow, seeing the Shepherd Arcas, found the
thoughts of his misfortunes to be sweetly assuaged, with the continual regard
of these counterfaites gazing upon them, without moving a long time: In the
mean space, Philistel, awaked the other Swain, not perceiving it at all,
having now called to mind poor Arcas, and how he had bin heretofore corriuall
in his Love; and imagining that he was as yet touched with his first passion,
by reason his senses were ravished, in staring so much upon the picture of
Iulietta; to awake him out of his dream, he began thus to accost him.

Arcas, the excellency of beauty, consists chiefly in this one point, which
is not to bear envy unto those that exercise the same, but rather to imitate
them in what we may, for happy is that country which as a thick and
shadowing Forest, is sowed, and filled, with a great number of worthy and
virtuous men. Thy self, and I, strooken with one and the selfsame dart, have
loved her, whose shadow thou here see, and because this Love of ours was
laudable, yea and worthy of reward, therefore has it never altered our
minds, nor separated our good liking, one from another.

The Spartaines heretofore loved (but yet chastely) the fair and pretty
children of their city, this liking of theirs, never breeding any falling out,
or jealous conceit, An example.
one against another, although three or four of them loved but one of these
youngest boys alone: But contrariwise, they rather forced themselves, and
striued one with another, who should best teach these youths, some rare
quality or perfection, whereby they might come to more estimation and credit.
And such was our love toward the divine Iulietta, we both having loved her,
and yet not hated one the other, forcing our selves to try, who could do
best, in chaunting abroad her fair virtues, seeking still, to render that
worthy honor, unto her perfections, as they of right deserved. And seeing
this Love, did part us at that time (for a while) asunder, we ought as now of
our own accord, to reunite our selves again together. For the Master of a
ship, who has had but hard fortune, having made a bad voyage at sea, has
need after his losses, to get the other, the relics, and remainders of his
Shipwreck, and to make account of that which (before this mischaunce) he would
have disdained to have done. And so we, if any small conceit ouerpartiall, has
passed twixt us about our Loves, now, at this hour when all is lost, and that
scarce we our selves, are escaped from the cruelty of the waters, let us
forget, and sorgiue what is past, and let the (joy in that we have once more
met again before we die) master for a while, this our overmuch sadness.
Friendship never bestows her divine brightness, A Sentence.
where abundance of pleasures flow; for they hinder us fro discerning the
same; being the occasions, that it is not adored according unto her deserts.
But when affliction and sorrow approaches, then does she best appear, her
wholesome effects, as then being most prised and commended. For at such a time,
necessity forces men to have more need one of another, then when they are in
prosperity, it being the only cause, that love shows it self more lively,
hot, and comfortable. My mind prognosticated unto me, the coming into this
place, whilst I not knowing the good and happy meeting, that I should have
here, did murmur against the Seas, for casting me upon this shore: but now I
have found by trial, that humane matters being ordered by divine providence,
happen oftentimes contrary unto the opinion of men; to the end, they may
know, that in respect of God, they are but vessels of earth, by him ordained
for shame, and that unto him only, appertains the disposing of all things.

O Philistell (answered the Shepherd) of great folly should he be condemned,
who finding himself all alone, would imagine to be able to carry away some
great victory amongst the midst of a huge number of enemies: For it is not
courage, but rather mad fury, for one to undertake more then he is able to
bring to pass, inasmuch, as it is no less virtue to know himself, then to
vanquish and overcome his adversaries. These considerations, are sufficient to
move me, to extinquish all bad conceits, which I might have conceived against
you, about the love of sweet Iulietta: For could I hope, to have any
recompense of her, whom hard misfortune, wretched poverty, the malice of
nature, and a thousand other hindrances, have set me up, as it were for a
mark, to discharge their deadly arrows at me? Whereas you, (who to serve her,
have left your country, and your realm, and who carry besides, the
auncientnes of your birth, and the greatness of your race, a brave and generous
spirit endued with as unseemly qualities) may well hope for that, which I not
so much as dare to name, or think of in my heart. Behold then the cause, why I
cannot bear any malice unto thee, as touching that thing, which I judge my
self unworthy to possess: and which for the same cause, I reverence and
adore. For my Loves have bin but shrill Trompets, to sound the glory, of this
fair and superexcellent virgin: my labors, but her Herrolds, to blazen forth
in right colors, her rich perfections: and mine amorous travails, but loud
Chaunters of her rare and divine virtues. But you my dear Philistell, easily
and sweetly may you obtain her good will, by the sacred bond of Nuptial
hallowed right; Nature having made you her equal in blood, How men ought
truly to love.
power, authority, credit and command. Diverse ways may a man love, for in
loving, are many effects. Some lay the foundation of their Love, upon the weak
and feeble ground of pleasures: Others, upon that of marriage; but the wisest,
place it upon the inexpugnable Rock of virtue. Voluptuous love, passes
slightly, and lightly away, with the pleasures themselves: for we love no more,
that thing, which we have no more occasion to use, by reason we have drawn
from thence all the contentment we desired. The affection which marriage
engenders, endures longer, and yet is there oftentimes in the same, many
contrarieties and disagreements, between the Husband and the Wife: but that
liking which is settled upon the firm Rock of virtue, never dies, because the
cause thereof remains everlasting: The foundation whereof, can never be
ouerthrown. With such religious amity have I sought divine Iulietta, yea with
such amity, as shall never die in me, no more then virtue, which is to me, in
steed of a strong Pillar, and therefore can never be removed. Now if that
Bandite, may count himself happy; who sees to arrive before him, such as are
come to restore him unto his former honors, and to bring him home again into
his wished for native soil.

Then may I, seeing thee (most generous Knight) half persuade my self, that
mine exile begins to end, granting me for thine only sake, a certain
Truce unto my ouer-tedious griefs.

But tell me I beseech thee, (if too too importunate I be not with thee) what
now does that fair Creature, whose likeness thou have here, does her Virtues
still continue, pursuing to glaunce forth her divine beams? does her Altars
as yet smoke, with so many Sacrifices which those brave Spirits offered unto
her? and does her learned vain, sigh forth such sweet verses, as were wont to
Enchaunt and Charm, so many thousands of lovely souls?

Ah Shepherd (answered Philistel) the alteration, and the changing of the
Planets, A Similie.
change and turn, by the selfsame manner, the nature of all creatures, and
the course of every mortal thing. The Prince that means to remove his
Court, where he stays, causes all his household likewise to do the same,
because they depend wholly upon his command: and so are men, servants unto
the will, and powerful command of the Stars. All things are altered, and
quite turned topsie-turuie, in our Deserts of Arabia.

The Heavens who before regarded them with a gracious eye, perceiving how all
Faith, all Piety, all Iustce, and all Learning, was banished from thence, have
therefore banished from thence, all their gracious favors, rayning upon other
Countries, that sweet pearly deaw of Mercy. They have turned their sight from
those parts, which (being unworthy of their so great bounty) they have
bestowed upon more thankful Lands. Well do thou know, that since that time,
wherein men have left the nature of men, to take upon them, that of the Wolf,
inuesting themselves, with both skin, and conditions of that beast, there
has been no other conceit, nor study amongst them, but villainy and
mischief: As those that are virtuous, hunt after Glory, having no other
thought, but of Honor, which they set before the^, as a reward for their
labors. The wicked sort to do wickedly, put in practice and use, diverse means
and devices. That which they are not able to execute, by plain force, that do
they perform, through devilish Treason. For they hold this general Maxim,
as an Oracle, that the skin of the Fox, Note.
must cover all that part which the Lion leaves bare, and vnhidden: and that
subtlety, should supply and help Force, Rage assist Valor, and Treason
support Virtue, at a dead lift. We are now no more of that Humor, which this
brave Prince was of, who refused to Combat with his enemy, by advantage or
subtlety, for fear least he, seeing himself so overcome by chance; should
once more venture, to try his Fortune again, to find if he could as well be
overcome by Virtue, as by false and sly Treachery.

Deceit at this day, is the chief ground of every man's actions, A Sentence.
which shows sufficiently, that they have no more access unto Virtue, that
they make no more account of Glory, and that nothing which is good, should
henceforth be looked for, to proceed from them. Thou know, how Phillis
having courteously received certain miscreant Infidels, to be as his
companions with him, and how they, (as jealous of his renown, and envious of
his virtue, being greedy to enjoy his goods, and more desirous then any way
deserving, his happy Fortunes) most cruelly and damnably slew him on the
sudden, this being the ordinary death of the valiant, valor it self, not
being able to resist the same, they themselves still venturing where danger
always bideth.

So Iuliius Caesar, the wonder of the world, was traitetously slain, An
Example.
whom the bloody hand of Mars could never subdue.

So dyed Sertorius, slain by his own followers, after he had spoiled, and
brought to naught the great strength and forces of Pompey, of Metellus, and of
all the Roman people. So dyed Eumenes, sold most basely, by his own men, he
having so often before conquered the kings of Asia, his deadly foes. And in
such sort dyed Dyon, (having overthrown Denis, the Tyrant of Siracusa) find
himself to be massacred, by his own household servants.

Thus then we see, that it is the common course of the greatest Conquerours,
to die after a strange manner. And although to make away any man, in this
base fashion, it is counted dishonest, cruel, and detestable, yet is the same
accounted of now adays, in the World, it being as an ordinary practice,
daily put in use, more then any other policy. Custom is another nature, and
preuenteth overmuch many times: for hardly or never, can we reclaim a thief
from stealing, although we threaten him never so much: So men using themselves
(as now) to commit Treasons, will not stick to glory in the same (that so
much) and as it seems, Deceit was the principal matter, of which they were
compact and made.

Phillis being dead, his divine sister would needs follow him, she giving
quite away so many dainty and worthy gifts, wherewith she was most sweetly
adorned and embelished. She now desires to live no where so much, as in the
dark and solitary woods, the company of mortal creatures, are troublesome
unto her, all pleasures disagreeable, all joy refused, and unwelcome, all hope
displeasant, and all cheerful mirth, most hateful unto her. Salt tears are
only sweet unto her, sorrow and heaviness, her best comforts, and pittious
laments, are most dear and welcome unto her.

Women have no other weapons (being crossed by hard destinies) then bitter
tears, not that they are able* through weeping to remedy their griefs, but
because through them, they show signs of their affected minds and good will
toward them, who being persecuted by unkind Fortune, are the occasion they
lament so much for their sakes.

For true tears are so dearly bought, A Sentence.
and cost so much to draw them from the moystned springs of the eyes, as none
can with reason, think they distill from thence, but for the loss of some one
thing or other, which we tender, as much as the better part of our own selves.

So her drerie Muse, (after his death) addicted her self unto nothing else,
then to bewail the loss of her Brother, sighing forth thousands of lamentable
verses, and singing mournful Anthems over his grave, whilst she powered forth
whole Oceans of more then affectionate tears. Of these mournful Ditties, had
I great store, but the Tempest upon the Sea, took them from me, yet hope I one
day, to recall them again unto my former memory, at what time, I mean to
make thee partaker of them.

Not long after my parents deceasing, and I being called upon continually, to
return home unto my people, was forced much against my will, to take my leave
of her, for a certain time, leaving her my heart: in easing of which, I
brought away this her table. My hope is, shortly to return back again, after
I have set in good order certain of mine affairs, of great importance: at
what time, if thou shall remain here, as then I will take thee with me, as I
pass, to the end I may restore thee unto thy sweet Country, unto thy dear
acquaintance, and unto thy loving friends, who remain not a little heavy for
thine absence.

Ah Knight, An excellent discourse, in praise of a Contemplative kind of life.
(answered the Shepherd) what need has he that is resolved to die, retiring
himself from the company of men, to return into their society again?

What need of a Chyrurgian had Cato, when after he had wounded himself, he
was determined with himself to die. Next after the dead, are men only happy,
who as these that are dead unto the world, never use to frequent the world more.

And seeing thou thy self confessest, that Vice does reign and rage amongst
men, why should thou envy at this small parcel of contentment, which mine
Exile yields me, tumbling me down (as it were) from the very height and
top of the same?

The right happiness of man, does not consist in greatness of Honor, nor in the
vain pleasures of this world: for how can you term such accidents to be
happy, when they have no assurance of continuing, wherein the chase of Virtue
is to be followed, without tracing the paths of Vice at all?

For what trouble can there arise unto a virtuous man? can the loss of goods
humble him? no, for he has none. Can the death of children? no, nor that: for
he finding by Virtue, that they were borne to die, vexes not himself at all,
in that they have paid the debt which they did owe unto Nature. Can the want of
friends? no: for, if he judge the time to be miserable, in which we live, (and
as it were, the father of all misfortunes,) he will then think his friends most
fortunate, to be departed out of this vale of misery. Can the afflictions of
his body? neither, for he knowing the goodlines of virtue, will soon find
that glory is gotten with patience, and that it is far better to suffer for a
little while, then to see himself mingled with the troops of unworthy
persons, whose memory and good name dies, even with their bodies. What then
may grieve the virtuous? Can the loss of his virtue? No, nor that likewise.
For it being a Treasure, far beyond the power of Fortune, and as it were
wholly divine, is not subject unto any mortal decaying.

Byas was of the same mind, who carrying his learning with him, wisely
affirmed, An Example.
that he bare away all his chief wealth with him.

If then, neither all the spiteful devises of envious Fortune, neither all the
bloody cruelties of stepdame Nature, can ever force, or offer violence, unto a
virtuous man, what need has he at all, to crave aid of men, or to enter into
their society? when by their vices, they shall corrupt his virtue.

Diogines was of mine opinion, who being content with his own virtue, very
boldly refused those Magnificall proffers of Alexander the great. And so did
Phocion, the Grecian, Fabritius the Roman, and Pyrrhus, that famous king of the
Epyrotes. Besides, what fear of punishment for his fault, does trouble the
wise man? what sudden apprehension of losses? what frightfulnes of pain? what
doubt of death? or what thoughtfull care, for worldly matters to come
hereafter? Anacharsis, being pounded to death in a mortar, iested at death.
Socrates, bought the same, and Plato, forced his own self to take the like.
That Rock that is founded most strongly, within the midst of the Sea, cannot,
nor ought once to fear, least the weather-beaten Barks, or Ships, should
break it in pieces; when contrariwise, it is the same that splitteth them in
sunder. Even so, the wise man has no need to doubt, least the force of any
worldly accidents, should carry him away, seeing in all his Actions, he goes
beyond them, and vanquisheth the puissance, both of the Heavens and of Fortune.
But this power has he not, whilst he shall be ranging, and running up and down
amongst men, spoiling himself through their vices, but rather, when he is
retired alone by himself, to entertain virtue, which as now, keeps and
abides in the woods, since she has been banished from Towns and Cities.

Our Savior CHRIST, being to encounter with Satan, chose not a
battalion-field, in the magnificall temple of Solomon, nor in the public
Marketplaces, of most populous Cities, but in a solitary and frequentles
Desert, within which, whilst S. John Baptist kept, he never saw the incestuous
adultery of proud Herod, nor felt his own head cut off from his shoulders, for
speaking nothing but the truth. He then, that will be counted wise, let him
forbear and fly from Cities, where grow nothing but contentions, and
troubles: for so did Ciccro and Seneca, very often lament, because they were
drawn from their solitary abidings, to be employed by the Roman Emperors,
about matters of Estate.

But now, what vice can the wise man encounter withal, here in these Deserts,
which may be offensive unto his Virtues? Does he find here any Injustice? No:
for such as have nothing to loose, and offend not the Laws, have nothing to
do with a Judge. Does he find ambition? no: for poverty is never hated, but
rather pitied, then spighted. Does he find murder? no: for uncouth
wildernesses never breed quarrels. Does he find falsifying of faith, and
lying? no: for here, being nothing to be gained, we need not to make our selves
rich with lying. Does he find disloyalty, or subtle treachery? no, nor that
neither. For the deceitful devises of the wicked, and their aspiring hopes, to
become great, does not combat with the truth and honesty of our contented
souls. Seeing then, all accidental causes of sin, are here prevented,
driven back, and quite taken away, that may trouble the virtuous, in his quiet
rest, deface his virtue, offer violence unto his constancy, and bring hurt
unto the calm contentment of his own mind.

Did ever any such man repent him of what he had done? not any, for of well
doing, A Sentence.
repentance never comes: Repentance being one of the most sensible, sharp,
and cruellest whippes, wherewith men are much scourged, because it never
marches alone. without shame and great hurt.

He only is right blessed, who at the very period of his life, and at his last
gasp, sorroweth not for any thing that he has done, finding himself to have
no more to repent him of his former actions passed.

A blessed and holy abode then for the wise, are these harmless deserts,
which bannish all vice, and give entertainment only unto virtue.

Unto such a place did that godly Saint, Duke William of Aquitaine, withdraw
himself, when he was determined to leave the world, to follow God: to
renounce all vice, to love virtue, to abjure all sin, and to honor pure
Innocence. If only natural passions bring men to be miserable, because the
success of natural things, happens much against our will: what then
contrariwise, can make them more happy, then to be delivered from the same? Of
innumerable troubles does he discharge himself, who retireth himself from
the world, and betaketh him to live in uncouth wildernesses: where the mortal
cares of worldly matters does not trauerse him, nor the continual businesses
of Commonwealths trouble him, nor the fear of any loss disquiet him at all.
That man who of long time before, is prepared for some certain kind of
Exploite, or who long since is resolute, to encounter against the shocke of
Fortune, is far less miserable, A Similie.
then he, who without ever dreaming of any such thing, finds himself (on
the sudden) entangled within her knottie Nets. Even so, he that many years
before, has wisely prepared himself, to entertain Death, calling for it, and
as it were, still marching to meet it, finds the same, when it comes,
nothing cruel at all: where on the other side, he that is filled up to the
very throat, and as I may say, choked with delicious pleasures, suffers
most unspeakable torments, tormenting and vexing of himself with hellish
griefs, when he (never so much as thinking thereof before) hears Death
knocking hard, at the gate of his heart, to seize upon him, and to kill him on
the sudden. And yet, it is not enough for a man to be wise, and virtuous,
unless he learn the skill, how to continue and keep his prudencie and
virtue; for to no end is it to get, A Sentence.
unless we can keep, what we have gotten: the consernation of which, is as
laudable, as the labor to gain it, is commendable.

The only best means for a wise man, never to loose his virtue and wisdom,
is to shun as near as he can, the subject of vice, every occasion of blame,
and all causes of sin, which may very easily be done by him, if he shall give
over, and wind himself out of the subtle snares of the world: As S. Ierom
did, conuersing and keeping company with wild beasts, who are far less
viciously given then men. For the perfection of Glory, consists in the end
of the work, it being no reason at all, that that wiseman should be
commended, who has but begun (as it were) to do well, no more then that
Crafts-man ought to be paid for his labor, who does finish and make perfect,
but the half of the task he took in hand to do. It is a small matter for a
man to be counted for to have been wise, and not to continue the same still;
for so, better were it, (like Socrates,) to have been a fool, and viciously
given at first, and afterward, to prove most grave and virtuous.

Let man then seek the means to continue his prudencie, to nourish his
Wisdom, and to retain still his virtue, and then shall he be called wise
indeed, and a most happy man, in that he has the end of his life, according
unto the beginning. Not any one is (in right) to be praised, but after his
death, because we know not, whether it shall please the Almighty, to continue
his good grace toward him, of which he makes (a show) until his dying day.

So that if a rich Prince has need to demand aid of a poorer then himself,
to assist him, then less occasion has the wise man (who is rightly rich
indeed) to request the succors of poor vicious creatures, to do him any
pleasure. He that needs not any thing to finish the contentment of his life,
has as little cause to crave, beg, or entreat the help of any other
person. The wise man then, who is rich in virtues, contented in mind, and
rightly happy, has no need to seek the company of men, through which, he
can receive no other good, then displeasure and unluckiness, when he has
enjoyed the same. All that time which a man lives, busied in worldly
affairs, of which, the society and company of men is the occasion, he cannot
truly vaunt to have had one small whole day of his life particular, and private
unto himself, his whole time and years being employed to the public
benefit, whilst in himself, he is full of sorrow and grief, despite, and
waywardnes, but no sooner is he let loose from the world, and that he is alone,
without being hindered by any person, living in some odd recluse Desert or
other, but that then his Life, and Time, begin to be his own indeed; for
then may he boldly dispose of the same, according unto his own mind, having
no body to control him, but his own self. What is so precious in this
world, as is our sweet liberty? The little Bird desires rather to die for
hunger abroad, as free, and without the cage, rather then to enjoy every
dainty thing, An Example.
whilst she is enclosed within her hateful prison. Whilst we live amongst men,
we shall not only feel our selves to be forced to do against our own minds,
but which is worse, constrained to submit our selves, unto the unjust
commandments of mighty men, being compelled to offer our selves as
executioners of their most wicked desires.

For if bondage, may in any thing, be termed sweet and tolerable, then must it
be such, as depends upon a just and lawful Master, unto whom reason is in
steed of self-will and desire: whereas to serve and follow, the unjust will of
a wicked Lord and Sovereign, is to make himself more wretched, then condemned
guilty creatures are, whom dying, are suspenced from all their pain. But this
solitary receptacle in these woods, takes away all these ills, remoueth from
us these miseries, hinders us of these misfortunes, and does countercheck,
all these sower disasters. In this wilderness then (to enjoy all these
benefits) do I desire to spend the short remainder of this my life, that when
I am dead, a small piece of ground may serve to shroud my harmless Carkas:
which is the only cause sweet knight, of the refusal of thy gentle offer,
which thou make unto me, to return again into the world. In requital of
which, I beseech the immortal Gods, to send thee all good fortune, and to make
thee as happy and fortunate, toward thy chaste, divine, and fair Iulietta, as
thou thy self would wish: whose rare virtues have served for worthy
subjects, unto every brave spirit of this our age. Live the^ happy with her,
and may the Heavens be propitious unto thee in thy voyage, to the end thou
may return fortunate, like Caster and Pollux, to behold once more those
lights of thine own eyes, and leave the miserable Arcas, to die here most
discontentedly, seeing he is deprived of that sacred Sun, whose beams only,
conserved his languishing life.

This said; the Shepherd kept silence, when Philistell thus replied unto him.
In truth (kind Shepherd) I cannot choose but approve what thou have spoken,
yet are there very few now adays to be found, that will follow thy counsel.
Although I must needs tell thee, that he that deuoteth his years, and life,
unto the service of this common wealth, is more to be commended, then that
virtuous man, who withdraws himself to live privately and alone, without the
company of men: For herein, he takes pains but for himself: his firends,
nor country reaping no commodity by the same. We are not borne, only for our
selves, but as well for our Country, friends, and parents, who for this cause
may challenge a certain interest in us. Cincinalus, and Fabritius, two worthy
Romans, had more respect unto the good of their City, then thou, who being
chosen and commanded to show their best service for the same, most joyfully and
willingly gave over their house of pleasure in the country, with all their
quiet, ease and delights, to follow the dangerous march of tumultuous wars,
taking infinite pains therein, without ceasing.

If every one were of thy humor, what comoditie, profit, or advantage, should
our native soil get, by bringing us forth? good turns don kindly, must be
recompensed with courtesy: which if we cannot do by the help of Fortune,
because we want the means, yet ought we, by our service, to show our
affectionate good wills. For the Murderers, yea the very Homicide, is not so
much to be detested and abhorred, as is the ungrateful wretch.

How rightly and justly may that father complain of his children, who in
steed of doing their duties unto him, and succoring him in his old age, leave
him, being not able to help himself, unto the rage of fortune, and to the
uncharitable times of this hard world? A Similie.
Such children, are by the Law deprived of their inheritance. How much more
then are we obliged unto the deuoire and service of our country? For it is our
first Parent, without whom, neither our predecessors, nor we our selves, could
ever have enjoyed this life. May that child, which may stand in steed to help
his distressed Sire, retire himself apart unto his private pleasures,
forsaking, and absenting himself from him, without his permission and leave? I
think none will say he can. Indeed, I will not deny, but that the living in
solitary places, and in the sweet Air of the wholesome country, is far more
pleasing, more blessed, and more godly, then that of the cities. But yet in
all our actions, we must have this consideration, that a public good, is to be
preferred before a piruate. A Sentence.
For the good we do for the commonwealth, extends unto the benefit of many
persons, it being both godly and immortal: whereas that which we do for our
selves, dies with us, because nothing is found to succeed us, but what ought
or should be bound to leave some good memorial of the same, after we are dead
and gone.

Virtue it self, consists not alone in leaving the field unto vice, and in
withdrawing her self from thence, because she dares not combat with her. But
it is her part, rather patiently and openly to encounter with the same: For
those are properly said to be without courage in virtue, who dare not offer
themselves before vice, and who fly, in what they may, to avoid the fight with
her. But as the Sun is discerned even in the thickest of the clouds, so is
virtue perceived and known, although in the midst of vice. Neither can he be
holden for virtuous, that having no bad subject to try himself, withdraws
himself all alone out of the listes, because virtue, does spring from danger,
and those that wage battle, carry away the prize. And seeing he cannot be
accounted virtuous indeed, but rather faint-hearted, and white-liuered, who for
fear to encounter with vice, does relinquish, both the defense of his own
country, and of truth it self. For it is not enough to say, that a man is
fortunate and contented, because he is so, unto his own self only, seeing he
cannot rightly attain unto that title, until such time as virtue has first
brought him home unto his country, by such happy means. Nor is he worthy the
name of virtuous, who sees vice to call and challenge him unto the Combat, and
yet dares not for his life, to try his valor with her. It is not virtue, but
rather self-love and liking, for one to procure his own proper ease, but when
he forsakes all his pleasures, to come to res^ue and succor his
commonwealth, troubled with viciousnes and disorders, then is it virtue indeed.

Had not Hercules, An Example.
left his own home; and as a Knight Errant, ventured abroad in the world, he
had not left such remembrance of his wonderful valor as he did, making every
Land and Region acquainted with his honorable exploytes. And therefore he
took the best course, searching and seeking out in every place, for the
enemies of his virtues, to the end he might try his force with them, making
himself glorious by their overthrow, rich by their defeit, and as it were
immortal, by their fall and deaths.

The torch which the traveler carries in the night, if he lights not the
same to guide him in his way, does rather hinder him, then help him. Even so,
virtue is found more hurtful in a man, then reverend, and worthy of praise,
if he do not employ the same for the public commodity of all, and for the
foundation and strengthening of his own glory and renown.

A brave man at arms, A Similie.
takes no little pride to be counted valiant, to show his strong limbs, and
warlike body, yet if he fight not with his foe, neither goes about to show
some proof of his valor; he shall not be accounted, neither courageous, nor
valiant. No more shall he, be esteemed as virtuous, who withdraws himself
from the society and fellowship of men, to live privately and alone, without
having once dared to combat with vice, whereby he might give a sign and
testimony of his assured virtue. Cato could have given over the Roman
commonwealth, spoiled and corrupted with vitiousnes, and vilde disorders, An
Example.
if he had would, and might have addicted himself wholly unto his ease. But
he, the more he saw, that it had need of stoutnes, and virtue to resist those
enormities, the more he exposed and thrust himself forward in her quarrel,
animating himself the more resolutely to take her defense upon him, and to lay
all the burden upon his own shoulders. Whereas on the other side, Lucullus
was to be much discommended, who being glutted with voluptuous pleasures, and
possessed of infinite riches, left all the care of his country, to live
without trouble, not so much as once to thrust forth his hand (as it were) to
save the commonwealths vessel, from dangerous Shipwreck.

And if that Soldier, which the unjust law of war, has brought to live as
a slave under the yoke of a strange master, cannot depart from him, without
his permission and love,

Then far less reason have we, to give over the service, which we owe unto
our Native soil, we going about to discharge our selves from the same, at
what time she has most need of our help. For force only binds the Slave,
whereas we are bound, both by Nature and honor, in a more perfect and
indissoluble chain, to stand in her defense.

Has not that Prince just cause to be angry with his Vassell, (nay rather, A
similie.
may he not worthily put him to death) who leaves him in his most extremity,
when he has most greatest and most dangerous affairs, such as concern his
whole Estate and Land, about which, when he should be busied, he gets him
away, and gives him quite over, either for fear least he should be put to too
much labor, and taking of pains, or else because he is loath to hazard his
life, for the safety of his Sovereign? If so, then is he worthy of far
more punishment, that does abandon his Country, when it is in most misery:
For offering our bodies unto her, we offer but the least duty that may be:
seeing we do but discharge us of that debt, which is due unto her, and which,
but for a time, we borrowed.

Of a better mind (O Codrus) were thou, who to serve thy Country, An example.
were content to sacrifice thy self to death, being willing for the good of
thine own Land, not only to loose thy pleasures, and thine Imperial Crown,
but also thy own sweet and Royal self.

So likewise did Themistocles, merit great co^mendations, who thought it better
to dispatch himself, by swallowing down a draught of deadly poison, then to
draw his sword against his native soil. He therefore is not worthy the name
of Honor, who in respect of his own private contentment, and safety,
renounceth and abiureth the troubles of his City, rendering by such bad means,
his virtue without fruit or profit, and without any merit at all.

For most seriously shall he be punished of God, who has not employed his
calling to some good use, which was lent unto him, and as a bad servant, has
hid the same under ground, without profit at all: Inasmuch as he shows
himself unthankful unto God, yea and deserves no goodness at all, if he
shall not make a commodity of that virtue and good gift, which he has
bountifully given unto him, more then unto others. Not unlike unto him that
makes the world laugh at his folly, who being diseased and sick, carries
the remedy of his malady in his hand, without once tasting or taking the same,
unto the benefit of his health.

In old time, such as lived as unprofitable members unto their Commonwealths,
were taxed at a very great Fine, to the end, that if their bodies would do no
service unto their Countries, yet at the least, their purses should supply
the defects of that fault. For there is no reason that we should live, without
bestowing somewhat of our substance, unto the relief of our Commonwealth.

Such then, as for fear of taking too much pains, for the Commonwealth, and
as loath to oppose themselves against the abuses of the same, withdraw
themselves apart, to live to their own selves, are much to be blamed, and are
far wide from being to be called or accounted virtuous. For it is not a
valuable excuse, to say, I cannot do any good service, because I am of no
account, and reckoning. No, no, this is not enough, we must do as much as we
may, to the uttermost of our power: for many little fagots laid together, make
a huge and great Bonfire: At the least, we must seek as much as in us lies,
to quit the debt we owe.

But as such slothful men as these, are to be condemned, so far more, are
some others, to be hated and detested, who stick not, as damned Traitors, to
conspire against the safety of their native soil, raising factions in the
same, consuming them with civil dissentions, and utterly overthrowing them,
with mutinous Seditions. Such vipers as these, are borne to the detriment and
damage of the Commonwealths, coming of the race of Tymon of Athens. These
kind of men being only such, as the further they are off from their
Countries, the more profitable it is for the same.

But amongst many children which a good Father brings up, it cannot be
chosen, but that some one or other of them, must be found to be bad: An example.
In as much as the earth it self, producing many plants, of which, some are
good, and some are badde, does likewise engender such strange and diverse
Natures. Yet as she teaches the Gardner, by skill, to set and graft his best
fruits, in such a season as he may bring them to full maturitie and ripenes,
at their fit time. And they devise how to cut off, and to pluck up by the
roots, such as be ill, and nothing worth. So has she also both ordained
rewards, and glory, for the best, and most virtuous Natures, in recompense of
their worthy and honorable deeds, and sharp and severe punishments, for such
as are badly inclined, to punish them, for such leaude faults as they shall
commit.

Now, as a King, who is to wage battle with a strong and puissant enemy,
has need of all his Forces to gether, valiantly to give him the overthrow; So
that Realm which perceives some of her own proper children, to rise, and to
take Arms against her, seeking (like the sons of Absolon, to destroy their
Father) has great need of all her good and faithful issue, who at such an
extremity as that is, neither may, nor ought to leave her naked and alone,
because as then, such an one does as much hurt, that will not seek to hinder
this conspiracy against her (and yet is of power to do it) as he, that is
the first Author and motive of the same.

This time then, will not suffer thee (my dear Shepherd) to take thine ease
(thus) thou must return again into thine afflicted Country, take thy Fortune
as shall happen, participate with her in her miseries, and sail with her in
the selfsame dangerous voyage.

For those are known to be true friends, that help at a dead lift, A Sentence.
and in greatest extremity, because they do good, without ever hoping for, of
any reward.

Change then thy advise, and like another Camillus, return from thine exile,
to bestow upon thy Country, these thy last deuoires, and deprive not thy
Native soil of thy bones, being to be pitied, as much as great Affrican was:
to the end, that either thou, being buried within the bowels of the same, thou
may leave a glorious remembrance of thy self, when thou shall die: Or else,
that thou offering thy service unto her, thou now bindest her unto thee,
although all the services which we are able to render unto our Country,
cannot bind her unto us, by reason we are far^c more beholding unto her.

Think not as yet, that thou art (as it were, a dead tronk, which is cast into
the grave) because it is unprofitable, and to be put to no good use: yield
unto thy Country what good thou can, and any brave quality thou have, to
stand her in steed, bestow it cheerfully on her. For in giving her that which
is thine own, thou shall deserve as well at her hands, as those who are far
mightier then thy self; unto whom the heavens have given better means to
succor their Countries, then they have unto thee: For every one is discharged,
after he has paid what he does owe, and having performed what he can, to the
utmost of his power. But it is not a sufficient discharge for the bad debtor,
An example.
to say, he has nothing, and yet in the mean time, can find wealth enough to
supply his own need. Change then thy mind, and take thy journey with me, and I
will think my self fortunate, if I may restore thee unto thy Country again,
because of the great want she has of such of her children, as are good,
natural, faithful, and valiant: Amongst which number, I account thee as one
of the chief.

To this speech Arcas was about to reply, when the sound of a most pittious
voice, ouerdrowned his, so that to understand the same, he was hushed and
silent. This voice sighed forth this Sonnet following.

Accursed wretch, and shall my blubbered tears
Nere mollify my Mystris flintie heart?
O no, for these strange heats my body bears
My tears to fire do change, to breed my smart.
Shall I no more behold her beauty bright,
Which wonted was alone, me so to please?
No, no, for now I live withouten light,
Since her I see not, cause of my disease.
In double wise (alas) I find my grief,
Whilst trebble still surmounteth my disgrace:
First, cause I am a Thrall, without relief,
And next, for that I see not her fair face.
Thrice blessed the dead, far happier then my self,
Death makes an end, of all their martyring pain:
But I still toyling, keep on sorrows shelfe,
Then, is my life, the worser of the twain.
Half dead, half live, I languishing do lie,
Under the beauteous eyes of my proud FAIRF:
Whilst I more cruel find my destiny,
Exilde from her, the essence of my care.
Oh what cold passions in strange uncouth wise,
Thy woeful absence breeds, through woes dispences?
Since that thy sight, made smile my weeping eyes,
The loss whereof, depriues me of my senses.
DEAR, what am I? poor I, withouten thee?
But like a coarse, quite void of vital breath:
Accursed Fate, that such a Law should be,
To force men live, against their wills on earth.
Of thousand griefs, the least and smallest cross
A Lover, loving, does in Love endure:
Is worse by ods, then is of life the loss,
Which we by gentle death, (our friend) procure.
Compared unto the passions which I feel,
O happy Fate, that so would end my life,
To rid me of my troubles every deele,
A Cordial wore, and comfort passing rife.
What, shall I not, from these plagues be releasde?
Never, before expired be my life's date:
Of blessings all, it is not, it is not the least,
To die, whom Heavens, (whilsts that the lives) does hate.
O heavens, when will you against me quiet cease,
And for a while take truce to do me spite?
No, no, I see with me you will have no peace,
Yet virtue after storms, does show most bright.
You then do mean, thus still my heart to rack,
On tenters yours, to sound my constancy:
But to what end, do you the same alack,
When I it know, and bear it patiently?
Then cease ye Gods, to grieve me still with plagues,
Ah whither carry you my vexed soul?
But it is no matter: show your utmost rage,
Not you my dame alone, can it control.
As long as she to accept it please, in show
You cannot hau't, nor for you shall it care:
For duty less, to heavens and Gods I owe,
Then to my life's sweet death, my cruel FAIR
He that sung this, was the Shepherd Coridon, whom (as Arcas) wilful
banishment had brought by chance into this Desert, and who calling to mind his
Love, sung this doleful Dittie: which being ended, and perceiving Philistell,
Arcas, and the old man together, he runs strait unto them, and most joyfully
saluteth them, praying them to hear a certain woeful history: of the truth
of which, his own eyes had bin witnesses, in this his traualie. Whereupon they
granted his request, and every one of them taking their places to sit down,
they began to listen unto him most attentively, when the Shepherd spoke as
follows.

The Tragical end of chaste Floretta. Although the Almighty, through his
divine providence, has most prodigally bestowed upon the soul of man, many
fair and goodly perfections, making him capable, to know and understand every
thing; Nevertheless, if there be not some striking motion to awake him, or
some strange accident to prick him forward, he remains oftentimes, as
senseless, without showing any effects, of his power and might at all. For a
horse, although he be by nature, quick, light, and full of life, yet if he be
not spurred forward well, he will neither run orderly, nor yet keep any pace
rightly at all. Now the sharpest spurs of the soul, are Glory, and Love,
being the first deuisers of his actions, and the chiefest causes of all his
enterprises. A brave General or Commander of a field, egged forward with
desire of glory, will with the price of his blood, amidst thousand of dangers,
in despite of all hazards, venture to show a proof and sign of the brauenes
of his mind: A witness whereof, is Themisticles, who was envious of the glory of
Milliades. So likewise, a Lover will make show of a thousand proofs of a
galla^t spirit, devising all the best means he can to bring himself in credit
with his Mistress, to the end he may thereby obtain the sooner his desire.

And of such inuentious, Jupiter is found to be the first inuenter. War then
and Love, are the two most necessary spurs for the mind, although they are
sharp and violent, as a comfortable potion though bitter, to heal the
sickelie body. And when by chance, the spirit of man is touched unto the quick
with these two hot spurs together, the^ is the time when we shall see the same
to discover all her perfectio^s, and worthy qualities at the full. For when the
valiant champions, begin once to love, then do they become most rare and
admirable in their actions, as well, by their valiantnes to get the good will
of their Ladies, as also because they less esteem of their lives, then they
have done heretofore. Of which number were Hercules, Troylus, Achilles, and
infinities of other more. And if the Roman writers speak truly, we find not
any brave caualier without a Lady or Mistress. This being the occasion, that I
have used this little preamble, before I come unto my history, which is a mixed
discourse both of Mars and Venus. For you shall understand, that a certain
Duke of Banier, had (not long since) a most fair and virtuous daughter, but
yet most unfortunate, as most commonly the virtuous are, because they being
envied for the same, always find a number of enemies, to conspire and work
their overthrow. This Princes being of an excellent beauty, her bringing up,
being according unto her birth, and instructed in all convenient qualities, fit
for so noble a Virgin, grew to be famous and admirable in every strange
country.

Such one divine Cassandra was,
The Pearl of Phrigian land:
Her learning such as it did pass,
Whose Sire, it could not understand.
Diverse foreign Princes amazed at the renowned report of this fair Lady,
found themselves taken with a certain great desire to see her: amongst others,
was the King of Danes son, one, who was young, gallant, and courageous, whose
chief delight was in the sweet exercises of love. He being driven by the same
of this peerless Paragon to pass the Seas, and to come unto the Court of her
Father, to see her, was received and entertained according unto the greatness of
his calling, with large testimonies of contentment every way, on the old Kings
side, for that he took it most kindly, that the young Prince vouchsafed in his
own person to come and honor him with the noblenes of his presence.

Having seen this Princess, he judged Fame to be envious, in that she had not
bruited abroad, the half part of her perfections, being of conceit, that all
such rare qualities as ever have bin, were all assembled and met together in
this one body: and that Nature has made this as a superexcellent piece of
work, to bring her self to be admired and wondered at in the eyes of all men.
For the effecting of the same, Thus whilst the Lover burns in this flame,
No beautie's like to that of his fair dame.


This caused him to think, that she was to be courted with some extraordinary
means, and not with any triuiall or usual discretion, required in such
affairs; Because such Maidens as are beauteous, both in body, and in mind,
are not so easily courted and obtained, with such facility as others are: by
reason, a man finds nothing to proceed from them, but what is found to be
grave, prudent, and of great understanding and judgment. In the mean time,
love daily grew more and more in the young Prince, which was the occasion he
imagined the perfections of his Mistress, to increase likewise in her. A
Sentence.
Such is the strange force of Love, as it changes the nature of men's eyes,
making them behold black for white, forcing them oftentimes, to adore such a
one for celestial and divine, which amongst others (generally) is of no
account.

But what marvel is it to see him master the eyes of our body, if he be
able to control our very souls, as he himself best pleases? And herein may
Lovers be compared unto such as walk in the night, who can discern nothing,
but what pleases their torche to make them see. Even so, they esteem nothing
to be fair, but what their Love allows them to think of. So the flame of a
fire, the more it spreads abroad, the more it makes the fuel to burn. And
so the Prince, the more he found his soul to be powered out upon the beauty of
his Lady, the more he still viewed and beheld her, always courting and
devising with her, thinking still that he should find one new perfection or
another in her. Resembling herein right students, who the more they read, the
more they are desirous: because their reading brings them some new
contentment or pleasure, causing them more and more to be ravished with the
admiration of wondering at the bottomless depth of divine Learning. But the young
Damsel, who through some secret and inward motion of her mind, prophesied the
end of this Love to be miserable, although the beginning seemed to be sweet
and goodly, carried herself herein, as the wise husbandman, who commends not
the day overmuch, A Similie.
until he see the evening to be come, especially, when he sees the Sun rise
too timely, and to burn too hot, at the beginning, which made her hardly to
be brought unto any thing, being the cause that moved him to use these
speeches unto her, having found her one day at conuenienient leisure.

Most excellent Princess, the greatest contentme^t that a man can wish for in
this world, is, to see his opinion and conceit, confirmed with experience: and
he that believes, and sees, the effect of his belief to take place,
esteems himself thrice Fortunate, as well of the good conceit he has of his
own sense, as for the pleasure and contentment he finds therein, when he
beholds his soul to be fully assured of that, which he so much, and so
long desired. Amongst the number of which, I may well place my self, esteeming
my fortune most happy, in that I (having seen you), have seen the effect of
my belief, and the full assurance of mine own infallible judgment: The
renown of your rare virtues, has driven me hither, desirous to understand, if
it were true or no: But I find it not so, because it has forgotten to speak
of you, as you have deserved, which parts in you, are far more commendable,
then all the reports that have as yet been made of you. And this is the cause
you ought not to wonder, if I (seeing you far more accomplished every way,
then was bruited unto me) do love, honor, and affect you, as I do; Seeing
that before ever I beheld you, I honored you deeply in my heart. And if the
Gods recompense the pains which mortal men take to visit them, to receive their
Oracles, and do answer them according unto their desires; Then, (dear
Sovereign of my thoughts) I shall desire you, I may not be frustrate of the
hope which brought me hither, which was to be graciously accounted of, by a
fair Princess, like your self, (who being perfect in all good gifts, cannot
I trust) want neither mercy nor mildnes. And if the just prayers of men, are
heard up to the heavens, though they themselves are in condition, base, and
unworthy to offer the same, yet mine, being of an other nature, (in that I
crave nothing but what is lawful and honest, should me thinks, be accepted of
you.

Such demands as proceed from a foolish and indecent Amity, A Sentence.
are to be rejected, as dishonest and beastly: but such as belong unto a
sacred and unspotted Friendship, ought to be accounted of, because without
CHASTE LOVE, both Gods and men quickly perish. The prayer which I most humbly
desire to offer unto you, is to beseech you to entertain me as your faithful
servant, to the end, that if my loyal, constant, and long services, may
deserve any merit, it might please your gracious and most sacred Love, to
find some place for me in the same; who has vowed to make you, and only you,
the Queen of mine own person, Royal Crown and Realm. For this I will be
bold to say, that if you shall grace me so much as to bestow the Title of
servant on me, I will not doubt but to show my self worthy of some reward: in
that I think, An Example.
having once obtained this favor at your hands, nothing can come impossible
unto me. Suffer me (divine Princes, to enjoy so rare a name, which shall be
more pleasing unto me, then to be Prince of Dace: For no Realm, do I value at
so high a rate, as I do your admired beauty.

The Gods (they say) esteem most, of the pure good wills, of men their
creatures, and love them for the same, perceluing themselves to be loyally
served, and faithfully honored by them. Imitate them, I beseech you, for you
can never affect or like any man that loves you, in that deep measure that I
do, which I always will maintain with the loss of my dearest blood, against
all such, as shall make show to love you: And I will dare to avouch, that their
devotion toward you, being far inferior unto mine, does not merit such, or
the like guerdon, as mine of right deserves.

To be brief, I beseech you (good Madam) vouchsafe to accept (as a deed of
gift) the whole person, and the entire possessions and Realms of the Prince of
Dace, who does not account nor imagine, his famous glory, nor his good
fortunes, to depend upon his own valor, or brave exploits, but only on the
faithful service which he has vowed unto you. For far greater honor shall it
be unto him to serve so rare and exquisite a creature as you are, then to
command, and bear sway, over ten thousand nations, were they never so generous.

The young Princes little or nothing moved with these sweet speeches, and yet
somewhat loath and unwilling to anger so great a Prince, whose affection she
found to be wonderful toward her, whose procedings she could not much mislike
of, seeing they did spring from a virtuous and loyal heart: and withal,
perceiving how greatly he was honored by the Duke her father, resolved with her
self (seeing she could not much affect him) to carry her self so wisely, and
to give him so polliticke an answer, as he should scarce tell what to judge of
the same: and that in such sort, as it should neither make him despair, nor
force him to conceive any great good hope at all: which she delivered after
this manner of speech.

My Lord, if my weak and shallow judgment were worthy to take place amongst
such as are learned, and could make difference and distinction in matters of
importance, I should then think, that this word of Perfection, is no way
proper nor convenient unto mortal things: for that which cannot be changed
from his first Essence and Being, his omnipotent power, and almighty
authority (as God himself) is only perfect indeed. But contrariwise, that
which is not certain to rest, or to keep as much as the space of one short
hour, in one and the-selfe same form, because it is subject unto alteration
and change, A Sentence.
it taking after the uncertain course of the Stars, and the chances of this
world, cannot any way be called perfect. Which seeing it is so (I beseech you
Sir, use not this word, proper unto God only) toward her, whose fairest
perfections that she has, is the assured knowledge of her own imperfections.
I am noble Prince too base a creature, and of too small account to be beloved
of you: the Gods love not any thing but what is rare, and worthy of their
friendship.

Princes are Gods here upon the earth, and ought to imitate them, not searching
for any thing, but such (as differing from the vulgar conceit of the common
people) carries in it self some excellent particular grace, and
extraordinary excellency with it. But these worthy qualities wanting in me,
what should move you to cast so great affection and liking upon me, as you
would seem to parswade me you do?

Let me alone I pray you, I pray you let poor Iustinai alone. Let not her
defects be, as a laughing stock unto your youthful years: Nature has made
her wretched enough already, without farther increasing of her miseries, to
make her the table talk, and common laughter.

Besides, say that your tongue did agree with your heart, and that they two did
not differ in affections, you being as willing every way (as you make show of)
to abase your greatness so low, as to love me vnfamedly indeed. Yet what
assurance can you have of her, who has no absolute power over her self, who
is under the subjection and rule of a Father, whose commandment is her will
alone?

A man can never get any benefit of a Servant that has nothing at all of his
own, A Similie.
and whose only good depends upon the pleasure of his Master. Even such is
my case, and so fares it with me, and therefore if you mean to obtain, what
you seem so earnestly to desire, you were best to make suit unto him, who has
interest over me, without whose permission and leave, I neither can, nor ought,
to promise any thing unto you at all.

If this be all (answered the Prince) and that there is no other let, I doubt
not but to have a good issue in the pursuit of this my business I have taken in
hand, (for I assure my self for certain) that my Lord, the Duke your Father,
will never refuse the alliance of my house, nor that we shall not be married
together. But neitheir his consent, neither our alliance, no, nor the marriage
it self, will I account of, unless I have your own good will. For what good
would it be unto me, to enjoy you as my spouse, when you as my mortal enemy
shall mislike the same? The consent of parents, makes not the marriage, but
the amity and liking of both the parties, who are willing that their two
bodies shall be bound in so inseparable a bond together, as death it self, can
scarce sunder them. Only assure me of your liking: for as concerning the
obtaining of your fathers good will, which I already persuade my self of, I
will follow it, as effectually, as speedily. And then will I think my self
the most happiest Prince in the world.

I am not so simple, (answered the Lady) neither so void of discretion, but
that I know that a wise and dutiful daughter, ought to love what her Father is
willing she should like, not being ignorant how faithfully, loyally, and
dearly, a lawful and honest husband is to be accounted of. This is all, I can
as now answer you: If you would crave more of me, you must pardon me. To talk
with my father, you may do as you please: In your business, I will neither
further nor hinder you, you know best what you have to do. And so with your
license, for this time, I will take my leave.

The Princes, being departed from him, he strait went unto her father, with
whom he was so earnest and vehement, in setting forth his amorous passions, as
he promised him his daughter, assuring her unto him before witness. Whereupon
the Danish Prince made all the have he could to be gone, to the end he might
carry these happy tidings unto the King his father, and that he might with
the more convenient speed prepare every thing ready and fit, for so worthy
and so Royal a Marriage.

But cruel fortune (in the end) did lie in wait,
Too soon so fair beginning for to ruinate.
But before he took Shipping, he would needs bestow this Sonnet upon his Lady,
who received the same, more for fear of offending her Father, then for any
pleasure she took in these his new proceedings. And this it was.

Lady (I parting) leave with thee my soul,
Carrying with me, naught but my captive corse:
My captive corse proud that you him control,
Through those fair darts, your eyes, Loves strongest, force
Whilst I shall draw, this aierie vital breath,
I still will keep within me, this strange fire:
Which in the furnace of my heart on earth
My heart does try, my hopes to make more higher.
My soul from death sweet Madame you do keep,
That you may it restore to me again
When at that heavenly harbor we shall meet,
Where our chaste Loves shall querdoned remain:
There shall I need it, for to make him taste,
After so many troubles freede from grief,
That happy joy, which Lovers hearts makes wast
Until thereof they find the right relief.
Then (Sovereign) pray we that some heavenly power,
May hasten for our good, this blessed hour.
The Prince taking his leave of his fair Mistress, delivered these verses
fairly written unto her, who was neither glad nor sad at his departure, as
well for that she was not as yet wounded with the golden darts of that little
blind God, as also, because she feared (I know not what lucklesse end would
chance in this constrained love unto her; yet nevertheless, she resolved to
follow the advice of her father, making account, and that very wisely,
whatsoever should happen, yet should not she be blamed, nor found to be faulty
at all; since she did but that she was commanded by him.

Now the Danish Prince, having only the bare promise of the Duke, without
being able to get any small grant at all of his daughter, leaves the Court of
Bauier, and scowring thorough the Seas with a merry gale of wind, returns
home to Denmark, where the King his Father, with all the Nobles of his Realm,
received him with great joy, they all being marvelous desirous to see their
young Prince married, for the hope they had to see some brave and worthy issue
to proceed from so forward and Princely a Gentleman as he was.

But as great and Noble personages, are the occasions, either of much good, or
of much evil, according unto such proceedings as they take in hand, even so,
marriages oftentimes bring with them, either much happy fortune, or else
exceeding great misery.

There is no so happy an encounter, A Sentence.
as is the chaste, loyal, and sacred marriage of two bodies united together,
with one and the selfsame good will. Neither is there any thing so miserable
and unlucky, as that marriage, where nothing but debate, discord, discention,
and all other mischiefs meet together. For the hatred of a stranger is in
some sort tolerable, because it comes but now and then; but that of the
husband and the wife, is insupportable, because it is contrary unto the nature
of marriage, and is continual and ordinary. This being the reason, that in
many countries, the people rejected and despised marriage: yea even amongst
Christians, and such as were heretics, was it had in no account, they
maintaining the community of wives, and bringing up the children so begotten,
of the common and public charge.

But yet as we must not give over a sick creature, because we perceive in him
an extraordinary feeblenes and weakness throughout his body; even so,
although we find certain defects in marriage, yet ought we not to conclude
against it, or to condemn it for the same. For though we see one corrupt
member in a sound body, yet must we not command to kill the body for the same,
but rather seek how to cure it: And so should we use marriage, being both
sacred and just, which if by chance it has sometimes imperfections, we must
study how to help them, such faults being naturally incident unto all sorts
of creatures.

But leaving this, let us come unto this wished for marriage, which chanced to
be the overthrow, both of the Prince of Denmark, of the Princes of Bauiers,
and many others, they being in no sort blame-worthie at all.

And now the Danish young Lord, having the consent of his Father, and all the
Nobility of his Realm, to go through with this match, and all things being
in a readiness for the entertainment and receiving of his new Bride, he sends
certain of his chief Barrons to bring her home into his country, they being
furnished at all points with six tall ships, richly set out on every side,
not wanting any thing for so honorable a Conuoy.

No sooner were these Lords are (...) Duke of Bauiers Court, but they were most
joyfully received, and most Princery (...), of the Duke, and of his daughter
(though somewhat against her will) whose beauty was such, and so rare, as it
seemed most admirable in the eyes of these strangers, they not a little
commending their Prince, for that he has so well and wisely made his choice.

After they had been feasted, highly to their contentments, the Duke according
to his promise, appoynting his daughter a Royal ship, and endowing her with
many precious Jewels, with rich treasure, and exceeding sumptuous suits of
Princely apparel, delivered her, with her whole Train, unto the Nobles of
Denmark, who (embarking her in her own ship) attending on her, with all the
courtly solemnities that might be: whilst she standing upon the hatches, and
taking her last farewell of her Father, country, and friends, she seemed
rather a Goddess, then an earthly creature.

But O how short of more all worldlings is the glory:
Her fortune is unconstant, and their lives but sorry.
The ships being launced from the shore, the Music sweetly began to sound,
the sky was clear, the weather fair, and the Sea most calm, as they began
to sail, seeming as it were to be ravished with his enchaunting harmony.

But what more wavering did you ever find,
Then Seaish waves, what more fierce or unkind?
This brave company found this to be too true, not a little unto their cost,
for about some two days after their embarking, Eolus opening his hollow caves,
suffered the blustering winds to come abroad, and the Sun hiding his glorious
face, gave place unto tempestious storms, to cover the whole giring vault of
heaven. The angry Seas began to boil, to rise, and like a Sauadge wild Bore,
to set up his bristles, hissing and roaring most terribly, as one disposed to
plague all such, as at that time had too too credulouslie committed themselves
unto his mercy. The whistling winds began afresh to bluster, to rage and take
on, and as it were to be mad for very anger. The azured sky, (clear and
bright a little before) now received down, hail, thunder, and lightning,
being all over eclipsed with a dark and gloomie cloud: no more was now seen
the comfortable day, whilst the unwelcome night brought with him his obscure
frightfulness, desperate danger, his dispairing fear, and iueuitable death,
his cruel amazement, presenting these Tragical shows before the eyes of the
poor distressed passengers.

No sweet Music was now heard, nor no sign of joy or pleasure was amongst
them. Only the Seas and the winds spoke, made a noise, and roared most
horribly, which was the cause that cold fear began as then to take possession
of their souls, and death to seize upon them, whilst salt tears fell down
like swinging showers upon their shaking hands, held up to heaven for mercy.
Most woeful were their cries, most heavy their sobbing and groaning, and most
mournful and pitiful the complaints which they made in this their
extremities.

Their leaking ships were tossed and tumbled here and there, some in one place,
and some in another, as pleased the uncertain winds, not unlike the
conqueror, who deuiseth and separateth his prisoners as he thinks best,
according unto his own mind, some of them were carried unto one strange cost,
and some unto another, every one of them having a contrary fortune, most of
them in the end being drowned, and few or none of them saved, and safely come
to land.

That vessel, in which the poor Princes remained, was by chance cast upon the
cost of Spain. Alas, how were her eyes swollen with tears, her heart broken
with grief, and her very soul galled with sorrow, to see what hard fortune
was happened unto her, and unto all her company and train, (...) ^^^es were all
fallen into the bottom of the Sea, whither she looked (...) follow after,
complaining most heavily of her partial destinies, that had brought her to be
a prey unto the watrie Monsters.

The wearied Mariners, and tired Sailers, had wrought all the means they
could, both by cunning and force, to withstand the rage of this storm, but all
in vain, for the pumpe was not able to deliver forth one quarter of the water
which the billows of the Sea continually beat in: in the end, the winds
drew this ship upon the coasts of Spain (as I said before) and in such a case
as was most dangerous, by reason of the Rocks, that were there all about,
which was the cause (in despite of all the Sailers) it ran upon a hard
shelfe, being with the blow broken, and splitted all in sunder.

A woeful spectacle was this to behold, and as drerie a Tragedy for to report.
What eyes could see this, and not weep? what ears can hear this, and not
tingle? And what tongue can read this doleful story, and not faulter in his
speech?

Then, then, every one cried out for mercy from above, one catching a board,
an other a chest, this one thing, and that, another, and all to save their
lives, their sweet lives, which all do hold so dear: but yet for all that,
all of them in a manner notwithstanding were cast away and perished: only
Iustina, by the grace of God, and assistance of Fortune, happened upon a casket,
in which were her Jewels, which she grasping fast within her arms, the
unmerciful winds, weary of their cruelties, through the help of a great
wave of the Sea, threw her upon the sandy shore; but yet in so miserable
estate, as most pitifuall it ws to behold her: she being pale, heavy, and more
then half dead, through fear and sorrow, insomuch as she moves no more then a
senseless stone, representing the form of a dead coarse, rather then of a
living creature, in which dreadfulnes, was found as yet some small spark of
life.

Thus long time did she live, as one breathless and liuelesse, not being able
to call, or to recover her vital spirits again.

In the end, (though it were first long) she came unto her self, beholding
with a pittious eye, so many drowned coarses to flote upon the water, and so
much costly stuff, and rich treasure, to be cast here and there upon the
shore, and how having somewhat recovered her former senses, lifting up her
moistened eyes, and trembling hands unto heaven, she began thus.

O Sage Roman, that rightly did blame such, who when they might take their
journey by land, will foolishlie commit themselves unto the mercy of the
waters. And thou prudent Philosopher, who were of opinion, that a man sailing
in a boat, had but two fingers (as it were) of life.

Alack alack, too true were your words, I having proved the same, not a
little unto my cost, and misfortune. O God, what vice, what fault, or what
sin has brought me unto this remediless mischief, into which I now see my
self plunged over head and ears? was this my doing? or did I ever go about
to labor, or seek for this unfortunate alliance, which has cost me and my
company so dear? No, no, I rather sought how to resist the same to the
uttermost of my poor power, and to shun and avoid (as much as lay in me) this
fatal and ominous marriage.

Ah vnfortunte children, from whom the respect, and duty they owe unto their
parents, takes away all the power and authority they have, to dispose of
their own persons, as themselves do chiefly covet and desire: my mind did
prognosticate this misfortune unto me, yet could not I avoid it, and as another
unlucky Cassandra, I advertised my self before hand of a mischief to come
unto me, yet would I not give credit unto the same.

Woe is me, woe is me, because I see my self delivered now from one danger,
and for that I am exempt and freed from the malice of the spightfull Seas; Am I
therefore more happy, then these breathless trunkes, which lying before me,
are deprived of life by these unmerciful Surges? No, no, for they by this
means are cleared from all debts: and whereas I am (yet) to pay mine, and that
perhaps with greater miseries, and mischiefs, and after a worse manner far
(by odds) then they have any ways done.

For what can I hope for in this strange Country, where I find my self
comfortles and alone, but either to starve and die for hunger, either to be
dishonored by the rude inhabitants and people, here remaining, or else to be
devoured with the jaws of some one wild beast or another?

Yet Heavens (I pray) to grant me rather that I may satisfy the famlne of
these sauadge monsters, then to be ravished, and to loose mine Honor, it being
the chief and only Jewel which I desire to conserve in this world.

O hapless Ariadne, and yet far more fortunate then I, An example.
for thou being left in an uncouth Island all alone, did doubt nothing but
death, being thoroughly assured, as concerning the preservation of thy
virginity, and good fame; whereas I, alack, fear greatly both the one and the
other.

To whom may I utter my complaints? of whom may I entreat for comfort? whom may
I crave to assist me? and from whom may I purchase to obtain remedy, for my
so great grief, and anguish?

No, I would think my Fortune to be marvelous good, if living hardly upon the
roots and fruit within these woods, I might be sure to keep my Chastity
untainted, and unpolluted: but who can or will assure me of such exceeding
favor? Cruel, and ouercruell Sea, of thee do I complain most of all, in
that thou have cast me upon thy shore, and not drowned me: for this do I
complain of thee more, then for the loss of all my friends, cast away most
cruelly by thine only means alone.

Why did not thou send me to death, as thou did them? and why did I not
take the same course, following them as they did: seeing we were all embarked
in ships alike, and were to pass all unto one place and Country?

Well, well, yet in despite of thee, will I seek to die, comforting my self
with this good, in my last misery, that so doing, my body shall not be a prey,
neither to vicious men, nor to any deformed monster. Nothing doubting at all,
but that some one pitiful man or other, will vouchsafe to bury me after I am
dead, and that the same earth, from which it came, will not stick to accept
and receive it again into her own bowels.

Thus complained the doleful Iustina, dispairing as it were, of all succor, A
Sentence.
hardly persuading her self, and scarcely believing that God would ever
deliver her from this woeful estate, in which she found her self, as then to
be in.

But as his power is far above the capacity of man, so does his succors come
quite contrary unto the hope and conceit of them, and as it were, by an
extraordinary kind of means.

For even then, when the unfortunate Princess, resolved within her self, to
make her self away, behold, she might perceive a young Gentleman to come
toward her, attended on with two servants, whose custom was, to walk
oftentimes unto the Sea side, for his disportand pleasure, his Castle being
seituate, and lying hard by the same, upon the top of an high hill.

No sooner had he cast his eyes upon the sorrowful virgin, but that he
thought presently, she was the hapless remainder of some shipwreck of the Sea,
and the rather, because he saw her environed and compassed round about with
dead coarses; which he perceiving, suddenly began to lament the hard hap of
this dispairing Damsel. And as the brauest and most generous minds are
soonest subject to pity and compassion, he resolved to help and succor her
in what he could.

Coming near unto her, he might perceive her most pitifully to sigh for her
disasters, holding her head between her hands, which leaned upon her lap,
and her dropping eyes, looking down very wistly upon the ground, which was the
cause she saw not the Knight, until he was come right before her.

But now his presence, coming as he did, bred a new combat within her
thoughts, freezing her heart with a novel fear again. For whereas before she
only doubted the cruelty of some ravenous beast: Now seeing so fair and
goodly a young Gentleman by her, she began to apprehend in her mind, the loss
of her Honor, which nevertheless, she resolved to maintain the same, unto
the uttermost of her power, and to plead what she could in her own defense,
before he should seize upon her as his prey. Whereupon with a good courage,
she flingeth her self down at the Noble man's feet, and with an assured
confidence (which through his mild countenance, she persuaded her self of
him, began thus to speak.

If GOD (moved at last, by mine incessant prayers, to be gracious unto me) has
caused thee to come hither, to the intent to succor and help me, I know then,
thou will forbear to dishonor me. But if not, and that thou art here arrived
to work my utter ruin and overthrow; Ah then, I beseech thee, without more
ado, cut off, and shorten this my loathed life.

Whatsoever thou art, An Example.
I beseech thee remember, that the glory of Alexander the great, was greater,
in that he vanquished his own will, preserving untainted and untouched, the
honors of Darius daughters, then in conquering Darius himself. And think
that the chaste continency of Scipio, brought more renown and fame unto him,
then the defeit and overthrow of Hanniball: and that his modest behavior,
purchased him more faithful friends, and seruitours, then the triumphing
Conquest of that huge Africa.

Thus (noble Knight) to vanquish our enemy, is the gift of Fortune, and not
our own proper force, A Sentence.
but to surmount and overcome our own selves, is a glory due unto our selves
alone, and to none other. Because neither Fortune, neither the assistance of
our friends, have any interest or part herein: for only from our selves it
does proceed, and from none else. Whereas contrariwise, if thou please but to
call unto thy mind, thou shall soon find, what blame, dishonor, and disgrace,
the beastly and vicious life of Tarquine of Pacis, of Theseus, and diverse
others, brought them unto: who because they durst presume most cruelly, to
ravish and deflowre illustrious and virtuous Ladies, felt the heavy hand of the
heavens, to inflict most grievous plagues upon them.

So perished Ajax Oillius, plagued most justly, for forcing the sacred
Prophetess Cassandra. For more foul was his fault accounted, and more was he
condemned, for abusing this Virgin, then proud Pyrrhus was thought cruel, in
sacrificing the mild Polixena, upon the tomb of his father Achilles.

I am now thy slave, as Cassandra was his, yet I hope I shall not be so hardly
used, as she was by him, lest the Gods punish thee, as severely as they did
Ajax. I rather persuade my self, that I have met with another Alexander for
chaste contine^cie, and that my hap shall be as fortunate, as was that of
Slutinas, the wife of Darius. But if not, and that I am deceived in mine
expectation, yet at the least, show me the favor, that I may succeed Lucretia
in her fortune, and lend me some weapon or other, with which I may open my
breast, and leave this my life, A Sentence.
which I have so much and so long disliked. For it is not life, but rather
death, for a modest woman to live without good name and fame, seeing we
properly call that life indeed, which never dies at all, and that is Honor.

Then worthy Lord, I commit and commend mine into thy hands, it is for this
only, that I so much entreat and beg, and not for life. For so little do I
account thereof, as I would think it time ill spent, and worse employed, to
demand or desire the same at all.

The Knight hearing this note, wondered at her beauty, and not a little, at her
brave mind, and rare constancy. And so much was he amazed at her excellent
oration, but far more at her virtuous and stout resolution, that in steed of
having her to be his slave and Captive, he found himself to be overcome as her
prisoner, and to be wounded with her sweet countenance, and pleasing
behavior, which was the occasion he replied thus unto her.

Fair Gentlewoman, I know no beast, were it never so sauadge, but would
willingly help and assist you in your misery. And fear you then, that any
man has the power, as much as once to offend you? especially, such as have
taken their oaths, and whose ordinary exercise extends chiefly to conserve
and maintain the Honor, and welfare of all Ladies and Gentlewomen whatsoever?

My condition brings me within the number of such: Heavens only grant, that
my proceedings, and mine endeavors, may by the fruits thereof, testify the
same. And as for your self, you need not doubt of any thing: for I assure
you, you have more power to command me, then Fortune has given me authority
over you. A Sentence.
In what base or abject state soever, virtue encounters and enters, she always
shines bright, the cruelty of Fortune not being able to darken her beams,
nor to oppose her self against her divine cleernesse.

Persuade your self then, not only of your life, but also of your Honor,
which this my hand shall preserve, against all the men in the world, even
until the last drop of blood in my body.

That prisoner that by miracle has escaped out of prison, A Similie.
is not more glad at the meeting of his dearest friends, who are come to
convey him away safe and sure, then this poor Princess was joyful, seeing
her self thoroughly assured of the safety of her Honor: Insomuch as she
resolves to take her Fortune, and to repose her self upon the promise of the
Knight: who sweetly kissing her hand, and helping her up from the ground
gently, with all courteous ceremonies, and dutious respects that might be,
conducteth her, (his attendants following him) unto his Castle, where being
arrived, he delivered, and recommended her, unto his own mother, an aged
Lady, who received and entertained her, with the greatest courtesy and
kindness that might be, as if she had been her daughter.

So, as she found her self to be honored and respected, as greatly, as if she
had been in the Court of her Father, without being as much as once urged, or
demanded, any thing that should be occasion of mislike unto her.

Thus when from Heavens of succor we despair,
We find that then they take for us most care.
So myraculously was Joseph the chaste delivered, so holy Susanna, An Example.
so vertous Judith, and many other such. Neither is it without great reason,
that high Iehoua should come for to assist us, but even then, when we have most
need, when we are in greatest extremity, and when we have wholly retired our
selves, from all expectation of worldly hopes.

For if we should be delivered after a humane manner, and by the hands of men,
(when we are in exceeding great danger) we then should never acknowledge the
puissance and power of GOD, to be so mighty and immortal as it is. Neither
should we be bound unto him as we are, when by his only special grace alone,
he does deliver us from such infinite troubles.

Iustina then, being so starngely freed from all dangers, began by little and
little, to forget her sorrow, being (in time) content to receive some comfort
and consolation, in these her grievous mischaunces, whilst in the mean while,
her fair eyes recovered again their former attractiue force; her color,
beauty, and grace, reviving again in her, as fresh as ever they were before,
having caught as Captive, the heart of her agenerous Host.

Valiant Achilles, so was slave to Brisseis Beauty, fought for her, and became
her servant, with great duty.

By which we find, how profitable Love is unto Slaves and Servants, making
them, An Example.
many times, Lords and Commanders, over their own Masters. And such was
Theseus to Phedra, Paris to Helena, Anthony to Cleopatra, with other more.

All which, shows a prudent kind of recompense in Love, to requite with so
great an advantage, such as Fortune has turned topsie-turuie, and utterly in a
manner overthrown, in giving them authority, to control over such as are
their Sovereigns.

Yet this good which he does, is rather to make himself seem admirable,
excellent, and divine, in his power, then for any good will he bears unto any
man, being for all this, merely ignorant, and stark blind, how to find the
means through which he may become rightly just, and pitiful indeed.

But leaving Iustina for a while, to pluck up her spirits, to take heart at
gras again, and to begin to be as merry as ever she was: we will return to
the young Danish Prince, who had now gotten a certain intelligence, and true
knowledge, of his betrothed Spouses shipwreck on the Seas, and as he thought,
her utter ruin and overthrow. For one of the company of their Ships, escaping
by the benefit of the winds, was driven back upon the coasts of Denmark, by
whom he was thoroughly ascertained, of the casting away of his fair Mistress,
and all her Fleet.

If hope of future things being prolonged and deferred, renders the soul
misery and trouble, how much more then does Despair afflict and torment the
same? The furious assaults whereof, this young Prince but too too well felt;
having lost that which he esteemed most of in this world, and seeing himself
quite frustrate, and void of the only delightful hope of his life:
Oftentimes went he about to embrue his own hands with his dearest blood, if he
bad not been prevented, and persuaded to do otherwise: he being of the mind,
that it was impossible for him to live, after the loss of that, which was the
only occasion of his life. Nor did he grieve alone, for all his Country did
participate with hm in his sorrow: not so much for the death of the Princess,
as for to see the exceeding passions and torments he still endured. For so much
did he take on, and so impatiently did he bear her loss, as not only he
forgot the office and the deuoir of a Prince, but also of an ordinary poor
creature, offering himself through the extremity of his passions, to become
the spoil of Fortune, as the most miserable wretch in the world. For all joy
became irksome unto him, all state and pomp, loathsome and odious, and all
pleasure, displeasant and wearisome; his grief made him forget his condition,
his health, and his welfare.

So faithful Piramus with grief was tossed,
When he had thought his Thisbe fair was lost.
His walks were solitary, his purmenados melancholy, and the savage beasts
of the woods, his only company. How often would he sit roaring, within the
bowels of some hollow Rock or other, and complain him in the shadie deserts
of his too hapless disasters?

How often would he run unto the shore side, looking here and there (like
Ariadnne) to see if the selfsame Ship in which his Lady was embarked, would
appear unto his sight, or no? yet could he see nothing, but the soming surges
of the Sea, and the swelling billows, beating on the banks too and fro. All
the news that he could understand, was the loss of his Mistress, for that was
the general brute that ran for current throughout all the Country. One
while he condemned his ouerrash fondnes (as wanting advise and discretion) in
that, through the same, he had hazarded upon the ungentle waves, so fair and
sweet a Creature, as she was. Another while, he acknowledged and confessed
himself to be the author of her death, and the cause of her destruction.
Whilst this opinion of his, drew whole floods of tears from his eyes,
thousands of sighs from his heart, and millions of heavy complaints from his
soul. Two cruel conceits did always afflict him; the one, was the loss of
his Love; the other, the constant belief, that he had been the occasion of her
utter overthrow.

Commonly we bear with more patience the misfortune which happens vntovs, A
Sentence.
by the despitefull malice of the angry Stars, then we do that, which through
our own default does fall upon us. For the one, we can no way remedy, because
we cannot resist against the heavens: but the other, we imagine, we might by
some devise have prevented, if in due time, we would with discretion have
looked unto the same.

All the Court, as well the highest as lowest, endeavored what they could to
comfort him, but he esteemed that as a double grief, to be persuaded to be
comforted by any, having lost her which was his chiefest comfort. In the end
he devised these doleful Ditties, in which kind of exercise, he spent most
part of his wearisome time.

This then, was the woeful Song, which he used oftentimes to sigh forth, when
he was in his Chamber all alone, or walking amidst the uncouth Forests, or
when he was retired unto some private place, along the solitary Seashore.

Now I have lost the dear light of mine eyes,
What should I do, but end my weary days?
That Lover which with Mistress his does die, A Sentence.

Dies not (Alas) but rather lives always.
So Pyramus and Thysbe, did disliue
Themselves, and lived together like two Doves:
That servant which his Lover does survive,
No faithful Lover by loyalty proves,
So great a loss tears cannot counteruaile,
The rate hereof at so high price is set:
Base minds it fittes (for life) to weep and wail,
That so at length their griefs they may forget.
Not death it self though stung with his sharp sting,
Their loyal hearts can parted make remain:
The One dying, does death to the other bring,
Making but one for to become of twain.
As sweet that happy life of Lovers was,
When the one the other joyfully did prove:
So seems it sweet to them from life to pass,
When they together end their Life and Love.
Love does renew, and so like Phoenix shall
In the Elizian fields, below the earth:
Chaste Amity, not mortal it is at all,
As is our fatal end, and flitting breath.
Ah how can one live in this world of woe, A Sentence.

When he has lost the best part of himself?
Who seeks not after Mistress his to go,
In Friendships Checquer has but little wealth.
Divorce me then from life ye Destinies,
To rid me from this labyrinth of noy:
The FAIREST shall not plain in righfullwise
Of me, since I have lost her, (my chief joy.)
Ay me, I see, Death no remorse will take
On me, whilst slow he hearkneth to my cry:
The Heavens, our plagues the greater for to make,
Will not permit, Death should approach us nie.
Shall I then live in grief, my self to banne?
Even in despite, and against my souls own will:
Alas I must, for I unworthy am
To be, where bides my Lady, freed from ill.
Am I not wretched then, more then the rest,
To cause her death, for whom I ought to have did?
Then why should I imagine me so blessed,
As for to look for comfort at this tide?
No, no, I must (and I deserve to find)
Thousands of crosses, ere I end this life:
Who ill has done, deserves no usage kind, A Sentence.

No gentle death, but direful sorrows rife.
My hope is this, that after thousand plagues,
A lingering death shall seize upon my Coarse:
Whilst thousand griefs throughout my veins shall rage,
The more to punish him without remorse.
Then let none comfort, or once counsel me,
Since this my wound is mortal sans recure:
A mad man never will persuaded be
By reason, what is best for him to endure.
Unhappy I, and trebble cursed my state
Wherein I live, a death ore desperate.
Thus wailed this sad Prince continually, and to say truth, just were his
waylings, and but rightful his complaints, considering how great his loyalty
was; and yet if he loved Iustina well, our Loue-sick Caualier, honored her as
much, if not more: for as he liked her for her beauty, so did he as much
admire her for her virtue.

To seek to obtain her, in hope to carry away that which many a Lover
proposes as a guerdon for his travail and pain which he has taken: he
knew full well that it was in vain, and against his word and promise: and to
espouse and marry her, being altogether ignorant of her birth and estate,
every one knowing in what wretched taking he found her upon the Seashore, all
alone, he durst not, both for fear lest he should do injury unto his
house, from whence he descended, and also, lest he should provoke the just
displeasure of his best friends and nighest kindred, in attempting so rash an
enterprise without their consent.

Thus was he troubled with many doubts, still running in his head, not knowing
what way to take, or which course to resolve upon: No more then the Pilgrim,
who being unskillful in his journey, A comparison.
and coming to a four crosse-path-way, knows not which of them all rightly
to choose.

Mean space, Love got the advantage of him daily, yea, and in that sort, as in
the end, he became absolute master of the Fort, and chief Lord and Conqueror,
over the soul of the poor Gentleman. In so much as he could no longer now
conceal this hidden fire any more.

The burning coal, covered with hot cinders, is more fresh, ardent, and full
of heat, then the fiery flame it self. Very willing and feign was he, to have
bewrayed his sickness, but he knew not to whom, he being not ignorant, that
none could ease him of his pain, but only she, who was the cause thereof, of
whom he looked to reap but small, or no comfort at all.

The day and night was all one with him, for he slept no more when the Moon
gave light, then when the Sun shined: his greatest contentment being, to be
always in the company of his dear Mistress, not remembering how the more he
resorted unto her, the more his heart was inthralled, and caught in the nets
of Loves pleasing servitude and bondage.

The often and dutiful deuoires he always used to do her service, his
stealing glaunces, and pitiful looks he cast upon her beauteous countenance,
and his continual burning sighs, coming like smoakie exhalations from his
breast, were the only secret messengers of his mind unto her.

All which, the Lady well perceived, (although she wisely dissembled the
same) beginning as it were, now to participate with him, in the selfsame
pain, and during in a manner, the selfsame that he did.

But the fear she had, lest this good will should force him to forget his
promise, and his honorable ^arriage unto her, was the cause she very hardly
entertained this kind affection which she bare him.

Yet is it lawful for an honest woman to love, for nothing is more sacred in
the whole world, A Sentence.
then Love: but yet so must they like, as they must seeeke to conserve their
Honors chaste and untainted: such was the love that fair Iustina cast upon
this Noble Spanyard.

But as a subtle Tyrant, having set foot into some place, although at the
first entrance (because he has not as yet planted strongly enough sufficient
forces, to serve his purpose) carries a show of mercy and mildness to every
one where he comes, by which means (at the length) he gets to be
absolute Lord and master over the same: which authority afterward, he
exercises with all kind of cruelties, injustice, and all other horrible
faults that may be. Even so Love, having gained one of the gates of the heart
of the Princess, in the end, made himself chief ruler over all the
Fortress of her fair body.

She now began to take liking unto the sweet looks of the Gentlemen, to praise
and make account of his services, and to lend a listening ear unto his pleasing
speeches: and as a sick person, leaving his bed and chamber, does give
testimony unto every one, of his welfare and recovery, by reason he finds
his stomach again, and can digest his meare well: even so, the delight and
contentment, which she took in the company, and in the behavior of the
Knight, was a sufficient and assured sign of the great good will, and singular
affection which she bare him: yet was her fancy nothing like unto that which
(Alfonso) for so was the Spaniards name, bare unto her: it being of such
strange force, as it not only governed over his health and welfare, but also
it held in subjection his very soul, which most miserably languished: Not
unlike unto such, who having taken a determinatiue kind of poison, consume
away by little and little.

He now thought, that there could be no such rare contentment in this world,
as to enjoy the company of his Goddess, which could not be too dearly
bought, although it should cost him his dearest heart blood. Neither was he of
the rainde he had been before, to make a doubt what she was, or that she was of
a more base or inferior house then himself was of.

Love now had drowned all such doubts in him, he only studied how he might
work the means to be gracious in her sight, and to enjoy her as his lawful
Bedfellow and wife; knowing too too well, that her virtues would oppose
themselves against all other sinister and dishonest means, that should be
attempted against her: but this could he not do, except he took a new
course, neither ever come to be master of his desire, without opening his
mind unto her, in such sort, as he resolved to give his Mistress to understand
of the whole matter at large.

Whereupon, as he was one day walking alone with her, after thousands of sighs
sent forth from his heart, with thousands of pitious loue-lookes, most sweetly
glaunced on her, and with millions of sweet alterations in his mind, his
tongue trembling, and his voice fainting, his countenance and his color
altering and changing, and a cold Fever running through all his bones, doubting
least he should be repulsed with a sharp denial, with a low and faint voice,
he began thus to accost her.

Sweet Charge, for (so she requested him to call her) the assured report of
certain things, amazeth oftentimes the spirit of man very much, but the
experience of the same, gives sufficient testimony, that it is most true.

I speak this unto this end, for that I have heard manieto discourse often of
Love, who have reported infinite strange effects, which he has with great
wonder brought to pass: so that I, for mine own part, have not a little
admired him, in mine inward soul, yet could I never judge rightly thereof,
until experience had acquainted me with an infallible proof, as concerning
the same.

Since which time, I (have found afterward) that he is more wonderful, then I
have been given to understand, there being such a certain thing in Love that
none are able to express, having more divinity in him, then one can imagine,
with which, only such as are strooken with his dart are acquainted withal, and
none else.

And certainly, he may be well called DORDE, and liberal disposer of mortal
men's fortunes, seeing he is able to make such as are Conquerours to yield, and
force masters to become slaves unto their own servants and vassailes.

Besides, he ought by great reason to be termed a God, especially amongst such
as are most wretched and miserable, who being ready, (as it were) to fall into
the pit, are by him helped out, and lifted up, giving them command and power
over their Superiors.

This which I speak is not by roate, nor by hearsay, but only by good
proof, as I my self can best justify. For I find my self vanquished by you,
(fair Gentlewoman) whom envious Fortune had sometime (though most unjustly)
brought into a most pitiful estate.

Then am I your slave, and yet none of these which seek the dishonor of their
Ladies, to satisfy their sensual desires. But such a one I am, as bears
more affection unto your Honor, then love unto your beauty.

Needs must I confess, I love both the one and the other, endeavoring in what
I may, for to conserve them both, wishing to die a thousand times, rather then
suffer the least wrong or injury to be offered unto them. For your virtue do
I love you; and for your beauty do I honor you: for your modesty do I seek
you: and reverence you, for your chastity. If I were found to affect you, but
for one of these good qualities only in you, may be, it were subject, and
likely to fall to ruin and decay: but having so many goodly and sacred
foundations, and all united one unto another, making it to be of an invincible
strength; Methinks it is impossible, that ever this my love should be shaken
or removed from his first place.

The hope of your goods, of your Nobleness of birth, or your riches, are not
occasions of the good liking I have of you, in that I am not acquainted with
any such matters, but only with your Nobleness: I rather hating such
friendships, because they are lost and ended, as soon as possession is taken
of such things, upon which they were founded. I then love you, with a sacred
and chaste kind of love, beseeching you, that I may be recompensed with the
like affection again.

For no woman can any way offer injury unto her reputation and credit, to love
those, that seek to conserve the same: neither shall that love which is
loyal, be ever defrauded of his due, because it has always a greater respect
unto the conservation of that thing which the woman loves chiefly, then to the
pleasure he takes in the fruition and enjoying of her beauty.

But if my spotless amity be of any merit or worth with you, I then most
humbly entreat you, so much to favor me, as to make me acquainted with your
estate, the cause of this your misfortune, your parentage, and house you come
of, and what your inward conceit is of me, to the end I may either live in
assurance of some sweet hope, or ever after pass my time in most wretched and
remediless despair?

The Princess who (already in her conscience) acknowledged her self much
beholding unto the Knight, and who thought him to deserve the better, in that
he loved her with so great consideration and respect, she being sick of the
same malady that he was diseased, and finding the desires of her mind, (to
cope and iump with those of the Gentleman's) they agreeing both in one alike,
with a low, yet a sweet speech, returned him this gracious answer.

Noble Governor, if I had no other assurance of your excellent virtues, then
your faith, which you have most strictly kept, and the respective care you have
always had most reverently of mine Honor, I cannot think, your intention and
meaning, to be otherwise, then most chaste, honest, and laudable every way: For
should you have any other worse pretense toward me, I cannot see what profit
might redound unto you thereby. I confess you may (if you please) I being now
in your power, force my chaste will, but yet, this pleasure should be both
dishonorable, in that you have falsified your faith, and offered violence unto
a silly maiden, who has naught but tears to defend her, and also short and
bootlesse, because this hand should purge and wash clean my body of this
fault, with the loss of his best blood, which I would offer unto mine Honor,
to appease his wrath and anger. As for this sacred amity which you assure me
of, I hold it most dear and agreeable, because it being such as you tell me, I
know it will always love that which I tccount of most chiefly, which is my
reputation and credit, studying, by all possible means to conserve the same, to
the end it may still preserve me alive.

And this is is a true sign, and an infallible testimony of faithful and
loyal Lovers indeed: For if they love their Ladies entirely, then will they
never offer violence, nor seek to wrong that thing which they account of most,
which they esteem of, as precious as their lives, and of which they make
reckoning of, as of their only glory and renowm For as we cannot rightly call
that friendship true love, which a thief makes a show of, to hear unto an
honest man, because it is a color only to rob him of his goods and wealth: A
Similie.
even so, that love is no love, but rather a most disloyal fury, which a man
professes unto a woman, when through the only shadow of the same, he seeks
to take from her, her sole and only treasure, which is, her high priced Honor.

For what law can bind a man to think well of such a Fellon as has stolen
from him all the riches he has, under a counterfaite show that he loved him?
And what Subject can a woman have, to make account of the love of such a man,
who under this counterfaite mask, has reft her of her credit, glory and
reputation.

I can never think, that ever there can be any orderly form of proceedings of
love amongst such persons, and that woman, that does not repute him for her
mortal enemy, that would with violence, seize upon her chastity, is the
only murderer of her own self, yea far worse then he, that kills his
own parents. For what law can bind a man to credit, to affect, and to
entertain friendly, him, that openly seeks to take away his life forcibly
from him? So likewise, who can compel a woman, to love and hold him in
esteem, that seeks by all means he can, the overthrow of her honor?

More reason is it, that the robber by the high way side should die, then the
true man, that stands upon his own defense: And so is it more necessary,
that the woman should rather suffer the enemy of her chastity to perish, then
to conserve him alive, to the utter ruin and destruction of the same: in as
much as the death of one man, is but a loss unto one alone, where the
shipwreck of a woman, is not only hurtful unto her self, but also unto her
whole kindred.

As for mine own part, I will never think, that that man loves me, (what
show soever he carries,) what cunning devises soever he uses, and what signs
of grief soever appears, who has an intention to dispoyle my chastity,
loving more his sensual pleasure, then my good name or fame: but rather
accounting him for my deadliest enemy, will I enforce my self always to
revenge me of his villainous mind toward me, arming in what I can, both heaven
and earth, against him.

I neither mean, nor seek this of you, being already thoroughly persuaded of
the innocence of your soul, and of your chaste, and right honest good will
toward me, which makes me the bolder to bewray my estate and condition unto
you, without concealing any thing that is of importance from you.

Know then (most courteous Knight) I am the unfortunate daughter of Arnolde,
Duke of Bauiere, betrothed by him (but yet without my consent every way) unto
the King of Denmarkes Son, who sending a company of ships for me, as we were
sailing upon the Seas, suddenly a storm happened, which for a long time raged so
cruelly, as in the end, all our fleet was cast away, and I by fortune thrown
upon your shore, in such estate as you found me, whom nevertheless I cannot
much accuse, in that she has brought me to be under your protection, you being
for your fidelity, honesty, courtesy, and continency, which I find in your
virtuous and liberal Spirit, not a little to be commended.

Thus have I discovered mine estate unto you, according unto your desire, and I
conjure you, by all the Gods, that in requital of the same, you will always
remember your promise, and seek to preserve that which you cannot bereave me
of, without loss of my dearest life.

All those, not a little amazed at the solemn discourse of the Princes,
admiring more and more her beauty, her house, and Princely descent, kneeling
down before her, humbly craved pardon for the neglect of honor, which was
due unto her, excusing himself, in that he was ignorant of her quality, and
promising (hereafter) to amend the same (and to have respect unto her)
according unto her Royal degree.

But she, that desired not to be known (for fear least being discourered, she
should be conveyed unto the Prince of Danes, and so by that means forced to
leave the company of the Spanish Knight, whom now she dearly loved (although
she somewhat dissembled the same) most earnestly desired him, not to bewray
what she was unto any man, until she should find a fit time to be known.
Which he most willingly promised, giving her more honor from that time
forward, and using her with greater respect, then he had done before: very
much discondemning his own judgment, in that he could not perceive this Lady
to be nobly descended, seeing so many rich proofs, and apparent signs of the
same, as her courtly demeanure, her rare virtue, her stately Majesty, her
learned discourse, and excellent beauty gave forth sufficient testimony which
every one did admire at.

Mean time, these virtuous Lovers twain, did burn in oneselfe fire,
And languishing, did pine away, for want of their desire.
But alas, no remedy could be found to ease their passions; for the gentleman
knowing the Princes descent to be so great and worthy, durst not as much as
once presume to think, she would vouchsafe to accept him for her husband,
choosing rather to die a thousand times, then to be very troublesome unto her,
or to receive so bitter a pill from her, as a sharp repulse, which he knew he
should never be able to disiest, but only by death. This conceit bred such a
melancholy apprehension in him, as by little and little, he began to languish
away, his blood was dried up, his color gone, and his strength decayed, so as
he seemed rather a dead coarse, ready to be laid in his grave, then a man
likely to live.

This sudden accident troubled every one, all lamenting the misfortune of this
gentle Knight, especially woeful Iustina, who knew her self to be the only
cause of this sorrow, and which was worse, knew no means how to remedy the
same, without disparagement unto her credit; yet in the end, she resolved with
her self, if otherwise then well should happen unto Alphonso, to die for his
sake, so dearly did she love him; who now was grown, to be in such a
pitiful taking, as he could neither rest, sleep, eat nor drink, so as he
was forced (although sore against his will) to keep his loathed bed, where he
thought never to have seen his Mistress more.

A strange thing, Lovers resemble the Basiliske, who desires to see that
within a cristall glass, which is the cause of his own death. So these poor
wretches, covet nothing so much, as the presence of that thing, which does
shorten their lives soonest, thinking themselves most miserable, when they are
deprived of the same. They account no time happy, but when they feel death,
and nothing is more agreeable unto them, then that Subject, which takes away
their life from them. Verily, if the law does most justly condemn such for
wilful murderers, as destroy and make away themselves, then ought Lovers, to
be placed amongst the rank of these her selfe-wild murderers, for their only
folly, hastneth the end of their lives, making them to die before their time.

This poor knight lies grievously sick, without hope of recovery, and
Iustina resolves (for company) to take the like course, she thinking it to be
no reason that she should live joyfully, when her friend should be dead,
through her only occasion. O how bitterly did she curse her cruel fortune,
seeing her self environed with two such violent extremities, either to permit
him to die, whom she loved more then her self, or else to suffer her honor to
be crazed, which she loathed more then death.

In the end she resolved rather to end her days, then to scandalize her good
fame with soul reproach, and to leave the bodies both of her self, and her
friend breathless, then to deface her chastity, which she preferred before
all things else in the world. Having set up her rest thus, she goes to visit
her sickly friend, who seeing her come, began to open his eyes, to move his
body, and to change his color and countenance: which soden alteration, she
presently perceived, by reason she knew better then any other the cause of his
sickness, coming to his bed side, she sits her down by him, and taking him by
the hand, with a soft and pittious voice, she began thus to speak unto him.

What cheer sweet Governor, and how fare you? what will you with this your
sickness, make so many of your good friends ill, who so much love you, and
desire your welfare? If you will not live, for your own sake, at the least
yet, (seek to recover for theirs: for what pleasure or delight can they take,
seeing you brought into this low estate, in which now you are fallen? We ought
more to respect the good of our friends, then our selves, because we are borne
for them: your virtues, your youth, and your valor, are to be profitable unto
your country, kindred and friends, neither can they (as yet) well spare them,
that death should enjoy them.

Live my good Lord, live, and let not your private loss, be a general
hinderance unto all your country: For unhappy is that man, who stands in
steed of a fire to burn his own proper realm. You that have so often
discomfited your enemies, won so many brave victories, and subdued and
brought under so many valiant adversaries, will you suffer your self to be
overcome with a little sickness, which you may (if you so please) easily drive
away from you? Courage man, courage, and like a good Physician heal your
self, and be not the occasion (lest for want of helping your self) it be
thought that you have been a wilful murderer of your own body. A Sentence.
For he may well be termed a murderer of his own life, who shunneth the
means for to conserve the same; and who entertaineth for his friends, the
executioners thereof. Comfort your self the^ I beseech you, and with your
recovery, make your friends recover their former joy again, banishing away
all their sorrow, with your abandoned sickness. And as for my self, I offer
unto you all honest services (as far as honor permits) to help you unto
your health again: which I esteem as dearly of, as mine own life, for the
many courtesies I have received most graciously of you, which I know and
acknowledge so worthy of recompense, as if I thought my life, might buy, and
redeem yours, I would think my self most fortunate to have it bestowed upon
so rare and worthy a Subject. The poor Gentleman, beholding his cruel
mistress, (the only precious Balm for his sickness) with a heavy eye, who
nevertheless Thrice happy thought himself, to see that beauteous face,
Although she had brought him into, so pittious a case.


Clasping her fair and white hand, hard within his, forcing the very walls
themselves to yearne and grieve, at his pittious languishing, with a hollow
voice, interrupted with many sobs and sighs, perceiving death to approach, he
faintly replied thus.

Ah my sweet Charge, what fault have I committed, that you should envy at this
small rest, which I find whilst I am dying? and why do you malice my fortune,
when by death I hope to rid my self from these so hellish torments? Let me I
pray you, depart hence quietly, who deserve not to live, since whilst I lived,
I could not conquer my self. If the brave Caualiere, suffers himself
sometimes to die, for very grief to see himself overcome, and if right
generous minds, think scorn to beg life of the victor, choosing rather to
die, then to live and carry the mark of a vanquished person in their face; how
much more justly then ought he to consent to his own death, and die willingly,
who ouer-charged with ordinary foolish passions, has not been able to
conquer himself?

It is not for me (Madame) to live any longer, seeing I am not of power to
hinder and forbid, loving that, which is the occasion of my death because I
find my self, unworthy to enjoy the same. Yet if it be a less disgrace to
be subdued by a virtuous and gallant Captain of the wars, then by a base
coward and a dastard of no valor, then do I count it a less displeasure unto
me, to die for so worthy and rare a Subject as I do.

Judge then (most gracious Lady) and judge but rightly, how sacred and chaste,
how faithful and firm my love has always been, which forces me rather to
die most wretchedly, then to discover it unto you, for fear of offending your
more then wonderful virtue. But alas, I, not only sacrifice this my life unto
your divine deity, but thousands more would I offer, if I had so many, only
to be reconciled unto you. I have done all that I could, before I came unto
this my last remedy, to take upon me this woeful resolution.

But Soldiers that are beggered, and despair of all hopeful succors, A
Comparison.
are in the end forced (despite of themselves) to yield. So I, seeing my self
void of all health and helps, to what end should I longer prolong my dolorous
life, to lengthen my cares the more? And yet, if it were possible you might be
moved with a solemn protestation, of a just, loyal, and lively affection
borne toward you; or if the misfortune of him (who for fear to offend you,
most willingly abandoneth his life) might touch you with some small drop of
pity; Ah then (Mistress) suffer I beseech you, this wretched carcass of mine,
to be enterred in your presence, to the end, that even unto his Tomb, he may
vaunt to have had your blessed company, who whilst he lived was his only
delight, and clearest light: grace this my unfortunate carcass so much,
unfortunate to die so soon, without having showed any sufficient proof of his
service, nor restored you unto your former happy fortunes. But alas, what good
could it do at all? Seeing (as unworthy to serve you) you have (and yet
justly) cashired him, and refused his unprofitable service.

Therefore was it fittest for him to die, seeing whilst he lived, he was found
as (Non proficiens) in the service of her, unto whom he was endebted for his
life. The only thing I wish for in this world, was but once more to see you,
to the end I might certitifie you of my mind, as (now) I have done: and to
satisfy my weeping eyes, who would have died most unwillingly, if they had not
once beheld your sweet self, before the closing up of their lids: which
request, since I have obtained, to what purpose should I longer breathe?

The trauailer reposeth himself at the end of his journey. A Sentence.
The crafts man gives over, having made an end of his work: and every one
seeks to rest, having finished what they first took in hand. So I, now the
houre-glasse of my life is run out, now I have seen, spoken, and obtained what
I requested so much, why should not I repose my self as well as others, and
quietly go down into my grave in peace? I must sweet Lady, I needs must die,
and bid you heartily farewell. I must die, for grief to want your presence, and
loose your company. But for a mortal disease, no remedy is to be found.
Pardon me, if I speak more boldly then becomes me, and think, that he that
lies on his death bed, has liberty at that time to deliver his mind at full.

Above all, I here protest unto you, and most humbly, (by the name of God, by
your fair virtues, by your Princely descent, by your sacred honor, and by
your rare beauty,) I earnestly entreat you to believe me, that I never
desired any thing more, then the conservation of your chastity: and that I
never so much wished mine own good, as I have always sought to maintain your
renown and glory. Yet before I die, let me entreat you sweet Mistress, to
hear a few verses, which the remembrance of you, and death together, endited
in memorial of your chaste amity: for he dies not at all, who dying, sees
himself Imprinted in the minds of his best friends, most sorrowful for his
departure. And having so said, he called his sad Page unto him, who, being
commanded by him, took his Lute in his hand, and with an excellent sweet
voice, unto a most doleful tune, sung these verses following, before his
weeping Mistress.

O Death, which unto death my griefs do consecrate,
For thanks, my heart blood I will offer up to thee:
Yet dying, I account my self as miserable,
That sooner this to thee I had not power to proffer.
Alas, what gain I longer life for to prolong?
If I am frighted thus as well by day as night?
He shipwreck makes not of his rest, that gently dies,
And his days ending, makes an end of all his griefs.
O God, what does it boot me to adore my FAIR,
Since I unworthy am to serve so rare a beauty?
And yet an honor great it is for me to be loyal,
My hurts their guerdons have in my fidelity,
Then must I die I see, and it is the common course
Of brauest spirits, death (gently) to endure,
Better resolve to die, then always live in woe,
The shipman toils, till he attaines the wished port.
A due fair beauty, which my soul have ravished,
A due, mine eyes shall nere more see thy brightness, pure,
I will entombe with this my sad disastred life,
My heart, my tears, my coarse, in my most faithful Love.
Ay me, I wail too much, A mind magnanimous
Distills not watrie drops, but floods of goarie blood,
And worser is his fault, who does unwilling die,
Then he that from this world does part, with stomach braus,
Courage then, thou my soute, leave this sad sorrows cell
My body; and goerise with those that live below,
Thrice blessed he that dies, his Mistress will to please,
Such end to make, not death, but Glories unto him,
For Country, Parents, Friends, their lives let others spend,
I will bestow mine, for my fair and chastest Friend.
The Page having sung this woeful Dittie, unto a passing mournful note,
wrought so much by his excellent cunning, as the soul of the Princess was
ravished with the same, so that not being able any longer to withhold her self
from weeping, she left her sick Patient, in whose ears (as she was taking
her leave) she softly whispered these few, but yet sweet speeches. Courage
true Servant, and live in hope, expecting from me all the helps that may be, to
recover your grievous sickness, which shall be such, yea, and that in such an
ample manner, as I will endaunger mine own life, to restore you to yours, and
will not stick to loose my self, so I may save you.

Saying so, she went her ways, leaving Alfonso to muse on this matter,
canaussing diverse conceits in his brain. By reason of these last words which
she uttered, he knew not well how to take them, nor how to understand them,
nor scarcely what to make of them. Yet in the mean time, he stayed to see what
effects would follow upon the same, and looked for some good Fortune to happen:
Not unlike unto the criminal, who expects some favor or friendship promised
him by the Judge. And now he begins some what to comfort himself, for that
he perceived some pity in the remorsefull eyes of his relenting Lady, who
being tormented with diverse passions, knew not well what to say, what to do,
or what to resolve upon. The death of her Friend went near her, his loyal and
sincere affection pleaded for some commisseration unto her: Insomuch, as the
exceeding great pains and travel he had taken in her behalf, and the
innumerable courtesies, and infinite kindnesses she had received at his hands,
began to make a breach into her constant breast: so as at the last, do what she
could, she yielded, and became wholly his. On the other side, the fear and
doubt, lest she should do any thing which might be a scandal unto her Honor,
or a blemish unto her invincible chastity, which she had so long, and with so
great admiration kept inviolable and untainted, made her give over, and retire
from her first determination. A Similin.
As we see a floating vessel in the troubled Sea, tossed and tumbled with two
contrary winds, neither forward, nor backward, nor to pass one way, nor
another; Even so fared the mind of this delicate Virgin, who being ouercharged
with many conceits and opinions, knew not on which to resolve. Yet in the end,
Love got the upper hand: For as a flame of fire, feazing upon a dry piece of
wood, covered with green Iuie, glideth ouerth wart the same, and at the last,
burueth into ashes, both the wood and the green leaves together. Even so Love,
entering at the first, by her eyes, descends down lower, and in the end,
runs over all her body, which he boldeth and arresteth as his own goods.

Iustina then, having once more resolved what to do, detemined with her self
to marry her kind Host, but being risen from her bed, a kind of bashful
shame began to break this enterprise, which would never permit, that a modest
Damsel, her own self, should discover her own Love, neither suffer that
the proper tongue of the Princess, should be the trompet of her own shame.
But LOVE, who would in no wise take the foil, and was very ready in aduising
her, how she should dispatch this business, which much troubled her, gave her
counsel to deliver her mind in writing unto her loving Servant, when she
should next go to visit him, and so the shame should remain within the
paper, which is of too pale a color to blush. Whereupon, as she was taking pen
in hand, she called to mind the place from whence she came, and the doubt lest
the Letter coming to light, might be a discredit unto her, which was the cause
she stood in a mummering (as it were) a long time before she began to write,
and still as fast as she endited, she strait-waies crossed it out again with her
pen. Love thinking that bashfulnes could not endite well, and bashfulnes
thinking that Loves penning was as ill. Long stood they disputing about fit
terms to serve the purpose, but in the end, the Princess emboldened through
LOVE, set down her mind in these terms following.

The Princess Letter to her Servant.
IF this manner of writing be of power to bring thee to life again, then know,
it is sufficient to take away mine from me: For in seeking to revive thee, I
cause mine owme Honor to die. But alas, can I see thee still languish (thus)
through mine occasion, and not participate with thee in thy miseries, in the
selfsame fashion? Ah would to God we had exchaunged our Estates, for then
would I presently desire to die as thou do, and wish thee to live as I do,
and so should I not be forced to satisfy thy request, neither should mine
Honor then complain of me, in that I have less respect of that, then of the
safeguard of one man.

The fear lest I should have been counted the murderer of thy life, caused
me to write this Letter unto thee. Neither had I done any thing at all in thy
behalf, but that I have a most assured hope and confidence, that thou
recovering (by my only means, thy former life) wilt be a help and aid unto
me, to teach me how to make away my self by death.

What shall I say more unto thee? thy recovery is my death, and thy life mine
overthrow and ruin. Yet had I rather perish, then thou should miscarry any
way.

Live then, and be well, except thou will kill her whom thou say thou love
with such respect. Or if thou will needs die, yet (at the least) term not
me the destroyer of thy life, seeing I have offered health unto thee. I know
not which I should most desire, either that thou live, or that thou die. If
thou live, I then must needs die. And if thou dyest, I may no longer live.
What good then shall I get, by letting thee have thy life? (Only this, only)
the glory that I have preserved thee from death, the obligation canceld,
wherein I was indebted unto thee, and the break-necke fall of that strong
opinion thou have, that thou dyest for me.

Live then, I entreat thee, and when thou shall be well, GOD I beseech him, if
so it please him, open unto us some honest and just means to unite us
together, in that sacred band, which of two souls makes but one. And this I
do promise thee.

Fare you well.

This Letter being written, there was a new Council called, to consult whether
it should be delivered, or whether committed unto the mercy of the fire. For
in accidences of Love, there is found strange contrarieties every minute of an
hour: as we see in a little while, diverse sorts of winds to arise in the
sky. Yet in the end, Love still prevailed, and so much persuaded, that the
Damsel her self resolved to go and visit the poor patient, and to deliver
the paper into his own hands.

No sooner was she entered the Chamber, but that she began to tremble like a
leaf, when coming toward Alfonso, and courteously saluting him; He force and
courage takes, A similie.
fresh blood comes in his face,
Nor finds he any pain, whilst she is in that place.


That done, she sits her down by him, and although she came with set purpose,
to let the letter fall down upon the bed (for the nonce) that he might take it
up; yet now, she was so ashamed again, as she kept it still in her pocket.
But in the end, after much disquietnes in her mind, after many dicourses of
this, or that, far off from the purpose, and after thousands of conceits, that
ran in her head, the time being come to depart, as she bad him farewell, she
thrust it softly (not being seen of any) into the sick man's hands.

Who then esteems himself most blessed in his glory,
More rich, then he had gainde a huge and great victory.
Nevertheless, as he that desires to understand some good news from his
family, seeing the messenger before him, looking neither joyfully, nor sadly,
knows not well what to guess at the matter, nor whether he should think all
well, or no; So this poor Lover, knew not, whether he had in his hand his
pasport of life or death. O how the souls of Lovers are troubled, when hope
and fear, both at one time, combat within them together.

He doubts that which he dares not doubt, and fears greatly to promise
unto himself, that which he most of all desires. Fear so terriblie
assaulteth him, that it hinders him oftentimes, in assuring himself of his
fear, by reason of the apprehension it has, to find things contrary unto
his desire. For yet it were better always to continue in one, and the
selfsame Fortune, then to change from good unto bad. And commonly Lovers
imagine their business goes worse and worse with them, and that it is not
possible for the Heavens, to establish them and their proceedings in a better
estate.

In the mean while, after many fearful doubts, and doubtful fears, he
opens a little piece of the paper, and then shuts it again, and then he
opens the same the second time, that done, he begins, first to read one
line, then two, and there standing at a stay, dares proceed no further. A
comparison.
Not unlike unto him that by little and little wadeth through a bad passage,
beginning often to pass along, now retiring back, and then resolving to go
through the same.

But as in drinking, we find the taste of the wine, so he in reading, now a
line, and then another, in the end, was assured of all: rejoicing not a
little, to find so many blisfull hopes, to proceed from the reading of this
short Letter. What should I say more? but that he began to comfort himself,
resolving (once more to live) daring to hope for many happy Fortunes to come,
and chasing away all frightfull fears and doubts whatsoever.

I will wonder no more now, if the fair Stratonice, healed the son of
Seleucus, he promising to give her unto him for his wife. For our Knight, A
Similie.
only upon the bare word and promise of his mistress, recovered his health
again, growing to be lustier and stronger then ever he was before.

No sooner came he abroad, but that he remembered to render condign thanks unto
his fair Charge, for abasing her gracious self so low, as to daine to
vouchsafe, so often to take the pains to visit him in his sickness, through
whose gentle pity alone, he confessed to hold his life.

Mean space, Love, like a cunning Soldier, (that fair and softly steals
unto the top of his enemies walls) by little and little had such interest in
these two Lovers, that within a while after, they were solemnly married
together, with all the pomp and ceremonies requisite in such a matter, to the
great contentment, and no little pleasure of them both. But alack, thus was the
marriage of Paris and Helena.

Who filde, with goarie blood, and flaming fire fair Troy,
Whilst as a woeful prey, the Grecians them did stroy.
Thus were they placed upon the top of the turning wheel of unconstant
Fortune, yea, and so surely seated (as they thought) that it was impossible
they could be thrown down from thence: but they considered not, that every
thing being come unto his last and vrmost perfection, does either alter or
decay: because of the ruin, overthrow, loss, misery, and corruption of old
things, such as are novel and new, A Sentence.
take their Essence and beginning, as of an old Phoenix, is engendered a new
one: So as nothing can remain perpetual in this world, seeing the world it
self may not always last, but must one day be changed into another manner of
form then now it is.

Besides, Fortune does not always make choice of mean and base people, for
small praise, and lesser glory, should she have to deal with such: she rather
choosing the most mightiest, most happiest, and most richest persons, to the end
her renown may grow more famous, giving such the overthrow, whose haughty
pride, and high prosperity, seemed to threaten, even the Heavens themselves.

The terrible falls of diverse Emperors, Kings, and Princes, are sufficient
testimomonies, that this is but too true; Of which, some have been thrown
down so low, from the top of her Wheel, as they have never been able to
rise again: which mischaunce has never happened unto the poorer sort, who can
never fall from high, because they are wretched, and are always moulled allow.

But to return where we left, three years (or there-abouts) did our two
Lovers live in all happy contentments that might be, without any alteration at
all; for every one imagined Iustina to be perished in the Sea, in so much, as
there was no more search, nor inquiry made after her, to know what became of
her.

But in the end, as (ill Fortune would have it, there was a certain Ship
cast by Tempest upon the same place, where the Princess before was driven, in
which were two Danes escaped from shipwreck, who seeing her to walk along the
shore, (as was her usual custom) presently knew her, and no sooner were they
returned home unto their Country, but forthwith they informed their Prince of
the whole matter, who (as yet) took it very heavily, and sore languished for
the loss of the Princess.

No sooner was he acquainted with this news, but as one joyful above
measure, he resolved to have her again (although with the loss of his dearest
blood) imagining in his conceit, that she was already his.

For Hellen, so his force did Menelaus try,
Resolu'de herfor to have, or else with grief to die.
Mean space, it happened that our Knight Alfonso was forced to make a voyage
unto the Court of his King, called Ramire. I will leave to your judgment to
guess, how loath he was to depart from her, from whom he could hardly be
absent, without abandoning his own life. But his Honor forced him, (although
sore against his will) to make necessity a virtue, and to show himself
amongst the assembly of diverse brave and valorous Knights, who all followed
immortal Honor, in quest. And now having provided every thing fit for his
journey, kissing his fair wife, he takes his leave, whilst with tears in his
eyes, he promised to return as speedily as might be.

But alack, A Sentence.
it is great folly for a man to give his word or promise to perform any thing,
seeing he is a servant unto the will of the Heavens, who may dispose of him as
they best please. Forwhat assurance can one build upon the faith of a vassaile,
who wholly depends upon the commandment of his Lord, and can do nothing at
all of himself?

No more can men, (who are the slaves of Fortune, the pastime of the Heavens,
and subjects unto mortal miseries) promise of themselves, they not knowing
what the Destinies will decree shall fall upon them.

But now Alfonso being come unto the Court, his friends entertained him with
all Courtly compliments that might be, as his virtues well deserved the same,
each Nobleman saluteth him most kindly, thinking the Court not to be a little
honored with the presence of so brave and valorous a Caualier.

Whilst he thus stayed, attending the pleasure of his King, Behold there
arriueth an Ambassador from the Prince of Denmark, certifying the King of
Spain, that his Lords wife was held as prisoner, in a certain part of his
Realm, desiring his Majesty, to command her to be rendered unto him:
otherwise, not to think ill of him, if he should do his best endeavor for to
recover her again, by force of Arms.

Alfonso being present at this Embassage, (for it was all the Country over,
how he came by his wife) and therefore it was verily supposed, that she was
the same woman which the Prince demanded, (presently replied, saying) that
true it was; that not long since he found a Lady half dead, which the waves
of the Seas (after she had suffered shipwreck) had driven upon the shore,
where he inhabited, and that afterward he married her with her own consent
and free will, she having before assured him, yea, and which is more, taking
her oath upon the holy Evangelists, that she never betrothed, nor promised
herself unto any other man living but himself: Affirming, that as the noble
Gentlewoman, was his true and lawful Spouse, so he was resolved to defend and
keep her, against all such as should go about to take her from him by force:
Vowing to be their death, and utter overthrow, as most wicked enemies unto the
majesty of sacred wedlock.

The King hearing Alfonsoes answer, and judging his reasons to be both just and
tolerable, returned back the Ambassador, with the foresaid speeches, who
delivered them unto his Prince, as soon as he came home.

If the baser sort of people, hardly support or bear any ruiurie, and seek
not to hazard their lives to be revenged for the same: Then I refer it to
your own censures, A Similie.
if this Prince being young in years, of a hot metal by nature, valiant and
hardy of spirit, and withal, wonderfully amorous of the Lady; could endure
patiently, and pocket up the Braua do of a simple Gentleman, seeing no man
whatsoever, can receive a greater injury than that which is offered him as
touching his wife, as well for the love he bears her, which oftentimes
enge^dreth jealousy: as also for the great desire he has to increase his
stock and family. Which was the cause that this youthful Lord, went about
most rashly and unadvisedly to set upon the Spanish King, to begin most
foolishly to proclaim war against him, who quickly would have ouerrunne all
his country, had not the Nobility of Denmark crossed the same: For they very
wisely, judging that they were not able to encounter well so great an enemy,
and that their slender shoulders, were too weak to support so great a burden,
would by no means yield unto his collericke and hasty motion, who although he
saw himself to be forsaken of his own subjects, yet for all that, would he
not give over his first enterprise: determining with himself, to recover his
Mistress again, or else to loose his life. Whereupon he sent another Ambassador
unto the King, to demand license of him (according unto the ancient law of
Arms) that he might combat with him, who detained his spouse so wrongfully
from him, to the end the fortune of war might determine and set down which
of them twain should enjoy her.

The King hearing this motion, entreated Alfonso to condescend thereunto: who
knowing that with his credit he could not refuse it, as willingly accepted
thereof, as the other earnestly did challenge him: which the rather he did,
because he might hereafter quietly enjoy his dear wife, without any more
quarrels. The Denmark Prince, having intelligence that the combat was
granted, determined with himself, to try the utmost of his fortune, although
much against the minds of all his Barrons, and Noblemen. But who can shut up
and enclose virtue, force the waves of the Sea to stand still, A Sentence.
or bridle the stately course of the Sun? Even so, what counsel,
persuasion, or wisdom, are able to withhold love, who being turbulent and
full of rage, resembles the furious mad man, that dasheth his own brains
against the stony wall.

Thus the Prince possessed with the spirit of love, takes in hand the comb at
against the advice of all his Nobles, and having provided every thing fit for
that purpose, arriueth at the Court of the Spanish King, with a gallant troop
attending on him, where he was received according unto his greatness, and as his
worthiness well deserved. Great was the desire that every one had, to see this
Princely Dane, who was famous for his chivalry, he being come so far to try
the combat with his enemy, to revenge him of the injury, which (as he
supposed) was done unto him. Having a day of hearing appointed him by the King,
he forthwith craved audience, declaring openly unto him, the cause of his
coming, reaccounting the equity of his cause, pleading hardly for his right,
and in conclusion, demanded to have Justice. On the other side, Alphonso
discoursing at large in his own defense, shows plainly, what interest he
has in the Lady, protesting (by the permission of his Sovereign) to
maintain this quarrel against all men living, with the peril of his life.

At the last (these two Caualiers) not agreeing) the combat is granted unto
them, but yet with this condition, that the Lady shall be the prize of the
Conqueror: and that the conquered, shall never after make claim unto her. The
day is appointed, the field chosen, their armor provided, and Judges
substituted only for this purpose.

The King having caused many scaffolds to be erected, as well for himself, as
for his own Nobles, and diverse other honorable strangers, great was the
concourse of people that were gathered together, to see the event and issue of
this dangerous battle. And now the time being come, the two Knights presented
themselves before the Judges, who gave them their oath, upon the holy Bible,
that they entered into this combat upon a just cause: that done, they vewed
their armor and weapons, and lastly, conducted them unto the listes; making
proclamation, that upon pain of life, no person whatsoever, should as much as
once presume, either by show, or sign, look or countenance, word or deed, to
favor either the the one, or the other; but to let their valor and fortune
try who shall be conqueror. A Comparison.
As two young Bucks, burning in love of a fair Do, take delight to try their
strength before her, and being both furious, pierce through their bodies and
heads, with their sharp and rough horns. Even so, these two gallant
Champions, longing to encounter, and either of them desirous to enjoy that
precious prize, which armeth the one against the other, being in place where
they may try the utmost of their force, most furiously discharge one against
the other, and as two terrible Thunderclaps, meeting together in a cloud,
break at the crack, and fall both down upon the earth; So these two Knights,
at the first shecke and meeting, tumble both down upon the ground, but their
lances being broken, they draw forth their swords, beginning to charge
themselves a fresh.

As did Achilles once, and Hector valiant stout,
When fore the walls of stately Troy, they fought it out.
The Dane, animated more with fury, then with force, laid on load without
ceasing, flinging forth his fire so furiously, as if his strength had not
failed more then his courage, A Similie.
Alphonso had been vanquished, but a great fire of straw, is quickly
extinguished. In like manner, the blows that despite and rage gives, are
as soon ended. Meane-while, our Spaniard fought coldly, but yet with great
aduisement, never striking, but to the purpose, and so still kept himself in
breath with great advantage. The Prince redoubling his strokes, supposing his
foe was grown feeble, both in force and courage, laid on load, hurting him
upon the left arm. This wound, from which the blood issued apace, the
remembrance of her who was the cause of this war, the presence of the King,
and the flower of Chivalry of all his country, did stir up the Spaniard so
much, as now he would combat no more soberly and with discretion, but as a
desperate Soldier against his deadly enemy, letting drive at him so lustily,
with such quicknes, and such dexterity, as the Dane found he was not a little
deceived in him.

But as he was chasing of him thus, by chance Alphonsoes sword fell out of his
hand, he having nothing now but his dagger to defend himself withal, which
was the reason every one thought as then, that he was but a dead man, his
enemy promising unto himself the victory, the desire of which made him
pursue the Spaniard hotly, who knew not which way to furnish himself of a
Target, nor how to warrantise his honor, and his life, but only by running in
upon the Dane, and so by maine force, to get him down; which devise of his,
the other fearing, looked more warily unto himself, lest he should get within
him, whilst in the mean time, he gave him many a sore wound, which he could
not well escape, because he wanted his weapon. In the end, such was the good
fortune of the Spaniard, that the Dane thinking to run full but at him with
all his force, (which the other avoided by moving his body from that place
lightly) his sword also slipped out of his hand, so as they were now weapond
alike: when coming to handie gripes, and to grappell together, Alphonso proved
to be the stronger of the twain, flinging his enemy down, and giving him so
terrible a knock withal, as both speech and senses failed him. That done, he
unbuckled his head-peece, and setting his poniard to his bare throat, wills
him henceforward to renounce all such claim as he before had laid unto his
Lady and wife, and to acknowledge himself to be vanquished, or else he should
die presently.

But the Prince, choosing rather death, than shame and utter destruction, then
the deprivation of his Mistress, disdained to answer him, looking still when
the other would stabbe him quite through: which nevertheless (as a right Noble
mind) he would not, but leaving the Dane wallowing in his own blood, and sore
bruised with his fall, he comes unto the Judges, demanding of them, if he
had done sufficient to be counted the vanguisher, and to have obtained the
glory of the victory or no. Who much commending him for his clemency, in that
he had so cutreously pardoned his adversary, told him, he had performed his
duty every way: that done, he was conducted unto the place where the King
sat, who highly praised him for his valor, and greatly honoring him for his
virtue, gave him leave to depart his Royal presence. From thence he rode unto
the Court, accompanied with thousands of brave Knights, where with great joy,
the fair Ladies as the custom was, disarmed him, whilst the Chirurgians
provided for the dressing of his wounds: that done, he was had unto his
lodging, keeping his bed, until such time as he recovered: whilst in the mean
space, he was every day visited by all the Barrons and great Lords of the
Realm, who did congratulate with him, for so famous a victory.

Not long after, the Danish Prince was carried out of the field sore wounded,
and well nigh dead for grief and shame; cursing his bad fortune, that he had
not been killed out right: who although he was highly beholding unto Alphonso for
his life, yet did he most tratierously conspire in his mind to murder him one
way or other, suffering himself rather to be transported with base revenge,
then with sage reason, or with honesty of the cause.

So Paris (dastard-like) surp isde with feruile fear,
Swear stout Achilles death, to whom he hate did bear.
But the gallant Spaniard, that meant nothing but well, never suspected any such
treachery, but rather that he had surely bound the Prince his enemy unto him
in good will, seeing he had showed him so great a kindness as to gratify him
with, his life. A Sentence.
For so the right valiant man indeed, judges by his self, that others are
valiant like unto him: and he that is honest, thinks other men to bear as
honest a mind as himself does. But all creatures, are not framed of one kind
of metal, or condition, their passions and desires in loving, being contrary
and diverse, Nature greatly delighting, and making proof of her mightines and
power, by this diversity of humors.

Alphonso being recovered of his late wounds, and very much longing to see his
fair wife, determined to take his journey homewards, of which his mind, the
malicious Dane having an inckling, he takes his leave of the King in most
dutiful manner, making a show as if he would take his journey toward
Denmark, riding a day or two onwards on his way, and then turns back,
poasting toward Alphonsos Castle, where he and his company being disguised,
lay in wait for the Spaniard, not daring for his life to set upon him nigh the
Kings Court, lest his villanre should be descried, and he well punished for the
same.

About some six days after he was gone, Alphonso leaves the Court, highly
commended and much praised of every one, little suspecting any treason, with a
small train following him, when being now within two leagues of his Castle,
behold the ungrateful Dane, and his attendants, to come out of a little wood,
well armed at all points, and to rush suddenly upon Alphonso, who being of an
excellent spirit and courage, carried himself so bravely, as before he caught
his deaths wound, the Prince was turned off from his horse stark dead, upon
the ground, by him, who being the first that set upon him. But in the end,
What can the valiant Hercules, against oremuch force prevail?
Courageous minds will sooner die, then yield themselves, or quail.


So our worthy Spaniard, had rather be killed manfully, then save his life, by
base and ignoble flying away. But after he had fought a long time, having given
unto many their death wounds, and receiving many himself, his enemies still
hemming him in round about, and setting upon him, with a fresh assault; at the
last, he falls down dead from his horse: which the villains perceiving, and
doubting lest they should be followed by the country, they took up the dead
course of their Prince in have, lamenting this hard adventure, and setting
spurs to their horse, away they flew as fast as the wind, being never heard
of after.

Behold here one of Loves fe^sts, of a contrary fashion unto other bankets.
For his first dishes, presented at the table, are pleasant, sweet, and
delightsome; but his last course is bitter, cruel, woeful, bloody, and full
of murder. His chiefest companion is quarrelling Mars, neither does he ever
march, without having with him, either Rage, Fury, or Folly. Mean space,
some of Alphonsos men, who as crauens, retired apart when the skirmish was at
the hottest, seeing their enemies fled, came back again, where all the broile
had bin, longing to know how their Master had sped, whom they found, with a
thousand wounds well nigh bleeding through every part of his body, and lying
amongst the thickest of his enemies, which were slain by his own hand;
whereat they making most pittious moan, began to search, if there were yet any
one spark of life in in him or no; At the last, they having done their best
endeavor to recover him, he began to come a little unto himself again, when
scarce being able to open his eyes, dimd and damd up with death, his soul
ready to flit from hence unto a better world, with a hollow voice, he thratled
forth these few words. My dearest friends, let me entreat you to show me this
favor, it being the last which I will ever hope or look for at your hands, to
convey this my martyred body unto my faithful spouse, to the end I may be so
happy, as once to see her, and to bid her farewell. More would I say, but I am
so faint I cannot. His sorrowful servants yerning for very grief, and
dissoluing themselves into salt tears, cursing now (though too late, their
cowardly running away) carried his dying carcass fair and softly toward his
house.

To Cleopatra so, Mark Anthonies dead coarse
Was brought, which she drew up to her with woeful force.
O what a spectacle, what a tragic present, and what a bitter encounter was
this, for miserable Iustina to meet withal, who not long before, had heard
how happily, and how valiantly, her kind husband had conquered his enemy in
the sight of all Spain, which good news had filled all her spirits, with an
exceeding kind of pleasing joy and comfort.

But alas, what a change and alteration was this from the first matter? Ah how
much more is that misfortune lively, and touches us to the quick, which when
we least think of it, surprizeth us, altogether unexpected (we passing our
time in iollitie and pleasure) then such as we are provided for when it
comes, it being (long) since we looked for the same, and therefore the better
prepared to bear the burden thereof. Mean time, the poor Lady must needs
taste this bitter potion, and bear as well as she can, this terrible clap of
dismal thunder. No sooner had she a sight of this dying coarse, which she
thought to be stark dead, But that she took on as one distraught and quite
out of their wits. O fair hair (before daintily curled) how cruelly were you
then torn? But far fairer face, how were thou bescratched? and thou
beauteous breast, how were thou be bloodied? So great was her anquish, as she
fell down in a sown, upon that body whom she so dearly loved, embracing the
same most tenderly, it being that, which she more accounted of then of any
thing else in the world.

Thrice happy had she bin, and not a little beholding unto death, if (at that
hour) he had bereft her of life: but her fortune was not so good, for she was
compelled to live the longer, because her pain should be the greater. And now
she being come unto her self again, although it was a woeful mirror to behold
his pale and bloodlesse face, and his mangled flesh all to be sprinkled and
washed in his own gore; yet did she not stick to kiss his wan and cold lips,
a thousand times and more, whilst her tears served her in steed of water to
make clean his wounds, to wash away the blood, and to solemnize his drerie
Funeral with the same.

Careless of her health, she lay long time upon the wet ground, whilst she
held the coarse as pitifully in her lap, as the kind nurse does her little
Infant in her arms; neither did she remove her sweet mouth from his, but kept
it still close thereon, desirous to die as he had done. Out alas, alas (cried
she) where am I? who am I? and what do I see? is it possible that I should yet
breath, having lost the only life of my soul? And you mine eyes, are you so
cruel unto my health, that you will abide to behold that which will force you
to be more miserable? and yet mine eyes, my woeful eyes, it is no shame to
behold your best benefactor: look then, on him your fill, although pitiless
death has closed up his sight with an eternal sleep. But thou art dead for
me, (my dear husband) for my cause have thou lost thy life, and for no other.
O wretched journey, and most unhappy that ever thou tookest in hand: yet was
it not death that slew thee. No, no, death durst

But it was I, and even I, it was I, and none but I, and I alone, whom thou
did think to be thy loving wife. Ah sweet, sweet Husband, shall I be
guilty of this fault, by murdering of my self, which I have committed
against thee?

No, no, for my death cannot counteruaile thine. Shall it be said, that I do
live after thee, and survive him who was the only nourisher of my dolorous
life?

Can I abide to be one minute of an hour from thee, who have so much always
desired the company of hapless Iustina?

Ah mine eyes, mine eyes, as much as you showed your selves cheerful, to
delight the heart of my Husband in your Loves: so much, or more, show your
selves full of salt tears, to lament his disaster.

But tears are the common offerings of every woman, at their husbands
buryalls, A Sentence.
and are too base oblations for so worthy and solemn an exequies. Thy
friendship deserves better then so: And more am I obliged unto thee, then to
offer such base trifles. Not my blubbering tears, but my heart blood is due
unto thee. For why should it not be thine, when my very soul is at thy
service?

Ah cruel Honor, why have thou not rendered me again mine Alfonso, in the
selfsame manner, as thou tookest him from me to do thee service? And how
badly have thou requited the pains he has taken, in seeking to preserve thee
fafe and sound? Who ever would have thought I should have seen so horrible a
sight as I see, before I had dyed? and who would have imagined, but that my
prayers which I made continually unto God, to take me out of the world before
my sweet Husband, should not have obtained grace from Heaven?

But come the worst that can come, there shall not be much difference of time
between our deaths, for (so) quickly will we follow one another, that if one
hour cannot cut us off both together, yet (at least) one day shall dispatch
and make us away. But in the mean space, justly may thou complain of me
(my dear Knight) in another world: for that I have been the murderer of thy
life.

But I beseech thee, complain not of that, neither of her, who thinks the
time but miserable, in which she lives exiled and banished from thee. Woe is
me, I have killed, I have slain and murdered that which I loved most upon
the earth: And unto him, which (I know and acknowledge) I was most beholding.

But is this possible? Alack, alack, it is but too true. Black and unlucky
was our marriage, not unlike unto that of Paris and Hellena: the conclusion
whereof, was bloody woe, and sorrowful death. Ah my tongue, can thou yet
talk? and thou my heart, can thou still breathe? and ye mine eyes, are you
not yet blind? Alas, I live not, for the least anguish that I endure, is a
greater hell then death unto me.

And thou partial death, who art not ignorant that my Husband and I were but
one only person, why killing him, have thou not done the like unto me? Or, if
thou then had forgotten the same, why do not thou (now) better remember
thy self? Come then (most welcome death) come I pray, and permit not her to
live, that so much desires to attend on thee.

And yet before I depart, where shall I find eyes sufficient to weep, and
lamentings, bitter enough, to be conformable unto the sorrows of my soul?

Oh that this my humor, changing it self wholly into tears, and drowning me
therewith in it, might be so forth ate, to drown therewith all my torments
also. And alack, what intolerable pangs do I suffer? can any sauadge body
endure the same, and yet not part hence? And can mine eyes view my Spouse give
up his ghost, and not seal up their liddes, with an everlasting slumber?

Loving and lovely bedfellow, as heretofore our affections were loyal, true,
and chaste, so as loyal, sweet, and chaste, shall our entombings be together.
Sweet Husband, as long as thou liuedst, thou never would deprive me of thy
kind and friendly embracings: Ah then, I desire thee, let me not be defrauded
of thy death. For I am not worthy to be called thy wife, if I do not as well
participate of thy bad fortunes, as of thy good, and take a say of thy sour,
as well as I have done of thy sweet: If joy could never divide our fowls, why
should they then be untied by death? And as I heretofore have slept with thee
in the selfsame bed (as our sacred marriage appointed us) so I beseech thee,
deny me not to lie with thee, in the selfsame Tomb that thou do.

Whlist we were living, we were perfitly united together, being dead, we will
be as kindly joined one unto another.

As well shall thou be my husband now thou art dead, as when thou were alive,
neither shall the Destinies themselves hinder me from following thee still, to
assist and help thee, according unto my bounden duty.

But now alas, before I come unto thee, how shall I pay the last remainders of
my Love which I owe thee? By what testimony shall I render sufficient proof of
mine ardent affection toward thee? and what perfect signs shall I show of my
true dolor, as thou too too well deseruest?

In times past, An Example.
those women that loved their husbands best, used to sacrifice themselves unto
the fire, burning their bodies, because they would die with them. And shall I
be less dutiful then those? And what, cannot I? for my Love is more perfect
then theirs was.

But yet before I die, let me kiss those eyes, which (living) ravished my
liberty: those eyes which were of late the cheerful Sun of my soul: those
eyes which once nourished my sad and dulled spirits. So let me touch those
sugared lips, whose lively breath was sometimes the chief comfort of my mind,
and a precious balm to my grief: And thou fair countenance, wherein
sometimes lay all my hopes, whose lovely presence entertained my good Fortune;
Never shall I be satisfied enough in kissing of thee: neither can my mortal
desires be satisfied as they wish.

Ay me; was I borne to murder mine own life? and was I so unlucky in my
birth, that I could not dye, without the loss of that which I held as dear
as mine inward soul?

And thou my soul, how hard is thy trouble? how heavy thy languishing? and
how wretched thy estate, whilst that of mine Espouse lives glorious by me
herein? I can no longer talk, and too long have I prolonged my life, and it
may seem my grief is the less, in that I have had such liberty of speech.
But how?

The Swan sings sweetly at the hour of her death, An example.
then let none wonder though I wail and lament so much, mine end being so
nigh. Dispatch then, miserable Iustina, and perform the last vows, which are
due unto thy Alphonso, to the end thou may hasten the more to follow him.

And therewithal she so often kissed and rekissed him, as his Ghost for a
while once returned again into his body, whilst having heard what pitious
moan she made for him, he strives even in the midst of his death pangs, to
open his closed eyes, and pale mouth, a little to look (once more) upon her,
and to utter these few words unto her.

Ah my dear soul, and deerer then my soul, if it were possible. Why
afflicting thy self thus, do thou add more misery unto my pain? If ever
I have merited any thing at thy hands, then I conjure thee, by that most
faithful amity I have borne thee whilst I lived, forbear to lament or
grieve any more.

And suffer I pray poor Alphonso to die quietly, who accounts himself most
fortunate, in that he sees, he dies in thy good grace and favor.

Most fortunare does he die, having been brought to his end by base treason,
and not through brave valor, having before revenged himself of thy mortal
enemy, my dear and lovely Lady.

Now if I shall find that thou seem to envy at my glory, shall I not then
have reason to complain of thee? to accuse thy friendship, to think hardly
of thy promise, and lastly, to condemn thy most loyal Love?

Alas Iustina, will thou make me so miserable, as I shall hear my self to be
the cause of thy death, now I am dying? Ah do not that injury or wrong unto
him, who has loved thee dearer then the apples of his own eyes.

How dearly, and at what a high price do thou sell to me this last
pleasure which I find in dying before thy presence?

Did thou think Iustina, when thou marriedst me, that thou had wedded
some God or other, that was immortal?

(Dear heart) Death is common and natural to all men, without sparing of any:
A Sentence.
we must all die, at one time or another: and if my days were shortened sooner
then thou wishest, what remedy can thou find against the will of the
Heavens? Then content thy self with my death, without making me die again,
through the unpleasant report of thy overthrow.

Live then, live long and happily, to the end I may die the more pleasingly.
And here I most earnestly pray, desire, and adjure thee, by our former mutual
love, by all our chaste pleasures, by our sacred band of wedlock, and by the
selfsame affection which makes thee so heavy and ioylesse for mine
occasion, seek not to offer any violence unto thy fair self, after I am
dead. Speak (my sweet Charge) will thou give me thy word, as thou have held me
dear, to hold this promise with me?

Ay me, I see thou disdainest to answer me, as unwilling to yield unto this
my last request. Oh most disconsolate, and comfortles my death. And will thou
then (mine only joy) refuse to grant me this my last boon, which I so
earnestly beg of you?

Thou that for my sake art willing to leave this world, and who of late did
please to offer it unto me to save my life; Be not so unkind now, nor offer me
this injury, to refuse me in this point, otherwise, I protest, I will curse my
birth, my cruel Fortune, and the froward Heavens themselves.

Speak then (sweet Spouse) for till then I forbid thee, to touch my dying face
and lips. Ah speak yet at length, and I beseech thee, be content with the
hellish pains which I endure to leese thy company, without aggreuating any
more, my more then endless torments.

Ah cruel Husband, replied the pensive Princess, what offense have I done
thee? what injury have I committed against thee? and how have I wronged the
bands of our sacred marriage, that thou should forbid me thy presence? Where
is now the time, in which thou have so much desired to have me about thee?
Where are those wonderful caresses, those sweet embraces, and those
affectionate kindnesses used unto me of late, that thou should now, thus
reject, condemn, and disdain me? If I am unworthy of thee, then why did
thou accept of me as thy companion and friend? And if I have not merited to
follow thee, then why have thou joined my soul so strictly unto thine?
Think thou I would be thine living, and would not be the same unto thee
after thou were dead?

My dear Lord, remember, that since I first was wedded unto thee, I have
always fulfilled thy commandment, and that I served and obeyed thee, and thy
will in all things. In leiu of which perfect obedience, grant me (once) what
I shall desire of thee. But if thou will not, not only be content to leave me
a most wretched Creature after thy departure, but also to make me more
miserable, wilt not permit me to follow thee, then to render a new proof of my
great affection toward thee, for the great good will I have always had to be
dutiful unto thee, and to satisfy thy dying Spirit at this hour; Behold I
here vow, not to lay any violent hands upon my person, but to attend with
patience, until it shall please the Destinies to call me unto thee from
hence. Then my kind Love, answered the Knight, let me embrace thee once again
cheerfully: and let me kiss thee once more, since thou art so pleasing unto me.

O how much do I acknowledge my self beholding unto thee? how blessed do
thou make my death, and how willingly do I depart from out this world? And
seeing thou have made me this faithful promise, I most humbly beseech thee,
to have always in remembrance poor Alfonso, thy loyal Husband.

Heavens grant, that if thou have a mind to take a second choice, that thou
may happen upon such a one, as may love thee, no worse then I have done. I
feel my speech begins to fail me, and death knocks at my hearts door,
to enter in. Farewell, my fair, sweet, loving, kind, chaste, and loyal wife.

Adieu my heart and life, close up these mine eyes, and this my mouth, which
once was thine: and cause my body to be carried unto his last home, whilst I
receive for vows, thy plaintes: thy tears, for oblations, and thy Faith, for
friendly assurance.

That little land and wealth I have, I wholly bequeath unto thee: I will that
all my goods whatsoever, be thine, although I doubt not, but that thy virtues
are able to purchase thee more great and precious riches. Only bestow a little
piece of ground upon his body, who whilst he lived, was unworthy to enjoy so
gracious a Princess as thy worthy self.

Farewell my good Friends, and faithful Servants, whom I desire and command,
to honor and make account of my dear Lady and wife, as you would of mine
own self, if I were living: whom I know will not be unmindful of you, for
your good services done unto me. And cease you your womanish tears, for not
with effeminate tears, but with shrill Trumpets, and warlike Drums, the
coarses of brave Soldiers are used to be conducted unto their graves. Once
more farewell my sweet Princess. Remember what thou have promised unto me,
and LORD receive my soul into thy heavenly King.

Alas, this word Kingdom, he could not thoroughly pronounce. Death with one
stroke, cutting off his voice and his life, both together at once. But why hold
I you so long with this Tragical discourse? or what should I report unto you
the unspeakable sorrows of dispairing Iustina, when she saw her noble
husband give up the last gasp in her arms?

I will now be brief. After the Princess found Alfonso dead, she remembered
her plighted vow unto him, and therefore sought neither venim, sword, nor ame
other extremity to end her days; but having sweetly embalmed his carcass,
and placing it in a monument of Crystal, because she might the better behold
it; she never departed from the same, until that after a certain time, what
with hunger, sorrow and grief, she finished her weary and loathed life. Her
fasting and weeping, had so changed her, as her nearest servants and
acquaintance scarce knew her.

Now had she (no more) that sweet face, for the beauty of which, so many
Princes had so often combatted and fought, nor were her eyes such, as had
ravished so many souls, neither was her hair, that passing golden hair,
whose tresses had served for nets, to catch and entrap the Courtliest and
greatest hearts that lived: And to be brief, she was no more that fair and
lovely Iustina: who indeed had no need of such comely favor, when her only
desire was to die.

Her face and cheeks were now become pale and yeallow, her eyes dark, and
sunk deep into her head, her hair foul, unkempt, and almost all torn off,
her breasts dry, and lean, her arms shrunk and brawnfallen, her hands
without flesh, or whiteness, and finally, she resembled the very portraiture
of a Ghost, or rather of Death it self.

In this misery did she live some few months, when at the last, perceiving
the date of her life to be expired, she came unto the Tomb, where taking the
embalmed carcass up, and embracing it in her arms, she used these pitiful
speeches unto it, as follows.

O sole remainder of all my good Fortunes, O only chief treasure of all my
goods, O sole pawn, furuiuing of my true Love, the only comfort I have in
these my languishing griefs, and the goodly body, which sometimes revived the
fair soul inhabiting therein, which now lives in eternal glory for ever.

To thee I appeal, as the only thing which I most love, honor, and praise,
praying thee to assist me at mine end, and to bear witness with me, that I
have kept promise most faithfully. As thou (when thou did die) were
willing that I should not malice or annoy thee at thy death; So let not mine,
(I pray thee) be any way displeasing unto thee.

All whatsoever thou did crave, did I yield and accord unto: then blame me
not, if having performed what I protested, I come unto the Heavens to find
thee. In thy life time I have lived, for fear to displease, but now thou
live no longer (fair and beautiful Coarse) and that I have taken order for
thy buryall, what think thou should keep me here any longer? It is
reasonable I should die, seeing I can now no longer live, and that I go to
make a search for thee (most chaste soul) in what place soever thou art.

Die then (sorrowful Iustina) and (leaving of to lament,) change these thy
reares, thy miseries, and cares, into this eternal repose, where rests thy
husband quietly. I have lived but too too long, and my miserable life, has bin
too irksome unto me. It is (now) more then high time, to make an end thereof
(and making an end of my self) to remove my self unto him, who whilst he
lived, had command over my soul. Thrice blessed Instina, to be quit and rid
of these unspeakable torments, to live in everlasting quietness, which is the
only hope of the miserable. Let us go then, let us go, and I humbly beseech
that great God (who as a just Judge of the innocence of our hearts, knows
the secrets of our thoughts) to open that sacred gate unto me, which he has
promised unto his faithful children. This said, she kissed the dead coarse of
her husband again, giving charge unto her Gentlewoman, to enterre and bury
her body hard by his side: that done, she lays her self along by the same,
which she still embraces: and having dressed her head, and apparelled her
self for the same purpose, she rendied up her spirit: A spirit, right
meritorious, and worthy of eternal glory. Her body according unto her last
will, was buried in the self same sepulcre which she had caused to be made for
her husband before.

Herewith Coribant held his peace, being hindered to speak any more, by reason
of his tears, tears which berest the others of their voices, who without
being able to discourse any more one with another, for that time departed,
every one to their senerall homes, so to pass away the dark and gloomie
night. As they were walking fair and softly onwardsvpon their way, Arcas heard
one sing this song following.

Love fare thouwell, live will I now,
Quiet amongst, the green-wood bow.
Ill betide him that love seeks,
He shall live, but with lean cheeks:
He that fondly falls in Jove,
A slave (still) to grief shall prove.
Love fare thou well, live will I now,
Quiet amongst the greene-wood bow.
What an Ass, and fool is he,
That may serve, and will go free:
In worlds not a wench so fair,
But I for my life more care.
Love fare thou well, live will I now,
Quiet amongst the etc.
I like not these Dames so smooth,
As would have men court and lous,
For as constant I them find,
As the Sea is, or the wind.
Love fare thou well, live etc.
Once I loved one that was kind,
But she did what pleased her mind:
Better it is nere to be borne,
Then live, as another scorn.
Love fare thou well, live well, etc.
Then Love, thee I do defy,
I hate thy bad dealing I,
He is a fool that lives in pain,
A toy so small for to gain.
Love fare thou well, live will I now,
Quiet amongst the greene-woodbow.
After the Shepherd had made an end of this merry Sonnet, another came unto
them, demanding if some of the company could expound his Riddle, which he
proposed in this manner.

Nor life, nor virtue have I, lest I die,
I borrow of my buried trunk chief strength,
Though I am dead, ore time yet triumph I,
Ore time, that cuerie thing consumes at length,
What Is dead, disdained is, yet all afford
Me honor, and their chief preseruers name,
All men may rightly call me their best Lord,
Since they (Sans me) the world cannot maintain,
Yet though so much good does from me proceed,
These thanklesse worldlings do not stick at all
To cut me off in Summer with great speed,
And beat me into little powder small,
Yet had I rather cruelly thus perish,
Then live a longer space, for many time
The season does but badly often me chearish,
Offering great hurt and wrong to virtue mine.
This Riddle was interpreted to be corn, which being sown in the earth, and
seeming dead, casts forth a green blade, and in time grows to be ripe, in
despite of all storms and foul weather whatsoever; It nourishes mankind, and
therefore is honored of them as a father, not forbearing for all that, to
reap him in Harvest, to thresh and grind him, and so to make flower thereof,
which he had rather should be done, then to be over long kept, for many times
it grows mustie lying in garners.

This Riddle being thus expounded, the harmless Shepherds retired themselves
for that night, as also did melancholy Arcas. Where we will leave them until
the next morning.

The end of the first days meeting of Iuliettaes Shepherds.
THE SECOND DAYS MEETING, OF THE FIFTH BOOK OF IVLIETTAES SHEPHERDS.
WHAT Frostie Night (never so bitter) were of power sufficient to cool the
outrageous and burning heat of the Shepherd Arcas? What obscure horror, could
bring a sleep, the watchful thoughts of his waking evils? And what deep
slumber, take from him the continual remembrance of his divine Diana? his
spirit being always troubled, as well in the night, as in the day, and
therefore far more miserable then the brute beasts. For whereas they repose
themselves (sometimes) from their travel, he (always) labored, and was
(still) in pain, he plainly perceived the day beginning to lighten the hollow
giering vault of heaven, he viewed the glorious Sun, to gild and adorn the
Roseall sky: and he beheld beauteous Anrora, to weep drerie tears, for the
death of her dear swarthie child; yet all these brought no comfort unto his
griefs. For such minds as are ouer-cruellie afflicted with cares, A Sentence.
are neither su^ iect to the coolie rest of the night, nor take pleasure at the
glistering lamp, of All-seeing Phoebus. because they receive no contentment,
neither in the one, nor in the other.

Scarce did the break of day appear, when this Swain arises from his bed,
running up and down the Desert, and searching for some fit place, where he
might bewail his sorrows at the full. At length he enters into a huge deep
Cave, environed round about with sharp brambles, and pricking briars, able to
terrify and affright any, excepting only such as seek for death, whom
wretched and woeful Caitiues fear not at all, because every hour they feel
far worse plagues then death it self: and for that it is rather a pleasure
then a torment unto them, to exchange their evil for good, and to leave a
sour and severe Master, to follow and serve one that is mild, and debonaire.

Arcas then being gotten into the bottom of this darkesome Dungion, after he
had for a certain time been mute, and as one fallen into a sound, in the end,
breaking as it were out of a dead sleep, he began thus to complain. Ay me,
Alas! What might I think to be the reason, or cause of the misery and
unhappiness of man? Is it the heavens, that jealous of their good fortune,
scourges them with so great cruelties? Or is it their sins, which provoke
the anger of God, forcing him to stretch out his threatening hand against them?
No doubt it is this last, for sin only and wickedness, first opened the gate
to death, that he might come in amongst us, and so overthrow us. It is for the
punishment of such offenses as we commit against the holy One, that we are
persecuted with pestilence, famine, and with war. So was David plagued for
his fault; and Sodom and Gomorrh^ with fire overthrown. So were the Ninevites
threatened: and so was Ezechias admonished to repent. O thrice happy the Godly,
who prosper like the fruitful Laurel, and possess in peace, that land, which
is taken away from the wicked with tempestious lightning and thunder. For so
was the good Abraham blessed, and so (after his imprisonment) was the righteous
Joseph, with many more besides.

But contrariwise, most unfortunate are the wretched wicked ones, because they
grudge and repine, in that they suffer for the faults they have committed,
whilst they are stung with Serpents from the heavens: as were the Hebrews
heretofore, when they began to murmr in the wilderness. Beware how thou
repinest against the Almighty Ichoua. And says the (wise man) for no good nor
profit, can come thereof. We cannot then term the heavens, to be the authors
of our evils; but it is the only transgressing of the divine commandments;
which we cannot truly say, be has given unto us, to break them, or that he
has given us so hard a law, as that it is impossible for us to sulfill the
same. For it should be a most rediculous and vain part of a Prince, to
establish and appoint such ordinances unto his Subjects, as they cannot any way
perform, as to defelid, or fo^^id them to grow, to wax taller, or bigger, or
other such fond and unreasonable impossibilities as these be.

And therefore, O how gentle and easy, are the commandment, of God, be
himself affirming the same, when he terms his yoke easy and ^ight, and his
burden little and gentle to bear. For, Is it not as easy a thing for a man
to do good as evil? when as in doing good, he enjoys the happy and blessed
content of the quietness of his mind, without being troubled, either with the
fear of the laws, or the doubt of reproach or slander.

Besides, he does not dread death, for he withdraws himself from other
hazards, whilst he meditateth upon the same; whereas Thieves and Murderers, in
robbing and killing, every hour encounter therewith, before they are aware.
But say it happens unto them, yet do they receive it most meekely: for sweet
and blessed is the death of the just, that die in the Lord; where, that of the
wicked is hateful and abhommable. Curtious then and gentle, are the
commandments of the highest, which his Apostle Saint John approves in these
words; Keep his commandments, and you shall find them, to be neither
troublesome, hard, nor difficult to observe. They chase away, hot boiling
Avarice, which burns men with her uncharitable coldness; they banish all
mortal ambition, which wears away the years of man before his time is come;
they take from them, all murder and robbing, which stifleth the neck of the
wicked with an infamous cord; they smother and kill adultery, which lays
hold as well upon the health of man, as on his honor: and to conclude, they
extirpe and root out, all those vices which are deadly enemies, as well to the
body as to the soul. By which we see, his laws are easy and sweet, yea, and
most profitable and necessary for the health and contentment of mankind; which
was the cause, the other Apostle Saint Paul, calls the commandment of the
Eternal Iehona, a godly, just, and sacred commandment; it being the
preserver of Justice, the purity of our lives, and the very essence (as it
were) of all equity, peace, and goodness; For what crosses overthwart the
souls of the godly, who delight in no other thing, then in the law of the Lord?

And what great and grievous courses do trouble and disturb the consciences
of the wicked, who take a pride (as it were) as did Remus sometime in leaping
over the walls of Rome) to exceed and go beyond the bounds of the divine
ordinances of God? which, because they are not hard to be accomplished, are not
the cause of our sins, and so by consequence, are not the occasions of our
miseries: For we may live well, if we will, and living well, (and walking
rightly in the commandments of God) we may taste of all happiness, without
once, as much as feeling the stroke of his heau^e hand to fall upon us. Then
let us choose the best, and leave the worst, and so shall we be free from
wretchedness: where, if we make election of vice, and refuse virtue, we must not
think it strange, if God does justly punish us for the same: for even humane
Justice, which is but a shadow, and a figure of the divine, corrects, and
awardeth death unto such as be malefactors and wicked, violating their laws
most injuriously.

After the same sort did God speak unto Caine, saying; If thou do well,
thou shall be recompensed for thy well doing: and if thou do ill, thy sin
shall be presently knocking at thy gate: that is to say, the punishment thereof
shall not stay long, but it shall seize upon thee, for doing so badly. But
under thee, shall the desire of sin be subject, and over it, shall thou
command; So that, if ve be scourged and plagued, we must impute it unto our
own faults; or we may auovd and leave to sin so wittingly (as we do) if we
will, and so our plagues will cease; but by reason we give over our selves too
too licenciously unto the same, and like beastly Swine wallow still in this
filthy puddle, we are afflicted by the heaven from above.

Thrice blessed (then) is he, that has not transgressed the sacred laws of
GOD: A Sentence.
which nevertheless, he has not done (thinking thereby to reap reward, for his
so well doing) for had he done otherwise, he had been tortured and afflicted
with many punishments. That famous Iosuah, one of the nine Worthies, followed
this advise, when he spoke thus unto the children of Israel: Worship such
Gods, as you list your selves, it lies in you, and is in your own power and
authority, to sacrifice unto such as you please: As for my self, and all my
family, we will acknowledge none for true God, but the HOLY GOD, of our
forefathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

Thus you see, it is in us to do good or evil: as it is in the power of the
Trauellerto follow what company he pleases, of all the rest he meets,
whilst he goes onwards on his Journey. If we shall worship the true God, as
Iosuah did, we shall live happily, as did our predecessors before us: but if
we shall come to be servants unto Idols, then shall our offenses open the
door, and make way for our afflictions and miseries, bringing us (at last)
unto utter destruction for ever. For our God, has presented unto us, both good
and evil. Yet does he say, Choose the good, (only) that thou and thine may
live in rest and quietness. Which was the reason that our blessed Sautour
forgave the sins of Mary Magdalaine the repentant, for that (said he) she
chose the better part, which could never be taken from her.

That servant that does ill against the consent of his master, can he justly
complain, An example.
when he is punished for his faults? If so, why then, (seeing we make choice
of sin and iniquity, and God scourges us worthily for the same) do we
murmr and repine against him? when we our selves, and not he, are the authors
of our own misfortunes, in that we commit those sins, which are the first
motives and occasions thereof? God, who in his own nature, is incapable of sin,
and who can no way receive the accident of vice, cannot be the author of our
offenses: otherwise, he himself should sin, (which to think, were mere
blasphemy) and sinning so, he should become the sinner, and not we, who
should be, but only the simple executioners of his faults: Being a sinner, he
could not be God, no more then pure white, can become coal black, because God
and sin are so much contrary and different, as they can never be in one self
subject, nor one agree, or like of the other. Again, if God should force me to
commit sin, A Similie.
how then could he justly punish me? For can that Lord rightly punish his
slave, who by his commandment has don that fault, for which he is corrected?
In like manner, what just color can God have, to inflict punishment upon us,
if he himself has not only persuaded us unto the same, but also has
constrained and urged us (as it were) perforce to commit this sin, for which he
does plague us. Besides, God has not created man to be damned, or lost, hell
(being ordained only for devils) neither will he the death of a sinner, but
rather that he live and repent. For if you your selves will (says the Prophet
Esaias) harken unto my voice you shall eat the fruits of the earth in peace,
without being touched with any kind of misery. It (then) lies in us, to be
fortunate and happy, in abstaining and forbearing from sin: for our
forefathers were blessed, and lived in all tranquillity, and peaceful rest
of the spirit, as long as thy abstained from doing what was ill: but when they
took once a contrary course, then were they overthrown and plunged in an
infinity of miseries: As the Jews were slain, ransomed, and carried away (as
captives) by the Heathen and Pagan Kings, when they had provoked God against
them, by reason of the hainousnes of their faults, and had purchased his just
indignation and displeasure against them. It is our bad and leaud life, and not
God, that brings us into so many miseries. Who (as the Psalmist says) is a
God that hates iniquity, a God that has not appointed death for man, and so
merciful, as he takes no delight in his utter ruin and everlasting
damnation. For with his own proper mouth, thus did he speak unto the Jews.

O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thee together, as
the hen does her chickens under hernings, but thou would not? And as by
our wicked behavior, we hasten the wrath of God against us, so by doing well,
we many times hinder and assuage his anger and his plagues, which he menaceth
and threatens to send upon us. So did the Ninevites, by their hearty prayers
and unfeigned repentance, change and alter the divine will and purpose of God,
breaking off that which he had meant to have done, which as it is
comminatorie, so it is not (always) necessary, it should be put in practice.

So the good King Ezechias, by his contrite penitence, and by his earnest
supplications, hindered the Almighties determination, which threatened him, that
he should die within 15. days after, prolonging and lengthening his life, whole
15. years more. And so Moses (oftentimes) through his earnest entreaty,
withdrew the predestination of God, which was then resorute, and rosolued to
suffer the Jews to perish, being then in the wilderness, and murmuring against
his holy Name. But the Apostle says, If we be not of the number of the Elect
and chosen of God, yet let us behave our selves so, as we may be of the same:
meaning by these his words, that if we list, we may save our selves. Then ought
I, to fret and fume against the stars, or murmr and repine against the
Heavens themselves? No, God forbid, since my faults and not they, have been the
authors of mine own misfortunes.

Had I not sinned, I had not felt the least touch of these troubles, that thus
torment me: I had not been so wretched as to have been despoiled of that
little mercy and grace, which I had of the Almighty: I had not been driven
from mine own house, banished from my Country, exiled from the presence of my
dearest friends, nor scourged with the sharp whip of extreme want and poverty:
Neither had this my predestined disaster (which still follows me, unto mine
undoing) been able to have crossed me in all my designs, as it does (even at
this hour) and will do continually. For alas, how little would I esteem of
my losses, and of mine exile (since he cannot be termed a Bandite) who is
welcome amongst the wiser sort, and who (yet) has some friends left him) were
it not for this my hard Destiny, which as a ghastly Fury, does still haunt
and follow me. But I see, I see, (as in a glass) my misery to be such, as it
will never be separated from me: and I perceive but too well, that Destinies
may be foreseeue, but never can be prevented.

As the Shepherd was (thus) pitifully lamenting unto himself, behold, he
might perceive two terrible roaring Lions, to come directly toward the Cave,
wherein he had gotten himself, it being the ordinary den, wherein they used
to harbor, which when he saw, he quickly started up, drawing forth his sword,
with intention to defend himself, and to make them buy his flesh dearly: but
they without so much (as once) offering to hurt him, gently passed by him,
moved as (I guess) with his more then woeful misery.

They being gone, he came forth from his melancholic Cell, and as he was
walking thus alone, the doleful Nymph Orythia, his old (yet loyal Lover) met
him by chance, who was comen (even into this wilderness) to find him out. After
she had saluted him, she entreated him to sit down upon a green bank,
covered over with shadowing Cipresse, and to hear a certain Sonnet, which
she had made in remembrance of him. The Shepherd seeing no other remedy,
sits him down, promising the Nymph, attentiucly, to give ear unto her
Dittie, which she most pitifully sung after this manner following.

Cruel mishap, the Butcher of my life,
All (thee except) is mortal here below:
Men are deaths foes, and with him, are at strife,
And death is that which I do covet so.
My tongue speaks what with heart agrees best,
Death and laments, is of my speech the sourse:
Ah judge (then if that I have any rest,
Loving (of evils all) the very worse.
If damned souls without en end (always)
Sharp plagues endure; Alas, I feel like pain:
A monstrous ill it is, all his life's days,
To bear the brunt of ghosts in Limbo slain:
And yet the damnd, suffer for their offense,
Whilst I (for doing good) endure these woes:
The guilty (to complain of ill) wants sonse,
Wrongly to suffer, patience makes to lose:
May not my plaints most justly counted be,
In right the Heavens of cruelty t'accuse?
What good, ere found I, O ye Gods, (to me
Unjust) ye slay us, yet to hear us ye refuse,
Without enfeele, of pleasure or of joy:
With anguish you our vital spirits fill,
Enforcing us to entertain annoy.
So what is good, leaves us, whilst we take the ill,
Thus against your fierce, and more then sharp Alarms
We sickly souls, too weak, must harden strong
Our selves, and for to help us in our harms,
We hope in vain, (the more) our selves to wrong.
"Alack, Cowards that fly, and followed are orefast,
"Small leisure have, or none, their Armor off to cast.
The Nymph having ended this her mournful Music, with a deep sigh, fet from
the bottom of her heart, began (thus) to woo the Shepherd.

O how (justly) do the powers above afflict thee, seeing thou so cruelly
do torment others! Is it not most meet and reasonable, that as we sow, so
we should reap? and as we have measured unto others, so we should look for
the like measure again? LOVE makes thee die, without depriving thee of life,
whilst thou forcest the selfsame Love (without killing me) to torment me most
cruelly. Ay me, what strange kind of Frenzy does trouble thy soul?

Thou refusest the friendship of one that is immortal, to seek after the love
of a worldly beauty, which is subject unto death, fortune, and change,
wherein thou do show a sufficient sign of the error of men, who follow
that that flies from them, leaving the best, and accepting of the worst. And
if they, (committing so gross an absurdity) feel themselves to be plunged in
the gulf of most bottomless griefs, by the Heavens, A Sentence.
should they, (therefore) complain and lament? He that has wounded himself,
can accuse none for his hurts, but his own self: and the prodigal child, that
has through his foolishnes, consumed all his wealth, may blame or thank no
body, but his own mere folly. Why do thou not accept of that present,
which willingly offers it self unto thee? and why do thou endure so many
miseries, to obtain that, which thou will never be able to purchase? Is not
he unwise, that whilst the storm lasts, leaves the dry house (in which he
was in) to run to seek another farther off, and in the mean time is subject
unto the bitterness of the Tempest? And is not he a fool, who leaves a thing
certain and present, to take what is uncertain and doubtful? Well may he
be counted to murder himself, that refuses what is profitable unto him,
whilst he vainly seeks, (and yet to no purpose) what he is likely never
come by. Love then, (sweet Shepherd) love her, that dearly likes thee. No
small punishment do they deserve, A Sentece.
who hate such as love and fancy them, in as much, as frie^dship being not
forced, but rather coming of his own accord, deserves a recompense, no less
then that gift which departs from a frank and liberal free mind, does
merit thanks, because it is not forced any way: Then (I say) do thou not
love her, who esteems of thee, more then of her own self? whilst thou (more
sauadge and fierce, then the cruel Tigers (who love their matches) do
refuse the amity of thine equal every way, that sacred amity, (so much)
accounted of, both by Gods, and men. Ah change thy self-will and stubborn
mind (hard hearted swain, as thou art) and call to remembrance, what dangers
I have passed, what hazards I have trauersed, and how many countries I have
run through to find thee out, resolving with my self, never to leave him who
has my heart, and carries the same within his breast always. But why speak
thou not all this while? and why breakest thou not this solemn silence of
thine? which cannot be but grievous unto such as behold thee: nay more, as
painful as death it self, unto them that think well of thee.

Ah fair Nymphe (replied the Shepherd) what delightful answer can thou
imagine to draw from him, who is not agreeable or pleasing unto his own self?
and what medicine can thou get from a sick person, that is not able through
the agony of his grief to help himself any thing at all? Can my discourses
be pleasing unto thee, when they are most odious and hateful unto mine own
self? he had need to be perfect in health, that will heal such as be sick, to
be fully at liberty, that can infranchise slaves; and to be perfectly content,
A Sentence.
that takes upon him to comfort the unserable. Stay but the time, (beauteous
Nymph,) I say, stay but the time, until the gracious Heavens, taking
compassion upon me, do cure my recureles infirmity, and that I be (once)
freed from the heavy and burthensom: bonds, wherein I am now chained, and then
will I condescend unto thy demand. For alas, can one loyal and faithful
servant, serve at one time two masters, and they (both) differing in nature?
Even so, can the true and chaste Lover, (love) with equal affection) two
contrary subjects? A Sentence.
No, no: for that Love which is sacred, firm, and commendable, can never
endure to be divided: Love it self being a simple substance, which
participateth with no division, and therefore, such as truly fancy any, do
love without the separation of good will, in such wise, as it is as impossible
for the constant Lover to have two Mistresses, as it is for the Element to
contain two Suns within it all at one time. If thy fancy were fixed upon
some Demi-god here below, would thou take it in good part, that a silly
Swain should presume to make love unto thee, seeking to force thee to give
over thy first love and promise, which never should be forgotten, what devise
soever might be wrought? If not, then I beseech thee (immortal Creature)
importune no more the despised Arcas. (too too much already wronged by the
Heavens,) but rather suffer him to take some breath in his miseries, which he
must (perforce) endure, as well as he may. Heap not upon him, stone upon
stone, burden upon burden, nor mischief upon mischief, satisfying thy self
with this his most heavy extremity, without seeking to make his woes more
terrible or cruel then they already be. For ( Orythia,) this I will swear,
that the Heavens shall fall upon this ground, and the cold frozen Seas shall
turn into hot fire, before the heart of unfortunate Arcas shall be heated
with any other love, then with that of his Diana: Her beauty will he love
alone, (she only) shall be served of him, pale death it self, not being of
force to alter this constant resolution.

Then speak no more of this matter unto me, and let it suffice thee, that I
honor thee, for thy Deity, as Numa Pompilius adored the Nymph Egeria: For
only Diana do I love, and none but her alone. Command my body to serve
thee, in what he is able; call my soul to ^ttend upon thee, at thy will;
dispose of my poor power, as thou shall best please; and bid me do any
thing, whatsoever thou likest; Behold me pressed to obey thee, (but not to love)
least I should forget my Diana: and say I should go about to do so, yet
cannot I, although I would never so feign. Content thee, that I do what I may,
that I offer thee all that my soul is able, and be not so vnourteous unto me,
as to bind me to things impossible, which no man is bound to perform.

So dear do I hold thy quietness, (answered the weeping Nymphe) that for fear
I shoulddisplease thee (to the end thou shall perceive how unfeignedly I do
fancy thee^) I will rather study to overthrow, and utterly ruinate mine own
life, then seek by any means, to hinder or force thy desire any way at all.

So let it be, yea, let it be so, and so let it still continue, since I was
borne to be the most miserable of all others. And seeing I see so many mortal
creatures preferred before my love (who am immortal) I will use to make mine
eyes (perforce) to weep continually, to the end, that they being deprived of
their lights, may no longer behold the cause of their inevitable sorrows.

Thou must then, (O poor Nymph) and wretched Orythia, resolve with thy self,
to endure this mischief, and prepare thy self to make an ordinary exercise of
thy more then heavy mischaunces. So lived Venus in woe, long time after the
death of her Darling Adonis. So did Phoebus lament the loss of his dear
Daphne. And so did Jove, wail for the loss of his Io, and his Europa. Even so
must I grieve at this mine vnlukie denial.

Yet nevertheless, A Sentence.
thou that art the only motive of this my mischief, and the only cause of
this my sharp and bitter Corsie, take heed, take heed, I say, lest for this
egregious injury, which thou (now) offerest me, the Gods revenge not
themselves upon thee, making thine anguish as great, as mine is grievous
every way: For never let him look for favor from above, that has not showed
mercy, unto such as sue and seek unto him here below.

And yet (accursed that I am) mine own grief is not so cruel, but that the
care which I take for thine, is far more troublesome unto me. I, seeking (in
desire) to be doubly plagued, perplexed, and tormented, so I might see thee
quite rid and released from these thy woeful passions; although
notwithstanding all this, thou do badly requite my great good will toward
thee. But the Heavens, who are far more just, more excellent, and divine then
thou, will yield me some sufficient guerdon: Mean space, dispose of doleful
Orythia, who is more thine, then her own, and (reserving her honor) do with
her what thou list, she being ready, with her divine power, to assist thee
in all thy writings, which thy mournful Muse shall sigh forth, not only
(alone) at this time, but for ever hereafter: not demanding any other reward
of thee, for her pains, but that she (sometimes) may be had in remembrance in
thy works: which already have found place amongst the most commendable
Inventions, that have been accounted of by the brauest Princes, and highly
prised and esteemed of by many others: and which also, shall be had in request
(hereafter) more then ever they (yet) have been, (despite of the envious
whatsoever) that go about to seek to deface the same.

Live then, (sweet Shepherd) and dream as long as thou please, with thy
self, of thy so much desired Loves, as I shall do the like of thine. But the
day shall come, in which the Heavens shall deprive thee from the pleasure of
the same, to the end thou may know, by the experience of thine own proper
misfortune, how lamentable the state of such Lovers is, that are barted and
excluded from all good hope, of obtaining their wish and desire.

The Nymph having so said, suddenly departed, running as swiftly into the woods
adjoining, as the light Hind, leaving the Shepherd all alone, who was as much
amazed at her speech, as is the wayfaring man, when in his travail, he sees
the Thunderbolt of heaven, to fall upon some proud Rock, breaking the tops
thereof, with his terrible flashie blow.

Long was he not in this brown study, but that the old man, (wonderful
earnest) to understand the discourse of his troubles, came to seek him, whom
he thus began to accost. There is nothing that is holden more reverend,
either amongst Gods, or amongst men, as is the word of man, which ought to be
respected most religious, amongst ones enemies themselves, be the never so
cruel or barbarous, and which we ought not to falsify, although it be for
the least things in the world: because it is the band, which tyeth the
society and fellowship of men together, which being dismembered, would most
foulie and confusedly perish, were it not, but in repect of the great regard
that is had, and held of the same.

I know thou have not forgotten, how thou have plighted thy promise, to report
unto me thy misfortunes, and thy Loves. Now do I summon thee, to perform the
same, praying thee, that thou will not be the cause, that this Desert (being
the habitation of the Nymphs) be not defiled with infidelity of speech. For
as the Gods will not (alone) be free and spotless from all vices, but also
clean from suspicion of the same, so will they have the like Ceremonies to be
most orderly observed, amongst their sacred abidings, where (as yet) never any
fault lodged.

And if thou imeginest, that this thy discourse will prove i^kesome unto thee,
then know, that the breaking of thy faith, ought to be far more grievous: and
that of two evils thou ought to choose the least: which is, rather to endure
the novel apprehensions of thine old sores, then to violate thy pawned
promise: I will crave nothing at thy hands, but what I will hereafter requite
again, offering in recompense of thy kindness (after thou have done) to
discourse unto thee the whole story of my life, to the end, that if our
Fortunes shall be found to be alike, we may (the better) seek the like remedy
to help our selves.

Then (courage Son) pluck up thy spirits, so long dulled with sorrow, made
overmuch sick with sadness, and almost massacred with extreme melancholy,
and begin to recount thy Tragedy, whilst I will listen unto thee, reporting
of thy hard Fortunes in thy travel.

The Shepherd somewhat rowsed, with this earnest request, replied thus. I
cannot deny, but what one promises he ought to perform, and so mean I. Yet
the debtor who has given his faith and promise, to pay his money at a
certain set day, although he is willing to keep his word, yet will he not
stick to get a longer time for the tendering of the same, if he can possible,
(especialie) if he want the means to satisfy his creditor, unto whom he is
bound. A Piouerbe.
For it is an old saying: What is delaide, is not unpaid: and such fruits as
are longest attended and looked for, are always the better, because they are
of better relish, and more ripe then the others.

Then suffer my mind (yet a little longer) to be in quiet, and make not my
mortal wounds so soon to bleed (freshly) again: For, as bloody and cruel
are the thoughts of a man's unlucky chances, as the memory is sweet and
pleasing, of his happy good fortunes.

To report the same anew, is as much as to strike the wound again, because we
call them to memory, when they are (in a manner) half forgotten, whilst Time
it self, that has somewhat lessened them, seems to complain (as it were)
that men are abused by his means. Give me therefore some longer respite,
(kind Father of these Nocturnall Abodes) to bethink my self better of this
matter, to the end I may have space to take breath a little more, being so
lately come forth, from so many outrageous Seas of extreme miseries.

The Sayler, having escaped the danger of waters, leaves to give over from
working, as soon (as ever) his Ship is come into the haven, An Example.
without looking unto either his Merchandise, or his vessel: for ease and rest
is more sweet then any other thing in the world, seeing for this rest, man
trauelleth all the days of his life, hoping at the end of his labors to
find the same.

Then give me leave (I beseech thee) some small while to be quiet, and trouble
not my mind, with this unwelcome business: otherwise, in steed of consolating
my pain, I shall think thou do aggrauate it the more, and make the same
more bitter unto me.

Ah Shepherd (answered the old man) do thou make account, that the quietness
of a woeful wretch is troubled, when one desires to understand his grief,
that so he may help, and heal him the sooner? Man, as he is courteous and
humane, is (afterward) more ready to do goood then evil, because he roweth
in the selfsame Boat that he does, whom he seeks to relieve, being so
much afflicted, and for that a good turn does never come amiss, but is
welcome at all times. Think thou, that thy sorrows shall wax worser and
worser, A Sentence.
by reason of this discourse, which I entreat thee to deliver? The sick
patient reuealeth his disease unto the Physician, but concealeth his grief, to
the end he may find remedy. Why then will thou make adversaries, thy tongue
and thy face? For, did thy speech fail thee, as not being able to discover thy
pain, yet should we plainly perceive it by thy looks. Satisfy thy tongue,
and thy countenance, in what they seem to desire, and begin not here in this
strange Country, to shift us off with disloyalty, and dissembling.

Behold, this hour most fit, the time now scrues, and this place is most apt
and commodious for the purpose. It is in uncouth Deserts, where Lovers use to
come, to report their mishaps at large, thinking themselves not a little
fortunate, when they can have auditors to listen unto them. I will attend thee,
whilst this shade does inuit thee, to perform what heretofore thou have
promised. Then I pray thee dispatch, to the end thou may satisfy my mind,
which eue^ (as it were, languisheth) with mere desire to hear thee.

The Shepherd seeing himself so sharply urged to keep his word, not being
able any longer to delay him, or to put him off, after he had sent forth a
number of scalding sighs, thus began his speech.

Scarce was I come out of mine infancy, and grown a stripling, my chinne (not
yet) bearing the mark of a man, when Love enrolled me for one of his band,
forcing me to love, before I knew what liking meant: whereupon, I being young
in experience, and less practiced in knowledge, began to set my self to
school, to learn the hardest science in the world.

Nevertheless, as of vipers, (by nature venomous) Physicians draw many
wholesome medicines: so Love, depriving me of my liberty, recompencing me with
somewhat worth the giving, for having within my conceit, a huge heap, and a
great co^fused mass of verses, he dispersed, divided, brake, and spread abroad
the same, in such sort, as in a small time, a thousand young shiuers and
pieces, came thereof. Know then, I loved a fair and rich Shepherdess, called
Magaalis, she not much disdaining my modest affection, for her sake, did I
compose many thousand Sonnets, but simple ones, and young (God he knows) were
they, as young and simple as was mine age, but far younger my knowledge and
skill. Yet such as they were, she most curtiously accepted of them, obliging my
miserable fortune greatly unto her, whilst she relieved it, by the means she
had through the benefit of Nature, so that my verse was recompensed, by reason
of the favors which she held of Fortune.

Long time did this fair maid enjoy my love, till (mine eyes being dazeled
with the renown of the most famous Iulietta,) I longed (exceedingly) to see
her, to confirm for truth, the sacred report, which her rare perfections range
of her, throughout all the country: whereupon I resolved to see her, yet
(sore) doubting the presence of so rare a thing, as the tender Eagle does the
face of the Sun.

There is nothing galleth the Fox so much, A Comparison.
as to be found to be nigh unto the Lion, because his beastlines is known by
the excellency of the other. And the bad Painter, will (always) shun the
company of such a one as is cunning, for fear least the perfection of his
work, should disgrace the unskillfulness of the other.

In the end, I was forcedto see this divine Shepherdess, who (as she is
divine, and her effects divine also) upon the first sight I had of her, stole
(at one time from me, both my soul, and the remembrance of the foresaid
Magdalis: yet did she not this by force, but rather with such a sweet violence,
as (me thought) I lost nothing, reputing my defait, to be a kind of victory
unto me. If Magdalis was rich, and honorably descended, yet this far passed
her in these accidences, especially, in wisdom, and in learning, with other
rich qualities, as well of the body, as of the mind. For I verily believe,
few Poets did excel her in Poetry: few Orators in the Art of Oratorie: few
Painters, in drawing of countorfaits: few Penmen, in writing of sundry and
fair sort of hands: few Musicians in Music: few sage men in gravity: and
few learned men, in iuditiall knowledge, and reading.

To discourse in all the seven liberal Sciences, was an ordinary course with
her, neither had she ever the overthrow of the cunningest and greatest Doctors
of her time.

This fair creature then, (fair both for virtue and for beauty) long time
stayed and brideled the folly and licencious liberty, of my forward youth. In
all which space, my Muse did nothing else, but chaunt forth her sacred praises,
the rare Thewes, and exquisite parts of this lovely Shepherdess being her
Subject, and the only efficient courses of all her writings; whilst she in the
mean time, disdained not (oftentimes) to answer me. For she has (always)
favored and respected gentle and towardly spirits, not that I am one of the
same number, but because she made account of mine, as if they had been such
indeed, they still producing, and bringing forth such fruits, as were to her
glory, her honor, and contentment.

If the name of the BERGERIES of IVLIETTA, have (by chance) come unto thine
ears, then may thou gather the truth of my speeches, by the report thereof,
and easily perceive thereby, what dutious respect, and solemn service, I most
religiously vowed unto this fair and learned virgin. But as the heavens
themselves, A Sentence.
cannot (always) continue in one, and the selfsame course, but ever changes
and divides themselves to an other form; Even so, the misfortune, or rather
the punishment of our sins, opposed her self most cruelly against the
chaste continuation, of my most modest and respective loves, secluding and
separating me, far from my divine Iulietta, of whom, (notwithstanding all
this) I carried away with me, the Teffigies and counterfeit, shadowed within my
soul, honoring her, as one, who had most power over me, and ringing loud
peales, of her well deserving praises, so long, till at the last, Time, not
only changed my nature, but also my fortune and estate.

And the sooner to finish my ruin and overthrow, he forced me to try so many
woeful miseries, scourging me with his severe rods, so sore and cruelly; As
(in the end) I forgot every thing, and gave over all; studying only what good
means I might find, to warrant and shield me, from the fury of my too too
spightfull desires, and to save me from the sharp arrows they darted at me,
knowing that one poison expels an other, that one nail drives out an
other, and that the greater eu^ll, that is more violent, makes the lesser to
yield and to give over.

Thus was I compeld to beat my wits, to find the way as well to preserve and
save my silly life, laid in wait for, by many envious persons, as to conserve
that little which I held, through the grace of Fortune. But (hardly) could I
keep safe, either the one, or the other, loosing both my goods, and my body,
which was drawn into an uncomfortable prison; where (yet for all this, such
was my good luck) I found so much courtesy, as I might rather have termed it
liberty, then imprisonment, in that it was more profitable, then hurtful unto
me, by reason I purchase many friends thereby.

After this had happened, I wandered into every place, as the Heart that searches
his companion gone astray, without finding any one place, of sufficient
security for this my wretched life.

In the end, (when I had sometime remained within a certain Castle, with some
of my friends) I chanced to arrive at a goodly, rich, and great City, which
served as a Sanctuary unto the miserable, and as a safeguard and refuge, for
such as were hardly destined, of which number I counted my self as chief.
There did I find my self, secure and safe, and therefore did I cast mine
anchor on that strand, wishing that I might make an end of my ouer-long pains,
and too too wearisome peregrinations. Now whilst I lived in this place, my Muse
was not altogether idle, one while in sighing forth my hard fortune, an other
while in lamenting my manifold and irrecouerable losses; and sometimes
Heroldizing the praises of those, that maintained my poor life; so that I was
not tongue-tide or dumb, neither lay I long in silence, without doing some one
thing or an other.

Mean space, it was my chance (one day) to walk into the Forests adjoining,
as well to assuage my griefs, as also to put out of my mind, the thought of
my mischances, where I found about a coolie fountain, many fair
Shepheardesses, who all daunced without fear, but only for fear to be seen.

Fair were they all, An excellent description of a fair virgin.
and (yet) not all liking unto my mind, nor alike agreeable in mine eyes.
Amongst the whole troop, one there was that pleased my fancy, above all the
other; being taller in stature, straiter of body, and fairer and goodlier then
all the company were. Her flaxen hair was daintily bound up, placed under a
curious Coife of fine Lawne. Her high forhead, goodly and broad. Her amorous
eyebrows, somewhat black, serving as an Vmbrill for her diamond-like-eyes.
Her diamond eyes, clear, quick, and sparkling; like unto two Suns eles,
which without hurting the body, pierced into the very soul, wounding most
cruelly. Ears, which took prisoners, millions of hearts, the virtues
thereof, drawing them most sweetly unto them. Eyes, resembling two sacred
lamps, being of force, to chase away all darkness, and to bring the bright day
with them.

Her witching lips, werered, like unto the Cloue-Gilliflower. Her prittie
mouth, faultlesse and little. Her chaste mouth, never touched of any, being as a
religious relicke, most sacredly reserved for the service and honor of the
celestial Goddesses Diana. Her cheeks, vermillion right, resembling the
Summer Rose, adorned with a white lilly. Her dimpled chin, short, round, and
well made. Her throat was clear Alablaster, and her goodly breast composed of
pure Iuprie: in which, were sweetly seated, two rich and precious monuments of
mountain snow, disdaining to be compared with any whitenes whatsoever. Her
hands with azured veins, resembled the precious stones dug out of the
quarrie of beauty. And to be brief, her feet were slender and little withal.

But O how perfectly fair were thou in all points, beauteous and lovely Diana?
How rare and gentle, was thy spirit? How stately and full of Majesty, thy
gate? And how sweet and pleasing, thy more then angelical presence? If so
admirable a Subject as this, was not of sufficient power, to enthrall and
captive me, when far meaner and baser (by ods) have made the greatest and
brauest personages in the world to stoop, I refer it unto your own sensures
to imagine.

O most seeret and marvelous, is the puislance of love; No sooner did I behold
her, but I felt my self to be wholly changed and transformed into an other
shape, as the Serpent changes his skin in the Springtime.

The remembrance of all whatsoever I had done before, was slipped and vanished
away, no otherwise then a wave of water, glideth swiftly in the Sea. I remained
as one bound, and inchained: and yet alack, I could not choose but honor my
bonds; neither could I withdraw, or retire my self from this deadly enemy of
my rest, which had deprived me already as it were of my life, but stayed still
by her. Not unlike unto the foolish fly, A Similie.
that buzzeth (so long) about the candle, till at the last he burns himself
in the flame thereof.

Egerly, did I suck this sweet poison down my throat, enchaunting my
spirits with the same. As the thriftie way-fairing man, drinks with great
greedines, whatsoever is presented unto him, to staunch his drines. With great
reverence did I use, and (not a little) did I respect, those arrows, shafts,
and darts, that were my death: so much fortunate did I imagine my self, to be
vanquished by so sweet and fair an enemy: neither could I once remove mine
eyes from her beauteous face, no more then the captive taken in war, who
looks pitifully on him that has taken him, upon whose will depends his
dear deliverance. The remembrance of all my fore-passed Disasters, was lost
with my liberty: this cruel wound, extinguishing all sense of grief of my
other lesser troubles, as a great evil does expel and thrust out a less.

Thus love covers all other miseries, his heat, drying all others sorrows;
and his force, asswaging all other losses whatsoever. And (as a great
broad-leafed oak) hides all kind of mischiefs whatsoever. Like as we see that
man, that has lost soo^e great matter of weight, to take on, and to chafe
wonderfully, as often as it comes into his mind, and when he calls into
his memory, the worth and value of the same, he held so dear.

Even so, does it vex my very soul, when I remember the rare and admirable
qualities of my Diana, considering the great loss I have thereby.

And therefore (good Father) let me here leave (I beseech thee) without urging
me to proceed any farther; but rather permit me to go my ways, that I may
find out some close and frightfull Cave, where I may sufficiently and enough
bewail this my inestimable loss. For the very thought thereof, does take my
voice away, pierces quite through my heart, and disturbeth all my wits and
senses.

Nay (forward) (good Shepherd) answered the earnest old man. A work half
done, ought to be thoroughly finished; yet in the mean time, thou may if
thou think good, pause for a while here, and take unto thee breath again,
letting pass this sad apprehension of thy losses, since others have had ill
fortune as well as thy self. But well have thou begun, and therefore I doubt
not but thou will make as good an end.

Arcas, having rested a while, began to proceed in his discourse, when
Philistell, and Corribant, coming unto them (and having saluted them) sat
down hard by them; whereupon Philistell, marking the countenance of the old
man very wistly, and judging him to be a Magitian, (as indeed he was) began
thus to argue with him.

Father, I am not ignorant, that these Desars, rese^ble a hot coal of glowing
fire, A Similie.
which if you fling amongst sweet and odoriferous spices, it shall yield a
delightful and pleasing savor: and if you cast it amongst bad, it shall smell
loathsome and stinking. Even so, these Deserts serve some to end their years
in holiness, such being ravished with the co^templation of the wonderful works
of the Almighty: whilst unto other some, they are as a Receptacle, to color
their faults, and as a commodious place, wherein they may hide their bad lives,
and leaud wickedness: Nevertheless, the latter of these twain, who help
themselves (by their means) to do ill, do offer them the more injury,
because these uncouth woods, have ever been fitter, for such as do penance,
and meditate upon God, then to scrue for a retrait unto the wicked: to the end,
they may the safer exercise their bad and detested leaudnes therein. And to be
plain with you, I think you are come hither, because you may the more fitter
put in practice your black Art here, and have conference with the devils. Now
whether this your trade be lawful or no, I feign would know the truth.

That Master will never account such a one of his servants, An Example.
for faithful and good, that shall go about to seek for aid of his enemy.
If so, Think you then, that God can allow it for good, that men, who are his
servants and creatures, shall enter league, confer, and be familiar with the
devils, his odious adversaries? Can the Judge, take it for well, and not
mislike the reof, that any of his followers, should aid and assist, comfort,
and keep company with the criminal, whom for his faults he has most justly
condemned to death? So likewise, if the devils (who for their pride and
wickedness have been condemned by the Almighty) are driven and chased away from
his divine presence, what excuse can such men allege for themselves? who dare
be so bold, as to presume to come amongst them, and to consult with them? It is
sharply forbidden, the good to converse with the bad; the faithful, to be
acquainted with the Infidels; and the Christians to have truce with the Turks.
Then what alliance or league, can there be found between men, the children of
God, and damned devils, condemned from the beginning of the world for their
most horrible offenses? Long since, did God punish the Jews most extremely,
for offering to marry with the wives of the Heathen, delivering them (for
theirpunishment) into the hands of their enemies: because light and darkness
can never agree well together. And think you not, that he will give over into
the hands of the devils, such men as serve them, and are familiar with them;
to the end they may be pumshed, by the selfsame spirits, whose executioners
they have been in all hateful ungodliness? Can any Father support and bear so
great an injury, A Sentence.
that his son shall follow and keep company, with such a leaude and bad
servant of his, whom he has driven out of his house, in that he sought to
deprive him of the same, rising up (most rebelliously) against him? Even so,
can God take it well at our hands, that we, who are his children, should
compact and agree, seeking for the friendship and acquaintance of these ungodly
servants (the devils) whom he has thrown headlong, down from out his
heavenly mansion, because they presumed through their arrogancy, to be equal
with himself? If devils are (by nature) wicked, and for their iniquity are
judged unto hell fire for ever; What then can men learn of them, but malice,
envy, evil, blasphemy, and sin? Now these qualities being extremely
displeasant unto God (who is the mortal enemy of vice) how then can such men
sufficiently excuse themselves, who have learned such wickedness of Satan and
his angels?

The old man, angered at the heart, as well to hear his Art blamed, as from
being hindered from the discourse which Arcas had began, (half chollericke)
replied thus.

My friend (and stranger unto me,) I see well, thou have a taste of thine old
corrupt nature, serving God, according unto the gross custom of thiue
Ancestors, and only after one fashion. An excellent discourse of Inchantuients.
Know then, there are diverse kinds of worshipping of God. To take an oath, is
forbidden by the divine law; for fear, least we fall into perjury: and
therefore will thou say, we ought not to swear at all? So far off from
offending, are we by the same, that swearing truly, and before the just face
of upright Justice, it is a kind of adoration, and worship, which we render
unto God, because we charge him (as it were) with the iustnes of the truth, or
with the falsenes of the oath taken, in his holy name. So likewise, will thou
blame exorcisme of spirits, and the coniuring of them, which men do to force
them to understand, and give care to that which is demanded of them?

The ancient Hebrews, had not they Enchauntments, which chased away devils,
commanding them in the name of God? Which our Savior his Son, when he lived
(here) upon the earth, approved and allowed, as authentical and lawful?

I tell thee, for thy learning, that there are two sorts of Art Magic (as
there are two kinds of swearing) the one good, and the other bad. That is
good, which is done by the divine power alone, inasmuch, as (only) to him is
the glory attributed, to command over devils Is not sin, a most wicked
evil? and yet notwithstanding, do not the holy Doctors of the Church, will us
to follow and haunt the bad, until we have chased and driven quite away, both
themselves and their vicious kind of living also? If so, think you then, that
it is forbidden to converse with spirits, when thereby they are bound more
surely, and brideled more straightly, as being unable through their malice to
hure manking, as they have done?

By whose virtue and authority do devils come out of hell? and in whose name,
do they speak, obey, and fulfill the desires of men? Whether invocation and
calling upon spirits, be lavvfull, or no?
Is it through the puissance of other Devils? No. For, they have no authority
one over the other: and every Kingdom divided within it self, shall (quickly)
be brought to confusion.

Is it through the virtue of men? That is vnlikelyer then the other: for so
far be they off from commanding over them, as they be far inferior unto
them in power and might.

In whose name do they then appear? Even in the Name of GOD; by whose divine
power, they come when they are called, which being employed for the benefit of
man, unto this purpose, the whole glorse thereof redoundeth wholly unto him,
he being the sole Author of this admirable work. For it is no common matter,
neither is it a trifle, or a thing of small account, to force, constrain, or
command Devils: This being not able to be brought to pass, but by the
Omnipotent might of God, the whole honor thereof, is attributed unto him alone.
So that to call upon spirits through the power divine (and not to employ them
unto any ill, but rather repressing, and keeping under, (more and more) their
wicked intentions, is properly an Act, or a kind of worshipping of God.

The sage Spartans, used to make their slaves drunk, and so to show them unto
their Children, to the end they might make them fly that foul vice, detest
drunkenness, and love sobriety the better. Even so, when one shall see these
Devils (to the end, that by contemplating of their most horrible vglines,
they may be the more enflamed with the sacred Love of God) Is it ill done of
them so to do?

But we (commonly) see, that men condemn that for bad, which themselves cannot
have, find fault with that Science, which they cannot attain unto, and
dispraise that, which they are no way worthy to enjoy.

As for the other kind of Magique, which extends to consult with Devils,
about the knowledge and Nature of wicked simples and herbs, A Sentence.
to make most damned poisons, hurtful unto so many Creatures, I cannot choose
but confess the same to be passing ill, and that it is prohibited both by the
Laws of God and man.

Neither can the one nor the other be good, answered Philistell. For as by the
one, the divine power of God is abused, so by the other, his holy will is (as
it were) checked and controlled.

What need has any man to confer with hellish Spirits, about the knowledge
of things to come? (seeing unto God alone, belongs the certainty of the
same) as long as we have a firm confidence, and a strong belief, that the
Almighty takes protection and care over us, (as he does of the least Byrd
that flies in the air) which also his providence nourishes?

Then what occasion have we, that we should have any recourse or speech with
Devils, who are the mortal enemies of God? In this we show our selves, either
to misdoubt the divine Bounty and Goodness: or else, to have no belief or
confidence in his eternal and everlasting power.

We are created of God, only to eleuate our minds in contemplation, to
consider, and to take knowledge of things present, and not to formalize and
frame our selves after that which is to come: the knowledge of which, he his
own self refused to participate unto his Apostles; and therefore (except we
would presume to be wiser the^ they) we have nothing to do to talk with
Devils, much less to inuit or constrain them, to show their puissance or
malice, because it is a kind of usurping over the power of the holy one, unto
whom is reserved this correction or chastisement, over these most damned
Spirits. And to conclude, the history of Saul may resolve us in this doubt,
who lost his soul, his life, and his Realm, for that he forced a certain
Sorceresse to raise up a Devil, who had the form and shadow of Samuel.

Besides, the Laws of man condemn such to be burned, as meddle with this
Art, because they are as well enemies to God as men, which nevertheless, they
had never done without just and good considerations.

The other sort of Magique, (far more wicked then this) is so detestable and
bad, as it ought not (in right) to be termed by this word (Science) because it
is an usual exercise of ill doing, which these Inchanters borrow of the
Devil, with the manner to find out these Venims, which is applied unto the
hurt and overthrow of all persons whatsoever.

Again, it has been (always) worse punished than murder: for a man may take
heed of the one, but he is most miserably betrayed by the other. The sword,
being able to destroy, only such souls as have life, whereas this Venim, not
only kills living creatures, but all other herbs, trees, and plants,
whatsoever. Far then be it from us, to exercise so wicked a study as this is.

O stranger (replied the old man) is not he worthy of more praise, that yoketh
strong and fierce Lions, then if he had done the same to little dogs, and
small whelps, that are of no courage? Is not that Prince more puissaunt, and
more to be redoubted, that commands over a nation, warlike and generous,
then he that has under him, none but base beggars, and poor white-liuered
peasants? Even so, is not that man to be more commended, who by his cunning and
industry, commands over devils, who for their sin, have lost nothing of
their former puissaunce, in which they were first created, (but only their
eternal Beatitude) then he, who for want of knowledge and skill, governs
over troops of fearful sheep only, and over a company of rude and simple
peasants.

That person, who by his art and cunning, shall have made, that which Nature
has hidden, A Similie.
(in the deepest bowels of the earth) framing through his rare skill this
glorious gold, which so much flourishes, and is in request throughout the
whole world. Is not he, to be praised and esteemed above all other?

Even so, can that wight merit less, than great commendation, who by his
wisdom, knows how to signorize ouerspirits, who term themselves, the Kings
and Lords of the world? For thou must understand (for thy learning) that there
be diverse kinds of spirits, whereof, some are extreme wicked, and sworn
enemies unto man, and other some there be, gentle and courteous, serving to do
good, in steed of hurting any one.

But what fault I pray you, can you find, with conuersing with such? Solomon,
on whom so much wisdom was bestowed, had not he conference oftentimes with
them? and in the mean space did he ill? No, for he had received such great
knowledge of God, as the virtue thereof, made him worthy to discourse with
spirits, and he himself being willing to instruct us in that notable perfect
Art, left certain writings of his behind him, which are much sought after by
the Magitians now at this day, which are called SALOMONS KEYS.

So that, by this we may gather, that if to have communication or a parlie with
devils, had been thought a thing detestable and unjust, Solomon had never
talked with them, neither he himself, would have left unto us in writings, the
means how to call upon their names, or to discourse with them.

Father, Father, (replied Philistel) all these reasons thou alledgest, cannot
defend this thy bad cause, for neither ought we to follow Solomon in this,
because he made an ill end, having forgotten himself (most miserably) in the
latter end of his age, and committed so horrible a fault, as the only
remembrance thereof, makes my hair to stand upright for fear) neither is thy
cunning herein to be allowed, inasmuch, as every Science, that proceeds not
from God himself, and is not drawn out of the sacred fountain of his
immortal wisdom, is not only worthy to be condemned, but also meriteth to
be rewarded with fire. That Magic, should be a Science ordained by God, thou
can not maintain, seeing that our Savior Christ never taught it, neither
his Apostles, ever learnd it, as they did many other, good, holy, and just
Sciences. It is (rather) the Art of Eve, who believed what the Serpent told
her, which was the cause, both of her ruin, and of ours.

For tell me, I pray you, what grace or goodness, can a man expect from his
mortal enemy, being not given unto any thing, by the corruption of his
nature, but unto bloodshedding, unto wickedness, and unto extreme cruelty?
And so, what can one look for, that may be profitable or good, to come from
proud Lucifer, and his angels of darkness, they being the most deadliest
enemies that may be unto mankind?

Besides, with what kind of payment, do they pay themselves (in the end) for
the service which they have done unto men? Is it not, with the precious price
of their souls, which they ought to esteem more dearly, then all things
(else) whatsoever? What does it profit a man, to gain all the kingdoms in the
world, if he shall lose his own soale thereby? And who ever knew Magitians to
die well, whose bodies oftentimes have been visible seen to have been carried
away by these Fiends?

Ochozias King of the Jews, being sick only because he sent unto the Oracle
of Beelzebub, died most wretchedly, by the just commandment of God, how much
(more severely,) had he been punished, if he had, had ordinary conference with
the devils, when he was plagued with death, (only) for that, he did (but)
send, to ask advise and counsel of him? But say, that God would forgive this
sin, yet tell me, I pray you, what truth and certainty can you find, amongst
these illuding spirits? First, they are (for the most part) ignorant of such
things, (as shall hereafter happen) as well as men be; And besides, there is no
truth in them, they being the first authors of lies, and those that first
taught us to speak untruly.

The poor Pamms themselves (over whom they had so great power) for that they
were Infidels, and abandoned of God, were continually mocked, deluded, and most
grosely deceived, by these malignant spirits. As witness Pirrhus, Alexander,
and thousands more. If then they would cosen their chiefest friends, and
dearest servants, how much more will they go about to deceive such as are
their enemies, and who, as strangers, give but little credit unto them?

To conclude, the devils are abiured enemies, against the righteous God
himself: and therefore, if we will be counted his true and faithful soruiters
indeed, we must not haunt, nor keep company with his adversaries; otherwise
he will suffer them, to make a prey of our souls, as being unworthy to
appear before his heavenly throne, because we have left him, and followed his
foes. Such is the common end, of such kind of people, who, whilst they are
living, serving the devils, do the like when they are dead, they being
rewarded with hell fire for their pains.

As the old man was replying again, they might perceive two Nymphs to come
toward them, where they sat, each of them, having a written paper in their
hands, which they delivered unto the shepherd Arcas, who unfolding the same,
found these verses following.

Love, is a dainty force above all other,
Which does enforce our spirits unto good things:
And without it, our souls were never able
Any thing to do rightly, that deserves
Gloriefor ever.
Contraries, it does bring into a concord,
Bloody wars, it (soon) swageth:
(Being more puissant, then the Gods themselves are)
Sweet, and the sower, it joins both together,
For to agree well.
Under him (wholly) gouernd is the huge world,
Under his laws, the heavens eke are subject:
Rightly may he be termd a mighty Monarke,
Whose power extends so far, as it is withouten
Any set limit.
He does his might use, only exercising
It, in the hearts of li^le pretty creatures, (green trees,
Flowers, plants, herbs, and fruitful springing
(Under his influence) like true hearty Lovers,
Love one another.
Of a brace of souls, he does make but one soul,
Which death it self does hardly make to sunder,
But man, does perish, by his destny fatal:
Therefore, is Love, more kinder to be counted
Then is our fortune.
Simple men's fortunes, he does (often) raise high,
Making them, like to those, of greatest Princess,
Then does not he (well) merit much rewarding
That to him submits, marching passing bravely
Under his banner?
Hope, to our fainting thoughts he bring to us still,
And to our hearts he brings joy and gladness,
For unto Lovers nothing is so pleasant,
As when they see, that of their lovely Ladies
Much they are made of.
He does revive our glory, that was extinct,
Through the displeasure of our perverse Plannees,
Oh how the pleasure is accounted dainty.
After laments, and bitter heavy sorrows
Which one endures.
After the brunt, of cruel raging Tempest,
We find the skies more fairer then before time,
Lone does reform us, making us become new.
And to resist our mischiefs, he does back us
Fresh to encounter.
It Is th'happie haven, of our best assurance,
The sacred Lodestar, Sailers use in voyage,
Whilst that his sweetness, all our fornser tranailes
(Which we endured) in our tedious journey.
Makes us forget them.
Never has he had taste aright of pleasure, A Sentence.

That in the field has never followed true Love:
As the dark night, is nothing to the fair day,
So, to delights of Love, there is not upon earth,
Aught to be equalde.
Every joy, must yield unto dainty Loves joy,
Thoughts of all other, what are they but bitter?
All chief contentment springs from this kind Love,
For the conceit (often) is so sweetly sugared,
As all, it passes.
What we imagine of it, in our minds still
Cannot be bettred, by our often wishing;
For it does (so much) please us in our own thoughts,
As it reuiues us, when our soul is passing
Forth of our bodies.
Then unto Cupid, as asacrifice fit,
I, on his altar, offer will my poor heart,
Nor is it disgrace for to honor rightly,
One that is counted as a heavenly victor,
Throughout the whole world.
These were theverses, which one of the Nymphs had composed, in praise of Love,
but the other had writ in dispraise of the same, as here follows.

Vain Love's, a furious burning force,
That chastest minds burns, sanus remorse:
Wretched (that loves) is that coarse,
And want shall his desire:
He hearts, and minds makes disagree,
Through him great houses filled be,
With slaughters, treasons, treachery;
For he of strife is sire.
Millions of men, he does betray,
The Gods he brings to his bay,
Like subtle tyrant he does slay,
(Through sloth) all virtue rare,
The smallest shrubs that grow so trim,
Do vade and wither thorough him,
Poor beasts fly his imprisoning,
Who lives he does not spare.
Such (as in Marriage) holily
Are knit, which none ought to untie,
He seeks to lose most wickedly,
Faith (plighted) to despite:
Brave Kings and Princes he destroys,
Mighty and feeble, he annoyes,
Whilst that, with proudest hearts he joys,
To feed his appetite.
The Lover often as desperate,
He eggs to slay himself through hate,
Better to be without Loves mate,
Than die, and damned be,
If any pleasure he does bring,
(For that) he (double) does us sting,
Love cannot yield forth any thing,
But what is sorrows fee.
To comfort us, when storm is done,
Then shines again the cheerful Sun,
Where, never joy to Lovers come,
For they are shipwrackt still.
Love is of man the fatal Rock, A Sentence.

On which his ship of ease does knock,
Whilst on the sands he does him shocke,
By death him for to spill:
He nouer felt has any pain,
That has not known the Lovers vain:
Each grief has but his course certain,
Where Love does bleed for aye;
No ill (so nigh) the heart does sit,
As does this fierce tormenting fit,
Death is more pleasing far than it,
Which rids our cares away.
Our souls with hope, it does torment,
Whilst naught, but Massacres are meant,
To die it is better far content,
Then (ay) live languishing.
Love (then) most cruel, without grace,
Whom I will curse in every place;
No God, but devil is in this case,
God, tha'utor's not of sin.
These verses being read, before the company, the first Nymphe, who wrote in
praise of Love, began thus to frame her speech, unto amorous Arcas.

It is a matter worthy of due consideration, to think how the Glory of
virtue, flies throughout the world eurey where, and how the renowned fame of
learning, fills the ears of all mortal men.

Never has there been any virtuous wight, A Sentence.
that has wanted his condign praise, for the more Virtue shunneth Glory, the
more it makes it self famous, Glory following after the heels of the same.

Many Sages have there been, in the old time, who thought (burying their
bodies) to have interred their memory and renown therewithal, but though
they sought it, yet could not they bring it to pass. A Similie.
For as the lightning, passes into the vessel without breaking of it, and
sucketh up the wine that is therein: Even so, fair Glory enters into the
Sepulcre and Tomb of the learned, and desirous to be at liberty, spreddeth it
self abroad, into every coast and country.

The fire covered close under the cinders, is more hot, then the outward
flame: and that Captive, more joyful, who is (newly) come forth of prison,
then he, that has (never) been in durance.

Even so, more bright, and more lively, is that famous renown, which we seek
to smother, and to keep secret, then that which has liberty to raunge abroad
every where.

Let never any wise man, then think to be without Glory, no more then the
leaude liver, A Sentence.
can be without shame and reproach. Virtue sows her seeds, in tr^uaile, and
trouble, which in the end, grow to be Glory and Honor, and which no tempest
from heaven can destroy, as it does other common Plants.

Thrice happier that labourer, that reapeth the fruits of his travail in
peace. And so, right blessedis that prudent man, that enjoys the fruits of
his Virtue with praise.

Well have (ye) verified my saying to be true, O (ye worthy persons) who are
(here) assembled in this place together. For your rare qualities have brought
you forth so many famous Glories, with so perfect and excellent a renown, as
it has come unto our ears (here) within this uncouth wilderness: and long
time is it (since) my Sister and I, have expected your coming, to determine
upon this our argument, as concerning the great valor, or the poverty and
baseness of Love.

Therefore since you (all) are now so happily here arrived, and met; Judge (I
beseech you) of our writings, which of us twain, shall carry away the praise
of victory, sending us, both away from you, thoroughly contented and pleased,
with your grave and prudent censure: whilst we in the mean space, will attend
(in all dutiful devotion) and with most willing minds, to be resolved of our
doubts, by your learned and reverent judgment, in all equity and right.

Whereupon, Philistel, reading over again the foresaid verses, set open
(first) the school unto these disputations, in these terms following.

No travail, (that is not without end,) or without hope, can properly be
called a pain, for he that labors truly, does endure and suffer (in hope)
to reap some sweet fruits of his labor, which does recompense him for the
toil he has taken; And (this) he cannot (rightly) call pains, but rather a
kind of busy and stirring exercise.

All men (every one in their vocation) travail and take pain, and yet (for
all that) they think not to suffer pain, in that they make no doubt to
receive the reward of their travail.

For if the labor of such men as receive fruit, were pain, then could they
not live, in as much, as very pain indeed, which is, neither comforted, nor
appeased, nor guerdoned with any reward, does bring a man (untimely) unto his
end.

We see in the bodies of such as be diseased, An example.
that the very anguish of the sickness, for want of helping the same, brings
them (at last) unto their grave. But now, we cannot give this name of pain,
(rightly) unto Love, because Lovers do live still, neither do they (suddenly)
die, for that they always hope well. Is it a pain unto a valiant Captain,
and an approved Soldier to sleep in the fields under a hedge, to suffer hunger
and cold, to endure thirst and dryness, rain and cold weather, using his
body to this hardness, (only) to purchase honor? I think not, but rather
(Judge it) to be a sweet and allowable exercise unto him. Even so, Lovers
cannot term that travail, which they endure (for loving) any pain at all,
but because (in the end) they either attain unto the scope of what they have
so long pursued and sought for: gathering the fruits, which to enjoy, has cost
them so deerly; Or else the continuance of time, purges and washes away the
pains from them quite and clean. Therefore, Love being no pain, it cannot be
taxed of cruelty: Nay more, I dare avouch, that it is very necessary, and not
a little profitable.

Fabius Maximus, was of opinion, that it was convenient that Carthage should be
suffered to continue in her ancient force, and not to be raced unto the
ground, that it might serve as a continual exercise unto the young Romans,
who for want of wan^es, would spoil themselves through too much idleness, which
(afterward) fell out to be too true; For the Romans being Lords over the whole
world (by reason they had no more enemies to overthrow) spoiled and overcame
their own selves, doing vengeance one upon another, with their own proper
swords: in requital of all such wrongs and injuries, as they had offered unto
strangers, who could never have been able to have done half so much hurt unto
them.

And so I may say of Love, The commendation of Love
for what exercise were able to keep down so great a number of follies
attending upon youth, who for the most part are idle and slothful, if Love,
did not set him to school, and busy his brains about matters of great moment
and weight? He would quarrel, brawle, and fight, delighting in drunkenness,
and in surfeitting: He would be arrogant and proud, a great Gamester, and a
leaud Dicer, or else become altogether sottish and foolish. But having (once
gotten him a Mistress, he must (if he mean to be entertained into her service)
cleanse himself of all these badde vices; For seeldome or never, does Love
meddle with leaude and ill disposed persons.

Well may comelines ravish and win the heart of a gallant Lady: but
beasilines, never is able, because it has no one jot of that divine
perfection, resembling the Almighty, which he does bestow upon such as
pleases him, to make to be loved, and to make them to be admyred for the
excellency of his gifts, which are enclosed within them.

Therefore must such young men as would be beloved, study to come to be grave,
curtcous, eloquent, stayed, and secret. These commendable qualities, must they
hold of Love in Capite: these being the ordinary lessons he teaches unto his
scholars, in his school.

Contrariwise, if you but mark these vain young Gulles, that love not at all,
you shall find them viciouslie given, Blasphemers, Drunkardes, Dicers,
arrogant Asses, and swaggering Bragadcchios.

The young Boy, that is without a Tutor, is he not worse, (and an hundred
times more rude) then he, that has a careful and severe Master, who looks
unto him narrowly, and sharply keeps him in? For nothing increases vice
and leaudenesse so much, as does wanton liberty.

The unbridled Colte runs galloping here and there, committing many foul
disorders. The privilege of Evil, takes away all Virtue, be cause it
stifleth the recompense of good deeds, and hinders the punishment due unto
offenses.

The ancient Princes, who would have their Children learn how to obey well,
before they should command, sent them to study amongst the Lacedcmonians, to
the intent they might be restrained and deprived of this enchaunting liberty,
through which men draw forth vice, as if it were at a full vessel.

LOVE therefore, must be governor and protector over youthfulness, which he
will purge from badde qualities, (as the Physician does the sick man, from
corrupt humors) replenishing him again, with many excellent and commendable
Virtues. Is not then Love very necessary? The wind carries the chafe from
the Corn, leaving only that, that is good, and fanned clearly. So does Love,
A Similie.
croppe off vice, cutting it away, as the husbandman does the superfluous
branches of his vine, leaving the inward mind, neat, and quite cleansed from
all filthiness of vice. Love can do more then all knowledge, yea, then the
Muses themselves can do. For he teaches learned men (who having a confused
mass and heap of thousand Sciences in their brains, not knowing in what good
manner to deliver their minds (ar full) as concerning these matters, how to
set down their meaning orderly, and to discourse of every thing, with good
method and judgment: imitating the cunning Goldsmiths, who of a great wedge of
Gold, forgeth and frames a great sort of good pieces of plate, right
profitable for men. Or resembling the Sun, which breaks and divides in
sunder the gloomy clouds, which darke^ the brightness of heaven. He is the
lukewarm blood of the Goat, mollifying and sotfning these rocks of Diamonds,
turning them to the use of all sorts of people. The greatest Doctors are but
Dunces, until Love has refined them, and that they have felt what his power
is, they after that, becoming witty and Courtly enditers, through the sweet
vain of Love. For necessity finds out the Art, and the peril sought forth
by the Soldior, urges him to find the means to save himself. And so is the
Lover compelled to please his Mistress, which he does, either discoursing unto
her his true and loyal affection, in smoothe and pleasing terms, or else,
couching them sweetly, and daintily in writing curiously, and with a Courtlike
phrase. And of this perfection, is Love also the author, and shall he then be
called a Pain, and not rather the father of all science and virtue? It is
reported that the Muses lighted one day upon Cupid, keeping him within a border
of flowers, but what could that border bring, but pleasure and contentment unto
them, who had enclosed him within the same? The Muses then honored Love (as
Conquerors are wont to be used) placing upon his head, a Crown of green
flowers, as also the most wisest in the world, have offered scrifices unto him,
and to his celestial Godhead, he being the greatest power amongst the Gods
that are in Heaven. Therefore, as I will not dispute against him, so dare I not
maintain the cause of any that should not plead in his behalf.

Herewithall the noble Knight held his peace, daunting very much the other
Nymph that had written against LOVE, with these his lively and excellent
reasons, which (she thought) were of such efficacy and force, that they could
hardly be refelled by any other. But the old man, who found himself to be
overcome in the argument he had with Philistell, as concerning Inchauntment
and Sorcerie, willing to recover his lost honor, and to win the spurs
again, in this second disputation, replied against Love, in this wise.

I cannot deny, but must needs confess, that neither the ordinary travails
that men use, nor the day lie labors which they usually take, ought to be
called Pain, for they are not (always) of one force and nature, they passing
away, quiet and rest coming in their place, as the Bow, that cannot always
remain stiff and bent, whereas Love only (and that most justly) deserves
well this name of Pain. An example.
The Laborer being paid for his work, is contented, and takes his rest, the
Husbandman, reaping his corn, takes his ease, and lives merrily after: but
in Love, what quietness can be found? The poor drudge being weary, reposeth
himself in the night, so does the tired Traveler, and every beast whatsoever:
but the Lover, what rest receives he, either in the night or day? As the day
is tedious unto him, so is the night irksome and sad, are they then freed of
pain? The hungry desire never takes quiet ease, but is in continual pain:
the greedy covetous wretch, craving still gold, can never so much as slumber
one wink: but the tormented Lovers, leads a wotse life (far) then both
these twain, because that good which he so much wishes for (and yet cannot
obtain it) seems more precious unto him, then all the Treasures in the world.

This doctrine, to KNOW: HIMSELF, does him no good at all, for it cannot
bridle his passions, keep in his head strong will, nor curb or constrain his
ardent affections: and he that cannot so do, can never be quiet in his mind.
Now the Lover coueteth always, and covetousness is the child of pain: Is not
then Love the author of pain? and is it any thing else then mere grief? Nay,
although the Lover obtains that which he desires, yet for all that, his
torments cease not, because he wishes still to continue the same: and (for
that the sore doubt he has to lose that, which he has obtained with so much
travel) increases the pain (still) in him. The more gold the covetous myzer
possesses, the more continually he wishes, A Sentence.
by reason the contentme^t of man is without any limit: for being glutted with
one kind of meat, he is greedy and hungry after an other. Diogines gave out,
that he was contented in his poverty, but yet he was not, for he did hunt
after vainglory. What shall we then say of Lovers? who not only desire to
enjoy their Loves, but also a continuation still to gather them. And when, that
length of much time, has quenched this fire of love, yet is there still
remaining some hot cinders, which presently is set on fire with the wind of
desire, as a flame (when it is out) is revived again, with the breath of the
Air: the selfsame Love, being of this property, that after it has a long
space troubled and tormented, overthrown, and ruinated a man, with continual
pain and anguish of mind, in the end it takes away his life, whether he
will or no. Achilles knows this to be true, who died for loving Polixena,
being slain most miserably amongst his enemies. So does Priam, An Example.
the foolish love of incestuous Paris, being the cause he lost his life. And so
does sage Agamemnon, whose disloyal wife cut his own throat, because she
might (the more safer) follow her disordinate appetite. O what a pernicious
thing is this Love! and how often has it broke the plighted oath between man
and wife, making them amorous of strangers, and causing them to disdain their
nuptial bed, with base and filthy whoredom? The good Emperor Marcus
Aurelius, remembered this but too too well, who saw so often his wife, over
familar with so many: and poor Sampson through love, was deprived of his
strength; and made a slave unto others: that Sampson I say, who was wont to
conquer others, and to make them become tributaries unto him.

Again, what faith and trust is there to be reposed in Lovers, so cunning are
they; and so ready to break their promises, and to swear falsely? that Jupiter
iesteth and scoffeth at their protestations, as one that thinks, they neither
can nor ought to keep them any longer then they list. For if men (now a days)
be so basely given, that they will strait yield unto Love, and that the desire
to enjoy a little paltrie beauty, or a little colored complexion, composde of
white and red, can make them to forget all duty, all promise, and their own
good nature it self; What then should hinder them, but that they may love in
another place, to endanger their Faith there, and to swear, and forswear
themselves again? For he that once commits one sin, will easily fall
into diverse other more grievous: and he that is known to be faulty in one
thing, A Sentence.
is reputed to have offended in all the rest. Besides, so far is Love off,
from standing the learned in any stead, that it hinders and overthrows
their learning: for it is impossible for a learned man, both to love, and
follow his study together, because the mind cannot in one and the selfsame
time, intend to hunt after diverse matters: and for that, the care which Love
engenders, hinders a wise man, in prositing himself at his book, and does
withdraw him from the pervsing and reading of the same.

Again, if there be never so mean and little ascience in the world, but is
sufficient to employ a man's whole life time, and all his wits therein, and
yet for all that, it has never been found, that any could ever sound the
deapth of the same: How (then) is it possible, that a wise man should be able
to follow both Love and Learning, and (to) prove excellent in both? Nay then,
I will see farther, and dare avouch, that the malice of the Serpent, not only
spoyleth and corrupts the study of the wise, but also his condition and
religion. And that this is true, great David, and his son Solomon, can
witness, and the Jews themselves, whom the love of the Moabite women, which
the traiterous King Balaac sent unto them, moved from the service of the true
God, making them become most wicked and abominable Idolaters. What greater
mischief can happen unto a man, then to deny his God, his faith, his belief,
and his religion: yea, and therewithal, to loose all his wisdom, and
authority? If Love (then) be the cause of so many misfortunes unto men, and
brings them with him unto them, is not he then, the damnable author of our
ruin, our perpetual pain, and utter overthrow? heeis far worfe then all
the poisonous serpents of the earth, yea, then the Devils of of hell themselves.

Not so, quoth Coribant, and therefore I pray you make a stop there: for Love
is not of that bad nature, neither is he to be compared unto such wicked
creatures, as you would have us believe: for were it not for him (whom you
revile so much) neither you, nor any man else could live at all. That which
maintains all things, and gives life and force unto them, can that be
teatmed an evil spirst? So far off is Love from being such a one, as he has
made the Fiendes of hell themselves, mild and gentle, when the faithful
Orpheus went down thither, to bring back his dear espouse. That which does
not usurp upon public honesty, but has respect unto every virtuous action,
may it be called an enemy of Nature? Love has preserved, both honor, respect,
and virtue, then why should any blame him? The son of Seleucus, falling in
love with his stepmother, chose rather to be brought (even unto deaths door)
then to declare as much as his passion, for fear least he should have offended
the honor, respect, and the obeisance of a Father, through the duty of a
loving Son. There is no doubt, but that man is to be commended highly, who
rather consents unto his own death, ruin, and misery, then to commit a most
notorious and unnatural fact. Love forces the Lover, to choose (rather) to
die, A Sentence.
then to perpetrate any heinous fault. Is Love then the subject of blame? Love
resembles wine, which taken moderately, and with measure, nourishes the
body, but being used too excessiuely, it burns and inflameth the same. Even
so Love, being well and wisely applied, may bring much profit and glory, as it
did unto the Romans and Sabines, who being ready to encounter, and to kill one
another, they agreed so lovingly, as (ever after) they were but as one body,
or a City within themselves. Indeed if it be ill employed, then I must needs
say, it may do much hurt: but it is the Lover himself that is in fault
thereof, and not Love. The grape of the vineyard, of it self is good, and was
given for a nourishment unto man, yet nevertheless, man sometimes dies, with
taking overmuch thereof: but is this the fault of the grape, or of him that
abused the same? Is there any precious treasure to be found, throughout the
compass of the wide and spacious world, that is to be compared unto a loyal
and faithful friend? What happier contentment can there be, between man and
wife, then chaste and perfect love? The greatest blessing that ever Mithr^dates
found in this life, was his kind wife, that in all his troubles, still did
assist and accompany him, she being attired in the apparel of a man, and
doing him all the serurce she could, as if she had been the meanest of his
ordinary followers. Many things are there (bestowed upon us) by the Heavens,
which of their own natures are good, and yet the malice of man does alter
them, into a bad property: As weapons, with which they kill one another: Fire,
wherewith they burn whole Cities and towns: Gold, with which virtue is
corrupted: and the cloak of Religion, wherewith they cover their proud
ambition, with many such like.

Yet although these things are (thus ill used) and wrested by the corruption of
man, we must not therefore say, they are bad of their own selves: but rather,
by reason of the malice of others. Even so, Love being perfect and good (in his
own proper nature) and of his own self, be abused and made worse, through
the default of men; it is not he, but they, that are to be condemned for the
same. Had Jupiter never loved, the earth had neaer been cleansed, nor purged of
such monsters, as much did trouble it, for then the mighty Hercules had never
been borne. Mark I beseech you, how much we all are beholding unto Love. Many
times when men fall a discoursing, and from words to quarrels, so far is Love
off, from being the author thereof, as quite contrary, (were it not for his
presence) contentious Discord would animate one against another, every one to
murder his companion and acquaintance: for where Love is, there never is seen
any disagreement at all. And therefore is Love the father of concord and peace,
and not of brawling and strife: A Historiz.
yea, and so puissant and forcible is he, as his power also extends to force
wild beasts to be mild, as was that Lion which was brought before Titus the
Emperor, which in steed of devouring the poor slane (who was flung unto her,
to staunch her exceeding great hunger) gently fell down at his feet, stroking
him, and doing him all the reverence that might be, and loving him most
dearly, by reason that this slave (flying away from the severe cruelty of his
master, and lighting into a wood, where this beast was, had pulled out a great
thorn out of his foot, which most pitiouslie did grieve him. Now if brute
beasts are taught to love, out of doubt then, such men shall be much condemned,
as will not follow the like example. The grave Spartans put in practice this
counsel, to the intent to have children, in as much as they imagined that such
as were begotten, through a firm and passing kind of good liking, would
prove far more valiant and courageous, then such as were borne of the
husband and wife, without loving one an other.

And surely we see by experience, that such children are more gallant, and of a
brauer spirit, then those that are brought forth into the world lawfully:
whether it is either because the love of such persons is more affectionate and
passionate, that are the cause of their byrths, or whether it be, for that they
see by reason that they are Bastards, they are deprived of their Parents
inheritance, and therefore the more willingly thrust forth themselves to seek
their own advancement.

Iefpha the Judge of Israel, and William, surnamed the Conqueror, that got the
Crown of England, were of this number, with infinite other brave personages.
So that by this, we may gather, that Love not only brings forth honor and
profit unto men, but also an unspeakable kind of comfort withal. They that
have tried the pleasure thereof, can better judge then I: For the delight that
Love affords, is so sweet, so gentle, and so delightful, as it is not
possible to set down, no, nor scarce to conceive the same, in any thoughts:
So that in comparison of that, all other mortal joys are but; A Bomparison
as it were, small sparkles, and like unto little stars in respect of this,
which for the glory thereof may be compared unto the splendent Sun.
Heerewithall Coribant kept silence, leaving Arcas to follow this discourse, and
to make an end of this disputation, which he did, in these terms following.

If it be lawful for one to say something, and to argue of that which we
cannot see, (as of a Deity or Godhead) then must we reason by the effects of
the same. But these which exceed our humane capacity and conceit, give us a
most certain and sufficient testimony, that we ought to believe, that there
is a certain puissance and power, far greater then is our own, which we
cannot attribute unto any other then unto GOD. As in a wilderness, the houses
there built, testify that men be dwelling therein, because they are the work
of men's hands. So may we say of Love, and so it is with him, for never has any
person seen him, nor viewed him at any time; yet notwithstanding, A Similie.
every one is able to talk and to discourse of him, by reason of the
wonderful effects, which proceed from his divine power and might. Where you
say, that Children borne out of marriage, are valiant and courageous; At that I
marvel nothing at all: for Love being a Bastard (as the son of Mars and
Venus) cannot do less, then like, support, and affect his brethren, they
having the same beginning that he has.

Nevertheless, (for all they have some particular gift incident unto them) yet
are they (as illegitimate) deprived both by Nature, and by the Civil Law, from
bearing any charge or office in the commonwealth, as their birth is contrary
unto the custom, as well of honesty, as of all civil order and Law.
Therefore Love is not praise-worthie in this point, for many times he
confounds Right, and makes a gallimalfrie, or a mingle-mangle of Justice,
bringing such unlawful Brattes as these, to inherit with those that are
lawfully begotten, either for default that they are not known, or taken to be
such, or else, because their presupposed father, will not publish them for
Bastards, for that he will not offend the honor of his wife.

But say the world were freed from such kind of men, and that there were no
more such to be found: yet for all that, it should be (never a whit) the less
honored, nor less defended, I confess and yield, that Love is mighty, and
of great power, in the procreation of such children. But as all Countries and
Realms (without the execution of Justice) are but plain and open theeueries,
and robberies, living as licentious Outlawes: So Love without reason and
Justice, is but a disordinate appetite, trampling under his feet, all respect,
all Justice, and all Law, to satisfy and assuage his hot and burning passions.

And how much Sumiramis, the nieces of Augustus the Emperor, Poppea,
Agrippina, Faustina, and diverse others, have been condemned, for following such
kind of Love, and giving over themselves, most voluptuously, unto all sorts of
people, you know as well as I am able to report. Where you say, that Love is
not the author of vice, but rather men, who apply the same ill, and abase it,
through the badnesse of their own nature; I answer, that it is nothing so. For
as the prisoner, cannot dispose of him, who is his keeper, and holds him
captive: Even so, men are so far off from ruling Love, according as they
would, that he uses them as he list, holding them so fast (in such sure
bands) as they can do nothing but what shall please him. There is difference
between him and wine: for a man may take heed if he will, that he drink not
so much, until he be drunk, but he cannot (so easily) resist Love, in as
much, as that reason being suppressed which is in man (upon which presently,
Love, as a tyrant ceazeth) he (can then) do no more of himself, he being
constrained and compelled, to follow the will and command of him, that does
signorize over him. For if Love were in the free liberty, and at the devotion
and disposition of men, and that they might employ him as they should think
best, then would not so many wretched Lovers, endure such cruel torments and
bitter anguish as they do, but would quickly rid themselves from out his
cruel hands.

But (alas) they can no more get from him, then the poor bond-slaue, can get
out of his chains, except it please his Lord and master. Therefore, we must
not say, that men can order and bridle Love at their own pleasures, turning
him, to good or bad purposes, as they shall think best, when it is quite
contrary, (and as they say, Allo reuerso) he playing the usurping tyrant over
them.

In the end of your speech (to make amends) you tell me, that this selfsame
Love, makes a perfect and an eternal league of friendship, between Gods and
men, in such sort, as it forces the husband to offer his life most willingly,
for his wives sake, and that the wife, does the like for the conservation of
her husbands welfare.

As Craccus, A Similie.
who to continue his wives life, shortened his own. And as Alcesta did, who
offered her self to die for Adentus her husbands sake. Yet as sharp and
strong medicines, engendered much danger and fear, yea and many times, are much
hurtful to the body of man, so Love (during this amity) brings forth many
bad and untowardly children, which alter and change their minds very much,
and are not a little hurtful unto both parties: as the burning Jealousy which
so much galled poor Juno long since, as the whoredoms, with which Venus
defiled the bed of Vulcan her husband, with the number of Rapes used by
Jupiter, and such like bad stuff. So as you see so many evils to proceed, for
one small little good.

But as he cannot be called a bountiful and liberal giver indeed, who
presents and bestows a small trifle, to purchase huge and mighty riches.
Even so, Love cannot be counted, neither good, nor healthful, when for one
(only) good turn he does, he yields forth so many sufficient proofs, of
his wicked and bad nature.

In no one action, does Love merit commendations, for he respects neither
reason nor Justice, and such things, as are void of those two qualities, can
never deserve honor, nor cause themselves to be counted perfect: he is without
reason, in that he regards neither law, nor kindred, friendship nor
acquaintasce, no good turn, nor any kind consideration else, so as he may
come to obtain what he desires. One while violating and breaking the laws of
hospitality: another while, those of marriage: and then, those of parentage
and kindred. He is without Justice, because he rauisheth, and takes away by
force, that which is none of his own, applying the same to his own advantage,
as if it were his own proper goods; raising and procuring, by these bad
means, thousands of brawles and brabbles, debates and quarrels, and continual
wars and battle; In steed of seemly, and fit exercises, he should
acquaint young men withal, he oftentimes makes them so mad and furious, as
they stick not to commit rapes, to offer violence, and to do all the
villainies that may be, thereby infringing the peace and laws of the
commonwealth.

Well may he be compared unto the Snake, which the husbandman carried in his
bosom to warm, it being nie dead for cold, which afterward went about to
sting him for his pains.

So Love, in requital, and for amends unto us, for the honor we have borne
him, and because we have so courteously entertained him, stingeth us with fury
and rage, and with injustice and misery, these being the fruits which he
brings us, and which are (as it were the precursors and forerunners, of a
most woeful and wretched death, which end, (most commonly) lights upon
Lovers: for fury is the daughter of sorrow, and not of pleasure, which our
desire does overmuch covet.

And that I allege nothing but Truth, I will prove it most apparent and
plain, by a goodly History, which if you please to give me audience, I will
deliver unto you. Whereupon they were all silent, when the Shephcard thus began
his woeful Tragedy.

LOVE, author of all evil, (the nurse of dainties delicate, The strange
history, and woeful end of proud Sycambra, and loyal Zersira.

That chooses for to soiourne proud, in Palaces of State:
Who makes himself be honored, as Father of the skies,
In Courts of mightiest Kings, and in the heavens, among Gods likewise.
As yet scarce haunted had the Plains, congealed with Ice and cold,
Nor solitary Deserts strange, which snowy mountains hold.
He had but little in the Woods (yet) used for to be,
Permitting Shepherds quietly, to joy their liberty.
Who, not so much (as thinking once, on him) had no more care,
Then their small flocks forth for to lead, along the meadows fair.
To watch, and to defend them, (armed) for armed still they were,
From roaring Lion, howling Wolf, or from the ravenous Bear.
Right happy is that man, that has, then (this) no worser foe,
The pleasant sweetness of his life, to make him to forgo.
Happy indeed, if other thought, he has not in this life,
This travail being the cause of all content, and foe to strife.
Withouten carke and care, they past their time deuoyd of fear,
And from the Fatal sisters sheeres, exempt and freed they were.
As iocund, and as meerrily they lived, as day was long,
No mestfull grief was intermixed, their sweet discourse among.
Nor were their cheeks beblubbered (still) with tears cominually,
As wretched Lovers, who bewail their woes, with weeping eye.
Withouten sighs, and sorrows sad, they lived most blessed than,
Nor they, their Fortunes did revile, and as accursed ban.
No pittious Tennor, such as this, their Songs or Chantings had,
No mournful note came heavily, forth from their breasts ore-sad.
As Lovers use, their Music sweet, and merry warbling voice,
Much like that of the Gods of Woods, that each thing does rejoice.
No envious malice among them was, no poison at their Table,
No proud desire, the spring-tyde of their youth, made miserable.
Exempt from all ambitious thoughts they were, whose mounting dart
(Piercing into the minds of men) does make them often smart.
Nor any other passion strange had they, or did endure,
Then such as did an earnest care, for their poor flocks procure.
They thought they could resist Loves force, and often did jest at him,
Thinking he was not able, them under his yoke to bring.
And as a stubborn Rock (we see) the Tempests rage does scorn,
Who growing angry at his pride, renues afresh his storm.
Until, with flashy Laghtning-claps, in pieces he does break
His flintie stones, whilst to resist, his fury is too weak.
And with a boisterous Whyrle-winds blast, on sudden casts down all,
So as being cleft in midst, it does, in thousand pieces fall.
Transporting (here and there) apart, by violence so burst, A Similie.

And with the clap of Thunderbolt, becomes black as dust.
Along the meadows and the fields, whilst they as trembling stand,
To see how raging Tempests fell, ore every thing command.
Even so, these Shepherds mocked at Love, they scorned at his renown,
Who, chafing at them, (quickly) pulled their Peacocks plumes adowne.
Taking them prisoners in the snares, which they for others set,
Whilst (idly) they went to hunt, the light-foote Leueret.
So long they gib'de at him, till at the last, they bought it dear,
As did the Muses heretofore, when as they amorous were.
And had him taken fettered fast, within a Flowrie line,
He thinking them to have embraced, through his great power divine.
For Cupid in mean time, as one envious of their glory,
Thinking the fairer that he took, the more his victory.
Resolved to vanquish them, and in his yoke to make them draw,
And force them prove (against their wills) the rigor of his law.
He at anynch does follow them, watching most warily,
As does the Hunts-man when his game (the wild Boore) he does spy.
When they were set along the banks, of some clear running brook.
Or on some little Hillock small, or Oak for shade had took.
Or whilst (like Fairies) they sat down, about some silver spring,
Some working, and some doing one, and some, another thing.
Some, tuning their Rebeccas rude, and some their Cornets shrill,
Each one, themselves applying to what sport they had most will.
Whilst in the thickest of the grass, and meadows colored green,
Their pretty foolish Flocks to dance to feed, and bleat, were seen.
Mean time, LOVE watch't with wary heed, advantage for to take,
To spoil their pleasures sweet, and them his prisoners for to make.
But he did find that this could not upon the have be done,
To vanquish such as prudent be, A Sentence.
is not effected soon.
This Fort of Virtue to assault, he could not find the feate,
Sore doubting, lest in skirmishing, he should (repulst) be beat.
Not easily can Love surprise, the double fenced breast
Of such a one, A Sentence.
who for his Love, of virtue is possessed.
Where (through prevention grave) he knew, he no good there could find,
Whilst, among chaste hearts, his force was like, a little blast of wind.
In the end, when long he had attempt (although it was in vain)
He plays the subtle Spy, with craft, his purpose to obtain.
Thrusting himself in midst of, this chaste and harmles flock,
As does the Wolf, when he does mean, the silly Lamhes to mock.
Dancing within the eyes most fair, of fairest Shepherdess,
To make himself be honored there, with lowly humbleness.
There does he take his lodging up, this practice for to prove,
And rauisheth thousands of hearts (most chaste) with her sweet Lone.
Mean while, unto the Shepherds all, this Shepherdess does seem
So fair a Creature, as her face, immortal they do deem.
They, her adore within their souls, and love her perfectly,
They seek to serve her, honoring her with zeal, religiously.
But she makes no account of them, she thinks her self divine,
Whilst mortal men, for her to love, she scorns, as it were a crime.
Thus Love, with pride, such minds does fill, as with such heat is firde,
And who, with such disdainful spirits, most hauty are inspirde.
So (often) fine coyest Dames, A Sentence.
most proud, and insolent become,
When, men they will have to account of them, and yet men's sights will faun.
Even as that Soldier, who does back return to native soil
As victor, not a little vaunts, and bragges of golden spoil.
So with vainglory, A Comparison
small is not, this angel possessed,
Whose insolency is such, as Heavens themselves the same detest.
Honor, oft-times, engendered is, of the most perfects thing,
Each one belieues his own conceit, (his passion following)
Accounts of what is excellent, within his proper soul,
But yet such faults as him disgrace, he never does control.
He sees the goodliest gifts he has, A Sentence.
to be distaind with pride,
Yet on this vice so palpable, to look he cannot bide.
This Shepherdess, Sycambra proud, was called, and christened so,
Whose high aspiring, wrought (in the end) her final overthrow.
A fair young Shepherd did her love (her) did he lone alone,
But at her hands (poor silly soul) contentment found he none.
For though she knew affection his, did toward her surmount,
Yet she, not of his friendship waide, nor of him made no count.
Too too divine, she thought her self, for any for to love,
Loves self, (so high she looked) her will could hardly change or move.
Yet, by the selfsame Love, her pride was punished to her cost,
And this presumptuous mind of hers, was cause her life she lost.
For now behold, LOVE (who to the Gods) for might yields not at all.
(Bravely) totame proud stubborn hearts, that pride might have a fall.
Beyond, this lofty minded Girl does soar, the prize to have,
Whilst to a heart more proud then hers, he makes her stoop, like slane.
This was a Springall young, who of his youth was in the prime,
Sanguin, as Adon, fair, as fair Nurcissus, in his time.
As trim, and fresh as May, whose chief delight and exercise,
Was hunting of the ravenous Wolf, as was his usual guise.
The poisoned darts of restles Love, which loyal hearts does slay,
His wonted rest, brake not at all, by night, nor yet by day.
He never dreamed of, nor ere knew, what those sad waylings means.
Which gripes the Lovers often with griefs, and makes them pule and lean.
He careful, looking to his sheep, his time away did pass,
In hunting was his chiefest joy, his love, wet fishing was.
Thus do you see, how Love revenged himself, on that coye Dame,
Who ore-presumptuous, both his grace and favor did disdaint.
Thus, hurly burly makes he, being the sire of leand debate,
Confounds all orders good, and sense, and changes our estate.
So brave Achilles loved, yet could not loved be of his friend,
So did Apollo, Daphne like, but tw'as unto no end.
So thousands loved have, who nere could right rewarded be.
Whilst they true trial made of Loves most vninst crueltte. A Sentence.

Sycambra, she (whom others lik'te) did love, s^^s being loved,
And seeking others to transform, herself transformde she proon'd.
The lovely Swain which she adorde, Armanda, (^^epedso,)
Armanda, whom Sycambra sought, yet nere could find him the.
Of stature he was tall, well made of personage and face,
And in discretion bare himself, with trim and seemly grace.
His chestnut hair, was like unto the whitish waters wet,
Which dangling down in tresses fair, did wave along his neck.
His faultlesse for-head, large and broad, as outward witness gane,
By secret instinct (as it were) of his stout courage brane.
His eyes in color like to black, with twinkling eyebrows hid,
The swift flight which from bow does fly, resemble aptly did.
His Currall mouth was Rubie red, like to the ruddyrose,
When through the heat of Sun, himself he daintily does close.
His checks, white as the Cream, wherein red strawberies one flings,
His Gate and port, like to the state Maiesticall of kings.
His naked chinne, declared his youth, on which no hair was yet,
His well-growne arms, his valor stout: his speech, his prudent wit.
By this same gentle Shepherd, was Sycambras pride took down,
Since (careless of her care for him) he on her still did frown.
Cruel he was without remorse, unto her endless pain,
As she unto her Lover was, retchlesse and hard again.
His great disdain, this cruelty made her to feel the more,
Which (through his beauty, over proud) he made her suffer sore.
Thus, often by selfsame punishment, which we do others make
To feel, for our offenses bad, like penance we do take. A Sentence.

So (often) the Heavens, by selfsame Blade, to slay our proper Coarse,
(With which we others slaughtered have) do justly us enforce.
Now whilst this Shepherdess did burn, infancy, with unease,
Nothing, (unless Armanda it was) her eyes bewitched, could please.
Yet nothing did Armanda loath so much, as when he spide
Sycambra, hateful to his sight, for then, for spite he did.
Thus, their desires (quite contrary) the one unto the other,
Could not but bring forth thousand griefs, which they were forced to smother.
Sycambra cursed that hapless Love, which made her for to burn,
For him, who unto her again, like Love did not return.
And contrary, that she must hate the Amity so rare,
Which Zerphir, Zerphir, Lover hers, most loyal to her bare.
For so that gentle Swain was called, whose friendship was not fainde,
And who, for honoring her so much, much sorrow had sustainde.
Mean space, Sycambra night and day, laments her Fortunes hard,
Accusing her cross Fate, and Love, from all good luck debard.
Whilst all this while, Armanda blythe, his hunting follows fast,
And chasing of the Heart and Hynde, his time with pleasure past.
He sleeps soundly in the night, withouten dread or fear,
Whilst amorous (only) of his health, himself he seeks to clear.
But weladay, the other Swayne, poor Zerphir, Zerphir poor,
As did Sycambra, so did he, most grievous pains endure.
As well as she Armanda loved, helon'd her, or as much,
Whilst with the flame of selfsame fire, Love his true heart did touch.
Yet could he not this uncouth flame, extinguish, cool, or quench,
Love, so from case and remedy, did keep him as a fence.
Sycambras grief, and Zerphires pain, alike were in like case,
Whilst from their blubbered eyes, salt tearesran trickling down apace.
Both wounded with like Love, and yet with diverse sundry darts,
Increasing more their dolours, and their pangs within their hearts.
Sycambra nere Armanda could, attain as often she sought,
Nor to affect Zerphir, her Swain, she ever could be brought.
Most wretched her hard hap, to place Love, where she reapt disdain,
Withouten any remedy, for to assuage her pain.
Nor to have power to succor him, who was her Lover true,
Whom she did force (yet could not choose) through her disdain to rue.
Thus many days, in this estate, these strange desires remaind,
Whilst neither length of time, nor wees, their Fortunes ever changed.
Sycambra loving still the man, that would not her requite,
Nor she once smiling on her Swayne, whose joy was in her sight.
But in the end, unable more this choking rage to smother,
She did resolve, at resolute, her toments to discover.
To try if she Armanda could, persuade to ease her smart,
And if a gainful purchase she could make, of his dear heart.
For one day (as his fashion was) as he was on the ways,
Attending on his flock of sheep, which want only did grase,
Not thinking he of any Love, (detesting such a fee)
Devising thousand toys himself to please, as he did go.
Sycambra sweetly him accosts, and prays him do her grace,
To give her leave, her Fortunes hard, she may discourse a space.
And not her prayers to disdain, nor yet her secret vow,
Nor crueller then Gods to be, who unto prayers how.
Vouchsafing mortal men to hear, and them not to despise,
But moved unto compassion, heal their wounds in pittious wise.
These words Armanda galled much, (who naught for her did pass)
Yet she so vrg'de him, as to hear her speak, content he was.
She then as one amazde in mind, quite out of countenance,
Her vital spirits bereft of hope, her joys for to advance.
A cold swet over all her face, quaking with frightfulness,
Her eyes half shut for shame, her heart fraughted with much distress
Her senses, daunted sore, her breath still panting too and fro,
All which, as true forerunners, did her griefs at hand fore-show.
Her tongue stuttring, and stammering thick, her voice trembling and soft,
Now weeping, and then sobbing fast, and sighing then full often.
She thus to him (unkind) did speak at last, though (first) it were long,
To him who pleasure small did take, in this her woeful Song.
Ah my Armanda, wilt not take on me compassion?
Nor of these torments which do vex me, in this uncouth fashion?
Will thou her send most cruelly, unto her fatal Tomb?
Her, who in soul has vow'de thine own, alone for to become?
Have thou the heart, the wight that lives, only for thee to slay?
To the end she might thee dutious serve, and chastely thee obey?
Sweet Shepherd, every labor great, deserves a recompense,
And (less men justly deal) the Heavens with them will not dispense.
They must respect unto them give, and awful honor chief, A Sentence.

They must their Lovers love, and seek to swage their inward grief.
Else are they not so courteous as is the Lioness,
Who shows to him that feeds her, a kind of thankfulness.
Ah then regard my pittious plaintes, reward me for my pain,
And suffer me to joy thy love, which I deserve to gain.
After a long laborious toil, the Husbandman does reap,
The wished for fruit, which Harvest does with plenty on him heap.
Whereby he well is guerdoned, for moyling so before,
Forgetting quite all former care, which troubled him full sore.
And will thou I, that party be, afflicted with such cross?
That I alone, shall merit none receive, for all my loss?
That I shall always live in Dole, in sad lamenting still,
Nor find no ease for all my griefs, is this thy pleasures will?
Will thou be without pardon sweet, and mercy all alone,
Like to a Fury full of hate, will thou be such a one?
Ah sweet Armanda, (heart too fair) so cruel for to be,
Beauty and Mercy, as two Twins, together stillagree. A Sentence.

Even as the Iuye with his arms, the wall does close embrace,
Winding himself most hard thereto: So Beauty cleanes to Grace.
And will thou then by Bedlem rage, thy Beauty rare defame?
Will thou through thy strange crucltie, purchase a Murderers name?
Will thou (ore-come with ore-much spite) force her unwilling die?
Who thee adoreth as the Gods above, most reverently?
Alack Armanda, do not so, thy Virtue so to wrong,
Wise men, themselves so carry, as (they after death) live long. A Sentence.

We must not have respect alone unto the present thing,
But hope that future praise, great ease unto our souls may bring.
Ah then (dear Shepherd) mercy show to me, which shall redowne,
To thy immortal Glory much, and much to thy renown.
Be thou content to see her breathe, who by thy Grace does live:
And who to view thy hurts, in soul (more then thy self) would grieve,
No Treasure like a faihfull Friend, so rich you can denise,
Who to himself gets foes, in mind, much diseontented dies.
Friendship from Heaven first come, and as a gift divine is held, A Sentence.

And mortal men from overthrows, it saved has not seld.
Then (Dear) vouchsafe for to appease the torments I endure,
Appease my sorrows, and my wounds (nigh mortal) daine to cure.
Nor force me not, lest dying, I (when life from me shall part)
Do call upon thee in my death, as if chief cause thou were.
Ah speak then (my Delight) and clear from me this bitter storm,
By comforting my deadly woes, which I too long have borne.
To the end thy kindness mild, to help my sickness may be seen,
As hitherto, the Author of my troubles thou have been.
But why do thou so long delay to answer unto me?
Hard hearted more then flintie rocks, which in the mountains be.
Ah cruel man, I well perceive, my love thou do disdain,
Nor wilt vouchsafe in cheerful wise, to staunch my bleeding vain.
I see thou meanst with those thine eyes, prides darts, still me to pierce,
To close me in my fatal Tomb, through rigor thine, so fierce.
Well, be it so, I am content; For happy I them guess,
Who dying, A Sentence.
see to dye with them, their griefs, which then do cease.
And since I find that sauadge-like, thou will not rue my state,
I am well pleased to end my days, because thou do me hate.
Then (yet but daine to speak to me) say, if thou will assuage,
Or still increase these plagues of mine, which do within me rage?
(Cruel, dispatch my loyalty, which nere from thee did swerue)
Say in thy conscience, does it not, one word of thee deserve?
Alas, A Sentence.
answer, but I, or no, what less thing can one find,
Or baser priz'de, then is a word, which is but sound of wind?
Thus said, she sighing ceast, whilst tears from cheeks, like showers did
fall,
Yet, nor her self, nor tears, nor speech, Armanda moved at all.
Nay more, so cruel was he grown, as he disdaind to look
Upon her face, her beauteous face, which hardly he could brook.
Her passionate words, could not persuade, they made him hate her more,
That he so long had given her ear, himself he blamed sore.
In the end, forced by the vrgings often, and importunity
Of sad Sicambra, who like Ghost, did haunt him with her cry.
With furious looks, and frowning brow, these words at last he spoke,
Which (like a dismal Oracle) her heart in sunder broke.
Foolish Sicambra, (thus in vain) to vex me, what do mean?
From these fond fittes of idle Love: thy mind, why do not weane?
It Is thou, that makst Armanda die, in worse then woeful wise,
Armanda, who thy speech and love contemnes, as worthless prise.
Thy tedious tale, told to no end, to hear, he little joys,
He dies, tormented, tir'de, and gaul'd, to hear thee make such noise.
Now pry thee, pry thee, let alone Armanda miserable,
Who for to take his wonted rest, is not through thee scarce able.
He at thy follies does but smile; his chief delight and love,
Is for to chase wild beasts of prey, his strength against them to prove.
He cannot like of any thing, except his flock of sheep,
With which, (to pleasure his, not small) he in the fields does keep.
To force one love against his will, is, what can never be,
Never the same has been as yet. nor shall you find't in me.
For loyal Love, that it may dure, and never prove to faint,
Does of himself, A Sentence.
seize on the heart, without force or constraint.
Where being forced, it is always bad, imperfect and unsound,
For nothing's goodly, but what is built, on Friendships firmest ground.
Then why, fond Gyrle, art thou so mad, to love, me to constrain?
By this thy earnest urging speech, which thou too well can feign?
I tell thee, I in those false eyes, nor face of thine, delight,
Nor do I pity ought at all, thy hard and heavy plight,
I laugh to see thee (heavy) weep, to hear thee sigh, I smile:
And in thy martyring, much do joy, whilst thou complainst the while.
Poor wretch, thou do but loosethy time; nor ever shall thou find,
Armanda will his fancy change, to thee for to be kind.
He Will never love thee; For before his heart should so conspire
To quench so worthless flames, a death most strange he would desire.
For never greater mischief vile, can any, himself bring,
Then when he tries the laws of Love, and feels his poisonous sting.
Unhappy they that know the same, and wise I him account,
That with this bedlem passion mad, will not at all confrount.
My years are too too young, mine age not ripe enough as yet,
My self to subject as a slave, to Love his furious fit.
Nor have I time enough, to be a scholar in his school,
And I am wild enough, although I play not so the fool.
Then leave me to my self, that I may of my self dispose,
Whose pleasure, hunting is, whose sport, is quiet soft repose.
And come not thus to trouble me, with these thy bawling cries,
Which I assure thee, I disdain, in most contemptuous wise.
Be gone, nor look (here) any more, thou come this text to preach,
For, for such sickness as these, I am no pleasing leach.
And therewith all the Shepherd stern departs, and all alone
Sicambra leanes vncomforted, Sanus pitying of her moan.
Alack, what should she do as now? She could do naught but wail,
Which rather did increase her grief, then cause the same to quail.
No tears our passions can repress, which from the heart arise,
A sign they are of woe, but want the perfect remedy.
It is but lost time to lament, whilst weeping we revive
Afresh, these cruel torments which do martire us alive.
Now as she woefully thus took on, in this her desperate plight,
Kind Zerphir, who had sought her much, on her by chance did light
And seeing her afflicted thus, all desolate and sole,
He (sighing) weeps, to view her weep, and with her does condole.
So suffers the Lover chaste, for his sweet Ladies sake,
If she but grieved be, the same he at his soul does take.
He of the pain participates, which in her mind is grown,
And more her hurt does trouble him, then that which is his own.
Zerphir then, did endure as much, as did the Shepherdess,
Her tears were his, his pensive plight, then his was nothing less.
But after much lamentings sad, with many a bitter sob,
He sweetly thus began comfort her, whilst fast her heart did throb.
Sicambra, who (thus miserable) thy life has made to me?
Who has thy fortune brought as mine, thus pittious for to be?
Whence comes these sighs, true witnesses of thine in interuall troubles?
Whence slow these tears apparent shows, that care within thee double,
Is It possible a wight, to fiad so cruel in his will
To work, or once in mind to think so fair a Virgin ill.
What heart so harsh, degenerate, can live here on the ground,
That to so rare a beauteous face, he dare a foe be found?
The all doing Gods, whose Essence is immortal and divine.
Have heretofore sought favors out, less fair a thousand time.
Phoebus, of not so fair as thou, did dearly like and deem.
And Jove, inferiors thine by far, did fancy and esteem.
Who then hard hearted so could be, to play so vile apart,
As for to seek to trouble thee, who more then Goddess art?
Never was yet divinity to be offended seen,
But for their rash temeritie, it has well punished been.
Then Lady speak, who could ecclips thy Sunshine glory thus
Or ore thy feature fair, who could become so tyrannous?
The hearts of many Shepherds proud, have not thou vanquished?
Thy diamond eyes, their haughty spirits, have they not ravished?
Then why should thou thus mourn, and weep? Ah cease to keep this guile,
And from thy heart, all dismal care, abandon and exile.
Too lovely is thy countenance, thy coarse too sweet to see,
That in the flower of youth, thou should withouten Lovers be:
Mong'st which, thy loyal Zerphir still, most dutious thou shall find,
And who more then his proper good, thy service aie does mind.
Whilst on the Altar of good will, his heart in zealous wise,
Unto thy Saint-like beauty he, (devout) does sacrifice.
Ah, if thou were acquainted with this heat so vehement,
With which Love does incensevs so, whilst he does us torment;
If thou but knew'st this ill, by which such crosses sower we have,
Nere leaning us, until our coarse, it brings to the grave;
Or if thou can imagine by thine own experience,
How much they suffer, whom Love keeps within his warlike fence:
Then by the selfsame bitter panges, which tortor thy sad heart,
Do take some pity on my woes, and rue my deadly smart.
If thou desir'st to have thy wound to be recur'd with ease,
To heal mine inward festring sore, let it not thee displease.
Chase hence mine ill, dry up my tears, and by one self same way,
Drive thine likewise from hence, which else will soon work my decay,
Live after Zerphir thy true slave, withouten teene and care,
Happ^e live thou Sicambra sweet, in beautle, enerrare.
Pass cheerfully thy time with him, who merrily would live,
If he might see these ioylesse fits, thou over once would give.
(Dear) let me hold this life of mine, as tennant unto thee,
That freede from all disasters bad, thy heart he mighten see.
Help thou thy self (Physician sweet) and drive away these fits,
These fits, companions unto grief, which in thy countinance fits.
And bring not him vnluckilie, before his time be come,
(Who is thy secret servant sworn) unto his dismal Tomb.
Ah speak to me mine only joy, and wipe thy watrie eyes,
(Of late the clearest lights of heaven) they were not made forcries.
Give to my frighted heart some breath, and yield to him such scope,
That (one day) he of that his ill, may be acquit through hope.
Put him in comfort, that (though now his fortunes in the waine)
He may once fiade it at the full, and franchisde be again.
But why Sicambra speak thou not? And why art thou so sad?
This humor thine melancholy, does make me almost mad.
Ah answer me, and by thy pain, what I do suffer indge,
Being ore loyal unto thee, at which I do not grudge.
The parley portall of thy mouth, at last yet open break,
Until hold me not thus in suspense, but some what to me speak.
For to importune thee with words, I never mean to leave,
Until some happy blessed repile, I shall from thee receive.
Speak, then at last, that my poor heart may know if it shall cease
From doubtful dread, or if thou meanst to grant it wished peace.
Thus Zerphir wooed, but she that had her mind (as then) not there,
No answer to him gave again, nor what he said, did hear.
She not so much as thought on him, nor what he had endured
For her own sake, (Love all her thoughts so strongly had immurde)
Yet he so earnest was with her, desiring her to show,
What her intention was toward him, whereby he might it know.
That in the end with choler moved (outrageous through grief,)
Her passions ruling over her, and desprate of relief;
With pale and wanny look, she forth to him these words does send,
The heavy sentence of his death, and of his fatal end.
What moves thee (Zerphir) unto her so troublesome to be,
Who cares not for thee, nor accounts of thy grief, nor thee?
Who through her dismal fortune hard, has so much for to care,
As other men's misfortunes, she (to hear) no time has spare.
Say what I have to do with thee, or with thy constancy,
When I nere mean to go about to quit this courtesy?
Thou nothing feel'st compared to me, my grief to thine is small,
Thy sickness in respect of mine, no sickness is at all.
To help thy malady, I am too much diseasde in mind,
To chase away thy cares, mine own troubles too great I find.
A sickly Patient sore attatch't with sharp diseases rife,
Unto another soul diseasde, cannot restore him life.
I cannot help thee, for, for want of succor I my self,
Complain withouten remedy, yet cannot I find health.
With self same pain, as thou art, I am vexed through Love,
Nor Fortune, me to favor more then thee, as yet I prove.
Seek then elsewhere to swage thy woes, among such as (so) are bent,
And suffer me that I alone my sorrows may lament.
Nor me importune any more, for fore I pity take
Of thee, the Sun shall leave the sky, and fiery coach forsake.
Enough it is, I already burn, with more then extreme pain,
Withouten entertaining more, a second worser gain.
It never shall be said or seen, Sycambra burns with fire
Of nouellchange, as if to rage, she had a swift desire.
For she, unkind Armanda still, will love and ever shall,
Nor ever any but himself in heart she will enstall.
She death will choose, before her faith, she once do falsify,
Though churlish her, he ( Sanus remorse) does use discourteously.
Thy service nere of me shall find reward or recompense,
Then get thee gone, go Shepherd go, dispatch I say from hence.
Thus said, she angry flings away (in mind tormented sore,)
As scarred wolf, from thickest flies, or foming saundge Boore.
When they do hear the Eccoing woods, with noyce of Hounds toring,
Which of their taking (at their prey,) unlucky message bring.
So went Sycambra, who did leave poor Zerphir in a sound,
Whilst banning his hard fortunes all, he grunting falls on ground.
He stood amazde, Enon like, and as a Bedlem mad,
When as (how Paris false had her forsook) she tidings had.
He having lost his Mistress, loathes to live, such life to rue,
As Piramus, for Thisbies sake, himself unhappy slew.
The Nymph, he follows heavily (who galde was at the heart,)
As th'Iron does the Adamant, so draws she him to smart.
Whilst metamorphisde into tears of woe, he knows no mean,
His torments being so cruel, as his griefs are too extreme.
He thinks no more of his poor sheep, he has forgotten those,
No other thought now troubles him, but how to end his woes.
His voice, his cry, his gesture sad, and his most morunfull speech,
Are all of Love, and how they Love for succor may beseech,
His color now is changed, and gate, so is his wonted grace,
Nored nor white as heretofore, remains in his face.
Like ashes he looks pale and lean, whilst sorrow dries his bones,
Nor has he strength for to do aught, except to send forth groans.
Without all hope, or comfort, he does draw his loathed life,
And for his refuge, death does seek, torid him of this strife.
But death, is deaf unto his call, as fieree Sycambra is,
And therefore thou, and the other too, he against his will must miss.
Well may he call, but they will not come (once) comfort for to bring,
But leave him, when he needs them most, to live thus languishing.
In brief, the heavens, death, and men, with destuies do conspire,
Against him, that he shall burn, yet have no mean to quench this fire.
Nothing preuailes him to avail, whilst on the other side
Sycambra, in like predicament as he is, does abide.
Of thonsand bloody passions she participateth, vexed,
Yet nothing can relieve her, whilst she languisheth perplexed.
Armanda, jests, and her, when she does speak, at every word
He skoffes, nor favor he at all to her will once afford.
He laughes to see her weep, to hear her sigh, it makes him smile,
Nor will so much as one small dram of pity yield the while.
But growing too too insolent, and puffed up with pride,
He wills her to depart and die, nor cannot her akide.
Swearing by all the Gods, that he will sooner seek his death,
Then fancy her, as long as he shall draw his vital breath.
She, seeing her self disdained thus, does ban her destiny,
And after many strange conceits, resolves for to die
By some strange kind of uncouth death, she means to cure her wound,
Which Love (as foe) had given her, her senses to confound.
Without imploring any more, sauadge Armandas aid,
Who neither her, nor her kind suit, respected aught or waide.
So loyal Hero, of her life, an end would willing make,
When fair Leander she did see drowned for her sake.
Ah fretting corsie worse then death, with never endless smart.
When cheating Love impoysoneth, the constant loyal heart.
More cruel then the rest by odds for dying, we but range
From this life to another, while we make a better change.
Whereas the for lorne Lovers life, so bitter is and fell,
As thousand deaths they choose before, they will abide the hell.
Of all the torments then on the earth, Love most outrageous is,
Love, that our youths makes wither fast, depriving as of bliss.
Sycambra therefore now resolu'de, to die does soon entend,
That so at length her Agonies, and senseless griefs may end.
A trenchant blade she takes up, but viewing it so kright
And sharp, she straitway lets it fall, so much it her does fright.
Her heart will not endure her hand should set it to her breast,
And therefore with such inchauntment, to die she does detest.
A throtling halter does displease, as much as sword before,
So rusly to be strangled stiff, her fair neck does abore.
She poison takes, but her conceit that drench has overthrown,
Which makes her, halter, poison, sword, (all three) to let alone.
A gentler kind of death (though strange) she has found out as the,
Which is, t'entombd her self alive, torid her of her woe.
She means within a Rock obscure, from other Rocks far wide,
With thousand Ditches compassed, and bushes on each side.
Fearful to Sauadge beasts themselves, and horrible to men.
Her self there to enclose, and there her self does closely pen.
Thus lanquisht she most wrethedly, no meat she had, nor bred.
But sighs and sobs, no drink at all, but tears which fast she shed.
No meat she would, but moan, no drink, but dole to end her life,
Meaning hereby her coarse to spoil, through starning famines knife.
The skriching night Owls dolefully, her wailings did assist,
And lucklesse Ravens moand her Love, whilst they to her did list.
Death, whom she wished for (often) at hand was still, though not so nigh
As she desirde, and sorrow was with her continually.
No voice she used but cries, no speech, but drerie dry laments,
So heavily she mournes, as Rocks for pity do relent.
Yet no man answers her at all; The comfort most she finds,
Is when false Ecco, her last word again unto her winds.
But he that of her misery, is cause and motive chief,
Is deaf unto her prayers become, nor yield will her relief.
More hard, then stubborn Rocks, then hills more Sauadge and more fierce,
He will not mollify his heart, no pity can it pierce.
His weal it is to see her wail, her bale, to him is bliss,
Whilst in a state most pitiless, far worse then death he is.
O Tigers whelpe, monster of men, worthy of any blame,
Too much unworthy to be loved of such a constant dame.
Ah may that fortune chance to thee, as to Adonis coy,
Who (of a Goddess dayning love) a Boore did him destroy.
And let it hap to thee, as to Narcissus peevish Elfe,
Who (others Loves refusing) did, in love fall with himself.
Yet can I not say, that the Gods are partial, but most just,
The self same measure, others we do give, we look for must.
So (Ladies) had Sycambra, kind unto her Zerphir been,
She had not (then) such tortors felt, nor had abid such teene
As she did bide, still languishing, desirous for to die,
Whilst she to death ( Armanda like) to come to her does cry.
Yet hopes she thus, she cannot live, and that her times not long,
Her heart she finds already broke, for bearing so great wrong.
Besides, her fainting body frail, prognosticates to her,
(By reason nature's grown so weak) death is not from her far.
Much do the ghastly dreams she has in slumber, her affright,
And fearful apparitions strange, which she beholdes in night.
Sometimes they to her bring dispare, then her with hope they feed,
With hope in vain, which when she wakes, her wounds more fresh make bleed.
For he that nothing has to loose, needs not to wail his loss,
Nor needs he fear that Fortunes wheels (swift turning) should him cross.
Where, he is in most pittious plight, that viewes his chiefest stay,
(Which should from ruin him support) on sudden took away.
Long time Sycambra in this wise most uncouth lived thus,
Like to the shape of ghastly death, in case most dolorous.
Whilst in mean space, Famine and Grief, with never ceasing cries,
Her flesh did turn to bones, her heart tormenting in strange guise.
Her color which before was fresh, and dainty as the Rose,
And that same beauteous varnish pure, no more (now) in her shows.
Like to the Flower, which trodden down within the Medowe green,
By bastie foot of trampling steed, or plodding Ox is seen.
Such one this dying Shephardesse did seem, quite changde and faint,
Her quondam lovely face, the tears with blubbring, foul did taint.
Her fair eyes, dark and heavy showed, as when the skies we see,
With thickened storm of wind and rain, ore shadowed for to be.
Those shooting Glaunces, which of late were in her rolling Spheres,
(Controllers in Dan Cupids Court) no more as now appears.
No more as Diamonds glister they, nor Sun-like do they shine,
But look like Phoebus, when his place to night he does resign.
And (now) death which did heretofore long linger, comes apace,
And gently seems by many signs, her offer to embrace.
Her for head fair, whose very frown, of all did favor win,
Was now become deep furrowed, with sharp and wrinkled skin.
Her sallow visage, pale and thin, and hunger-staru'd did seem,
One of th'in fernall hellish hagges, for shape you would her deem.
Her breasts, too precious Iuerie mounts, were fallen lanke and bare,
Her body (that rich shop) had lost her wonted precious ware.
Her feeble arms, and shoulders weak, supporters of her coarse,
Were naught but joints of skin and bone, withouten strength and force.
So short and thick she drew her breath, sighing so deep and sore,
As one might easily guess she was, not far off from deaths door.
And had not been but for her tears, which on her cheeks she shed,
You would have iudgd, she had not been alive, but stony dead.
Had she not throbs and sighs sent forth, from fainting breast like storm,
That all her senses had been past, you would have vowed and sworn.
Ah too too hapless Lovers chance, like her no wretches such,
So Dido did, the Troyan Duke, for loving over much.
Enon so for Paris died, so, Hero for her friend,
(When him she could not save from death) her life did willing end.
Mean while Zerphir, most hapless wight, on whom fortune did frown,
This dying Shepherdess echewhere, does search for up and down.
And as we oftentimes the Heart, with furious raging mood,
Do see to seek (his mate) the Hind with eger pace in wood.
(Who is retired alone for nonce) into some private way,
Or running through the forests wild, wandering (perchance a stray.)
He scales the matchless mountain tops, the hugie hills most bold,
And then he rangeth longst the banks, of streaming waters cold.
Now, through the thickest quickesedge thick, he venters far to gee,
And (now) the Caves he visits in hollow dales below.
So Zerphir (frantic like) does run, to seek that beauty, which
Did (long before) unto his pain forespeake him and bewitch.
One while, he wandereth by the Sea, the sandy shore along,
An other while, he skales high hills (through Love enforst so strong)
And then, again, most desperately, with courage he does creep,
And diueth into'the bottomes low, of rockie Caves most deep.
He, scoures the valleys, and the plain, through meadows he does run.
Against Gods and man, he murmureth, as one that's quite undone.
He calls Sycambra, still, the same Sycambra he does sound,
Whilst Ecco, pitying him, again Sycambra back does bound.
In the end so long he searches, that at last he finds her out,
When now his voice was almost lost, with hollowing all about.
A Ghost he finds, no lining coarse, her hair about her ear,
Which blustering blasts of froward winds, abroad dispearst did bear.
Her brow, did pale and earthly show, whose color natural,
Death chased had away as now, and ceazed over all.
Her obbone eyes were dull and dim, suncke deeply in her head,
Ore whom the Fatal sisters three, too much tyrannized.
Her bloodlesse lips, like ashes showde, her sweet alluring lip,
From which a juice did come, which Love (being ill at ease) did sip.
Those Cherries, Roses, Rubies, which you once might there have spide,
Were vanished, and in their steed, worse colors were descride.
No favor was within her face, no cheerfulnes of look,
For some dead coarse, not living wight, you might her then have took.
This heavy sight and spectacle, did stop his fainting breath,
And forct, his inward powers to be as cold as any earth.
Withouten moving, he did stand, and seemd to be one
Of those which fierce Medusa chaung'd into aworthlesse stone.
But lucklesse she (the Touchstone true of Love) to try all wrongs,
Who only to bewail her griefs, exceedingly still longs.
Perceived him not, when first he came appearing to her nigh,
Whilst with her passions she partakes, which makes her peece-meale die.
Which when the Shepherd thoroughly vewed, awakt from out his sound,
He wondered, that for very woe, he died not on that ground.
He draws nearer unto her, yet loath to offend the fair,
And though her fault he blames, yet he not to reproach her dare.
Upon the sudden, back he startes, and from her does recoyle,
And then with stealing pace, returns to her another while.
Nor for his life dares he to speak; For where Love loyal is,
There no respect nor due regard at any time does miss.
He sees how she does sigh and sob, and how she tears does shed,
Apparent signs and witnesses, that (yet) she is not dead.
This makes him sigh and sob (as she) and weep with pittious dirme,
Yet all this pittious stir could not (once) move her look on him.
So much the wretch was ravished, and earnest in conceit,
About resignement of her life, which sorrow did her threat.
Whilst she does lean her aking-head, upon her hand below,
Giving scalding tears, passage into her panting breast to flow.
Tears, that not quenched, but did increase the flames that burnt her heart,
Tears, that even to her inward soul did pearce, like glauncing dart.
In the end, the Shepherd cloyd with noy, with grief hardued and bold,
In pittious voice and low, to her his mind did thus unfold.
Woe is me Sycambra is it thou, I see so miserable,
And, have I liude (so long) to view, a sight so lamentable?
Is It thou whem death by uncouth Fate, and Fortune over strange,
Does force vntimelesse thus into thy darkesome Tomb torange?
Is It thou, which nothing have but tears and cries to entertain
The sharp assault of death, the which thou couetest ore feign?
Is It thou, I see to run unto thy end ore desperate,
By cruel Planets hateful doom, to ill. predestinate?
Is It thou Sycambra, whom thy Fates, and fatal Destiny,
As jealous of thy praise, thy days to shorten do agree?
Is It thou that have that color fair no more upon thy face,
Which as the color of my griefs, in heart I did embrace?
Is It thou that have no more those flames, within thine eyes now dead,
Through which before with brightest fire my soul was daily fed?
Is It thou, that have no more that show, of more then beantie rare,
The prison of my liberty, the cause of all my care?
Is It thou, is it thou, whom partial Gods enforce unwilling me,
Of thy departure from this life, a witness for to be?
This thou, I know, but too too well, whose perfect Picture right,
Is too too lively portraide forth, within mine inward spright.
It Is thou, I know, but too too well, though changd thou art the same,
I, for Sycambra thee will know, thou still shall be my dome.
It Is thou, it is thou, that die with sobs and sighs tormented thou,
Whilst blessed thou think thy self, to leave a life so delero^^
It Is thou, that parting from this world, this would is maked left,
And void of pleasure and delight, which with thee is bereft.
Woe is me, and must these eyes, (yet no eyes, but streams of brine,)
Live for to see eclipsed to be, so fair a Sunshine?
Whose glittring Lamps, my chiefest light of yore were wont to be,
Without whose glances bright, nor day, nor morning I could see?
Alas (my God) why was I not, when that I first was borne,
Transformd into some stone, then thus to be false Cupids scorn?
Why died I not, before the time in love with thee I fell?
Since thy plagues vndeserude, do prove my soul a Criminell?
Why do I not miscarrie, but (against my will) that live,
Through force of this so vmust Laewe, the more my soul to grieve?
Which forces her to die, that does deserve to live for are,
Whilst wretched me, who merit death, it will not take away?
Ah too too partial lawless law, of miserable Love,
Accursed be that day, wherein thou first this life did prove.
O Gods, dart down your thunder bolts, upon my hateful head,
Plague me, not her, it is I, not she, that should be punished.
This trunk of mine unprofitable, of vital breath bereane,
Since that mischievous Love does me, in my best love deceive.
Ding down to hell, this coarse of mine, this wicked perjured carse,
(Consuming it to powder small) by flashing lightnings force.
Kill (Zerphir) kill, that by oue death, he end may all his we,
And with the same rid all his plagues, that in him daily grow.
But (fairest Fair) must thou needs die? O loss inestimable,
No, no, thou can not die, for death to kill thee is not able.
Thy glory, among both Gods and men, shall never have an end,
(Despite of Destny) Virtue this, from Tomb shall still defend.
Within the hearts of living men, shall be thy lasting grave,
And as another Pallas thou; shall reverence of them have.
Thy soul has heretofore too rich, and royal tired been,
Thy beauty eke too sacred, and thy Faith too constant seen.
Then (as base servile Bond-slanes poor, tide unto Vassalage)
Subject to be, or homage yield, to deaths ore hasty rage.
No (lovely Lady) thou shall live, and Zerphir he shall die,
Because he came not as he should, to help thee speedily.
Zerphir must die, who by his death (atrue certificate)
Shall show, how through the want of thee, that be to live does hate.
Zerphir must die, because he cannot after thee seruine,
Nor without thy sweet company, delight to be alive.
Zerphir must die, because depriude he is, of thy sweet face,
And therefore means by self same steps, the self same path to trace.
Yet my souls joy, if of my grief, if truth that nere did swerve.
The smallest spark of favor left, did ere of thee deserve.
If my dear blood, to beauty thine, which willing I afford,
(As sacrifice for to be shed) merrits of thee one word,
Ah then look upon Zerphir thine, these sighs and sobs restaine,
And fore he dies, vouchsafe to speak to him a word or twain.
This is the only boon I crave, to which, (but) condescend,
And most contented then, below to the other Ghostsile wend.
But I perceive thou will not grant this fute (cruel) to me,
I cannot this small grace obtain, I find it will not be.
Why then lets bravely hence depart, lets die her face before,
And lets before her seek to gain, the (...) Elizian shore.
So saying, he full often (farewell Sycumbra) did rehearce,
Which done, his sword he plact against his breast, the same to pearce.
When as Sycambra wakt, as it were from forth her passions sad;
To see Zerphir arrived there by her, was much a^rad.
But more she troubled was, when she percou'd how in that place,
He as one desperate, would have slain himself before her face.
This forced her pittiously to look toward him, and with her hand
To make a sign, as though she would grannt what he did demand,
Beckning to him, to throw his blade from him, which he ore bold
Had drawn to sley himself, whilst she her meaning would unfold.
To which the Shepherd willing greede, approaching to her nie,
Longing to hear what she would say, resolude with her to die.
He comforts her, he cheareth her, he prays her leave her moan,
Whilst she with much ado these words, (her last will) forth does groan.
Zerphir, if I have iniurde thee, (as needs I must confess)
Yet more revenge, then what is light on me, thou needs not press.
If heretofore my beauty proud, has (often) abused thee,
The heavens, to punish that foul fault, thou now do (justly) see.
I feel, (and that but rightfully) the very self same grief,
That thou endur'st to live disdaind (daining) Sanus relief.
I die (Zerphir) I die in pain, because as thou I love,
Then with my death contented be, since I this penance prove.
Now, I conjure thee, if thou feelst the tortors and the plagues
Allotted unto Lovers true, which never cease to rage.
If thou do know that sdainfull power, of Cupids matchless force,
(Which makes us often count of such, as yield us no remorse.
And such as much do make of us (as barborous and ungrate)
To scorn their suits, and for their Love, them to repaie with hate.
Then (Zerphir) pardon I beseech, since I have made thee smart,
Thou see, (although not by thy means) enough reuengde thou art.
That eye which once did thee contemn, with ouer-haughtie scorn,
Death to requite thy wrongs on it, and upon me, has sworn.
Sycambra dies, plungd in woe, and none does her deplore,
Her countenance and complexion both, are changed over sore.
Her face is blooalesse, and heat does keep within her veins,
Her arms are brawne-falne, in her cheeks no color now remains.
She dies, she dies, desirous more to die, then for to live,
Only that thee she could not help nor succor, she does grieve.
Ah Zerphir, if to think on me, no anguish thee twill bring,
If for thy over cruel Dame, it moves thee any thing.
And if that Love (of late so hot,) be not as yet grown cold,
But as a valiant conqueror, thy heart does prisoner hold.
If (yet) affection thou bearst her, who never thee affected,
And that all pity thou have not (from pitying her) rejected;
Then humbly I do thee beseech, by that rare former Love,
That these thy griefs, right bottomless, compassion kind may moan.
And that this thy compassion sweet, for me may (so) prevail,
As thou to grant one suit to her, vouchsafe not for to fail.
And this it is I beg of thee, that after th'Iron sleep
Of death shall cease upon my coarse, possession there to keep,
When thou my coarse deprived quite of beauties gifts shall view,
My cheerful eyes to loose their lights, and bid those lights adue,
When thou do here her sigh from forth her soul (untimely crossed,)
And when thou shall Sycambra thine, view to give up the Ghost,
Ah then, do this good turn for me, do this for me straitway,
Unto my cruel unkind friend, this RING from me convey.
Tell him, his too too flintie heart, and barborous cruelty,
Has forct me (loyalst maid alive) for him (alive) to die.
Tell him, by that quick lightning fire, which from his eyes forth came,
Which swifter far then whirling darts, my gentle heart have slain.
By his rich beauty, too too rich for me, too poor to enjoy,
Which, for my time, untimely brought, me unto endless noy.
And by that heart of his, too proud, tryumphing ore my glory,
That he forget me not, but think upon my pittious story.
Do this, sweet Zerphir, for my sake, do this request for me.
It Is all before my death to thee I give, as Legasee.
Nor do deny me this, although in conscience I confess,
I, not deserve thy smallest grace, for my ore cruelnesse.
Ah Zerphir, this deny me not; This said, she held her peace,
And presently death fore her came, with violence to cease.
Whilst with a gentle quiet sigh, her soul that weary was
Of loathed life, most willing up unto the heavens did pass.
Leaving her body void of life, withouten vital air,
Disrobde of beauty, spoylde of form, depriude of color fair.
Yet happy she, to die in such kind sort as (then) she did,
Since that her grief vanished therewith, (which living she did bide.
Happy to die (so) as she did, since partial Love unjust,
Disasters hard, and vndeserude, upon her still did thrust.
Like as we see in the end of day, upon the set of Sun,
When Tethis entertaines her spouse, (the light being well might done,)
A kind of cloudie sable dampe arises to our eyes,
And with a gloomie curtain thick, is covered all the skies.
So as upon the face of the earth, there nothing does appear,
But darkness, sleep, and heavy care, with ghastly sighs each where.
So by degrees this beauteous coarse, looked pale and wanne like earth,
When (once) the soul, had it depriude of his quick living breath.
Like to a shadow was it, of a substance fair before,
No cheerful color was there in that face, so fair of yore.
Withouten sense or motion, it remained like a block,
Or as a comely pile of stone, carude out of marble Rock.
Yet Zirphir does embrace it often, (and as ift twere alive,
The same with pittious glaunces, he to yield to him does strive.
But kiss her, he not dares, though she be dead, lest he offend
The soul of her, who (whilst she lived,) he loved as dearest friend.
Her (as before) he does respect, and does her reverence,
Although him no drop of grace she gave, his amorous heat to quench.
Tears like to flowers he streameth down, yet not one word he speaks,
Sorrow, so much does seize on him, as tongue from plaining breaks.
Long was he in this agony, at length he comes his way,
Taking the Fatal Ring with him, his Mistress to obey.
He hunteth up and down to find Armanda, and at last,
(Reuiling him) into these terms (terms fit for him) he brast.
Hard hearted, cruel, Sauadge wretch, for thy unworthy Love,
Fairest Sycambra, now is dead, since thee, she could not move.
Dead is she, for thy sake, thou live, unworthy of thy life,
Thou liu'dst, her, and her love to scorn, through thy orethwartings rife,
Take here this Ring, she sends to thee, as witness too too true,
That she destroyed her self for thee, though thou her death naught rue.
The Flower of all fairenes is dead, slain only for thy sake,
Whilst thou, nor her, nor on her Love, would any pity take.
More fierce then Tiger, beastly more then Lion, when as such
Relent, and show compassion more, then thou have done, by much.
Why takst thou not this precious I em, thou that do women kill,
Which, for thee, till her dying day, she had reserved still.
Happy to have so dear a pawn, yet cursed, because thou art
The cause, the owner kind thereof, was struck with mortal dart.
Hold, hold, rude carle, and think not but the day shall one day come,
When as just plague thou shall receive, for this, by heavens just dome.
Armanda, hearing him to rage in this wise, naught does say,
But smiling, flings the Ring from him, to the woods betakes his way.
Leaving poor Zerphir, almost quite bereft of wit, and mad,
To see what slight regard of her, and of her Ring he had.
And, but he feared the quiet Ghost to grieve, of his fair Dame,
He had Armanda for his pride, as he deserved, slain.
This held his hands from slaughtring him, he (so) did her respect,
The only reason why to kill, that wretch he did neglect.
The reverence which unto her, he (long before time) bare,
Made him for his so hot revenge, his hasty will to spare.
As one enraged, this careless man he looks after long,
And by his eyes, his mind bewraies, he feign would venge this wrong.
Nor does he leave to curse and ban, this more then ruthlesse wight,
Until, through thicknes of the trees, no more he spy him might.
Wherewith he rises, and turns back, unto his Ladies corse,
Which he embracing often, through grief to fall in sound does force.
Her Ring, on finger hers again he puts, nor dares he
Retain the same, as his own goods, although now dead she be.
Fearing Sycambras angry Ghost, once fairest over all,
Should be offended for so doing, and him disloyal call.
This causde him bear himself so just, whilst in most mournful wise,
These his last words he sighed forth, mixed with strange doleful cries.
And is it thou Sycambra sweet, whom now I do embrace,
Whom whilst thou liu'dst, my chiefest joy I in this earth did place?
Is thy fair body, framed by heavens, all others for to foil,
Become deaths prey, unworthy, death Sycambra sweet should spoil?
Are these the eyes, whose lights of late, did shine like brightest Sun,
Now darkened by dire destiny, and of their sights undone?
Is this fair forhead, honor chief, of Muses virtuous,
Bereft of beauteous feature quite, and quite disfigurde thus?
Is this sweet honey mouth of thine, O grief that makes me banne,
Dispoylde of all his treasures rich, become pale, white and wanne?
Are thy chaste Breasts, the pure ripe fruit of Paradise so fair,
Which to allure, the staiedst wits, two dainty Apples bare?
Dead and shrunk in, and thou thy self, Sycambra tirde with grief,
Have thou thy soul to heavens resignde, there for to find relief?
Thou have alas, nor liu'dst thou more, those eyes of thine, but late
Like Diamonds sparks, now dim do show, as deaths dark Sable gate.
Nor part nor parcel is of thee, from head unto the foot,
But yields a heavy solemn show, attirde in deadly suit.
Thy dates expirde, dead art thou now, led, have thou me the way,
High time, now it is for me, the laws of Nature to obey.
Reason it is I follow thee, for is it possible,
Thou being gone, I longer here upon this earth can dwell?
My wretched days in this vile world have been unfortunate,
Yet dying thus in chastest Love, most happy is my state.
The Stars have fully recompenst, my hateful fortunes here,
In granting me, the liberty, to die by thee, my dear.
And that I touch that coarse, by death exempt from vital sense,
Which, when it lived, full hardly did my service recompense.
Ah beauteous shade, of late the lodge of honor and fresh Bower,
Whose praise, deaths self, though he thee slew, to kill has not the power.
Fair coarse, receive these tribute tears, and let me pardon win,
If thee embracing after death, I ouerbold have been.
Daine to accept my scalding sighs, and do not him despise,
Who whilst he lived, honored thee, and dying, thee does prise.
Rich coarse, thou art to make amends to me (poor soul) in this,
That for so many woes I felt, thou yield to me one kiss.
For, what have I for all my pains, and travail I endurde,
Which thy hard heart continually too willing me procurde?
What recompense or pardon due, did ever I receive,
But what (through sorrow) my best rest from me did take and reaue.
To cancel all which former counts, be pleased (fair Love) I pray,
That Zerphir dying (thou being dead) kiss thee (now) chastely may.
And yet alas I dare not, lest that thou should take it ill
Against me, as if I sought the same withouten thy good will.
Fair shadow, now with glory dect, take for my offerings
These tears, these sighs, these passions sad, which sorrow to thee brings.
Receive this blood I sprinkle here, upon thy sacred shrine,
To the end, my soul in dutious sort, may follow after thine.
My heart was thine whilst I did live, and fortune wills it so
That it be thine, when Zerphirs dead, and lies in the earth full low.
Daine therefore (sacred soul) and think not little proud am I,
That it is my chance, I may have leave by thy sweet side to lie.
Willing thou were not whilst thou liu'dst, that I should be thine own,
But being dead, I for thy slave, most loyal shall be known.
By reason I have well deserved, through griefs (long by me) borne,
And by my chastest countenance, that never woes did scorn.
The memory whereof, me thinks, should make thee, sometimes call
To mind thy Zerphir, and not quite forget him once for all.
But Zerphir (now) lets die; too long we stayed have, it is enough,
Sufficient tears on this dead coarse, we now have powered forth.
The heavens are wearied with my cries, and never ceaselesse plaint,
And my broke heart, through trembling fear, does beat in bulcke and faint.
Lets die by this one word, and as he spoken had that word,
(Most cruel against himself) his side he pierces with his sword.
Wherewith, he tumbleth dead, upon his Mistress breathless corse,
Whilst that his wound, both soul and blood, to issue forth does force.
Thus died Sycambra, meriting for constancy great fame,
Thus Zerphir died, deserving well, to have a living name.
Death, joined them both together near, their bodies in one Tomb
Were laid, which living were disioynd by over partial Dome.
And (not long after) that proud youth, Armanda for his pride,
(As well he aid deserve the same) full dearly did abide.
For presently upon their death, like to Narcissus fond,
He died (in love, being with himself) whose loss not any monde.
Thus Cupid's in his Laws, unjust, as by this Tale you see,
Yet (Ladies) learn to love, if loved (again) you mean to be.
The Shepherd having made an end of his Tragedy, held his peace, bringing
unto the whole company, a kind of mournful and solemn silence, upon the
ricitall of the same, with a secret, still, and inward sorrow, for the
lamentable end of Zirphir, and Sycambra.

O how miserable are those, who seem as (it were) to feel their own losses,
through the recital, and reporting of other men's mishaps, being as bad almost,
as to awake the happy patient (sleeping) by reason of his soporiferous potion,
just at that time, when the Chyrurgian begins to cut off his leg.

Too too much do I prove it, find it, and try it, to touch me to the very
quick, (cried out) the sighing Arcas. The misfortunes of every man, reuiueth
mine own, which (before) lay closely covered under the cinders of my former
Distasters.

The remembrance of things prosperous, is nothing so pleasant, as the recalling
to mind, of what is unhappy, is bitter and sower. For the pleasure thereof,
hinders the true knowledge of pleasure aright: and so by the contrary, the
contrary is the more to be commended.

But, O how cruel then is the conceit, and apprehension of a man's evils? For
the felicity of the other, does not oppose himself against the cruelty of
this thought: those which are fortunate (being exempted) through the joy they
conceive of their ill chances which are past and gone.

Old Hecuba, when she was captive, rendered the memory of her miseries more
cruel; by reason; she (always) thought upon her happy time that was already
gone: For one is not so much grieved to be wretched by Nature, as when he is
brought down so low by Fortune: and the cause is, for that we are
(naturally) borne to suffer, and that he accounts not his ill hap to be
unsupportable, which he receives of Nature, in that he is accustomed to
endure, and bear the same always.

But even as where both Fortune and Nature abound in any notable spirit, it is
the more excellent, and accomplished for the same. So twice miserable is he,
who (as my self) feels him self to be iniuried, both by Fortune and Nature!
By Fortune, she having made shipwreck of my liberty: of my Goddess, and fair
Mistrisse, A Sentence.
and of the sweet air of my Country: By Nature, I having nothing in me, that
can draw any commendations for me, amongst the learned, or win unto me any
credit, amongst such as are accounted rare and admirable persons in the world.

Then why love I? or why should I desire to breathe any longer? Unfortunate
that Mariner, who arriving safely into the Haven, will needs venture again,
to thrust himself into the tempests of the Sea, to drown himself most
wilfully, in the bottom of the waves. So fares it with me, for after I had
been cruelly plagued with the chaste love, of the learned and famous Iulietta, I
fell to love the renowned Diana; The fire of this affection, being far more
hotter then the other: but although this my first fault may be well pardoned,
yet the second falling again into this error, is to be greatly doubted and
feared.

Ah Arcas, thou should have contented thy self, with thy first imprisonment,
without seeking to commit thy self afresh, into a new captivity. But
Soldiers in war, may be taken three or 4. times, in that they be not of
power, to withstand the Conqueror: Even so, if Love has so often taken me
prisoner, what resistance could so weak a wretch (as my self) be able to make
against him? But unlucky is that prison, into which, we unwillingly enter:
and so too unhappy were my chance, if I should be deprived of the divine and
chaste love of my Diana.

I resemble that Captain of war, who complains of the pain he takes,
lamenteth for the trauails he endures, grieueth at the perils he is subject
unto, and murmureth against war and warfaring, and yet (in the mean time)
while he desires to return home, he would take it far more heavily, if he
should be put from this painful kind of exercise.

In like sort, most happy should I think mine estate to be, if (were I never
so wretched) I could, with the loss of all other things, repossesse my
liberty, as I had it before. For they live (although but poor and needy) who
are not subject unto any one, where such as are slaves, live not at all,
(although they be full of riches) because they are not masters of their own
lives, but be under the coutrolment of other.

Leave these unnecessary and frivolous complaints (said the old man) and
follow the discourse of thy Loves already begun. The mind that hops, is
galled, when the hope of what he desires, is prolonged with delays.

Tell on then, for it may be, thou shall receive comfort by thy speech, and
help, A Sentence.
and assistance of those, which shall hear thee: in as much, as what one man's
will is ignorant of, another may know it: and he that seeks remedy for his
grief, of the Mayor part, in the end, finds that he does the sooner recover
of his disease. Therefore (good Shepherd) continue the course as thou did
begin.

Father (replied the Shepherd) tell me, I pray you, is it forbidden, the
Traveler, who has wandered out of his way, to reprehend and blame himself,
after he perceives that he is faulty? Even so, if I have done ill, in
beginning the recital of my misfortunes, (the only remembrance whereof, does
astonish and amaze me) can you be angry with me, if I found the retrait,
giving over a subject so lamentable, and so far diffring from my desire?

Covet not I beseech you, to know, and to be acquainted with that, which you
cannot remedy, it being a case desperate, and past recure: Or, if you will
needs pursue me, in my promise, then yield me a place fit for my Fortunes,
find me a place horrible, and sad, to the intent that my pains, my speech,
and mine abode, may be conformable and alike.

I will not stick with thee for that (answered the old man) do but follow
me, and I will bring thee to a Receptacle, very convenient for such a conceit
as thou have.

Come then, and I will lead thee, into the hollow bottom of a
Lightning-blasted-rock, which, for frightfull darkness, and darksome
fright-fulnes, is as bad as Hell it self: and therewithal, the aged man went
before the Shepherd as a Guide, he following his slow steps heavy and
sad: A Smilie.
not unlike unto a young Child, that follows (aloof) the party that
leads him to school, to tell some tale unto his master, for some fault that
he has done.

Thus they two, leaving the rest of their company, walked all alone, toward
this obscure lodging, where only horror does inhabit: and being now come to
the watrie Seaish shore, they heard (upon the sudden,) one scriching out
most pittiouslie, and therewithal, might perceive a sad and weeping
Shepherdess, to come running toward them, her golden Tresses hanging about
her ears, which the wanton wind blew here and there. Her face was pale and
blood-lesse, like unto the fall of the leaf, whilst for want of breath, she
remained almost windlesse, being hardly able to cry, or run any longer. Upon
the ruddie Roses of her lips and cheeks, and all along the white Alabaster of
her luory breasts, streamed down tears, like drops of peerlesse deaw, issuing
forth from her mournful eyes, as between two valleys, runs a most swift
flood of waters. Fair was she and lovely, although fear (at that time) had
disrob'de her of her beauty, and frightfulnes taken away (at that time) the
vermillion Die, from her cheeks. In this sort did she fly away (as the Hind
does from the Hounds) being followed after, by six tall and lusty Thieves,
all Pirates of the Sea, who having their naked swords ready drawn, pursued her
hard, threatening to massacre her, unless she stayed and yielded her self unto
them. Alack poor soul, what likely hood of help was there, in that uncouth
place, to save her self? but that the Almighty and puissant IEHOVA, contrary
unto her hope and expectation, provided means for her escape and safety:
giving sufficient proof hereby, that he not only helps such as trust in
him, but also, those that are quite without hope, and (in a manner desperate)
of all succor whatsouer.

The old man, moved with compassion, presently took his book, opened it, and
red certain Spelles in the same, whilst rolling his eyes wildely, too and fro,
the manner of his proceedings, being not so fearful, as the casting of his
looks, seemed to be terrible, whereupon the Rouers were forced to stand
stone-still upon the sudden, An example.
as the Ship that is cast upon some sandy shelfe, can no way move. Liuelesse
and senseless did they stand, as whilom did the Lovers of Medusa or as the
companions of the Duke of Ithaca, the old man having changed them, some into
Trees, some into Lions, some into Tigers, and some into Wolves.

A worthy punishment for their so foul a fault. The Almighty God (sometimes)
serving himself, with others, skillful in the same Science, as this old man
was, as he did with the three Magi, or Kings, that came to worship his SON,
our only Savior.

But of this strange adventure, we will talk, at a more convenient time
hereafter: Coming again unto the aged man and the Shepherd, who followed
onwards on their journey, the one, mourning for the cruel execution he was so
lately forced to put in practice, and the other joyful, hoping to find some
comfort of the old man, by reason of the admirable effects of his skill, which
he had seen already.

In the end, they came unto the foot of a Rock, halfe-eaten, through the
continuance of time, which oftentimes, had felt the fury of Lightning, and not
seldom assuaged the choler of angry Jupiter. On the top of this, (with much
ado they got) where they found a certain straight and dark Cave, beset with
sharp thorns and briars, and sensles Serpents, Serpents turned and changed by
this old man, into black and ugly stones.

O place, passing fit and convenient, to report the miseries of the
melancholic Shepherd, which seemed (somewhat to come nigh unto the horror of
his pains, and to participate with part of his misfortunes, whereupon the old
man said thus unto him.

Speak gentle Shepherd, have I not (now been as good as my word with thee?)
and is not this (think thou) the still Cell, where heavy sleep remains,
and the dreadful lodge of the fuskie daughters of black Night?

Hither did Juno come, to find out drousie Slomber, she as then abiding here,
when she wrought so cunningly, that she cast Jupiter into a dead sleep, whilst
she in the mean while, favored the Grecians in battle, who before that
time, had been forsaken, both by her Brother, and her Husband. Here did Pluto
hide his dear beloved Proserpina, before he conveyed her into Hell: And here
Aeneas understood the Oracle of Sibilla, which was his sufficient warrant, to
descend down unto the pitchie kingdom of the youngest son of Saturn.

If this place be agreeable unto thy mind, then onwards with that which I have
so earnestly urged thee to bewray, and fail not to perform as much as thou
have promised unto him, who will show what testimonies possible may be, of a
grateful mind toward thee.

With all my heart (replied kind Arcas) for it is no loss nor travail, to
seek to discharge and satisfy, such as we are bound or beholding unto, there
being no remedy, but we must needs one way or other, clear with them, who
are our Creditors, and unto whom we are obliged.

Let us then sit down (reverend Father) and give me leave to take breath for
a while, to the end I may call to mind, and knit up the broken thread of this
my last discourse with you. For (already) have I told you (if you have not
forgotten the same) how Love (against reason and judgment) had quenched the
affection I bare to Iulietta, mine enforcing me (in steed of the other) to
affect my Diana, as the Smyth makes his coals more hotter, by flinging water
upon them.

And to say truth, what is he that could not have been overtaken by her fair
feature? For if there had been exception taken against the beauty of the
Goddess of beauty (as did Pallas and Juno) no doubt, the Phrygian Shepherd
had yielded the prize unto her, and had not needed to have trauersed the Seas,
to bring away Heliene, because she was less fair then she. By her only,
Zerxis, had been able to have drawn the counterfeit of Juno (through which,
he thought to make himself to become admirable and divine) without drawing
together so many fair women of Crotona as he did, to borrow from every one
of them such beauty as they had.

This then, so much inflamed my heart, at every word she spoke in her dance,
seemed a swift dart, which thwirled into my soul and every step she moved in
the measures, An Example.
proved a firebrand to burn my heart withal. Whilst she (minding her
dancing) never marked me, nor once so much as cast her sight upon me, except
it were by great chance. Great personages, having their minds busied about
matters of importance, seldom or never; wouchsafe to look, or to behold
miserable persons, which are altogether unprofitable unto them.

Mean space, Love lying in wait, let not the least of her looks fall unto the
ground, but that with the same, he pierced, and through pierced my soul, as a
young child gives a thousand pricks upon a piece of paper, in which he would
set out the show or resemblance of some figure or shape.

What should I say? I forgot every thing, only to think upon her, and to
mark (if peradventure) she did cast her eyes upon me, and (like a fool as I
was) I flattered my self, made my conceit believe, that she perceived my
meaning, and that she would take some pity of my disease, construing and
interpreting all her gestures and glaunces, unto mine own advantage: not
unlike that fond Captain, that dreameth he has vanquished his enemies, giving
the spoil away, before he has won the field.

But, O (how much was I deceived I when the dance was ended) seeing her, A
Similie.
where I stood, to go on the other side where I stood) retiring (as it were)
her self fat from me.

Yet was I so foolish for all that, that I thought she used this policy, to
the end she might bleare the eyes of the rest, and conceal the great good
will she bare me, as if she had had a great care of me, when (as God knows)
she was far off from the same.

Thus Desire, causes Lovers to interpret every thing to the best, and for
their own conceits, imagining that they cannot love, but that they must needs
be loved again.

But Phedra, loved the chaste Hippolitus, yet was not she beloved again. An
example.
Apollo loved Daphne, yet found no requital at her hands: and Myrrha, doted
upon her own Father, yet could never obtain, what she so much requested.
Notwithstanding all this, Love grew so extremely within me, as he began to
make me courageous and bold, as that Captain which takes into his grace, his
enemy whom he has ouercom, puts new life and valor in him. So I would
not give over, nor play the coward in this extreme peril: but as a second
Theseus, began to devise how I might draw my self out of this intricate
Labyrinth: whereupon, plucking up my heart, and setting a good face upon the
matter, I adventured to approach, and to come nigh my fair mistrisse.

O divine force of LOVE, how great his puissance is? Being a far off from
her, I was hardy and bold, I made reckoning that I had gotten her, I devised
sundry sorts of speeches, which I meant to deliver unto her, and began to grow
proud in my gesture, words, and countenance; But no sooner came I near unto
her, but that I was another kind of man, quite changed and altered, having (in
steed of my former brauados and bragging conceits,) fear and respect, awful
duty, and grave reverence entered into my mind: all which, took possession of
my heart, so that I was as timorous as could be, not knowing what to do.

So Casar stayed a long time, doubting about the passage of Rubicon, although
before he was thoroughly determined to wade through it. An Example.
I then might have been compared unto that miserable creature, who calls for
death, prays, and most earnestly urges death to come, and to carry him
away. (With a good will faith death, behold me here ready) but when the poor
wretch sees him, he is astonished, amazed, and terrified, wishing rather his
room then his company. So soemed it, that death had feazed upon me, I being
so confounded upon the sudden, that I knew not whether I had any heart,
life, or sense, within me or no.

The Fool perceives not his own folly, which the wiser sort take notice of,
because they are wise. A Sentence.
So I, being taken with this new desire, which had blinded as well (the eyes of
my body as of my mind) took no knowledge of my foolish carriage, only being
ravished with the fair contemplation of my sacred Goddess, I never thought of
any thing, but how to stare her still in the sweet face. O how hard are the
entraces in to Love, where dutious respect, timorous fear, uncertain doubt,
and bashful shame, keep the door, through which we cannot pass, without
their permission and leave, we being bound to content them all (one after
another) before we can go any one foot further.

My beauteous Lady, nothing sick at all of my disease, gave a guess presently
of my malady, she quickly found out my fault, which I my self could not see,
and being wary and grave, soon descried my vain and idle folly. My cruel
passions, which confounded my senses, (bringing me to be as an idiot, or as
one deuoyd of sense) moved her nothing at all. For virtuous she, had never
known what Love was, she having been (for her most exquisite beauty, at the
first beginning of her life) consecrated and bestowed upon that Goddess, whose
name she bare, and whose sacrifices she most solemnly did perform. But all
Natures are not subject unto Love.

The right Diamond can never be cut with all the iron tools that may be,
neither can Cupid be counted the commander over all such souls as live here
below in the world: whether it is, for that he can do nothing with us, except
we give him leave, and so submit our selves voluntarily unto him; or whether it
be, because he being blind, and an infant, he cannot see, how to strike such
rightly, which escape shot-free from his tyrannies. She then perceiving my
folly, and acquainted with my sickness, began thus to school me.

Shepherd, who has so suddenly taken away thy voice and countenance from
thee? And what is the matter thou carryest thy self so strangely? I am no
Medusa, that changes men into stones, neither any Circes, or Medea, to alter
the shapes of men, by inchaunting potions. Who willed thee to come hither, thus
to lose, both thy self and thy speech together? what foolish imagination has
seized upon thy spirits? what fortish disease does bridle thy tongue? and what
sensles dolor does possess all the parts of thy body? Am I so ghastly a
sight to behold, that my very face makes such become amazed and astonished,
and those mute and dumb of speech, that do but look upon the same? What
uncouth frenzy has brought thee hither, to give us so many testimonies of thy
extreme and witless folly.

Fond man, that thou art not sufficiently satisfied and content, that thy
neighbors should know of this thy madness, but thou must needs make strangers
acquainted with the same also, who (before) knew no such matter.

Either withdraw thy self from my company, or else declare unto me, the
cause, and the occasion of this thy coming hither, and of these thy
brain-sicke fittes and humors: For what profit or credit should a man look
to get, by talking with such sortish companions, as will believe nothing but
their own gross folly? and who are without reason, to take in good part such
wholesome admonitions and warnings, as shall be for their best benefit and
behoof?

Speak then, or be gone, for a dead truncke of a withered Tree, would perform
as much as thou do, thine eyes being only they (of all thy other members)
that swiftly move, and strangely stare upon me.

As the wayfaring man, heavy a sleep, under some shadowing Oak, A Sentence.
awaketh upon the sudden, in the morning, when he hears the Hunts-man, with
his yelping dogs, to pass along by him; Even so I, with this sweet voice of
hers, awaked out of my drousie slumber, and contrary to the companions of
Ulysses, whom the Songs of the Syrons brought to sleep, I was much revived
with the same. Or as the watchful Lover, deprived of his Mistress, (dreaming in
his bed, that he speaks unto her) waketh, and starteth up suddenly, verily
imagining that he sees, and discourses with her.

So likewise, this short and sharp Oration of hers, rowsed me (by force, as it
were) from my dull and leaden musings, and brought me into my right wits
again. O how Love resembles the Sun! For it takes away from us both our
voice and force: As the other gives life and vigor unto us, and by the
selfsame heat consumes us again. This made me sore ashamed, blushing to
look about me. But in the end, I plucked up my spirits, being bold to answer
her in these terms.

O fairest, amongst all that be fair, less perfect then thou art, have
(heretofore) with their presence, taken away the speech of more excellent
Orators then I am by odds. If in beholding the ordinary works of GOD, which
daily present themselves before our eyes, and which we continually see, we
become mute and dumme at the same, wondering and admiring at the puissance of
such an immortal and merciful Creator.

How much more them (most gracious Nymphe) thinkesh thou, we should be
astonished and amazed, seeing so rare, so perfect, and so exquisite a (...) as
thou art, coming so near unto the beauty of God indeed?

If the Infernal powers in hell below, have (in times past) been moved with
the sound of a melodious Harp, and if that gentle Orpheus could by his Music,
allure and draw after him, such things as had no foul; Ah then, by how much
more shall out souls be enticed, with that which is both comely, lively, rare,
and fair, and such as is divine beauty?

Nothing delights our eyes so much, as that which is beautiful, A Sentence.
neither do they take any pleasure to behold that which is deformed, foul, or
il-fauoured.

And as the greedy and huugtie starueling, who has not seen any victuals of
a long time before, finding himself at a great feast, is so ravished with joy,
as he loses his color and speech, confounded with the sent and sight of the
meat; Even so, in seeing an Object so admirable, and so pleasing as thy beauty
is, why should thou wonder, if I be ravished with the same?

Has not Love had the power to race out of the heart of Theseus, as well the
sweet favor of Ariadne, as the great good turns he received at her hands,
forcing him, wholly to affect and like of Phoedra?

And the same Love, did it not take away all the remembrance from periurde
Jason, as well of the pleasures, as of the beauty of Medea? repudiating her to
take Glauce, unto his espoused wife?

Then (comeliest Creature of all others created) muse no more at this my fond
behavior and carriage: and if I have offended, condemn (not my mind) but thy
peerlesse countenance, which (as the Sun pierces the Crystal) so can it
penetrate the power, the puissance, force, and might of Constancy it self:
yea, and through the hardest heart of the most barbarous people that are.

This was the first speech I made before her, and which, God knows, I could
hardly finish, by reason I was so afraid lest I should offend her. But this
prevailed no more with her, then an earnest and vehement persuasion does, with
a right brave and constant mind, urging it to break his Oathe and promise, or
to commit some horrible treason, or extreme vile and egregious villainy, she
being thoroughly resolute, to serve still the goddess Diana, and never to love
any man, Cupid himself not being able to overthrow or remove, her firm and
loyal determination and intent.

Thus did the amorous intreatings of foolish Phodra, displease chaste
Hippolitus; So did licentious Myrrha, anger her father, she being over
importunate in her lawless love. And so did my unwelcome speeches make her
frown, even through anger and disdaines Virtue forcing her fair face to blush
with shame and despite, which she, like (as with a pensill) to temper with the
vermillion of her bashful modesty. Me thought I felt my self condemned, with
that controlling look of hers, and the changing of her color, seemed to
execute me (even alive) as I was; Love being of that nature, that one only
countenance or gesture, increases or diminishes the hope of Lovers, as in a
sick Patient, a little good or ill diet, kills or reuiueth the health of his
life. And now, though too late, A Sentence.
I repented me, that I had spoken any thing. Often is a man blamed for
speaking, but seldom or never for holding of his peace. I confessed (now) that
I had done a fault, yet knew I not thereof, until I had committed the same.

The Mariner overtaken with storms, and wel-nigh sunk with surging Billowea,
has leisure to repent him, that he took Sea in such foul weather, and must
endure the penance for the same.

Too late did the Troyans perceive their own oversight, An example.
in having permitted the Grecians to bring in their horse within their City
walls: and so was it with me. But alack, what people be there living in the
world, that are so much subject unto repentance as Lovers be? in as much as the
more their loss is, the greater is their repentance, for that they kept the
same no better. Nothing is so precious unto the Lover, as is the affection of
his Lady, because it is the chief nourishment, both of his body and mind.

Often did I wish, that I had brideled my tongue within my mouth, but the byrd
flying in the Air, cannot fly but must be seen, and a word once spoken,
cannot be recalled back again, being no more able to be recovered, then the
Time, which is most vainly and sondly lost. A Similie.
The (...) once shot, cannot return back to the bow, but must fly to the
mark, at which it was aimed. Neither can the stone that is flung up into the
air, come again into the had of the stinger, before it has mounted up
aloft.

What to do I knew not, only I hung down my head (and as one unworthy to fee
that face, which was most justly offended, with my foolish temeritie) I held
mine eyea fixed upon the ground. Wherein, I resembled him that plays at
Tennice, who looks upon his Racket, after he has made a fault, not knowing
whom to blame for the same. The lovely Virgin, not any thing at all moved in
mind, as I was (for though the Fellon that has offended, A Similie.
is troubled before the Judge, we must not therefore say, that the Judge
himself being innocent, and the father of the Law, should be astonished at
all:) took courage bravely again, and as it were (in disdain) thus began to
jest at me.

How now man, what cheer, all amort still? Tell me, thou rash and
inconsiderate Swain, do thou not fear the pains of Ixion, or to be
plagued as that amorous Hunter was by Diana, for his overmuch saucy boldness? I
well perceive thou find that I am more courteous and gentle, then thou art
bold and ouer-foolish-hardie (far more then any way becomes thee indeed)
thy fault deserving as great punishment as the others did.

But it may be, thou art one of that accursed race of the Titans, whom Jupiter
blasted with Lightning, for their notorious pride, taking down their proud
glory, with the horrible darts of his all-daunting fiery Thunder.

Do thou not know, my nature, my calling, and my birth? In going about to
mock me, thou would seem, to make me believe that I am otherwise then I am:
making Love to be author of thy folly, and my beauty, the mother of thine
error. But thou playest, as almost every one does; For who (ever) has done a
fault, that lays not the blame thereof, rather on another, then upon
himself? You Lovers are happy in one thing, for that you have this Love
always at command: upon whom, (as upon a Rock) you found and build all the
buildings of your faults, when it is a mere gross Error, to think that there
is any such Love at all.

Man, if he list, may keep himself from Loving: For brideling his appetites,
with the snaffle of Reason, and holding them in their right places, they can no
way offend, and they no way offending, he can never be forced to love. A
Sentence.


Thou art the first that like bold Bayard, durst be so audatious as to trouble
me with such speeches as thou, even now have done. For to what purpose seems
it the Husbandman, to go about to remove a huge stone or Rock, from one place
to another, whose black and cold shade spoyleth his Corn? Or what profit is
it for the Pilot, to seek to tarry the course of the flood, because it
hinders his Navigations? I am vowed unto the Goddess Diana, and am one of her
Virgins, which (only) I will serve.

Hence then all love from me, and thou, that have presumed (as the first) to
speak unto me thereof, shall be him that shall be first refused: protesting
unto thee, that if thou return again unto thine old Error, I will so punish
thee, as thou shall be a warning unto all other whatsoever.

Ah (good Father) I yet stayed for a more hard and cruel answer of this
angry Nymph, resembling the guilty person, who not fearing the arrest of
death, contrary to his fear, is only condemned to pay a Fine. Which was the
cause that hope and assurance came unto me again: Whilst with an humble
reverence, I thus began to excuse my self unto her.

Glorious and resplendent Lamp, the purest Gold in the world, has sometimes
been dispraised of men, and counted as base, because they knew not the value
and worth thereof: Even so, if not any before my self, have not attributed
glory unto thy beauty, the reason is, because they were not acquainted with
the excellency of the same. Say what it best pleases your sweet self, yet
shall you never keep me from worshipping, admiring, and adoring, that which is
so precious and rate, as it approaches near unto the Gods; because it is not
in the power of man, to hinder the same, no more then the bond-slaue can
contradict whatsoever pleases his Master.

If the divine Goddess Diana, has entertained you for her own, do you
admire and wonder, that mortal creatures, after the example of the Gods, do
unto you honor and reverence?

Too bold I must needs confess I am, to trouble you, with these my harsh and
tedious importunities. But (O worthy Diana,) what famous deeds, and memorable
acts, have ever been accomplished and brought to pass, without extreme
boldness, and exceeding great venturing: yea, and many times, without all
appearance of Reason?

They which spare to venture, prove for the most part, Audaces Fortuna iuuat,
the midosque repellat.
poor and beggarly wretches; For Fortune most commonly favors such as be be
bold, and of a desperate spirit, whereas cowards, and such as be
white-liuered, she rejects, and brings enought.

The Gods themselves, vouchsafe to accept men for their seruitors, nothing
disdaining at all their sincere oblations and offerings. Neither do you judge
aright of mine inward affection toward you. For, in loving you, I do honor
you: this my love, not being the child of an unchaste Venus, but of renowned
and illustrious Honor.

Too too divine is your Beauty, too brave your Virtue, too chaste your mind,
and too sacred your honor, to be tainted or once touched with the dart of
Cytherea.

Besides, Virtue it self, never disdaineth dutious affection, and loyal
constancy, for her attendants and seruitours: which, if it be so; Then why
should not you entertain the poor Shepherd Arcas, for your slave?

The selfsame Goddess which you honor, has dearly loved a simple Swain,
she descending down from the heavens, to come unto him, and to search for
him, with all delightful and pleasant shows that may be. Venus likewise, has
not thought scorn of the amity of lovely Adonis: why then, should you
disdain mine? Well may you forbid me, but hinder me you cannot. For love you I
must, nor can any thing turn me from the same.

Easily may man tame his covetous passion, his losses, and hindrances, his
sorrows and griefs, but hardly or never, can he overcome Love. For neither
Dame Nature her-selfe, nor any cunning Art, are able to give us any such
precepts, as are sufficient to bring the same to pass. David, nor David's wise
son, Hercules, nor strong Sampson, Plato, nor witty Aristotle, Ovid, nor
learned Virgill, were never able to do it, he having forced them all, to try
his conclusions.

Be then persuaded (most excellent Nymphe) and esteem not so lightly of the
puissance and force of LOVE, lest he make you to feel of his powerful
effects, as that Prince uses to deal hardly with such of his people and
subjects, as go about to revolt from him.

Fond man, A Sentence.
(replied she smiling.) The faults of great personages, excuses not the
follies of the meaner sort, whom we must follow, not in their riches, but
(rather imitating them) in their Virtues, for their mightiness covers the
faults which they do, the other, not being able to do the like, because they
want the authority the first are in.

If Diana and Venus have loved, therefore think thou, that I am bound to
follow them, and Love as they did? If so thou think, thou art much deceived.
A Kingdom may well suffer a wicked and an unjust Prince, and yet it does not
follow, but that his subjects may be both faithful and godly. Virtue is as
much commendable in the poor, A Sentence.
as in the rich: and the silly wretch, dught as much to doubt to offend, as
he that is most wealthiest, and mightiest of all, because the violating of
Virtue, admits no excuse at all, in as much as men are more bound unto her,
then unto any thing else in the world.

Think not then, that either these thy examples, or these thy reasons, are
able to change my mind, to alter my will, or as much as once to make the least
breach that is, into the invincible Forte of my chaste thought. Subtle
Sophisters in their schools, (to maintain their bad opinions) never want
Arguments, which carry the show and face of Reason.

So you Lovers, learn in the Academie of your Master, many goodly
discourses, which resemble such fruit as is fair and ripe outwardly, but
within, is rotten and unwholesome, and good for nothing. For how can they be
good or just, when the Doctor that teaches them (by your testimonies) is
without reason, and blind, and without all equity and justice? The beginning
of your Song is always this, that it would please unto entertain you into our
services: Because (forsooth) your Love is most sacred and chaste toward us. But
good wine, in time, grows to be sower and sharp; And so these your goodly
considerations, and chaste respects, wax daily worse and worse, so that in the
end, they come to be stark naught indeed, and much disagreeing with our
Honors, as the sweetest meat is soonest spoiled, through the heat of the
Sun. Give over then, good Swain, and never talk unto me more of these
errors, which make both high and low to forget themselves: otherwise, I will
stop mine ears, as the Serpent does his, with his tail.

I seeing her choler to be somewhat abated, replied thus. Rich Treasure of
Virtue (under correction) your own words condemn your own opinion which you
hold; For if we must not judge by the example of others, and if particular
actions, be they good or badde, bind not the general; Then, why think you,
that all Lovers are scarce chaste or virtuous? when there be diverse found to be
of a contrary disposition and Nature.

All the Goddesses were not like to Venus, nor all the Gods, of the humor of
Jupiter. He that has abused himself no way, but does his business honestly,
and well, (not going about any Treachery or Treason) ought not to abide the
punishment of a Traitor. For that were to do against all Justice, there being
great difference between the guiltless and the guilty, in the manner of
their lives.

When I shall have spoken, or done any thing (against my former meaning) then
may you well enroll me amongst the number of those infamous Lovers, but until
I shall so do, you cannot justly accuse me.

Did I think you were otherwise, then you say you are, and that Honor, Virtue,
Modesty, and Chastity, lodged not in your breast, I could not (I assure you)
love you so much as I do: For that Love that is not immortal, is but a Love,
false, deceitful, and counterfeit.

The Love which one attributes alone unto Beauty, passes and dies, without
the the same: but that, which respects Virtue, continues sacred and sure for
ever, because it never dies, no more then Virtue it self does.

If we will love rightly, then must we love the soul, which is the
receptacle of Reason, which never perishes, and not the body, which in small
process of time ends and decaieth.

My conclusion is thus, that I honor you for your virtue; I love you, for your
beauty; hoping you will accept of my poor sacrifices, least you be condemned
to be more haughty and high-minded, then the Gods themselves, who disdain not
to listen unto the supplication of a sincere and loyal heart.

No more Shepherd (answered the Virgin) importune me no more: He that is
wise, ought not (alone) to be without spot or blame, but must as well be free
and clear from all suspicion of the same; Taking away the occasions of vice,
to the end he may not sin at all: For he that is grave and considerate, can
find no excuse when he has offended. For mine own part, I will neither love,
nor be beloved, much less, be the cause of another misery.

But O you blind and frantike Lovers, who always make your Mistresses the
motives of all your misfortunes. As if a fair Crystal River, and such a one,
as is profitable unto the whole Commonwealth, should be condemned, for
drowning such as cast themselves headlong into the same, and not their own
foolish and desperate fault.

But (say thou) I cannot hinder thee to love me, (a Gods name) let it be
so, but yet this cold comfort I will give thee, love me as much as thou will,
yet never would I wish thee to look for any requital at my hands: for if thou
do, assure thy self, thou shall be mightily deceived.

And take this also for a warning from me besides, that if thy indiscretion or
want of government, shall (by chance) bring the least spot, or blemish unto
mine honor, (yea as much as any small color of the same) I here solemnly
protest, that in revenging it upon thee, I will likewise punish mine own
self, in that I have suffered thee, so far to run on, and not to have
plagued thee for thy offense. For I will wash my hands in my best blood, and so
purge my self clear from the fault.

Fond Shepherd (that thou art) this frail and withering beauty of the body,
is nothing worth, in comparison of that of the mind. And that woman that has
the first, and wants the second, is like unto a dead body, which is nothing
but a fair and fat-feeding for worms.

If thou love me indeed, (as thou would make me believe) then love that,
which I esteem of, more then of mine own life; that is, mine honor: and
loving it, (even for my Loves sake, withdraw thy self from doing that which
may hurt it, and so by consequence, mine own person.

For, (Shepherd) assure thy self, this mine honor can never die, without my
life, and they sailing both in one Boat, never shall Diana see the one without
the other.

Admirable Lady (answered I) great wrong do you offer unto me, to account me
as an enemy, of the thing which you so religiously esteem of in this world.
But if I so much displease you, yet can I easily content you again, in
absenting my self from you, by a gentle kind of death.

Permit me only to execute the same, and then shall you see, how willing I am
to be serviceable unto you, in all my best deuoires.

If I have forgotten my self any way, I crave pardon for my fault, I being
over rash, in that I have presumed to love you so much as I do, and not that I
ever went about to offer outrage or prejudice, unto your good Name or Fame, in
any sort whatsoever. Or if without making satisfaction for mine offense, you
will not forgive me, yet I beseech you, suffer me to die: For never will I wish
to live, to be holden for an enemy unto that, which I hold to be so precious,
and which I esteem more off, then of all the wealth in the world.

Shepherd, Shepherd, answered the courteous Damzell, I take little delight or
pleasure in blood. Neither am I descended from those Gods, which demanded men
to be sacrificed unto them, I will endure all; yet not with force, as Tyrants
do, but rather with sweet mildness, as gentle Princes use, I am content thou
live, but yet whilst thou live, I would not have thee, kill her, who has
given thee so much liberty, or to bring her unto her latest home; if by thy
fault her chaste credit be any way impaired or diminished.

What shall I say more unto thee, to content thee? when I have already (I
fear me) said enough, if not too much. I must now leave thee; for I perceive
my Sister is about to call me, to begin our dancing again. Heavens grant
that thou may live, freed of this thine evil, and that my loss, make thee
not wise too late, after thou have wrought mine utter overthrow.

Having so said, away she goes from me, comforting her self, amongst her
divine company: And I, being not a little proud, of this my gentle good
fortune, withdrew my self from the company, making my prayers unto the Muses,
who devised these two Sonnets, which (after the dance was finished) in the
best manner I could, I presented unto her.

SONNET. I.
My thoughts, a new clear Sun, (now) wholly do adore,
My heart (pale, through great fear) does march under his light:
This Sun, thy sweet Face is, where beauty keeps his store,
Which being divine, divinely prized is aright.
Sacred Diana, worshipped in Heaven and Hell,
Thou, ore my heart (alone) deseru'st to signorise,
Men vanquished, by rare Deities, that do excel,
Thee taking (so) should honor in most sacred wise.
If then (I) by thine eyes, am overcome and slain,
Yet I esteem myself, most happy so to be:
Men (serving Gods) Cannonized Saints, are for their pains,
Ah then, these humble prayers, and vows, accept of me.
The greatest Gods vouchsafe, A Sentence.
meant presents for to take,
And meaning good (the sacrifice) most perfect still does make.
SONNET. II.
Fair Dame, which with sweet bonds, in bondage holdst my heart,
Daine, that he may thee serve, his ransom so to pay:
Or, if thou will not that from prison he shall part,
Then as a guilty wretch, in bis best time him slay.
He cannot see thee, lest (he dutious) thee may serve,
Needs must he rest thy slave, for who has venim taken,
A counter-poyson seeks, himself so to preserve,
Or finds Death out, for to ease him of his pain.
That torment (sudddainly) which gentle Death does kill,
Ought not to be lamented, when it riddes all grief:
Whereas my woes are heavy, during (always) ill,
Ah then, kill me (on sudden) or yield me relief.
For happier is the Tomb, then is his vital breath,
Who rightly lives not, but (wretchea) languisheth.
These were the first verses, which with a Viole, (pleading for pity) I
presented unto my beauteous Diana, who accepted of them, and read them, with an
indifferent kind conntenance.

O divine Muses, even vice it self, loves, honoreth, and reuerenceth you:
Neither is there any, be they never so ill given, but likes of the praises,
which you (with your melodious harmony) attribute unto them. Diana, finding
me to be somewhat favored of the Muses, began to think somewhat better of
me, then she did beforce imagining that they would not suffer vice to reign
in my Love, because they are of themselves divine and chaste. So Maro, by the
help of his Muse, obtained the favor of Augustus the Emperor, recovering his
lands again.

Whereupon, I began to conceive better of my self, then I any way deserved,
and as Pompey, because he had forced some of Caesar's army, to retire back,
as far as their own Trenches, imagined with himself, that he had already
got the gole, and won the victory.

So I (because of this small grace I obtained at my Mistress hand) began to
persuade my self, of things, that neither might, nor could well be brought to
pass.

A small matter, makes Lovers, to hope or fear. I now took upon me, to make
this Dittie following, which (as sweetly as I could) I sung before my Lady.
Hear it then, though unworthy it be of your patience.

(LADY) how much do I respect and love
Your beauty rare, which does my heart control?
When (lest that you to anger I should move)
I bite my tongue, and silent am in soul.
Ore me you have (still) such a hand,
As, none but you, may me command.
I rather choose, a thousnd times to die,
Without offending your most heavenly face:
Then like to Dedals son, fall foolishly,
And so, through rashness, end my youthful race.
Borne was I, for to be your slane,
My service you (alone) shall have.
If I of you, such reverent regard
Have, as to you, I dare not tell my grief:
Ah then, but guess my Crosses over hard,
By these my tears, I bide without relief.
Think that (as others) I do mourn,
The fire kept close, more hot does burn,
Before, to you, my cares I will bewray,
I Will perish, as your loyal servant true:
Death cannot be so grievous any way,
As for to be offensive unto you.
So you be not displeasd by me,
The loss of life, no loss shall be.
A double burning burden I do bear,
My self consuming with a twofold woe:
First, for because I love, and hold you dear,
And next, because I dare not tell you so.
A pittious pain, that to conceal,
Which most we covet to reveal.
The Law does men (sometimes) compel and make,
All that they know, not to disclose or tell:
But LOVE all speech away from us does take,
Which is a plague, as bad as second Hell.
We must not for our selves once speak,
Whilst silence makes our hearts to break.
But though my tongue most secretly, this ill
Does keep, my pittious eyes yet show the same:
Thus whilst I loyal do contiuue still,
I counted am a coward, to my shame.
Because that I am over kind,
I am condemned of abject mind.
To reap for loving true, a mortal wound,
I hold is as a sacred thing divine:
And so I rather wish, dead to be found,
Then a denial, should cause ruin mine.
What need I (then,) my griefs her show?
When what I would (fair she) does know.
I Will rather fly to Heaven, with swiftest wing,
Then that mine earnest suit, my Dame should grieue^
To speak too much, A Sentence.
much danger often does bring,
When wary silence nere does blame receive.
Of Gods we learn secret to be,
Little to say, and much to see.
Then (Dearest) since thou art not ignorant
Of my hard state, rue on my pittious plight:
Which though in colors, forth I do not paint,
Yet they, in conscience merit favor right.
Who serves well, A Sentence.
though he (not craving) stand,
Yet does his good deserts enough demand.
After I had sighed forth this amorous Dittie, it pleased my Lady, to allow it
for passable and current, she doing me the honor to sing it her self (now
and then) unto the sweet sound of her dainty Lute.

But O thrice happy Song, to have been thought worthy for to live in the
sacred memory of my Mistrisse, and to be warbled forth, with her sweet and
melodious voice.

This (reverend and grave Sire) was the beginning, and first progress of my
chaste Love, which made me so careful, as I could take no rest, in so much as
(like one ouer-curious) I would needs know the event of the same: and thereupon
(one day) I addressed me, unto an Ecco, of whom I demanded many things, which
she resolved me of suddenly: But yet her answer was so fatal and heavy
unto me, as it not a little irketh me to repeat it. Nevertheless, because I
will hide nothing of my proceedings from you, listen if you please; For thus it
was.

ECCO. Hark (Goddess of these Woods) unto my never ceaseless cries,
Who here most blessedly do live, exempt from vanities.
Thou Goddess, which through knowledge thine, of prudent foreseeing Fate,
Do know our ends, and deaths, and of our lives, the course and state.
Goddess of heavenly Nature right, to whom Jove does reveal
Great secerets of importance, and naught from thee does conceal.
Thou, that of us, according to thy own will, do dispose,
Thou, which one while do make us live in joy, and then in woes.
To thee, to thee (do I appeal: To answer me) then come,
Whose voice seems for to fly from out, a hollow ghastly Tomb.
Who shall relieve my woes, and breathe into me vit all breath?
Into my soul ore-chargde with grief, and ouerwhelmde with death?

In what estat shall Love (which cuts my wings of thoughts ore-glad)
Find my poor mind, which when it left it, left it over sad?

What, with my heart once strong as steel, against griefs shall then be done?
Since hardly it was made to yield: shall it be overcome?

After so many weary toils, where-through I needs must perish,
What will my Lady count of this, my too too dear bought service?

But shall I from this wretched state, whilst I do live, be free?
Or shall I still, unto her will (as servile) Bond-slaue be?

Ah say, what good at length shall I find, in this my cold damage?
What new come novel Accident, shall set a fire my courage?

Shall Rage and Fury then, within my bones unconstant burn?
And for to quench this flaming fire, to me shall none return?

Who is the cause of this my grief, and of mine usual pain,
Since I have always honored the great Palladian?

Why senseless find I senses mine, from Reason (thus) to moan?
Who works this uncouth fear in me? Say, is it cruel Love?

And is it cruel to one, that is the author of my grief,
The greatest of Gods, that will among God, be honored first and chief.

Shall I then be unfortunate, starre-crossed in my will?
And (without succor) succourlesse, must I continue still?

Ah Arcas, miserable wretch, behold now (here) the life
Which thou must lead, whilst thou do live, begirt with sorrow rife.
Choose rather death, then thus to live, in endless misery,
(By dying) all thy griefs do end, they woes and anguish die.
Seek in this uncouth Desert sad, some kind of gentle death,
Who Is plungd in pain, should nere desire to draw his vital breath. A
Sentence.

One plague's as bad, as is some death, one death ends torments all,
Then death, not life, I Will choose, and take of evils what is most small.
This was the pitiless answer of cruel Ecco, which made me bedeawe my
cheeks many times, with brinish tears, and to wish my self to be as low
under the ground, as I was high upon the earth; whilst I consumed peecemeale
away in most woeful plight. Stay there Shepherd (said the old man,
interrupting him) for thy misfortunes have put me in mind of a doleful
History, which I will report unto thee. Hearken then, for thus it begins.

In the reign of Emanuel, King of Portingall (who with his Army Royal, The
pitiful History of the Virtuous Izabella, and her incontinent Husband Don
Horatio.
scoured all the Seas thereabouts, planting the faith of Jesus Christ, in the
hearts of the unbelieving Moors, who then had small knowledge in the same, and
at what time he vexed the Infidels of Africa with continual wars, having
won Saffin and Arsillias, too famous and strange Cities (of that country)
from them, fortifying them with sufficient, brave and valant Garrisons) there
(then) lived a young gallant Gentleman, called Horatio, who for the great
proofs which he had (already) showed abroad, of his rare and admirable
chivalry) was grown to be very famous, and had gotten great fame and renown
amongst the Portingalls.

Hercules, though he was valiant, yet did he love, and through love died.
Achillis, for Brissesse, left the defense of his own Soldiers and
countrymen, An example.
and for the affection he bare to Polixena, lost his life. Mars and Cupid (as
the Father and Son) walk most (commonly together, and few generous
Cauailiers have there been, that have not vouchsafed to love. Amongst the
number of which, this youthful knight was one, who was forced to submit
himself unto the good liking, and to seek the favor of a fair Gentlewoman
(as then attending upon Maria the Queen) and one of her Maidens, of Honor)
being the daughter of Samperius, an ancient Baron, and defended from a most
honorable house.

Neither was he much to be discommended in suffering himself to be overcome by
this young Damozell, he having made his choice so well, that for virtue and
wit, for stature of body, for good color and complexion, and for perfect
properties in all parts of her, there were few or none to be preferred before
her in all the court of Portugal, yet, though his fancy was great, he
mightily concealed it, until (maugre his force) the fire discovered it self,
bursting out into a great flame, and that at a very bad time for him, the King
then dispatching him presently away, for Sassin, to follow the old wars
against the Affricans.

Although Don Horatio was by nature borne to be a Soldier, being far fitter
for the field, then to dally in a field-bed, war, being his most pleasing
pastime, and that he delighted in nothing so much as in battle, yet did it
wonderfully grieve him, to be absent from his Mistress, wishing in his mind,
that he might have given over his weapons, and have spun by her side (as
Hercules did sometimes) rather then to have departed from her. But there was no
remedy, bound he was by oath, and needs must he obey. Besides, this Nation is
wonderful respective and dutiful unto their Prince, and (which was of most
importance) his honor, would have complained upon him, if he should have
refused so worthy a charge.

One thing there was, which did not a little grieve him, and that was, because
he could not make known unto his Lady, the sincere affection he bare her, to
the end she might (sometimes) think upon him, and for fear, lest in his
absence she should entertain some other stranger into her service, he being
not able (by reason of his quick dispatch) to talk with her in private, for
occasion offers her self (now and than) unto such as are willing to seek
her.

Whereupon he thought it not amiss to write unto her his mind by Letter,
which being done, he knew not how to convey it unto her: Much did he study
about the same, one while, devising this way, and another while that way, but
in the end none pleased him at all, he being as far off to find out any
means, as when he (first) began to think thereof. A Similie.
Not unlike the covetous wretch, who does nothing else night and day, but
study how to increase his rich substance and wealth, beating his brains,
only how to get gold and yet is never contented nor satisfied.

But behold how Fortune was Horatios friend in his business. Samperius, the
Father of this Gentlewoman, was (by chance) as then, in the Indies, two great
Caracts, being sent by him from thence, unto the King, the very same day, that
Horatio departed from Lisbon to pass into Africa. Now our young Lover, whom
Love roused up, as the Hu^tsman does his game, counseled him, to get some of
these, who were (newly) come to the Court, to deliver this Letter, as if it had
come from her Father, which as he wished, was quickly brought to pass.

For a certain friend of his, offered him to be the messenger, and to deliver
the same, with his own hands unto her, which he did, so orderly, and with so
great cunning, as none perceived, no nor the Damozell her self, but that they
were sent from her father, until she had opened and red them: for there she
found the sweet entreaties of a friend, in steed of the grave counsel of a
Father: when being deceived (like him that returning home from a far country)
finds his house (seized upon by his enemy) she thought to tear the Letters
all in pieces, before she had thoroughly red them.

But as it is generally seen, that novel sights, though bad, do please our
eyes, many men of the better sort, thinking that a sudden change and alteration
of things, will breed their great contentment and ease. Even so, this Damozell,
moved with this strange case (after many doubtful determinations within her
own self) first reads one line, and then another, and at the last the
third, and then foldeth the paper up, resolved to read no more of the same,
but to burn it. Yet as he, that tastes good wine, although (at the first) he
is resolved not to drink much, by little and littile, swalloweth down a great
draft, allured by the sweetness of the same; So this Gentlwoman finding somewhat
that pleased her, in the beginning, made no more adoc, but read them quite out:
the copy whereof was this.

DON HORATIO, his Letter, to IZABELLA.
Fair Gentelmoman' if it be an irreuocable Doom, that men, be they never so
valiant, or courageous, shall be subject unto a brauer and more liuelier force
then their own; I hope you will not marvel overmuch, if I humbly yield unto
your divine Graces; and if as a Captive unto your beauties, I resign my
weapons unto you, and yield my self as overcome, by your beauteous self.

The valiant Champion, takes it for more credit, to be vanquished by a famous
Conqueror (accustomed to vanquish) then to have subdued, some base and
cowardly enemy, because glory is the mother of travail, and of labor. And
seeing the heavens have appointed ihat I should be overthrown, I take no small
pride and contentment, that it is my fortune to be prisoner unto the
resplendant sun of your beauteous eyes, I having never beheld any thing, so
fair and divine, throughout the world.

But as mortal men, deserve norecompence from the heavens, until they have by
thousand good proofs, testified the faithful and dutiful service toward
them; So I will not presume, to importune you to affect me at all, much more to
yield me any guerdon for my pains, until that by infinites of dutious
deuoyres, I show myself (insome part) worthy of your gracious service, which
has bound me, so firmly unto your peerlesse beauty. Mine only request unto
you is, that it would please you, to have me in your lovely remembrance, and
not to entertain any other as your loyal servant, before you shall have just
occasion to discard, and give me over. For, as (no doubt) it will be little
pleasing unto you, (hereafter) to repent you, that ye have made a worse choice,
than of my self, so will it be far more bitter unto me, than a most
desperate death, to be discharged from serving her, whom I love, more then mine
own heart, and cherish, more then mine own life, yea then mine own soul,
which is (now) wholly yours, seeing that he that is owner of the same, is the
inviolable slave, unto your incomparable beauties.

DON HORATIO.


Izabella, (for so was her name) not acquainted with the humor of Love, as she
iested at his amorous passion, so did she scoff at his Letter, making no
account, either of the one, or the other. But as Cremona, and Mantua, were
given by Augustus the Emperor, as a spoil unto his men, at Arius: and
Soldiers, because they had taken part against him, holding with his enemy,
the inhabitants thereof being driven from thence, and hardly entreated) and as
such Subjects of that Prince are worse used, and with far more rigor and
cruelty, who prove Rebles unto him, then those which have been always
faithful and true. Even so, such proud, audatious, and disdainful hearts, who
at (the first) make no account of Love, and refuse his yoke most stubbornly,
are more fiercely plagued after they are once taken down and conquered, then
those who (betimes submit themselves unto this servitude, accustoming
themselves by little and little, to support and bear this bondage patiently;
of which, Sabella may be a sufficient witness, as (ere long) you shall hear.

Horatio was then forgotten (as the Infant that has forgotten his lesson which
was taught him) and his Letter torn in pieces, which afterward the proud
Virgin bought at a high rate.

Mean space, as two Rivers which mingle themselves together, A comparison.
enuiron a whole country, and became a little Sea; And as the fire being
blown with two pair of Bellows, kindles more, then when it has but one. So
Don Horatio, pricked forward, by valor and Love, began to do incredible
matters against the Infidels of Africa. So that he became to be famous in
every man's mouth, there being no talk, but only of his worthy and valiant
exployts.

Izebella hearing him to be thus praised, and marking how the King himself,
with all his chief Martialists, did highly commend him, began by little and
little to grow gentle and mild. As the hard Diamond, becomes soft (put into
the blood of a Goat; and that great Mass and lump of cruelty of hers,
began to wax more kind, and to break in sunder, as the Snow fallen thick
upon the top of a hill, at the shining of the Sun, melts and droppeth away
to nothing, in small time.

But yet these light motions, were not sufficient, nor strong enough for Love,
whereon he might build a firm foundation: he knowing the presence, and the
speech of the brave Portingall Knight, would do more good then all these,
which were no other then castles built in the air, or conceits framed by an
idle head, they passing away as the clouds do post from one to another in the
firmament. Not long after, news was brought unto the Court (for certain) that
Horatio had won a notable victory of the King of Fesse, killed many of his
enemies, and gotten a notable rich booty and spoil: amongst which, was taken
prisoner, a maruailous fair Lady, sister, unto the Barbarian King, married
unto the Lieftenant of that country.

Izabella; who cared not much, whether she lost Horatio, or no, before these
news, because she made no great account of him, began now to doubt, that this
captive Dame, would take her conqueror prisoner, robbing her of that, which
she refused to take for her own: so as now she began to wish for to have him
playing as young children do (who after they have resused some certain thing)
begin to grieve mightily when they see the same given unto others: and this was
the cause, she now began to wake and look about her.

Diverse strange and prodigious are the effects of Love, which makes me think,
that Force only, and not Venus, was his mother: and that Despair first begot
him, for he does nothing but violently: not unlike unto the thunderbolt, which
never tumbleth down upon the ground, but it breaks one thing or another.

But now Horatio, laden with fame, with spoils, and with prisoners, returns
home to Portingall, upon whom every one casts his eye, whom every man does
highly commend, and unto whom all degrees (whatsoever) do use much dutious
respect, and humble reverence.

The King himself does him great grace, entertaining him with high
commendations, giving him many kind thanks, for his so valorous and honorable
carriage against his enemies: yet notwithstanding all these favors, he rather
chose to have had one amorous glaunce from his Mistress, then all these Royal
courtesies.

He sees himself honored by the King, made much of by the Nobles, respected
by the inferior sort, and to be accounted of and commended by every body.
Nothing wants for the perfection of his glory. He cannot wish for more then
he has, nor desire more, then is already attributed unto him: yet
nevertheless, he makes no account of all these his good fortunes, no more
then that man does, who enjoy a most precious and inestimable Jewel,
disdaineth and refuses other little rich stones, although they be much valued
and accounted of by other. The only presence of his Lady, was that which
pleased his mind, and the least sweet look cast from her smiling countenance,
bred more contentment in him, then all the honors and entertainments
whatsoever. Every man has a particular affectection that governs him, and
some one thing which he esteems more then all the rest, to enjoy which, he
accounts his chief glory, pride and contentment in this world, despising
all whatsoever else might happen by any other means unto him. Some delight in
greedy covetousness, some in renowned Chivalry, some in aspiring ambition, and
the most part in hot and furious Love.

Nothing pleases these kind of men, but only what is affected through these
things, not esteeming ought to be good or allowable, which comes any other
way, although it be profitable, praise-worthie, and fair. And this was our
Portingall Knighs conceit, who now was grown into such credit in the court,
with the King having won himself such commendations by reason of his valor,
as he might command that which other Gallants and Gentlemen (scarce durst not
open their mouths to entreat for) so that having egresse and regresse at all
hours, and to every place, he one day espied (a fit time) to break his mind
unto his Mistress, whom he finding alone, began thus to give her the onset: he
that is troubled with any grief, is much lightened of the same, when he has
unfolded and discovered it unto his friend. Now fair Gentlewoman, of all evils
that I have known (in my conceit) there is none that comes nigh unto Love,
in respect of cruelty, for all other diseases have their remedies only, he is
(as it were) without recure.

Notwithstanding, as he enters in at the eyes, who stand him in steed of
torches, to set him a fire in the heart, so will he (perforce) pass from forth
the mouth, taking (the tongue for a Herold) or Trompet of his dissignes. I
speak this by experience, although unto my no little sorrow: unless your
harsh and hard rigor grow to be gentle and mild, and except you lay a side
this cruel veil which hide the pity of your inward thought. Alas sweet
(Lady) if sometimes we love those who hate us, and such as bear us no good
will at all, how much more (in reason) then ought we, to affect those that love
us indeed? For although their friendship is not profitable unto us, yet
nevertheless, ought we to accept of their good wills, inasmuch, as we cannot
love one, unless we wish, covet and procure the credit and good of such whom
we fancy: which me thinks should bind us in conscience, to show the like
good meaning again: considering that the bruit beasts themselves, fancy
those, that do good unto them, doing a kind of reverence unto their gouerners,
that govern and bring them up. That your beauty, being so rare as it is,
cannot suffer or endure any thing, that is bad or vicious, I doubt not at all:
for (most commonly) that which is perfect of it self, is not so easily through
vice corrupted, which put me in good hope that you will not blame my loyal
amity, my true intention, nor the chaste desire I have had (always) to serve
you. If therefore it shall please you, to entertain me into so happy an
office, you then shall quickly perceive many true effects, to spring forth,
from this my faithful servitude, a double band, tying me, against the harshnes
of your rigor, and I being double wise moved and compelled to serve you; the
one is your admirable and incomparable virtue, which admits no comparison:
and the other is your excellent beauty, which glistereth among other faces, as
tho Sun does among the startes. May be (you will say) that Love has set me
down this lesson, teaching me what I should speak, and that never any Lover
thinks that Subject foul which he loves. To which I will answer you, that
if you were not worthy of the praise I have given you, and meriting every way,
to be beloved, Love never had made use of your singular perfections, to
overthrow my liberty, as he has now done; because he can never make a show,
of the greatness of his power, but by such rare Subjects, as Nature does furnish
him with all, through which he helps himself, to take prisoners, the hearts
of greatest Monarks: this being the reason, we seldom or never sees foul or
vicious woman to be affected or loved, for that Love refuses to do such a one
as, she any service at all.

It is no dishonest desire, that inflameth me with your kind a mitie, for rather
would I choose to die, then once to hold within me such a bad thought, and much
less, do I make Eburting mine exercise, to pass the day withal, now I am
free from wars. For too precious a thing do I esteem Time to be, to consume
and lose it without any good occasion: neither is it my meaning any way, to go
about to deceive you, for so doing I should but deceive my self; and deceiving
my self, I should (quickly) be the author of mine own proper overthrow, my
pretense being to seek you with a chaste mind, in the way of sacred marriage,
with the consent of your friends, according unto all orderly proceedings.

Think then (sweet Lady) how plain my meaning is, how holy mine intentions
are, and how chaste my desires; remembering that Wedlock is a matter you can
hardly avoid: and therefore I beseech you, if you find me any way worthy of
your friendship, cast him not away, that honors and adoreth you, more then
his own soul: neither frustrate him of that good fortune, which he hops to
find by enjoying of your seemly self, because he neitheir will, nor can be
fortunate, but to make you blessed: neither seek for any renown, but only to
make your self, the more glorious for ever. This was the sum of the
Caualiers speech.

Who, silent (now) attends his Ladies kind reply,
Whilst to his heart, she wounds does dart, with her fair eye.
Our saine Maid of Honor, vnaoquainted altogether with such business as this,
whose chaste cares (until now) were always shut unto such Orations as these,
was much amazed, to hear such a speech as this, not knowing what answer to
give unto Horatio, upon the soden; She saw his virtue, his reputation, and his
glory, had made him famous and commendable, his love to be chaste and
laudable, and his modest, and pudicque intentions, worthy of all succor
reasonable.

But yet on the other side, a number of these odd contrary conceits (which
hinder men much in their first proceedings, and so hardly bring it to pass,
when they have begun the same, as the most part of them, like faint-hearted
cowards) give over in their pursuit, without doing any good at all) made her
to pause, and doubt upon the matter, fearing lest, as into unknown places, all
entrings and beginnings are dangerous, so this his eager chasing in love, was
followed, either for some mischief, to light upon her body, or else for some
stain or blemish unto her honor.

Besides, such Virgins as are not practisde at all in the Art of Love (although
they think well of such as are suitors unto them) always imagine (so simple
are they) that their (credits should be much disparaged, if they should not
give two or three proud or disdainful answers unto their servants, when they
first begin to court them: and therefore for fashion sake, this Gentlewoman
thought to do the like: but yet bethinking her self somewhat better of the
matter, she thought it was as good to forbear, as to do it, one while she
thought upon one thing, and another while, upon an other, in the end she
resembled The Rosy bad, which wind blows here and there amain,
Holding his head down, which he raises up again.


She loved Horatio, admired at his valor, honored his Chivalry, highly
prized his glory, and found her self tickled with the great praises he gave
unto her. But as too much good fortune, is not the best, and too much ill
fortune, is as bad, the moderate and temperate, being that which is the golden
mean; so this Damozell compoundeth her answer of sweet and sower, nourishing
the mind of her Lover, as well with hope, as with fear; following herein, the
cunning Pothicarie, who covers his bitter Pill with gold all over. And thus
she answered unto him.

I willingly confess (noble Lord Horatio) that your worthy valor, deserves
great commendations, but though it be of great force, against the enemies of
the King, yet bath it no power, nor interest over me. For although I highly
prise it (as every one else does) yet do I far more esteem of mine honor:
and therefore persuade your self of this, that in comparison of that, I scorn
the greatest things in the world be they never so precious. I, most strange and
monstrous is it, for virtuous Maidens to love, whose liking ought to be tied,
unto the good will of their parents, and depending upon their pleasures, they
can make no promise without their consents.

This makes me to smile at you, and to think such Lovers to want their right
wits, that so foolishly follow in pursuit, the love of such Virgings as are
wholly subject unto the disposing of their kindred. For what good answer may
they look for (to please themselves withal) from such as cannot bestow
themselves as they would? And such an answer, must I be feign to give unto
you, for that I cannot assure you (for certainty) of any such thing as you
defire. For, of my self, I am no body, but as it were under covert barn, my
good ill and my body, being wholly in the possession, and at the disposing of
my gracious Lady and Mistress the Queen, and of mine own Father, my Lord
Samperius.

Besides, I so well like of a Virgins life, which is not subject unto cruel
Himen, as I wish not, nor willingly would give it over, to be come a Bond-slaue
of a freewoman, not forgetting, that as long as men are woers, they are
servants: but no sooner have they obtained what they would, but then (strait)
they become Masters and Lords over us.

Again, I am not ignorant, that they will not spare for fair speeches, that
they want not pithie persuasions, and above all, they will not stick for
golden promises. But the old saying is, that he that scoreth best, paieth ever
worst: and great braggers, are least performers of their words. And me thinks
you do great injury unto these beaue qualities in you, to spend your time, in
courting a silly damozell, who cannot pleasure you: when you might better
employ the same, to the great profit of your King and Country.

Then (valiant Horatio, follow the Wars again, and loose not your glory and
Honor) through vain and idle LOVE: to the end you may not be blamed, neither
I suspected to be the cause of your loytering (here) at home, without doing
any thing: as if I had pulled your Armor off, from that warlike, courageous,
and valiant body of yours.

And this persuade your self, that the renowned credit which shall come unto
you, by your gallant, venturous, and brave exploits, shall sooner win me to
be yours, then all the cunning trains that you can devise by Love to take me:
and that I make more account and estimation of them, then of all the Oaths and
protestations that you daily use.

And this, when you shall have accomplished at the full, and when my Father
shall be returned from the Indies, (if it shall stand with the good liking of
the King, the Queen, and him) I then shall be well content and pleased, to
take unto husband, such a brave Caualier as yourselfe is: and until then, you
shall pardon me. For as I am now, so will I keep my self, whilst you (in the
mean time) may study how to show and make trial, of the rare and admirable
proofs of your undoubted and invincible courage and valor.

But will you then (sweet Mistress, replied the Knight) be every way as good as
your word, and perform what you promise at this time?

That will I (answered the Lady) as I am a true Maid. Provided always, that
you take that virtuous course, which I have set down unto you, accomplishing
every thing orderly, and all obstacles and lettes taken quite out of the way,
by the consent of all my foresaid friends.

It is enough (said Horatio) and I take your, fair promise, upon which I will
build, as upon a flintie Rock, assuring your self, that ere long, you shall
hear some news of me.

Heerevpon, kissing her dainty hand, he departed from her, most luckily
performnig his promise.

O mighty LOVE, not Jove: (though mightiest God be be)
Can bring to pass such wonders, as are done by thee.
Horatio making all possible haste to be gone, and providing every thing
necessary for his journey, (presently) saileth unto Saffin, where he
achieved many strange and wonderful enterprises, over the Infidels in
Africa: burning their Cities, slaughtering their people, and ouer-running all
the whole Country: Insomuch, as his glory every day, grew greater and
greater, he being now grown a terro unto his foes, and a great Honor unto his
own Countrymen.

Which done, he comes back again unto Portugal, whither also Sampeius the
Father of Izabella, was returned from the Indies: who hearing such a general
applause of pra^se given unto Horatio, began to affect him wonderfully, whilst
he, following his Love business in chase so earnestly, and with such good
means, as with the consent of all parties, as the King, the Queen, and
Sampeius himself, the marriage between valiant Horatio and fair Izabella,
was concluded, consummated, and finished, with the greatest pomp, and most
Princelike solemnities that might be.

Our Lovers, so entierly loving one another, as they could scarcely abide to be
one small minute asunder. So rare and admirable was their love, as that of
Priam and Hecu. ba, was not the like: Nor that of Scipio and Cornelia, to be
compared unto the same.

Their two hearts were but one: their two bodies, but one mind and thought:
and their will and affection, was all one, without any difference at all.

In respect of their kindness, let that of Seleucus and Stratonica be void,
and the rare fancy that was found to be between Ulysses and his constant
Penelope, there having been (never) so earnest, or ardent a kind of affection,
as theirs was.

But what is too violent, can not be permanent and firm. Tempests and storms,
the more furious and raging they are, the lesser time they continue and endure.
Even as that body is suddenly overthrown and killed, that is surprised with
a most sudden dangerous disease.

Mean while, Horatio grew every day in more favor with his King then other,
In so much, as not long after, he chose him Governor of Ansillies, whither he
must needs go, to keep possession there.

O how sweet is Honor, (be it never so painful) unto generous and
courageous Spirits, as unto Hercules, and to others? They leaving all soft,
ease, and safe pleasures, to run desperately to win Honor: passing through
many thousand Pikes, and wading through infinite dangers and perils, with
great labor and pain, before they could attain unto the place where it was
seated.

So the prudent Prince of Ithaca, left his constant wife, to follow the long
and tedious ten years siege of Troy. And so the great Gueslin, high
Constable of France, left his Spouse, to venture for that glory, in the
midst of wonderful dangers, which made him famous for ever. An example.


And so our renowned Portuguise, although he held nothing so precious, nor so
religious in the whole world, as he did to live with his sweet Izabella, whose
company was his Paradise, and whose presence, his heaven here upon earth.

Yet would he needs leave all this felicity and happiness, to endure in
steely Armor, the brunts of bloody War, and whole worlds of Travails and
painful labors, to the end he might win Honor: which Noble and Heroical
minds hunt after so much. And (which many times, they dearly buy) with the
loss of their most precious lives.

He therefore resolved to depart, (although not without exceeding great
grief,) to leave his fair and beauteous Spouse, and the rather, because he
hoped to attain unto more Honor, through his worthy demeanure, and brave
carriage, he having excellent means (as now) to show afresh, some fruits of
his former towardness and forwardness (in his Princes service in the Wars)
by reason of that great and worthy Command, which was bestowed upon him.

He thought, that (who always) should live drowned in pleasures, resembled the
Companions of Ulysses, changed into Swine, and that nothing was well gotten,
but what was purchaste with the hazard of a man's life.

Whereupon, with many sighs, with many bitter tears, and sorrowful laments,
he takes leave of his doleful wife. For commonly, we are admonished (by GOD)
through some secret knowledge, when some mischaunce is coming toward us,
which we can no way avoid. So that the woeful Lady Izabella, (foreseeing as
it were, beforehand) the mischief that was like to light upon her; did
nothing else, but power forth whole showers of tears, having not the power to
let her Husband loose, from out of her arms.

The winding Vine, never held the Hasell or Filberd, more entangled within her
leaves, A Similie.
nor the green Iuy, never cleaued (so fast) unto the old stony wall, as this
young Lady clung about her heavy Spouse; whom LOVE, whilst sought by
violence, to hold still, stern HONOVE plucked him from thence by maine force,
carrying him away with him.

He was ordainde for further ill, to go his way,
Nor does the life of Man, A Sentence.
stand always as one stay.
His wife prays, desires; and coniureth him to break his voyage, to give
over his enterprise, and to continue still with her: teling him, that she had
(as yet) but only tasted the blessed pleasures which chaste wedlock
acquainteth faithful Lovers withal, without having had the lawful fruition
of those sweet contentments, which she so much desired.

But she pleaded in vain, and to no end, her Husband was deaf, and would
not yield unto her demand. Honor dried up her tears, making them to be of
no force, whilst glory was the hatchet, that cut off her precious speeches:
and desire of praise, the fire which consumed her most passionate prayers.

And therefore (though passing loath, he takes his leave and departs,)
carrying away with him the wounded heart of his lovely Spouse, in exchange of
which, he leaves hauie mournings, and sad laments, which followed her, even
unto her very grave.

Horatio being now arrived at Ansillies, follows his business most
fortunately, Mars chasing away Cupid: cruel wars, gentle Love: and hautie
ambition, the sweet remembrance of his wife.

It is a common fashion of many men, to follow a thing most earnestly and
eagerly, and then presently (and upon the sudden) when they have gotten it,
A Sentence.
they give it over, nor caring a whit for the same any more. Resembling herein
the wayfaring man, who (a far off) seeks a fountain or spring, to staunch
his thirst, and having freed himself of his dryness, makes no more account
of the water, nor would stir one foot to find it again.

But this was not all. For the Heavens above, abounding in good or bad
Fortunes, rain not one down alone, but many other, all together and at one
time: and we see (for the most part) that one mischief never comes, but that
there falls another, upon the neck of the same.

For so it was, that Horatio being far off from his dear Spouse, and
deprived of her company (by reason of the wars, wherein he was so much
busied) chanced to become amorous of the fair Prisoner he had of late taken
in a Battle, as I have said before: yea, and so much does he doat of her,
that as the flaming Torche, darkneth the light of the candle, so likewise this
love, quenthed the love he had before borne unto his wife.

O ungodly Husbands, which so wickedly falsify your faiths, unto your lawful
and loving bedfellowes: deceiving them so shamefully, unto your own shames.
Against had Husbands.
Have ever any of you lived, without being punished of the Almighty, for your
heinous faults? Was not Paris the overthrow and breake-necke of all his House
and Country, for defiling the bed of Menelaus, and rejecting his betrothed
wife Enone? Came not Jason to a miserable end, being deprived of his Children,
of his Wife, and his Palace, for abandoning Medea, and for taking another
false wife?

And did not Theseus stain his hands in the chaste and pure blood of his own
son Hippolitus, for giving over his dear Spouse Ariadne, Examples of bad
Husbands.
to the end he might satifie his lust with Phoedra?

And so was Horatio well plagued for his licentious pleasures: For God most
justly punished him, defacing his former glory, weakening his virtue, ruinating
his credit, and utterly overthrowing his valor.

So (long since) Solomon, through Harlots, lost his divine wisdom: they
forcing him to become an enemy unto God. So the strumpet Dalila, was the cause
of the death of Sampson the stout. And so have many other brave and great
personages been utterly overthrown, by this enticing Sex, and severely
chastised by God, as he did our great Commander of Ansillies, who was so
besotted of his slave, as he lived not, but only by her looks.

Her eyes, was his bright Sun, he none desirde but her,
She only fair was, her above (none else) he did prefer.
A strange thing, that (many times) these foolish and wicked Amors should be
more hot and lively, then such as be lawful and chasse. The reason being,
either because they are forbidden by the Law (man commonly, loving that which
he is prohibited to do) or, because they are (as it were stolen) or enjoy de
but seldom, keeping such Lovers in a perpetual appetite and desire. As those
who rise from the table (their bellies half filled) come to their diet with
better stomach, then such as are ouer-satisfied and glutted before. Or else, it
is (as I think) for that the devil is in these leaude livers, who more and
more enticeth and provoke them to follow this sin, from which they can
never, (without the great grace of OOD) retire nor withdraw themselves, until
such time, as utter ruin and destruction falls upon their heads.

But now Horatio began to loose his wonted reputation and credit, every one
speaking ill of him, for his new Minion which he had gotten, he being then, as
infamous for his bad life, as he was (before) renowned for his worthy virtues:
yet was he so shameless and so impudent, that he would stop his ears unto
such as sought to give him good counsel and advise, making a show as if he
knew no such matter, and that all was well: whilst he was so bewitched with
this raging and incestious Hellena, as he could not be quiet, nor rest any
where, except this notorious Curtezan were by him, insomuch, as he carried her
with him into the Wars, wheresoever he went, which she made earnest show to
desire, faining that she loved him so dearly, as she could not live without
his company: when the truth was, (she sought all the ways that might be) to
be with her former Husband again, and to be revenged of Horatio, who kept her
sore against her will.

Such foolish women, doing much like unto Lice or Fleas, which leave a dead
coarse, (presently) as soon as they find whereon no more to bite: and so these
kind of common ware, never love, but for their own commodity or profit. No
more then the common Queanes, who sent packing away the prodigal Child,
without as much as one cross or penny in his purse, to bless him withal.

Now whilst our Governor of Ansillses, lived thus licentiously, the chaste
Izabella, chanced to hear how badly her periurde Husband had used her, how ill
he had demeaned himself toward her, she understands of his follies, and has
knowledge of his ouer-lustfull and raging fault.

O how cruel is the wound that one receives of his friend! and how
grieuouslie do we take an injury of those, whom we account and hold as
chief defenders of our welfare and our good, reputing them as our best
friends. To receive a wrong of a foe, is an usual matter, but to be abused by
ones dear friend, does gall the very heart.

Too true does this poor Lady find the same, who hearing of these unwelcome
news, thought presently, as gallant spirited Portia, to give over her life.
Diverse conceits ran in her troubled brain, whilst she is vexed and
tormented with rage and disdain, with grief and jealousy.

One while, she thinks to die, and then changing that advice, she
determines to revenge her self of her unconstant Husband, but she bare him so
loyal an affection, and loved him so dearly, that this also was quickly out
of her mind.

Now she resolves and determines to commit her self unto the mercy of the
Seas and winds, and to sail, to seek him out at Ansillies, to complain
justly of him there, to reprehend him for his fault, and to be object unto
him, in his vicious kind of life. But disdain quickly altered that devise,
thinking with her self, that in so doing, she should too much abase her
self, to venture and indaunger her self so much, for a most leaude and vile
licentious Palliard, he no way deserving so charitable an exployt at her hands.

Many times did she send unto him, and often did she write, one while sharply,
another while sweetly, but all was one with him: for never would he vouchsafe
her any answer, by Letter, or by word of mouth.

Only he would Jest and gibe at her messengers and messages, whilst being
inchaunted with the dishonest love of his enemy, he studied how he might
satisfy and content her alone; which, his last bad usage, grieved her more
then the rest, enforcing her to begin to lament afresh.

Ah (said she) how justly am I punished for mine own error. Who will bemoane
him, that would not be warned by the harms of his neighbor?

What reasonable excuse can that man allege for himself, that falls into
the selfsame pit, into which he has seen him fallen, that has gone before
him? How many wretched Ladies like unto my self, (most ungodly abandoned, and
cast off by their wicked Husbands) might I have had for examples, not to
believe these flattering men?

Shall I come and complain unto thee, woeful Ariadne? Alack I dare not. Shall
I make my moan unto thee hapless Enone? No, no, I must not: seeing the least
of your misfortunes, had been enough to have made me wise.

O just God, revenger of all Oaths broken, that so cruelly did punish
Laomedon, for infringing his promise: Can thou suffer the most perjured
wretch in the world to live, and to escape scotfree?

Am I so cruelly destined, that he must follow me, with thousand torches of
grief unto my Tomb, who should have hene (in right) unto me, as the
comfortable Sunneshine of my life?

O faithless Husband, how quickly have thou trod under thy feet, thy fair
promises? And how little a while, has lasted the care of loyal Love betwixt
us? And (now) thou have so miserably deceived me.

What can thou have of me, more then my death? which I know thou would be
wonderful glad of, to the end I might not urge thy guilty conscience, for
this so foul a fact against me.

And certainly, were it not for this, I would most willingly die, but to the
end, I may somewhat vex, and revenge my self of thee, I will, although
unwillingly, live a little longer; knowing nothing can be more grievous or
unwelcome unto thee, then my company and presence. Yea, I will come before
thee, (face to face) and vpbraide thee for thy fault, even unto thy teeth.

I will pull out those shameless eyes, of that impudent Strumpet, who keeps
(unjustly) that from me, which is mine own: and whom thou preferrest before
thy lawful and chaste spouse. That done, I will hasten the heavens to shorten
my life, I will make my daily prayers, that I may die quickly.

The foming waves (therefore) shall not hinder me of my journey: the cold
Seas shall not freeze the hot desire I have to see thee: neither the fear of
the rising billows, shall let me from coming unto thee, I being not able any
longer to live, unless I may come to put thee in mind of thy fault: not
doubting, but the raging waters will be more kind unto me then thou art, at
(lest-wise) I mean to try them, by reason of the small joy I have of my life:
which I neither esteem, nor make account of at all.

Thus lamrnted this comfortless Lady, whom Love and Jealousy egged
forwards, to go onwards with her journey.

No peril (to give ore her purpose) can her make,
So little care, she of her loathed life does take.
(Often) is it seen, that such desperate persons as are weary of their lives,
An example.
escape the soonest the greatest dangers, which never offend them: whether it
be, because they are (already) thoroughly satisfied and contented with their
miseries, being loath to wrong them any more. Or whether it be, for that some
good Angel does accompany and guide these wretches, who without divine help
and assistance, would utterly damn themselves for ever.

But (now) by this time, the desolate Lady, had caused a Ship to be
thoroughly furnished at all points, into which, as a courageous Medea, she
enters, cutting and slicing the salt waters, so long, till at last, she
happily arriueth at that City, unto which her Husband had with-drawne
himself, the better, and more safely to live, in his secure and sensual
pleasure.

When, he hearing of her arrival, being far more savage then the brute
beasts themselves, (who hear the voices of their little ones, and of their
companions) caused the gates of the Town to be shut, commanding her, upon
pain of his displeasure (without vouchsafing so much as once to see her) to
return back again into her Ship, with all her train, and so to hoyse up
sail and away, to the place from whence she came.

O far more cruel then Jason, who suffered Medea to be present, and to set
out the Marriage of his new wife: far more unkind then great Agamemnon, An
example.
who permitted his wife to live, and keep company with her Lovers. And more
shameless then Mark Anthony the Romone, who left his virtuous and Princely
wife, to satisfy himself with the embracings of that impudent harlot
Cleopatra.

There is no better vinegar, then that which is made of good wine when it
sowreth. Even so, the best Natures commit the grossest faults, when they give
themselves over unto evil; I know not whether it is, because they have the
more means to do the same then others: or whether it be, for that vice
(waxing proud of so rich a prey) will never give them over, still keeping them
to execute her wicked will in every thing. This pittious news so appalled the
senses of the poor Lady Izabella, as she fell down into a dead sown.

Her vital spirits fail her, and she falls for lorne,
Like one that is unto his grave (untimely) borne.
In the end she came unto her self again, for an exceeding kind of grief,
drives away pain from the bodies of women, by reason that their sorrow
flows forth with their tears, and so waxes less, because of the help that
they have by sighing: which is not so with men, who for that they cannot show
forth, either by their eyes, or by their voice, any part of their grief, are
in the end stiffed and choked with the same: Not unlike unto an old Oaken
tree, that breaks before it will bow, which by reason it cannot bend
(according unto the wind) is torn and rent up unto the very roots.

Izabella then, hardly distressed, must needs swallow down this bitter potion
(and patience perforce) must do all he has charged her, not being able to
contradict him in any thing. For the woman by the civil Law, is subject unto
her husband, whose fault nevertheless, is not in danger of punishment, as that
of the wife.

Certainly, a most unjust Law, which (two being culpable of one and the
selfsame offense) punishes the one, and permits the other to go scotfree.

Man by his sword reuengeth the wrong his wife has done, if (by chance, she
breaks the bands of Marriage, whereas the poor woman, in steed of using the
like punishment upon him, is forced to see, to suffer, yea, and to allow, and
bear with the unlawful adulteries of her husband. But such men, God (no
doubt) will punish, as he did our forgetful Pertingale, not long after.

Izabella, seeing no other remedy, puts her self (once more) to the Seas,
being often in the mind to throw her self therein, had it not been, but only
that she feared the loss of her soul.

Which custom the Paynims oftentimes used, to rid themselves from their
troubles, and for that they respected not the immortality of the soul, in
that they knew not the true God.

All day long she wept, but the waters carried away her tears, and all the
night she sighed, but the blustering winds whirled away her sighs.

The Sea, storming at the injury she had received, began to swell for anger,
to whistle for rage, and to fret and murmr, for despite and choler.

It could not suffer such a great wrong, being far more pitiful, then her
careless and cruel husband: And therefore means to bring back the Ship
(once more) wherein his saithfull spouse remained, driving it to the selfsame
Haven, where it had been the day before.

Horatio not dreaming of any such matter, but still glutting himself in his
amorous sport, with his subtle friend, seeking nothing so much, as how to
please her, by all means possible.

Even as Achilles did himself, a slave to Brixis yield,
Although she was his slave by law, and won by him in field.
But ( LOVE is said to be blind) and respects not the condition of
Creatures, neither has he any respect of persons at all. Only he
accounts of their beauty, with which, he oftentimes helps himself to
tyrannize over the proudest hearts, forcing the Prince (sometimes) to yield
unto the Peasant, whereby he may bring himself to be (thought to be) more
admirable in the eyes of mortal men.

The comfortless Lady, seeing her self to be brought back again, by the
proud and imperious winds, into the same port (much against her will) wherein
she had harbored but a few hours before, fearing sore to offend her wilful
Husband, (whose only pleasure and delight was to work her injury) began a
fresh to renew her former complaints, sighing and crying out after this
pitiful manner.

Ah God, ah God, was it not enough, that I had mine husband to my mortal
enemy, but that I must (needs) have the waves of the Sea also to bandie
against me? for what remains to come, or what can there be left behind, to
make me more miserable and unfortunate then I am already? seeing that he, who
has promised me so great love, so great friendship, and affection, and vowed
so much, and so many oaths unto me, is the only man, that persecuteth me, as
if I were the deadliest foe that he has upon the face of the earth?

Ah hard hearted, and forgetful Knight, ill would thou pass so many dangers,
venture through so many perils, and hardly would thou endure such a hell of
disquietnes, for the love of thy wife, as Ulysses did for his, seeing, when I
come unto thee, with so great trouble, thou not only disdainest me, but also
refusest to admit me to come into thy presence.

Ah good and kind Graccus (who to prolong the life of thy wife, did shorten
thine own) how far do thou differ from my injurious Spouse? Such as are
guilty, and do (but worthily) suffer for the evils they have done, complain
(unjustly) and without cause, but oh how hard and unsupportable grief is it,
to reap injuries, in steed of reward, for doing good turns? and how bitter is
the pain which we endure, through the malice of those, whom we love best,
and of whom we expect the like friendship again?

The offense we receive of our enemy, is tolerable, because the law
permits revenge in that case, whereas the law of friendship, forbids to
revenge us on such whom we affect, for fear of their displeasures.

Ah my good God, what fault have I committed against my husband, that he should
use me thus despitefully: Have I as Clitemnestra, defiled our Nuptial bed?
Have I as Hellena the Greek, run into the arms of a rauisher of women? Or (as
Semiramis) have I polluted mine honor and chastity, with incestious kind of
living? Oh no, I fear no such matter; God that sees the sectets of all
hearts, knows my conscience is free of any such ill.

What have I then done? Alas I know not. Alas, for what sin am I thus
severely punished? But O sweet Lord, as thou art divine in thy miracles, and
terrible in thy judgments (the exemption of which comes either, soon, or at
last) so (I confess) thou now do punish me, either for some fault of mine
that is past, or else, for the sins which my forefathers have committed
against thee. And yet this is some comfort unto me, that I am not the first
Innocent, that has been sore afflicted. For so was Susanna, so was Job, so was
Joseph, and so were diverse others, far more godly then my self.

O miserable Dido, and yet more happy then I am, though thou were left
forsaken, by forsworn Eneas, for short was thy pains, not long was thy
grief, and sudden was thy complaints: a gentle death ending (with thy life)
all thy sorrows and cares together, whereas I have not the selfsame liberty,
to die as thou had, an other respect holds my hands, death being not in my
power, as it was in thine.

But (now) in the mean time, what shall I do, whether shall I go, or what
shall become of me? The Sea will make me no way, to return from whence I
came: and the furious rage of my husband, will not suffer me to come on land.
Am I become some Patricide, whom the laws of man, deprive of air, of earth,
and of water?

O lamentable chance of mine, pitiful death receive this my wretched
carcass into thy bosom, there to be huried, and rather sink this vessel,
wherein I (now) abide, before thou carry me back unto that place, wherein I
have received so great despite and wrong.

Alas (mine eyes) what can you see to delight you any longer, when he that is
most pleasing unto you, debarreth you from his lovely presence? To whom will thou my voice speak, seeing he has closed thy mouth, whose speech before was
most agreeable unto my soul?

And (you my feet) whither now will you take your coarse, seeing that he, who
was wont to guide your steps unto the Lodge of pleasure, has now shut the gate
against you?

Ah gentle death; if ever the wailings and lamentings of a most distressed
wretch, have ever moved thee to compassion and pity, ah then let me obtain
the same at thy hands. Do that which my cruel Husband (ere long) will put in
practice, making meas happy, as I am now unfortunate.

Thrice blessed Portia, death came unto thee, (to help thee) at thy need, and
thou acceptedst of his help: happy Ariadne, for God took care of thy life,
made much of thee, and in steed of Theseus, accepted of thy company.

And O luckie Olimpia, though abandoned of Birannos thy forsworn Husband, yet
a great Prince, revenged thy wrong, and took thee to wife, where thou liuedst
afterward in much joy and delight.

But alas, no man helps me, none succoureth me, neither does any come to
assist me, in bewailing my misfortunes. Who (then) has ever had so strange a
mishap as my self? Ah that the spirit and Quintesence of my grief could
dissolve into tears, that it might distill forth from out mine eyes: and that
I might die like him, that having his veins opened in warm water, loses both
his life and blood together. Or that my sorrowful heart (weary with overmuch
sighing and sobbing) would break, and burst in pieces. Might I (but die) I
would not care what kind of death I suffered, so that once I were dead: for no
death (be it never so monstrous) is equal with the least anguish that I
sustain. Degenerate knight, and void of all remorse, seeing thou meanest to
entertain all kind of cruelties whatsoever, that have been found in any
creature (yea cuen worse, then the brute beasts themselves do use) why do
thou not put in practice, the bloody execution of the same, by cutting in
twain my throat, as thou have most irreligious cut in sunder the sacred band
of Marriage, which should have bound us (still) fast together? Thou can not
do me a greater pleasure, nor a better satisfaction can thou make me, for so
many bad parts as thou have plaide against me, than to make an end of me, with
that hand which has (so often) vowed and sworn, in most solemn manner, that
I only maintained his Master alive.

But I forget my self, let God (I beseech) work with me as it pleases his
holy will: for just he is, and just are his judgments, he knows the hearts
of every one, and he that is most culpable of us twain, he will I am assured,
(in the end) punish.

Whilst she was thus bewailing her misfortunes, behold news comes unto her,
that her husband was living, the City to go forth to the wars, through which
occasion, she might very easily (if she pleased) have access and speech unto
him. Which when she heard, she stood (long time) doubtful what to do: for as
Love persuaded her to present her self before him, so the fear to offend him,
the just disdain for so abusing her, with rage, jealousy and despite, did
dissuade her from the contrary. What should she then do, she, both loved, and
feared the presence of her Husband: she (wonderfully) desired to see him, and
yet (sore) doubted, lest in offering to see him, she should (too much) move and
anger him, by reason he had given commandment, she should not as much as once
presume to come into his sight.

But see the sudden changing of man's nature, and how God (oftentimes) puts
men in mind, of their own good and souls health, when they are approaching
nigh unto their ends, to the intent they utterly overthrow not themselves.

For Horatio, who so mortallie hated his chaste and loyal wife, being mounted
on horseback, to encounter with the enemy (suddenly) began to be touched with
a secret advertisement from God; sore longing (as then) to see her, whilst
(from his soul) repenting him for his foul fact (his conscience told him,
that the Almighty would punish him for the same, (as he himself thought he
deserved no less) marching thus forward (although not with that alacrity of
mind, nor that brave and stout resolution as he was wont to do) but rather
heavily, and as one terrified and fraide, with some fatal and sinister
mischaunce (his notorious strumpet riding by his side) behold, his sorrowful
Izabella presents her self before him, falling down at his feet.

As the woeful wife (to whom it is reported that her husband was slain) is
confounded with amazement, and (suddenly) leapeth up, for very joy and
strangenes of the matter, when she sees him alive before her face. Even so was
Horatio astonished, and wondered when he saw her there before him (whom he
thought swiftly) to hau^ been (at that time) as far as Lasbon: and who
(quiuering and shaking for fear) began thus mournfully to expostulate her
cause with him. Cruel and v^^kind husband, was it not enough for thee to abuse
me so extremely as thou have done, and to fallifie thy faith and promise
plighted unto me, in sacred wedlock, but that thou must needs exile, and chase
me from thy presence, I coming so far off (as I did) only to see thee?

Ah stay a little, stay and answer me if thou can. Be not less cruel unto
me, then that good Emperor Traianus was, who stayed his whole army, to do
justice unto a certain poor woman, which complained unto him, that one of his
Soldiers had ravished her daughter. Nor be not more ungentle and discurteous,
then that barbarous Tambarlaire, who did as much to all his men of war,
whilst (in their sights) he punished a Soldier of his, who had most
villainously devoured certain victuals belonging unto a distressed widow.

But it may be, thou know me not. Alas, I am thy miserable Izabel^a, (once)
much loved and accounted of by thee, although thou now hate her unto the
death: yea, I am thy lawful and loving wife: whereas she (there) that
accompanies thee) is no better then a beastly strumpet, unworthy to be
compared unto me.

Ah speak (then) degenerate and discourteous Lord, and let me know thy mind,
to the end I may understand whether I have lost my time and labor, or whether
I shall be able to persuade thee to any thing. Remember, remember, too too
(forgetful man) thy first love, thy millions of promises, and the many great
favors which I have done thee, and let these just considerations and respects,
be (as it were) flames of fire, to lighten, and revive in thee (again) thy
first love, nor reject and contemn her, with so great disdain and
displeasure, whom thou have vowed to have esteemed as precious as thine own
life.

Alas, what offense, what fault, or what injury have I done unto thee, that
thou should thus injury me, and dishonor thy self for ever? Ah then at the
last (dear husband) open thine eyes, and think of thy fault, amend what is
amiss, and have care thou loose not thine ancient reputation and renown:
Otherwise assure your self, you shall be severely plagued by God, who will
(also punish me) although I am not guilty of this offense, for that I ought
not to live without you. O what great force has the passionate and earnest
speech of a just and rightful person, to touch a guilty conscience withal?
and how truly speak that Greek, affirming, that if such as did but hear an
Oration of Demosthenes penning, were much astonished and amazed thereat: then
(no doubt) it would in a manner have killed them, to have heard Demosthenes
himself, to have so lively pronounced them as he did.

And this was the cause that our Portuguise, so insolent (before) began now to
yield and to be vanquished, remembering himself of his fault, and resolving from
his heart, to amend the same (had it not been for his strumpet) who very
cunningly persuaded and egged him forwards of his journey) he had (as then)
returned back with his wife unto the City again, to entertain her according
unto her desert and calling: this had he done, had it not been (as I say) for
the other, whom (now) in mind, he began to loath and hate (the presence of his
own Spouse, making the other seem in his eyes, loathsome and foul, as well
in body, as in mind) and but for that he could not with his honor retire
back) being gone so far on his way, lest the world should have thought he
durst not dare to look his enemy in the face.

Whereupon, kissing his wife very kindly, he desired her to enter into the
City, and to stay his coming (where said he unto her) I do solemnly vow to
satisfy you every way to your own contentment, and to make you what amends
you shall appoint, for the amiss I have done you. Mean time (sweet wife) I
most humbly beseech you, by these salt tears of mine, distilling from mine
eyes outwardly, and by these warm drops of blood, that drop down from my
heart inwardly) Pardon, ah pardon this my foul sin toward you: for (it may
be) I may be slain in the field, or die in battle. And thus, hoping upon
your gracious nature, I will now leave you, because my time is short, and the
business requires great diligence I have in hand, (sweet) then (for a while)
be satisfied with this, hoping as speedily as possibly I can, to return as a
joyful Conqueror, to make you the more happy. In the mean time, let me have
your good wish and prayer, and so (farewell) mine own dear soul. Herewithall
kissing her again, he commanded certain of his Train to attend upon her into
the City, who brought her into Ansillies, where she remained, expecting her
husbands coming hom.

Now Horatio, no sooner was come into the field, but that finding the enemy,
he so bravely charged upon him, as he put him to the worst presently.
Notwithstanding all this, within an hour or two after, his foe had gathered
another strong company, and with a fresh supply, was coming toward Horatio,
to win the day, which he had but that morning lost.

Amongst the rest that were in this Pagan Army, was the husband of that Moore,
whose wife Horatio had brought with him into the wars, who having a sight of
him, and spying a fit time for her purpose, used these short and sharp
speeches unto him.

Well, cowardly and faint-harred Knight, well, will thou still suffer me to
live as a slave, under my hateful enemy? Have thou no shame of my shame, and
does not my dishonor touch thee any thing at all? Where is that former love
thou did heretofore protest unto me? Swearing, thou would venture thy
best blood in my defense, and for safe-gard of my life. Base minded man, do
thou not blush, to suffer thy wife to be with thine enemies prisoner, whilst he
uses her, and forces her to satisfy his will as he pleases, and when he
thinks best himself.

Come, come, for shame, show thy self valiant (now) or else never, and try
thy force, to deliver and set her free, who has done nothing else but sigh and
wail (since she was first taken from thee) so much has she grieved to loose
thy love: And this, if thou do not perform, she her self voweth, with her
own hands to murder her self, rather then live (thus) still, in such base
and abject servitude and bondage.

These speeches did the cunning Curtezan use sepatheticallie, sending forth so
many sighs and tears, to accompany the same, that (as I guess) the
rightful God (to revenge poor Izabellas wrongs) did so much animate the
strength and courage of the Moore her husband, that as one desperate, with rage
and jealousy, he most furiously runs with all his Troops, upon the
Portugal Army, whom as a Thunder or Lightning, he ouerturneth, so that the
Christians (do what they could) were overthrown, and had the worse. Which
when Horatio percelued, he as a wise and politic Captain, began with
advantage, to retire, until such time, as the foresaid devilish Moore came
where he was, who with his wife set upon him, where Horatio slew them both,
whilst in this conflict, over pressed with numbers of Soldiers, he was
stricken down, and thrust through with a Iaueline, where he lost both force
and life together.

So died the companions of Machabeus, An example.
being slain by the fword, who were found charged with Thefts and Robberies.
So by the decree of God, those chief men, and heads over the people of the
jews, were hanged up, because they caused the other to commit Idolatry, and
leave their Creator. So was the periurde Zedechias, forced to die in prison,
having his eves pulled our, and his children slain before his face. And so
perished Ioconias, and diverse others, justly punished by the holy one of
Israel. For Justice divine, never gives over from doing right. And if it be
slow in coming, yet does the cruelty of the punishment, make amends for the
deferring of the same.

Mean time, the Portingales gathered themselves again into battle array,
and followed their enemies, with so hot a pursuit, as they (at the last)
recovered, and brought back again the body of their Captain, over which,
the Moors meant to have triumphed.

So for the body of Achilles dear friend slain,
The Greeks and Troyans, hand to hand, do fight amain.
Hardly did these Infidels let the body go, skirmishing (oftentimes) with
their foes for the same, yet nevertheless, in despite of them all, the
Portingales got it away, and brought it with them, which (as yet) breathed,
and had some little life within it. But sorrowful news were these unto heavy
Izabella, who hoped, that at the joyful return of her husband, all should be
well, as she her self could wish. But man purposes, and God disposes: man
hops of one thing, but God does quite contrary to that which he supposes.

So Senacherib, thinking to conquer, was (himself) conquered: and the Jews,
who thought themselves to be quite overthrown, came in the end to be victors.
So proud Goliath was slain contratie unto his own conceit, and to the opinion
of all men.

So Amon was hanged, never any thinking he should have died such a shameful
death. And Mardocheus, who was condemned (to be slain) was honored and
delivered. And so it fell out with this uncomfortable Lady, who hoping to see
her husband to come home well, and safe unto her (and to repent him of his
former follies) found him to be slaughtered and dead, without life or soul.

O cruel mutation and change, truth it is, that she (before) had heard by
certain of her husbands Soldiers that had escaped out of the field, that the
Portugalls had lost the day, but (yet) knew she nothing of his death. And yet
even then, a cold fear ran all about her heart, whilst she (sore suspecting
the worst) prophesied within her self, that it was true, and that she had lost
her husband: and (not not long after) her doubt was confirmed, but with too too
true a proof, when the rest of his band, brought his coarse into the city,
unto her, where she was, and when (so denly) at the sight thereof, she sounded,
it being long before they could get life in her again: whilst (in the mean
space) Horatios mangled carcass was laid in a bed, God giving him so much time
of repentance, as he craved mercy of him, and of all the world for his bad
life, whilst all that small time as he (so) lamented his sins, his faithful
Soldiers, with sad tears, wonderfully lamented the loss of so noble a
General, under whom they had always remained vanquishers.

So Greckes did wail Achilles death (of great renown,)
So Troyans, Hector moande (chief Fortress of their town.
Great Machabeus, one of the Nine WORTHIES, was never more lamented amongst his
men of war, than he was amongst the Portugalls, whom he had so often brought
home victorious and lade^ with foreign spoils into their country; Who then
perceiving himself, to draw nigh unto his end, desired to talk with his
wife, that he might take his latest leave of her.

But now what is he, that can lend mea Sea of Ink, to set down the grievous
passions, and the insupportable sorrows, of his pitiful wife? Where shall I
find a pen of Iron, to paint forth her lamentable speeches? And what paper is
sufficient to receive in writing, the number of her more, then sad and heavy
complaints?

To hers, was the woes of Niobe, nothing at all. Nothing the griefs of Hecuba,
nothing those of Portia, nor those of chaste Lucretia, compared unto hers. With
much ado, was she brought unto the bed (for go she could not, for very
faintnes and weakness) where her repe^tant husband was giving up the Ghost) who
so soon as he beheld her, O grief, O love, O pity, and O heavy spectacle
that it was, to see this heavy meeting, such (as like) was never seen before:
the poor dying soul, beginning in his death, to affect and love her more
entirely, then ever he had hated her before, whilst thrusting forth his dying
arms with seeble force, to embrace her, and laying his cold lips upon hers,
with a hollow faultring voice, he began (thus) to speak as well as he could.

O fortunate day, in which poor Horatio dies, reposing himself at ease in
the bosom of his Izabella. O my chaste and sweet Lady, must I needs die,
leaving after my death so foul a fault, as thou shall have cause to complain
of me, as the author of all thy griefs whatsoever. No way am I able to make
thee any reasonable satisfaction, neither know I, how sufficiently to make
amends for so heinous, and so detestable an offense, as I have committed
against thee, which the just God has revenged upon me for thy sake, and
according as I deserved.

But (sweet wife) if (as yet) there remains any one small spark, of that
rare and loyal Love, thou have heretofore borne me, and if just grief, and
rightful disdain, has not quenched it all, and quite put it out; then by the
selfsame affection and fancy, I pray, desire, and beseech thee, most humbly
to pardon me this once, and not to be the cause that miserable Horatio, should
go into his grave with great anguish, and exceeding bitterness of his soul.
This pardon, as I hope for of thee, so do I expect it at thy hands: craving in
the mean while (by reason of that little space of time I have to breath) thou will do me the favor to embrace me kindly, if it shall please thee, to think
me worthy of such a kindness: this being the last request, and latest favor I
shall crave at thy hands.

Ah let me kiss those fair cheeks which were (sometimes) mine, and those
sweet sparkling eyes, which had not the black foulnes of my fault dimmed them,
they had still stood me in steed of two glorious Sunnie lights. Although I
cannot deny, but thus to die in thy arms, does much lighten and ease me of my
torments I endure within my mind, yet had it pleased God, to have but given me
the grace, to have suruiued (but some few years) that I might have made some
amends unto my faithful Spouse (whom I have so wickedly abused) I then would
have thought my self, to have been the happiest creature under the heavens.
Think (dear heart) that I make no account, neither care any thing at all to
die, but only for this cause, and for that I shall be forced to leave thee a
Widow, whom I love, more then my own soul.

Just and great reason have thou to complain and find fault with me, and far
unworthy am I, that thou should shed these salt tears for my sake. For why
should thou wail his death, who has been thy chief adversary? why do
thou sorrow for the loss of thy mortal enemy, and lamentest thou the death
of him, who sought thy utter overthrow? Dry up these tears, for I desire them
not. Leave these thy sighs, for I not merit them: and give over these thy
bitter wailings, for I am no way worthy of them. Only pardon me, and close up
these my dying eyes, when they shall leave their wonted light: which done, if
it shall please thee to honor this miserable carcass of mine, with thy
presence, unto my Tomb, and (now and then) to think on me (although thou have
small reason so to do) then, then I say, shall I be every way contented and
satisfied unto the full. Weep not I pray thee, then for me, who descrues no
tears at thy hands, but rather ill thoughts: for otherwise I shall sustain a
double death, thy sorrow being nigher settled unto my heart, then my deperture
hence can be any way doleful unto me.

So saying, the fainting knight kisseth his wife, wiping her blubbered eyes,
and embracing her (as straightly) as the Iuie does the wall. If the poor Lady
could not answer him, it was no great wonder, when as those that were but
spectators in this heavy sight, (although they felt not as much as she) yet
were they mouelesse, and much amazed for very pure pity.

In the end, the disconsolate Izabella, began to recover her speech, answering
him in this sort. Cruel and hard-harted husband, let my pitiful pain, my
easelesse griefs, and my insupportable sorrows, satisfy thee, without
gaulling me any further with this word (pardon) unto her who never desired to
live, but to do thee service.

Ah dear Horatio, think thou I can live after thy departure hence, and that
I can joy in this world, being bereaved of thy company? Whilst thou did dest
live, I was thine by the laws of marriage: and when thou art dead, I will be
thine also, resolved to follow thee, wheresoever thou go, thinking my self
happy, that I am so luckily come, as to die with thee.

Then, if I may, or thou would have me to give any credit unto thy speeches,
then in requital of them all, let me again entreat thee this one thing,
which is, that I may leave this world with thee. But why should I ask leave of
thee, when I am at liberty my self, to dispose of my life, as I shall think
good of: and when with ending of one life, I may rid my self of a lingering
death, which does continually haunt me? Thanks (therefore) to thee kind
Thethis, who did drive my ship into this Port, where I may pass to heaven
with him, who was the only life, and maintainer of my life, and who (being
dead) I can no longer remain allue.

Pitiless husband, to debar me from my tears, when as I see my country
deprived of a brave defender of his liberty, and find my self forsaken, of
the only, loyal, and most loving friend I had here upon this earth. No, no, I
will weep, and shed tears, as long as any drop of moisture shall remain
within this body: for should I not wail for thee, for whom (then) should I
reserve these tears? Whose loss should I lament but thine? and for whom
should I take thought or care for, but for thine own sweet self? who was so
near to me as thou? who so dear as thy self? and who is to have interest in
me, but my best and sweetest Horatio?

Then hinder not her from lamenting, who lives only to shead tears: and do
not enure the happiness she finds, in that she has time to bewail her
unhappy Fortunes. How wide is (my best Lord) from mine intention and meaning?
and how slenderly does he conceit of my love toward him? when he imagines,
that although I see him dye, yet should not I wail: and that his death and
destruction, should not be the end and date of my life: this being the least
thing that I can do for him, the least duty that I do owe unto him, and the
smallest testimony of my great affection, which I have ever borne him.

Gush forth then my brinish tears, and stream down along my pale cheeks,
washing away the blood of my wounded Spouse, mingling your selves together, as
my soul has always been (with his) most perfectly mixed and conjoined, the
one with the other. (My dearest Lord) if ever thou have thought well of me,
speak never more of this word pardon, it becomes me to entreat, rather then
you: I having been she, that has so often offended you: let us forgive and
forget all unkindness whatsoever, that our souls as most loyal friends, may
die and live together in eternal felicity for ever.

O how like an Angel (replied Horatio) does my Izabella speak, and how
pleasing does she cause my death to be unto me? would she but promise to
survive and live after my death. (For sweet Lady) it is thy sorrows, and not my
death, that shortens my life's and I die not for grief, but for sorrow, to see
thee lament for my cause. Will thou die, and do not descrue death? No, it is
I that have offended, and therefore merit to be punished for my fault.

Live thou happily still, and safely return thou home into thy Country
again, where thou shall not want new husbands, who will deserve (at thy
hands) far better then I have done: and had I not so much forgot my self
toward thee, as (I confess I have) my joys had been at the highest, and I
had departed hence, the happiest man alive. But now mine hour approaches; I
feel death ready to arrest me with his iron mace; my heart faints, and my
soul begins to fly from hence.

To you I turn my speech now (my faithful fellows, and companions in Arms)
who have always taken such fortunes as I have done; to you I recommend the
honor of your dear friend Horatio, (sometimes your Governor) after his death.
Most strictly charging you (as you shall answer before God) and most kindly
entreating you, (as you will have the good will of men) to see my faithful and
constant wife, conveyed safely from hence into Portugal, according unto her
calling (after this my carcass shall be interred) and there to do her all
dutiful service that may be.

Farewell my brethren, my friends, and my companions: I go before you, to
prepare places for you. I go to heaven, there to enjoy eternal happiness.
Give me your hands every one of you before I die, and leave now these your
needless and unnecessary mournings in my behalf. Remember that God is just in
all his actions, who has (and that deservedly) punished me, for abusing my
constant Spouse, so hainouslie as I have done, being so void of grace, as to
prefer a most damned strumpet, before her chaste and virtuous self, which was
the only occasion of mine untimely death.

Murmr not therefore at the divine judgments of the Almighty, neither be
you grieved at my loss and ouethrow: for a far better, and a brauer Captain
may you have then I am, Portugal being able to veeld forth men, better for
desert, and for valor then I have been every way. I say no more, but wish you
(my faithful Soldiers) no worse, then I do unto mine own soul.

And now once more again I come to thee (my chastest wife.) Although, what to
say, more (then already I have done) well I know not: Loath I am to leave
thee, yet leave thee I must, and therefore I hope thou will remember, not the
fault I have done thee, but, how I repent me for the same before I die. And
this persuade thy self, that if ever sin has been grievous unto the sinner,
then has mine been the same: My very soul being sore vexed and tormented,
day and night, every hour that I do but think thereof. But things past and
done, are not to be undone: and what is once remediless, must needs prove to
be recurelesse.

Once more farewell, my sweet Izabella, to whom I wish no less joy, then I
have felt of sorrow. Thou God, that know the secrets of all hearts, receive
my soul (I beseech thee) and save it from the hands of the enemy. So saying,
he gave up the ghost, being infolded within the chaste arms of his kind
wife, his face touching her face, and his lips joining unto hers.

No sooner was his carcass without life, and cold as a marble stone, but his
mestfull Izabella sunk down for sorrow. So that afresh as then, began cryings
out, screechings, wringing of hands, and sheading of tears, the house
resembling a shadow of that miserable mourning, when the Troyans saw their
City set on fire by the Grecians in the night. So woeful and so shrill was the
sorrows that every one made for their Lord, as the noise thereof, waked their
unfortunate Lady from her passionate ecstasy, who being somwehat come unto her
self, and falling upon the dead coarse, began thus to exclaim.

Woe is me, that ever I was borne, and art thou dead, my dear Lord without
me? Ah why have thou left her, who had rather die with thee, then live with
any other else. Thou have left me at the worst, now thou art gone. For what am
I, but an Anatomy of grief it self? What is my heart but a receptacle of
sadness? And what are mine eyes, but a cold fountain, that distilleth salt
water continually?

Is it likely or possible, that Izabella should breath, now Horatio is
breathles? Can it be he should be dead, and I should be as yet alive? No, no,
it cannot be, and yet in the mean time, his body is without life, and senses,
and mine, too full of vital motion: but long it shall not be so; I must now
resolve my self to follow the course my husband led me, and to take such part
with him, as he has taken before me: unfortunate I, to have stayed so long,
and that I died not before my lovely husband. Could Portia die, when Brutus was
slain? and may Izabella live, her Horatio having left her? Before that time
come, the Seas shall change the course of his floods, and mountains shall
remove, and come to settle amongst low valleys. As I saw thee (here) upon the
earth, so hope I to behold thee in the Heavens. And for the conclusion and end
of all my disasters, I will be interred in the place where thou art buried.
Then kissing the pale lips of her dead husband, she thus began again.

O fair mouth, from whence sometimes I sucked Nectar forth, must thou be a
Trophee for death? And must thou be despoyled of so many rich virtues, to make
famous his victory? Sweet lovely eyes, must you likewise serve to honor
death, resigning over your quondam Diamond lights, unto black and gloomic
darkness? And thou beauteous face, must thou turn unto earth, and show pale
and wanne, whilst I remain here against my will and pleasure?

No reason is there herein, but that I should follow my Guide, and accompany
him, at whose command I was always, and that most willingly. Ah my kind
friends, I conjure you, by the late affection you bare unto your Lord and
Goueruor (now dead) by the faith and promise you vowed and swear unto him, and
by the sacred remembrance of his glorious renown, which never shall be
forgotten, that you consent and agree to bury our two bodies both in one grave.
Whilst I lived, I esteemed as my chiefest treasure, my honor and good name; and
now I die, my love unto my Lord shall remain as a president for Ages to come,
of our loyal and true faithful love.

I come sweet Horatio, I come, nor will I any longer linger in misery, but
will seek thee wheresoever thou art, until I find thee, ending this my
loathed life, with a death most sweet and comfortable. Then (sweet Jesus) be
merciful unto me, and forgive me this my last fault: which extreme and
unsupportable sorrow, and not any desperate kind of conceit, forces me to put
in practice. And having so said, she went about to stabbe her self with a
poniard unto the heart; when one of the company there by, snatched it forth of
her hands, upon the sudden: whereupon, she seeing her self to be prevented
of her purpose, looking angerly upon them.

Well, quoth she, Portia (for all her Guard that watched over her) had her will,
and died. Cato (despite of all his attendants) slew himself. And think you
for all your narrow looking unto me, that I will not rid my self one way or
another of life? Yes, yes, ye unkind men, I will dispatch my self from this
misery (mauger your malicious minds) who I perceive do envy at my good
Fortune: and I will complain of your hard dealing toward me unto my dear
husband, in that you go about to keep me from him, whither I will or no. Nor
was she deceived of her purpose, though thrice happy, in that it pleased God
to call her himself, from out this vale of misery, and so by that means to
save her soul. For no sooner was she hindered of her intent, but what for
anger thereof, and what for extreme grief, for Horatios death, she fell into
a dangerous and hot burning Fever, which so violently seized upon every part
of her, as her weak body being not able to endure the fiery raging thereof,
she yielded her tormented carkas unto death, within six days after. At what
time she was freed from all her former troubles, and after her death, she was
(according unto her desire) enterred with her husband, leaving behind her many
commendations, for her matchless virtues, her loss being lamented of cuerie
good body, as was fufficiently shown, by the pitiful laments that were
every where used for her sake, because of the rare examples of chastity, of
patience, of modest demeanure, of love, and of loy altie, which she carried
toward her ungrateful and unkind Husband.

And this (Shepherd) is the history I meant to report unto thee, but because
that Diana looking palish with her silver horns, means to run her course,
entering into the place of her glistering brother the Sun, we will (for this
time) until to morrow morning, withdraw our selves unto our Cortages, and
then, as early as thou will, shall thou begin the discourse of thy Love again.

Whereupon, the old man, and Arcas, began to retire themselves homewards, and
by the way they encountered a fair Shepherdess, who proposed a Riddle unto
another, desiring him to interpret the same rightly. And this was it that
follows.

For others good and profit, I (outrageous) still
Consume, what does my proper vigor entertain:
And though my burning is not (unto any) ill,
Where I should prais de be, they vngras of all me do name.
Father of living Creatures all, I am renoumde,
And Lord I am over the Time, on earth, that stays:
Yet does a little thing dant me, and me confound,
And of a Conqueror, conquered, forces me strait-waies.
But in the end, although that I am plagued thus,
Through succor of the winds, when (all) think I am dead,
I rise again, to men (of times) most dangerous,
And through my harmefull rage, I fill them full of dread.
My mother I devour, whilst I a stranger nonrish,
(For ill) I good do to my spightfull enemies:
Judge then, since Serpents in my bosom, I do cherish,
If I ore wretched am not, in most pittious wise.
The other Shepherd knew not the meaning of this Riddle, which the old man
interpreted in this sort. Your Emgma, (fair Shepherdess) signifies the fire,
which being for the use of man, to warm him, consumes and deuoureth the wood,
it being his mother, and nourisher. It is counted the Father of all living
Creatures, who without heat, cannot live. Although he is of great force, yet
does a very small thing vanquish him, which is water. Nevertheless, when he
shows to be dead, a little blast of wind makes him to burn more furious
then before. He does good to such as count and call him ungrateful, in warming
them with his heat, and deuoureth his mother, which is the reason he terms
himself to be most miserable and wretched.

This solution every one commended, when (as they were walking homewards) one
of the Shepherds sung this Ode following.

To Lovers what good does the Sun,
If by his beams they be undone?
LOVE'S as bitter as is Rue,
Blessed are such, as nere is knew.
He is accursed that comes tot'h Sea
Once were, and in port waist have ease.
To Lovers, what good does their Sun,
If by his beams they are undone?
A fend Lover does not ^^ril,
Name, nor fame, of mant inberit:
Since he is fee to his own health,
Whilst in fire he burns himself.
To Lovers, what good does their S^^^e,
If by his beams they be undone?
Grief (...) Love tends nis,
Pleasure is his (...)
Better laugh, then wade and sigh,
Who then Loves not his own life?
To Lovers what good death.
If by his beams.
Without tears no Lover is,
Nor his sad laments does ^isse:
Better far to live at ease.
Then to seek a shrowe to please.
To Lovers what good,
If by his beams.
Wretched then be such as love,
I Will live free, nor it will prove.
For who will count of him, that still
(Like set) his wees nourish will,
To Lovers, what good does the S^^^e.
If by his beams he be undone?
This Ode being sung, every own departed, until the return of mestfull
Aurera, leaving the Sister of Apollo, to run out her dark and gloomie course.

The end of the second days meeting of Iuliettaes Shepherds.
THE THIRD DAYS MEETING OF IVLIETTAES SHEPHERDS.
NO distance of place can hinder kind amity, no change of air, altar firm
affection, neither can the separation of that which is loved, divide or keep
back the Lover from his sweet Mistress.

Too true (noble Phillistell) do thou know this to be, thou being so far
off from thy fair and sacred Iulietta and yet nevertheless, thou live in
her, and still dreamest of her beauty, whilst loving her, (although she be
absent) thou can not forget her, for that she holds thy heart with her as
in a close prison, thou (in the mean time) feeling, and by thine own
experience finding, how cruel unto a loyal Lover, the absence of his
beauteous Lady is: the fish, not more desiring to have water for his
nourishment, then he does covet her company, it being the chief food of his
soul.

O how tedious and irksome unto him (who attends and expects the break of
day to come, having some great matter of importance to dispatch) is the long
seeming course of the unwelcome night: In all which time, he is not able to
take any rest, looking still with open eyes, to spy the rising of the fair
Sun, which he joyfully marketh, at his first appearing, to warm the little
hills, to melt the soft snow, to glister and shine upon the earth, and with a
solemn pace, to mount up, and to settle himself in his glorious chariot,
riding in progress through the huge giring Vault of heaven, he sees him
bravely to chase away the sparkling Stars, as the Conqueror does his
enemies, that he has vanquished; and beholds the sad and sable night, to fly
from his cheerful face, as the timorous thief does the severe Judges
presence, whilst he listeneth unto the melody of thousands of pretty Birds,
which solemnize and celebrate, in their warbling notes, the arrival of the
prudent Sire of proud Phaeton.

Poor Philistell, how often have thou counted short days for long years,
after that malicious Fortune had sequestered thee, from the company of thy
Lady? and how many times, did thou dream in the night, that thou saw
her, devising and talking with thee, in the same manner as she was wont to do,
when those happy Deserts of Arcadia, were true witnesses of thy chaste Loves?
But all these were but fond imaginations, thy desire being but vain, and
bootlesse, which so much the more urged thy soul to see her again, because
her only sight, had (long since) wounded thy dearest liberty. Too truly
did thou then prove, that the greatest grief which the Lover endures (being
by his sweet Love) is nothing in comparison of that which her absence brings
unto him, for she (which wounded him) is (then) at hand, and presently might
help him if she please; whereas contrariwise, O'how lean, and meger, is the
hope of him that is hurt, and is far off from a Chirurgian to heal him.
Small wounds are incurable, where none is to help them, and the most desperate
disease may be remedied, if a cunning Doctor be in a readiness to heal the same.

If at any time a Lover (not having tried, how bitter the absence of his
froward dame is) desires to be banished far from her, by reason he is not
able to support and endure her too too rigorous and disdainful demeaners
toward him; how often then will he (afterward) condemn, and curse this his
rash and hasty opinion, when (being far from her sight) he mourns, and
bewaileth in the very anguish of his soul, her absence, which he so much
(although in vain) does wish for.

If weary Travelers rejoice, when being nigh unto their native soil, they
see their chimneys smoke, A Similie.
and smell the wholesome air of their own pleasant Country; how much more
then, should Lovers triumph and joy, when (after many years of absence) they
are coming home toward their Ladies, to have a sight of them again, they
being the chiefest food whereon their hearts do feed?

Philistell, then secluded and separated from his Iulietta, staying for a calm
and fair wind, to put to the Seas, being by chance driven upon this uncouth
Shore, could not rest day nor night, having this Trumpet of Love, which sounded
always most shrillie in his ears.

And therefore one morning he rose very early by break of day, walking along
the Desert, to see if he could drive away his melancholy thoughts, and by
chance passing by those Trees, into which the old Nigromancer had changed
those wicked Thieves (which pursued the She pheardesse, to have ravished her
perforce) he not thinking any thing thereof, (and being ignorant of this
strange Metamorphosis) brake a little bough from one of them. When no sooner
had he done so, but (behold) the Tree began to swell, to writhe, and bend, and
to gush out with bleeding, from that branch that was so broken, casting forth
great store of blood, which fell upon the ground. At which sight, Philistell
was almost senseless with the wonder thereof. (For who would not be amazed at
such a fearful accident?) Nor did he well know if he dreamed or waked, but
much more was he astonished, when he saw all his hand bloody, and the broken
arm of the Tree dropping down blood apace.

This made him to stand stone still, to change his color and countenance, and
to look as one that were ready to fall into an Ecstasy or sownde. A Similie.
No otherwise, then the young Scholar that is half dead with fear, seeing
his master behind him, and taking him (upon the sudden) as he has done
some gricuous fault. Scarce would he believe his own eyes, to think he saw so
strange an event, as a Tree to distill both blood and tears. But this was
nothing, to that he was frighted, when he heard the Tree to speak in this
manner unto him. Stay (courteous Shepherd) and hold thy hands, I beseech thee,
contenting thy self with my most miserable Fortune, without increasing my
mischief any more, in heaping Ossa upon Pelion, and one disaster upon
another, it being a great shame, and no small disparagement unto mighty men,
to afflict such as be plagued already, and who in kindness demand succor
from them.

Besides, thou shall understand, I am a man most unfortunately turned into this
insensible Tree, by a Magician abiding in these Woods, sore doubting that I
shall still continue so, unless some good body or other, makes intercession
unto him in our behalf, (for more companions have I in this my misery, and as
hardly destined as my self) that it would please him to restore us unto our
former shapes and likeness again.

Now, if every offense that is offered, demands satisfaction, and if this,
which thou have done unto me, (drawing most violently from me great store of
blood) does merit any favor at thy hands at all; Then I beseech thee, for
amends of the same, to take the pains to seek out this cunning man, and to
beg of him so much grace for us, as to turn us again into our pristinate
estate, and former manner of living, vowing (in requital of the same) never to
commit any wicked outrageous behavior so long as we shall live.

Never was Juno more confounded, when she saw the periurde Aeneas (quite
contrary unto the promise that was given her) to sail in the maine Seas, then
was Philistell, when he heard this Tree to make this pitiful supplication, he
being half persuaded, that that time was newely come again, into which Niobe
was changed into a Rock; Myrrha, into myrrh; Daphne into laurel; and the
companions of Ulysses into Swine. Notwithstanding, in the end, after he had
plucked up his heart again, and called all his spirits together, finding
himself to have done a fault unto the Tree (and therefore bound, as it were in
conscience, to make him amends) he promised to work what means he could unto
the old man, not only for his own, but also for the rest of his fellows
deliverance, and with this resolution, comforting the poor dismembered plant as
well as he could, he left him, to seek out the old man, who only and none
else, could help these poor wretches thus transformed: whilst walking alone,
and musing much of this matter, he began to discourse with himself in this
wise. O what a wonderful thing is this black Art, and what great force has
it to bring to pass admirable matters?

Admirable is Magic, and a thing supernatural; and incredible the effects of
such as exercise the same. No longer will I (now) wonder at the sorceries of
bloody Medea, nor at the Enchantments, of wily Circes, nor at the chaunting
witchcrafts and Spells, of subtle Zoraastes, since I have seen with mine own
eyes, such strange and miraculous devises of Magic. Neither will I maruile
more, if these three wise men, which came to worship our Savior, came to the
knowledge of his divine nativity, by reason of their profound learning and
skill: when I perceive and see, that a silly poor old Magitian, is able to
turn men's bodies into insensible Trees, this being the cause, that all such
(as practice this kind of Art) are highly honored and much esteemed, and
especially amongst such as are infidels, and put small confidence and trust in
the true God.

So that, if these wicked Ministers of damned devils, make themselves to be
admired of all men, then how much more ought the true Pastors and Seruitors of
the almighty, be respected and regarded? For according unto the bounty,
goodness, and greatness of the Master, is the servant honored: and according
unto the baseness and vileness of him that he follows, is he respected: which
if it be so, then of how much esteem and account ought the good and faithful
Pastors of God to be, who walk in his ways, and follow his holy laws and
commandments; seeing, that such great honor is attributed unto the officers
of devils. And if such bad Seruitors, have so great power through the favor
that their Master does bestow upon them, that they are able to change,
transform, and make a tree, a rock or a brute beast of a reasonable iran; how
far more excellent power and authority then shall those have, that are
followers of the everliving God indeed.

And certainly their puissance and might is great and large, for they not
alone command over malignant spirits, but are (after some sort) more then the
Angels themselves. They have authority over Infernal Ghosts, whom they chase
away, and make them tremble at their divine words, in such sort, as they can
do nothing, where they be in place. A witness is Simon Magus, who in the
absence of S. Peter, wrought strange miracles by reason of his Art, but in his
presence, and at his prayer, was seen to fall down from the air, and to
break his own neck, as he took upon him to fly with wings before a number
of people. For our Savior Christ, having vanquished the enemy of mankind,
has of his own goodness, left (as an inheritance) the same power unto man
himself, through which he is able to break Satan's neck, bringing him under
subjection, and vanquished, who before did vanquish, so as now, by this means
men command over devils, who before did dominier over them.

And that this is true, you may know by many religious Divines of the word of
God, who are of force sufficient, to drive away wicked spirits by their
speeches, and in the name of the holy one of Israel. Now, he that draws and
chaseth away is far more stronger and of greater might, then he that is
chased, as the enemy, that is vanquished for want of courage turns his back,
and by flying away confesses his want of valor, yielding himself as prisoner
unto his foe. Then if it be so, and that men can make the black angels of
Lucifer to give place, and retire, they are far more strange and mighty then
the other be.

Besides, has not man advantage above the Angels themselves? in that he
receives the sacred and holy communion of our Savior, which he has given
unto us, as a testimony of his divine love, and for a perfect pledge, and
assurance of his grace toward us.

Again, have not some men that virtue, that they can heal diseases and
sicknesses, (without the help of medicines, or precious potions (only with
their words) yea, and have there not been othersome, that have had the gift to
have raised dead bodies unto life again, and yet nevertheless,
notwithstanding that all these wonderful powers are found to be in many of the
Ministers of God: how many wicked persons are there to be found at this day in
the world, who more esteem of these vile Magitians (attendants upon the
devil) then of these holy and sacred Preachers, worshipping that most wicked
and infamous creature, to leave the thrice blessed and heavenly Creator
himself? by reason of which, they must needs leave, deny, and hate the
Church, of which men are appointed Ministers, and hating her (without
acknowledging her to be their mother) they never can obtain to have God for
their Father. For if the good and faithful husband, cannot abide to love,
neither can (willingly) suffer any such to live, as be mortal enemies unto his
kind and lawful wife, because they seek the means to oppress her, and to
work her overthrow;

No more (then) will God permit and bear with any such, who go about to
havoc and spoil the Church, which is the sacred and legitimate Spouse. For
what vices soever be found in the Pastors of the same, yet is she still holy,
and propitious unto our welfare always, even as (although a Judge chance to be
wicked and bad, Justice it self nevertheless, is right and just, the
Ministers not being able to defame, nor disgrace the virtue of that Ministry
which they exercise.

And therefore it is but a foolish argument, for one to withdraw himself from
the Church, and to give over to come to Gods Temple, to make Intercessions and
Prayers unto him, for despite that the Ministers live ill, and are occasions of
many scandalls and much reproach unto the divine word: not a little degenerating
from their former ancient predecessors, God having (alone) reserved unto
himself the separation, and the division of the good and bad, which he will
divide, at the time of his latter judgment: and therefore, as his garment was
not divided nor parted at all, but kept and conserved whole, so the Church
(being a figure of the same) cannot be parted, and such as thorough their fond
error withdraw themselves from thence, resemble the Raven, which lighted upon
the carrion, without returning again into the Arc, as the faithful Dove did,
all which shall perish in the end, because there is no hope of salvation, but
from the Church, I mean our Savior Jesus Christ: and therefore is she
compared unto the Arc of Noah, that saved mankind from drowning, during that
great and terrible deluge of waters. And although that within the same ship,
there were found all kind of living creatures, to do their filthiness therein
(for the time) that they remained therein enclosed, yet for all that, Noah
never came forth, but endured all those vnwhole some and loathsome savors, for
otherwise if he had not kept him so immured, he had been drowned.

Thus we see the Arc that saves men, is the Church, from forth of which, no
person can come, unless he mean to be browned, and lost in hell fire; in as
much as within the same, the health of man is encluded and enclosed. Cursed
then be he that loves not the Church, or shall think, that she is stained,
polluted, or in any thing at all, lesned of her dignity, through the faults of
her Pastors, who are (be they never so leaude) to be accounted of, because of
their profession, especially as long as they shall deliver the very truth it
self unto us, forced thereunto, by the holy orders into which they are
inducted: as bad Casphas, had the gift of Prophecy (although he will be wicked
and ill given) by virtue of the pontifical dignity, through which he had that
special grace bestowed upon him from above. And therefore, we may compare our
mother Church, unto a goodly ancient palace, which thorough continuance of
time, and by reason of many hard storms and bitter tempests (that it has
endured) is much decayed in every part, the Galleries, chambers, and other
chief Rooms, being ruinated and fallen flat unto the ground, but yet the
foundation thereof, stands strong and sound, and is not rotten nor perished
at all. Now the walks, the lodgings, the hangings and the chief beauty of
our Church, were the good works; the charitable deeds, and the wonderful
miracles done by the Apostles thereof, in the old world: most of which, the
corruption of this age, and the vicious living of these degenerate successors,
has spoiled, defaced, and trod under their feet: and yet notwithstanding all
this, the foundation upon which she is settled and placed, remains still
unshaken, and vndecaied, being strongly built upon the word of God, who is the
chief builder and pillar of the same. Now that the Ministers of Gods word,
have been heretofore much reuere^ced, we may find by the ancient Heathen
people, who made more account of them, then many do (at this day) who
intelleth themselves with that fair name of Christians. Abraham laden with
spoils, and returning home victorious over Kings (who had taken his brother
prisoner) offered the tenth part of all his rich booties, unto the high Priest
Melchisedecke, Alexander, being an Infidel, after the taking of Tire, marching
toward Jerusalem, as a victorious Conqueror, with intention to ruinate and
take it unto the ground, was himdered and let by the high Priest, who (very
courageously) came against him, meeting him by the way, receiving many high
favors and honors done unto him, by that unbelieving Monarch, who then missed
of his purpose.

Antiochus having besieged the self same City, not only gave seven days of
Truce unto the Priests thereof, to celebrate the solemn Feast, but besides
that, sent them fat Bullocks, with garlands and gilded horns, to go through
with their Sacrifices the better. O grave and religious Monasteries, how much
more reverence have you received in times past, of those Infidels and
unbelievers, A Commendation of all true Minister of the sacred word of Gods
then you do now (at this day) of a number of bad Christians? But you need
not to wonder thereat at all, for the servant shall never be made much of, nor
be accounted of by the enemies of his Master, whom he pursues even unto the
death. Such as hate God, have no regard to favor his Vassals and Creatures,
and the ill willers of the Chuch do malign the Prelates thereof. It is not
for eue^ic private man (but only for Magistrates, and such as are in
authority) to judge of the fault of the Minister, his duty is, only to
believe that he does not err, as long as he labors in his reverend
vocation and calling, orderly and well.

For the Jews, although they were ungodly, yet had they the power to chase
away wicked spirits, by Exoreismes and Spells and the Sacrifice that is offered
of a bad Munster, is as profitable unto such as be there in place, as if it had
been done by the iustest Priest in the world.

Do that which the Scribes and Pharisees command you (says our Savior Christ)
because they are placed in the Chayte of Moses: and be Ministers of the Law,
although otherwise, they are froward, ill given, and malicious, and therefore
vnwerthie to be followed. For although you owe no honor unto their own
persons, yet are you indebted, and are bound unto their vocation and calling,
as long since, the people kneeled down, not unto the Ass, before whom they
sell but unto the Image which the beast bare upon his back.

Say a Prince should sends Lieutenant into some of his Provinces, that should
be a bad man and wickedly given, to gouernt the same, yet (for all his faults)
would the people bear respect unto him; were it bus ouely because their Prince
sent him unto them, and for that they would not thshonor hice state and
dignity Royal. For sometimes the dignity of the Office is honored, by
reason of him that exercises that place, and so likewise, the Minister is
often reuerence^^ for his function and charge, which he executes and puts
in practice.

The ancient Romans were more careful then any other Nation, A History.
to attribute and yield honor unto the Officers of their Commonwealth:
whereof we have a notable proof, of that gallant young Fabius, the son, who
being a Consuil, and seeing his Father (a far off) to come ^^ding toward him
in the street, being then but Dictator; sent before one of his Sargimts, to
desire him to light from off his horse, and to remember to do (not unto him
who was his Son, and whom he might command) but unto his place of
Consulship, such honor and reverence as did there unto belong. And Alexander
the great, gave so great credit and respect unto the answer which the great
Priest of Jupiter ^mmon gave him, calling him his son: that he verily
persuaded himself, he should conquer all the world. And upon this resolute
belief of his, he fought many bloody Buttells, of which he (always) proved
Conqueror. Had we that are Christians, accounted (as much) of our Preachers;
as the Inside is did of the Ministers of their Gods, there had not (then)
sprung up so many Errors amongst Christian religion, as there has done. The
only cause, that so many excellent wits have been overthrown, and that the
pease and quietness of the faithful, has been much broken and troubled. For if
every man had honored true Preachers in their places, without rising up
against them, and not seeking to suppress and keep down their authority and
power as they have done, never any contentious heresy had sprung up amongst
us, because he can never be heritike, nor adversary unto the Church, who does
the commandments of true Ministers thereof, they being not able to command
any thing that is contrary unto the express word and will of God.

Our Savior himself, vouchsafed to acknowledge the priests of the Jews, for
chief Heads and Sovereigns, when he willed these Leapers that were healed and
cleansed by him, to go and present themselves before them, as they that had all
the power given unto them (as indeed they have by the ^^ernall word of God
himself) who says thus unto his Prophet Jeremy, he speaking unto the
Ministers of the Church.

Behold I have put my word in thy mouth, and have appointed thee, over all
Kings, peoples, and Realms, to the end thou may plant, or pull up; build, or
pluck down; do or undone, whatsoever thou please. And I will have thee to
have authority over all the Monarks and Princess of the earth. And this was
confirmed and ratified by our Savior himself, who gave the selfsame power
unto S. Peter his successor, and so (by co^seque^ce) to all the succeeders of
Peter, (...)
to bind and lofe; and to open and shut, promising to ratify in heaven,
whatsoever he should do here upon earth. In times past, the Ministers of the
Church, were holden for such, they were honored as Vicars of Christ; respected
as the successors of S. Peter; beloved as the fathers of souls; sought unto,
as Physicians for afflicted co^scie^ces, feared, as the punishers of enormities
and abuses; saluted as the Superiors or Elders of the Church; redoubted as the
I rophets of the sacred Scripture; and proclaimed as Herolds of the pure and
sincere verity and truth it self. The ancient Emperors disdained not to be
chosen by them in their Empire, and Gregory surnamed the Great, named and
appointed the seven Roman Electors; the seven Roman Electors (I say again)
who oftentimes deposes such Emperors as before they had chosen, when they
were found guilty of some notorious and detestable crime.

But now alas, what shall I say unto you poor miserable, contemptible, and
despised Ecclesiastical Pastors? In steed of honoring you, you are now
injured: in steed of loving you, you are hated and loathed: in steed of
saluting you, you are abused: in steed of respecting you, you are disdained and
contemned: in steed of giving unto you, most that you have, is taken from you:
miserable are you your selves, and most wretched your calling, since you are
abused through so many gross indignities: and yet (for all this) the
everlasting son of the heavenly Father, found not a dignity more godly, and
more worthy, then that of Priesthood, according unto the order of
Melchicedecke, he was the first High Priest, whose successors, were the
Apostles, of whom at this day are the reverend Pastors and Preachers of the
word, the true and lawful followers.

But (comfort your selves Religious and godly Divines) for thrice blessed are
all those that suffer trouble and persecution in their bodies, for the name of
Jesus Christ-Glorie is the daughter of travail and pain, as envy is the
infant of glory: and only by trouble and pain, have the Saints beaten the
way for us to mount to heaven.

But as such as think so meanly of Religion, and of the Prelates thereof, are
themselves to be as meanly accounted of: even so (highly) are such to be
esteemed, that have given them there due, and rightly honored them. And such a
one, was Theodosius, that famous Emperor (sarnamed the Great) who sought (all
the means he could) to have the favor and good will of S. Ambrose, when he
had exco^minicated him, yielding unto his will, and fearing greatly his
displeasures: and not long after he being threatened by a certain Hermit with
the like punishment, he sent for all the Bishops (there-abouts, to know of
them, whether he might be interdicted the Church and all godly company, by so
poor a creature as he was, standing mightily in awe of the same.

And therefore ye worthy (learned and religious) Divines, whatsoever disgraces
are offered unto you, and howsoever you are most injuriously handled, or most
contemptuously made account of, yet be not you troubled thereat, but follow
your grave and virtuous calling, you being appointed and chosen by God
himself, to be the dispensers, and the celebraters of his blessed Sacraments,
and the blasoning Herolds of his eternal and euerlaistng word; lawful
Successors in his divine function, and great and mighty, by reason of your
more then worthy dignity.

But behold where the old man comes, unto whom I must make intercession, in
the behalf of these wretched Pirates, so strangely metamorphosed by him. To
him will I plead, with all humble modesty, lest growing in chollor with me,
he use me as hardly as he has done them, and the rather (because not long
since) I somewhat angered him.

Herewithall, the Knight coming unto him, saluted him with great courtesy, in
this manner. Learned and respective Father, God prosper thy years, prolong thy
life, multiply thy days, and conserve and keep thee still in health. Let me
entreat thee a while to stay, and a little to rest thy self in this place,
whilst I shall be bold to deliver a few words unto thee.

The Gods sometimes lend their cares unto mortal men, neither do they
disdain to hear them, as thou make show (me thinks) as if thou art loath to
listen unto mine.

Stay then (reverend old man) and give not just cause unto me, that I may
conceive any unkindness, through this thy harsh and hard denial. Nothing is of
smaller account then the speech of man, who so yields not unto that, will
yield unto nothing.

The old man, seeing himself to be held by the hand, and urged so hardly (as
it were somewhat in choler replied thus) Palmer, thou art too troublesome and
importunate, let me go I would wish thee, and hinder me no longer from the
service of the Gods, about which I am now going, lest thou force me to do that
which I would not be willing: for what thou would have, I know already
before thou speak.

Thy request is not lawful, inasmuch as Justice should be wronged, and rightly
might she complain of me, if I should yield unto thy demand: give over then
thy vain suit, for no body is bound to do what is ill and unjust, at the
request of another, because we ought to make more account of Justice, then of
all the world besides: and for that no amity or affection is to be preferred
before a reasonable and righfull matter: Hear me therefore, and disquiet not
my mind, which is now busied about heavenly things, and think I love thee
well, to let thee go seotfree, when thou shall urge me, with such an
unreasonable motion as this: for Justice punishes as well those that seem to
allow of evil, as those that do commit evil themselves. Pardon me (grave
sir) (answered the knight) there is no man living that less allows of evil
then I do, which I hate, loath and despise: but I cannot choose but I must
needs love pity and mercy, for as we are all men, so are we bound, one to
help another, the brute beasts themselves doing the like through the very
instinct of Nature. Compassion ought to be preferred before all other respects,
because a fault that is done, may be amended and become a virtue, but a man
once dead for want of pity, never rises again, and his loss is
unrecoverable, and can never be repaired again.

Mercy has always gotten the upper hand of rigor and fiercenes, and the
pitiful man does deserve more then the just, whereof Cosar shall serve me for
a witness, who affirmed, that the fruits of his victories, was the pardon, he
(daily) gave unto thousands of his enemies, as soon as they sought his favor.
What nourishes the society and company of men? What maintains their lives,
and what increases their health and quietness, but mild pity? If there were
none but hungry wolfes, or greedy Lions, how (then) should the world endure?
and how could men be sure to enjoy their lives in safety? Ah if our most
loving God (should be found (as thou art) without mercy, what hope should we
have to enjoy eternal glory? but rather look (every hour) when we should
be swallowed up into the bottomless gulf of hell. Change then this thy too
too obdurate resolution.

The exceeding great courtesies that Alexander used unto the Persian Kings
daughters and wife, was the cause that Darius prayed the Gods, that if he needs
must be driven out of the throne of Cyrus, he might have no other successor to
follow him, then the same Alexander his chief enemy. Great account do we
make, and much do we esteem of great and noble personages, that have lived
long before our days, yet not so much for the many victories they obtained, as
for the kind gentleness, and mild courtesies they used unto their foes, when
they had overcome their own passions. For to conquer an enemy is the benefit
of Fortune, whereas that which we win and carry away from our own selves,
cannot be attributed unto any thing but unto our selves, and that is the
victory which consists in pardoning of our enemies. Then follow this direct
course, and thy memory shall flourish for ever.

O how ignorant do thou show thy self to be (replied the old man) by this
thy discourse. Who knows not that every one of us is bound for our own
credits, to bridle our affections, and to show grace unto our adversary, unto
whom Fortune has left no means to defend himself, when he is once vanquished.

But the same law that commands us to be pitiful unto our enemies, teaches
us, to be just and severe unto the adversaries of Justice.

For what sufficient reproach and shame, can a Master do unto such a servant
of his, who shall stand by, and see his Lord beaten, abused and defamed, and
yet (never as much (as once) stirs his foot to take his quarrel in hand,
nor once to defend him, he having been able to have done the same if he would?
We are all the servants of Justice, by whom, since we are all nourished,
protected, and defended in this world, is it reasonable, that we should endure
to see he^ spoiled, abused and trod under seere, and yet never revenge her
wrongs? The same eternal God, whom thou tearmest merciful, has not himself
contemned Justice, but rather has yielded unto the satisfaction of the same,
choosing rather to become man, and to die as man, then to fal^ific or offer
injury unto Justice.

So likewise the selfsame Alexander, whom thou paintest forth to be so kind,
deferred not to punish in most cruel sort, the murderers of Darius, causing
them to be peecemeale torn with wild horses in sunder. No reason is it, that,
that man, should be suffered to live, who is not moved to revenge Justice when
she is profaned and wronged, she being that virtue, that contains within her
all the other, and they are all (as it were) tied about her neck, inasmuch as
it were to no purpose for one to be sober, and continent, if he should prove to
be an unjust man, and an usurper over other men.

And were Justice honored of every one (as she ought to be in right) we then
should have but small need, either of force, valor, or prowes at all. For
should every man live orderly and well, giving unto his neighbor that which
is his due, there should be no occasion, to use force to compel him to deal
justly and true: stand not then, to importune me thus, to show compassion upon
the foes of Justice, and hinder not the divine vengeance of the same, lest thou
be punished for taking their parts so much.

For cursed is he that bears with vice, and winketh with his eyes, because he
will not see that fault, which he is loath to punish. Learned Father (answered
the knight) how much more easier is it for a man to pardon, then to revenge?

A small labor were it, and little or no time would it ask, to speak this
one only word (I pardon them) but not so qucikly, is found the means to
revenge. Happy may he account himself, that has not a cruel mind, nor
bloody hand, the Lord himself rejecting the sacrifices of such as have rough
and bloody hands.

Besides, the same Justice in whose behalf thou alleagest so much, is content
that that sinner be received into grace, that craves pardon for his fault, he
promising to make hartle satisfaction for the same. For what more can one
demand of the offender, but amends for the offense he has committed.

Justice misliketh not, to see her dear sister Mercy, to be respected and
sued unto, because that without yielding satisfaction for the crime, and not
paying what is due unto Justice, she never receives the misliuer into her
favor.

That good Father, did not he take again into his former grace, his prodigal
child, after he had so vainly and prodigally spent all his wealth and
patrimony? And that wild King Loies, surnamed the Debonaire, did not he
forgive all his children, who had chased him out of his kingdom, deprived him
of his Crown, and had forcibly made him a Monk? If so, then let him be
merciful that looks for mercy: for as we sow, so shall we reap. And if we
do otherwise, we shall prove our selves but liars before God, and cruel of
our speech before the face of the world. Let us pity one another as we would
be pitied again of God himself: for if he should but once look into our
faults, who then dare appear before his presence?

This is the reason I am so earnest with thee, to the end I might obtain so
much favor at thy hands, as to restore those poor distressed souls, unto
their pristinate and former shapes again, that they may be continually obliged
unto thee, for so great a bounty toward them.

Thou know not (answered the old man) what thou demandest. For, if the law
given by Princess, does not exempt themselves from the rigor thereof, and if
God himself will have evil punished (as he pardons the faithful) having
slain the infamous inhabitants with fire and brimstone, and swallowed down
alive into hell, that rebellious crew, of Dathan, Coran, and Abiron. Why then
contrary to his ordinance, will thou solicit in the behalf of the wicked,
when the sin is so heinous, as it can never enough be plagued?

Call to mind the saying of that great Emperor, who putting into a certain
Judges hand, the sword of Justice, said thus unto him. Hold here, and take
this weapon against mine own self, if thou shall find me culpable: And if I
shall do any thing against Justice.

Agesilaus, King of the Spratanes, did not think the King of Persia to deserve
that name of GREAT more then he: A Sentence.
but only for that he was more upright and impartial in all his actions:
making account by this means, that all the glory and honor of great
Monarkes, consisted in the beauty of this JUSTICE.

And to say the truth, she is a most beautiful and divine Lady, seeing she
renders unto every man what is his in right, not taking away from any man by
violence, the least thing that is, but rather makes such ill-gotten goods to
be restored unto the true owners thereof again. Worthy then are such to be
severely punished, that violate and defile her so much.

Cursed be you (says the great GOD, by the mouth of his Prophet Esaias) that
publish wicked Laws, and do commit Injustice, A Sentence.
to the end you may oppress the poor in Judgment: do wrong unto the
widow, and that the goods of the poor Orphans and Fatherless children, may
serve as a prey unto your insatiable covetousness, and that you may ruinate and
overthrow the weak and feeble estate of the poorer sort.

JUSTICE being the daughter of the Almighty, cannot be sold by men, because
she belongs not unto them, but unto GOD, In praise of Justice.
they being but mere executioners of the same. No more then a Farmer may sell
the Farm of his Landlord: which if he do, he is severely to be punished.

For an Advocate that pleads, may sell his Plea, and a Counselor his
Counsel, which he gives unto his Clyent, because they be things of their
own, and appartaining unto them. But the Judge can in no wise sell Justice, by
reason she is not his own, (he being but one that is put in trust, faithfully
to deliver the same) and that he has the charge thereof from God: Now he may
be properly said to sell her, who does not punish such as abuse her. Then talk
no more of this matter, which I may never grant, nor thou art like ever to
obtain.

Sage and prudent old man (replied the Knight) although Laws are appointed to
punish offenses, yet nevertheless, they are always construed unto the best,
and interpreted with most favor that may be. For it is not necessary (always,
and at all times) but upon great necessity and constraint, that the rigor
thereof should be put in practice: No more then the skillful and cunning
Chyrurgian uses neither fire nor saw, but when there is no other remedy.

And that this is wisdom so to do, we find it in great personages, who have
sooner yeeded by mild entreaty, and fair means, then by all the violence in
the world. An example.
Which Coriolanus can well testify, who could never be vanquished by all the
Romans Forces, and yet was soon overcome by the sweet entreaties of his dear
wife and mother.

A right generous spirit, and one that is nobly borne, will never yield by
constraint, but being kindly used, condescendeth unto any thing. As we have
Cato for a witness, who never could be brought to give place unto the good
Fortune of his enemy.

So likewise honorable minds use to dominier and rule, managing their affairs
and business, not with controlling cheek, but with a sweet and mild kind of
entreaty. For so did prudent Demetrius, pardoning (oftentimes) the Athenians,
and setting them at liberty, when they (notwithstanding all this) requited his
great good turns toward themwith monstrous ingratitude, and thousands of
outrageous misdemeanors.

Better were it for us to imitate the good and kind Dion, who being driven out
of his Country, by his own Citizens, (whom he diverse times had delivered
from bondage) and gently pardoned them all, sussering himself to be put to
death for their safety.(...) their Savior and Redeemer, and yet nevertheless,
that mild and immaculate Lamb, the everliving Son of God, forgave them,
prayed for them, and not so much as once remembered their wic^^dnes: They being
afterward plagued (not so much for that they had orucified the Just) as, for
that they still persisted in their wilful iniquities.

We see then, we are commanded to pardon our enemies, by the example of our
Savior hmfelfe. Then what should hinder thee, but that thou should for give
these poor miserable wretched creatures? For thrice blessed is he, that shall
(worthily) imitate the Almighty, in as much, as he that has such a guide,
can never walk out of his right way.

I see now (answered the old man) that from Caribdis thou fallest into Silla,
and from one bad mattes, enterest into a worse. For both the Jews were
punished, and God himself (although at the prayer of Moses) would not forgive
the Children of Israel.

For if that he has not spared Justice upon himself, in (the going before us,
and learning us a way that we should follow) are we so foolish to imagine,
that he will not permit the same to be executed upon men?

He has punished the Israelites many times, not sparing them at all, when
there was a sault, and has severely chastised such as have not plagued his
enemies, according unto his will, as we find by Saul and Ahab.

Besides, he thus spoke unto the Judges. Behold, you do not execute the
judgment of man, but of God: and whatsoever you shall wrongfully give
judgment of, the the same shall light upon your own heads: therefore let the
fear of the Lord be always before your eyes, doing every thing orderly and
uprightly, for God will not accept of any injustice, nor has respect of
persons, of Presents, or Riches.

Shepherd, Shepherd, the greatest glory that our Ancients thought they
could merit, was in studying how they might live, to be counted just, they
using to punish vice, in such sort, that this word (JUST) carried with it
self, an entire and full perfection of an accomplishment every way.

Traian is not a little commended, for staying his whole Army (marching in
battle array, against the Parsians) to the end he might do Justice upon one of
his Soldiers, who had ravished a poor widows daughter. An act so meritorious,
as no doubt it wan him the field, by reason of the prayer of that good old
woman, who made earnest prayer unto the Gods for him, in his behalf, that he
might return home again victorious.

To be brief, there was no wickedness, but was sharply punished by our old
forefathers; amongst whom, Justice was much reverenced, and respected chiefly
of all.

The Spartanes honored her so much, that for sear to offend her, they
banished all use of gold and silver out of their City, taking away by that
devise, all unlawful means of corrupting of Consciences: And all the while
they kept this kind of strict life, they were the first, and chief of all
Greece. And no sooner gave they over this kind of government, but they became
the most wretchedst, and most miserable people of all others.

Let us then leave this wanton pardoning, and injustice, it being a sin, for
which God alters and changes the state of many Kingdoms and Monarchies.

As the Knight was ready to make answer unto the objections of the old
Nigromancer, they might hear notfarre from them, a most lamentable voice,
which was the occasion they then gave over, looking about them to see if they
could spy the wight that so lamented: whom they presently saw to be a
Shepherd, that came toward them, singing this Song following unto himself.

My soul, say to me (now) where art?
Where live thou (speak my poor heart?)
The Lover that does live apart,
Without his Mistress fair:
Is like a shadow substancelesse,
Where naught but grief the life does press,
As pisture of sad heaviness.
And connterfeit of care.
Say Phoebus, what good is it to me,
Though Skies I view gilded to be?
If my ador de Sun I not see
To please my pittious eyne?
Can Ceres (of me) praise deserve,
Though all the ground with Corn does swerve,
When I through hunger pure do starve,
And ready am to pine?
My broken joys, repair who may,
Who can my weeping Conduits stay,
Since who of sorrow is the pray
Belongs unto grief?
Mine eyes which death orechargeth sore,
(As now) can wail, and weep no more:
Since she is gone whom I adore,
And who brought them relief.
My heart through sorrow's waxen cold,
Loosing what he most dear did hold,
Blessed, if that in grave enrold
He were, his hopes being past.
No comfort to my soul's arriude,
He seeks the means to be disliude.
So Piramus of Love depriude,
Gane up his latest gasp.
Now I, my cruel Fair have lost,
Of what sweet comfort may I boast?
Yet for ones Mistress to be lost,
The pains of death or pleasure.
He is not bound in world to live,
Who (always languishing) does grieve,
When he, (by dying) may it relieve,
Which to him is a Treasure.
The Sun, though hidden be his beams,
Extinguished yet are not his gleames,
So Lady mine, her sight forth streams,
Though she is far from me.
More cruel did I feel the pain,
When her fair glannce burnt every vains,
Respecting what I now do gain,
Although she absent be.
When she was took from me away,
Why then did not my heartsome slay?
For who with Conqueror his, is pray,
Cannot be said to die,
Ah cruel day, and lucklesse time,
When as I lost those looks dinine,
My soul (consumde) away did pine,
Wanting that Deity.
Then seeing that deprinde I am
Of her, no longer live I can,
My Fortunes hard, I Will curse and ban,
Expecting still for death.
Withouten soul, no body lives,
His Mistress loss, a Loner grienes:
Whilst he such woeful torments prieues,
As none feel like on earth.
The old Magician, and the Knight, hearing so doleful a Dittie sung by the
Shepherd Arcas, (who did nothing but lament, for the absence of his Diana)
could not choose but weep, when after he had made an end of his Song, they
might hear him use these speeches unto himself.

O troublesome and unquiet Sun, who has caused thee (so soon to leave thy
bed, before thy wonted time? And what need had any Creature of thine, so quick
to return, as long as they ouer-wearied and tired with trauatle, slept sweetly
under the protection of the secret and still Night? A Similie.
And how happy was I, before thy brightsome coming? For then, (at my
pleasure) I did contemplate and behold the face of Diana, shining in the
heavens, which nourished in my soul, the remembrance of my beauteous Goddess.

And what can delight me more, then to think on her, who resembles her much,
and who it honored with her name? Nothing pleases the sick man so much as
his health, which he desires above all things, (although many times) in vain.
And so, nothing is so much agreeable to me, as my fair Mistress, whom I do
often wish for, although to no end. For the pale and breathless coarse, laid
upon the cold ground, is not more deprived of life, A Sentence.
then I am void of all hope, to see my cruel Fair again.

Miserable is he that languisheth without all hope: for nothing sweeteth the
sharpnes of his wound, when as a little hope alone, is of force to nourish the
poorest wretches in the world. Easy are the travails, and gentle the pains,
that one suffers, whilst he hops; For the conceit of the delight of the
thing he hops for, makes them pleasant, changing them into contentment and
joy: whereas the labor and pain of him that is in despair of all hope, is
most dangerous, insupportable, and intolerable.

Tell me mine eyes, to what end do you see and give light, if you can no more
behold her, who was your chiefest delight? O fair and lovely Diana, in what
place soener it is thy Fortune (as now) to be, making the same blessed with
thy beauteous presence; Heavens grant that thou may live happily, and that
the remnant of all my good Fortunes (if at least I have any reserved for me) be
heaped and bestowed upon thee, whilst I in the mean space, will live (here)
alone, in this solitary Wood, to bewail my disasters, and languish daily, as
one in a consumption, that piecemeale pineth away, and can never be cured. For
to what end does he make intercession, or prayers unto the Heavens, whom the
Heavens themselves do hold for their enemy? That man that is difasterly
destined, has no reason to expect any good fortune: which if he does, he but
mocketh himself, and in the end does find he is deceived.

So I look for nothing that is comfortable or pleasing to come from above,
because I know my self to be in the number of those miserable Caitifs, A
Sentence.
who (never have felt any thing here) in this world, but woe and distress,
until they have been laid and lodged within their graves.

O too too partial Fates of men, that some should be still happy, luckie, and
blessed in every thing, and others so unfortunate, that they should (never)
taste of aught but of sorrow, care, and anguish! And of this last accursed crew
I am the chief.

But perhaps some will say: Eucry one feels his own grief and misfortune,
but not that which another is tormented withal. Yet let such judge (but
indifferently of my case) and then I know they cannot choose but pity me; For
is it not an evil to be endured, for one to loose the cheerful light of his
own sweet life, his much desired health and welfare, his own loving native
Country, his dear Parents, and his affectionate friends and acquaintance,
without finding any succor or relief at all, but of his proper enemies. For
vain is the help of them, from whom I hoped, and as bootlesse is the reward
of my travail, that I am like to receive of such as I served.

O misery worse then despair it self, for one to be beholding for his good
Fortune unto his mortallfoe, and not find recompense, of those of whom he
has so well deserved.

O Themistocles, it was thou that did pass through this narrow straight,
being welcomed, caressed, and honorably entertained of thy cruel adversary,
when thou were banished by thy ungrateful Countrymen, whom thou had most
faithfully served, and oftentimes most valiantly fought for, to save their ^^es
and Country.

And thou Coriolanus did find the like favor and grace amongst thine
enemies, after thy own Citizens had unkindly driven thee out of their City,
whom thou before had served loyallre, with many testimonies of rare and
wonderful fidelity.

And such was thy Fortune brave Alcibiades, exiled by thine own people, and
entertained most lovingly by the Spartanes, thy hateful deadly foes. In your
Ship do I sail, in your boat do I row, and the selfsame mishap you had,
do I participate of; but sore (full sore) against my mind: for in an ill
hour was he borne, that is driven unto such a narrow estate, as he is forced
to have recourse unto his il-willers: in as much as his obligation is like to
be forfaited, (the sum never likely to be paid) when he shall receive so
great a benefit of his enemy, who is least bound to do the same good unto
him of all others.

Thus said the sorrowful Arcas, who (having ended his discourse) was chosen
as ludge between the old man and the Knight, about their first Argument. But
when he understood how these Pirates of the Seas (changed so lately into Trees,
and bruit beasts) and would have offered violence unto the fair Shepherdess,
he then gave his Censure, that they were worthily punished: confirming this
his Decree, to stand (as authentical) in the presence of the Shepherdess her
self, whom he presently knew to be loucly Delia: who was not a little
comforted and revived, when she so happily found Arcas, and other her old
acquaintance in this place: Even as banished persons cheer themselves in their
exile, being maruellouslie joyful (when in a strange land) they met one with
another.

Whereupon, the Shepherd demanded of her the cause of her coming into this
uncouth Desert, and by what chance she came thither: As also the reason why
these cruel lawless persons did pursue her with their naked swords, in such
a strange manner.

And therewithal, they sat down upon a green bank, placing the Nymphe in
the midst of them, who began to tell this sad Tale following.

Not long since, there was a certain Noble man of an Island, Delia the
Shepherdess, reports a strange history
who became amorous of a goodly Maid, she being the only child he had. This
Damsel had vowed her self unto the service of the Goodesse Juno; Which her
Father not knowing of, pursued her the more eagerly, she still denying, and
flying from him, as much as she could, calling upon her Mistress to assist and
help her.

One day amongst others, he found her at such an advantage, as he attempted by
force to ravish her: which shameful deed, was repugnant against all reason,
honor, and honesty.

The Virgin not knowing what to do, resisted and cried out, imploring for the
aid of Juno, who seeing such unnatural usage of a Father unto his own Child,
delayed no longer to help her: For as the lustful Lord, thought to have
embraced his daughter, and to have had his pleasure of her, in steed of holding
a living body in his arms, he found a cold and senseless image of white
Marble. The Goddess Juno, having changed her faithful servant into this
liuelesseforme to preserve her chastity undefiled.

The Father wonderfully amazed at this matter, but more sad and heavy was
he, (as well for the loss of his only child, whom he loved as his own
soul, as also to see that he was deprived from enjoying of that contentment
which he hoped of) was ready in a manner to kill himself for very mere
grief and vexation: when upon the sudden, he found out, that the Maid had
vowed herself unto Juno, and that, that Goddess, to the end to frustrate him
of his will, had turned her into this cold form of Marble.

Which when he knew, mad for rage and grief against Juno, (it being not the
duty of any creature to murmr or bandie against the Celestial powers) he
runs unto the Altar, plucking down her Image, and breaking it in a thousand
pieces.

The Goddess being justly moved with this outrage, provoked her husband
Jupiter likewise against him, who took this injury done unto his wife, in as
heinous a manner, as if it had been done unto himself: and therefore (to
revenge the same, he sent an infectious pestilence into this Island, of which,
all the land (in a manner died.) The cruel Lord, being the first man that was
punished with the same, whilst those few that remained alive, fled
(presently) out of that Country, shifting as well as they could to save
themselves, and came to inhabit in a certain barren and fruitless foil, not
far off from their own.

But after they had some few years been tired with their banishment, and (as
weary of this hungry and unpleasant place where they did bide, desiring and
longing to see the smoke of their old Chimneys) they ventured to return back
again into their own Country: where no sooner were they settled, but the same
pestilent disease began (afresh) to seize upon them, taking them away as fast
as ever it had done before.

Whereupon they sent unto the Oracle of Apollo, to know how they might be freed
of this plague: who returned them answer, that to appease the wrath of Juno,
they must sacrifice a young Virgin unto her, she being every way as fair in
beauty, as that Virgin was, which Juno had changed into a picture of Marble.

They heating this, began to bethink themselves what they should do in this
case, for their Island brought forth no such comely creatures, and therefore
they determined to scour all the Coasts near about, to see if they could
find any such.

Now after the damnable Fiend Discord, with her breath, like brimstone, her
wings, like a Dragon, and her paws, all of fire: had driven that gracious and
goodly company out of the sweet Groves of Arcadia: every one (highing him unto
his own home, after the death of that valiant Lord Phillis) so much bewailed
and lamented of every one. I alone, amongst the rest, resolved with my self,
not to stir one foot from thence, but to take my Fortune patiently (as it
should happen) not unlike unto a Lamb that is reserved for Sacrifice.

In the mean time, Report had blasted abroad the beauteous faces of all our
Shepheardesses, (which sometime were biding in this happy Desert) carrying the
same tied unto his wings, brought it unto the ears of the men of this cruel
Hand: who no sooner heard it, but that they took ship, minding to take one of
the fairest Maidens there, and to sacrifice her unto the Goddess of Riches.

Coming (then) a shore upon our Island, and not finding any more to please
their fancy, then my poor self, they took me perforce, and brought me
prisoner into their ship, hoping that I should be a remedy to mittigate the
anger of the Goddess; and not because I was saire enough for their purpose.
But such as desire any thing, are contented with little. Like unto right
Gamesters, who rather then they will be excluded from play, will play at small
stakes, and hold the candle unto the rest: So they imagined any beauty, were
it never so simple, would serve well enough for their turn and purpose.

I seeing my self (thus) taken, like unto a silly Partridge, seized upon by
the gryping Faulconer, (and sore doubting what the other Virgin feared) lifting
up my deawy eyes unto the heavens, I made mine humble and hearty prayer unto
the Almighty, to assist me in this extremity, and to deliver me out of the
hands of these monsters, whom I doubted sore, because of mine honor. And no
sooner had I made intercession unto him, but he, as a most merciful Father,
heard my prayers, gave ear unto my cries, and pitied my woeful tears. For
within a while after, he caused a blutering storm and Tempest to rise in the
Seas, that drove them far away from their own Coast, forcing them in the
end, to cast Anchor upon these parts. Which being done, I did conjure and
entreat them so much, that they permitted me to come a shore to take the air,
somewhat to refresh and recover my crazed health, which the rage of the
Tempest, and the swelling billows of the Ocean, had much impaired and made
worse. But no sooner was I upon the land, and had set foot on the ground, then
I began (suddenly) to take my heels, and run from them, choosing rather to
be killed by them as I fled, then they should take from me mine honor
violently.

And being in this mind, I thought to venture my fortune, as that young Roman
Virgin did, which bravely swum over the River of Tiber, thinking there was no
other way with me, but that either death, or flying away, could save my
chastitic untainted, and preserve me vnhart. They seeing this, followed after
me as fast as they could run, threatening me with many outrageous and
injurious terms, to cut my throat if I stayed not: And this had they done,
had not you (dear Father) come to rescue me, by your learned and miraculous
aid: for which I most humbly thank you, acknowledging my self, by your
only means and favor, to hold both mine honor, and my life, (for both
which) I am obliged unto you.

This pitiful discourse moved all the assembly to compassion, and especially
the old man, who gave her many kind speeches, comforting her in the best
manner he could, and so left her to repose her self, because she was
wonderful weary.

And in the mean time, he singled out Arcas, whom he led unto the old
solitary Dungion or Cave, sommoning him to go forward in the History of his
misfortunes.

The Shepherd hearing this, began to chafe in his mind, as a little boy does
fret, when he is forced to repeat his lesson twice. But it is to no end to be
angry, for he durst not displease him any way, because he sore doubted his
devilish cunning, unto whom not for love, but rather for fear, he willingly
seemed to condescend, beginning where he left, in this wise.

Diana (as I told you before) took great pleasure in my verses, yea, and did
me grace (sometimes) to sing some of them her own self. But as the rain
transformeth and changes it self into cold sharp snow, so this pleasure
turned into grief and despair, by the answer I received of the cruel Ecco.

Yet nevertheless, I thought to follow my game, having already roused the
dame. He that will be a soldier in Loves camp, must never be faint-harted,
nor give over with a repulse, or some small loss, for continuance of time, and
mild patience, are the sacred Ttees, from which loyal Lovers, gather the
fruits of their constant perseverance, and long looked for Amity.

This was the cause I put forth my self to serve my Diana, more then ever I
had done before, although she accounted nothing at all thereof, by reason she
was addicted wholly unto the service of her Goddess.

Nevertheless, I always hoped the best, ruminating in my self, that Rome was
not built in one day, and, that that was rare and dainty, could not be gotten
easily, but at a high price and dearly.

I remembered, that small drops of water, with often falling, makes (in the
end) a hole in the flintie stone, be it never so hard, and I relied very much
upon the promise of time, who vanteth to ripen every thing, so they stay his
leisure. A small hope encourages such as be Lovers, and hinders them from
giving over their suite begun already. Wherein, they resemble such soldiers
as are besieging some City or other, in which they hope in the end to enter,
although they have the worst at the first. And so Lovers, never despair, for
all their crosses, and ouerthwartings, but still hope the best, as the Sun,
which waxes the clearer, the more the clouds seek to shadow him. This made me
still to follow my footing, as the good Blood-hound does the trace of the Dear.

When the day of the solemn feast of Diana drew near, which was the day of
joy, and year of Iubile to all, but unto me (alone) heavy and sad, I then
(again) began to weep and wail afresh: for no remedy was there, but my
Mistress must needs go thither, with the other Nymphs her companions, whilst I
(in the mean while) should want her pleasing company. For to follow her it
was not lawful, which both her honor forbad me, and also the sacrifices and
mysteries were such, and so servile, as none might see them but women.

Besides, I remembered the fault which Clodius committed in Rome, profaning and
defaming, the ceremonies of the Goddess Bona: to the intent he might enjoy the
carnal company of Caesar's wife, which offense brought forth many other. The
Judges being (through the same) corrupted, and the Injustice which they did (in
absoluing the guilty) without punishment.

I calling all these things to mind, suffered my Lady to go unto these
sacrifices, which continued diverse days, whilst I (in the mean while) was
left alone, at what time, I began to find, how heavy and grievous the absence
of this Lady is unto the Lover, whilst I tried the same all that space within
my self. Yet, although she was absent, I was not altogether idle, for I
composed these Heroical verses following.

Now do I mean, in this my verse, to tell that thy beauty
Has by thy glaunces sweet, of freeman made me a Bond-slaue?
When mine cies surprisde with a fear more terrible then death,
Began ouer-bold to cast looks on thy heavenly feature.
So will I tell how since that time, I never had one day,
But that my thought, and my mind have run of Love still rouings
Nor have I dreamd of aught, but of that blind little Elfe, Love,
Who has my heart kept captive, and my soul as a prisoner.
Yet is he happy, that can serve a dame so tryumphant.
Happy is he, that is bound in a chain so sweet and so lovely,
That all carking care drives from me, lest I be grieved,
In that I am thy servant true, I blessed do account me.
Who like the sacred Sun, do glad the world and his of spring.
For so divine a soul as thou, who would not endanger
Life, and himself, and what he has that is aught worth?
No aisgrace it is, of brave Captain, for to be vanquished.
Love never soiournes in the hearts of cowardly Milkesops,
But in the thoughts of Noble men, most fierce does he combat:
And great Ladies minds he seeks to keep in his own puet.
Woeful witness hereof is Dido, cruelly destned.
And those kindsisters that Thesius sau'de from his ending,
Hercules that Demigod, that Monsters conquered and Fiends:
Had for his foes, thieves and Love that war made against him,
Die did be, for pure love, who the pride of the world did encounter:
And wicked Tyrants did send to hell with a mischief.
So did Achilles love in his prime, and he but a youngling,
Was by the crafty means of his foe, most cruelly murdered:
Greatest states have loved, why then for love should I blamed be?
If that I seek (as they) to love thee my Goddess above all,
Not any things here in this earth, compared to thy beauty.
Not any things here in this earth, that like to thy sweet self
May vaunt to give laws, as Gods that dwell in the clear sky.
For Love, falling in love, with thy faue face, and with thy rose check,
Plase like awanton in thine eyes, and like to a Babie.
Nor does he live but in thee, who art his Court and his Heaven.
Happy thou, that can command so lofty a Godhead.
Such and so rare thy favor is, thy grace so beseeming,
As their Palas most denine, does seek to repose her
On thy cherrie lips, hunnie sucking, Mercury seazeth.
And thy sacred Angels voice, is the voice of Apollo.
And to be brief, thou art so divine, as few thee resemble:
Fowe or none that lives in this world so beautiful as thou.
Then will I love thee; what do I say? too little a thing it is,
Less that I worship, do to thee as unto a Goddess.
Then to thee as immortal might, my life I do offer,
And my loy all heart do I sacrifice to thy beauty.
Whilst I hung on thine Altar, this my verse, which has chaunted
With thousand close sighs, the praises of many others,
But yet never honored any, like to thy rare self:
Wondered at of men, of Gods most worthily worshipped.
Then this my chaste voice receive, as heavenly powers do.
And vouchsafe for this song, a corner of thy sweet Altar,
Unto the end I deeply may engraue in the same place,
How in coarse, and in mind, thou framed art daintily perfect,
And that nothing equal can thy feature immortal,
Who art honors lonely Nurse, and Eternities own child.
Having made these verses, I plaide as the country Farmeth does, who having
gathered some dainty, or new kind of fruit, keeps the same very charily,
to make a present thereof, unto his Landlord, upon the first occasion he shall
have to see him: and so I resolved to keep these my verses, and to present
them unto my Diana, as soon as she should return from the ceremonies of her
Goddess, and long was it (as me thought) that she stayed. For to one that
expects and looks for any thnig, every hour seems a year at the least.
Willingly could I have murmured against the Goddess Diana. If I durst, and
more willingly have curtold of, and shortened her Sacrifices, if I had been (as
I was not) the great Priest of the Gods.

But in the end, the best thing that I could find to help me, was patience
perforce, whilst I attended with good devotion, the will of the heavens, which
at the last brings every thing to his perfection. Yet when these Sacrifices
were at an end, they were no more fortunate unto me, then was their beginning.
For my Diana being elected and chosen Queen of these Mysteries, by the other
Nymphs was conducted (not far from thence) by the whole troop of them to be
enstalled, and to receive the Robes of her Royrall Sovereignty, much did it
please me, that my Lady was so highly honored, but as much (again) did it
displease me, that I should lose her presence longer, for the same; which was
the cause, it drowned and choked all the contentment and pleasure, which I
conceived of her prehemmence, and to know her, to be preferred before all the
rest of the Goddess train. For the good servant is not a little glad and
proud, in that he serves a brave and virtuous Master, who surpasses all
others in virtue, and in chivalry.

And so the Lover is fully contented, and not a little does glory, when he is
the servant of such a Lady, as not Love (alone) makes her seem beautiful in
his own sight, but when she is so reputed and accounted of by the voice of all
men.

Nothing delights our minds more, then when we see every man's conceit to
iumpe with our own, in the thing that we love most of all.

Now the honor that was attributed unto my Mistress was great, for she was
brought from the temple, arrayed with a fine and dainty robe, of white lawne;
under which was a garment of cloth of gold, rich, and of great value, her head
was adorned, and embollished with a Royal golden Crown, and the lovely traces
of her flaxen hair, were tied with small and delicate colors of the purest
silk, set out with many pretty knots, and wonderful rare devises.

Her countenance was such, and so Maiesticall, as if she had been the Goddess
Diana indeed: for apparel sets out the body very much, being one of the
goodhest and chiefest ornaments to increase beauty: especially if there be
good store of change of the sacred and costly, with ill, and that it be fit and
well made for the person that shall wear it.

Her Chariot was of Iuorie, wherein she sat inthronized, drawn with four huge
Lions, which shaked their yellow rough skins, to make such stubborn hearts to
fear and quake, that were loath to bow, and do reverence unto their beauteous
and Princely Princess.

Before her, and by her side, the other Nymphs marched orderly, and in a row,
every one of them, carrying a branch of Olive, wreathed and intermixed with a
bow of green Laurel, and a writing upon the same, which bare every ones
own Quatrin in praise of this royal Nymph, whereof some of them were these
here under inserted.

The Muses (Goddess fair) this chaste verse offer thee,
And to thy peerlesse Coarse, and Beauties excellence:
To praise the good, to blame such wights as wicked be,
Is honors double gain, and double recompense.
Another Quatersan.

If thou Dianaes name, her beauty, and her wit do bear,
Who is adornd in heavens, whilst thou below do soiourne here?
What reason is it then, but that we worship thee likewise,
As we the mighty Gods do, and like honors, thee devise?
Another.

Too small a toy this Laurel is, to make for thee a Crown,
Thy temples to embellish fair, thou art of such renown.
It Is mortals gain this honor, yet as we present to thee,
Immortal verses so with such, the Gods presented be.
Another.

Rare virtue never honored is enough, at any time,
Nor can we too much make to smoke, her Altars ore divine.
Then if thy works (as hers) immortal right do show,
Wonder thou not, though beauties thine be worshipped so.
Another.

Queen of our works, and Princess of our heart,
Of our chaste minds we offer thee best part.
Our verse, it is, through which the Conqueror lives,
Which to his deeds, most heavenly brightness gives.
Another.

Blessed be our Queen, immortal she always,
In words and deeds we'ele honor her with praise.
Whose body beauteous, and whose soul is fair,
And who for gifts with Pallas may compare?
Another.

The Ox, to Jupiter we use to sacrifice,
To Baccus, Wine, the Goat to Pan, we give likewise.
Corn unto Ceres, and sweet Myrre we Cupid offer,
But unto thee (who vice do hate) our verse we proffer.
Another.

Thy Feature fair, nor stately Gate, has us overcome,
It Is none of these, thy virtue it is that this has done.
He is not vanquished, that has endurde the sight
Of one that is far more in power, then mortal might.
Another.

Among thousand honors due unto thy glorious Deity,
Receive our verses, and these Flowers, as offerings to thy beauty.
Small triumph for the Captain it is, to foil his enemy,
Unless Apollos sisters ring out his victory.
These Quatraines were fairly written, in great Letters of Gold, all in my
Mistress honor, which (how much it pleased me to see commended by so many sweet
voices) you your self may soon imagine.

This done, after they had carried her up and down for a certain space, and
that the Lions (being wearied) had reposed themselves, all the Nymphs gathered
themselves together in a round, and holding hands one with another, they began
to sing sweetly again in the praise of their Queen; ringing out this peale
with their notes, sounding (like sweet Bells) as follows.

Another.

Now must the Gods above,
And all the heavens that move,
Of Diana praises sing,
That may hereafter ring.
Now must me with knot fine,
The Laurel green combine:
With th'oliue, that his hair,
May be adornd were fair.
O Cibile, whom the skies
Does worship reverently:
Give us of Flowers gay,
That Garlands make we may:
Ye Muses that do chaunt,
And of worlds honor vaunt:
Give us Invention still,
From forth your sacred hill.
O Maias learned Son,
Give us a hunnie tongue:
And with thy rods us touch,
That we may pleasure much,
Ye Gods and Goddess.
Beston your worthiness:
That we may celebrate,
Our noble Princess state.
Who with renow^^e does live.
Whose deeds forth honor give:
A thing most worthy it is,
To praise what worthy is.
Then each where we will tell,
Her glory does excel:
(Fair) we of thee will sing,
And make our song to ring,
Of thee and of thy acts,
Of thy victorious facts.
Thy beauty we le not hide,
Which in thy looks does bide;
Being full of Majesty,
Whilst thou most worthily,
For chastity do gain,
What Hippolit did (stain)
Live then, and die thou namer,
But be thou crowned for ever,
With Coronet divine,
Becoming wearing thine.
And never may thy heart,
Feel sorrow, teene or smart.
Still may thy virtue yield,
Flowers fit, for such a field.
And ore Love dominere,
And with thy looks him fear.
Daunt such as ouer-bold,
Thy honor dare behold.
Let us right glory find,
Within thy peerlesse mind.
Celestial things still love,
What mort all is nere prove.
This only of thy beauty,
We sing as is our duty.
And though thou in thy heart,
More firm and loyal art
Then loyatie it self, (wealth)
(Since Love, takes place fore
May we of thee alone,
Ay think, or else of none.
So death it self may have,
No power thee for to brant.
So may thou always flourish,
Although we die and perish.
Like Phoebus Lawrall green,
That fresh is always seen.
So will we wish, that care
Thy Feature nere impair.
And that what thou do crave,
Thou ever may it have.
That black despair, thy soul,
With thoughts may nere control.
And that no grief may cease
On thee, to wound thy peace.
That Jove may ding the down
Who on thy good do frown.
And envious are through spite,
To see how thou shinst bright.
Since all the Gods do show,
Their power here below.
(A sign tha^le thee defend,)
Unto the world his end.
Then fear not, for they will
Protect, and shield thee still.
Whilst thy (...) shall shine,
Increasing time from time.
Enfranchising with joy,
Thy self free from annoy.
To the end thou help us may,
Whom (only) we obey.
Fair) then these verses take,
Which we pen^e for thy sake.
Our selves, nor life, our soul,
Do as thou please control.
By all thy deeds of honor,
Which thou hidst in a manner.
DEAR, gra^^^t this Boon, past be,
It Is (all) we bog of thee.
How pleasing this song was unto mine ears, you may (kind Father) easily
suppose, seeing it was so much in the commendation of my Lady: for the
faithful Lover indeed, makes more account of the honor and credit of his
Mistress, then of his own, and whosoever does otherwise, is not a true servant, but
a despitefull enemy.

This feast continued a long time, being both grievous, and gladsome unto me;
first grievous, because I could not have thee company of my dear Diana, and
then joyful, to see how much it did redowne unto her honor.

For the desire of glory is so sweet, that as sugar sweetneth such things as
are most bitter, so it makes all pains and troubles seem light and pleasant:
I wishing in my mind, that my FAITH might grow to be famous, rather then mine
own self, which was the reason, I did the better endure to be absent from
her, because I perceive that it was for her renown. This made me have patience
perforce, which I easily brooked, by reason I saw that in my mind during all
these Solemnities pleased me, as much as that thing did, for which I so eagerly
and earnestly attended and looked for.

Willingly would I have thrust my self amongst them to dance, to have
assisted therest, according unto my slender power, and to have (the more)
praised my Lady, but I durst not, neither would they have received me into
their company, I knowing, that mortal things ought not to be mingled with
divine, and that nothing could unite and join together the high Empire of
Inpirer, with the base ruling of Caesar. Yet in the mean time, I was so
foolish in my conceits, that (I thought) it grieved my Dear, because she could
not have leisure to speak unto me: but I was far wide from the matter, for
the pleasure and glory which environed her round about, drowned all other
imaginations, excepting only that, wherewith she was so highly honored.

And had not this carried her mind away, and busied it about the same, yet had
she never (so much) as once thought upon me, because she did not affect me at
all: neither bare me any good will, but as she did ordinarily unto others.

Such is the humor of Lovers, that judge every one by their own selves, as if
it were necessary and expedient that every one should be as fond, as they
themselves are foolish. What should I say more, but that as one ravished
through too much joy, I beheld my Goddess so earnestly, and with such zeal,
as I persuaded my self, she was the true Goddess indeed: and thereupon I
imagined, that she being raised to so high a dignity, would (no more account
of me, then she had done heretofore) of my verses: for (commonly) prosperity
makes men insolent and proud. And yet again, I was not a little glad of her
good Fortunes, because I gessed that by that means, none could rightly blame
me, for being an Attendant upon so excellent a Virgin as she was: who was so
respectively used of all sorts.

Passing well did I like of their Devises and Sonnets, but only for one thing,
which was, that in one place, they prayed and wished her, that she should not
make account of Love: and this one word was it, that made me think the worse
of all the rest of the Song: as one limb of a man cut off from his body,
deformeth all the rest of his personage.

But you need not to wonder, that I took this matter so hainously, for I
(forsooth) thought I had some interest in her, when indeed there was no such
thing. I afterward bethinking my self, that if she would have disposed of her
self to love, she then would have chosen some one far more worthy then I
was, on whom to cast her good liking.

Nevertheless, I excused the Nymphs, for that which they had said, knowing
that it pleased their Princess well, to make such a motion unto her: and the
rather, because I thought I was not likely (in have) to be the man whom she
meant to affect. What will you more? The feast (was now) at an end, my Lady
took again her own former apparel, returned unto her old place and meadow,
and there lived as she was wont to do.

No sooner did I see her, but that I played the humble Publican, looking upon
her a sarre off, and not once daring to approach nigh unto her: doubting least
I should find her more hautie and furlie then before-times, by reason of her
great advancement, and good fortunes bestowed on her. And yet I hoped my verses
would be an occasion that I should have access unto her, although (to say the
truth) I feared greatly that she would not much care, neither for them, nor for
me: Holding them (thus) in my hand, and not daring to present them unto her.
One while I took them out of my pocket, thinking to offer them unto her, and
so stood doubtful between both what to do: Not unlike unto a young scholar,
who (whilst he is going unto his master, to crave license to go play) has
many conceits running in his head, not daring (when he comes before him) to
beg leave, for fear least he should be denied.

Oftentimes I repented me that ever I had devised them, seeing I had lost so
much time and leisure to write them out^o fair, and now was ready to tear
them in pieces.

In the end, I took courage, knowing the worst was but a deny all: hoping
well of her, because I was well assured that the fruits of the Muses were
honored and esteemed, even of their own enemies, yea and of the most worst
and leaudest people in the world.

Drawing nigh then, I (presently) perceived the excellency of my Mistress
spirit, for I found her more affable then she was, before she had been so much
advanced in houor. I saw her to be one of those wise Sages, who are neither
puffed up with advancement of good Fortune, nor taken down, through too
extreme miseries of the same. I perceived that firm constancy lodged in her
soul, and that she carried the same countenance in prosperity, as she would
have done, if she had been in adversity.

Marius the noble Roman, deserving no more to be drawn with one and the
selfsame countenance always, then she was, when neither joy nor sorrow could
change her. After I had with a solemn Conge, and low cursie, delivered my
verses unto her, she with a mild look accepted them, and as me thought,
liked indifferently well of them: For never did she give over, until she had
thoroughly red them. Whilst I (In the mean time) fearing like the criminell,
who doubtfully attends the award, either of life or death) began to
consider within my self, of her virtue, mine eyes beholding her beauty, my
heart contemplating upon her glory, and all my senses trembling for fear,
least I should have offended her: Judge then, in what an extremity I was, when
being as it were in an ecstasy, I could not so much as once move my hands, not
stir my foot, from off the place where I stood, resembling that senseless
Statue of the Sun, which the Rhodians made so much account of.

No sooner had she red them, but that she began thus courteously to speak
unto me. Employ not any more (good Shepherd) thy time thus, who am not
worthy thereof. For if thou take this small and homely beauty of mine to be
the subject of thy Muse, assure thy self, that then thou soon wilt want
matter.

To things perfect, are praises due, and not unto imperfect, and to such silly
Creatures as I am. Rob not so many Heroical spirits, and exquisite wits,
of thy verse, when they deserve it so rightly. Nor do not bestow the same on
me, who knows not what it is to do well, whereby I may merit praise.

Ill does he employ his Muse, or rather profane it, who bestows it about
the commendations of imperfect things, because the nature thereof being divine,
it ought not to discourse, but of divine and celestial subjects. Homer never
sung of Thersistes, nor of thousands more of Greeks, unworthy to be named:
but only of stout Achilles, of valiant Hector, of prudent Ulysses, and of
venturous Ajax, with such others.

Change then thy Theme, and make the world see by some rare work of thine,
how much thou art able to do through the power of the Muses: and that thou art
fit and worthy to describe the valiant and Martial exployts of peerlesse and
Princely Potentates, in a proud and lofty flile.

We ought not to wear our wedding garment upon working days. That which
justly appertains unto God, ought to be rendered unto him: and after him, that
which is due unto Princes, and so then unto meaner persons, every one their
own, according unto their estate and degree.

More delight shall I take to read thy verses, when they shall be filled with a
stately vain, and when they shall sound forth the Martial praises of such
great States, as shall every way deserve the same: and yet I will not refuse
these thou have bestowed on me, but will keep them, because they are excellent
pleasing: Marie (hereafter) I would advise thee to spend thy time better, and
to write of some grauer matter, and of more importance then heretofore thou
have done: that neither Time, not Death, may be able to destroy the same. I
being emboldened with this her speech, stayed not long to answer her, replied
thus.

Fairest, amongst the most fair, and worthy to be accounted wise, amongst the
wisest; Although I cannot choose but confess, that virtue is of so great
puissance and force, as she is able to command out souls, to dispose of our
hearts, as she shall think best her self.

Yet cannot she let and hinder Honor, to pra^^ and commend what is most
worthy. The more wise folks refuse glory, the more will glory follow them,
and honor them: And the more folks pursue the same, the more it flies away
from them, and disdaineth them.

The body cannot move, nor live without soul: No more can virtue be without
glory. If the Gods themselves hold thee for fair, for virtuous, and for
wise, and if the immortal Nymphs make account of thee for such a one, and
respect thee for the same; Why then will thou refuse this small praise my
mournful Muse gives thee?

If I am deceived, so are the Gods deceived: If I err, the Nymphs have erred.
And if I have done amiss, so have all the Demy-gods of the Forest likewise.
But gracious Diana, no man can do amiss, in imitating the Gods, in as much as
they are not subject unto vice, and for that they use not to sin. Why then
do thou blame me, in that I follow them?

Penelope, so renowned for chastity, has never been of that worth that thou
art of: nor Cassandra more learned. Helene was never more beauteous, nor Enone
more wise: whilst in the mean time, every one of these (for one only rare gift
that was within them) have caused thousands of Poets to sweat in their praises:
why then should thou who art possessed of all these goodly virtues alone,
refuse that honor which is so rightly due unto thee?

But alas, what say I? Great reason have thou to refuse such a poor praise, as
comes from one so simple and weak a Poet as my self. For the glory which
the ignorant give unto the wise, may rather be termed a discredit, then ame
honor unto them. Yet such as I am, I beseech you accept of me: imitating
Alexander the great, who cherished and graciously entertained, as well bad, as
good writers, as did blazon forth his praise. For although (through want of
skill) the ignorant man fails very much of this mark, by reason he cannot
explain and show forth the effects of his good will as he desires; yet
cannot it let him from manifesting the good will it self: which always is
accounted for the first part of the work. Permit then, my poor Muse, to
celebrate thy renown: thou being far more fairer then the Cassandra of great
Ronsard, more chaste then the Oliua of Hunny, mother Bellay, and more perfect,
then the Diana of courteous De Reports.

For a more divine subject, my Muse could never choose; my pen could never write
of a daintier matter; my wit could never find a fairer field to walk in; nor
my tongue, a sweeter Theme whereon to discourse. And should thou deny me,
yet would I not give over to praise thee: for not only do I hold thee worthy
to be worthy thereof, but also account thee the only she, that heercafter I
will celebrate and make famous, as mine only Lady and Mistress.

(Shepherd answered she) affection oftentimes blinds the eyes of the wise,
and good will is ever partial in the praises of his friends. What soever a man
loves, that (never) seems soul nor deformed: because Desire is the child
of fair, pleasa^^ and agreeable things, and for that none will covet that
which he thinks or, imagines to be loathsome or deformed.

And this is the reason that many have praised vice, and discommended Virtue:
writing most foolishly, as their passions have led them, without respecting, or
once having any regard unto the Truth it self.

Dido was reported by Virgil to be amorous and wanton: yet was she chaste.
Ulysses by Homer, to be more valiant then Alax, whom he durst not look in the
face. And Aeneas ^o be pitiful, and godly unto his Country, and yet it was
he, that (most ungodly) betrayed the same unto his enemy.

Poets write according unto their own humors, when they please, but not
according as the Truth it self is indeed. And so thy forward affection only,
and not the night, thrusts thee forward, to take pen in hand in my behalf.
But what may thou expect to follow upon the same (hereafter) but only that
men will say of thee, as I have said of Homer and Virgil, that thy fancy has
made thee to affect and commend, that which was not any way praise-worthie of
it self. Thou will stand me in no other steed, then to revive the memorial of
mine imperfections after my death, which were far better to be buried with me
in my grave, then to be bruited abroad.

Content thee, therefore I pray thee, and let it be sufficient that I am known
to be full of defects now I am alive, without making me to be remembered for
such (hereafter) when I shall be dead. If thou love me (as thou make a
show thou do) then love my memory also: for we ought not so much to
respect things present, which we see whilst we live, as we should do those
that are to come hereafter. The reason is for that we may find some one
remedy. For the first, whilst we remain (here) in this world. But for the
latter we cannot: because we are not (here) to make means for the same. Be
not then the occasion that my name shall be called in question, when (for that
I am then dead) I cannot come to excuse my self as I would.

For happy are such worthy persons, as leave no remembrance of their
Imperfections, after they are gone out of this world, least the people should
call again unto mind their faults, and so condemn them for the same: And
also thy verses (testifying the great affection and good will thou bear me)
will also show apparently my defects, and what was amiss in me.

For who doubts but that Lovers (in respect of the great love they bear unto
their Ladies) hide under the colors of their smoothe and dainty kind of
Enditings, all the faults and defects they have, be they never so foul?

There is none so vehement a passion as Love, neither is there any thing that
does so much wrong to Truth as that does: in such wise, as women should rather
take these praises, for a discredit, then for a credit unto them, which they
receive of their Lovers. And this is mine opinion, which all the persuasions in
the world shall never make me change.

Fair Nymphs (replied I then) because Love is mighty and celestial,
therefore does he never intermeddle amongst the basest and meanest creatures,
especially with such as are deformed. For never is there any hard favored
face beloved. Who (then) will believe otherwise, but that Lady that shall be
found to be honored by ^ grave Poet, is otherwise then a most perfect and
accomplished Creature every way, seeing perfection (only) has authority over
our souls, which hates as much the thing that is deformed, as it adoreth that
which is fair.

How exquisite and excellent a Virgin was the fair Laura of renowned Petrar^^
and how much have his works brought lively credit unto her praises? The Muses
never sung of unworthy subjects ^ And although some may think, that a Poet can
make huge Elephant of a little Fly, yet cannot he commend an dishonest matter,
and worthy of reproach (although he feign would.) Because the Muses (who are
the sounding Tru^^ pets of Heroical minds) would oppose themselves against
him.

No, no, fair (Dame) chaste and modest writings never alter the honor of any
Gentlewoman. Many have written of Lucretia, and their discourses have made her
the more famous, throughout the whole world. For as the remembrance of
infamous person is much detested and hated by the Muses: So is the glory and
renown of the ven^ous installed by them in eternal memory for ever.

What are men but dust, if the Muses should not make them survive after they
are dead, and live in the world again? He never leaves this world, whom the
Muses do grace so much, as to paint his egregious Acts in the Temple of
memory, when his successors and succeeders behold him continually, with
great admiration and wonder, by which means he dies no more, then such
sacred and noble minds, do, who are obliged and bound unto the Muses, as
Achilles and Hector were, with diverse other.

Refuse not (then, gracious Nymph) the commendations of my Muse, although too
base for thee, which shall never cease, nor give over, to sing of thy virtues,
according unto thine own mind and pleasure. For the Muses are the waiting
Gentlewomen of Virtue, and are bound to reserve the memories of all such as
have lived (...), and with honor: So that if Virtue force her own enemies, to
reverence her? much more can she compel the Muses to do the like, they being
obliged by duty to be always at her call, and to attend upon her.

Scipis the great, after he had given over Rome, was daily visited by the
Pirates of the Sea: which men (although in their own proper nature) they were
cruel and wicked, yet nevertheless were they forced by reason of his virtue, to
honor him, coming so far out of their way, only to see so famous a
Captain, and kissing his victorious hands, as if he had been some great God.

So Casar likewise, after he was taken prisoner by certain Rouers of the
Seas, was much respected of the same Thieves for his virtue, although he
threatened them, to hang them, when he should come on land. Deny not then
(divine Da^^^zell) the fruits of my Muse, but give her leave to do her good
will, who hash vowed to praise thee, although thou forbid the same.

I will not then hinder thee (answered the Nymphe,) because I see thou art
resolute Yet this I will tell thee, that as it is a pleasant pastime to labor
and sow, where a man may reap the fruit thereof again, with increase: So is
it most grievous and intolerable, when one shall toil and sweat, night and
day, and yet obtain no recompense for the same. When thy Muse shall have
composed thousands of verses in mine honor, and when thou have made whole
volumes, perined and endited at large, written wholelie for my credit, yet what
profit do thou hope for at my hands: Or what shall thou get thereby?

They say, that Baccus and Cupid, as they were one day going a hunting, caught
Minerua in their Nets: If so it were, (no doubt) it was with her own
consent. For I do not think, that any can force one to love or affect him,
whether the party will or no.

Neither shall thy writings, nor thy persuasions, ever take me in their
Trappes; For where the Judge is just and vncorrupt, there is no altering, nor
wresting of Justice, nor can his virtue be dimmed or abused with presents or
gifts.

So likewise, never look for any commodity by thy study, at my hands: For
so should I buy them too too dear; Inasmuch, as nothing is to be rated at so
high a price, as our good Name or Fame is. For every thing that is lost, may be
recovered else again, but the loss of this, is deplorable, and altogether
impossible to be obtained, when it is once gone.

But say I should believe thee, and yield unto thee in this point, that thy
love toward me is sacred and just, yet art thou so simple, to think that
those that shall come hereafter, will imagine the same? and that they will
judge (thy flowring youth) and the springtide of thy life, having been spent
in my behalf, and for mine occasion, thou have found no recompense nor guerdon
of me, for so great pains? So that if whilst I live, I can hardly keep mine
honor from blame, yet when I am dead, I cannot preserve it from the suspicion
thereof, it being become a prey unto most venomous and slanderous tongues; For
this I will tell thee (Shepherd) the presence of a man (oftentimes.)
withholdeth many things from being spoken against his credit and good name,
which when he is absent, the mischievous and malignant sort will not stick to
report and blaze abroad.

And although I know that every kind of friendship is not dishonest, but that
many have loved for pure virtue only: yet can we not let every one from
speaking as they shall please, and it is left unto the conceits of those, as
shall be then living, to think according unto their own humors and will, and
to believe as they list, because there is none to forbid them the contrary.

But in the mean space, how many is there in the world, that will rather
speak ill then well, and give forth bad speeches, then once think good
thoughts, especially such kind of people as speak of spite, who because they
are bad themselves, therefore they will report maliciously of others, that are
better then themselves, only of ill will, and for nothing else.

These reasons make me take small taste in thy writings, when they shall
prove more damageable then profitable unto me, and chiefly, if by their
means, I chance to be defamed any way; For, for glory only (it being
accompanied with virtue) may mortal men account themselves worthy, both of
the name of men, and of immorrall renown, and not for any thing else.

Gracious Lady and Mistress (replied Arcas) is it possible that the Sun
should shine at midday, and yet not be seen with our eyes? And can any be so
blind, as to take that glorious Lamp for night, seeing so many bright and
glittering beams to issue from the same?

And so likewise, do you think it is likely, that any one dare be so
shameless and impudent, to slander the spotless virtue of an immaculate
Virgin, whom every one knows to be both prudent and chaste?

Those that are replenished with virtue, can never blame such a one, because
she is as they are, and resembles her: And if the vicious and foolish seek
to backbite her, then does her glory increase the more. For that they see (by
daily experience) that she is nothing unto them, in as much as in malicious
sort, they seek to oppugn and rise up against her.

And if this (which you say) should be true, then should the world think ill
of so many worthy and virtuous women, who are commended in the works of
diverse Poets. Then should Cassandra the Troyan, Penelope, Pelixena, Portia,
Lucretia, Alcesta, and diverse others, be but hardly thought of which
nevertheless, we see commended throughout the world: there not being found any
of so foul a tougue, that dare to speak against them.

No, no, it is not so easy a matter to bury and interre the glory of the
virtuous, for virtue shines still, in despite of all her enemies, although
they seek (but yet in vain) by many strong and subtle devises to eclipse and
overthrow the same.

And though Virgill have written against modest Dido, yet is she made famous
for her honesty, and so accounted of (despite) of such as thought to darken
and smother such rare and admirable virtues, as were within her.

Upon diverse considerations, and with diverse kind of conceits, have the
learned written of women: And an easy matter is it, to judge by the style, by
the phrase, and by the affection of the writer, if they were chaste and
virtuous or no: For it is not possible that he that describes an dishonest
woman (and of whom he has had his pleasure) can carry that awful respect,
that temperate moderation, and that dutiful fear in his style toward her; as
well, and in as good order, as that man that does blazon forth (although he
loves her well) the admirable virtues of a chaste and modest Lady, because
one cannot (although he would) respect or fear, that which is his own, or
rather is in Common, as well unto others, as unto himself.

But of her that is chaste, sober, and well qualified, a man cannot speak, but
with great advise, and mature deliberation, as when we speak of the Gods,
because we have no interest in her.

Then is it but a hard interpretation, to think that the modest and regardfull
writings, of a loyal Lover, bring any disparagement unto the fair virtues of
his lovely Mistress: when she shall so highly be praised, in that she has with
stood so many strong assaults of such as have laid battery against the
invincible Fort of her admirable chastity, and when every one shall see, and
read, of her more then rare qualities, drawn and painted forth in their
lively and right colors, with the cunning pensill of the lofty verse of her
most faithful servant.

And after this manner (O divine Diana) do I pretend to write of thee, and
make thee famous, and when thou find that I mean otherwise, then let most
shameful death befall me; defacing and overthrowing me, and my writings, as
most unworthy to be seen, or looked upon, or (once to be remembered) within
the memories of man.

But yet (answered the Nymph) I would feign know what you shall get by loving
me? For never shall you find (as long as I live) that I will be Scholar unto
Love, so cruel and unjust a Master he is.

And to prove that this is true by example, seeing no reason will satisfy
you, I will not stick to take the pains to tell you a strange history.

Hereupon, fair Diana placing her self in the midst of the other Nymphs
(who as I) were ravished at her great wisdom, began to recount her
Tragedy, with a most pleasing grace, in this sort following.

About what time the earth (withouten sowing) plentiously,
Brought unto men their Harvest rich, (and that continually)
When as the wished for bearded Corn, which Ceres forth does bring,
Waxt ripe, without all cockle bad, in fields fair glistering.
When bended Trees, in Autums rain, with burdens there did groan,
So full of fruit they hung, without deceiving any one.
When every hedge a vineyard was, and that in goodly show,
Thousand, and thousand bunches thick, of grapes each where did grow.
When as the harmless flocks of beasts, and thick-woolld bleating sheep,
Did rou^ themselves abroad alone, and on the mountains keep.
When all the long day, Heads of Cattle grazde every where,
Withouten doubt of Wolf, or Fox, of Tiger or of Bear.
When Elmes and Reech, with stately Oaks, drop honey down amain,
Which on the plants and tender herbs, in deawie wise did rain.
Before that any thunder crack, and lightnings flashie blast,
On flintie marble Rocks did seize, and them in midst brast.
When all was quiet, full of peace, and when this self same place,
Blessed Astrea with her gifts most happily did grace.
When fire and sword, hard Iron and steel, were banished away,
Which (at the first) the causers were, of worlds and man's decay.
When that in steed of blood and war, was nothing but mild peace,
Which made the earth, with thousand joys, to flourish and increase.
In that blessed time and happy age, a Shephear desse did live,
To whom (all) for her beauty rare, the palm and prize did give.
Thrice happy Stella was she cl^apt, and well she might be so,
For never star in firmament, more fair and bright did show.
As Luna when in midst of pride she shows, in frostie night,
With sparkling lights, attended on; so shon her beauty bright.
But yet (alas) the mortal woes, and hard end she did pass,
Did testify but too too well, that she not happy was.
The names of things to the natures often; accord and well agree,
And yet to the names, the natures (often) discordant show to be.
Malicious LOVE, as subtle spy, abounding in all malice,
Amongst sweet pleasures, seeks to sow errors and shameful vice.
He likes (alife) sorrow and grief, to chop our joys among,
And pleasure ours, to turn to pain, the more to do us wrong.
Jealous he is of mortals good, of their sweet ease and rest,
And in their actions (them to cross) he makes an vsualliest.
This made him cast himself into the eyes of this maid fair,
Which as a torch scru de for to set a fire most deadly care.
Of her bright glaunces (diammds right) he forged all his darts,
With which he (as merciful) did pierce the loyalst hearts.
Her flaxen hairs were bands, wherewith (as Conquor) he controld,
And bound most fast, the souls that were most wariest and most bold.
Of her sweet smiles and pleasing speech, he made a luring bait,
Through which, to ravish mind and sense he (covert) lay in wait.
As with the sound of his rare. Harp, when Orpheus used to sing,
Hard stubborn Rocks and liuelesse woods, he forced to follow him.
As beasts and Birds did tend on him, as ghastly spirit of hell:
To list to Music his, of their own minds did them compel.
And as the fowler sly, by note of his deceitful pipe,
The simple Bird (unwittingly) arawes in his net to light.
And as the adamant, that nere by lightning takes flawe,
The Iron by a secret power unto him close does draw.
So by the lovely smiles, and by the sugared speech and grace,
Of this rare Damozell, Love did charm the minds of men apace.
By th'unnie of her dainty tongue, they too too credulous,
Themselves did offer for to fall in danger perilous.
Now in this place lived Shepherds twain, the proprests of all others,
Instuture tall, and upright height, there were not two such Lovers.
Nor were they only goodly wights, but strong withal and stout,
Often they the Bear and Lion chaste the Forest all about.
For hunting (at that time) was al^ their sport and their delight,
This pleasing travail being the life, that pleased them aright.
Nor was (as then) known unto them, Bellonas bloody rage,
Nor did vain Love seek them to vex, in prime of their green age.
No brawles, nor loud debates among them, was there, them for to grieve,
Old Saturn in the golden world, more happier did not line.
(Withouten tilling,) store of corn came forth of fruitful field,
Withouten dressing viniards aught, the Viniards, grapes did yield.
Their beasts increast, Sanus taking pain, their Muttons brought forth wool;
Their bleating Ewes with skipping Lambs were always big and full.
But now (behold) in Ambuscade, how Love does lie always,
Meaning with uncouth cruelties, his honor more to raise.
Sezing upon them (through his might) and on their liberties,
The better for to make them taste of his disloyalties.
For one day as those harmless Swains did homewards come amain,
Half windelesse, and half wearied in pursuing of their game,
Each of them, a huge wild Boores head, holding within their hand,
Tirde with their sport they had abroad, dry, as they could scarce stand
To drink, and rest themselves awhile, they to a spring did come,
Whose water was as cold as Ice, and clear as any Sun.
A stately Rock from forth the foot, did issue of this spring,
Bout which, a thousand Cipresse Trees stood thick innironing.
Into this Fountain (as they say) a Nymph was chaungde sometimes,
(And it might well be) for most bright and glorious like it shines.
Round all about the same, of Turfs most green was there a seat,
By artificial Nature framde, most pleasnt and most neat.
Here meant they to repose themselves, and here they meant to lie,
Whilst with this water cool, they sought to quench their thirst ore dry.
But as they thought to lay them down upon this bankeside cold,
They might a wondrous beauty rich, soundly to sleep behold.
And Stella fair it was, for then, Shepherds might at that time,
A midst Shephear desses sleep, without suspect of crime.
(As then) their modest chastity to stain, each one did fear.
For, as they in their minds were chaste, so they in body were.
Amazde they stood at this sweet face, their drought they had forget,
For now another thirst then that, did dry them far more hot.
Nor cared they (now) for to sleep, all sleep they banished quite,
Whilst they as dreaming stood, to view such an unlooked for sight.
They play the wanton Lovers (now) whilst with their rolling eye,
They nothing do but only mark how sweetly she does lie.
As senseless Rock, Sanus power they seem, nor can they stir or rise,
Nor other pleasure take they, but to mark her with their eyes.
Mean time, this beauteous face, which them does gently to her train,
Smiles, as she sleeps, to see how they do blush (overcome with shame.
So is he daunted, who orebold with ouer-daring wink,
That's able for to look against the Sunnie beams does think.
So such as are presumptuous, did too too fondly stare
Upon Medusa, into stones, and flints, soon changed were.
Our Shepherds (so being ravished) would never lin nor rest,
To view one while her lovely face, and then, her milke-white breast.
Another while they mark her long and yellow flaxen hair,
Which gentle winds (as waves of Seas) did moan, now here, now there.
Not half so fair the golden locks of stubborn Absolon
Showed, as were hers, nor did they seem so trim, to look upon.
Her forhead large, they then did view, as smooth as any Iet,
Where (often) the Graces, in their pride (to make them merry) met.
Nor they forgot her Eielids small, which Love with his pure fire,
Had somewhat blackish made to seem, the more to breed desire.
Rare Eielids, which through her two spheres, even among the very Gods,
(Through kind of shadowing sweet) did make them more admirde by ods.
Her eyes as then they could not view, her eyes with Diamonds right,
Which, when they opte, the heaven, did show, discovering true delight.
Then to her matchless mouth they come, most dainty, Sanus compare,
How often wished they it to kiss, but that they durst not dare.
A just report did them debar, so much for to forget
Themselves, as that to do which might be unto them a let.
Whereby their Ladies afterward they might offend and grieve,
Which (fore a loyal Lover so would do) he would not ^iue.
Upon her cherrie lip, where die of Gillsflowers did flow,
The damask Rose along the same, ran spredding too and fro.
Her beauteous cheek, most freshly shewde, like the Vermillion flower,
Cheeks, which (hearts made of flintie Rock) for to contro^de, had power.
Her dimpled chinne, and snowy neck, the Tower of statelines,
Not Iunos neck so seemly showed, and Vents, far was less.
So were her breasts imbellished with riches manifold,
Ah who so fair a sight could see, and not be ouerbold?
There was the bosom which did part the milkie way aright,
That leads into the golden field, the center of delight.
There were those sacred mountains twain, where perfect joy does rest.
None mount those hallowed hills, but such as borne were to be blessed.
O pleasure vnconceiu'd, to have the grace them for to touch,
But to have license them to kiss, to die it were not much.
Her supple hand in seemly sort did lie, and comely wise,
Her fingers such, as fault to find in them none could denise.
And last of all (though covered) stretched out her round cl^^ne f^^^s,
Supporter of that building brave, of beautions form the root.
The rest (and better part) lay hid, yet what was to be seen,
(To make one lose his liberty) enough and more had been.
Had Jove seen one but half so fair, he had of her estee^d,
Mars would have yeelden, Phoebus s^de, and well of her (...).
Thus at one time, these Shepherds twain^, are feign to be in love,
Whilst one and selfsame grief, they both ^^st at one time (...).
Their souls are touched to the quick, with this one (...),
Of thousand amorous wishes sweet, they (...).
LOVE, has two arrows, one of gold (...),
The others lead, and that does quench by (...).
The One on the sudden pierces, but the other does no harm,
The One does increase the fire, the other against it is at harm.
These two strange darts of Cupid proud, Stella felt in her (...),
The One forced her love, but the other did all ^one with check contr^^^^.
One of these Shepherds she did like, the other she (...)
Did hate, against the silly wretch a monstrous spite she (...).
The One Coridon was called, whom she in heart (...)
The other, Aridon, into a hard Rock attered.
But now (to come where as we left) our Shepherdess does (...).
And lifting up her head, she leave (as then), of sleep did take.
For she was frighted with a dream, that did not please her well,
A dream (that as an Oracle) did her (...).
But when she saw these Shepherds twain, she (...),
To see them lie so night to her, she wonder did the more.
Yet this her wondering, her became the better, cause she blushed,
Whilst she more fair did show, when through her face the color flasht.
Her eyes she cast on the ground, and at (...) so look,
By them (upon the soden) she durst not upon them to look.
That done, with sad and heedfull ear, she does about her prit,
Lest, what not comely had been, they about her (...)
In the end, she finds all well, not much (...)
Who doubts some theenes, but having found (...), their does not fe^^e.
Mean time, poor Cloridou, who is perplexed most dangerus,
Takes heart at grass, whilst boldly he, gins to accost her thus,
Fair light of my best life, why art thou thus possessed with care,
When heauent themselves, they virtuous life, hurt cannot, nor once dare?
Chaste is thy soul, virtuous thy mind, most beautiful thy face,
No Tiger fierce, or Lion fell, thy beauty dare disgrace.
The devils themselves cannot thee hurt, why doubts thou? things divine,
Are not (as mortal be) to shame subject at any time.
The Gods, have made thee goodly, that the heavens might honor thee,
Our spirits, are bodies framde, that thou by us mighst worshipped be.
Thee will we serve in humble wise, with dutiful respect,
Nor whilst we live (as us becomes) our duties we will neglect.
Then sacred Saint, thy self assure, my soul thus languishing,
No bad conceit through carriage mine, to thee shall ever bring.
No rash attempt (indecently) shall make me ouerbold
With her (...) home Mistress of my heart, and my chief good I hold.
Then do all dread abandon quite, look merry, and be blithe,
For we both honor thee, and for thy Love contend and strine.
So said the Shepherd, whilst that Love did shoot in cunning wise,
Fancies swift darts into his heart, which came from Stellas eyes,
From Stellas eyes, who now begins to fell an uncouth flame,
And who does find (as Cloridan) to bide the selfsame pain.
She finds she forced is to love, although against her will,
And more she seeks him to expel, the more be en^reth still.
The Shepherds words are wounds to her, and pierce her like a dart,
His speeches breaches be, which soon make entrance in her heart.
And now (on soden) Cloridon she likes (and sowell,)
As (in her sight) for beauty he does only hear the bell.
And so likewise does Cloridan think of his dainty Love,
Vowing within his soul, that death shall not her thence (...).
So in the Phrigian forest thick, when Paris liu de (...).
In Enons Love (he was intrapt) and (for the same) did (...),
Of whose dear love, that loyal Nymph so highly did esteem,
As after he was slain, to mourn for him she (ai^) was seen.
But Stella somewhat fearful now, and blushing in this case,
Unto her Shepherd thus replide, with comely bashful grace.
A worthy Shepherd (like thy self) I never doubted yet,
That (for to offer wrong to me) his honor would forget.
The mind that generous is indeed, and does for gl^ris made.
Is nere so base, as to abuse a silly harmless maid.
His honor he does holy wrack upon discredits shelfe.
That having others conquered brave, cannot overcome himself.
It better him becomes to bunt, the Lion or the Bare.
The greedy Wolf, wild Boore and fierce, then silly Da^^ze^ f^^e.
No glory it is, much for to force, or proudly to command,
As have no might, nor any power, such fury to withstand.
But I assure me of thy self, and that I trust thee th^^,
Thou see, I do not fly from thee, as one ore time (...).
Besides (with blushing) I confess, thou art the first of all,
That have against my will, enforct me follow Cupid^ call.
A soul thou have (that Love as now) compels to be thine,
Love that does both our hearts in one, in loyal bands combine.
That Love which makes me yield to thee for to be overthrown,
That Love, which Tyrant-like denies, that I shall be mine own.
Then look that in this love, thou do mine (...) still preserve,
It being all, that for our pains, me righly shall deserve.
For thou shall sooner Stella see in grave for to remain,
Before that any vicious soul, her virtuous life shall stain.
She Will rather die a thousand times, for constant amity,
The treasure is, which I do rate at endless price so hie.
Chastely to love in virtuous sort, is sure a worthy thing,
And heavens themselves to modest Love, a joyful end will bring.
Remember then what I do say, or trouble me no more,
Fair words without performance true, I loathe and do abore.
So Stella said, and Cloridan to hear these words of joy,
So ravished was, as now he quite forgot all former noy.
Nor could he speak for gladness, while his heart did leap within,
He knew not how to frame his tale, or which way to begin.
As dead men we, through overmuch displeasing grief, become,
So sudden pleasure overmuch, stops passage of our tongue.
Both the one and the other, oftentimes, us too too much does move,
Extremities of both (without a mean) we often prove.
Many through pleasure die, their days many do end through woe.
Grief kills our senses suddenly, and joy likewise does so.
And after winter, many storms and rainie shewers apace,
The Sun begins (by little) for to show to us his face.
The plants and Trees revive again, looking both fresh and green,
Which in the frostie season cold, through snow did lie unseen.
So at the last, the Shepherd got his wonted speech again,
And pleasure former dread and fear, did chase away (...)
Which being gone, as soon as time did breath to him afford,
In humbl^ wise, he once more thus began her for to board.
(Sweet Lady) since the law divine of Cupid heavenly king,
Such favors great does show to me, (not of my meriting)
And that I blessed am so, that to your heart mine tied is,
(A cause our chaste desires are like for to obtain rare bliss.)
And since our minds are so unite, and knit in bonds so strong,
As death it self with all his force, shall never do us wrong.
I vow for to be yours alone, hap ill to me or well,
Despite of destiny, despite of Fortune, spite of hell.
For to be loved of thy self, it passes, and is such,
As like no glory is on earth for to be found by much.
When Adon Venus did enjoy, so blessed was not he,
Nor Pirams love to Thisbe could, so hot and ardent be.
The Gods themselves in glory theirs, who are redoubtable,
In pleasure with me to compare cannot, nor are not able.
More fortunate am I then they, my heart is more content,
Then when Jove with Europa lived, and time away so spent.
A thousand Almours in my mind I feel for to be hid,
More sweet, then when Leander kind, embrace his Hero did.
With Paris vain, is Hellens joy compared unto mine,
My fancies are so sweet, they seem as if they were divine.
None is so happy as my self; the Ambrosia of the Gods,
Not so much likes them, as does my life like me, by ods.
Ah then amongst contentments such, do not me so much grieve,
As for to think to offer thee dishonor I would live.
No, no, I held thee too too dear, and at too high a rate,
And more of thee, I do esteem, then of mine own estate.
Wrong me not so, for from the heavens, the Sun shall swiftly fall,
And I my life will sacrifice, before that happen shall.
A great offense with punishment, most grievous plagued is,
Then think not i will forget my self, to do (so much) amiss.
And that I will perform my word my promise thou shall have,
So that (with leave) my mouth of thee this tinie Boon may crave.
Only to kiss thy sacred hand, is that which I request,
That hand of thine, which being touched, shall make me (living) blessed.
No other good (for all my pains) then this I will require,
For all my love, and my good will, I will no way desire.
Grant me my suit, that as my soul is ravished with thine eyes,
So by the same, may ravished be, my life, in selfsame wise.
Which if I shall obtain, i will judge, my joys for to abound,
And that (so happy as my self) no Lover lives on ground.
So said, his Mistress kind, to yield this favor is content,
Giving her hand to him, which he does kiss incontinent.
Thrice blessed hand, which through thy power, does quench so hot a flame,
And through thy gentle touch, the rage asswagest of the same.
She powers the drops of pity, on his more than burning fire,
And from his heart plucks forth those darts, there fixed through desire.
And now is Cloridan content, and cased of his smart,
He goes no farther, nor makes show from promise his to part.
Yet in his hope is comfort hid, he hopes well in his mind,
And in assurance he does live, some better good to find.
Mean space, Dan Phoebus leaves his work, his ta^ke he having done,
His place resigning, Sisters his, that she her course may run.
When being wearied of his toil, he gets him to highed,
Whilst Luna pale, amongst the clouds appears, with horned head.
This is the cause that Cloridan, half angry takes his leave,
Whilst homeward for to go, his heart with thousand thoughts does heave.
The day he does accuse, as one, unconstant wavering,
That dai'es nere long enough, when one hopes, that good twill him bring.
But he must pack from thence, and men the Gods ought to obey,
Who have as well the night ordained, as they did make the day.
His leave of Stella he does take, and prays her be so kind,
That he next morning in that place, her lovely self may find.
Which she does promise (half compeld) for Love does force her please
Her amorous Swain, and means to seek his torments for to ease.
And (now) both part, and go their ways, whilst vndershadowing tree,
They leave their bleating flocks to rest, which (there) in safety be.
For Woolues, no enemies (as then) were unto any beast,
The Tiger nor the Lion then, upon them neuerceast.
But Phoebus now was scarsely rose, his wonted course to make,
Nor to his brightsome Chariot had, his fiery horse betake;
Nor was Aurora stolen yet, from aged Tithon^ side,
To get unto Eudimion leu'd, and there with hi^^ to bide.
When Cloridan (whose mind did run upon his Mistress beauty,
(To whom he had devoted all his service and his duty)
Leapes from his couch, for he that hopes upon some good luck sweet,
To (come next day) has small desire to slumber or to sleep.
He to the old place makes have, to wait on those fair eyes,
Which spoil his rest, yet to his heart, are kind in gracious wife.
Mean time the Shepherd Aridon, that wretch most, miserable,
To find such like (as Cloridan had found) he was not able.
Most pitiously he languisheth, whilst Love and ^^ll his law,
He curses more then thousand times, of all his woes, the cause.
Feign would he leave to love, since he sees he can gain no grace,
And that the fruits of Love, he nere is like for to embrace.
But all in vain, his destiny he can no ways prenens.
Nor can he aught of ill resist, what powers divine have ^ent.
What he is able that he does, but what does it avail,
For man, LOVE to withstand, when Gods he forces for to quail?
But as the Heart being sore hurt, the more that he does seek
To ease him of his hurts, the more he worser is and week,
So Aridon, in thinking how to rid him of his grief,
The worser waxes still, and in the end, dies sans relief.
Nothing on earth the power of LOVE is able to control:
Like whirling Tempests, what denies, before him it does role.
So Aridon is not of strength, his feet for to retire,
From forth that place that burns him, with vnextinguisht Fire.
Whilst Cloridon within himself, does think how he is blessed,
Poor Aridon, his Fortunes bannes, from pleasures dispossessed.
Both equal in affection, but in comfort differing,
The One sighs for his woes, the other stands his joys often reckoning.
Both like in passions, but in luck, both too too contrary,
In pleasure the one consumes his life, the other for pain does die.
Until this time, the one unto the other was a friend,
Nor did the one against the other, mischievous hate pretend.
Before (as brethren sworn) they were, and so together lived,
What the one did like, the other loved, nor the one the other grieved.
But at the the last, fair Stellas love, (alas that should be so)
Causae this their amity to end, and less and less to grow.
The blinded Son of Mars, (who does his Fathers heir right prove)
Strife and discention takes from Sire (and from his Mother) LOVE.
For more he sets at variance, and whips with Discords rods,
Then be the hearts he subingates, and brings to Love by odds.
But now is Cloridan again unto that Spring returned,
Which quenched had the flame, in which before he woeful burnd.
The coming of his Dame he stays with great devotion.
For now to hunt the Sauadge Bore, he thinks not once upon.
His mind on Stella, only runs, (such is this sudden change)
As after Wolf, or Lion fierce, he cares not to range.
To her his heart he does deuote, and unto her prefer
His vital Powers (as pawnes of Love) engag'de be unto her.
The place he kisseth often, which with Flowers was strewde all ore,
Whereas his Mistress he had found to lie the day before.
Happy he called and counted them, more then a thousand times,
Them honoring, as if they had been some power of God divine.
He blessed their beauty, and did pray, that storm nor soking rain,
That Sithe, nor Plowe-share there might come, their beauty for to stain.
That neither Winters cold, nor Summers great heat, might there be seen,
But that they always fresh might show, with cooly shadow green.
Thus stays the Shepherd, wishing still, and still expects sore
Her coming, who (until she comes) each hour imagining four.
He thinks that for her he stays long, but when her company
He has, he then says Time runs fast, and too too soon does hie.
Lovers esteem not any time, excepting such a Day,
When they are sure their Mistresses, that they enioyen may.
Their beauteous presence is their Sun, it is their brightest Sun,
Their absence is their darkest Night, through which they are undone.
The earthly glory of the body, is the Sun and Light,
But (of our minds) the clear day is, fair beauty shining bright,
And this they reverently adore; The Essence of the soul,
Is far more excellent then that of body (sans control.)
Beauty attends on the soul; the Sun on body waits,
The Sun (for worth) to beauty then must yield in all conceit.
This makes the Swain most earnestly to listen with his ear,
If he, the rising of his Star, can see for to oppeare.
The smallest blast of wind, or leaf, that blows in any wise,
The Shepherd hearts, and at the noise thereof strait up does rise.
He look th wist I round about, and thinks her for to see,
Her, that does force him unto Love, a seruite slave to be.
Now does he think, that forth her house, she is coming unto him,
And (now) he judges in his mind, she is hard at hand agin.
He counts how sarre off she is, then up he starts on feet,
And forward runs, to see if he, her, on the way can meet.
But now, lest by some odd by-way she comes, he fears again,
And then he pensive sit him down, recounting of his pain.
At last, though (long it be) she comes more lovely then the Morn,
When rising an her glorious pride, she Thetis couch does scorn.
Softly she comes, with Snaile-like pace, and to her self does speak,
Whilst fear (for loss of her good name) makes her look pale and bleake.
And as she is coming in her walk, in midst of thickest wood,
She more then (often) stays her steps, and doubting so, she stood.
Half ready to turn back, to break her promise that was past,
(For honor, which full dear she held, such doubts did make her cast.)
But Love, then on the other side, and beauty of the Swain,
A thousand new desires afresh, did breathe in her again.
He t^lleth her, she is bound to keep the Oathe she made of yore,
(Although that no account is made, what eger Lovers swore)
For LOVE himself does mock and jest, to see how Lovers swear,
Lovers, (but none else) do dispense, with Oaths withouten fear.
In the end, the Nymph arriueth at the appointed Crystal spring,
Where pensive Cloridan does walk, his thoughts still cannesing.
Sometimes he lay upon the ground, with Flowers bedyapred,
Where Stella (but the day before) herself with sleep had f^d.
One while he rose, and then to lay him down you might him find,
Now this he did, now that, for Lovers troubled are in mind,
Thus (being out of hope) he spies, the sight that likes him most,
Which make new joy in every part, throughout his Coarse to cost.
Quickly he runs to her, her hands to kiss, he soon is pressed,
Whilst with a thousand sorts of Flowers he beautifieth her breast.
She seeing these two forward prancks, her face with blushing did^,
Whilst in her self (for this) she hears; how honor does her chide.
Aduising her to reprehend him and his leande demeanor,
And that before she yield, she should resign her lives sweet Tenor.
But Cupid makes her change her mind: The Shepherds beauty fair,
Mikes her ore-bold and from her mind, abandoneth all care.
She is resolude to use him kind, nor with him to find fault,
But him embraces in sweet wise, who her in acmes had caught.
Now all respect of honor, and all fear of future shame,
By power of Love were banished, who her had overcome.
Love only is her chiefest choice, her honor, and her pleasure,
The Shepherds will, her ready wish, her joy, and her chief treasure.
But (in the end) to cover this, their ouer-amorous rage,
Between themselves, they plight their faith, and promise Marriage.
The witnesses were Love, the Spring, and many colloured Flower,
And thousand pretty chirping Birds, there present at that hour,
All which, with cheerful warbling Note, Hymen, Hymen, sing,
And with the ECHO of the same, the woods made for to ring.
Whilst in mean time, our Lovers twain, within a bottom low,
(Of a close valley) where no light scarce in the day did show.
Did reap the long de for fruits of Love, both equal in desire,
Which ready was to burn their hearts, with more then uncouth fire.
That done, on many Beechen Trees, and Rocks, and many a Cave,
They enter last their names together, and finely them did grave.
Love knots they make on every twig, and Garlands passing gay
They hang thereon, whilst pleasantly they pass the time away.
Thus (for a while) their hap was blessed, and sweet their destiny,
Their marriage sweeter, and this held a tweluemonth (very nigh.)
Nor at this space, they thought as much (as once) of time to come,
The present time was only that, which in their minds did run.
Poor souls they judge the heavens had not power to do them ill,
Thinking this hunnie Moon with them (thus) would continue still.
But all things that are mortal here, do change as does the time,
Pleasure none sooner's come, then gone, scarce leaving any sign.
Love (as a Feather's) quickly lost, are wavering and light,
As suddenly as in our breast conceived it is through delight.
A small thing spoils and hinders it; The twinkling of an eye,
The joys of any Lover soon can make to vade and die.
Witness these twain; whom Cupid thought lived pleasantly ore long,
Against whom th'enuious heavens sore conspirde to do them wrong.
Through which, the partial Planets wrought their overthrow to be,
And with a general consent, did of their death decree.
For (still) the far all destinies by Gods aye ordered,
Whilst by their sharp Edicts against men, they cut their lives, not thread.
Like Potters they do play with men, who if they please, their Pot
They break which they do make; and if they list, they break it not.
But now to let this pass; one day fair Stella did arrive,
Burning with amorous pain unto the wonted fountain blithe.
And there (expecting Cloridan) her friend she does repose,
Who was as yet (for early it was) from out his bed (scarce) rose.
Looking for him who did not come, she watched and staid so long,
That at the last, on greeuish turffe she fell in slumber strong.
Mean time the lucklesse Aridon, in extreme Love that fride,
(Who so much more) the flame for to increase within him tried
By how much Cloridan he saw expelling care and Dole,
To have the hap to quench his fire, in pleasures fountain cool.
Dogs her as she does go from home, resolving in his heart
To die, or (else by violence) to ease him of his smart.
The friendship of his friend which he did hold most dear of late,
Regard to offend the honor of his dame, who him did hate.
Fair honesty, nor conscience, all these his hot desire,
Bridle could not, but (furious he) would to his will aspire.
Whilst thus he thinks, behold he comes whereas most pleasingly,
(Yielding as twere her self) he finds his cruel enemy.
Which when he saw, Reason and Faith as (frantic) he neglects,
And as one void of sense, from him each good thought he reiects.
As on the fearful Hunts-man pale, the wounded Lioness,
(Bleeding apace) with egerforce, for to revenge does press.
So this same Sauadge Lover hot, this Lady rauisheth,
Whilst she unhappy lies a sleep, as one withouten breath.
He does abuse her, whilst to wake she does (as twere) begin,
Yet she in such dead slumber was, as open her eyes not bin.
With sleep as (then) she was oppressed with sleep most miserable,
That ever after made her life, and fortune lamentable.
Still Aridon she kisseth, and most kindly does embrace,
For she (God wot) dreamd Cloridan had been there in that place.
Whilst in mean time (but in ill hour) does Cloridon arrive,
And viewes that sight, which for to see, his soul does him distiue.
He sees how Aridon (in spite of him) does him misuse,
Who is his Spouse betroth't, and whom none but himself should use.
He sees how Stella (being deceived) his face does sweetly kiss,
Whilst (through her eyes as yet not open) mistook she fowly is.
Like as the Traveler, in strait and narrow way does spy
A hissing Serpent for to come, toward him, on him to fly.
Or as with cry most horrible, his passage to defend,
A hideous Dragon makes to him, and rollings forth does send.
Whilst trembling through pale chilly fear, ready to give up Ghost,
He backward turns, nor dares he pass, whereas he wishes most.
So Cloridon with woeful grief, with frantike Jealousy,
With rage, mixed with despitefulnes, and burning frenzy.
Is vexed so in inward soul, that he in desperate wise,
(With sorrow mad) now here, now there, rowles up and down his eyes.
Shame and sad grief so seize on him, as he flings thence away,
Nor can he bide in that bad place, there longer for to stay.
Stamping and cursing up and down, he runs about the ground,
Seeking himself, through uncouth means, of life for to confound.
Resolude he is to die, since that his Dame he held so chaste,
Another loves (not him) whereby her self she has defaste.
But now when graceless Aridon, the Nymph had thus deceiu'de,
He flies away so fast, as he of her is not p^rceiu'de.
Which made her soon to open her eyes, when by her, seeing none,
(Frighted) she leapeth up, and stands as still as any stone.
In pittious wise she looks about, her self so for to ease,
Yet nothing could she see, but what her sight did more displease.
Her dearly loved Cloridon, (on whom she often does call)
She cannot spy for to appear, or answer her at all.
One while she thinks he hides himself, that for him she should seek,
Another while, that he is gone, to hunt where he does leeke.
And then again, poor soul she thinks, that she has been deceiu'de,
And that the same she could not see, through sleep of sight bereu'de.
She thinks, if he (who was with her) had been her Cloridon,
He would not her have left so soon, nor so soon from her gone.
Thus troubled in her mind, with fear, she sits her down alone,
Whilst of her lovely Shepherd she, does stay the coming home.
Each hour, a year seems to her, and his staying ouer-long,
Makes her to doubt all is not well, and that somewhat is wrong.
She weeps, and wailes, she takes on, and screecheth out full sore,
But had she known his hard estate, she would hane wailed more.
This gauls her still, yet Cloridon, comes not all that same day,
The cause that thousand torments do her tender heart assay.
Woeful, she sits like Niobe, tears streaming from her run,
Whilst of her utter overthrow, she does presage to come.
The evening come, she home retires, yet all the night no wink
She sleeps, only of her Swain, of him she still does think.
That which had past the day before, increases more her woes,
This runs still in her mind, nor what to say thereof she knows.
Fear so does trouble her, as scarce the day appeard in sight,
And that Aurora had expeld the darkness of the night,
But up she gets, and every where, seeks her Swain to find,
As is the youthful Heart sought out, by his beloved Hind.
Her husband Cloridon she seeks, and searches all about,
She looks for him in the woods, and thickets all throughout.
A thousand times she too and fro, unto the Spring does run,
To see if he by chance (as was his wont) were thither come.
But when she does not find him there, she then misdoubts the worst,
Of some mischaunce that happened is, and counts her self accursed.
Yet for all this, she gives not ore, although she is in despair,
She trottteth still, she searches still, and prieth here and there.
The name of Cloridan, she often repeateth, and does call,
Yet none except the ECCO shrill, does answer her at all.
Ah, what sharp griefs and passions sad, to vex her did she proone?
Before that she her Cloridan, found well-nigh dead, through love,
Who (weary for to languish, as sorrows servile slave,
With his own sword, a mortal wound, within his body gave.
After he had a thousand times blamde his disloyal Dame,
Accursed Love, (as most unjust) hating his amorous flame.
Within the bottom of a Rock, beset with gloomy wood,
Sprawling he lay along, in midst of his warm purple blood.
And yet his breath was not quite gone, though from his deadly word,
Through floods of goare, that streamde from thence, his scalding sighs were
drowned.
Death him consumde, grief for love him kilde, thus twice he did,
His pains above all possions were, that did such pangs abide
From his sadeyes, the limbecks wet, of sorrow did distill,
Such store of tears, as all the place, with water they did fill.
His heavy groans, his endless sighs, that came his tears betwixt,
His lukewarm blood, that with the moisture of his eyes was mixed.
Of his laments most dolorous, the only witness were,
And those hard Rocks, which courteous then; retolde what they did hear.
Bus now that hapless Stella, many times proved had,
And that she Gloridan did find, in this estate so bad.
She straight-waies (sownding) falls on him, and liuelesse so was seen,
As the poor Shepherd thought forthwith, that (quite) dead she had been.
Which when he saw (although nigh dead as then) was his fair Corse,
And that in him, through want of blood, remaind small strength or force.
Though death had (now) within his power, his sense already brought,
And that he justly angry was, against Stella, as he thought.
Thinking (but wrongfully alas) that she had done him wrong,
And though he felt his weakness such, as live he could not long.
Yet at the l^st Love vanquished him, and pity him ore-came,
Now gins he love that beauty which, before he did disdain.
Remorse of Conscience touches him, and tells him in his mind,
(Which he repents) that he has used his Lady too unkind.
Although his thought (that she herself abusde has) does him tell,
Yet nevertheless, he honoreth her, and now he loves her well.
Which is the cause, with arms, though weak, he seckes to make a shift,
And tries if her (sore languishing) he from the ground can lift.
He opens her fair eyes, and forced through Cupids proud command,
He kisseth them ten thousand times, whilst senseless she does stand.
O God, how rich and puissant is Love, and of what great power?
All former injuries, to make him cancel, at this hour?
Desire for to revenge his wrongs, (as Lovers wont to use,
He now abhors, with such bad means, himself (he will) not abuse.
He Will rather die, then offer wrong to his disloy all Dame,
Minding in death to honon her, and to conceal the same.
Softly he rubs her liuelesse face, often kissing her fair lips,
And (being deadly sick, from them dead almost) life he sippes.
Her forehead he does water, with his brinish tears that flow,
Her forehead, father of his grief, and motlue of his woe.
Thus whilst he over her does mourn, Stella gins to revive,
Wondering that Cloridon she sees, again to be alive.
Who feeling now his senses fail, and life to fleet full fast,
With hallow poyce, and throtling throat, he spoke these speeches last.
Ah Stella, Is It thou whom I have lou'de, then mine eyes more dear?
Is It thou, that do before me in this pittions plight appear?
Is It thou ungrateful cruel wench, whom I do see here lie
Hard by my side, whilst for thy sake, I do unjustly die?
Is It that bright Diamond eye of thine, that wounded has my heart (...)
That eye that against all reason, makes me renerence my smart?
Is It that fair Forehead (yet forswor^e) and those gold hairs of thine.
That have been enemies to me, and to all good of mine?
Ah Stella, what have done, thy faith (alas) why did thou break?
So dearly prised on my side, through yielding ouer-weake?
Why have shou falsely lefs thy Spouse, thy loyal Cloridon?
And entertained in his stead (on sudden) Aridon?
Since at the first, thou (willing) me, and vnconsty giued took.
No reason it is that now sans cause, I should be (thus) forseeke.
Thou having then abused me (to tell) how, I abhor,
Have thou the face, and dare thou, to come my face before?
Alas, should I permit thee? Or, should I now banish the^?
As periurde wretch, whom I do find, mine overthrow to be?
LOVE and the Heavens, for witnesses, against thee do^ I craue^
If whilst I lived, I any way, myself abused have?
My faith and vow, plighted to thee, I always have conser^de,
My loyalty thou pr^oued have, of thee it well desornde.
Not any, but thine only self alone, I loved still,
And now I die, (O spite) to hate thee, I have not the will.
Yet have thou falsified thy Faith, and gone from thy first word.
Whilst (for true love) false fained love to me thou do afford.
But, have I so ill merited, and Aridon so well?
That thou should entertain him, and me thou should expel?
Ah, I have seen, that with mine eyes, in such vnd^cent sort,
As cause that they have seen too much; they now are All-amort,
I have thee seen kiss Aridon, false Aridon unjust,
Whilst to caresse him (as thou did) my heart in twain did burst.
Disloyally through perjury, thy Faith thou broken have,
Thine Honor lies in the dust, and thy good Name is past.
Thy glory through inconstancy, has caught her deadly wound,
Thy credit stained is, nor more it can be healed sound.
Who ever would imagine once, or ever would have thought,
That one so fair a beauty would, so foul a deed have wrought?
Who ever would have had suspect, an eye so full of love,
^^full of infidelity, inconstantly would prove?
Ah say (discurteous too unkind) why have thou me deceived?
This thy false show of Amity, has me of life bereaved.
For not my death it is I lament, nor much of that I waide,
If thou had not my meaning chaste, and honest mind betraide.
Had I not found thee mutable, unconstant, wavering bad,
Not lingered nor languished in life, I so much had.
This mischief, that thou false art found, and double in thy heart,
Does gaull my soul, worse thousand times, then deaths most keenest dart.
But yet although thou have to me, this injury procur'de,
Although thy love to me is found, immodest and perjured.
Yet now I die, I love thee still, though I it is am abusde,
My death yet shall disponce with thee, and thou shall be excusde.
Love that at first me unto thee in bands most strict did bind,
Commands me (on allegiance mine) with thee no fault to find.
^hen judge of I did honor thee, whilst I did live on earth,
Sense (dying now) I do the same, and will do after death.
And since it is thy will sweet soul, that I shall leave this place,
Why does such outrage offer now, unto thy beauteous face?
If the thy will, that I shall die, and that to have me dead,
Me and thy self in subtle wise thou have dishonored.
Why sobst and sighest, why with fist do beat thy tender breast,
To see (as thou desir'st) that I be freed from this unrest.
Ah leave to shed tears thus for me, (now good) thy self appease.
To see this sight torments me more, and more does me disease.
Weep not for me, unworthy I, that thou for me should wail,
Since those thine eyes, once my chief bliss, are now become my bail,
Nor seem thou thus to grieve for him, or aught for him to (...).
Who (not thy love deserving) dies, because he was forlorn.
No, no (dissembling wretch) thou do not weep for death of mine.
^et fore I part let me once kiss those dainty lips of thine.
Let me (dying) but kiss those eyes, although I not deserve.
Which for to light me to my Tomb, in steed of t^^ch shall ^erne.
What will thou not grace me so much, this favor wilt not gra^^^?
To have obtaind so much at my last gasp, shall I not vaunt?
Do thou deny to suffer me to taste of that sweet good,
Which heretofore I often have had within this darkesome word?
When our sacred marriage rights, consummated with oath,
Vowing one to the other faith, and to be constant both.
Why do refuse me (cruel) since I die through heavy grief,
Whilst dying, thou wilt not to my pain ad debut some small relief?
Stella, this hearing next in soul, perplexed with strange pain.
Once more upon her faithful Swain, does fall on sound again.
She falls down upon his breast, her body senseless is,
When fainting Cloridan begins afresh her for to kiss.
And now what is true he doubts, and thinks he was de^eined right,
Cursing his folly ouerbold, and hating his best sighs.
He cannot think that Stella was with any one untrue,
When he does see how pitiously (he takes on anewe.
So often to fall in Traunse, so often such Corsiues to endure,
Which makes him curse his tongue, such woes that to her did pr^s^^^^.
But in the end she to her self again comes, when with cries
And pittious plaints she breaks forth thus, in lamenting wise.
O death, sweet death, why unto me do not such favor show.
As for to end my course my soul and time, all with one blow.
Alas, why so long do permit her for to breath and line,
Who lives not, whilst languishing she more and more does grieve.
O death, why thus to nourish life in me, do me despite,
Who am of all that line on earth the most accursedst wight,
This body which polluted is, with worse then worse may be,
This body which unworthy is, the heavens, or man to see.
This body spoild of honor rich, and clothed now with shame.
(Although my mind did never yet consent unto the same)
This body which deserves from grave and burial to be ^ard,
The mock of Fortune, and the tipe of punishment most hard.
This body which with mine own hand, in pieces I should ^^^e.
This body which for to be burnt to ashes (...) orthie were.
Ah cursed body, have thou staind thy soul without re^ure.
And (guiltless of this ill) must thou eternal pains (...)
Have thou thy credit lost, thy honor have thou blemished?
Defamde thy Spouse, and Traitor been unto thy Lord and head?
Thou shall be plagued for the same, of death thou shall not miss,
Yet death's too good for such a sin, too mild a pain it is.
Ah then (sweet friend) why do it touch, why to it comes thou night?
Alack forbear, infectious it is, it is thine enemy.
Unworthy of thine eyes it is, unworthy of thy face,
Nor does it merit for to have, the least drop of thy grace.
Vouchsafe not for to touch the same, but rather let it perish,
It Is it has sind and murdered thee, the same then do not cherish.
But yet before into the hands of wish^ for death I fall,
The Gods to witness of my truth, as records I do call.
I call the heavens above, the earth, the Seas that stowing show,
The spirits of the firmament, and them of hell below.
The Tritons, Siluans, Satire swift, the Nymphs in Groves that walk.
And damned hags, whose ghastly shapes strike terror as they talk.
In brief, whatso has life or mines, all Trees, all Rocks, and Caves,
All Fountains, Groves, and shadowing Vales, from parching heat that same.
All these as witnesses I call, that I am culpable,
But yet deceived most traitorously and so made miserable.
All these I call, and do conjure, that know the innocent,
Unwittingly I faulted have, yet never did consent.
My faith I never brake to thee (my Spouse) I here a vow,
This (heavens ye know for truth) for I did think that it was thou.
I thought it was thou (as thou were wont) that thou have hid my face,
(My face that is the cause that thou art in this woeful case)
Unwilling though my body is tainted, yet pure's my mind,
My body, which against his will, thy shadow false did find.
But yet it is faulty and deserves (and righly too) reward,
Since it thine overthrow has wrought, through Fortune over hard.
Twice (then) it thee offended has and double wrought thy we.
Alas, that double for to die, I cannot force it the.
The greatest sorrow I sustain, of these my sorrows all,
Is, that I double cannot die, nor twice by dying fall.
Then why should thou desire (sweet heart) new friendship to begin,
With such a body, as but late does come from doing sin?
Unworthy it is for thee, the earth, gross earth, let that it cover,
A fitting spoil it is for the same, and not for any other.
Or rather let this carcass vile, be purged pure with fire,
And th'a shes be dispersed abroad, through winds as I desire.
Woe is me borne was I to be thy death, and through hard hap,
By my bad means, the Parce three have caught thee in their (...)
It Is I, and none but I, that killed thee have (my dearest Spouse)
It Is I that death have brought to thee, and that most dangerous.
Thou die for my fault, O cruel Law, and most uncivil,
He that is guiltless, bides the pains of her that has done evil.
It Is I that blood have drawn from thee, it is I thy heart have split,
It Is I that have thy loving name, amongst the dead souls writ.
It is not death (as thou do think) thy life that shortened has,
But it is thy Stella, hapless borne to do thee ill and skath.
Then to thy self I do app^dle, if death I not deserve,
And how much fortune mine accursed, from other Fortunes swernt
When as (in steed of honoring thee) dishonored thee I have,
And when I life to thee should give, I bring thee to thy grave.
When as our sacred Hymen, I should reverence and adore,
I have abusde, disparaged, and scandalisde it fore.
And lastly, when with joy thou should thy youth with pleasure pass.
I do untimely our thee off, and make thee vade like grass.
I being then, the cause of all this mischief, and this ill,
Do seem to wonder though I weep, and beauens with sorrow for?
Have I not reason to lament, to sigh, to wail, and groan,
Like unto Niobe, till like to her I turn to stone?
Since first the skies were framed, and Sun to shine, at first, was seen,
More wretched woman than my self, nere was, nor ere has been.
O woeful Stella, Cloridan, O Cloridan, my life,
My life shall expiat my fault, to end these sorrows rife.
That self same sword that wounded thee, shall through my body ranse,
Whilst dying both together, we will laid be in one Tomb.
Then pardon me sweet Cloridan, for pity pardon me,
Since that through others treachery, I have offended thee.
Adien my Lord, I loath to live, and not thy self enjoy,
And saying so, her self, she (strait) does with his sword destroy.
O brane Virago, glory and renown of women kind,
Few like thy self, thy self like few, did show a worthy mind.
O virtuous Lady, O fair spirit, of thy self, conqueror,
Ore whose rare constancy, nor sword, nor death it self had power.
So Lucres did, the Romans Pearl, when by base treacheris,
She vndefilde, defiled was, through Tarquin, forcibly.
So Hero did, so Thisbe with the selfsame sword did slay
Her self, when Piramus to seek, she went the hapless way.
And now her breathless coarse did fall upon the pouer Swain,
Who with that burden g^^ to breath, and seek some life again.
As when the night approaches, we behold and view the Su^^^^,
By little and by little steal from hence, his race being done.
His color lesneth, and looks pale, disdaining that still tide,
Whilst in some corner of the sky, his fair face he does hide.
So that vermillion color sweet of Stella (but of yore,)
That beauty boue suparlatine (as sacred to adore.)
That passing snow white Iuorie, that did all thoughts control,
By little and by little, forth from out her body stole.
Ore that (...) lovely coarse of hers, death sits predomina^^,
Who (for that he came there) for Rose, and Lilly fresh did w^^t.
Pale looked now those cherrie lips, like ashes they appear,
Whilst with aniron sleep shut up, her eyes fast closed were.
Her arms hung down ( Sans motion) and like a picture fair,
Which (linelesse) is in colors wrought tresemblance, so she bare.
The woeful Shepherd when this sight most dolorous he spide,
Afresh his plaints he does renew, and out aloud he cride.
Kissing this linelesse coarse, and dying, he seeks himself to ease,
Whilst (her embracing) he does think, her griefs somewhat to appease,
His sight he wistly sixeth on her face, and on her eyes,
And like amad man he takes on, in most outrageous wise,
Yet he to Stella listueth still, who still does him require,
And pray to pardon her foul fault, this oneli's her desire.
And as she gives up the ghost, she forth these words does groan,
Ah pardon me, sweet pardon me, the most distressed one.
Sweet Gloridan forget, for give poor Stella for her ill,
She did offend, but knew it not, it was against her will.
Oh, in one Tomb let me with thee (sweet friend) be buried,
Gods laws command to pardon such as do offend (being dead.)
Farewell dear Spouse, and grant to me, but this my last request,
Farewell, for death to seize on me, I feel already pressed.
I Will meet thee in the Lizian fields, and then I will thee know,
Once more farewell my Cloridan, for now from thee I go.
So saying, she does breath her last, as any stone she is cold,
Yet closely in his feeble arms, the Shepherd does her hold.
But when that he had bleeding left, which like a spring did come
From forth his breast, and among the blood of his fair Stella run.
He lays her softly down by him, her eyes he then does close.
And by her side placing himself, unto his end he grows.
And having cried out full often, as one accursed most,
That he was author of her death, he gives up his ghost.
Whilst by his warm blood, and salt tears, he seeks to appease.
His Ladies spirit late gone from thence, to live with greater ease.
A thousand times he says farewell, sweet Stella, still he cride,
And in the end, in self same sort (as Stella did) he did.
Their bodies twain, which whilst they liude, had but one soul alone,
Were buried both together, shut within one Tomb and stone.
And Aridon that Traitor cursed, who these two Lovers paind,
By iustest punishment of Gods, into a Rock was changd.
Which Jupiter does oftentimes scourge for his former sin,
With thunderbolts, breaking his top, and all to battering him
Then let no Lover once presume unlawful means to seek,
But be resolved to be content, as shall their Ladies leeke.
For forced Love or treachery will nere prove well at all,
Which if they use, worse plagues shall them, then Aridon befall.
After the fair Nymph had made an end of her dismal history, she spoke thus
unto me. Now (Shepherd) confess, confess (I say) by this example, the unjust
cruelty of Love. He that will not yield neither unto presidents, nor unto
reasons, ought to be accounted as a most obstinate and ignorant person; for it
is more folly, not to submit unto reason, then to be altogether vnacqainted
with the same.

It is an old said saw, that he is happy, whom other men's harms can make to
beware. For to grow wise, at the charges of another, and not at his own cost,
is a greater treasure then the golden sands of the river Pactotus. As for mine
own part, this examample (with diverse others) which I can report, and all unto
this purpose, wherein Love has showed thousand proofs of his bloody rage)
shall make me wise, and warn me to look unto my self well enough.

They say that a man should take heed of a mad dog, of a frantic bedlem, and
of a notable Drunkard, because by nature they are apt to do shroud turns. And
even so, we should look unto our selves, lest we should fall into the laps of
Love, seeing we know him to be so perverse, so wicked, and unjust: for he shall
never be moned, who most sondly flingeth himself into the pit, that has been
showed unto him before.

Then (Shepherd) shall thou be wise if (betimes) thou withdrawest thy self
from such a Tyrant: and foolish, will I account thee, if thou imaginest that I
will ever follow so bad a master as he is, his school resembling an intricate
labyrinth, into which it is easy to enter, but impossible (or very hard) to
get out of it again. He that will do well, must never do any thing whereof
he may repent him afterward; for a man never droupeth, but when he languisheth
through fear, still looking for that mischief to happen, which will at the
last make him to repent. If I know (already) that repentance would not be
fair off from me, if I should love, by reason of the damages that proceed
through the same, were not I (then) very simple to go about to love? Then
talk no more unto me of such vanities, but rather discourse with me of such
Ceremonies, Fraiers, vows and Sacrifices belonging unto Diana, which are mine
ordinary exercises. For every workman delights to here talk of his own
Science or Mystery. I hearing her say so, replied thus.

O fairer creature then Venus; more chaste then Polixena, and more learned then
Cassandra; The brave Captain that continually follows the wars, knows
well, that his function or calling, is full of dangerand trouble, and yet (in
the mean while) he repents not, to follow the same, because of the hope he
has to reap renown and credit, which is encountered and won, even in the
midst and the thickest of Cannon shot, of the battle. And so, although the
Lover doubts not, but that he is like to endure great troubles and turmoiles
in his amorous pursuit, yet does not he give over the following thereof,
without repenting himself at all, because the hope to please that which he so
much likes, brings the thoughts of all his troubles and labors to be very
weak, and of no force or violence at all.

The sick patient, which takes a potion, knows that it is bitter, and yet
for all that, he sticks not to swallow it down most willingly, by reason of
the firm confidence he has to be healed of his grief.

That the pains of love are bitter and cruel, I cannot but confess; yet then
(again) we must remember, how sweet and luscious is that joy, that the Lover
participateth of, when he sees himself beloved of his Mistress.

An inestimable lewell is not gotten, nor given for nothing, neither such and
so rare a good thing as this is, can be obtained without great labor and
travail. And for mine own part, will always account those sorrows and
troubles most easy and sweet, be they never so sower and insufferable, to love
a thing, so absolute and perfect, as your sweet self is. For that General of
an army, shall never be taxed with cowardice, who has done his end uour, and
(what he can) to cause the enemy to come into the field, but he shall soon be
condemned for a dastard, that shall fly from his foe, through very sear.

The honor that one finds in loving a divine beauty, easily recompenceth
the pains thereof: for that man shall be more accounted of, who has combatted
with some famous Conqueror, although he be overcome by him, then he, that
shall remain Master of the field, over a weak and feeble enemy.

Think not much then (fair and glorious Nymph) if I dare venture to serve you,
when the meanest followers of mighty kings, are more respected and regarded,
then those that are the greatest, of other great Lords and Nobles.

The fair Nymph would have replied, but that by chance a certain Virgin came
before her, presenting her with a Sonnet, composed in the name of all the whole
company, which hindered her from answering me. But this was the Sonnet
following.

The glorious heavens we praise in goodly wise,
Because the Gods do lodge within that place:
So you that hold sweet beauty in your eyes,
And honor in your soul, have fairer grace.
Then who to glory yours, can silence give,
When (than the heavens) it is far more divine:
Heavens perish, but virtuous spirits always live;
Glory shall flourish still, and so shall thine.
Then at your feet, we hang this verse of ours,
Whilst, under shade of thousand Lawrells green,
We of your virtues will discourse, whose powers
No Tempests rage (to fear) shall ere be seen.
Since Pans fair Sisters, to you honor yield,
Since this our Song your virtues do sigh forth:
And since all Lawrells do your for head shield,
Vouchsafe thereof, though it is of little worth.
Diana (having read this Sonnet) liked it passing well: which I perceiving, and
that she delighted in Poetry, made bold to request my Muse, that she should
daine to inspire some dainty vein or conceit in me, to be able to endite the
like. Whereupon she pitying me, gave care unto my prayer, which was the
occasion that (at that very instant) and upon the sudden, I wrote these
verses following.

If nothing fair I see, but what is thy face,
If brightness thine, the day is, of mine eyes,
If virtue thine, I do (as Gods) embrace,
Have I not reason (then) in dutious wise,
Thy gracious self for to implore,
Since thee (as Goddess) I adore?
Who finds a salve to cure him of his grief,
By friendly hand, of that shall he not make
Account? when he thereby may get relief,
Whereby his sickness from him he may shake?
The wounded Dear, to the herb (...)
Which can him help as be does know.
So then, in this my worse then Captines state,
These lines I offer to thy Deity,
Not doubting, but (though hapless be my fall)
I, from thy self, shall find some remedy,
Of thee I beg some grace to have,
In thee of health, to spill or save.
Who dies for want of succor or remorse,
Does not deserve or merit any blame:
But such as by their own power and their force,
May wretches help, yet let them take their bane,
Such do deserve punished to be,
Of Gods and men, in highest degree.
Another.

(Dian) thou shin'st in heavens with Majesty,
In hell below, likewise thou do command:
And in the earth, thou raignest gloriously.
Ah then (if I am thine) let me so stand.
Slaves to immortal Essence are we all,
And them we honor must, though against our will:
Do ask (Divine) then how this does befall,
How I dare love thee? I must love thee still.
The sacred skies are made for to adore,
What that resembles, we must worship too:
For mortal men have life from them therefore.
And unto them we reverence ought to do.
Then if thy power, breath to my soul does give,
Ah then conserve the same; for I am bound
Most strictly thee to honor, whilst I live,
And whilst I tred upon this earthly ground.
(Dear) a presumption let not this be thought
In me, to serve thee (though a thing of naught.)
I having finished these two Sonnets, presented them unto her, who showed them
unto all her companions, they marking and looking upon me very wissly, I
thinking that by that means, I might obtain some of them to be my good
friends, and to speak a good word for me, unto my Mistress, who now was (once
more) conducted by the sweet voice of the other Nymph unto the temple of Diana,
where she (for a while) stayed. And so (dear Father) let me entreat you, that
I may make a stay here (at this time) for my mind is troubled within me, my
tongue fails, and my voice begins to be hoarse, we will defer the rest
til unto morrow, for what likes not one day, may chance to please at an other.

Content (quoth the old Magitian) and let us away. The bow must not (always)
be bent, lest it weaken too much, and so must thou take some rest, or else thou will be over weary, and soon tired. Therefore am I the more willing to yield
unto thy request, to the end, thy discourse may be as agreeable unto thee in
reporting, as it is pleasant unto me in hearing the same. Whereupon they left
the place, where, as they were walking homewards, they might perceive a
Shepherd talking with a Shepherdess under the shade of an old Oak, which
was the occasion they drew nigh, to hear what they said, the Shepherd viging
her, in this sort. Fond is that man that thinks to remove a huge Rock, from
one place into another, and as fond is he that goes about to turn, or stay
the course of the salt waters of the Sea: Fuen so (O cruel Delia) is he a
fool that will take upon him to resist the will of the Gods, and oppose
himself against the power of the heavens.

Those huge Giants the Titans, went about such a bold piece of work, but being
overthrown with lightning, they serve as witnesses, that the hand of the holy
one of Israel, does not strike in vain. If so, why then will thou so wilfully
stand against the decree of the Gods? Which if thou do, think not but they
will quickly abate thy boldness, and punish thy over presumptuous pride.

That Master does punish his servant worthily, who scoffeth at his
commandments, and makes no account to be obedient unto him. And think
thou, that the Gods will not plague thee, seeing thee so stubborn against
their wills, so perverse against their minds, and so unwilling to perform
their desire? They have saved thee, from the ravenous tallents of the
murdering Pitate, and as it were (by miracle) brought thee hither, and
wherefore do thou think they did so, but only because thou should be
mild unto my prayers, and yield gently to grant me some favor?

But it seems by thy carriage hitherto, that thou will as it were (of mere
obstinacy) bandie against them, in this thine error, but take heed thou be
not plagued, and (then too lately, thou will wish that thou had changed thy
mind, for the Gods use always to afflict selfewild people, because it is not
fit, nor the part of any man, to rise up, and to rebel against them.

Then seeing the most marvelous and divine providence, has brought us here
both together, that they have assisted thee in this Desert, and most happily
have caused thee to meet him (who has endured so much for thy sake, without
any recompense as yet at all) ah change thy humor sweet Delia, alter thy
opinion, and show thy self, to be of another mind, to the end thy
sweetlenitie, and gracious bounty, may bring the Gods to be as pleasing and
willing in all thy desires; as thy unkind rigor, and harsh disdain, have
(heretofore) made them to be austere, and angry toward thee: for miserable is
that wight, and worthy to suffer trouble, who being admonished, will not
amend, and therefore is out of all hope to find any succor at all.

Love then (froward Delia) him who (to obtain thy grace) has dispended so
many tears, consumed so many whole days, sent abroad so many scalding sighs,
and left so many dainty pleasures, only to follow thee: and who, if he might
but in some sort be assured of thy friendship, would think himself the most
happiest and the best contented man in the world. But miserable is he, who
still labors, and yet finds himself frustrate of the fruits of his
labor: yet far more accursed is he, who consumes his years, and his life
in the service of such a proud dame, as yields no recompense unto him at all,
for that he loses his labor and pain, and because he is forced to sigh and
bewail his foolish and unkind choice alone unto himself, never expecting any
remedy.

Thus pleaded the Shepherd for himself, when the hard-^arted Shepheardesss
made him this sower and unwelcome answer. I can never belcoue (fond Shepherd)
that the Gods, who are the authors of goodness, and most curtenu, Ear^hers unto
mortal men, can be the cause that they should commit any fault, much ^esse, to
eggs and incite them forward unto the same, but (rather) that men themselurs
are the occasions thereof, and therefore when any one has done any such
offense, he must turn it from bad to good, and seek to cover the visage of
his ill fortune, with the color and show of good chance and hap.

If the Gods (as thou affirmest) had brought me hither, to yield unto thy
wanton desires, and to be an attendant upon this Tyrant Love, then should they
be the authors of my ruin, and the occasions of my sin, but I will never
think so irreverently or wickedly of their prupent providence, and sacred
bounty, and if my good fortune has made me to escape so great a danger (as I
confess I have done) I most humble thank the Gods therefore, of which
sithence I now find my self free, I think it no wife dome, to tumble into
Caribdis, because I have avoided Silla, and having gotten out of one mischief,
to fall into another: for I hold my hap more cruel, to be subject under the
bloody tyranny of Love, than if I had been laid upon the cruel Altar of Juno
(as a Sacrifice) to have appeased her fury.

Think not, that the Gods, take any care of such as they suffer to fall into
the hands of Love, but rather, that they account them, for lost creatures, and
such as be most miserable, as the Physician gives over a patient, whose
disease is desperate and recurelesse, when he sees there is hope of his
recovery.

No man will bring his friend whom he affects, under the yoke of a
Tyrannical master, who will make his life over miserable, and whose cruelty
he himself has felt: now the Gods have (oftentimes) had experience of this
bloody Love, and felt his overmuch rage, fury, and anger, and therefore it is
not likely that they will deliver into such a Butchers hands, that creature
which they (most of all) desire to protect, and defend in safety.

The accident of Love then, does not come by the means of the Gods; neither
are they occasions of such idleness in our brains, such Lovers being but
foolish so to think, who being afflicted with his passions, lay all the fault
upon the Gods.

Who then (answered the Shepherd) is the author thereof, and who is it that
breeds it in cur souls? and if Love is seared of the Gods the^se lues, how
is it possibly but me^ should be troubled therewithal? and what dainty
spirit has there cuer been, but has loved? what brave generous mind, or what
heroical and magnanimous heart has been without it? As the wind serves for
a guide unto the Sailer in the Sea, guiding his ship rightly: Even so, Love
does serve as a Pilot unto the Sons of the Gods, to effect and bring to pass
brave expoites, which can never be perfected as they should be, unless that
Love, set foot into the fame. What rare deeds of chiularie did Hercules a
atchieue for fair Andromacha, whom he loved? How bravely did Achilles carry
himself for Bxiseis sake, Jason for Medea, Theseus for Ariadne, and Orlando
for his Angelica?

The Ox pricked with the good, begins to mend his pace, and draws more
lustily then at the first: and so Love is a kind of prick, and prouokement,
which eggeth forward valiant minds, forcing them to bring to pass, far more
worthy and illustrious enterprises, then they would have done, if they had
lived quietly at home, without knowing what Love meant. And therefore, I am of
opinion, that not only men, but the Gods also, ought to account themselves
happy, that Love flourishes in them, for it is the bright tosch of their
nights, and the splendant Sun of their days.

Shepherd, Shepherd (replied the Nymphs) thy own speech has confounded thy
self, for if Love be so violentas thou describest him, he then cannot last,
nor make himself known to be just. Things violent are always hurtful unto
some one or other, and being so full of misfortunes and miseries, they can
never abide them, because they pass with as great heat and fury as a flaming
fire, which consumes all that is before it.

Therefore Love, being never in the mean, but always in the extremity,
cannot choose but be very unjust, in as much as Justice expels all force,
without hurting any body.

So likewise, are there very few, that willingly entertain it, but as the
Tyrant by maine force, and rigorous compulsion, compels his subjects to do
him service. Even so Love, through mere violence, makes men to submit
themselves under his yoke, and therefore he cannot be both just and violent
all at one time: which two qualities can never be at one instant, and in one
and the self same subject.

By thine own confession, he is violent, and therefore he cannot be just, but
ought (as one unworthy) to be rejected and shaken off. Nay, I will say more,
there is nothing that makes a man oftener to offend, and to commit sins, then
this Love does, for it picketh out the eyes of Reason: In such sort, as the
Lover respects neither Law, Kindred, Virtue, Grace, nor any Courtesies
received, so he may obtain his unruly desire, the enjoying of which, he
respects more then he does any Reason, Justice, or Honor, whatsoever.

For what respect I pray you, had Paris of his Host Menelaus? Clytemnestra, of
Agamemnon her husband? and Tarquine, of the good name and fame of Lucretia? To
be short, it is an accursed kind of Rage, that breaks all Alliance and
kindred, all Amity and good friendship, Faith, and hospitality, overthrowing
topsituruie, all the buildings of Reason.

Talk not then unto me of this pernicious LOVE; The burnt child, dreads the
fire, and I have somewhat felt the flame thereof: and therefore I will resolve
rather to die, then to be overtaken by so furious an Enemy.

Ah (fair Shepherdess, replied the Shepherd) how much art thou deceived
herein? when amongst all mortal respects whatsoever, LOVE is esteemed the
chief, and carries away the prize before them all. For what is he that is
more wary and circumspect, then the constant Lover it toward his Dame? Whom
fears he so much to offend, as her? and how willingly would he offer his life
to besacrificed, rather then he would so much as once move or displease her?
The same LOVE, being the reason, that she alone is not respected, but as well
all such (of her well-willers) as go about to advance and honor her.

There is nothing that teaches men better, the Adoration of the Gods, then
Love, for that service which Lovers yield unto their Ladles, has a kind of
resemblance unto the reverent worshipping of the Gods: who are not displeased
that we should attribute such respect unto such a beautiful thing which they
have made, to the intent it should be honored.

For were it not for LOVE, what account or difference can there be made
between an excellent and exquisite kind of beauty, and that which is but
mean? But that God, that has taught us, to discern the fair from the foul,
and (esteeming of the one) to Love, and refuse the other: makes us to love and
covet fair faces, setting on fire thousands of Inventions in our souls, which
reuiueth us with lively effects, to the end we may satisfy and content our
desire.

But (answered the Shepherdess) these effects are for the most part wicked
and bad, as are the Childern of a leaude and ill-giuen Father, resembling the
offspring of such as be crooked, who are borne with crooked backs, as their
Parents had before them.

Now, if such effects are contrary to Law and Reason, it were far better
they should be stifled as dead, then being suffered to live, they should grow
to be mischievous and unfortunate. But, if it be necessary, that to drive away
all smne, we condemn the sinner, to the end, that afterward it may find no
fit instrument to put in practice. so ungodly a force.

So, if we will take away all the bad effects of LOVE, we must despoyle and
banish himself and his enticing allurements also.

For in vain does the Gardener go about to kill or destroy any bad and
noisome weed or plant, if without pulling up the root, he does but only
break the tender leaves thereof.

Let us men (Shepherd) ^nue away this pestisent Love from us. As for mine own
part, I ve we, never (willingly) to follow the same: For marching but a while
under his Ensign, I have (already) suffered more then thousands of hard
misfortunes, and terrible crosses.

So said the Shepherdess, (when as the Shepherd was answering her) they
might understand the voice of another Shepherd, speaking as follows.

ECCO. O that the Gods of these huge Woods, would show me favor such,
But for to hear my Fortunes hard, ore Fortunate by much.
O that they would but mark, how I do naught but wail and cry,
I doubt not then, but they their ears, would lend me by and by.
Might I but them so courteons find, to listen to my moan,
I would adore and honor still, their Majesty's each one.
Then with a voice like Lightning flash, I soon would thunder forth,
And show with sighing in my verse, their bounty and their worth.
Of them alone; then would I fing, and of their great renown,
Whist that my tongue should never linne, but still their praises son.
Their kindness, my soul unto them should bind in, to be so fast,
As nere I would forget the same, as long as life should last.
Ah then shall I obtain of Mistress mine this happy Bonne,
To yield me liking? when will she? will it be long, or soon?

What may I hope for, when I thus fight under Cupids Banner?
Whilst I consume my self thereby, and work mine own dishoner?

What may I of my FAIR expect? when as the Gods I find,
To cross me in my amorous suit, unless she will be kind?

Who is of power this gloomy Cloud from off mine eyes to move?
^^nd to repair my late fallen help, quite ruined by Love?

Then, is it not he that courtcously after our grievous woe,
Our Fancy brings to happy Port, I now perceine to is so.

But are the gentle Heavens content, importunde without cries
To yield to us poor worldly wights, our wish in courteous wise?

If so, what shall become of that quick Fire, which burns so bright,
Within my bowels languishing, shal't be extinguished quite?

What shall become of this mine ill? (which in my Coarse does stay,
Shall it increase my farther care, or shall it soon away?

Shall I, for any good (ere) hope, to come from her (my grief,)
Who holds my heart fast tide, and plagues my soul without relief?

Say then, has Lone acquainted yet, my Mistress cruel Heart,
With this my woes, has she as yet, felt (of my pains) some part?

Then (sacred Gods) I Will hope the best, and as an Oratle,
I Will look one day, that this to me, may fall out veritable.
Not doubting but that fore I die, I may that sweet fruit reap,
In Joy, which I have sown long since, in anguish and in sweat.
Mean time, with these your answers kind, I Will satis fide return,
Assuring me, through favors yours, I shall give ore to mourn.
For whilst your comfortable beams shall shine upon me bright,
My heart shall live (sreed from all fear) enfrancht from danger quite.
Then (heavenly Powers) remember what your promise is to me,
Who trust repose in you, that I deceived may not be.
of men are taxt, for Farth not kept, you menit far more blame,
S^^te you our deeds brightly adorn, as glistering Sunny flame.
Upon this, the Shepherd being maruellously well satisfied in his mind,
beganue to speak thus unto himself.

If we have any reason to give credit unto the Oracles of the Gods, then out
of doubt, I have no other cause but to hope well. For many times, through
thousands of such answers, have they assured me, that I shall enjoy that
which I most desire and covet.

And yet alas (alas) this is a great and gross error in me, to believe them;
For God only, who alone is without beginning and ending, knows what is to
come: whereas these Diueis judge but by conjectures, and by ancient experience
of things that have hap^^d before, they being the fathers of lies. And
therefore wonderfully glad to de^^^ and decerne munkinde, because they have
sworn their utter overthrow and ruin.

And yet a brave and resolute spirit, ought rather to hope well, then to fear
ill: For hope no wishes and comfort, whereas fear afflicts and
tormenteth, both soul and body. Of one thing I may count my self happy,
which is, that it seems the Gods of these woods, have a care of my Fortunes,
and that they will assist me in what they may. We ought not to refuse the aid
of any person, be he never so feeble and weak: becausone may dot some one
good or other unto us; As we may find virtue in the least Planenr Hear be that
grows. But alack, what hope may I lodge in my soul? and how is it possible,
that the Prophesies of the Gods of these woods should prove to be true? If my
peerlesse Iulietta, (who is far off from me) never feels the piercing
darts of outag^ous Love?

LOVE (scarce settled in any) is easily quenched again, especially when the
means that should nourish his heat fails, and waxes very cold, for
millions of contrary conceits and imaginations is intermixed in the same,
which does quickly drown and quench it.

My Lady is sarre remote from me, and therefore remembers not me: For (as
yet) was I never registered in the role of her memory. And (say) there should
be some small draught of me therein, yet would this cruel absence quickly
deface it. For the bare shadow of a Counterfeit, which the Painter leaves
(without his right colors) imperfect, can neither be fair, or esteemed of any
price.

Clytemnestra forgot her husband when he was absent: Hellena her Spouse, with
diverse other women, all which, through the separation of place, and absence of
their friends, forgot themselves so much, as they (not once) thought of their
ancient Lovers; For one Hyper^estra, that remembered her husband, forty nine of
her Sisters, cut their husbands throats.

And amongst ten thousand women, scarce you shall find one that preserves the
memory and favor of her loyal friend engraven in her soul.

Heavens grant I may not have just cause to complain of this Accident, but
that, returning back unto my divine Iulietta. I may find her heart, to be
gentle and tender toward me, her rigor to be abated, and her self more mild
and affable unto me, then she was wont to be: Otherwise, I shall think my
self most unhappy, that the flowing waves of the surging Seas, had not (with
my insupportable flames) quenched, and drowned, both my love, and my life
together. For more fearful is the frowning countenance of a Lady unto her
sworn Servant, then the horrible face of the three fatal Sisters unto a sick
man: for the one makes him languish, burning in a lingering fire, of thousand
deaths, whereas the other, in a small space, does rid him, both of life and
pain.

Thus said the Knight, not a little joyful of the answer which the late ECCO
gave unto him. But fond is that man that believes in things that are to come,
seeing they are in the hands of the Almighty, who can change them, making them
to take a quite contrie course, as shall best please him.

And yet may man (only) bring his Estate, to be either Fortunate or misetable.
Fortunate, in being penitent for his defaults, appeasing the wrath of God,
through his true repentance: who being merciful unto him, sends him
Celestial Manda down from heaven. And miserable, in provoking his heanie
anger against him, whereby he withdraws his grace, without giving him that
good which he promised him, and which he hoped for, because heirs unworthy of
the same.

For the Children of Israel were deprived of the Holy Land, (although God had
premised it unto them before) by reason of their sins: their wickedness
opposing it self against his divine force and help, and his heavenly bounty
being turned from them, in that they did so grievously offend him.

Let no person therefore assure himself (through others reports) to taste of
happiness, or to feel of unhappiness heereaster to comes but rather dispose
himself to live well and godly, to the end he may enjoy a blessed life,
without feeling any form of cuill.

But leaving this discourse, we will come to Philistell, who went away much
conceneed, being guided by a good Hope, which because it had wings, fled
quickly from him.

So many are the humors, that Hope is bound to content, as it is impossible
for her to stay long in any one place, they thinking to have a great pleasure,
by enjoying of her, when indeed it is the greatest plague that can be. For he
that is possessed with her but one noure, is punished (at the least) ten days
after for the same. By reason the apprehension of any bad news is so cruel,
as it drowneth and kills all hope of contentment to come hereafter: Enery one
feeling the chances of grief, sarre more sharp and bitter, then the
Accidents or occurrences of joy can be sweet or comfortable any way.

But as he was thus iocund walking homewards, he might hear a Shepherd to
sing this Sing, the sound whereof, suddinly made him stay, as the voice of the
Ryder, does the horse upon which he is seated. And the rather did he listen
unto it, because he was desirous of novelties, which naturally pleases our
senses, whilst staying his walk, between (the several passions of) griese
and delight, he might hear this pittious Dittie following.

What should I wail thus, weep, and make those outcries?
If my misfortunes, (where themselves they should drown)
Burn their most hot selves, hotter far, then burns
Thick smoking Aetna.
Thrice woeful Lover enerlasting wretched,
Who still does lauguish heavily (sans comfort)
And nener hopecan, but to live in sorrow
Until his life end.
Far better were it never for to be borne,
Then to be always cru Ily afflicted
With such a plague, as hourly more and more does
Grow and increase still.
What cross a man is subject to by D stini-,
(Withouten hope) is sure nere to be helped.
Nor does it leave him, till that he be forced
For to leave life's term.
Then (prithee) sweet death, come away and and me,
Come, and abridge the number of my bad days,
Nor caust thou blamed be for to kill a body
Wanting a line soul.
Thon that cuttest off so many of our crosses.
(Courteous) come, come dispatch me quickly,
He cannot live, but in exceeding anguish
That his own life hates.
There is not anything but has his ending,
And what is mortal, has not here long biding, (once)
But yet my wounds grow more and more, nor death
Seeks for to change them.
None will (so much) as pity on me take (now,)
Nor on my fancy too too dearly purchased,
All (saning sorrows) in the lash doc leave me,
I being at worst.
Thus without dying, do I vade and perish,
Thus flow sower salt tears from mine eyes for ever,
Whilst thut the heanens scoff at these my crosset,
And my fair evil.
But if, (...) tall Cupid be, and mighty,
Able to vanquish men and soneraigne Gods too,
Why then my soul (now) heales he not? He cannot,
Only my Love can.
But she (ore cruel) too too much deceiues me,
Not from her (as yet) any succor find I,
Baln^e for my sore, she yielded not unto me,
But my decay seeks.
Yet it is my hope, that Cupid (at the last) will
Venge on her my death for her oner proud heart.
Ofe such deceitful dames (as she) hane loned,
Yet never are loved.
Love often strikes as he passes by, blind,
And hurts the best; as well as basest persons,
Venus is witness, Mirrha so, and Dido,
Who slew her own self.
And yet before (thus) Mistress mine should plagued be,
I pray (ye Gods all) let my soul from hence flit,
Fore I endure to see that any ill should
Unto her happeu.
Too well (to wis^ them ill) her eyes I do love,
And too too careful am I, of her welfare,
I only study, how I best might please her,
Though to mine own pain.
He that (indeed) loves, rather had he hazard
For to die desprate, thousand times, and thousand,
Than for to veiw his Lady line in anguish,
Making her end so.
Philestell, knew by the voice, that it was the Shepherd Coribant, who being
set leded from his hard hearted Dame, was walking all alone solitarilie, sighing
forth this Song, which was (in a manner) no sooner ended, but that he might
perceive a fair Nymph to approach toward him, who having a warbling Lute in
her hand, sits down by the side of the foresaid sorrowful Shepherd,
singing most sweetly these verses following.

Trust (now) no more,
Ye mortals poor,
The Gods above,
Their wonted grace,
From you they chase,
Nor you they love.
They do despise,
Our sighs and cries,
And ue them jest:
All pity mild,
They have exilde,
From out their breast.
Their Altars proud,
No hope does shroud,
Of good to come,
And when we pray,
As deaf they stay,
Seeming right dumme.
Then silly Swain,
And Shepherd plain,
Else where go crane,
Fonds he that mones,
To stocks and stones,
Himself to same.
Elsewhere declare,
Thy woeful care,
And leave the skies:
Thy woeful plaints,
Thy heart that taints,
They des despise.
The heavens look red,
With rage are spread,
And borrour too:
It Is they, is grief,
Without relief,
That us undeo.
He is a so,
That thinks not,
That from that place,
Through destiny,
Most wretchedly,
Comes our assgrace.
Then better it is,
For death to wish,
And end our days,
Then still in strife,
Lead such a life,
So plagude always.
For death's our friend,
When he does end
Our bitter smart:
And through the same,
Does rid our pain.
With hickrome dart.
This Nymph was Orithia, (amorots of Areas) who after she had sent forth many
scalding sighs, spoke thus unto the Shepherd. Whut hope remains for that
vassasse (who have taken up arms against his lawful Prince, and done him
thousands of damages in spoiling of his country) to look for succor at his
hands, when he shall fall into misery.

The law of Justice, permits to oppose force to force, to suffer wrong, against
injury, and to repulse violence with all the fury that they be; Neither is he
blame-worthie, who rightly punishes such injuries as he has wrongful
received: Inasmuch, as Justice commands that he that does ill, must receive
reward according unto the same.

It is a hard matter, to obtain succor from our enemy, although Coriolanus
had that good fortune, and that sumous Aihenian Themistocles, long before him,
for the remembrance of the injuries that are past, and those outrages which we
have received, does bandie and set it self against the good will, which
(perhaps) we might find in our need.

And surely they had need to be borne under a most fortunate Plannet, to be
most excellent and worthy men of desert, that dare venture to lend their
helping hand unto their adversaries, being in a manner half dead: yet Caesar
did it, although too late it repented him thereof: for he through saving of
Brutus and Cassius, lost through their ungrateful hands, both the Empire and
his life. Malicious hatred being (once) deeply rooted in the breast, is a
poison so violent and strong, as it can hardly (but with great pain) be driven
out of the heart of man yea (do the best you can) for your life, yet will there
some small sparleles thereof still remain couo^t: as we see, we cannot empty
a well never so clear and clean, but that some few drops will always rise
to be seen there.

Besides these little sparkles will carch hold on fire, upon the first and
least occasion that may be; making oftentimes a greater flame, then there was
before. If then disdain, hinders our enemy from doing good unto us, what
hope may poor wild worldlings have, to find relief from the heavens, the
worst adversary they have. For if the faults and injuries, or the wrongs and
abuses, that one offers unto another, makes them to be at deadly hate, what
friendship may we look for from the heavens, whom we so often have so
grievously offended? It is an ordinary course here amongst us, to transgress
the commandments given unto us from above, to tread under our feet their
ordinances, and to jest and scoff at their might and power, which if it be so,
are they then bound to assist us, when we are in want? He that will seek, to
obtain the good will of any man of worth, seeks how to obey and please him
in what he can, studying to apply his will unto his mind, and to condescend
unto whatsoever the other shall command. For of the agreement in manners, is
friendship engendered: whereas we take a quire contrary fashion, showing all
the signs and tokens we can, of ill will unto the heavens, whereby they have
reason the more to detest us.

But you (perhaps) will reply and say, that the heavens are puissantand
Divine, and therefore if they please they many help us. But to this I answer,
that therefore we are the more to be blamed, because that fault that one
commits against a great Monarch or King, is more severely to be chastised,
then that of a poor private person: and he is more to be punished, that does
injury unto a wise, grave, and upright man, than if he had done it unto one
that was wicked, cruel, and unjust.

The powers above then being puissant, may make our fault to be the more
heinous, in that we dare presume to offend them, and they being Divine, our
finnes are less subject to pardon, because we seek to iniure them, who are so
sacred and just. But of all such miserable wretches as appeal unto the aid of
the heavens, I know none, whom they are less bound to help, then such as (we
call) Lovers. For their vnfortunatenes, comes not from above, they are not
the cause thereof, neither are they these which power down upon their heads
this cuill (as oftentimes they do, war, Famine, and Pestilence, these being
the ordinary whippes, with which they scourge the^ for their impieties) but it
is themselves that are causes of their own sorrows, because they drive away
sage Reason from them, who is of might sufficient, to deliver and set them free.

The frantic Bedlem that wilfully kills himself, can he, dying, accuse any
other of his disaster, or complain of a stranger, when he has murdered
himself? No more can a fond Lover, hurting himself, be angry with the
heavens, who was not the cause thereof, but he himself. And herein, they
resemble little children, that having done a fault, lay the blame thereof,
either upon their play-fellowes, or upon something else, being never willing to
confess that they have done amiss. Fuen so, they themselves having felt one
burning in their breasts, the furious fire, which in the end consumes and
destroy eth them, condemn the powers above for the same.

But small reason have they so to do, for they that use it, are rather counted
to be full of rage, and given to murmr, then esteemed as wise and prudent
persons. And yet I cannot deny, but that the heavens narurally, do (as it
were) seem to be bound to do us good, but the accident oftentimes corrupts
the Nature.

The Parent by Nature is bound to love his child, yet, if his his own flesh,
shall be perverse, and ill given, becoming a mortal enemy unto his Father,
this right of Nature cease, and he is no more bound to do any thing for him,
no more than for a stranger.

There is a just law grounded upon this reason, which permits the Father
being justly offended with his Son, to dishinherit him of his lands; this
being the very same punishment that the children of Sophocles suffered, for
that they most maliciously accused their Father to dote for age, and to be out
of his right wits, only because they would have deprived him of his
possessions and goods.

Brutus likewise, stuck not to prosecute the death of his too forward son,
most cruelly, and with great disgrace also, because he had done, as well
against the Commonwealth, as contrary unto his own command.

So therefore, although the heavens (I speak all this against my self as well
as thee) Coribant, for that I am as wretched a Lover as thy self art (in
every degree) be our common Father, and for that cause is naturally bound to
do us good, yet notwithstanding, is he not bound to show us this kindness,
if we shall gricuously and willingly offend him: as the Accidence of the
offense shall be more violent and strong, then the natural Right is, which by
reason of this, quite overthrows the other. For as water quenches the fire,
and makes it cold as any Ice, which by nature is hot, burning, and full of
heat. So the discourtesies and injuries, which we offer unto such as by Nature
were provided to be our protectors and defenders, drown and extinguish all
their deuoire and Right, altering their good minds from us, quite contrary
unto that it was at the first.

A man that is by kind borne vicious and bad, and such a one as brings forth
of the womb of his mother, wickedness with him into the world, may (per
Accidence) through (good education, and bringing up) become virtuous and wise.
Euenso, the Accident of injuries and displeasures, may change and alter the
courteous inclination of a kind friend, sowring and sharpning the same against
us, as the Lees and dregs do the sweetest wine. And this mischief falling
upon our heads, we cannot condemn any for it, but our own selves, who are
the chief and efficient cause thereof. And therefore we are much in the wrong,
to lay the blame on him, whom through our own mere folly we have made him
our so, although he be slow and slack to help us, we being fallen into
misery, although before he by nature, was bound to lend unto us his helping
hand, and to assist us, in what he could certainly, if we were well and godly
given, and without provoking or tempting the Eternal Power above: would we,
but confirm our selves in all our actions, according unto his desire, keeping
us with the bonds of his commandments; there is no doubt, but he would aid
us, hearing us when we should call unto him, and would nor stick to rain
down Manna (as he did) for the children of Israel, nourishing us in the
wildest Deserts that be.

But what law can force or constrain him to show us this mercy, when we show
our selves to be his mortal enemies, going about to increase his wrath every
hour against us. But say that he were willing and ready (as we are most
unworthy thereof) to help us, and that it would please him, to have this
pitiful and favorable regard over us, yet may you be well assured, he would
never take any charge, nor ever make any account of Lovers; for their griefs
is not numbered amongst the plagues of other miscrable creatures (the second
cause whereof the heavens oftentimes are, our sins being the first) Love
being seen to be but a very mere folly, and therefore never moves the
heavens with compassion to heal them.

A great and gross error therefore it is amongst Lovers, to imagine that the
heavens are the Authors of their pain, but a far greater fault is it in
them, to require their aid and assistance: for Love is not any kind of
contagious disease, causing men to die, cutting off one after another, and for
that cause, has reason to implore the heavens for aid to help them (as they
do when any great mortality or plague rages amongst them: but it is a
sickness, that continues still without dying, with which only sensual
persons and sooles (and none else) are infected.

This is the reason, that we have never known any Lovers, to have been cured
through miracle, whereas we find written in diverse learned books, that the
bodies of many men, being dead, have been restored to life again, and that
many have been cured of incurable discases, only this vain sickness is
unworthy of remedy and relief, because it proceeds not, neither through
the anger of the heavens, nor by reason of the contagion of other diseases, but
only through our own foolishnes.

Now as that amity cannot be firm and strong between man and woman, where
they answer not one another in desires and affection (although naturally they
are bound to love one another) even so, the heavens cannot be accused of
cruelty, in not scourging mortal creatures, if the cause which should draw
them unto this charitable endeavor, be taken away from them.

Let us then no more exclaim against the Celestial Power above, but let us
thank our own selves that we deserve no better of him, our sins being the
cause, he gives us over. As the fellon cannot blame the Judge that condemns
him to death, nor accuse him of overmuch severity, in that he dies, but
rather his own bad living that brought him unto so untimely an end; for he is
not to be thought ill of, who does rightly discharge his office, wherein he is
placed, following the line of Justice in all his proceedings, though never
so much discommoditie happen thereby unto the wicked; because it is a virtue to
punish vice, and not any Tyranny, what punishment soever is afflicted upon
those that are ^ad and leaudly given.

Never trouble thy self then to cry unto the heavens, to assist thee in thy
troubles; for they are deaf at the prayers of Lovers, and are not obliged, to
require and make whole that sore, which we (through our own foolishnes) have
made to corrupt our own bodies. After the Nymph had thus schooled her
Shepherd, she without staying for his answer, began to sing in a sweet note,
this Ode following.

Now that Boreus with his cold
Does this Country round infold,
And his Isicles displaies,
Whilst the Verdure green he slaies,
We must end our life ere long,
And shut up our mournful song.
Now that more than cruel pain,
Brings our hopes for to be vain,
And that Love makes us distill,
Salt tears (sigrnes of ou kind will)
Needs we must our lives term end,
Unto t'h eanens to ascend.
Now that such is our sad care,
As of help we helpless are.
That cross Fates seeks us to grieve,
Why should we desire to line?
Better it is to die, than still
Follow what works us more ill.
Now that sighs, and sobs, and tears,
The subjects of our verses hears.
And whilst this plague gains our heart,
Let us likewise make it smart.
By a death that one day may,
Make us victor every way.
Now that skies with lightnings blast,
Forct our pleasures not to last.
And that Sun no more does shine,
We must yield to tempests time.
(Loyal we) will lay us down,
And go (willing) to our Tomb.
Now that cold and chillie fear,
Haunts us ghastly every where.
Seek we must, by cruelty,
For to end our misery.
For an end to every thing,
Gentle death (none else) does bring.
Now that burning fire are bright
Has our souls consumed quite.
Leaving naught with us but greanes,
Lets our selves rid all at once.
Dying, lets our courage prous,
Oenon like for Paris lone.
The Nymph having made an end of her drearie song, began to speak a fresh in
this sort. I assure thee (Shepherd) though I sing, yet do I take small
pleasure in the same, for my note is like the tune of that snowy Bird which
sings in the River Meander, and yet with these my sighs, the extremity of
my pain is somewhat slaked and assuaged. Grievously does he die, that is not
able to digest the potion which he has in his stomach, so the grief which
is enclosed in the mind, does most suddenly choke us up, if there be not some
way devised for a vent, by which it may pass. That Cannon bursteth, into which
powder is put, if there be no void place, through which the fire may issue
forth.

There is not a heart, be it never so courageous, but the pain of Love will
make it to bend and break, unless it ease it self with sobbing and weeping:
and yet alas, these remedies are but as worthless Plasters of subtle
Chyrurgians, who to keep the wound the longer from healing (to the end they
may gain the more of the Patient) win time (still) by laying such salues
unto it, as rather make it worse then better. For to speak truth indeed, Love
passes not away through length of time, wears not away with weeping, nor is
satisfied, though we lament and sorrow never so much. He is more proud and
fierce, more stubborn and hard, than the Rock, that is made hollow with the
often droppings of water. And to give you a sufficient testimome of the same,
besides that I my self have had experience thereof, I will report unto you a
strange History, in which, you shall have a taste, of millions of cruelties
that he did committ, bringing his loving flaues to their utter overthrow in the
end.

But what? did I say I would display Love in his colors? Alack it is
impossible, for I my self am not able to report the least part of mine own
griefs, not much unlike unto the principal Actors of my Tragedy. But it is
all one, I must, and will report it. Examples that are gone and past, teach us
(that come after) how to live well, and beat plain the way, which leads us,
either unto black infamy, or else unto immortal glory; besides, the times
with such chances as they bring forth, are found (often) to be like, and
agreeable in effects. Harken therefore, for now I begin my Tale.

It is a comman speech (almost of every one) that beauty, ought to be
accounted, as an inestimable Jewel, be stowed upon us, by the Gods, whom (as
it is thought) it does resemble, they themselves, having vouchsafed to honor
it (here) upon the earth, to the end, that men, adoring the same, may (the
better) learn how to worship them aright. For one would think, it were
impossible to encounter or meet with anything, more excellent, or, that is of
more power to commandouer the hearts of mortal men. Notwithstanding all this,
I am of a contrary conceit, being of opinion, that beauty ought rather to be
christened by the name of the Fountain, from whence sprang forth (in great
abundance) all the misfortunes, and calamities, that happen in this world. For
the more beautiful a thing is, the more it is desired, this desire ingendring
in the mind of man, a thousand devises, either, cruel, dishonest; or
unreasonable to obtain the same, and to carry it away, because, to purchase
what one does couetor like, a man carrth not (oftentimes) to infringe and
break, the bars of Justice, Honor, and of Law, imagining that the
accomplishment of all things, lies in the effecting of his desire. So as, I am
not of their minds, who place beauty above all other mortal things, but
rather judge it, to be more pernicious unto men then Serpents, whom they loathe
and fly from, as from their deadly enemies.

This beantie serves for a Subject and matter where upon Love may work the
better, to exercise his most unlawful and tyrannical effects, in as much as
(without him) he could have nothing whereupon he might be working. Now the
cause of vice being taken away, the effect thereof ^^eth, and he that shunneth
the occasions of sin, can hardly or seldom offend. Only beauty is the
occasio, of all such enormities as Love does commit, and therefore upon her,
may we well lay the foundation of all humane calamities. For what wickedness is
there, but Love has perpetrated, and brought forth? Helena the fair, wrought
the overthrow of famous. Troy, and all the Phrigian Nobility; Bryseis the
beautiful, sowed discord and di^fention, amongst the Gretian Captains: And
lovely Cleopatra, filled the whole Sea and Land of Egypt, with streams of
goarie blood. And now harken, how I will confirm what I have spoken, to be
most true, by this Histone following.

In the Marchesse of Lomherdie (a most sruitfull country) there dwelt a
Gentle, man, nobly desceded, being Lord of a (...) goodly Castle, wherein (for
the most part) (...)

This Ge^lle man (...) more challe) (...) be made much (...), by her husband,
she having two such (...) bounding miner.

This their maritage (at the first) was the (...) them both, for there wanted
nothing more to (...) Paris and (...) conceived, when they were first (...)
Admitus with Alcesta: or that of Vltsses with Penelope; or (...) was nothing,
in respect of the true delight that these two (...) being coupled so sacredly
and surely together.

But what is too violent (be it adversity or prosperity) can not be (...)
more then he who over swistly, and too too hastily beginning his course,
loosert (v^ on the sudden) his breath, and so in the midst of his race
fails, both in force, and in running, whether it be, either because their
violent beginnings ingendereth their proc^edings, (for that without reason, no
sure foundation can be laid or else, that their hues passes away with their
own overmuch violence, as a great and outrageous fire, consumes in a sinall
time great store of wood and sewell.

But not to digress from our first matter. Not far from this gallant
Lombard, called Leander, was there an other fair place, the owner whereof, was
a neighbor of his, a youthful Gentleman, a Batcheler, and unmarried; which
two, what by reason of the nearenesse of their houses, and the conformity of
their manners, grew to be so inward and dear friends, as they could not
abide one to be from another; and their love was so great, as all things (as
far as honor would permit) was common between them.

Pilades was never so great with Orestes, Theseus never nearer to Peritheus,
nor Alexander, never more beloved of Ephestion: then Leanaer was of his friend,
and his friend of him.

Never went they on Hawking, Hunting, or any other such like laudable
exercise, but they were together: Being at home, they had but one board, and
being abroad, but one bed, and one purse between them: as if they had
benesworne brethren, and both borne of one mother. But now mark the difference
between leaud Love, and loyal Amity.

This friendship betwixt these two young neighbors, so sacred, so religious,
and honest, was famous every where, and commended throughout all the whole
Country there about: which never thelesse, cruel LOVE divided and brake in
sunder. Yea, and in such sort, as that which was the chief joy and contentment
of them both, cost them both their lives.

By this then, may we perceive how contrary LOVE is unto Friendship: for
whereas the one is laudable, honest, praise-worthie, and profitable, the other
is wicked, and cruel, sowing discord and malice, (amongst such as were, and
should be) most faithful and firm friends, one unto an other.

So did LOVE drown and extinguish (long since) all respect, friendship, and
duty, which Medea ought unto her Father, bereauing her of all natural pity,
tearing in pieces her own proper Brother, to succor and help her Lover Jason.

And so likewise this mischievous LOVE, forced the daughter of Minos, to be his
mortal enemy, only to follow her deceitful servant Theseus.

Neither did this wicked LOVE work a less villainy against these two
friends: for Leander, having (as I said before) a most excellent, fair, and
modest wife, but (as Hellena, unfortunate) was the occasion that she ministered
means and matter unto LOVE, to put in practice, and to exercise so many
cruel and unjust parts, (as he afterward did) but if the Innocent merit to
be excused, then is she not to be accused, as the loss of her own dear life
afterward showed.

But what? kingdoms (oftentimes) which of themselves are rich and necessary,
set a fire, most hurtful, damageable, and spoiling wars, of which
notwithstanding, they are many times clear of) craving no other thing, then
only to submit themselves under the dominion and government of the right and
lawful heir unto the Crown.

But the ambitious desires of men are they that make the wounds, by reason of
the greediness they have to enjoy that, which in their conceits, they judge to
be fair, profitable, and pleasant.

This Gentleman, the friend of Leander, called Antonio Picchio, made account of
Leunders house as his own, being seldom or never from thence, and the longer
he stayed (there) the better he was welcome, his married friend, and his wife
(for his sake) giving him the best entertainment they could devise.

It is an old said saw, that a man always likes his neighbors house,
better than his own. Whether it be the changing of lodgings is the cause, or
the strange and good company that he finds, An old saying.
where there is good refort and merry.

Now whilst our Batcheller passed his time most pleasantly away, he began
inwardly to cast an affection unto his friends wife, and to love her far
better then he did her husband.

And thus are many men now a days made account of, only for their wives
sakes: as many kiss the children, only for the Nurses sake.

Tuta frequensque via est, per amici fallere nomen,
Tuta ftequensque licet sit via. crimen habet.
The safe and surest way it is
By fri: udship to deceive:
Though safe and surest way it be,
TO is knauerie by your leave.
So long he began to like her, that at last he was troubled in his mind, so
as a secret conceit ran still in his brain, a novel flame was kindled in
his breast, and a new strange desire changed the nature of his first humor: And
in so much as within a little while after, he became another kind of man then
he had been heretofore.

I will (now) marvel no more, why the Poets have set down so many humane
bodies to be changed (through LOVE) into diverse insensible and senseless
likeness, and shipes. For there is no doubt, but that the very countenance, the
conditions, and the desires of Lo^ers alter and change, in so much as they
turn themselves into new bodies, (as the Snake does cast her skin) by reason
this extreme hot and supernatural passion, coming upon the sudden) and
crossing the right nature of man; breaks and chaseth it soon away, as a
sudden flood of water, carries before him, both hedges, Trees, and houses,
and whatsoever else withstandeth his violence.

And so did it happen unto foolish Antonio Picchio: The desire he had to see
his she friend, and chase the Dear with her husband, was the occasion he came
oftener to Leanders house, Lovers metamorphosed and changed.
then (otherwise) he would have done: for he was passing crafty, and knew too
too well, how to color his coming thither, Love being his Schoolmasters, and
having taught him this cunning.

Lovers never want a pretext or shadow to cloak theit affections. It is the
first lesson they learn in Cupids school, and which they study carnestly to
observe, to the end (that for want of concealing that, The first lesson that a
Lover learneth.
which they are most desirous should be hid from the sight of others) they
fear it it should be afterward discovered, and appear in his right form and
likeness.

The eyes of his Mistress only seemed in his judgment, worthy to be marked
and regarded, although they resembled the Viper, which as well hurts as
helps a man: for no sooner did he gaze upon them, but that his soul
swallowed down a sweet poisonous potion, feeling at one instant both pleasure
and pain, yet could not he live, without approaching near this ardent Fire.
Although the nearer he came unto it, the more (by degrees, he consumingly)
both melted and wasted away.

Wherein he resembles that sick patient, who does nothing else but drink,
and after he has drunk, finds the drink to double his grief, thoughout
his body.

Had he had but the liberty of speech, and might he have been bold to have
uttered his mind, he had not endured half the torments he did, but being
prevented by dishonest means, and because he was unworthy to receive any
succor or help, he was forced (though much against his will) to be silent,
and to hold his peace; For overmuch talk (oftentimes) doubleth a man's shame,
and hinders him not a little. His aim, was at the mark, which only
appertained to his Friend.

And like as the Thief fears to deliver his mind unto the Judge, because of
the great desire he has to commit some one Robbery or other: Fuen so, a Lover
(being in his conceits dishonest, and quite repugnant to Honor, dares not but
conceal the same, as much as he may, to avoid greater disgraces that may
ensue, for fear of further danger.

This was the cause that the son of Seleucus loving his Stepmother over
dearly, (because he kept his mouth so close, his lips being sealed with the
Signet of dutiful respect and lawful Honor) endured great torment, lying at
the point of death.

The heart of man being tainted with poison, dies soon, unless by some means
or other, the venom be cast forth; and therefore most insupportable is their
anguish and tortures, who dare not discover their hurts, because they are
unworthy of help. But what?

Who ever saw, but that a Lover vain,
Conceales his grief, nor dares bewray his pain?
And so did Picchio, only his heavy eye, and sad countenance, supplied the
office of his tongue, by which he declared his mind by sighs, though
otherwise he durst not. And therefore, it is a hard matter for those that love
constantly, to conceal their passions, do they never set so hard and close a
Bridle before their tongue; for either the pale color of their face, either
their sad and heavy countenance, A Lover can hardly co^^cale his grief.
either the tears that (always) flow from their eyes, or else their
continual sighing and sobbing, will discover and bewray their affection, for
this passion is too terrible, too vehement, and too hot, to be keptsecret,
without disclosing some sign or token of the violence thereof: no more then
fire can be hid under the Ashes, which (nevertheless) sends forth a heat.
Yea, and sometimes a flame too.

This then, was the occasion, that Antonio was changed both in favor and
shape, and yet notwithstanding, these were not sufficient strong testimonies,
for the standers by, to judge that he was in Love.

Seldom or never is the Criminal condemned to die upon bare suppositions or
likely hoodes; if neither his own eyes, have given any shrewde guess, or his
own tongue discovered his offense. And yet this alteration of body in
Picchio, made every one to wonder, in so much as they were maruellously
desirous to know the reason thereof; for the nature of man is always very cur
lous, to hear of strange matters, delighting in novelties, and to understand
the several events, and occasions of the same.

But to what end should the Physician enquire of a sick man, the original of
his discase, what it is, and how it came; if the patient be steadfastly resolved
to die, and will not live?

Even so, it was but lost labor, for those who did importune very often poor
Picchio, to discover where his most pain lay, when he meant not to tell them.
For he had been worthy to have been registered for a right Dolt indeed, if he
should have made them acquainted therewith, when they could do him no good at
all, and who were so far from helping of him, as they sooner would have
brought poison then Balm, for his recurelesse wound.

O Tyraunous LOVE, thou art not content alone, to inflict upon us many
corrosiues and dolours, unless thou forcest us also to commit many villainous
Actions, making us thy executioners, by doing of which, we loose our whole
contentments, our honors, and our lives.

Was not the anguish and agony that hapless Antonio endured, sufficient to
content thee? but that he must needs perpetrate so heinous a deed, as must
cost him the life of her, whom he so dearly loved; must cause her husband to
die, and make him to spill his own heart blood, and all to satisfy thee?

But it is a thing usual and ordinary, to see in thy Theater, thousands of
Tragedies, of all sorts of murders, horrible Treasons, and most damned
villainies, presented upon the Stage before thee.

It is not (as thou think) enough to have life of one only, (as those
cruel Gods used to do, (who demanded men to be sacrificed unto them) but
thou will have many to appease thy wrath, that thou may be (as it were)
drunk with their blood, and grow fat with eating and feeding upon their
flesh.

But to come to kind Leander, who seeing Picchio in this heavy taking, began
to condole wonderfully with him for his sickness, and as it were, to
participate, and bear parcel of his pain, crying out for the sorrows of his
friend. But that which grieved him most of all, was, because he could not
learn of Antonio, what the cause of his coffeehouse should be, taking it
passing unkindly at his hands, that he would never tell him. But, had he but
known the mind of him, he had cut off many woeful inconveniences which
after followed.

But alas, Men have not windows in their bodies, that we may see into their
hearts, and only God above knows the secret thoughts of every one.

Priam thought that he had broke asunder the fatal thread of the destruction
of Troy, commanding that Paris (his own son) should be cast amongst wolves,
to be devoured of them.

And yet (good man) he could not. Danaus causing his own daughters, cut their
husbands throats, came for all this unto that lucklesse end, which the Oracles
of the Gods, had foretold him.

Astiages sought to murder, and to make away Cyrus, and nevertheless, he dyed
a wretched death, as was before allotted unto him.

Often may Destiny be foreseen, but (never) can it be prevented: for what the
Heavens decree against mortal men, that shall happen unto them; let them seek
never so much to prevent it. Leander was ordained before his birth to have this
hard hap, neither could his good Fortunes hinder it: had he sought never so
much to avoid the same.

For can poor men, with their weak feeble power,
The force of Gods cross, when they gin to lower?
The Titans, those monstrous Giants, were blasted with Lightning, and tumbled
down headlong into hell, because they would pesume to encounter with the Gods:
And Tamirus and Marsius, the one lost his eyes, and the other his skin,
because they dared to compare with Apollo, and his sacred Sisters. But never
thelesse, to begin where we left.

Although Leander often entreated, solicited, yea, and Coniured Antonio, to
make manifest the cause of his sickness unto him, yet could he not so much as
get one word from him, which made him so much the more disconsolate.

And yet to say the truth, who would have done, but as Antonio did, being in
his case? For to have discovered the truth thereof unto him, had been as if a
guilty wretch should have confessed his criminal misdeeds before the Judge,
and to put himself into the hands of his utter enemy, having just cause to be
revenged of him.

Mean space Leander (after his old wont) takes on, and lamenteth, that he
has not that kind interest in his friend, as (before) he thought he had had:
Crying out that he loves him not. For otherwise, he would not let to have
disclosed a greater matter then that unto him.

For (said he, weeping) unto Antoni^o, Persuade thy self (dear friend) that
I will spend my heart blood to do thee good, and neither shall any means be
left unsought for, to help thee, so I may but only know the cause of thy
malady. Thou know thy welfare is mine, thy sickness, my sorrow, and that
as long as thou art ill, I cannot be well at ease.

Why then (thou that art the sweetest part of mine own self) should thou
thus defer to reveal thy coffeehouse unto him, who is thine own sworn
brother? and who cannot be content, as long as thou art thus displeased? Now
(good now) do not delay any longer, but let me know thy mind, since I am
grieved as much as thy self, to see thee in this most grievous taking.

Truly, truly, if you do keep this still (thus from me) I cannot choose but
think, you are no perfect, nor true friend indeed: for no fortune bad or
good, ought to part such as knit in true frienship, and loyal affections
bands, and they ought to be partners, as well of weal as of woe.

Then why should thou doubt me, or be thus strange unto me? have you seen
or marked any thing in me, that might make thee conceit me, not to be the same
man toward thee, that I have been of yore? Or do you imagine, that I am not
as willing to take part of your bad fortunes, as in former time I have been, to
be acquainted with your good? If you think so hardly of me, I protest you do
me the greatest wrong that may be.

No, no: one friend must not conceive sinisterly of another, neither mistrust
him, without vehement and most apparent presumptions, but must always judge
the best, rather then imagine the worst, no more then one ought to condemn him
that is virtuous and honest, unless there be apparent proof and restimony
against him of the same.

The affection that is between two friends, is so sacred and religious of it
self, that there is no sense, why any should take exceptions against it, as
long as it shows no contrary effects, but such as be worthy of all
commendation and praise.

If thou think, that to recover thy health, or to purchase some comfort for
thee, it lies in my power, and that I have that which may do thee good, then
have thou the more reason to demand it freely: For rightly may he be counted
but a counterfeit friend, that will not employ the uttermost of his power, to
help his friend, and the rather, for that true friends indeed, rejoice, and
are not a little proud, when there is any occasion given them to engage
themselves, or what they have, for to profit one another.

For as a learned Scholar desires nothing more, then that his learning may be
known abroad in the world: so a sure friend, does not covet for any thing so
much, as to render some assured testimony of his infallible friendship, unto
his best beloved friend.

Then do not smoother this thy grief within thy self, but make me acquainted
therewithal: Otherwise, thou will induce me to have this opinion of thee,
either that thou do hold me for thine enemy, or else, that thou art no
right friend unto me, and therefore, judge of me by thine own self.

Although these speeches were uttered with great earnestnes, and with a most
hearty affection, yet could they not work any thing at all in the mind of
Antonio.

As the wild Boar, sitting upon his tail, stands stoutly in his own
defense against the dogs, not stirring once, as much as one foot, from his
first place, now tearing one Brache, and then shaking in pieces another: even
so Antonio Coneealeth still (within his breast) his pain
Nor, (but to Mistress his) will tell the same.


But the means how to discover it unto her, he knows not: much less, how to
find occasion to break his mind unto her.

O how hard a matter is it to do ill, and when we have done it, to conceal
the same? whereas the behavior and carriage of the well-meaning man is safe
and sure, not unlike a common beaten way, that is easy to be found.

But now Leander looks for an answer of Antonio, who could not choose, but
that he must needs answer him, and answer him he did: but (God knows) in
such manner, and with such simple and bare excuses, as Leander perceived too
plainly, that the young Lover meant not to acquaint him with that which
troubled him so much: which was the reason that for that time, he gave over to
importune him any more, and the rather, for that his conscience told him, he
had done what he could, to the uttermost of his power, as much as did belong
unto him.

For, when one has offered unto his dear and beloved friend, (as much as in
him lies, to hinder, or cross and keep back some inconvenience that is like
to happen unto him) although he cannot bring what he would to pass: yet is it
far less grief unto him, then if the pretended mischief had come, and he
had offered no kindness at all unto him: because we being mortal creatures,
are not able to cope with the Gods, whose wills it is, it should be so, and to
be overcome by them, (after we have done to the uttermost of our strength and
power) is not a cause why we should chafe or stomach thereat; in as much as
we are subject unto them, and the rather, because we are made and formed by
them.

But now Antonio his discase increases (daily) more and more, he takes no
rest, nor can he eat or drink, his color is earthly, and his face is pale
and lean. The day he spends in sighing, and the night in sobbing, whilst his
eyes look read, with continual weeping. (For though tears be forbidden
brave and gallant Spirits) yet are they tolerable in them, when they chance
to fall into the amorous and ardent passions of Love. His arms are
brawne-fallen, and on his body appears little or no flesh at all, in such
sort, as he resembles an Anatomy, or dead carcass, rather then a living man.

As he that is plagued with a hot burning Fever, gives many testimonies of
the same. One while, by sudden shaking and shiuering, throughout his whole
body, another while, by a cold sweat, and then by a hot one again. Even so,
Antonio, his in firmitie appeared by many signs, there being not one joint or
member of his coarse, but what showed him to be extremely tormented, and as it
were, at deaths door.

Which Leander seeing, began to be half mad, for the very anguish thereof:
what to do he knew not, and therefore was almost at his wits end. To set
upon him afresh, to see if he could persuade him to shriue himself unto him;
he thought were but follic, by reason, he found him (before) so unwilling to
participate unto him, or confess any thing.

At the last he began to think, that although he kept it from him (perhaps
upon some secret occasion) yet peradventure, another might wring it out of him.
Whereupon, he went unto his wife, praying her to take the pains to see, if
she could learn of Antonio, that which he had spent so much labor to know,
and yet by no means could attain there unto.

The chaste Lady, who was wonderful willing to obey her husband, and who
affected (yet with modesty) what her Lord liked, being of her own
disposition, so courteous and pitiful, as she gricued for the hurt of an
other: especially he being the dearest friend her husband had, gladly accepted
of the proffer. Promising him to handle the matter (both by her diligent care,
and good aduifement) so cunningly, as it should go hard, but that (before few
days were gone and past) she would understand and know all.

And so she did indeed, speaking (then more truer then she was aware of. For
after she had used to come and visit him (now and than) he began to recover
prettily well: insomuch as one day, the gentlewoman finding him alone,
intteated him very kindly to walk with her into the garden hard by, somewhat
to recreate himself, (and to revive him in that feeble and weak estate)
telling him, it would not be amiss for him (now and than) to take the open
air: which words, she delivered with so sweet a grace, and so lonely a smile,
as (now) he was ten times deeper in love with her, than he had been before. O
how foolish are Lovers, who because they themselves are senseless, therefore
they think that every one else is so likewise; and that, because they love,
therefore, none should be exempted from loving: especially this is one of their
conceits, as concerning such women as they affect, that because they are men
worthy to be liked, therefore (forfooth) these women must love them, if they
but give them never so little entertainment.

And so this vain Antonio persuaded himself verily, that his friends wife,
affected him, because she vouchsafed (in private) to walk abroad with him. He
that has been long sick, is so desirous of his health, that the least ease or
amendment that he finds, makes him believe he is well recovered and whole.
And so fares it with these Lovers, who if they receive the least favor that
may be, at their Ladies hands, they (straitwaies) think, they are their own.

Now was Antomo where he would be, for he might (at leisure) behold the
beauteous eyes, the lovely face, and the fair breasts of his sweet Mistress,
but the more the fond man gazed upon them, the more he was burnt with a secret
inward fire, these rare beauties of hers, drawing him into the bottom less
gulf of his utter overthrow; as the whirle Pooles in the Seas, by many
windings and turnings, still by little and little the ships within their
circled arms, and so devour and swallow them up: mean space, wretched
Antonio, one while, by his looks, another while by his sighs, one while
changing countenance, and another while, looking red as fire, discovered unto
his Mistress (so lively) the secret grief that tormented him within his soul,
as she needed to have known no more, had she been trained up so well as he,
in the school of Love.

But, as the right, true, and honorable Captain, suspecteth not any treason,
because he knows not what it means, and for that he never did covet to
learn the same, so this rare Ge^tlewoman, having never learnd, how to
entertain or like any one, except her husband, could not conceive the amorous
fashions of Antonio, nor what he meant, making love unto her, which was the
reason, his sorrows slaked not, but rather increased more and more. His
fearful glaunces which he stole upon her, and his scalding sighs (faithful
messengers of his mind) forget not to set out the sorrow that he endured. One
while he looked pale for fear, another while he blushed red for shame,
oftentimes, beginning to speak, and so made an end before he had begun. His
heart is willing that his tongue should discover his sickness unto his
Physician, but his tongue (who doubts he shall make the matter worse by
speaking) has not the courage to speak one word. His head is intoxicated, and
troubled, whilst thousands of imaginations run in his brain.

Now he is resolute to bewray his grief unto her, and now again he is of a
quite contrary opinion, not to do it, whilst he both hops and fears, and
all at one instant. But, o wretched carcass the while, to entertain so many,
and so diverse enemies, within it. Fear opposes himself against Love, who
feign would speak, and yet respect does stop and hinder his desire. Feign
would he have some stranger to deliver his mind unto his Lady in his behalf,
by which means (should he have the denial which he already apprehended in
his thought) yet being delivered unto him, at a second hand, he thought it
would not be altogether so terrible unto him.

But he too well knows that there is not any that can do it, or that knows
his secret meaning but himself, and therefore as the saying is, he must make a
Page of his own age, or else he must continue as he did, without bewraying his
mind at all. One while he held down his face for shame, fixing his eyes upon
the ground, and an other while Love lifted them up again, forcing him to
stare, and gaze upon the fair countenance of his Mistress, he had all the
gestures and signs of a most miserable Lover attainted of Love, speech only
accepted, and he that is a firm and zealous Lover indeed, never walks
without respect and fear.

The Centlewoman perceives such alteration in his face, and that he often
began to speak, was very importunate with him to know what he meant, and what
he ailed. But every word she spoke, was as a stabbe of a Poinard, given him at
the heart. He fears to speak, what might make his wound worse, and doubts
as much, least he should displease the Lady, who (as he thought) might
(perhaps) enquire the cause thereof, because she would heal it.

The fit opportunity he had, made him to think, that it were best for him,
(now) to lay open his mind or else never, thinking, that when he would, he
should not find so apt a time again; and now again a new toy takes him in
the head, persuading him to remit and refer this business until another day,
but then, by and by, he condemns himself as unwise, that having spent so
much time, to find this commodity, and now (at the last) having gotten it, he
goes about to leave it. In the end, being urged (still) by the Gentlewoman to
resolve her of her doubt, and seeing that he could not well be rid of her,
unless he did satisfy her, in what she demanded, he determined whatsoever
should come of it, to break this Ice, and to bewray his Love unto her,
whereupon with a sad countenance, and often faultring in his voice, he thus
began.

(Fair Mistress) I was in good hope, that my often sighing, with my heavy and
perplexed countenance, had been sufficient to have bewrayed the sorrow that
galleth my heart, without of having had any need to plead for pity unto
you, with my mournful tongue.

But seeing it pleases you, that my speech shall deliver what my heart gave my
troubled countenance in charge, I think it but reason so to do, it being the
command of her, who is the cause of this my woeful martyrdom, I know I do but
sow my seed upon the salt sea shore, and that I lay my nets (although in
vain) to catch the winds, and yet had I rather to deprive my self of all
comfort and joy, then displease you, and send you away justly incensed against
me. He that has devoted himself unto the service of any woman, and will show
all dutiful respect that may be unto her, will have great regard that he
offend her not, and will rather endure any punishment in his own person, than
move her whom he vowed to adore with all reverence.

Seeing then you have so earnestly commanded me to open unto you the very
secrets of my soul, and the first causes and original of all my trouble, I
will condescend unto you, and most faithfully deliver the same, without keeping
back any thing from you at all.

Know then (sweet Lady) that your diamond eyes, have been the torches that
has first lightened this fire, your beauties have been the Fuel, and your
courtly behavior the bellows to kindle the same. You only have made the
wound, and if you list may heal it, and from no other but from your self, am
I to seek comfort, for the wounds of Love are healed by the selfsame dart
that made them, as the Scorpion does, who is of power to help such, whom he
before has stung. Judge then (I beseech you) in what a pitiful plight I am,
and what great cause I have to curse and bewail my hard disaster. For what
hope to recover my self of this dangerous disease have I? and how is it
possible for me, to obtain that, for which (so much) I wish?

Alas, I know not I, and yet Mirrha, joined her desire (although it were
incestious) with her own Father. And Passiphae, Queen of Candio, had her
pleasure of a Bull, quenching by that means, her dishonest heat. But I (poor
wretched Caitiffe) how may I purchase that which (so feign) I would, except
your favorable grace, take compassion upon me, in vouchsafing unto my deadly
sore, that comfortable remedy lying in your hands, which (only) is offorce to
make me well.

Then, what should I use so many words, or trouble you with so tedious a
discourse? Only this I will say, that I hate mine own self, because I would
love you, assuring your self, that my life shall as soon be converted into
ashes, as my soul is likely to be burned through the fire of Love, unless you
cast this necessary water upon it, to quench the heat thereof, putting my
dying heart in security of some good hope to come. I am bold (dear Mistress)
to be thus plain with you, because I am resolute, and have set up my rest, to
choose one of these two ways, either that of death, as soon as you shall
pronounce the sentence of denial unto me, or that of life, if I shall find
you ready and mild, to ease me of my pain.

Think then as you please of this my speech, and censure of me as you shall
best like: here I stand, before the bar of your beauty, expecting either
life, or death, the one being as agreeable unto me, as the other: and although
I must needs tell you that it shall be far greater glory for you to save me,
than to cut me off before my time.

Antonio, having delivered his mind in this desperate kind of manner, made
the Gentlewoman so amazed to hear such an occasion unexpected from him, as she
scarce knew where she was.

Her speech was gone, pale, earthly, was her sight,
A stone (not living creature) seemd she right.
But being come unto her self again, she began to curse within her self, her
foolish over hardines, in that she was so earnest and inquisitiue to know of
him the reason of his discontentments, when it concerned her nothing at all,
doubting least if any disgrace should happen about the same, all the blame
should be laid upon her. How to reply (upon the sudden) she knew not, and
whilst she was musing what she might do, she began to hate him deadly, wishing
vengeance to light upon him, for presuming to court her with such shameless
impudency. Now whilst she stood thus bethinking her self of the matter,
Antonio straitway, imagined it was for his good, that she delaied so long to
answer him; but he found the contrary too soon, for (in the mean time) she
remembered her own honor and chastity, and the great friendship her husband
had showed (though undeservedly) unto this traitorous friend of his, which so
incenst her with just rage and choler, as she began to take up my Gentleman in
this sort. How now sir, what is this you say, dream you, or are you well in
your right wits? What sign or likelishood of vice or dishonestie have you
seen in me, that you should thus proudly solicit and importune me, to
dishonor my self and my kind husband, who loves you far dearer then his
own self? was there ever any so bold to attempt an enterprise so difficult
and hard as this is, which thou go about, without he had been assured before
by some guess or other that he might bring the same to pass? I think none but
thy self.

But tell me I pray you (Antonio) what notice or testimony of lightness have I
given unto the world (at any time) that you should dare thus immodestly to
accost me? Go to your Minions and Curtizans abroad, and court them and not me,
there make a spoke unto such like huswiues, who have no respect either of good
name or fame. You are no Chapman for my Merchandise, no gold can buy mine
honor, I hold it at so high a rate, neither can any love or affection purchase
the faith which I have paund and promisde unto my husband. I am no Lays, nor
any Thais, that thou should seek to urge me thus; thy persuasions being so
perilous unto me. Besides, I am least bound unto thee, than unto any other (in
that) thou, as my mortal enemy lie in wait to spoil and ruinate that
which is ten thousand times more precious unto me than mine own life.

Think, that never the Roman Lucrece redeemed more courageously the loss of
credit, with the price of her blood, then I desire after the same rate to
preserve mine, and that I had always choose rather to die, a chaste and
faithful wife, then live like a most dishonest and disloyal harlot. I rather
covet the troubles and crosses of Penelope, with her slainlesse virtue, then
the merry life of Clitemnestra, with all her foul and beastly pleasures. And
the death of a sober Polixena, shall be still more agreeable unto me, than the
voluptuous living of a wanton Semiramis, being glutted with all sorts of vain
delices and dainties whatsoever. Talk no more (then) unto me of this matter,
for thou do but loose thy labor: for sooner shall the heavens become Sea,
and fair grow to be Ice, before I will yield unto the least of thy requests.
And were it not but that I am in hope that there are some sparks of grace in
thee, and that thou will become a new man, I would take such order to make thee
give over, and to bridle this thy rash attempt, as thou should (never)
speak more unto me thereof, by laying open and displaying thy shameless
practice unto him, who may with good reason and Justice, be revenged of thee
for a busing him (so much) as thou have done.

Cynthia, (for so was the Gentlewomans name) having cooled Antonios heat with
this sharp iniectiue, moved with just chollor, left him, and returned into her
house, he being as much amazed and confounded therewith, as those were, who
went about the building of the Tower of Babell, seeing themselves so suddenly to
have so many languages amongst them, and so different in their proceedings one
against another. As that Murderer is mightily astonished, and in a most bad
taking, upon whom the Judge at unawares comes, as he is wiping of his bloody
sword, and stands by the carcass of him that he has slaughtered, because he
sees there is no way (but one) with him, which is the loss of his life: Even
so was Antonio in such a plight; long time did he stand as still as a stone,
and no sooner was he able to speak, but that he began to lament and cry out
afresh. No heart (were it never so obdurate and hard) had been able to have
endured so heavy a burden of torments as he did.

And now he begins to hate Love, the motive of his miseries: he accuses his
Mistress, the Author of his despair: detesteth his fortune, that his success
was no better in his suit: and curses his tongue, which for being over sawsie
and presumptuous, had utterly overthrown him for ever.

All joy he bids adue, all hope farewell,
No longer now in sorrow, he will dwell.
He is fully bent to die, devising with himself, what kind of death he were
best to choose, to the end he might be rid, both of the world, and of his
wretched estate, all at one time, he will (now) neither sigh nor weep more for
the matter, determining to change his tears into blood, and his sighs into
woeful death: only his desire is, to be fitted of a convenient place to put in
practice the same, for he durst not lay violent hands upon himself in the
Castle of Leander, least (perhaps) it should come to light why he made himself
so away: whereupon he privily conueieth himself away from thence, and gets
him into a thick and dark wood, not far from thenee, where he resolves to
end his life, and make that place his grave. It was aunswerable unto his mind,
it was secret, obscure, and unfrequented of all. This was the cause he began
afresh (being all alone) to sigh and sob, and to ban and curse his ill fortune
again, which being done, he draws his sword, he feels the edge of it, to
see if it be keen and sharp enough, and that done, prepares himself unto
death, thinking it to be much better to die by his own proper hands, as
another brave and high minded Ajax, than to live in continual vexation and
misery, as a base and degenerate Thesites. And now he sets the pommell of
his blade upon the ground, the point whereof was placed just against his heart,
when (as he was minded to thrust himself quite through) behold, death (as he
thought) appeared unto him, with so horrible and ghastly a visage, as he gave
over his enterprise: long was he not in this muse, but that he drew his Raiper
again, condemning much his first fear, when (upon the sudden) an other humor
(more diuilish than the rest) took him, which was not to die, until he had
obtained what he so much coueted, vowing within his soul, that he would have
his will of the fair Cynthia, at what high price soever he bought it.

His Love (now) was turned into hate, and his respectfull duty, into sensual
lust. He thinks not of the danger he is like to incur, by entering into so
infamous an actio^. All former friendship and kind Hospitality is forgotten,
so he may have his wish, either by violence, or what way else, he cares not,
although (afterward) he die for the same: for (so to die, he imagines) he
shall be most happy: and this is his most certain and constant resolution.

O frantic rage, O cursed madness, and O cruel furiousnes of Love! This made
Medea worse than a Bedlem, to massacre her own children: and this brought the
famous Mark Antony, to lose both his honor and his life. Now Antonio hammering
in his head this wicked practice, began to set a good upon the matter, as if
all had been well, beginning to look cheerfully, and making the world believe
he had quite forgotten all former sorrows, as if he would have been merry
ever after, which recovery from his sickness, made every one glad, especially
his true friend Leander, and the Lady his wife, who (verily) thought, that
Antonio had forgotten all his old love to wards her, and that her schooling of
him, in that shroad manner as she did, had made him to be come a new man.

But alas (poor soul) how much was she deceived, for all this while, Antonio
was working of treason against her, and her husband, which wrought their utter
overthrew. As a fire that long time lie hid in a hollow hole, when it bursteth
forth, becomes more violent, more outrageous, and more hurtful, than when it
begins first to burn; Even so the villainie of Antonio, was far more
terrible (making no show of any such thing) then if he had put it in practice
(before) when he was in his sickness, languishing through pain: for he having
bethought himself what he would have them to do, gets a company of
notable Rascals (secretly) together, certifying them what he would have them
to do for him, every one of them being as ready to condescend unto him, in
hope of base gain, as he to command them: and the rather, when they knew it
was to put in practice so damned a deed, such cursed murderers as those being
(always) more prone to evil, than unto good.

Thus having set every thing in order; he most solemnly inuiteth Leander and
his loving wife, to feast with him, upon a certain day appointed for the
purpose, who suspecting no treachery, very kindly accepted of the same,
promising for himself, and for his wife, not to fail but to be there. O how
worthy is a false and treacherous friend of the greatest punishment that may
be, who plaieth the false counterfeit, and of a dear friend, becomes a
deadly foe? and how far more hurtful is he, than an open and professed
enemy, for of the one a man can hardly take heed, because he carries the
veil of friendship to nide his treachery, but the other we may easily avoid,
by reason we know, he seeks to do us any injury that lies in his power.

Poor Leander found this to be true unto his cost. For coming unto Antonio
his house, with his wife, at the first meeting, he made a show unto them, of a
most solemn and hearty welcome, but no sooner were they set at the table,
thinking to be merry, and that they were there as safe, as if their had been
in their own Castle, but behold the ruffianly Murderers being disguised,
brake in (upon the sudden) amongst them, with their naked swords in their
hands, running upon Leander, and giving him many wounds, and that done, they
laid violent hands upon his woeful wife, carrying her away (perforce) and
leaving him there for dead, wallowing in his lukewarm blood.

It is an old saying, that gold is a bad servant, being the occasion many times
that his own masters throat is cut, and that rich men live the wretchedst
lives of all others, because they have great care, and much ado to keep their
goods, and are in as great a fear (continually) least they should lose them:
yet I am of this conceit, that a fair woman is (far more) hurtful unto her
husband, she being as much laid for, or rather more than his gold is, for gold
(except it be taken away by force) never offers himself unto a stranger,
nor betrayeth his Lord: whereas, a beautiful wife (oftentimes forgetting her
self) her honor, and her faith, suffers her self to be carried away by
another, and so betraieth her husband, who (afterward) either dies for grief,
or (else) has his throat cut by his wives Champion and friend.

So was Agamemnon slain by his wife: so died Achilles for Polixenas sake: and
so were the Sabin women, the cause of the wars between their own countrymen
and the Romans. But (now) who could in lively colors set forth the
unspeakable grief of mournful Cynthia, the espouse of Leander, she thinking
he was dead, and her self being in the hands of her most deadly enemies? What
pen were able to write all her pitiful complaints? what paper were
sufficient to contain her laments ^and what report, her more then doleful
speeches?

Ungracious Antonio, the Author of all these evils, having now the prey he so
long time desired, leaves his house (presently) carrying her away (in post)
with him, meaning to go (so far off) as he should never be heard of
afterward, not caring for any thing else, but for her person; and the rather,
because he had gotten in his purse great store of gold and Jewels to defray his
charges in his journey.

But leaving him galloping away with her, we will come (again) unto Leander,
who being found to have (as yet) some life in him, was carried home unto his
Castle, where his wounds being searched by a reverend Hermit (dwelling not far
from him) and one that was very skillful in Chyrurgerie, and sovereign
medicines applied unto the same, he recovered, and was cured before he was
aware. But though he was well in body, yet was he not so in mind, for the
unfortunate knight had many fearful conceits, that troubled him in his head;
one while the dissoya^ltie of his friend gaulled him, and an other while, the
departure of his wife grieved him, but that which most vexed his soul, was,
that he had a vehement suspirion, she should be privy unto this conspiracy,
and so (by consequence) partaker of this murder, as willing, he should be made
away.

Never were the ships of Aeneas or T'lisses, tossed so furiously and with
contrary winds, upon the swelling waves of the soming Seas, as his mind was
canuased and carried too and fro, with diverse opinions and thoughts, as
concerning this matter.

When a man happens to have any strange mischance, he (still) does consture
every thing in the worse part; because, he thinks every body should be
against him, by reason ill fortunes is so common and ordinary unto him, and
therefore he lays the cause of his Disaster, upon every one, and this was it
that made the distemperato Leander to suppose, that his modest wife, had been
consenting unto his plot laid for him, and that he had made her Pailiard, to
put the same in practice, because he had such a firm confidence in his
friendship, as he could (hardly) be induced to think, that he would (ever)
have perpetrated such an heinous act, unless his wife had very earnestly
provoked and urged him to baue done it.

Thus we see, how the Pilgrim (oftentimes) in the night, takes the wrong way
fot the right, and how some take black for white, and yellow for red, in
colors. Yet must I needs say, that such are to be pardoned in some sort
(although they censure ouerrashly and hastily) who coming from having a shrewd
turn done unto them, know not, but as they blindly guess, whom they should
justly blame, for true grief deserves pardon, and loosers have always leave
to speak.

But the righteous God above, who knows the truth of all things, did discover
this, at the fittest time for distressed Cynthia, to clear her, as sometimes
he did Susanua, of this villainie, falsely imputed unto her.

Leander, waxing strong in body (although troubled sore in mind) determined,
either to die, or else to find out the traitor, that had offered him this
monstrous outrage, vowing to be revenged on him; as also, to seek his wife,
whom likewise he meant to punish, if he should find her accessarie, in any point
of the same.

Whereupon, he armeth himself, gets upon his horse back, and accompanied
by three or four Gentlemen (his friends) he searches all the country
thereabouts, to see, if he could hear any tidings, either of that treacherous
villain, or of his wife. In the end, he lights upon a great thick and
gloomie Forest, through which, as he rode, he found a dead carcass of a man,
and a woman lying by him, being in little better case then he was.

But leaving Leander and his companions seeking their adventure, we will come
unto woeful Cynthia his wife, and (when fit time shall serve) we will discover
who was that creature dead, and who that woman, being almost in as bad a taking
as he, upon whom Loander (so strongly) happened. Cynthia being carried away from
her husband, so suddenly, and by such barbarous treachery, was (for a great
while) as one in a trance, hardly coming unto her self again.

And certainly (I think) that if women were subject by nature to die for
sorrow, then (no doubt) but she had died, for never was there woman in this
world, more sad or heavy than she was, no not Niobe, Hecuba, Oenone, Porcia,
Cornelia, nor any other Lady, were she never so overwhelmed with miseries. But
this kind of death seldom or never is incident unto the Female kind, as that
of sudden joy is.

Long lay she in this Ecstasy or sound, and (long) was she before she recovered
her right senses again, and (so much) was she astonished in her mind with the
same, as the passage of her speech was kept close, and shut from her, yet (at
the last) her vital spirits recovered force within her, and her tongue had
liberty to speak.

But alas, she could not as much as pronounce one word, neither was she able
(once) to open her mouth, so woefully did she weep, and so pitt^fully did she
sob and sigh. Diverse sorts of colors (and that in great number) must a cunning
Painter have, to draw a fair and great Picture: Even so, thousands of tears,
and millions of sighs, had this wretched Gentlewoman need of, if she meant
lively to set forth and bewail her Disaster at the fall. For never was any
Ladies sorrows to be compared unto hers.

Hellena was ravished, (but) with her own consent. Neither did her rauishment
bereave her husbands life, as hers did.

Penelope was daily and hourly solicited and importuned, by a number of
tedious and impudent suitors, but yet she was suffered to live chastely, and to
attend the return of her Ulysses.

Hecuba (after she had seen her husband murdered, and all her sons slain)
was led away as a captive or slave into Greece: and (yet) had she more reason
to have borne with patience these her misfortunes, (though in a higher degree
of misery) rather then Cynthia in hers.

For Hecubas mischaunces proceeded from her enemies, to whom the law of Nations
gives leave to do what mischief they can: whereas hapless Cymhias
unhappiness, came from him, whom she esteemed as the dearest and most faithful
friend her Husband had.

Lucrctia, for loss of chastity slew her own self, but her death was the
death of her adversary, and the life and liberty of all her Roman Citizens.
And theresore no woman can be said to have been more wretched then hopeless
Cynthia: for she saw her Leander murdered as she thought, whilst she remained
as prisoner, in the power of him, that was his bloody Butcher, looking (every
hour) to be forced of her honor and good name.

Infinite were the occasions that she had to complain, and the reasons without
number, that compelled her to exclaim against the most partial Destinies. For
what could she loose more precious and dear, then her sweet Spouse, whom she
esteemed more then her honor, and her own life?

Needs therefore, must her complaints be grievous, and her lamentings heavy
and bitter, as one that dispaired of all comfort to come.

Ah (woe is me, cried she out) why was I borne, and why did my mother bring me
into this world? since there is no person living (so unfortunate) as I am? for
I do not count those miserable, who have liberty to shorten their own days
by death, but only such as feign would die, and yet cannot. Is it possible,
that one should be borne under so hard a Planet, as not to be able to die, when
most fainest he would?

O how great is that evil, when it forces us to require aid of the Fatal
sisters, to rid us of the same, whom men detest and loath, as their mortal
enemies? And (yet) can none but they, relieve and ease such wretched creatures.

The healthie man, (whilst he is well) loatheth and abhors, to take, or
taste any potion or medicine, but when he is sick, he is glad and feign to
swallowe it down, be it never so bitter and sower. So we, whilst we live
merrily, and at hearts ease, we contemn death, but when our griefs are so
great as we are not able to endure them, then we account our selves, as happy
to have him.

O God, is it possible for me to be able in words to deliver my losses, for my
sighs to deplore them? for mine eyes to bewail them? or for my heart to be of
force to endure them? If the loss of paltrie goods makes men outrageous in
their passions, and if the death of our kinsfolks or friends, be sufficient to
engender afflictions in us, how much more then, have I cause of insupportable
sorrows?

Alas, I have lost my kind husband, but am I able to say so, and not my soul
to fly forth of this miserable body? or is my condition so miserable, that I
may say, I have lost him indeed? No, no, I will never believe it, rather will I
die, then persuade my self, of any such unwelcome matter unto me.

But say I die, yet have I lost him, yea I have lost him, and only through
mine occation. I have been the homicide of my husband, and I (alone) have
slain him: but why then (alack) does not the rigor of the Law pass upon
me, which condemns such murderers unto death? Was it not enough for me to
be brought into the most wretchedst estate of all others, to be deprived of my
dear Leander, but that I must be the cause of his utter overthrow also?

Damned and accursed Beauty, how wise was that young Roman Gentleman Spurius,
who (most cruelly mangled) and defaced his lovely face, because he would have
none to like him. And so, thrice happy had I been, if I had spoiled, and made
foul, this my wicked countenance, which was the first motive of all these
evils and mischiefs following.

O fair soul, of my dear Spouse and Bedfellow, great reason have thou (now)
to complain of me, just are thy accusations, and most right thy greeuances
against me, yet since the Gods are appeased with the sacrifices of men, I hope
that my life shall be a sufficient satisfaction for the offense I have done
unto thee. Thou live in the heavens, where nothing is hid from thee, and
seeing thou know all things, thou need not to doubt of mine innocence
herein.

But what is this unto thee, seeing (now) thou live no more, and that thou
art cut off, before thy time appointed? But I will presently follow thee,
neither had I stayed so long as I do, but that I am prevented much against my
will. For with what weapon should I pierce this my fainting breast? or what
kind of death were I best to die of? and in what manner will these mine
enemies give me leave to slaughter my self? Alas, they will not do me so
great a favor, and too too narrowly do they watch me, that I can not hurt
my self.

Thrice happy were thou (miserable king Perceus) in comparison of me, since
thy Conqueror Paulus Aemilius, gave thee liberty to make away thy self, so
to rid thee from thy servile bondage. But I have lost my Husband.

Porcia would not survive hers; No more would Cornelia, Cleopatra, and diverse
others, all which, made away themselves, to follow their husbands: and shall I
not be as willing as they were in this case, and as ready to take the same
course to follow death, that I may live with my dear Leander for ever? Yes,
yes, I will be as forward as the best, and I will devise some way or other, to
rid my self out of this loathed life, which cannot live without his soul,
who was my friendly husband.

Besides, the longer I live, the greater fear I am still in, to loose my
chaste honor, which although God has (yet) preserved, yet doubt I sore, I
shall not long continue so, but be forced by them, unless I escape away from
them, by some miracle from above.

But, say I should be so fortunate, as to be freed from out the hands of this
Tiger, (who holds me as his slave) without any violence offered unto my
chastity, yet who would believe the same, seeing he has attempted so
desperate and villainous an exploit, forgetting all religion and friendship,
only to have me in his possession, and considering the strange and extreme
affection, that he has made a show unto the open world to have borne me?

A grave and wise woman, must not only be free from blame it self, but as
well must be clean from all suspicion of the same. For what makes her to
look without blushing, but her upright carriage and her good name (always)
untainted, which being once defiled, resembles a barren Tree, that is without
fruit, or has been blasted with Lightnining or Thunder, never looking
(afterward) green again.

Filthy and base is the most excellentest beauty of any woman, if (once) her
modest life be corrupted.

Venus was fair, but (yet) of no account, because of her immodest desires.
Hellen was beautiful, but too much defamed, because of her luxurious life: and
so were Thais, Flora, and Laxis, lovely to behold, but (yet) accounted of, as
common, because of their shameless, and too too wanton behavior.

In what a pecke of troubles then am I in, looking still every moment, when I
shall be froced to make shipwreck of my chastity; for the defense of which, I
have (oftentimes) hazarded my life.

But I appeal unto the Almighty, who shall be my judge, if I be forced, how
much my soul abhors this vice, for though my body be defiled, yet shall my
mind never be, I being fully resolute to wash the same clear, with the
dearest blood I have, as soon as any opportunity shall serve me to put it in
practice.

Mine only hope is, that when I shall have most need, God will vouchsafe to
give me a sweet taste of those comfortable words of his, who has promised to
succor and help those, which be his faithful true servants, in their
greatest extremities, and when they least look for any such aid or assistance
from him.

Thus wailed the distressed Cynthia, dispairing of all means how to relieve
her self in her wretchedness: suffering her self to be carried away with the
violence of her cross, as the Ship is tossed too and fro upon the Sea in a
Tempest.

But our heavenly FATHER above, kept safe and untainted her Honor, and so (by
that way) received again into his mercy, her chaste and pure soul, which he
before had lent her.

It is in our adversity that we find the admirable succors of GOD, so
profitable unto us; for in prosperity we cannot rightly taste them. No more
then the Drunkard (being overcome with too much liquor) can judge of good wine,
whilst we being rocked a sleep in the cradle of sensuality, despise his
mercies, as Porklings and hogs do Malt and Acorns, when their bellies is
full of them, but being once pinched with hunger, run up and down for them,
as they were mad.

So we, whilst we live in pleasure, cannot rightly know how sweet the favors
and kindness of God is, because we are glutted with worldly delights. But when
we are (once afflicted with misery, we (then) find the comfortablenesse of
the same, and can quickly judge, how necessary it is unto us, for our good and
welfare.

And this Cynthia found, although after a strange fashion. For those ungodly
Thieves, which wicked Antonio had hired, to be his bloody executioners in this
his villainous Teagedie, (not daring, for fear of being tortured with plagues)
to stay in the Country, after they had committed this detestable outrage,
followed him as fast as they could; Amongst which, there was one, more bold
then the rest, who marking the favor and comeliness of Cynthia, (although as
then she looked pale and lean, for very anguish and grief) grew to be
amorous of her, determining with himself, to have his pleasure of her,
although he paid never so dearly for it.

Thus was the poor Gentlewoman, come out of Gods blessing into a warm Sun,
and fallen from a plain Ague, into a hot burning Fever, and yet this
misfortune, turned in the end, unto her good.

Thus Heavens make prove, that profitable often,
Which mortal men account of, as of naught.
The hand of the Lord is mighty and strong, who rewards sin, according
unto his desert, not winking thereat, at any time, but either soon or late,
punish the offense that is committed: For as we have used others, so shall we
our selves be used, and such measure as we give unto strangers, such measure
shall be meated unto us again.

The murderer (most commonly) dies by the sword. The highway Thief is
robbed and spoiled, the Adulterer shall be dishonored and shamed, and the
cruel man, shall find no mercy of them into whose power he is fallen.

If we well remember this lesson, we shall find it to be most true, confirmed
as well by the words of the everliving SON OF GOD, as by a number of ancient
examples in the Sacred scriptures.

David for defiling the bed of Vrias, saw civil discord and discention amongst
his own children, he himself (after he had seen his daughter Thamar
defloured, and his son Ammon slain) being chased up and down by his own
child, and reviled and railed at, by a base and abject Peasant of the Country.

Iezabell, for having shed the blood of the Prophet, died a shameful death,
she being flung from out a high window, in her own Palace, upon the ground,
to serve for food for dogs.

Pilate for pronouncing an unjust sentence against the Innocent, was condemned
unto a most heavy death. And in our time, and in these our days, we see
Fellons and Thieves most wretchedly perish.

The law of God permits not one neighbor to offend another, but that he
receive his reward thereafter: for otherwise God should not be just, except he
should do good for good, and evil, for evil.

And so did it happen upon the Traitor Antonio, who was repayed with such
injury, as he had done unto his dear friend, (but yet with great reason, he
having violated and infringed the laws of friendship and Hospitality) by one
of that cursed-crewe, which wrought the foresaid villainies, and in whom he
reposed greatest confidence and trust.

So we see the ravenous Wolves to howl, and to bicker one with another: the
greediness in feeding, hindering them to know themselves, although they be
all of one company: and so the sent and sweetness of the prey, makes Thieves
to forget their former kindness (amongst themselves) egging them forward, to
cut one another throat, to have the more gain.

And such was miserable Antonio his misfortune, who having (as I said before)
gotten a good round sum of money and Iuells together, to live unknown with
his Mistress, (not minding to return any more unto his own home, where he had
committed this wickedness) the smell of his Gold began to come into the noses of
these murdering Rascals: who when they knew not from whom to steal, used to
rob and filche, one from another.

It is a very difficult and hard matter to give over any kind of vice,
especially, if a man take an habit in the same: for then, the more he marches
forward to exercise it, the more he is plunged over head and ears in it. Not
unlike unto the horned Stagge, who the more he seeks to get out of the Toil,
(which as a snare, was left to intrappe him) the more he intangleth and windeth
himself therein.

Denis of Siracusa, had gotten such a custom, to spoil and rob the Gods in
their Temples, that he thought he had not spent that day well, in which he had
not pilled some one God or other of his ornaments, or shaven the golden beard
of some others: But he and his were punished for the same, their fortunes
being, to be banished out of their Country, and to die in great want and
beggerie.

But to come unto the bold Thief, (of whom I spoke before) who being deeply
in love with Cynthia, and whose fingers itched to be busy with Antonios gold,
called his copes-mates together, unto whom he told so swoothe a tale, and (so
cunningly) persuaded them, to set abroach this second Tragedy against Antonio,
as their teeth being seton edge for the Treasure, they quickly condescended
unto him, and the rather, because it was their ordinary trade.

The wicked still, heap sin (like Hills) on sin,
So long, till they their Souls do soil within.
And now the Holy one begins to reign down vengeance upon the head of
perjured Antonio, who least thought of danger, when it was nighest at hand: he
not (once) as much as dreaming of any mischief that hung over him, his
chiefest study, being how to persuade the sorrowful Cynthia, to give over her
pensive mourning, and to cast away all care and sadness.

And as he was one day (alone) in her chamber with her, very busy to comfort
her, and as earnest to solicit his old love unto her, seeking to win her
good will and savor: Behold (upon the sudden) this notable Rascal, with his
fellows, breaks in upon them, who without speaking (so much as one word)
ran furiously upon Antonio with their naked swords, massacring him, as Caesar
was in the Senate; and that with such imp^^^ositie and outragiousnes, as they
spoiled one another, especially the miserable: but then, most happy and
fortunate Cynthia, who wonderfully desirous to die, rushing into the midst
of their brandishing blades, and presenting her naked breast unto the mercy of
the Thieves, was (in the end) wounded to death amongst them, her chaste and
purple blood, streaming out of her weak and fainting carcass, as from a
running Fountain.

And (yet) may we count her fortunate, in this her misfortune, since she was
borne by destiny to be miserable, her hap (being so good) as to die without
the loss of her honor and reputation, carrying away with her, her good name
and fame, even unto the grave.

Thus was the chaste Iphiginea sacrificed: so was the bashful Polixena, put to
death: and so dyed the virtuous daughter of Iepha, with diverse other Virgins,
who to conserve their Chastity, left both their lives and souls together.

This murder done, there followed another, for these Rakehells, fearing to be
taken for doing the deed, and willing to be gone, urged their fellow Thief to
make haste away, with them, but he was so far in love with Cynthia, (who lay
at the point of death) as by no means he would leave her: which they
perceiving, and doubting least (if he should be found there) he would bewray,
and appeach them all, thought to make sure work, as nigh as they could, and so
thrusting him through, they trussed up their bag and baggage, carrying away
Antonio his Treasure with them, leaving Cynthia ready to give up the ghost,
who though she were so nigh her end, yet could she speak a little.

No sooner were these Hell Hounds gone from her, but she began to take some
small comfort in her mind, counting her self as blessed, to die in this
manner, having a sure confidence, that she should see her husband in Heaven:
the glory whereof, she hoped to enjoy, because she had so luckily preserved
her honor.

O how sweet a thing is death unto them, who are desirous to die, when they
see themselves disfranchised, and freed from all misfortunes, and when they
find their miseries, with the vpshot of their lives.

Such was the death of the modest and pudike Cynthia, and with such joy did
Thisbie leave the world, to follow her beloved Piramus: for death is not of
power to unbind the hearts of true Lovers. No, no: they must follow one
another, even into the Elizian fields, and there, tie (again) those chains,
which death before had broken in sunder.

And now sweet Cynthia perceiving her self to be alone, and ready to render
up her Soul unto her first Redeemer, lifting up her eyes to heaven, began to
make this prayer.

I know and acknowledge, I confess, and proclaim all abroad, that thy speech
(o most gracious GOD) is both Sacred, true, and veritable: which is that thou
assurest succor and aid, unto such of thy distressed servants, as be ready
to despair, for want of help.

So did thou relieve that Country of Aegipt, which was wel-nigh starued
with famine, through the wisdom of chaste Joseph. Thou did assist the
Jews in their great extreamie: when the red Sea gave back, to make them
passage, drowning their enemies, which went about to pursue and follow after
them. Thou did send the foresaid people most miraculously Manna from
heaven, when they were (almost) dead for very hunger. Thou did make clear
water to flow from the hard and frozen Rock, to staunch their dryness: and
thou (Lord) did free them from the power of Senacherib, by thy holy Angel.
Thou did deliver Daniel from out the Lions den: and the modest Susanna,
out of the bloody hands of the two old Palliards, the Elders. And so (sweet
Savior) have thou protected mine honor, which without thee, had been
overthrown utterly.

Thrice happy I, that through thy sacred guiding of me, have escaped this
misfortune, but far more blessed, in that I shall leave this world, in this bad
and wretched time, where nothing does reign and dominiere, but vice, Treason,
and violence.

I most humbly thank thee, most merciful Father, for so great a benefit
bestowed upon me: For what could happen more acceptable unto me, then to follow
my dear Husband into heaven, thereto continue with him, and to enjoy
everlasting glory with thy Saints? Let us die willingly, then (Cynthia) with
a brave mind and constant resolution, leaving a rich testimony of our loyal
love and affection, unto the posterity that shall come hereafter.

And although a faithful Christian ought not, (as he is dying) either to
desire, or to wish any vengeance for to light upon his adversaries and
enemies: yet must I needs confess, that it is a great solace and contentment
unto me, to die in the midst of such as were foes unto my Leander, land mine
honor, and the rather, because they are dead as well as I, to make
satisfaction for their faults.

O GOD, how sacred are thy decrees, how just thy judgments, and how rightful
thy proceedings? Thou have not permitted the murderers of my Husband to live
long, after they had done so horrible a deed, and contrary to all expectation,
thou have defended me from their most furious and unchaste lust: and therefore
I will take this my cross most patiently, and will be contented to die, as
willingly, as when I was first joined by the holy Church, unto my dear
Husband in sacred marriage bands, most religiously.

And yet (my Sovereign Savior) I greatly fear thy Justice, the number of my
faults, weighing far more heavy then my good deeds, but thou can (if thou
so please) deface them all. Thou art the God of all mercy, and art merciful
unto all men, for the consolation and salvation of whom, thou thy self (of
thy great compassion) have been willing to die.

O then, let this innocent blood of mine, shed by the adversaries of thy
glory, be sufficient to wash my sins away, through thy grace, and let my
modest and stainelesse mind, be as a fire to consume the number of mine
offenses.

O ye mine eyes, the Authors of my disasters, cruel and proud eyes, first
motives of these our common miseries and calamities: soon shall you loose your
wanton lights, and soon shall you be closed up, with an iron sleep of death
for ever.

But o gentle Death, when come thou? come I beseech thee, come away unto
me, who art so courteous, so apt, so fit, and so profitable for my sorrows.

Often have I desired thee, a thousand times have I called for thee, and with
thousands of entreaties and prayers, persuaded thee to come to assist me, and
(now thou art come) I salute thee, and thank thee, entertaining thee, as one
who can save me from a great loss, thou being able to withdraw me from
shipwreck, and of power sufficient, to bring me safely into the Haven, where I
long so much to be.

O how foolish is that Mariner, who being miraculouslie arrived in the Port,
will back again into the Sea, whilst the storm plays his part, and not
stay until the weather be clear and calm.

Even so, how mad were I, if having cast Anchor at the Haven of my welfare,
I should now begin to wish to live once more, returning back into this
miserable life, in which we encounter so many dangerous Rocks, and perilous
stumbling blocks, as we can never be quiet.

Then let us die: what say I, die? Nay (rather) let us live, for he only
lives happily, that changes this frail and transitory life, after an
immortal and an everlasting estate.

That Farmer may be said to be right fortunate, who leaves his Farm which
he holds of his Lord, to enjoy a fair Manor in Fee simple, to him and his
heirs for ever.

This was the cause that so many holy and grave persons have wished for
death, thinking that being dissolved from life, they should become far better
by this alteratation and change.

Elias living in the wilderness, did often covet it. Old Symeon demanded it, and
Saint Andrew refused to live, to make his choice of death. Who then can hinder
me, but that I should desire it? imitating so many worthy personages? No, it
is that I only require and look for. For the grief thereof, is less, then
the least pain we feel, when we are alive.

That debtor, that is still vexed, haunted, and abused by his Creditor, because
he should pay what he owes, is he not happy, when he has made even with all
men, that he may (after) live in quiet? If so, why (then) far more blessed
are they, who pay their due unto Nature, unto whom they are indebted, and who
by tendering the same unto her, (which they must once do) are quited and freed
from all worldly calamities afterward to come.

My only desire is to see, and stand before the presence of my most gracious
Lord and GOD, and to behold the face of my loving Husband, waiting and
attending upon him.

Dispose thee, then once more Cynthia, to go this pleasant voyage, resolving
to give over this mortal life, to enjoy an immortal felicity. Lord, then
receive my soul, and deliver it out of the hands of mine ancient and sworn
enemy the devil.

So said the dolorous (or rather) joyful Cynthia, who having laid her self
down in a comely manner, expecting every minute when she should die, took
thought for nothing but how she might be buried orderly. But God took order
for that matter. For no sooner had she made an end of her Prayer, but Leander
(by chance) came that way, who perceiving (far of) these dead bodies, and
desirous to know what they were, set spurs to his horse, to ride toward them,
and when being come near them (by little and little) he found, what he so much
sought for.

As the young amorous Bull, seeing (a far of) a young Haifer to brouse upon
the banks of a clear River, approaches nearer and nearer, to know ye better,
if it be his Love or no, and as he marches forward, holds up his head for
joy, because he finds her by certain marks to be the same. So Leander,
every step he goes, rejoices greatly in his mind, as assuring himself, that
he has (now) found, that which with so great labor) he had made search for.

But as that Merchant is not thoroughly joyful, who after he has made a long,
and dangerous voyage, finds but the half part of his Merchandise in his
ship, the gain of which, drew him to adventure abroad, and to leave his
country and friends.

Even so, Leander found himself, but half contented and pleased, when he
perceived those to be dead, whom he so much coueted (in his mind) to have
encombred them alive; nevertheless, he drew nearer unto the place where they
lay, marking very wistly, both his dead enemies, and his wife.

As he stood (thus) gazing upon them, diverse conceits ran in his head, not
knowing well, what to think of the matter, one while he thinks that his wife
loved Antonio so dearly, as she would needs die with him: an other while, he
judges rightly of the fact, imagining that civil discention had caused one to
kill an other: now, he judges that some foe of Antonios, had stabd him, and
then again, he gesseth that some of his friends had offered him this cruel
outrage, for doing so great villainie against him.

But Love crossed all these contrary conceits, dispearsing them here and
there, as the crack of the thunder forces the cloud to give way, when it
breaks through the same, and falls upon the ground below: he thought, he
had many just occasions to hate his wife, meaning (if she had been alive) to
have inflicted upon her, that punishment, which he had (already) found her to
endure; and yet, when he had a little better considered thereof in his mind
(seeing her to be brought unto so pitiful a straight) he could not choose, but
must (needs) lament and bewail her hard mishap. Whilst she lived, he loathed
her, nor will he (by any means) be induced, to believe that she is culpable of
that fault, of which he (before) accused her, seeing that (now) she is dead.

A friend is never known (so well) as when he is mist. He comes nearer and
nearer unto her, which woeful Cynthia perceiving, and not knowing who it was
(but rather supposing, that the villains were come back again, although she
were not quite dead, yet did she feign her self to be so, fearing least they
would offer some violence unto her body, if she should have made show, that
she had been still alive.

Leander (lighting of his horse) kneeleth down by his wife, weepeth bitterly,
and then kisseth her, which the poor soul perceiving, maruelling much what
this should mean, opens her dying eyes a little, when after she had a good
while (wistly) looked upon him, she saw and knew him to be living, whom she
held and accounted to be dead.

That Roman woman, who died with sudden joy, seeing her son return safe
and whole, from that bloody battle of Cannas, and whom she esteemed to be
dead, was not half so much ravished with true delight, and amazeme^t, in
viewing him, as Cynthia was, when she saw her spouse alive and well.

And now she strives (as much as in her feeble strength lies) to open wide
her languishing eyes, that she might the better gaze, and look upon her
husband.

But (alas) mortal and deadly were the glaunces she cast upon him, mortal
were they unto her, and to Leander, she now began to wend away, as mildly as a
lamb, whilst her woeful husband (what sinister conceit soever he had before
of her) died for very anguish to see her in this woeful taking.

He was alive, and not wounded at all, his wife ready to give up the ghost,
all to be mangled with gorie blood, and yet, had not he his tongue so ready to
command, as his poor Cynthia had, for so great was his grief, as he could not
speak as much as one word, which she perceiving, and (now) knowing thoroughly
who he was, with a kind of hollow and broken voice, she spoke thus unto him.

Ah my dear husband, art thou then come from heaven, to assist and help thy
faithful wife, she being ready to give up the ghost? and have thou dained (so
much) as to remember her, and to honor her at her end, with thy welcome
presence?

Ah say, is it thine own self whom I see? or is it some evil spirit that
has taken thy shape upon him, to mock and delude me? If it be thee, and that
thou live (as yet) then thrice fortunate is Cynthia to see thee, before she
gives over this wretched life. And yet if thou be that Leander, who
(sometimes) were the kind husband of unhappy Cynthia, how (then) can thou
abide to approach near unto her, she having been the occasion, of so many
evils lightened upon thee, thou knowing not whether she be clear from them or
no? But I see well, that Love draws all such doubts in thee, and will not
suffer thee, to believe any thing that is not good for me.

And (yet) Leander, have thou reason to conceive the worst of me, because I
have been the occasion of many troubles, that have happened unto thee;
notwithstanding, I swear unto thee, by that God before whom I hope to be
judged, and who reuengeth every perjury, that I am merely innocent of what
ill so ever is done, I having not been defiled, either in body or in mind,
the Almighty having (most miraculosly) preserved me, from all such harm.
Whereupon she began to discover unto him, all that had happened, since she last
saw him, and withal, how she had not made him acquainted with the affection
which Antonio bare unto her (the cause of all this mischief) and the reason,
that it might have been prevent, if he had known thereof.

But (said she) I was in good hope he would have become a new man, being loath
to bewray his soily unto you, because you made so great account of him,
thinking he would (never) have borre so bad a mind toward you. But now I see
this sore to be vnrecurable, I know not what to say, but only to crave pardon
of you for the same, and withal, to take some order for my burial.

Then (sweet husband weep no more) for what reason have thou to bewail her
death, who has brought thee so many losses and incurable damages, whilst she
lived with thee? rather have you cause to rejoice and be glad to see her final
end, and therefore I most humbly beseech you, if you do love me indeed (as you
seem at this time to make some show that you do) dry up your tears, cease
these lamentings, give over this sighing and sobbing, and suffer me to finish
this small rest of my life in some pleasure: for my sorrow proceeds not from
my death, but for that I see thee thus to take on.

Trouble not then I pray thee, that contentment which I have to view, and
behold thee, before I shut up my dazeling eyes, through thy too much lamenting
for my death.

If thou have loved me, then call to mind this thy good will toward me, and
let the remembrance thereof (now I die) persuade thee to do so much for me. It
is the last office of friendship, which thou must do for me, for (now) I shall
trouble thee no more, my glass being run, and the date of my life (in a
manner) quite expired.

Then grant me this my request, for my days, were but days to serve thee, my
soul, but a soul to honor thee, and my heart, but a heart to affect and
only love thees and I hope, thou have found, known, and perswadest thy self,
that I speak nothing but truth. Which if thou do, then let me obtain this
last Boon of thee, and be not so cruel, as to deny me so small a matter.

Grieve then no more (my good Leander) for me, which if thou do, I then will
close mine eyes, and shut up my tongue, because I cannot abide to see thee in
this heavy plight for her, who is unworthy that thou should torment thy
self (any way) for her cause.

Having thus complained, she held her peace, when her woeful husband (who
during this her lamentable discourse, had recovered his speech) began thus to
comfort her. Ah my sweet Cynthia, what cause of mislike, have I ever given
thee, and when did I use thee otherwise than became me, that thou should
imagine, I were not able to forbear thy company, without great coffeehouse
unto my self?

Do thou (then) think, that I love thee not? If so thou think, (O God)
what wrong do thou unto me? yes (Cynthia) yes, I love thee, yea, and in that
sort, as thou can not die without me. Death is not of power sufficient to
extinguish my love, which shall live in despite of him, and shall still
continue with thee, be thou alive or dead.

Not so soon can thou command, but I will as willingly condescend unto thee
in any thing, and yet thy entreatie cannot hinder me, but that I must bewail
thy Disaster, and far more should I take on by odds, but that my hope is to
see the (shortly) in another world. Too zealous and affectionate is my love
toward thee, to see thee suffer that thou do, and I not to be moved with
the same.

O would to God thou were without hurt or wound, and that I had had that
misfortune, to have fallen upon me, which thou now have. But seeing it cannot
be, thou shall not choose, but give me leave to bear some part of thine
anguish. When we were well, and lived at hearts ease, there was not any thing,
but what was common between us, all things were alike between thee and me,
why then should thou oppose thy self (now) so much against me, as to deny
me, that I should participate of thy troubles with thee?

No no, I will bear a heavy burden, in this thy sorrowful song, and mine
eyes shall stream forth, before I die (as two fountains of water) all the
liquid humor that remains within my restless body.

Thou go thy way (my dear Cynthia) and leauest me here plunged in deep
perplexity, but I will not stay long behind, soon will I follow after thee,
and quickly overtake thee.

Is it possible mine eyes should give light unto my body, and want thy sight?
and is it likely I shall be able to abstain from thy company for ever, when I
cannot endure to forbear thy presence one short day?

O (dear wife) now I conjure thee, by the chaste pleasures of our sacred
Hymen, and unspotted nuptial bed, by that Love of thine and mine (as yet never
broken) and by thy heart, and mine, which never were but one, let me entreat
thee, that thou take it not ill, although I die with thee. Great is the
authority that Love has given thee over me, but yet not so great, as it shall
disturb my desire, or make me follow any other course but death.

Certainly, certainly, I will bear thee company even into thy grave. O
fair and beautiful eyes, mine were you, whilst you lived, and mine shall you
be, when you are dead. No man living, has interest in you, but my self, and
you, will I as well see, being dead, as when you were alive. O courteous death,
if it be possible for thee to be entreated by the Prayers, or the cries of
mortal wights, or if ever thou have done any kindness unto them, then I beseech
thee, let me find this favor at thy hands, that I may breath my last gasp,
before my Lady.

Do me this good turn, for all the evil thou have done me, and in recompense
of such great losses, as I am like to sustain by thee, in snatching away from
me (most violently) the only support and Atlasse of my life, which if I may
not obtain, I will complain and exclaim against thee, making it known unto
the whole world, that thou art cruel, and partial, against me only: for it
should much abate and assuage my torments, to go before her, to the end, I
might be exempted from those (more then deadly darts) which will pierce deeply
into my soul, when I shall behold her to be laid within her grave.

O cruel Tomb, must thou be so fortunate, as to lodge and entertain so
precious a treasure, to possess so rare and lovely a beauty, and to enclose
and cover a body so exquisite and perfect, that same, being the chief
maintainer of my glory, and the only vpholder of my life?

O that some gentle power would be so kind unto me, as to transform me into
thy likeness, to the end, I might enjoy that benefit, which is permitted to be
thine, and of which (whilst it lived, I was Master and owner.

And yet think not thou shall have the body of my dear wife alone, no no,
thou shall have mine also, to bear hers company, and by that means, thou
shall receive two bodies, which (living) had but one soul between them. And
now (my sweet Cynthia) let me (once more) take thee by the hand, for a final
farewell, and let me kiss thee (once) again; to the end that my breath may
issue out of this his earthly mantion, and part hence, at the self same
instant, that thine passes away.

Leander having so said, and weeping most tenderly, takes the cold carcass of
his wife in his arms, often kissing, and rekissing her cold mouth, he being
never sufficiently satisfied with the delight of that dying, which was wholly at
his commandment whilst it was living. His lips never parted from hers,
whilst his eyes streamed down tears, and his heart sent forth scalding
sighs in abundance.

O thrice fortunate souls, whom neither death nor sorrows could part asunder,
and o happy couple, who would not have but one Tomb to enclose you (both)
together. And now Leander began to faint as well as his wife, he being sore
wounded with grief, and Love, which she perceiving, forced her self to vttes
these few words (as well as she could) unto him. It is enough (sweet husband)
it is enough, you too much trouble your sick self with an unworthy burden,
for we may count our selves blessed, in that we have incountered one with
another before we die.

The end crowns the works of man, their glory lying only in their deaths;
which death shall make us famous for ever, allotting unto us the Garland of
commendation and praise, to continue hereafter.

For mine own part, I can no longer live, and had it not been for your
presence, I had been dead long since, the same having been the occasion that
the thread of my life was drawn forth so long as it has been; For thee have I
lived, even until this hour, but (alas) what talk I of living, when all my
senses fail me, when my voice is going away, and my heart begins to be
cold within me. What should I say more, but that thou live happily after my
decease, banishing away these sighs, and drying up thy too too drerie eyes.

And this (sweet husband) I require and desire thee, (nay more) I conjure thee,
as thou love me, to lament no more, what cannot be recovered. Once more adue
(sweet Leander) I go before to prepare a place for thee in the heavens, and so
farewell dear husband.

Come come, embrace and kiss me, to the end that my soul (coming forth of
body) may make his passage into thine, which (whilst I lived) was his earthly
Paradise.

The sad knight hearing her say so, embraces her anew, holding her closely in
his arms, whilst death approaching unto her, seized upon her, closing up her
beauteous eyes, and leaving her senseless coarse, as cold as any stone, which
when Leander perceived, he sought all the means he could to bring her unto
life again, although it could not be.

And as the wild Bear from whom her whelps be stolen, searches up and down
for them, leaving no place unlooked, and yet (do what she can) she cannot
find them.

So Leander leaves no part of his wives body untouched, to see, if he could
find any one spark of life in her, but all in vain, for death had already
extended his heavy hand over her.

As ye Damask Rose being once withered, has not one green lease about it,
but such as be dry, and fallen from their natural color: Even so was her
body without force, or moving, lying along without any motion or sense at all.

And yet although she were dead, she lay as lovely, as if she had but been in
a smiling sleep. No marvel then, if whilst she were living, she was so
gracious with All, when (being dead) she was able to make men fall in love with
her, for the cruel destinies were not of power, to take from her the propotion
of her beauteous visage, but only the rare vermillion color of the same.

But now, how is it possible for me to describe (at large) the true sorrow
wherewith her kind husband was possessed by reason of her loss? It is a task
too great for me to take in hand, and therefore I will give it over, neither
mean I, to set down, with what great pomp, and exceeding charges, her
funeral obsequise were most solemnly performed.

Only I will speak a word or two of his end, which was, that after her death,
he never ioyed (so much) as one small hour, nor lived any long time after her.
His chiefest delight was to think on death, his diet he fed on, was sighs,
tears, sobs, and lamentings.

Besides, he caused all his Castle to be painted with black, mixing here and
there white tears amongst the same, neither did he, nor any of his followers,
wear other than mourning apparel, as long as he lived. And to conclude, so
vehement was his passions, in his sorrow, that they brought him into a
recurelesse consumption, wherein, he continued not above three months but that
he died, having given order (before) to be buried in the same Monument, that he
erected for his constant Cynthia.

This Tragedy was so pitifully delivered by the well spoken Nymph Orythia, as
she forced all her Auditors to shed salt tears, especially when she made a
conclusion of the same, when they perceiving that the Sun was down, began
(every one of them) to withdraw themselves unto their proper Lodgings, but she
stayed them a while, meaning to revive their dulled spirits, after the hearing
of so doleful an History, with this Song following.

Blessed is he that nere did prove
False in Faith, in all his Love.
Love (without fidelity,)
Is a plague, that makes us die.
Without Faith, one sues in vain,
Love of beauty fair to gain.
Blessed is he, that nere did prove,
False in faith, in all his Love.
Beauty soon, away posse will,
Sacred Faith continues still.
Th'ones divine, and nere deceiues,
The Other often our hearts bereaues.
Blessed is he, that nere did prove,
False in Faith, in all his Love.
Without Faith, Love could not be,
For through Faith (aie) lives he.
Who a Louer's, and not true,
Lovers name to him's not due.
Blessed is he, that nere did prove,
False in Faith, in all his Love.
Oh how sweet a thing it is,
Two to love, and faith not miss.
It Is two souls in one to bind,
Whilst days (turned to nights) they find.
Blessed is he, that nere did prove,
False in Faith, in all his Love.
No sooner had the Nymph made an end of her delightful Song, but that they
might perceive a strange Shepherd hard by them, who (after he had saluted
them) desired them, to resolve him of this Riddle following.

Though light as Feather yet a burden great I bear,
And live within the lap of my chief enemy,
One while I shake, and nod, as if a sleep I were,
Another white as swift as flight, away go I.
Light though I am, I (often) heavy armed men
Carry, and am their faithful friend and save their wealth,
Yet (with my self) I cast away them, now and then,
And (many times) through swiftnes mine I save my self.
But after I, in many a place have serud their turn,
And old become, they throw me strait into the fire,
Whilst, I (of cold) grow hot, and in the flame do burn,
To serve these men, lo here, you see my goodly hire.
For all my labor (done to them) in pieces they me spoil,
And having done the^ service good, I am naught worth, and vile.
The learned old man, studied not long about this dark Enigma, which he
expounded in this sort. These verses (said he) do signify a ship, which being
made of wood, and light, as sailing, carries away people within her, she
remaining (always) in the water, which is her mortal enemy, because it
rotteth her. One while, it lies still, and rides at Ancor, as one idle and a
sleep: and an other while it makes profitable voiages, scowring the huge Seas.

She is a guide, and an assistance (oftentimes) unto Soldiers, whilst they
encounter and fight with the enemies: upon the top of the Hatches thereof,
notwithstanding, (now and than, she drowneth these which she carries, and her
self also. Sometimes she escapes (alone) when being (afterward) employed of
her wares and commodities, and now grown old and rotten, they break her in
pieces, which they fling into the fire, it being burned there, although (by
nature) the wood thereof is cold, and being in the fire, it complains of men,
who pay her with burning her, for requital of so many good services done by
her, unto them.

The old man (having delivered this exposition) satisfied the strange
Shepherd, who left him, when he and the rest of his company retired (as fast
as they could) unto their own Lodging; where we will (as now) leave them.

The end of the third days meeting of Iuliettaes Shepherds.
THE FOVRTH DAYS MEETING, OF IVLIETTAES SHEPHERDS.
LOVE pierces not (so far) the tender breast of a young Heart, in the love of
a fresh and iollie Do, or that of the sturdie Bull, toward his fat and
fair Heifer: as was Coribants, pricked through the remembrance of Deliaes
beauty. What rest took he in the night? what sleep went down with him?
what pleasure felt he? or what contentment did he perceive or find?

Night, which otherwise is the mother and refresher of all travel, is the
Nourse of Lovers labors: For in that they are (then) solitary, and alone,
nothing crosses the meditation of their Loves. Their torments present
themselves (daily) before their eyes, and they bethink themselves every
hour, how with a thousand troubles and crosses, they may (but speak) unto
their Mistresses. Solitude, does more hurt then good, to him whom grief
tormenteth: and that coueteth to find out a place to his desire, wherein to
complain himself.

Even so, the young Bull, deprived of the love of his iollie Heifer, goes away
roaring, to hide himself, in some cool cave or den, and there he beats
and tormenteth himself, roaring and crying out with maine force.

No otherwise brave Orlando, deprived of his Angelica, sought out the most
remote and secret places, therein to complain his disastrous mishappes.
Solitary and sad night, therefore, in stead of bringing any relaxation or
ease unto the torments of this Shepherd: more renewed them, even as the Smyth
makes the heat of his Forge more ardent, when he throws water upon the same.

Only God Morpheus beguiling him, might have given him some asswagement of his
grief, but (yet) such as would not long have continued. For Truth chased away
imaginations and dreams, and discovered her face.

These torments, these dreams, these labors, and these flames, are stirring
very early. And as the Hare goes out of her Form, betimes in the morning,
to feed in the corn fields, being afraid, lest (in the day) she should
light upon some unhappy encounter;

In like manner, the Shepherd can no longer remain in his Cottage, when he
sees the day dawne, on that side of the heavens, where the Sun rises: he
will (by no means) that his bright beams should reflect upon his drousie
head. This would turn him (as he thinks) to great shame, to be discovered by
the Sun: And he feared the like reproach, as Mars and Venus received, being
found together, and taken within the industrious Net of Vulcan.

A sluggard never acts any thing of importance: Glory is not obtained by
being idle, but by plying out fingers, busying our selves in many matters, and
styrring (early) about our affairs.

The Sun yet wet, in rising from his moist bed, let fall certain drops
upon the earth, and it seemed by his appeara^ce, that some flagitious fact by
him seen, had made him look all pale, sad, and heavy: notwithstanding, by
degrees, he ever drew nearer and nearer.

Oh, what a power has this goodly Lamp, which gives life unto all creatures,
keeping and preserving the same in them, as also by the same hand, he takes
away, perishes, and confounds the same: notwithstanding, there is no good,
how little so ever it be, which is not far better, then the best griefs of
the world. In like manner, though the Sun showed himself pale, morphewed, and
ghastly, yet was he by all creatures, a 1000. times more desired then night,
how clear soever. The clifts even smoaked, with a desire to see and feel his
beams upon their tops: even as the furious Bull casts fume out of his
nosthrills, when he seeks after fight, and desires to meet with the Lydian
Lion, to set upon him. There was not so much as the flowers, which smiled not
at his coming: they being his beautiful kinsmen, to the end to please, and
joyfully receive him. The Birds called upon him, in their notes, the beasts, by
their sounds and voices, and men, by many signs and demonstrations: Desired
therefore, of all living creatures, he comes and spreads on all sides his
flaming eyes, causing all the world to behold his fair and bright countenance.
Every one beholding the same, blusheth thereat, and is ashamed: heaven it self
appears more near and clear, and the Shepherd, conducted by this immortal
light, with slow pace, arriueth within the Deserts. He neither drove lambs nor
sheep before him, for the iniquity of the time had dispoyled him of them:
robbing him of his bleating troops, and of whatsoever else he had received by
the benefit of Fortune: He went out therefore, all alone, walking along with
an awaked spirit and mind, disburdened of all drowsines, all quick, and living,
whilst he thus said to himself; It is with special reason, that men term
heaven their Father: for in truth without him, what could they perform? Does
not he bestow on them their being, life, vigor, contentme^t, and pleasure?
Whatsoever favor or bounty men feel, it descends from above. For the earth
of it self, produces unto them nothing good or excellent: but on the
contrary, brings the^ forth a thousand maladies, cares, torments and labors.
And though there tumble down from heaven, sometimes miseries and scourges,
which torment and whip men, yet nevertheless, their own sin is the cause
thereof. For this is the lively fountain of malediction, and not heavens: even
as the fountain is no occasion of the water that harboreth within the same, but
the spring from whence it flows so cold. Is not heaven the nourice of this
fair Sun, which ripeneth all things, heateth as well those bodies sensible, as
other immovable, and that gives virtue and power unto the earth? On the other
side, within heaven dwells the Eternal Deity, in the same is his seat,
there within is his Empire, and there his divine Tabernacle.

In heaven dwells this great and merciful GOD, who does not only pardon men
during their lives, but even when they are dead also. His mercy walks over
the Tombs and Sepulchers of the dead, and goes seeking them out, even under
the earth, to relieve them, by his charitable office, giving us trial, not
only of admirable Clemency, but also of divine Justice. That which makes him
to be known for true God, is only his Justice and his Mercy. For he could
not be God, except he were both just and merciful.

Besides, he most liberally gives unto us wherewith to maintain our life:
having a care of the least hairs that fall from off our heads, and of the
least byrd that lives. He gives nourishment unto every one: yea, unto the
Crows little ones themselves, that call upon him, when their old ones deny
to give them food at all.

O an hundred times worthy of infernal punishment is he, who lofty and
proud, will not give thanks unto God, for so many of his benefits I seeing
besides a thousand others, he might have just occasion so to do, for this
only good, in that he has procured mankind to be borne, master of all other
creatures, and given him a soul immortal in felicity. For if the enemies of
men be punished and if sometimes the Ancients ordained equal pain, for one
Ingrate, as for a murderer. Surely, the man ingrate toward Almighty God,
that acknowledges not so many blessings and graces from him, ought to suffer
much, as worthy of most grievous punishment.

Thus said the Shepherd to himself, and had further discoursed upon this
subject, but that a sudden storm of rain made him run out, to go stand
under a thick Rock, the top whereof, save guarded him from the injuries of
heaven. And being there above, he heard a voice, which uttered this which
follows. Blessed be they which are either perfectly happy, without ever
having felt grief: or altogether miserable, having never made trial of any
contentment. For he which (suddenly) comes out of the Stoue, finds the
air colder, then he (who having never been within) has always stood without
door. In like manner, those which never felt any good during their life,
endure nothing so much as they which have bin happy, and are afterward become
miserable. For if white makes us better to know and discern black, in like
sort, good makes the grief (which ensues) more cruel and intolerable: the
remembrance of which loss, terribly tormenteth our souls. It greeueth not one
so much to go without clothes, who ordinarily goes naked, as well in winter
as Su^mer: but it would be a cumbersome and hard matter for him, who has bin
well and warmly clad, to be stripped, thrust into his shirt, and forced to go
all bare. In like manner, the miserable that have known nothing but grief,
are not so greatly oppressed with pain, as they who have sometimes tasted of
felicity, whereof at the same instant, they find themselves deprived.

More cruel was king Perceus his change, who of a puissant king, became
miserable, a servant, slave, and laughing-stocke of Fortune, then if he had
never known any such greatness, remaining as a private simple man, and without
a Diadem. Of the self same now speak I, by experience, for more cruel at
this day do I feel the grief, to see my self absented and deprived of my
dear Diana: the^ if I had never seen her, or that she had not pleased mine
eyes, as she has done. Alas: Can it be that I should remain without her, or
that my soul may continue in my body, being deprived of her fair and shining
countenance? If the body cannot move without the soul: Oh how can mine live,
enjoying no more that Sun which caused it both to live and move? Oh my Diana,
in what part soever thou glau^cest forth thy beautiful and celestial rays,
let the heavens be always favorable unto thee, in recompense of the good thou
have done me, in suffering me to behold thy countenance. Far from thy years
and days let pale death fly: all coffeehouse, absent it self from thy
soul: all vexation and grief avoid thy heart: and let sadness be banished from
thence: and to conclude, let no feeling of grief ever touch thee living: let
heaven always make thy beauty durable, thy chaste virtue immortal, thy sacred
fidelity and power, eternal, and thy excellent glory endless. Alas, if the
heavens preserve thy noble perfections, who under the Sun shall live, more
perfect or happy the^ thy self? for none can equal thee in these worthy
virtues: virtues (alas) which augment misfortunes, and make my complaints more
bitter. For he has greater cause to complain, that has lost much, then he
that has endured the loss but of a small matter. I have lost thy divine
presence, which only chased and drove away my obscure nights: now I wander in
darkness, in night, in horror, and vexation. I have lost my Sun, and my days
are turned into nights. (Alas) but have I not likewise lost my miserable life?
Alas, my Goddess, if thou would (if thou would I say) take my soul, and
as thine own, retain it with thee, why take not thou in like manner my
life, causing him to die, which cannot live, removed from thy light? but I must
scour both sea and land to find thee out. I will fly neither pain, danger,
nor labor, to see thee (yet once more) before death reap my sad and wretched
days. And then in all repose, contentme^t, and pleasure, I will yield this
miserable carcass to the earth, shaken and quashed, with so many hitter
griefs, and even broken (as it were in pieces) with a thousand martyrdoms.
During these days replenished with obscurity, and dyed in lamentation, and
darkness. In that I shall not behold thy beautiful and divine countenance, my
tears like streams, shall pour out from my blubbered eyes, sighs shall come
forth, even from my soul, sad wailing and mourning from my heart. No
apprehension of pleasure shall dwell within me, no appara^ce of life, to sign
of pleasing delights, nor any note of health. Miserable will I always remain,
no joyful accident, no change of fortune, or new form of life, can administer
the least consolation to my soul, void of pleasure and joy, of all good and
contentment. I will sigh continually, while destiny (moved at my long
complaints) together with my life, cut off my tears and troubles. Thus spoke
this wretched Shepherd, wretched surely, and miserable, who never felt so much
as one smiling glaunce of fortune, miserable (certainly) in that he was borne
to suffer, and never knew what joy meant: and yet more wretched, in having
spent his years, employed his whole life, offered his days, and yielded his
time to service of many, who permitted poverty to swallow up his years, and
manage and ouermaister his life.

And though he were peerles in misery, and that his state of life, was only
swayed by misfortunes, which held him caytif: notwithstanding, cruel envy,
which biteth all things, though they be incorporeall, ceased not to make a
thousand malicious and jealous of that little commendation, which his dolorous
Muse acquired to his years. In all considerations therefore, he was most
wretched above all others. But that which gave the greatest blow, and that made
his grief insupportable, and fell, was the absence and loss of his Diana. The
remembrance whereof, was sufficient to forget, choke, and quite extinguish all
the mortal pleasures he could have tasted of in this world. Every one makes
his chief felicity, of that he best likes, and things which are sometimes
held for happy and commodious of mortal men, are in contempt with those, who
have placed their sovereign good in some other matter, as Lovers flout at
riches, treasures, Empires and kingdoms, which mortal men propound unto
themselves, for the good of their contentme^t, and upon which, they build their
most pleasure and delight. But the only presence of their Ladies, is their
chiefest good: for their souls be more joyful in beholding of them, then are
the eyes of a covetous mizer, and when they take pleasure in contemplation of
the goods and riches of fortune.

In the number of these, was this miserable Shepherd, who scoffed at the
commodities of that blind goddess, desiring no other thing for his full
satisfaction, and delight, then the presence of his fair Diana. Diana, who
surely amongst the fairest, was most fair, sage, chaste, prudent, and of the
stock of the most famous families in Europe. Diana, who took pleasure in
reading of his works, and that never showed him frowning countenance, in that
she knew he honored her honor, more then her beauty: and that his chaste love,
loved rather her soul and mind, then her body. Nothing could hinder sage and
chaste Diana from showing good countenance, and chastely loving excellent
spirits. She should have been a cruel Bear, if her soul had been void of
amity: and this learned Queen of France, kissed learned Chartier, finding him
a fleeepe, upon a bancks side, though (amongst all other evil favored and
deformed) he was most crabbed of countenance: giving this excellent answer to
those that wondered at the same: I kiss not Chartier, but that excellent
mouth, from whence have issued so many learned discourses, not loving the man,
but his doctrine: In doing thus, no Lady can be blamed. For one may, and that
more commodiously, affect chastely, that which meriteth Love, then impudentlie,
that which tends to vice, and corruption. The Shepherd, (after his dolorous
complaint) began to sing this Sonnet which follows.

SONNET.
Come, and approach, and hear my cries, you Hagges, and Hob-goblings,
And do receive in gree, my heavy plaintes, and abuse.
Unto your cruel fatal Sisters, naught do I profer,
For, I (no more) life have, it is, with my griefs ouerdead.
LOVE, that has took my loyal Heart, for a pawn everlasting,
(Gagd'e, for my Truth) is dead, splitted in every part.
Whilst, to an ancient Elm, I seem like one that is,
Spoylde with Lightnings blast, when (but the root) does remain
(O kind Death) all mortal woes, who make an end of me,
In this my chief pangs, thee do I call, me to help.
(Sweet) let me die, through thee, that then, I truly report may,
LOVE has wounded my heart. (Death) of my pain, make an end,
Only (in the^) is my hope, a hope, God knows very slender,
Naught hope I in my cares, but, for to dye out of hand.
Dye would I rather, then in woes lie, still for to languish,
Blessed is the soul that departs, when that he cannot be curd'e.
But you, mine eyes are accursed, to have seen my Lady so cruel,
Since that distoyaltie, has (to me) done such a wrong,
Well had it been for you, if, with a night everlasting,
Shut had you been always, your proper death not to see.
That so sacred Light, you are never like for to see more,
Which did revive my spirits, when that they first were in thrall.
Sweet should I (then) count my misery, comparde to my bad hap,
If that the world I might leave, as in my mind I do wish.
Sighed have I, more then a thousand times, yet she with her hard heart,
Is no more mollified, then in the Seas is a Rock:
More do I pray, more does she say nay, for all mine entreating,
Whilst that her looks are so sower, as they my woes make the more.
These Verses could not (yet) content him, but with the same conceit, employing
his Muse, which (she furnished him withal) he carved these two Sonnets, upon
the hard front of the Rock.

SONNET. I.
More hard then Rocks, I feel my Martyrs hard,
The flinty Rock, the chisell does endure:
Yet naught but death, from hurt can me award,
So great's mine ill, which is without recure.
Ye heavenly Gods, cast Lightnings on my face,
As on the Mounts of Epire, or consume
Me Phoenix like, reviving (in a space)
For I, (in Love) a Phoenix am become,
Too much I have abid, then from these eyes,
Since you have drawn forth fountains of salt tears,
So many sighs, from heart, let it suffice,
Nothing so strong, but sorrow (quickly) wears.
Each thing, (except my self) with change does mend,
(Yet see my cruel Destenie) I am still,
In pain, and yet my pain does never end.
Living, I die, though (dying) I do live,
This is the favor, my FAIR does me give,
SONNET. II.
What may it be, my Mistress should me scorn
So much, as not on me vouchsafe to look?
Was I then under such hard Planet borne,
As that my sickness strange, no Salve can brook?
That Beauty which, so often does me wound,
Those sacred eyes (Authors) of all my smart:
Kill me, when I, to look on them, am found,
Nor help they me, as I, to death depart.
What Destenie then, may change this mine ill hap?
What alteration may my griefs appease?
I, ill Fortune, in such sorrows does me wrap,
As (though they would) yet me they cannot ease.
For she that is, of torments mine the sourse,
More sacred is, then heavens, and more divine:
Fierce Destiny, and Fortune (in her course)
She does command, and with her beck combine.
Then, to this Goddess, must I seek alone,
To cure my mortal wound, or else to none.
He had further sighed, and spoken more in renewing his long complaints, if
Coribant (sad for his grief) had not drawn near, laboring to comfort him.
For oh how true, and assured friends be they, who both in deed and word,
assuage the grief of their friends: and worthy of commendation, is that
Amity, which the injury of time and fortune, cannot change nor alter. It
resembles that gold, which we highly esteem of, when purified in the furnace,
it has passed the fire: Even so, sacred is that Amity, and worthy of
commendation, which the injury and oppression of fortune, cannot kill, nor
destroy: Coribant therefore, approached to this miserable Shepherd, saluted
him, sat down by him, and said;

Tears have always been held (for reproach) in noble hearts, magnanimous
minds never weep, they leaving this effeminate and base quality unto women.
And in very good consideration, the victor Aemilius, cast in miserable Perceus
his teeth, pusillanimitie, and want of courage, in addicting himself to
lamentation, why then do you weep?

Brutus with a constant and cheerful countenance beheld his childrens death.
And that Philosopher was no whit at all moved, understanding of the death of
his only son. In lamentation, Time slippeth away, and in the mean while,
there is no remedy found to come out of misery. There is a double loss, the
one of our health and quiet, which reares over whelme: the other of precious
time, which in steed of bestowing of it in complaints, we should employ in
searching out proper remedy for our miseries and torments. That thing only
should be deplored, the which is without recovery and remedy. But that which
may be remedied, should not be lamented, but with diligence sought out to be
recovered. For what can be over difficult for men to perform? Are not all
things subject unto the^? and does not the wise man command over the stars?
which is to say, he may by his wisdom, avoid the sinister aspect of the
heavens, make them otherwise disagree of their disastrous Influe^ce? What care
moved resolute Diogines, any thing at all? either the cruel blows of perverse
fortune, or the terrible constellations of heaven? Lived he not happy, without
sighs, in his Tun? By his knowledge he surmounted both the stars and
fortune. For properly, he may be termed victor, that fears not his enemy,
and when he can no ways injury or offend him. And if all men would frame
their lives, after the example of this wise man, when should we hear any sighs
proceed from them? or what dolor could entangle their repose? Nothing wants
in man to be perfectly happy, but resolution. For when he is resolute to be
constant in misfortunes, without so much as being once moved at the darts of
adverse fortune, nothing can annoy him, he remains brave and courageous,
like the Conqueror within the Lystes, against whom none dare make further
trial of their force. In like manner, fortune fears the noble heart, and he
(which with a brave resolution disposes himself to resist inconstancy) she
dares no further lay hold upon, but permits him a free life, quiet
breathing, and happy repose. She is like the cock, who having been well
beaten by an other, and bleeding in all parts of his body, dares not return to
encounter, but auoideth the pit, and vanquished, flies away. In like manner,
resist thou this unjust fortune, who has made upon thee so huge and cruel a
war, and resolve as a Marius, to withstand misfortunes, without changing thy
countenance thereat, more then he did. For man's wisdom is not discerned in
prosperous fortune, in that it is an easy matter to show himself wise and
constant in his felicities, but rather in adverse and contrary occurrences,
the which to surmount, valor, constancy and virtue, is requisite.

Shepherd, (replied Arcas) I confess, that the loss of earthly things,
yea, and of the life it self; should not draw tears from the eyes of the
wise, nor enforce his heart to send forth sighs. For they be things of small
value, and the ancient Sages thought always that they carried their treasure
about with them, in bearing their knowledge: but this doctrine takes no place
in Love. Every thing has always some exception, and the very threatenings of
the eternal God, change oftentimes, and saves some one or other. So
(notwithstanding, we may justly maintain, that tears and sighs are
unbeseeming a valiant and noble man) yet must we always say, except only in
amorous actions. For the Gods, Goddesses, and the Heroes, have lamented in this
case.

Did not Venus bewail her dear Adonis, moving to pity therewith, even things
without life? did not Apollo lament his Daphne? did not Hercules mourn for his
wife, which the Centaure took away from him? did not cruel Achilles bewail
his Brisais? did not Ulysses the wise, take on for his wife? and that Palladine
of France, Orlando the Frenchmens honor? did he not a thousand times bewail
his Angelica, becoming furious and mad, in that he had lost her? has not
brave Renaldo, and all those valiant Heroical spirits made moan? whose
complaints wise and mellifluent driostus reports unto as?

O (Shepherd) why art thou then astonished, if I bewail and grieve, for my
sacred Diana? the fire of love like thunder, which never comes without rain,
although of it self it be burning fire, and hotely kindeled. In like manner,
the flames of Love are always mingled with lamentations and tears. For Love
oftentimes forgeth his firebrands of contraries, that is, of Love (oftentimes)
and of hatred, both mixed together. Experience gives testimony of the same:
For only Lovers lament and are sad, when they are not beloved, but hated of
their Mistresses.

And behold, even as the thunder is engendered of heat, and cold, so be the
flames of Love compounded, of love and hatred: so that it is impossible for the
Lover to love, except he be beloved again: but bewail, and lament he may,
because these contraries proceed from him, and render diverse effects, of their
sorme. Why wonder you therefore, that I weep?

Oh Shepherd, he which sows upon the Sea, sand, spends not his time more
unprofitably, then he which bestows it in searching remedy for his Love. For
what can enforce an heart of Diamond, or a lofty, proud, and cruel dame, to
love against her will? Violence in this thing is forbidden, and though law
would permit it, yet would lively and loyal Love hinder it. For the Lover will
never do any thing (though he may) which shall be displeasing to his
Mistress: all means of remedy ceasing, we must (necessarily) have remorse to
lamentation and tears, which be the arms of the afflicted, crying out of the
injustice, and cruelty of the Stars, which make us love, the thing that
hates us, and to desire the thing that flies and shunneth us. And if the wise
(as thou say) overcame, and surmounted the diverse assaults of Fortune, I
answer thee withal,

That Love has tamed them, as well as my self: and none can make head against
him. Let Plato, Aristotle, and that prudent King endued with the gift of
wisdom bear witness: I will no more therefore think my self foolish, or
deprived of reason in loving, seeing these great lights (as well as my self)
have by Love been darkened; and, that these Sages have trodde^ the path of my
error. But Shepherd (replied Coribant) if some have offended, will you
conclude, that by their example, every one may err? And if amongst the
ancient Sages, some have been fools, and deceived by Love, will you affirm
that others have yielded themselves to this inconvenience? You should in this
do them great injury, for all the Jews (for the most part) were wicked, and
yet the Apostles, being of the self same nation, were good men. The cruel
daughters of Danaut, killed their husbands: but pitiful Hypermuestra, (that
saved hers) must not be put in the number of these bloody sisters. In like
manner, a thousand learned personages, which have not only subdued Love, but
even the stars themselves, ought not to be taxed of reproach, because there
were some amongst them, suffered themselves to be transported away with this
fury: for the vice of one particular man, obliges not a generality to the
blame which he only deserves: and an othres offense, cannot prejudice the
innocent. If Plate have erred, wise Aristetle stumbled, and Sage Solomon gone
astray, will you say (for all this) that divine Socrates, wise and grave Cato,
and prudent Moses, have been sinners, and plunged in the self same vice: and,
if the former be not to be followed, nor imitated, take example by the second,
doing like the wise Apothecarie; who extracteth the juice and virtue of
herbs, and afterward casts away that which is worth nothing.

Fuen so, amongst the Ancients, we must imitate those, whose excellent actions
may serve in stead of a guide, and pattern, leaving this, who, in imitating of
them, may cause us stumble into the pit of vice: in which, they be drowned and
washed: You conclude not well therefore, in drawing a liberty of doing evil
from an other man's vice: but on the contrary, our neighbors error, must serve
us in steed of a dark night, wherein, during the same, to kindle our own
virtue, must shine bright, instructing our selves, by his famous example, as
the ancient Spartaines caused their slaves to be made drunk, to the end that
their children might hate wine, by the brutish, and dishonest actions they saw
these base creatures commit, being possessed with this liquor.

It is a foolish conclusion to say, that if my neighbor be a fool, I must
therefore become insensate, and set fire on my own house, because I see my
neighbors on a burning flame: It is rather requisite, that an other man's doing
be beneficial unto us, and that the vice of our neighbor, reform our own,
and not make us to offend like himself: For virtue would be imitated, and vice
avoided.

To maintain that no man can be constant and resist Love, were to err
grosely: For Alexander amidst his great victories, delights and conquests,
performed it.

Demosthenes refused the Love of Lais, loving ten crowns better, then the
enioyance of her. This wise and grave Philosopher I say, whom she could never
set on fire, either by her wanton enticements, amorous looks, or her beauty
so renowned: so that she thought him an insensible stone, and not a man. You
should in this do injury to modest Scipio, who being conqueror of all
Affricke, religiously abstained from the love of a woman: And a thousand others
have lived free from this misfortune, which you may not (rightly) place in the
number of offenders: For their fault, obscure not the excellent glory of the
vertuo^^, and draw not from their offense matter of opprobrietie against the
wise: It will be greater honor unto you, to see wise men in name offend, and
your self free from fault, then if you erred after the example of some simple
creatures.

Oh Shepherd (replied Arcas) I deny the foundation of your argument: for I
will not confess that it is a fault or crime to love, and judge Lovers no
less wise, then those that have not loved at all: for he may justly be said to
be perverse and an offender, whose offense procures public damage, but (so
far of) is a Lover from preiudicing men, that quite contrary he profits
them greatly.

The Lover (like the prodigal man) iniureth none but himself: he only
bears, he only endures, he only suffers: but from his torment arises
mortal glory to the subject he loves: for was there ever Lady faithfully by
her servant beloved, that did not both honor and sing forth (according to the
ability of his invention) her excellent and rare virtues.

What can mortal men desire more dear and precious, then to see themselves
honored, and made immortal to future ages, the which Lovers favored by the
Muses, may make their Ladies and Mistresses? That great King of Macedon,
thought he not Achilles happy, to have been set forth and commended by Homor?
and all great personages, have they not desired the like honor? Not to be
moved with the passion of glory, is to be brutish and without feeling, or not
to be stirred up with a desire to make ones name living after death, is a sign
of a base and boorish mind. They to whom the heavens have not imitated either
Art or Learning to attain to this glory by writing, seek after it, in
buildings, or other rare works of great charge and expense, which continue for
some time, but not so long as books.

But it is certain, that the Muses having taken Love in a snare of flowers,
would say nothing else, but crown this God, with green garlands,
acknowledging, that they should be nothing without him, who gives them
vttrance, power, and breath, to set forth their verses, in despite of time it
self: For neither ye greatness of gifts nor of fear, nor the hope of rewards,
nor threatenings, could never make a learned Poet write well of any one, if he
do not love and affect him: but (on the contrary) only Love will make him
speak better of those whom he shall love simply without hope of reward, then
of those whom he loves not, and yet expects from them some recompense.

Questionless, without Love, many excellent books which are made in the
honor of men, would be yet to do, and a thousand other noble Acts (which now)
through him be apparent to the eyes of men: Commendable therefore are Lovers,
and more then any other sort of men, at least they loose not time, nor consume
it not in doing nothing.

(Oh Godhead) replied Coribant, but on the contrary, a thousand evils have
proceeded from Love: The ruin of Troy, may verify this, and a thousand other
testimonies.

I but quite otherwise (replied Arcas) Love stood the Troyans in steed, for he
sent them the mean to kill Achilles, revenging the death of their Princes; and
he being dead, they (in such a sort weakened the enemies Camp, that without
Treason, Troy had never been subject to the Greeks

But what has Love to do with the Treason of men, as long as he is not the
cause thereof? And yet the selfelame Love (replied Coribant) was it not the
cause of the death of modest Hip^olitus, who was pitifully slain by the
unjust dealings of his wicked Stepmother? Nay rather quice contrary (answered
Arcas) he was the occasion, that he was made immortal, he being raised from
death unto life again, by the cunning of that learned Esculapius, who could
never have done him so great a good turn, unless he had (first) tasted of
death through Love. But what say you then (quoth Coribant) unto Love, which
forced Tarquin to offer violence unto the castitie of Lucres, being the cause
of so great a mischief?

It was an occasion (replied Arcas) rather of a marvelous good turn, by
reason it was the cause of liberty of the Romances, with ye utter ruin, and
overthrow of their Tyra^ts, and Lucretia dying in that order (as she did) was
she not most fortunate and happy? For does not such a one die happily, who as
Codrus by his death preserves his country, making the same (through his
loss) to be fortunate afterward? And yet the very same Love (said Coribant)
was the Author of the cruel perishing of Piramus and Thisby, they having but a
sorry guerdon, for their so constant affection which the one bare unto the
other. Is he not then bloody minded and cruel?

No truly (replied Arcas) for what more sweet and pleasing kind of death
could they suffer than they did? And had it not been a thousand times better
that one of them should die with the other, tha^ to be separated and divided?
seeing the Lover that loses his Mistress, or that Lady, that has lost her
servant, live not at all, but rather languish.

And yet still the same Love was it (said Coribant) which urged the daughters
of Minos to betray their aged Father, giving instructions unto Theseus, how to
slay the monster, and to get out of the Labyrinth when he had done. Why? and
the same Love (answered Areas) was the occasion of a greater benefit, in
delivering Athens from such a servile bondage, as forced them to offer their
pretty little children unto the greedy laws of that devouring Monster.

To conclude, much honor, great glory, and infinite good, has proceeded
through Love, in so much as he that has never loved, deserves not the name of
a man.

As the Shepherd had made an end of his speech, the fair Nymph Orythia
arrived, who having her Lute in her hand, sung (in a most dulcet tune) these
Heroical verses following.

What? shall my Fortune never mend, in which I do languish?
Yet (O ye Gods) let me die, for line without heart, can I not now.
Cruel he, that my soul commands, does mock at my hard haps,
Cursed be the flame, that every thing does burn sane our anguish.
Ah shall I never see, my life nor my Love to be ended?
Never; for these skies are cruel unto my plainings.
And they do seem to be deaf, when with my cries I do moan them,
More, that I live, I plague my self, and am mine own Hangman.
Cruel (alone) is that grief, that no remedy finds,
But for to suffer (without hope) if destiny mine were.
Why was I brought into this world, and why was I borne then?
Better (nere) to be, than always so to be tortred.
Woe to me, hope have I none, that ere my pain will be swaged,
Yet no grief there is to be found, but finds his easing:
Excepe such, as over desperate, only by Love comes.
Then since I needs must langnish thus, content will I hold me.
For (at last) my comforts this, although that I perish,
Yet from all these cares and troubles soon shall I rid me.
That man never fears, when death does venture upon him,
When to loose this wretched life, he rides in a Haven,
Free from the Tempests of this world, to live everlasting.
After the Nymph had with many scalding sighs delivered these verses, she thus
bespake the Shepherd Arcas. What time will thou limit unto my sorrows, and
when will thou make an end of tormenting me as thou do? If pity cannot
induce thee to succor me, at least let these mine earnest prayers move thee.

Why take thou delight thus to be importuned, and why is it a pleasure unto
thee thus to be sued unto? Ah wy do thou not restore my heart unto his
former health, and why deuiest thou, to help him, who is so much affected to
do thee service?

Cruel is that Lord, that makes his faithful servant to serve him still, and
yet yields him no recompense for his pain: unjust is he, and hateful both
to God, and man. For what vice more horrible can there be, than barbarous
ingratitude? Ah wash from thy soul, that foul fault, and suffer not thy self
any more to be reproached, in that thou art hard-harted and bitter, against her
who only deuoteth her self unto thee.

After the Criminal has his fatal sentence pronounced, he is put to death
presently, without making him languish any more, in prolonging his misery.
Fuen so, let me entreat thee, to dispatch, and give thy verdit of life or
death against me, without delighting thy self any longer in my Disasters. The
fire put into the mouth of a Cannon, forces the powder to fly out suddenly,
which turns into a flame: Even so, I am not able longer to endure, without my
grief burst forth of my soul, or that I give up the ghost and die.

But what talk I of death, when it is denied unto me? No no, had I but had the
benefit of the same, thou (cruel man) had never heard so many prayers come
from me, never had I made so many vows unto thee, neither had I moved thee so
often unto compassion as I have done: for with some desperate instrument or
other, I had finished both my life and grief long ere this, and both at one
time.

But (alas) I (being immortal) must endure this anguish, whilst being able to
help others, I cannot heal mine own festring wounds. Not unlike the
Physician, who dies after he has conserved the lives of other, not having the
skill to preserve his own. Were some God the cause of these my plaints, and
that by reason of some one Deity or other, this mischaunce had happened unto me,
I were not worthy of some excuse amongst mine equals.

But when I call to mind, how I have suffered my self to be vanquished by a
simple Shepherd, and yet am not able to persuade him to have remorse upon me,
I needs must confess I am worthy to be blamed, and that rightly. But alas, I
know not well what I say, for my Lady the Goddess Diana, loves a Shephcard as
well as I, and under this weed oftentimes lodges, virtue, learning, and
beauty.

Never was any more beautiful than Adonis, none more fair than Narcissus, and
none more lively than Paris, when he was a Shepherd, neither was there ever a
Nymph more amiable than Enone the Shepherdess.

Angelica, the peerlesse Paragon of all beauty, left many great Princes, and
valiant Paladines (all which were suitors unto her for her Love) and accepted a
poor common Soldier for her sweet heart and Love. Love respects not riches,
only he has an eye unto the perfection of the person that is loved.

Then (sweet Shepherd) fancy me, and give me some sure proof, of thy
affection toward me, without putting me any more to further troubles.

So said the pensive Nymph, when Arcas, being ravished with the contemplation
of his fair Mistress, as if he had been speaking unto her, and as if Orythia,
had been far from him. Began to speak thus.

O sacred Diana, have I not as yet given thee sufficient testimony of my
zealous good will toward thee, considering my long and many sorrows, but will thou still see more, and yet never yield me, any recompense for the same?

Alas, the Goldsmith tries gold but once, if it will endure the fire, which he
uses to make so me excellent piece of work withal: and the Eagle is
contented to carry his little ones but once against the Sunnie Beams, which
if they are able to abide, he suffers them to live, making account they are
his own. Why then (dear Mistress) art not thou content with these many proofs
of my faithful Amity, without demanding (still) new at my hands? If it be,
because I am too base a creature to be beloved, and that thou think me not
worthy of so high a favor;

Ah then, I beseech thee remember Jupiter, who disdained not the Love of
Europe, or of Semele, although they were mortal women, nor Thetis, who
(although a Goddess) yet vouchsafed to espouse Penelus, an earthly man, and
sacred.

Apollo who vouchsafed to affect the Troyan Cassandra; yea, remember the
Goddess of all beauty, who was willing to accept the Love of Anchises, and to
bear a child by him, which was called the wandering Prince Aeneas. And
therefore, be not angry, although I dare to love thee, for I fear not that
the torment of Ixion shall ever punish me, because I honor thee, in as much as
my love, is neither dishouest, beastly, nor viticus, but rather sacred,
virtuous, and chaste, and therefore not subject to any reprehension.

Why, do thou thus oppose thy self against that fair glory which thy
worthy carriage does permit? why do thou reject that praise, which every one
would render unto thy peerlesse beauty? why do thou disdain that honor
which the heavens have ordained for thy matchless perfection? And why do
thou refuse the service of the most loyallest Lover that ever breathed? In
times past those beautiful Ladies counted themselves happy, that could vant
themselves, of the faithfulness of their Lovers.

Hero, thought her self fortunate, in that she had Leander, for her faithful
friend: and why then do thou deny to be most faithfully served of thy
devoted and true hearted Arcas? Suffer him, suffer him (hard-harted as thou
art) to honor thee, for the Gods themselves forbid not men (although vicious)
to adore them, because friendship is not to be scorned from whence soever it
comes, in that it proceeds from a willing and well-wishing mind.

Thus said the Shepherd, when the Nymph hearing him to make this strange
kind of Tale, pursued her former complaint in this manner. Ah barbarous and
disdainful man, why do thou stop thine ears against my pralers?

Take heed, take heed, least the heavens (justly punishing thee) harden not the
heart of her whom thou honor, against thee, as thou most unkindly have done
unto me: for (oftentimes) we fall into the snare which we have laid to intrappe
strangers, we being scourged with the same plague wherewith we have afflicted
others. Is it not enough for thee to be contented with these my sorrows, but
that thou must mock me therewithal, making a show as if thou saw another
and not me, unto whom thou framest thy speech? But the Gods be just, and
therefore thanked be they, seeing thy Mistress makes thee know (and that unto
thy cost, if thou so much love, as thou make us believe) how insupportable
the torments are, which thy Sauadge rigor makes me to feel, for he only can
talk rightly of grief, that has felt the same, and daily experience makes
us perfect in the knowledge of such things as we practice.

If thou feel this evil, and if thou know how full of anguish it is,
then permit not me to abide the same any longer, which if thou do, thou will
then force me to call for aid unto the heavens, that they assist me, to take
reuengement upon thee; for he ought (and that justly) to be punished, who
knows the evil that he does, is acquainted with the greatness of the fault he
commits, and yet (neuerthele^le) will not give it over: for only ignorance
excuses the offense, which knowledge condemns, because such as did
perpetrate the same, were not unacquainted with it: Open then, those deaf
ears of thine, and show me some pity, to the intent, I may commend thee for
kindness, as long as the world shall flourish.

The Shepherd (notwithstanding these her earnest persuasions) seemed not to
hear one word, but as he did at the first, so still he continued, making
solemn intercession unto his good Angel Diana, in this wise.

Alas, must the distance of place, hinder thee (fair Virgin) so much, as thou
can not answer me? and must I be so miserable, as I may say, I am far
exiled from thee?

Can my soul breathe and not behold thee? O wonderful miracle, that wretched
Arcas can live without the chaste and prudent Diana; for she is his soul, and
the body without soul, how is it possible that it should joy at all?
Certainly, I should think my self much blessed, if I might but only see thy
face, without speaking as much as one word unto thee, for then would I most
willingly yield unto death: but I see it is my destiny to die, and not so much
as before my death to see thee.

Unfortunate, my Tomb to be so far off from thee (my dear) and accursed
mine eyes, to sleep in any other resting place, than where thou abidest.

But alas, art thou the cause of my distress? no no, it is the heavens, who
are over jealous of my glory, and who would feign love thee themselves, they
knowing thy like is not to be found in the whole world: and therefore are the
more unwilling to have any Corriuals in their Love. But in despite of them,
will I love thee, nothing being of force to quench this outrageous heat of
mine, no, not death it self.

Thus wailed the sad Shepherd, thinking verily that he had been before the
presence of his divine Diana, and more would he have lamented, but that
Coribant plucking him by the sleeue, and wearied with hearing him (and the
amorous Orythia) put him out of this amorous dream in this sort.

Enougn (man) enough, no tears nor sighs make a man the wiser, after the
fault committed; but rather more miserable and wretched.

Cease I say, cease, both of you to lament, and rather seek some remedy how
to redress your sorrows. And because I would be glad to persuade you to give
over this dangerous Love, which makes you thus to torment and massacre your
self continually, I will account unto you a most lamentable History, by which
you may gather how cruel and damned a plague Love is, for we cannot come from
out this Rock, as long as this tempest lasts, and which is but scarcely new
begun.

Arcas and Orythia seeing there was no remedy, considering the foulnes of the
weather, sat them down, when Coribant, sitting betwixt them (and they lending
a listening ear unto him) began his dolorous discourse in this manner.

Ye hollow Rocks be witnesses, what here by me is sed,
Within whose gloom it horror dark, the night is shadowed.
Ye stately Rocks, to powder burnt, of times most cruelly,
When Jove, your tops with thunderbolts, does scortch and bruise, from sky;
Ah be your witnesses of this my sad discourseile tell
You, which of late the loves of these two Shepherds ouerwell
Conceiude; of these two loving wights, whose lucklesse hapile show,
Undone by Love, by Love who dares the Gods to overthrow?
A^dye broad Beeches, in your shade that often hane themseene,
When they reposing of themselves under the same have been.
You; which a thousand letters carved, within your tender rind,
(Knots, and devises in their love) and such like Toys may find.
You dark (...) Caves, where whilst the day did last in bright some wise,
They (blushing) of theor chastest Loves did among themselves devise.
Ye pretrie Foordes, and crystal springs, ye Rivers murmerous,
Whoat the sigh of them became for to be amorous.
Ye vncorh Deserts, witnesses, what they in secret did,
Importunde by their often plaints, which from you were not hid.
And thou, thick private shadowing grove, that know most of all,
To thee (and all the rest) to hear, what I will speak, I call.
Unto you all (bear witness then) I to you all appeal,
Since it is as true (as pitiful) what I shall now reveal.
In that same time, when among the woods, as yet Love was not known,
In that same happy golden world, when none through Love did groan,
Wren Shepherds (free from Cupids darts) as careless did remain,
And for to languish were not forced, through too much amorous pain.
But rather not so much as once thinking of this proud Love,
'Voide from all ill, themselves sought still, merry to make, and prove,
Whilst want only amongst themselnes, in joy they spent the day,
And pleasantly to their contents, the time did pass away.
Freed from those cares, that Lovers haunt, and brings them to their grave,
Making them pale, and weary, fore their youths they passed have.
Then was no wailing there, nor eyes, that tears do shed apace,
Nor (that they grieved were) could you perceive ought by their face.
Cleerd from all plaints, releast from sighs, not knowing what meant care,
They did despise, and eke contemn the Cyprian Goddess fair.
Her cruel Son, the very Sire, and father of all vice,
Of them Oblations never had, nor any Sacrifice.
The mighty power of Cupid blind, (as then) they did not know,
Nor what did mean his firebrarnds, his Arrows, and his Bow.
Withouten troubling with this Love, their never troubled brain,
A kind of ordinary kindness did, among them remain.
In merry laughter, and in sport, they spent the soon gone year:
Their chiefest pleasures, thousand songs, and Madrigals then were.
Which they sighed forth, with comely grace, whilst beut the flowing bank,
Of some clear river, all the Crew of them, themselves encampe.
One while they daunced hand in hand, within the Meadows green,
Another while, bout foot of Rock, for cooltnesse they were seen.
(As then) plaintes were not their repasts, nor tcares, as drink to use,
(As Lovers wont) who what is ill, still for themselves they choose.
Consuming sorrow did not gnawe, nor gripe them at the heart,
Nor was their chief relief of Death, the penetrable dart.
But rather, without carke and care, without malice or strife,
As happy souls (in all content) they wore away their life.
No palenes was within their cheeks, no hollownesse in eye,
Which frighted with a sudden fear, most pittious you might spy.
Nor could you once perceive as much, as sign of heavy chance,
In their well featur de faces all, and lovely count enance.
Ah trebble blessed such; For he cannot be said to live,
Who for Death wishes, that his woes, no more might make him grient.
In steed of pastimes to be blithe, they sounded their shill Crowde,
And with a hundred Songs, they filled the Groves with noyses loud.
Whilst their soft instruments, apace (according to their use)
Oftimes well tun'de, and then vntun'de, as they themselves did choose.
A thousand Brawles, and Pastoral Odes, they sung in plainest sort,
Whereby (the more) they did increase, their merriment and sport.
In cool of day, to dance (about) you might en them epsy,
And when the heat was great, in midst of shadowing Groves to lie.
There would they many an old wives tale, and jesting Fables tell,
Whilst (some of them) to blow a fresh, their Bagpipes fell.
Now under cooly Trees they would (friendly) make their repast,
Feeding on bread and Mornings milk, for to delight their taste.
And dipping in the water clear, their Hattes, they that did drink,
Which better far then any wine, (though daintiest) they did think.
But weladay, the nature of this sauadge inhumane LOVE,
Did alter this sweet course of life, and worser made them prove.
He chang'de their pastimes into plays, and spoiled so their sense,
As (weakening courage theirs) he forced them stand without defense,
As we do see amazed to stand, the gentle harmles Sheep,
(And that in running here and there) no order they do keep.
When as at unawares, the Wolf, wtih reuenous mouth them takes,
And of them as him likes best, a bloody slaughter makes.
Or as we vieu the Shepherds from the fields in haste to run,
One here, one there, least that by death, they should be overcome.
When Jupiter, to threat the earth, with which he seems wroth,
From heaven he, in angry wise, his Thunder sends forth.
Making a thousand flashie Lights, (the children of dread Fear)
Unto their frighted eyes, and on their bloodlesse cheeks appear.
Whiist fury of the Thunders hard, with such a sudden crack,
As one would think it were hard by, and even at his back.
Even so did LOVE, these Shepherds fray, and trouble to them wrought,
Consumde their lives, and chiefest glee, and to their end them brought.
And thus it was: Nature had framde one Shepherdess among rest,
More perfect then the other all, and fairer then the best.
Young was she in experience, and in age, for but as then,
She passed had of years some fine, and joining to them ten.
Yet stature hers so comely was, and full of Matestie,
As for a second Venus her, they did (of right) descrie.
Her hatre far brighter then pure gold, in knottes was tied fine,
Empaling round her head most rich, of Princely Crown the sign.
Whilst those her tresses amorous, did genttly move with wind,
As we the calmy waves in Sea, to role and rise do find.
Her Forhead (heavens sweet mount) was smoothe, by Nature framed fair,
No Art (though exquisite) could mend the same, it was so rare.
No wri^ckle was there to be seen, no frowning in that place,
(That) truly got by Beauty was, Beauty gave it such grace.
Her Eyelid, lids of Ebony, enclosed there within,
Which Gods and Men amazed made, and every heart did win.
Her sparkling eyes, two stars did show, then Lightning far more bright,
More clear then glorious Sun, when he does show his chiefest light.
Eyes, which who so presumed to dare, their looks for to behold,
They soon were stricken blind as to were, for being ouerbold.
Eyes where as LOVE in all his pride, did seem for to repose,
And through the sparklings of the which, lies chiefest honors rose.
Eyes, which as sacred and divine, all did adore and fear,
Although to every one their full, and overthrow they were.
Her Checkes that checked greatst Potentates: which Beauty beautifide,
Of ruddie Rose, and Lilly white, the equal combat tryde.
Her Checkes vermillion colloured, by Nature, not through Art,
The perfect Type of loveliness, to each one did impart.
Her witching lip was Curr all white, like to a Gillsflower:
Which ^atred was in pearly deaw most supple every hour.
And as her Lips, so was her Mouth, her mouth like Orakell,
From which, a speech forth came, that did Pallas (though wise) excel.
Her Lips inuiting to sweet sport, did grace her dimpled chinne,
Whose sight was such, as was enough (in thought) to make us sin.
Her snowy Throat was seemly plac'te, so was her sweatlesse Neck,
Which whitest Marble of the Alps, and Porphery did check.
Her matchlisse Throat so delicate, her dainty Skin so clear,
As through the same, what so she drank, the color did appear.
Her beautous Breasts, LOVES lobbie right, right way to Paradise:
Where grew those golden Apples rare, vnvalued for their prcie.
Two Mountains there were plac'te, from whence on amorous sweet fire,
Did send forth sighs (children of Care, begotten through Desire.)
Her slender Middle like a Spanne, did show her waste so small,
Which who so looked on, as he looked, he languisht therewithal.
Next was that place. (Alas, that of that Place, I may not show)
Unworthy we, such Mysteries and such rare sights to know.
Her hands were white, as Whale his bone, so matchelesse was her foot,
The first whereof, were Arrows, which Dan Dupid used to shoot.
Then such this wondrous Beauty was, of this fair Shepherdess,
Who many a Shepherds heart did chaxm, and wroght them much distress.
Her name was FLORA (FAIR surnamed) well worthy of that name
And worthy was that name of her, so glorious was her Fame.
Her exercise, and use (as then) was bout the Fields to walk,
And chiefest pleasure which she took, in shadowy Groves to stalk,
Whilst (as her harmless flock did feed) about them she did sing,
(Full merrily) some pleasant Round, which made the woods to ring.
For spiteful LOVE (as yet) had not his malice against her bent,
Nor had he (yet) through his devise, spoylde this work excellent.
Free was she from a Lovers life, from amorous annoy:
With liberty (most pleasantly) her youth she did enjoy.
But (soon this humor for to change) she against her will was forced:
(Compeld to Love) from her hearts ease, (poor soul) she was diuorc't.
For, by her dwelt a goodly Swain, that did increase her care,
A valiant Shepherd, gallant and lovely, as she was fair.
Borne on the selfsame day, that she into this world was borne,
And subject, by the selfsame chance) unto this fatal storm.
Hight NV MIDOR, he cleaped was, both affable and kind,
So courteous and so debonnaire, as like you could not find.
In feature, shape, and comeliness, Adonis he did pass:
And (if he did not him exceed) his equal (sure) he was.
Each morning, when the break of day began for to appear,
He used to accompany, his FLORA, loved dear.
Unto the Meadows with her Flock, and there with her would chat,
In friendly wise, as they did walk, of this, and then, of that.
And afterward, they both would set them down, or in some shade,
Of some thick Pinetree, or by Foord, which trickling murmr made.
There would he cate of vittailes hers, and she on his would feed,
Whilst (what they had emongst themselves) as common, they decreed.
When any sport commenced was, among Shephear as she was found,
The first that led the Dance with him, and he began the Round.
No sooner was it night, but they, together home did go:
And in frank manner one of the other, Gifts used to bestow.
These pretty sports, were but a light (as it were) more strong to tie,
And to begin to bind them in, more perfect Amity.
And yet this plain and simple kind of Courting (though plain stuff)
To set their harmless hearts on fire, too much it was, and enough.
Since LOVE we see engendered is, only by looks and speech:
And so continues through the same, beyond all humane reach,
This was the cause that many woes they did endure,
Of Friends, they loyal Lovers did, become most firm and sure.
As both their Birth-dayes were but one, so was their Loves but one:
Equal they in affection were: and love they did alone.
One mind there was between them both, two bodies, but one soul,
One Conqueror, both of their hearts, and fancies did control.
What one did wish, the other would (alike) was their Desire:
If the one did burn through heat, the other did feel as great a fire.
If the one did send forth pittious plaints, with many a drery tear,
The other, for to wail with sighs, and sobbes, did not forbear.
No love, like hers, so passionate, so loy all (ere) has been,
Anchises love, with Venus fair, so constant was not seen.
Nor Pyramus, may I compare, unto these Lovers true,
Although so dear his Dame he loved, as that himself he slew.
In every Rock and Tree, they did ingraue the hour and day,
In which LOVE (cunningly) had wrought, to bring them to his bay.
In midst of Groves, and thickie Woods, cut in the tender kind^,
Of Oaks and Elmes, these Lovers names, engraven you might find.
Whilst as they romed here and there, a thousand Songs they sung,
To make them to forget their pain, fierce LOVE, them so had stung.
The lovely Shepherd, Sonnets made, in honor of his Dame,
And in her presence sung them often, presenting her the same.
Which she accepted gratiousty, whilst with hot sighs from heart,
She shewde, how he grieved not alone, but that she bare a part.
And thus (long time) both comfortless, did comfort one another,
Long time, this secret Fare (hid close) in bosom they did smother.
Whilst in some sort, the heavens did seem, their actions to allow,
And LOVE made show (as good, what so they did) for to avow.
Bin weladay, what mortal thing, can ever lasting be,
When they themselves must (once) decay, and unto ruin gree?
When Fortune (enuicus of our good) such interest has and power,
That he can alter our delights, and pleasures in an hour.
No marvel (then) though that sweet life of these two Lovers in aine,
He topsie turme turned quite, for pleasure bringing pain.
As you behold a stately Oak, in growth surpassing proud,
Under whose shade of late, the Plants, were glad themselves to shrowde.
Whose cooly leaves and branches green greatst Conquerors does scorn
Upon their helmets and their Crests, most bravely to have borne.
Upon (the sudden through mischance) with Thunder sirucke, as the
Whilst (blasted with the Laghtning flash) his head does lie fall low.
His scorchea leaves look black and swarth, his verdure all is gone.
The Tree it self, showing like a Truncke a Block, or barea stone.
No sap or juice remains therein, but dead it seems to be,
Nor former glory of his green, you any more can see.
Even so by malice most unjust, through Fortune full of strife,
Of these two Lovers (happie-once) did end the pleasant life.
The jealous heavens repining that, they thus should live on earth,
(Exempt from canes) Death sent to them, to stop their vital breath.
Death did they send as messenger, to sommon them from hence,
And (for to bring the same about) they wrought a false pretense.
This which we LOVE call, which two hearts makes one, in loyal wise,
The same (vow'ae to the other often) makes deadlyest Enemies.
Of cold and freezing jealousy, the Author first be is,
Whose sweetness, sowrest misery, to follow does not miss.
Nor ever has there any thing, as yet, in him been found,
But (what with grief and wretchedness) thick swarming does abound.
His preasures like are unto spoils, or like an April shower,
Which is no sooner come then goue, nor any while does dure.
That this is too too true, I vouch, Aenone, she it proved,
And dolefidl Dido, who did die, because one-much she loved.
Achilles felt his fury fierce, when he Polixena
Did sue to have, whose witching-face, was cause of his decay.
Then of these faithful Lovers twain, attend the Tale most sad,
And mark, through vile injurious LOVE, what pittious end they had.
It channced (now) the Holly-day, due unto LOVE, was come,
In which, once every year, great Feasts, most solemnly were done.
His Temple in this Desert was, which holden was divine,
For honor it was wondrous rich, for beauty rare and fine.
As well as Neighbors, Forrainers came thither far and near,
The Demy-gods, Fawnes, Satyrs, Nymphs, among Shepherds and appear.
These with their Crowns of Laurel green, upon their bushy head,
Themselves did show (in Courtly pomp) adorned and bellished.
About their necks hung hugie chains, and precious Carkenets,
And bout their arms they Jewels ware, and costly Bracelets.
Now that this God propitious, among them himself would show,
Great store of Sacrifices they, upon him did bestow.
Perfumde with Incens offered, and hundred sorts of verse,
Which did his power, his Majesty, and noble deeds rehearse.
That done, they did begin to dance; each one as lik'te them best,
And to what dance they Fancy had, to that themselves addressed.
Whilst that the Syluans, and the Gods of woods, with Cornets shrill,
With Hoboies, Bagpipes, and such like, the place throughout did fill.
One does a Brawle of Poitiers show, another with a grace
The measures leads, the third again Lauolta treads apace.
Thus every one does strive to please themselves with fresh delight,
No falling out amongst them is, no malice, or despite.
Not any was there bent to ill, nor any to displease,
One sought another to content, to purchase joy and ease.
Together, among this merry crew, there was our Lovers twain,
When, as a cursed mishap did chance, that cause was of their bane.
For among the rest, that in that place did dance, with blith-full glee,
Even in the midst of all their mirth, as merry as might be;
A Nymph, there was, surpassing fair, for so she well did show,
So fair, as FLORA she did match, if not, before her go.
From forth her eyes, like Diamonds, a sparkling fire did come,
Whose glaunces showed to be of force to equalize the Sun.
Her Amber locks (by nature curlde) lay wauing on her cheek,
As Seas do gently beak on bank (a sight that all did leeke)
This Virgin sweet, to NVMIDOR comes, with a grace most trim,
And by the hand, the Shepherd takes, to dance a while with him.
Long did they dance, and as they daunst, her color fresher shoowes,
And (still) the more she daunceth (aie) the more she fairer grows.
So beautiful she seems (indeed) as in that place there is,
A Sauadge Satire, who begins, to think to do amiss.
Insecret sort, to ravish her, he vows by force and strife,
Or else, before he lose his wish, he will lose his hateful life.
This Monster foul (misshapen wretch) unworthy for to Love,
Dan Cupids fire, within his breast, begins (now) to prove.
He frets, and fumeth inwardly, and through this uncouth heat,
His color (changing) comes and goes, his heart does pant and beat.
Respect of persons, place, and fear, lest he should not obtain,
His hairie body makes to shake, through a cold sweat amain.
Mean space, none does him mark, or think that ere he durst presume,
The company thus to disturb, in this his fretting fume.
But LOVE that forces mightiest Gods, and them has (often) controld,
Makes him auditious, insolent, proud, haughty, and so bold.
That in the end (and suddenly) he carries her away,
As does the Wolf, when violently, he seazeth on his pray.
Ah help (she cries pittiously) ah help, help (loud) she cries,
Whilst, that through fear, and sorrow she, dead in his rough (arms) lies.
All are amazed, nor can they move, only brave NVMIDOR,
Vows for to rescew her from him, or else to die therefore.
With naked sword in hand he runs, after the Thief amain,
Yet all his running's to no end, he labors but in vain.
For so fast tripps the Satire, as it seems he does fly,
The Eagle faster takes not flight, when he from Jove does hie.
Nor does the Hawke (when he has got the Partridge) seem so swift,
As this rude villain does, his feet so fast still move and shift.
But (still) the Nymph (for aid) does cry, and after NVMIDOR
Does follow, hearing her hard by, which grieueth him the more.
He follows him apace, and (still) he keeps where he has tras't,
And (more he hears her to lament) the more he makes have.
Yet, though he does all he can, he cannot him ore take,
Which is the cause his breast he beats, and sorrow great does make.
And now hard at his heels he is, which when the Satire sees,
Into a hollow gloomie Rock, to hide himself he flees.
This was the cause the Shepherd lost, the woeful Damzels sight,
Only by cry of hers he knew, how follow her, he might.
So long he seeks, that at the last he comes into the room,
Where as the Satire, against her will, the Virgin would ore come.
Which sight, incenst him so with rage, as that his sword he takes,
And trusting him through body quite, an end of him he makes.
Down falls the Monster in his gore, his lust begins to cool,
Whilst with his streaming blood, he makes the place seem like a Poole.
Which when the gentle Shepherd saw, no more he weary was,
(Now he had had his will) he for his travail did not pass.
The frighted Nymph, he comfort, and bids her be of cheer,
Since that the Satire (for his rash attempt) had paid so dear.
He wills her thanks the God of Love, who had him thither sent,
Her to protect from villainy, which was against her meant.
Nor looks he, for praise of her, but happier thinks himself,
To save a Nymph from shame, then if he purchased had great wealth.
Thus said the Shepherd to the Nymph, but (thus) although he said,
Yet answered she him naught at all (for still she was afraid.)
She shook like an Aspen leaf, her heart did throb and pant,
And being frighted in her mind, she breath, almost did want.
Resembling right a pretty Hind, by Hounds that being chaste,
And hardly scaping from their claws, thinks scarce the dangers past.
She viewes the Satire, wallowing in his own blood desperately,
Yet though she plainly sees the same, she scarce believes her eye.
The Shepherd seeing her still doubt, from fear, her for to win,
Once more begins to comfort her, and thus he does begin.
Sweet Nymph, what meanst thou thus to doubt, and why thy self do wrong,
Do not behold thy lustful foe, dead for to lie along?
To fear (where cause is) Reason wills; withouten cause to fear,
Argues a mind deprived of sense, and signe's of folly mere.
Comfort thy self, and (if thou can) tell me what new disgrace,
May be of force, to daunt with dread; thy bloodlesse palie face.
See not thy liuelesse enemy, his countenance do not know?
His earthly coarse, as evidence that he is dead, does show.
Cease then to doubt, for fear of ought since now thou have no cause,
Leave thus to weep, wail, and lament and make thereof a pause.
Take courage unto thee, and think my victory upon,
The wise (of dangers past) will were so much as (once) think on.
Then leave off for to sorrow thus, and seem not to disdain,
Through too much passion, honor this, which I through thee do gain.
(So said) he gently helps her up, and sets her on her feet,
Whilst with a thousand hunnie words, he sweetly her does greet.
The Nymph, now come unto herself, begins to gather heart,
To chase away all fear from her, which fore did breed her smart.
Her former color now does come into her cheeks afresh,
Whilst she in humble sort, with thanks unto him does express.
Her grateful mind, acknowledging in courteous manner trim,
How that her honor, and her life, preserved were by him.
With blushing look, and smiling cheer, she crowns with flowers his head,
And vows in modest wise, to be at his devotion led.
But weladay, who ere would think, that thanks for his reward,
Should be the cause, a recompense he should receive so hard.
This kindness, which the Nymph on him bestowd, deserving worth,
Th'vntimely end of him and of his FLORA dear, brought forth.
For doing good, the fillie Swain, his harmless life must lose,
A slender hire for praise, when at so high a rate it grows.
Things taken well, are still done well; a sin it is to mistruct,
Upon surmises false and vain, and proofs not to have just.
Ah had the Shepherds Mistress been as wise as she was fair,
She had not heapt upon her self, nor him, such dismal care.
Meane-time, brave Numidor, through his exploit, most famous grew,
And through the Nymphs grateful report, each one this matter knew.
Which FLORA made for to misdoubt, for long time she before,
Had marked the Virgin to be fair, the cause she feared the more.
She saw (as she did think) that over familiar he was
With her, and how often them betwixt, great kindnesses did pass.
She well remembered, how they daunct together; and which most
Did gaul her, how in have away, he (after her) did post.
When as the Satire snatch her up, her to have ramshed,
And (how to save her) he again his life had ventured.
All these compared together, made her guess, all was not well,
So that, her body quite throughout, an uncouth cold sweat fell.
And now she began to love so much, as jealous she did grow
Of him, that (nere) the same deserved, nor had off ended so.
She sighs, and sobs, and frantic like, now here, now there does run,
Thinking her dearest Love of friend, an exemie was become.
Nor dares she (in her soul) him call her faithful servant true,
Nor worthy of a Mistress kind, since he has got anew.
Against (him say) she does exclaim, and still against him does cry,
Calls him unjust, deceitful, false, of right, an enemy.
And (as if he committed had some monstrous sin on earth,)
She counts him worthy for to die, unfit to draw his breath.
And now, she thoroughly is assured, that he is given to range,
And that of his first plighted Love, he has made an exchange.
This forces her, with face (one while) as pale and wan to look,
Another while to be as red, as fire from furnace took.
Now does she burn, and then again, she suddenly does freese,
Whilst through these passions contrary, her senses she does leese.
And now to kill her NVMIDOR, she vows most resolute,
Since him, a perjured wretch (and not better) she does repute.
That done, she means to end her days, and slay her self, him by.
The more, her constant Love unto the world to testify.
But now, Love makes her change her thought, although against her will,
And forces her (although despite of her) to love him still.
She weeps and wailes, and pearly drops fall from her like small tears,
Whilst as a bedlem she does rent her face, and golden hears.
She flings her self upon the ground, her head thereon she knocks,
Whilst grief so much in her bears sway, as it tongues passage locks.
With arms a cross, unto the heavens, she lifts up her hands,
Whilst she, of Venus and her Son, revenge of him demands.
Yet, after of the matter she, better bethinkes her self,
And then unto him she does wish, all happiness and health.
Grieuing that she so much has spoke against him, she does repent,
And from her former cruel mind, most willing does relent.
But nerethelesse, she is resolved her self, to end her life,
Thereby to ease her of her pangs, and rid her from this strife.
So much, she does disdain to live, as death she means to choose,
Since Numidor, a Mistress new, has took, her to refuse.
Ah cruel Shepherd does she say, lamenting pittiously,
Have thou the heart, who thee so dear has loved to force to die?
Well, well, most unkind man, I for thy sake, my self will slay,
And go into my grave I will (untimely) fore my day.
To please thee (not my self I sought) whilst I on the earth did live,
Nor to prolong my days tle seek, since thee (I see) I grieve.
But at this fault of thine so foul (ungrateful) do thou think,
The Gods above (true Iusticers) will seem at all to wink.
Think thou (unkind) the heavens will (ere) unto thee be kind,
When (how thou fowly have profaned their Altars) they shall find?
No, no, the immortal powers, sharp foes unto thy perjury,
Shall do me right, and wreake my wrong, for this my injury.
Such punishment (with tortors huge) they shall on thee bestow,
As they do on Danaides, in Limbo lake below.
And as they Theseus plagued because he wreched was forsworn,
Or Jason, who Medea left, all comfortless, forlorn.
With many other Lovers false, which like are unto thee,
(There) as thou (rightly) do deserve, afflicted thou shall be.
For Jupiter, though (for a while) he men permits to rome,
And fickle changings prove, yet in the end he paieth them home.
So Paris died (and well deserved) Enone that abusde,
Who in her life time (better) him (than he deserved) had used.
Then do thou think (fond-man) that thou shall escape this scourage alone,
Who, art the sowrse of all my grief, and motive of my moan?
Perhaps thou dreamest, because that they awhile their plagues do spare,
They slow are unto punishment, nor of the same have care.
What is deferd, is not unpaid; the time shall come ere long,
That thou shall make amends for miss, acknowledging this wrong.
The more to chastise any fault, the Gods (gently) forbear,
The more at last they are rigorous, more cruel and severe.
Then, think not (wrech most treacherous) but that the day shall come,
That thou shall smart, for what thou have to woeful Flora done.
My cause to the heavens I do commit, to them I do appeal,
They know the secrets of all hearts, nor ought will they conceal.
And yet (sweet Numidor) forgive, and pardon what I say,
Since it is my grief (not I) that thus, against thee does enuay.
For should thou never so much wrong do unto me each hour,
Yet angry for to be with thee, nere shall I have the power.
Love, which is of more force in me, than is this thy offense,
Command me (loving thee) with thee and with thy fault dispense.
Judge then of this strange cruelty, that it should me constrain,
To love and honor him who is the Author of my baine.
So we, the feeble sick man see, through senseless fond desire,
(What is the occasion of his death) to covet and require.
So I (arrested by proud Love) am forced injuriously,
Alack the while, to honor thee, who laughst to see me die.
Thee must I like, and follow still, despite of my poor heart,
Although void of all honesty, and friendly Love, thou art.
Still for thy sake I languish must, in death, with great disease,
Yet I my self count happy, since I do it thee to please.
The Gods forget (as I forgive thee) from mine inward soul,
And never may they, for my death, as faulty thee control.
As willingly I thee forgive, as to my death I go,
For, being dead, thou then too late my constancy shall know.
Well may thou have a fairer friend, but faithfuller was never,
Who as she served thee, whilst she lived, in death she will love thee ever.
But thou, great Cupid, rightful Judge, revenge my cause above,
On her, who traitorously has stolen from me, my heart and love.
Plague her, that makes me pine away, example let her be,
To Lovers all, how they take heed, to use such treachery.
Plague her that has my Lover stolen, my lovely NVMIDOR,
And let her feel like punishment, as I have felt ore sore.
Ah let her not, who loyal Faith, so shamefully does soil,
Raise Trophies of my overthrow, nor triumph in my spoil.
Thus Flora prated and sigh't, thus wailde the heavy Shepherdess,
Was never Nymph, or Maiden borne, that felt such deep distress.
In wailing, and in weeping, she did spend the day and night,
And the remainder of her life, in sorrow, sans delight.
And now she weary is of life, life does her vex and grieve,
A greater Corsie has she not, than that she thus does live.
She does resolve to die forthwith, and yet she feign would choose,
The gentlest, and the easiest way, her soul from corpse to loose.
For to dispatch her self with sword, it was too fierce and fell,
The fire displeased her, and the rope to her was horrible.
To fling her self down from some Rocks high top she had desire,
But being there, the height thereof, did make her to retire.
Upon the Seaish bank she stood, minding therein to lep,
But raging waves did her afright, from drowning they her kept.
As we behold amazed to stand, the doubtful traveler,
Not knowing which way for to take, by reason of great fear.
(Unskillful which path for to trace, beset most dangerously,
Which he already, seems in his mind, to view with eye.
On every side with Theeus, who all the passages about
Have laid, so as he knows not how, from thence to get him out.
So Flora doubtful, and yet full of corsiues and of pain,
Knows not what death were best to choose, though she would die full feign.
She musing looks, now here, now there, she runs every hour
About the woods, and wishes that some beast might her devour.
O, that we should ill wish our selves, oftentimes we wishing woe
Unto our selves, it lights on us: poor Flora found it so.
No wisdom it is, the Gods (to punish us) to put in mind,
Too soon, they can, if so they please, to plague us, just cause find.
Mean time, Love, at this Shepherdess does smile and at her grief,
Who more she does her woes bewail, the more she wants relief.
His glory he embellisheth, by reason of her care,
And his victorious Chariot, with the same does make more fair.
But leaving her (still) languishing, we will again return
To Numidor, who missing her, does wail as fast and mourn.
He seeks and searches every where, for Flora, he does call,
But yet no voice but Ecco shrill, does answer him at all.
Ecco, does only answer him, with wast, and fruitless sound,
He hears her name, but Floras self, can no where yet be found.
Like as the Heart (that loving Dear) when he his pretty Hind,
Runs round about in every place, with flying pace to find.
Now seeks her amongst the Rocks, and then the woods among,
Then in the Forests there by Foords, and Rivers all along.
And finding still to miss her, then seeks in some hollow Cave,
To see if there her company, as fortunate he may have.
And weary now, with seeking her, he down lies in some place,
Sighing full sore for want of her, whom he longs to embrace.
So does our Shepherd; who was now, with seeking her being tirde,
Wailes his hard hap, not her to find, whom he so much desirde.
So much he wailes, as hardest Rocks, grieve that so much he seeks,
And pittious Ecco, when he sighs, in recompense (now) weeps.
Each thing, seemd (to their power) as though they succor to him brought,
Only did Flora want (alas) for whom so much he sought.
Flora, for whom he sought, whom yet he could not once entreat,
That she vouchsafe would to his cries, to answer and to speak.
Flora, who power had over him, him to command alone,
Whose death and life lay in her hands, for her (thus) did he moan.
And now into his troubled brain, did many fancies come,
One while he thinks some God of woods with her away is run.
Or that some other Satire ruff, has drawn her to some cane,
And there (against her will) does mind, his will on her to have.
Another while he doubts sore, lest in this uncouth wood,
Some sauadge beast has seazde on her, and spilt her harmless blood,
Or else, he fears, she him will have no more unto her mate,
But rather means, some Lover now, into her grace to take.
Thus does he languish comfortless, to see his hard estate,
And in a manner does begin to grow as desperate.
What hopeful is, that he reiects, no joy he entertaines,
But as a man careless of help, he wretchedly remains.
As is a guilty person brought before the Judge severe,
Convicted (fore him) for his fault, which proved is most clear.
His conscience telling him of his offense, and his amiss,
And for to prove the same, before him, his sharp witness is.
Which when he finds, shame and grief does so his sins confound,
As he his life, not to respect, nor to regard is found.
So woeful full of heavy care, this hapless Shepherd was,
And (so, he Flora had not lost) for life he did not pass:
But having lost her, he did think, his heart and soul was gone,
And therefore comforted he would not he of any one.
Yet he no sooner breath had took, but that he nerethelesse,
For all his toyling, began to seek, and search for her afresh.
He prieth into every bush, through groves he looks all,
Andrunnes so fast, as oftentimes (through have) he down does fall.
Trough brambles sharp, through bushes, and through hedges he does pass,
Through thick and thin, and all to find his long sought dearest I ass.
Like to the Dear that chased is, by Hunter, he did run,
And then again begins the course, that he before had done.
When, missing of his purpose, he laments in pitteous case,
And (cruel to himself) does scrath and tear his manly face.
Even as Hippollitus the chaste, was drawn by his fair hair,
Through forests, woods, and mount aine tops, and hurried every where.
And at the last, his limbs were rent asunder one from one,
Whilst (frighted with sea monsters) he from Chariot fell alone.
So, such our Shepherd seemd to be, resembling such a wight,
Whilst streams of blood run down along his body, view you might.
He sighs and sobs, within the woods, with voice most dolorous,
Whilst on the name of Lady his, he cries and calls on, thus.
Ah where art thou my Flora dear^ alas, where may thou be?
And why should thou be so unkind, to hide thy face from me?
What place so happy is to hold thy self (mine only joy?)
Thy beauty (now) where does it shine, chasing away annoy?
(Light of mine eyes) say do thou love? ah yet unto me speak?
And be not so unkind, my heart (with calling thee to break?)
Where so thou live, blessed is that place, thrice blessed aie,
More willing than in paradise, I there would bide and stay.
Alack what have I done to thee, thou should be so unkind,
To part from me (my better part) and leave my soul behind?
No doubt, some God has gotten thee, enjoying presence thine,
Some heavenly power does honor thee, which breeds sorrow mine.
For think thou, withouten thee, I can draw forth this breath?
Think thou that in thine absence. I can live upon this earth?
Then speak (my sweet) vouchsafe so much, as tell me, where art thou?
Where bide those rare perfections, and where shine thy virtues now?
May I not be so happy, as to know, where thou do keep?
Since for thy loss, I cannot choose, eternally but weep?
Without thy careful Numidor, tell me where do thou stay?
Who (ever) has thee loved, and who will love thee still for aie?
Can thou, if him (as he does thee) so much and truly love,
Grieve him so much, vex him so much, and overmuch him move?
I knew the time, I must confess, when as thou did sermount,
For loyal Love, and when of me, thou did make account.
I know, I know, thou loud'st me once, that loved me thou have,
And that for constant loyalty, our mutual Love has past.
I know that Love, ore both our hearts, tryumpht as Conqueror,
And that over both our souls he had, the like and selfsame power.
I Will swear that once thou louedst me, though now thou love me not,
Though now that fire extinguished is, and thou have me forgot.
I know not, if (as weary of me) thou beginst to range,
And that thy fickle mind desires, else where to soar and change.
Or, whether, having found a man, thou better likst than me,
I am rejected, and shook off, and quite cassheirde by thee.
Which if that it be so, why then, die must poor Numidore,
And with his death, his fortune hard, and thy bad mind deplore.
If it be so, he must resign his life to death, and die
Rather than live, thus languishing in pain continually.
If it be so, I needs must say (though so to say) does griue,
There is no trust in any one, no faith on earth does live.
Needs must I say women are false, that constant few remain,
And that their Sex does harbor ^ ought, but false dissembling shame.
If it be so, that Flora, false, to Shepherd hers has proved.
Then well I swear, that loyally, never has (woman) loved.
But why (alas) talk I so vain? too idle is my head,
Whilst with such frantic raging fits my fantasy is fed?
What madding humor vexes me, what bedlem jealousy?
What fond conceit makes me to talk (Sans Sens) so foolishly?
Am I so vilely given, to think that Flora will cassbeire
Her servant Numidor, whom she (before) has loved so dear?
That she (to any) but to him, will true and faithful prove,
That she will falsify her faith, orethrowing her first Love?
O thought most base to have of her, conceit her to mistrust,
O traitorous Shepherd, worthless man, O lover most accursed.
Have I (long) heretofore, her Love with Touchstone thoroughly tried,
And shall she now with sensure hard, withouten cause abide?
Shall I, of infidelity condemn her, and suspect,
When I have ever known her, all bad motions to reject?
No, no sweet Flora, I dare swear, and I do know too well,
Thou love thy Numidor, nor him (for new) wilt ever sell.
No, thou do love him, though some God, has taken thee against thy will,
And keeps thee (perforce) although, thou never meanedst ill.
I know thou dearly love him, as dearly as thy heart,
And that his absence makes thee wail, and in thee breeds smart,
I know my presence thou do wish, and do lament my loss,
I know, that my not being with thee, thou do count a cross.
I do believe assuredly (nor otherwise i will think,)
Thy love so sacred nere can die, nor ever be extinct.
Too much thou louedst me, too much thou (aie) of me did make,
To leave me, to abandon me, and me for to forsake.
Thou love me, and do desire with me to be, I know,
But that bad fortune crossed thee, the faults thereof to show.
Then in what place, thy sweetest self does soiourne and does stay,
And where so ere thy beauty fair her brightness does display.
Where ore thy gracious eye does glaunce, controlling with delight,
Embellsshing with lulstrious rays, the glory of thy sight;
Ah, there the Gods I do beseech, all happiness to reign,
Down on thee fast, whilst there thou may, in pleasure (safe) remain.
Whilst I mean while, will go to seek some woeful uncouth place,
Some hollow Rock, where I may live, since I can find no grace.
For being of thy seemly shape (though undeserved) depriude,
I needs must breath my last of force, and seek to be distiude.
Then happy live thou, live thou long, and never may thou taste,
Of sorrow such as I have done, to force thy life to wast.
Thus said the Shepherd, and therewith, seeks still some hollow Cane,
Wherein he soon may find his end, which he desires to have.
He seeks to find his death, whilst her to find he nere does linne,
As did Apollo, Daphna chase, whose love he sought to win.
Nor wearied is he: Lovers nere are wearied, when the fire
Of Love does burn their entrails hot, with coals of strange desire.
Long travail, never tireth them, but still they labor fresh,
And though they be ore chargde, yet take thy courage nerethelesse.
Then Numidor (by Love) borne out, both day and night does seek
For his fair Saint, for whom he longs and much desires to meet,
As one beholds the Lioness, at mouth with froth to foam,
When she to seek her little ones (stolen from her) forth does run.
She never staieth, but restless runs the forests all about,
Nor gives she ore, although her bones and back do crack throughout.
Running, sometimes upon the bills, and then on Champions plain,
Another whilst along corn fields, with swiftie pace amain.
And in the end wearied with grief, her self flings on the ground,
Resolved to die (through hunger) starved, since they will not be found.
So such a part our Shepherd plaide, when he did see with eye,
His Mistress he no where could find, he faints, resolved to die.
But weladay, before his death, he saw his Flora fair,
Flora for whom so often he calde, the cause of all his care.
The coarse of that fair Nymph, for whom he thought himself forlorus,
He found a Sauadge beast had all in pieces cruel torn.
For whilst through madding jealousy, she up and down did fret,
In thickest woods, as she desirde, a Lion there her met.
Which seazing on her with his paws, did tear her in a trise,
(The goodliest creature that did live) he slew in furious wise.
Yet as she died, on Nunidor she calde (as he might hear)
For help, though all in vain, and though (as then) he was too near.
Too near to her so pittious sound, too far to help her tho,
Which was the reason, that the more it did increase his woe.
(She slain) away the Lion runs, when as from mountain hie,
He might perceive her breathless trunk, in pieces torn to lie.
Which when he saw, he thither ran, as if he had been mad,
So fast he ran, as (running) then, nor strength nor breath he had.
Down falls he sounding for pure grief, upon the linelesse corse,
So long, as he did seem indeed as dead, without remorse.
At last (though long) he once more comes unto himself again,
Calling his vital spirits to him, although with grievous pain.
Whilst for to utter these few words (words grievous) he do (...),
Words such, so pitiful, as well both heaven and earth might move.
And art thou dead (fair natures work) the Mirror of thy time,
Art thou disliu'de, whom all admirde as sacred and divine?
Art thou a prey to envious Death, could Death thee thus annoy?
Who whilst thou liu'dst, my comfort wast, my selace and my joy?
O Death unjust, damnd, ennious unto my chiefest ease,
Durst thou so much (ore insolent) my Flora fair displease?
Woes me thou art dead, and with thee dead, are those thine Eyes so bright:
Thine Eyes, which men for to revive, had power, enough, and might.
Ah thouart dead, where whilom lodged mine heart, and inward soul,
Thou now art dead, whose only looks, the proudest did control.
But thou art dead, and can I live, to see a sight so sore?
Is Flora gone, and likely is it, that live should Numidore?
Prodigious Planets, me to make ore-liue my Lady dear,
Since she, the Essence of my life was, whilst I tiued here.
Heavens most unjust, to give to me, of life so long a scope,
Since I behold (destroyed) her, in whom was all my hope.
But ye mine eyes, why fear you not, so foul a sight to mark?
And looking on it, afterward, become not blind and dark?
Most cruelly destned as I was; thrice happy had I been,
If I had never had these eyes, and never could have see^^.
Thrice happy I, if some wild beast, in pieces had me tore,
So I this murder nere had spide, which I so much abhore.
I was not (beauteous Nymph) no way, to be compared to thee,
If so, why then should any way, Death hinder be to mee^
Accursed soul of mine, and thou, mine ever restless heart,
Can thou abide to breath so long, to taste such uncouth smart?
I am a Man, and of more strength, then she was; why then first
Since I could (better) death endure, died I, not most accursed?
Reason it was, and conscience, that I die before thee should,
Since as my Faith, and duty was, not save thy life, I would.
Cruel Lion, that have deuourd my joy, come do thy will
On me, who for to live on earth, count it a heinous ill.
Come, come, and from this misery, let him I pray be rid,
Who does desire to end his days, as his poor Flora did.
Do us this pleasure, for to kill us both (at once) together,
That dying so, thou both may please (as well contenting either)
Why come not (cruel) then; since that for thee I do attend?
And stay thy leisure, that thou might, my wretched body rend.
I see thou art no Lion right, but of a Bastard kind,
Else sooner me, then Lady mine (ere this time) thou would find.
A Lion, generous indeed, disdaineth for to prey,
On silly Virgins, harmles Maids, but lets them go their way.
He only seazeth on stout men, or such as be his Foes,
And spoyleth them, that chaseth him, tearing in pieces those.
Where, forth tyrannize upon a Nymph, a murders such,
As never like was heard before and is detested much.
But I perceive thou dare not come, yet in despite of thee,
I Will spoil my self, that so I may, with my dear Mistress be.
I Will die, that I may follow, for to serve my Misteris,
Who seckes his Lady to survive, of life not worthy is.
(Fair) thee the heavens have reft, to make themselves more fair to show,
Whilst here, upon the earth with us, they naught have left, but woe.
Fair, they have taken thee away, to beautify more fair
Themselves, whilst here (instead of thee) they leave eternal care.
Mean time, I live still languishing, thy heavy loss to rue,
Unworthy to have bidden thee farewell, or once Adieu.
Yet Flora, in despite of Death, thou flourish shall for ever,
Thy praise shall show Acanthus like, still flowring, dying never.
The sweet Cloue, Gilliflower, and Rose, of Spring, it shall put down,
Thy beauty was more beautiful, and of more fresh renowue.
My dainty Flora being dead, shall be such kind of Flower,
As she shall be eternal (aye) and flourish every hour.
Death may our lives abridge (through Spite) bating our youthful days,
But Virtue it can nere subdue, nor subingate her praise.
But why live I? it may be said, that I in life remains.
Who living, feel the torments of damned Ghosts, sternall point.
No, no, I live no more, my days are turned to darkest nights,
Already I am registered, amongst the liuelesse Sprigh^s.
That I should live, and Flora dead, a thing's impossible,
To stay b^hinde her, she being gone, I loved her too well.
(Sweet) I must satisfaction make, to thee for mine offense,
Although I shame, when I do think, on my vile negligence.
Had I been careful over thee as (but my part) it was,
Thou then had been alive as now, to joy with me (alas.)
I did deserve the punishment, for thou did nere ^ffend,
Ah woe is me, thou not through Foes, have died has through thy Friend.
For which my ^respasse, I resign my life most millingly,
Never so much desiring life, as now I wish to die.
But yet before I breathe my laft, let me obtain thy grace,
That I may kiss those Diamon eyes, that quondan^ beautions face.
Which said, the Shepherd takes up, her li^^^es so seatered,
Whilst them embracing, floods of tears, upon them (swife he shad)
So much, and often, so pitiful, he sobb'd, and s^h'd ^o fast,
Asru^hlesse Rocks, seemd for to moan, and half inpieces brast.
So woefully he wailde, as All. (except his Mistress dear,
Who to a better world was gone) did seem his (...) to hear.
Yet though he sighed, wept, and grieved, and did la^^nt so fore,
He could not nere-thelesse his Love, to former liferestore.
For Floras Spirits were flowen from hence, her soul it did uscend.
To heavens, where her betrothed Spouse, with joy she did attend.
Which he perceiving, gets him up, and to a Mountain goes,
From top of which, on Mistress his, himself (he headlong) throws.
He falls upon her breathless limbs, and as he dying fell,
He calls on her, and still he cries, Flora, Adieu, Farewells.
Th^^r murdered bodies massacred, within a while were found,
Which were entombed together both, within one grave in ground.
And that of this their loyal Love, the Fame should never die,
This woeful Story was engraven, in plates of Iuonis.
The Shepherd having made an end of his Tragical discourse, forced the eyes
of his Auditors to stand full of water, whilst thev streamed down so small
tears, as it seemed to be the dribling golden shower, in which Jupiter
descended down, falling into the fair lap of lovely Danae; Whilst Arcas
sighed, remembering his dear Diana. Coribant wept, thinking upon his cruel
Delia, and whilst the lovely Nymph Orythia, casting a look (pleading for
pity) upon Aroas, mourned in her heart, to see his more then fierce rigor
toward her.

Mean space, Delia arrived, whom no sooner Coribant espied, but that he
presently arose, going toward her, and after he had saluted her with great
kindness, thus began to accost her.

Beauteous Shepherdess, every thing (excepting thy self only) freely
exercise their LOVE: what? is thy soul (alone) made of Ice, or thy heart
framed of Steel? Which way can it hinder thee to love me, seeing I have given
thee so many proofs of my more then common fidelity, and faithful constancy
toward thee? Will thou be the only She in the world, that shall live without
loving? Why, the sacred Muses themselves (have loved,) and Caliope her self,
did bear, and bring forth a child.

What God is there that can forbid and prohibit to Love, when they themselves
first gave presidents unto men, to follow the same? He is not to be blamed,
that follows the instructions of his Lord, and (to his power) does imitate
his master in what he does.

Love then, and if not, as a mortal creature, yet at the lest do it, as the
Gods have done before thee. For he deserves not to be termed a true and
loyal servant unto his Master, that takes a quite contrary course, unto
that which he teaches him, as if he would oppose himself against him, for the
very nonce.

Is it possible thou should (so long) hate him, who loves thee so dearly?
And will thou be longer in making me some recompense, then those two brethren
of Helen were, who saved that Poet, which sung their praises all abroad? Speak
then, and satisfy me, seeing the Gods, (although they be puissant and mighty)
disdain not to answer men, by the mouth of their Oracles.

What should I answer unto thee Shepherd (replied Delia) but that it is
impossible for any creature ( LOVE only excepted) to make one love, against
their own minds. Hippolitus (for all the prayers and entreating, which
Phoedra used unto him) could never be moved to fancy her: Neither could
Daphne, for all Apollos persuasions, be induced to love him. No, no, LOVE is a
piercing dart, not thoroughly known of mortal men, which oftentimes without
reason, urges us to affect that that is not worthy of our Amity.

Be not there many Lovers, that if one should demand of them the cause of
their Love, they know not what to say, nor can allege any reasonable excuse
for the same? I know there be.

How many Blowses be there, which are preferred before such as be beautiful
indeed? And how many base and beastly fellows, before right brave and generous
Spirits? What is the occasion of this disorder, none can tell: Only they will
say, it is the pleasure of Cupid, it should be so.

Then think thou with thy often speeches, to compel me to love thee? and
do thou suppose, that without the power of Love, I can be moved to bear
thee any affection? If so thou do, thou art in the wrong, and therefore
trouble Lone no more, but rather let him take such course, as he shall think
best: without seeking any more to constrain him, against his divine pleasure.
For if he be able to take down the Gods, much more is he to conquer thee, by
forcing thee to follow his will, and to condescend unto whatsoever he shall
command thee.

Alas (answered Coribant) few diseased persons there be, that do not
complain for grief, (engendered of sighs) they being his forerunners, and
messengers, to manifest the same abroad. Do thou imagine that I am able to
support this sorrow, which I feel in liking thee, and that I can conceal the
same, without making thee acquainted with the tediousnes thereof?

But I see for all I complain, yet I find small comfort, (for mortal men
cannot obtain all they covet of the Gods:) Yet nevertheless, I will discharge
my conscience unto thee, which has enjoined me to manifest this my so great
evil, to the end I might see if I could find any remedy, to make it whole
again.

But (say thou) LOVE is not purchased with tears nor plaintes, neither with
sighing nor sobbing, but must come of his own proper mind, and when he
pleases. What is this thou say, (unkind as thou art) will thou deny, that
perseverance in constant liking, is the mother of LOVE? If small drops of
water, by often falling, do make hollow the Stone; And if rough and rustie
iron is made smoothe and bright, with often handling of the same; Why then,
will thou not in like manner also confess, that unfeigned, long prayers, vows,
plaints, and loyal offices of Fidelity, are able to make a breach in the
heart of a Lady, through which Love may enter.

Such hard-harted women, as neither the tears of their Lovers can mollify or
appease, neither their complaints move to pity, neither their secret and
faithful service, persuade them to affection, nor their extreme miseries,
reduce them to any compassion at all; are far worse then Sauadge Bears,
denouring Lions, or ravenous Wolves, that live in barbarous deserts: many wild
Beasts, in steed of swallowing and devouring of men, which have fallen into
their paws, to assuage their greedy hunger, in steed of praying upon them,
have cherished and made much of them, and shall a woman (by natute gentle and
mild) be accounted less pitiful then brute Beasts?

Do thou think that it is an offerice to love? If all such Ladies which
Jupiter loved, had given him the repulse as thou do me, the world should yet
be full of Monsters, spoiled with Tyrants, and overthrown with bad and wicked
persons.

But these courteous women, entertaining that great God, with all kindness
that might be, brought forth many Demigods, and heroical Spirits, who most
bravely purged the world from these hateful and damned Monsters.

Olympia, the mother of that great Alexander, received into her bosom that
mighty Jupiter, conceiving by him that glorious Son, and that great Monarch
of the earth. Rbea, the mother of Remus, and Romulus, refused not the kissings
of God Mars, being big with child, of those two worthy Princess, which built
Rome, afterward, she coming to be Mistress over all the world.

Away then with these fond conceits, and remember, to be favorable unto me, as
these courteous dames have been heretofore.

Shepherd, Shepherd (answered Delia) never dream of any such thing,
between thee and me, for those women yielded unto the Gods, because they might
bring forth children worthy of such Fathers, which might be as profitable unto
the public God, as they themselves had been before.

But such a commodity, cannot happen of our Love (and say it might chance to
be so) yet my opinion is (according unto the common saying) that we ought not
do Evil, that good may come thereof: because the ill being once done, cannot
be amended: whereas we we are not sure, whether that good, which we expect,
will fall out according unto our hopes or no, and the rather, because many
things happen between the cup and the lip.

Therefore these presidents shall never persuade me to love, for none are bound
to follow that which is leaud or bad, neither are they commanded to be wicked,
after the examples of others. Then Shepherd, change thou thy mind, thine own
self, or else thou will force me to shun thy company, for there is nothing
that troubles the ears of another more, then to repeat often that which is
pleasing unto him.

Remember the torments of Ixion, for affecting the jealous Sister of Jove, and
think how poor Tamirus was plagued, for being amorous of the Muses: neither
go about to debash a chaste mind to cast liking unto thee, for fear least
the heavens, who punish all such wrongs as are done unto Innocents, revenge not
this injury which thou offerest unto me, seeing that he is in more fault, that
persuades one to leaudnes, then he that does the same, the first, inuenting
that which (had not he been had never been done) whereas the other, does but
put in practice, what he never (of himself) had meant.

Quench then and mortify within thee thy foolish desires, and let me alone (I
pray thee) to live as I have done, who have been offered but too much wrong
already, without having need of thee to buz such vain toys into my head, as
thou do continually.

Coribant would have answered, when he might perceive hard at hand, the
reverend old man (protector of that Desert) having a staff in one hand, and a
book in an other, with which, he controuled the Spirits, as well of the earth
below, as of the air above.

He came to find melancolike Arcas, to the end he might follow and prosecute
his amorous History, whom he no sooner espied with Orythia (who was all this
while courting of him) but that he marched toward him: which the Nymph
perceiving, left him, when the (Magitian making a sign) poor Arcas followed
him, he not daring to deny him, whereupon they went unto their accustomed
place, where being set down, the old man thus began.

Come on Shepherd, and now begin thy Tale, which the other day thou leftest
imperfect, for it is to no end to take a business in hand, except we finish the
same.

Dispatch I pray thee, and let me hear what thou can say more, as concerning
thy chaste Loves, for sweet is the memory of things commendable, the recital
of which, purges our souls from many faults, which otherwise we are likely to
commit.

Happy are such, as have had the friendship of good and excellent Poets, and
so likewise, unfortunate are they, that chance to fall into their hatred. For,
of the first, they make the memory and remembrance everlasting, and eternal,
asthey make the last to be counted hateful and detestable; for so do the
writings of the ancient Poets show us.

Homer, brings Achilles, and the Greeks to be victors, although it was the
Troyans that had the upper hand, making Penelope to be the Mirror of chastity
and wisdom, when indeed, she was no better then an infamous Curtezan: and
Virgil commends the traitor Aeneas, when the very truth is, he like a
disloyal wretch, sold Troy: and condemns modest Dido, to make the world to
hate her, she being as free from any such lascionsnes, as Maro was, from
telling what was true.

Happy therefore are such, as learned Poets favor with their pens, but
above all, most fortunate are those, whom thou have taken in hand to praise,
because thy Muse is veritable and not a liar, or untrue.

Blessed are those, thy beauteous Ladies, whose worthy virtues thou have
blazed forth, with so great respect and reverence; since the memory of them,
shall never perish, by reason of devouring time, or be drowned in the pitchy
Riner of forgetful Lethes.

Go forward then, for the soul that is dallied withal, deferred from hope,
is grievously afflicted with sorrow, and the hinderance of that thing which one
desires, makes the conceit of the joy, to be far less, than otherwise it
would be.

Great is the charge thou laiest upon me (replied Arcas) and hardly would I
take such a piece of work in hand for any other, but the law wills, that he
that receives, must render again: neither is it sufficient for one to be
beholding unto another, unless he make some satisfaction for the same: and
therefore, seeing I am in this predicament, it is but reason, that I should
endeavor to acquit my self toward thee, in satisfying thy desire, because I
am so much bound unto thee.

And yet (before I go any further) I beseech thee (grave Father) and all such
as shall come after thee, unto whom this work by fortune shall happen, to
believe, that I have not declined from the truth, in any one word, in
describring the rare perfections of IVLIETTA, and of DIANA, they being such as
I have painted forth, or rather far more excellent then I am able to display.

And therefore let the Posterities hereafter believe (as we at this day do)
that as there was a brave and valiant Harpalice, that as Thomaris, sometimes
reigned, who discomfited the vanquisher of Kings; that as Pentisilea, gave
succor and assistance unto the Troyans, that as Sage and courageous Zenobia
lived, with thousands of other peerlesse women: So was their flourishing
IVLIETTA and DIANA, two Ladies and Virgins, of so excellent and exquisit
qualities, as well of the body as the mind, as never any of their Sex, in the
old time, are to be compared unto them.

But to come to the purpose: If you remember, I presented certain verses unto
my sugared Saint (for so I told you) and she accepting of them, went with the
other Nymphs toward the Temple of Diana. Follow her I durst not, for those
secret ceremonies were forbidden to be solemnized by men; whilst she in the
mean space carried away my heart with her, to stand her in steed of a
sacrifice, which she might offer unto her Goddess.

Long did I expect her coming back again; and grievous was it unto me, to
stay so long her return: but there was no other remedy; wherefore I laid me
down under a broad Beech Tree; where, if I had heard never so small a noise,
I presently started up, thinking I should have beheld the sweet face, and
comely countenance of my glorious Sun.

If but a small leaf had moved, I thought straightwayes she was come. Then
would I count in my mind, how many paces it was from that place unto the
Temple, and me thought that now she was coming from thence, and that (by my
account) she was so far onward of the way, and and yet I was deceived in my
conceit. For I reckoned (as they say) without mine Host.

One while I doubted least she had altered her journey, and that she determined
to walk some other way. Another while, I feared least she stayed the longer,
because she was loath to come where I was.

O most weetched is the condition and estate of Lovers, from whom, doubtful
fear, and fearful doubt, can never be abandoned. Although men owe reverence
unto the Gods, and that they ought to respect that Service, as they should
their own proper lives: Yet nevertheless, I could (as then) have been very
well contented that Diaxa, had been spared from doing that Sacrifice. O
miserable law of LOVE, which spoyleth all other, and which (so that itself
may restaliue, and go for current) cares not although all other
considerations be made void and disanulled, how just soever they be.

The Lover, so he may enjoy what he coueteth, he forgets all that is to
come, not so much as once thinking of the duty which is due unto the Gods, nor
regarding the fear of men, nor respecting sacred Religion at all.

Great is the Fury (no doubt) that haunteth them: else would not amorous
Phoedra, have sought the death of innocent Hyppolitus, neither the wife of
Putiphar, gone about to have made the virtuous Joseph endure so great misery.

Now, whilst I expected her, whom I could not see: I might hear (not far
from me (a certain voice, singing this Dittie following.

Lucklesse, and luckie, (both at once) am I,
With fear and hope, I trembled as a Reed:
Lucklesse, by Beauty thine, by Destiny,
Luckie, because I am thy slave indeed.
For (then thy face) there nothing is more fair:
Then thy sweet Eyes, naught more divine or rare.
One while I hope, another while I fear,
Nor can there any thing my fancy please:
It greeues me for to see the heavens, though clear,
So much I doubt thy favor to displease.
Then thy fair face, there nothing is more fair:
Then thy sweet Eyes, naught more divine or rare.
Then (sweet sower Foe) vonchsafe me for to love,
Or once for all, abridge my time of life:
Nor suffer me, such torments more to pr^^^,
Since I must die, lest thou appease this strife.
For then thy face, there nothing is more fair.
Than thy sweet Eyes, naught more divine or rare.
Although thine Eyes, my pains increases more,
Yet (more I see them) more I them admire:
Thy beauteous feature, I so much adore,
As for to die for it, I still desire.
For then thy Face there nothing is more fair:
Then thy sweet Eyes, naught more divine or rare.
For loving thee, my greefes I happy deem,
Though cruel and vnsuffrable they be:
Whilst at the same (as enuioue) I do seem,
Though for thy sake, how I still die I see.
Then thy fair face, there nothing is more fair:
Than thy sweet eyes, naught more divine and rare.
Then whether death, my life shall take away,
Or whether I shall laid be in my grave,
Yet will I love, and honor thee for aie,
Both dead, and live my service thou shall have.
For then thy face, there nothing is more fair:
Than thy sweet eyes, naught more divine or rare.
This Song was doleful enough, and yet more dolorous was the voice of him that
sung it, which was small remedy unto my sorrows, but rather a fresh beginning
unto them, whilst I lanquished, being oppressed with a double martyr, and my
grief, increased more and more, the first was, because I loved: and the other
was, because I perceived that I was seconded in my loving.

So violent was the affection which I bare unto my Lady, as it began to breed
in me, a certain kind of jealousy, I beginning to imagine, that this other my
companion in Love, because he was better liked of, then I was, might be as an
overthwart bar, to cross my happy success, making Diana, more hard-harted
unto me, then she would have been, if she had had no more Suitors then my self
only.

This second wound gauled me more than the first, I maruailing much, how it was
possible for me to resist so sharp an assault. This was the cause I could not
take any rest quietly, my mind still running, that I was not so much favored,
nor affected, as this new commer was: Not unlike unto him, who lying in a wood,
cannot sleep all that night long, as well because he fears the ravenous
teeth of the wild beasts, as also, the cruel spoiling of fierce and
murdering thieves.

Nevertheless, I began to comfort me at the last, thinking that if this new
come guest had been so well entertained by my Saint, he would not then have
lamented so much as he did; for one cheerful look, one lovely glaunce, or one
pleasant word proceeding from his Mistress, is enough to make a Lover revive
again, although he were before at deaths door.

This then, was the reason, that for a while, I was pacified and contented; but
then by and by, I began to doubt again, remembering, that it was an ordinary
course of Lovers, to complain without cause; whether it is, because still they
have one thing or another in their heads, that makes the always fear the
worse, or whether it be, for that they take a kind of pleasure in complaining
and lamenting, after they have glutted themselves with delight, no otherwise
than such as (being extreme and hot) fling themselves into cold water, or as
unto staruen and famisht men, victuals and food are most sweet and delectable.

This was the perplexity in which I was in, I being so troubled in my mind,
as I was half out of my wits, yet in the end I resolved to draw near unto
this Shepherd, and to behold him wistly, hoping (that when I had thoroughly
marked his contenance) I might quickly conjecture of his disgrace, or
contentment, and whether he were in favor with my Mistress or no. Whereupon I
stole fair and softly unto him (as with slow and secret pace, Mirrha,
approached the bed of her father) when being hard by him (who lay along at the
foot of a shadowing Rock) I might here him demand his fortune of God Pan,
who used to answer Lovers, out of the mouth of certain enchaunted Rocks.
Thus then he began, unto whom an Ecco replied, in this sort.

Hard Rocks, Rocks cruel, insolent by nature and ^b dure,
Will you no pity take on me, for torments I endure?
Is no compassion in you lodged, can nothing be offorce?
Yet (at the last) though long to rue, and yield me some remorce?
Ah, of my plagues cannot blaine, that they may cured be,
At lest, yet daine, at my sad cries, with voice to answer me.
Ah speak, and say the truth, shall I be freed once of this pain?
Or must I still endure therein, and languishing remain?

Ah say (alas) must this my pain (as thou assurd'st me have,)
(Immortal be, continuing still, and must it alwates last?

What comfort then may succor me, who scarcely draw my breath,
What may my dying soul revive, which is so nigh to death?

Shall I then live in sorrow thus? my life away that wears,
And sighing, shall I nothing do, but power forth watrie tears?

But sighing thus, is it possible my more than mortal ill,
(Which makes me peanemeale pine away) should thus continue still

Continuing in my passions thus, oppressed with torments rife,
What other things will they take hence, will they take hence my life?

To end my woes, in this sad plight, an end, how might I have?
Shall I find my relief by Love? or when I am in grave?

But after millions of these woes, being burnt with Loves hot Fuel,
For to requite my pains, how shall I find my Mistress cruel?

Why, then I see, no pity she, willford me for my grief,
And since it is so, i will yield my self to death, without relief.
With one self bloody instrument, and with one selfsame blade,
My wounded corpse shall healed be, my soude be well apaide.
Since only death, and none but death, some can comfort give,
What should me hinder (hapless) that I should longer live?
I, I will die, yea I will die, and will a mind embrace,
To massacre that wretched state, that follows me in chase.
Well may you (reverend Sir) imagine, if this answer was pleasing unto me, or
delightful unto him, especially when he heard the Gods of the Forests to be
so contrary unto him in all his desires. Which was the cause, that the poor
Shepherd lying groueling upon the ground, and bedeawing the green grass with
his drerie tears, began to moan thus heavily.

O death, will thou be still dease unto my cries? and will thou never hear me,
I calling so often and so much upon thee? Have thou not had time enough, to rid
me of my troubles, and will thou (still) thus drive me off with delays
continually? Think thou, he can live, who pineth away piecemeale, whilst he
is fettered with worse than Iton manatles, in the joy less dungeon of
unmerciful Love?

No, he cannot, for he lives not at all; but rather, miserably consumes away,
who sees himself, not only deprived of his desire, but also is quite
debarred of all hope, ever to obtain the same.

Ah dear Love, if ever thou (heretofore) have loved, empoysoning thine own
soul, with thine own proper venom, and if thy Mother likewise, has often
played the selfsame part, why then do not thou take pity upon those, who
have endured the same Martyrdom? and since thou know their disease (by
thine own experience) why do thou so long defer to bring them remedies for
the same? Well, cruel Cupid, well, I see thou art blind indeed, nor have thou
any regard at all to help me.

The better thou art attended on, the worse thou show thy self, as one who
by nature is borne to do hurt, but not good unto any. Woe is me, I live
without hope of any help, more disconsolate, than that Pilot, who though he
saileth in a thick and gloomie storm, yet does he hope (the same being past)
to see the Sun shine again, trusting in the end safely to arrive within the
wished Haven.

But in my dark tempest, and in my stinging corsiues and bitter crosses, I see
no hope of any sign of comfort to shine, or smile upon me. Eternal is my
shipwreck, and my travail is without all end. O fair Diana, although thou
art unkind unto me, yet do I take no small pride, to call my self thy slave,
for nothing can come near thee in beauty, neither can I believe, that the
heavens themselves can create a beauty, able to paragonise thine. Happy is
that Bull, that is chosen to be offered up as an oblation or sacrifice unto the
Gods, although his blood be there shed, and so most fortunate should I account
my self, (...) for thy sake, I might be thought worthy to finish my days,
seeing that for thee, I should suffer death, and be sactificed by Love, upon
the Altar of thine extreme rigor and fiercenes.

Thus wailed the Shepherd, his eyes sending down whole streams of salt
tears, which watered his face and cheeks all over; I seeing this, came nearer
unto him, and whilst (he not perceiving me) I began to mark, and behold his
countenance, which I saw quite colourlesse, and the very Anatomy of an inward
afflicted mind, whereby I gathered, that he had found no more favor then I
had, at his Mistress hands, neither that his fortune was any way better then
mine. This was the reason, my second doubt died, but not my first, which still
increased more and more, because I saw she was sued and sought unto by many,
although I could not find any, to be more in her books then I was, which God
knows was little or nothing at all.

As I was thinking hereupon, a sudden desire came into my mind, to return
unto the place from whence I came, and there attend my fairest Saint, for me
thought still, she should be come thither already, and that (she not finding
me there) was gone home again, judging my Love, not to be ouerhot, seeing I
had so small patience to stay a little for her.

Being come to mine old place, as fast as I could, I began there to condemn
mine own folly, in that I would not take time whilst I might, but rather so
foolishly loose so fitan occasion, as I had offered unto me; and this new
accident engendered another trouble in me. Love is an Orchard wherein are
planted thousands of Trees, in which Lovers walk, gathering continually diverse
sorts of fruits, of grief and sorrow, and it is a lively spring of misery,
from whence do flow, millions of little Rivers, of pensive care, and sad woe.

Long had I not kept my stand, but that one of the Nymphs came by, who was one
of the play-fellowes of my Lady, of whom I enquired if Diana were coming from
the Temple or no. Offentimes, the over great curiousnes we have to understand
news, brings us much dollor, and sadness. As then, I found the same to be
true, for the Nymph told me, that Diana would stay all that night in the
Temple, and that Phoebus, being amorous of her, had entreated his Sister
Phoebe, that she might remain there until the next day, to the end he might
enjoy her company.

This unwelcome news, utterly overthrew me, I seeing my self to be bearded
with such a companion in my Love, as no doubt would put my nose out of joint,
and chase away that small hope, that I had before to creep into some little
credit with her.

Although (some might think) that I had had great reason to have rejoiced,
that I had so great a God (unto my Rival) in my Love, yet nevertheless, I
bare so proud a nunde, as (like another Marsius) I could willingly have
hazarded my skin against him, so I might have hindered him from enjoying my
Lady. But they that are bound must needs obey, the weakest must unto the wall,
and such as are inferiors, must yield unto the will of their superiors and
betters.

This speech of the foresaid Virgin, made me almost besides my self, for I
judged (and not without reason) that so fair a dame (after she had enjoyed the
Amity of so mightre a God) would never vouchsafe to stoo pe so low, as daigne
to think upon a silly Shepherd; and this was the cause I counted my self as
utterly undone, and with this heavy resolution I withdrew my self unto my
poor cottage, where I gave my self over to weep and wail at my pleasure.

But whether it were, that the Nymph had false intelligence, or whether she
meant to be merry with me or no, I know not, for my Diana stayed not that night
in the Temple, but presently after I was gone, returned unto the selfsame
place, where I (so long) had expected her coming: which when I understood, I
was more vexed and grieved, then I had been before, thinking my self to be
forsaken of all good fortune: and thereupon as one mad for very anger, I tore
my h^ire most grievously, bit my fingers for despite, and cursed my self more
then ten thousand times, thinking that this just punishment was lighted upon
me, in that I presumed to imagine, that my Lady, who was the very tipe and
pattern of all chastity, would be so vain, as to consent unto such a
monstrous immodest motion, although never so great a God had required her: for
the greatness of Princes, does not diminish the offense of a woman, that
yields herself unto them, but rather (if she be wise) she ought to close her
eyes against such puisant Royalnes, remembering that her honor is as well
ravished by a great potentate, as by a mean person, and one of low estate:
mean time, whilst I was absent, the other Shepherd (my companion in low
estate: mean time, whilst I was absent, the other Shepherd (my companion in
love) amorous of Diana, lost neither time nor place, but finding a fit
occasion, he ventureth to approach her presence, using this short speech unto
her, and presenting her with these two Sonnets following.

Receive gracious and lovely Nymph, receive (after the custom of the Gods)
this lean and bare present, which as a Sacrifice, I offer unto thy rich
beaurie, excuse the weakness, and unworthiness thereof, esteeming as much, of the
loyal good will of the giver, as if he had been able to have bestowed a far
more precious treasure upon thee: she hearing him say so, with a smiling grace
took the paper, which when she had vnsolded, she read (aloud) as follows.

The first Sonnet.
Thy beauty it is, which (cause, immert all it death show,)
So many proud hearts it does curb, and bring down low.
It is thy dauntlesse spirit, that all as wondrous deem,
Which thy fair face, and The^es, more fairer makes seem.
Ah do not suffer then are cruellte appear,
Whilst they, their honors due (due unto them) do hear.
Sacred, he is held with Gods, and sweet to Lovers such,
Who faithfully does thee adore, and reverence so much.
(Fair honor) never do, this mischief foul permit,
But let mild pity in the look, of this mine enemis sit.
In my sweet enemies eyes, where writ is beauties story,
And let not Surquedrie eclips, with hate such seld seens glory.
At lest yet come to me: so, if the worst do come,
I shall have honor, though by death I be undone.
Whilst she the beauens shall see, her (sharply) to rebuke,
And mestfull mourn, that she such wrong course against me took.
The second Sonnet.
I live no more, or if (as yet I live,
It Is thee to please (thou enemy to my life:)
No greater ill, then nourish what does grieve,
Maintaining quenehlesse fire to burn us rife.
What hates me, I most greedily desire,
What help me may, that help to me deniese
Alas of whom then shall I aid require,
A happy Louer's he (bewaild) that dies.
Cruel mishap to force us for to lone,
What us does follow with a deadly hate:
And that, as sacred to account and prone,
Which spoils, and shortneth our chief quiet state.
Thrice trebble blessed, that never knows this ill,
For better it is disloyal to be thought:
Then (for a dismal Lady) suffer still,
Who better lost is, then for to be sought.
The fair Nymph, most graciously accepted these verses. But I (who had no
other way to grow in favor with her, but only by this selfsame means)
perceiving, that I was seconded by another, who took the selfsame course (and
perhaps with better success then I had therein) was not a little sad, fearing
least I should be hindered very much through the same; yet was I not sorry,
that many did haroldise the praises of my Lady, neither was I envious at all,
that she was so much commended: for a constant Lover indeed, will always
prefer the honor and credit of his Mistress, before his own, or all the
pleasures which he hepeth to enjoy of her: because that Love that only
expects pleasure, is no true Love, but rather a filthy desire of Lucre and
gain, whereas right Love indeed, esteems more of the honor and renown of
his Lady, then of his own particular commodity, and profit.

For that Lover cannot justly say, he has done any worthy thing in the behalf
of his sweet Saint, who aims at his own contentment alone, studying out how
to benefit himself.

But he may be said to have made a proof of faithful Amity indeed, who has
labored, not for his own good, but for his Ladies, whose reputation, good
name and same, is more dear unto him, then his own proper life.

This then was the cause, that I was not sorry, although my Diana had never so
many worthy Poets at her command; only, I was exceedingly afraid, lest she
should (therefore) make the less account of me, when she had others that could
do as well, and as much as my self: and yet nevertheless (I protest I speak
not this to flatter my self) she showed not so good a countenance unto this
fresh water Soldier in the camp of Cupid, as she did unto me. For these were
the speeches she used unto him, after she had red his Sonnets.

Certainly, sweet is that verse, and dainty is the vain of that Muse, that
takes a worthy Subject to exercise her divine power with all, as brave and
goodly, seems the swift courser, which runs in a fair and spacious
plain, being guided by a very expert and excellent Horseman.

But as it is not easy, to make him that is crooked, straight, and as he that
goes always stooping, can hardly walk bolt upright: Even so, although one
have never so rare a vain to endite, yet if he have no worthy matter, whereon
to be employed, he can hardly write learnedly.

Homer thought to have made Achilles more valiant and strong then Hoctor, but
yet he could not; and Maro did what she was able, to persuade us, that Aeneas,
was a man, just, religious, and a great friend unto his City of Troy. But, it
was unto no end; for he cannot leave any worthy commendation behind him, that
takes upon him to commend a coward, or one that bath been a Traitor unto his
own country.

I speak this (Shepherd) unto this end, I well perceive thy Muse is
wonderful desirous to paint me forth most bravely: but yet nevertheless, I
must needs tell thee, that when thou have done all thou can, it is to no
purpose, because thou shall never be able to make the world believe otherwise,
then that I am a poor silly soul, simple and plain, and one that have not,
as much as one good quality in me.

Take then some other better theme to declaime upon, for if thou relyest upon
my praise (which is too weak a stay) thou will quickly fall, and thy invention
cease, as having not, whereupon to write. Leave me, poor Nymph as I am, with
my imperfections, least thou be the occasion, that where thou seek to
magnify me, I shall be mocked for the same: for far better were it for a
man, to have his body and the remembrance of himself to be buried both
together, then to be renownred as Thersites was, and so to be infamous, by
reason of his memory. Leave then I pray thee, to poetise thus upon me, and
rather bestow it upon some other, that does better deserve it, for too simple
am I, to be a Subject for thy Muse.

To refuse the gift of another, is as much as not to wish him well, or to seek
not to be beholding unto him, for fear lest we should be constrained to make
him some amends: for as the giver, in bestowing a present, does show his good
will, so he that receives the gift (in accepting thereof) does make manifest
his good mind unto him: Even so, my Mistress in refusing the fruits of the new
Lovers Muse, gave sufficient testimony she did not much affect him, of which
thing when I heard, I was not a little pleased. And yet (God he knows) how
much I was at that time gaulled with afflictions, seeing so many contrary
winds (and all in one day) to toss and tumble my weather beaten Bark. All
that long night could I not sleep, as much as one wink, as often as I
remembered the inestimable pleasure which that great God enjoyed (as I foolishly
imagined) with my Diana.

Besides, I began to grow exceeding jealous, doubting lest, she being now come
to have so glorious a Deity, unto her Paramour, would disdain the Love of any
other mortal creature, yea, and that now she only doated upon him.

I dreamed of the great delight Apolle took, to have in his arms so rare a
Paragon, but I never (all this while) thought upon that which most of all
concerned me, which was the chaste and pure virtues of my Lady: for although I
did believe verily, that (as that night) she lay between the arms of that
God, yet could I not choose but love her, as much as I had done before; such
great force has Love over us, as he makes us love our Mistrisses (although
they be bad and vicious) as well as if they were well given and virtuous; nay I
was so far wide from reason, as I thought she was to be excused in satisfying
the request of so mighty a God, not thinking this to be any blemish unto her
credit at all.

Thus every Bird, supposes her own neast to be most fairest, and every mother
her own child, pretiest, although it be misshapen, and deformed.

But when I was assured (of a certain truth) that my Lady had not only, not
lain that night in the Temple, but rather like another Daphne, or a new
Cassandra, had most virtuously refused this great God, rejected his promises,
disdained his gifts, shamed and hated his presence; ah then, two contrary
doubts, began a fresh to combat in my heart, the one was, of contentment,
seeing my Diana so wise, so modest, and so virtuous: the other was of despair,
imagining (and not without cause) that if she had refused the amity of so
great a God, much less would she make any reckoning or account of me.

And thus was I still troubled in my mind, although so much was the affection
which I bare unto her, as I had rather to have ^ene quite void of all hope ever
after, then that she should have committed so foul an offense. For the rare
constancy which she had showed, against the sollicitings, and inticement of
that God, made me to look more cranestly into the greatness of the fault (which
she should have committed) then I had done before: like unto him, that flinging
himself into a large River, the more he wadeth in the water, the more he
thinks of the danger he is in, not dreaming of the same before.

This made me to admire her more then ever I had done in times past, although I
perceived, I was out of all hope, to be affected of her. Strange is the
puissance and force, that virtue has over our souls, we choosing, rather to
love her without reward or recompense, then to follow vice, although we should
be richly guerdoned for the same.

Most sacred is this divine Goddess, we choosing rather to be afflicted for
her sake, then to cast our liking upon ugly and deformed vice.

This then was the cause, I loved my Mistress more, then if she had tainted her
honor with Apo^^o, and that afterward she should have given me love, to have
enjoyed my pleasure with her.

This made the Duke of Ithaca, to esteem more of the modest and bashful cares
of his chaste Spouse, then of the voluptuous pleasures of wanton Circes. With
my soul did I reverence my Diana, being of conceit, that I could not suffer
too much, for so admirable a creature: for sweet is the trau^ile of brave and
haughty enterprises, a virtuous man choosing rather to endure labor, and gain
notorious praise, then to be quiet and at case, without any honor or
commendation at all.

And thus spent I the tedious night, (which before I spoke of) thinking one
while that my Mistrisse discoursed with me, in most kind manner, showing me
many excuses, that she had done no such heinous fact, but that I had greatly
wronged her, to suppose she had committed the same.

An other while I imagined, that that great God, being jealous of me,
threatened to flea me alive, (as he did Marsius) if I presumed to prosecute my
suite any further. And then again me thought my fair Saint, thrust me from
her most disdainefully: she being grow^ proud, as an other Olympia, or Rhea,
because of the company of so glorious a Deity.

To be short, many dreams troubled me in my rest, abused me in my mind, and
caused me to be maruellously sorrowful, as I did (now and then) slumber.
Always the thought of such things as we have desired and sought for in the day
time, presents it self, (through Fancy) unto our eyes, in the night.

Beauteous Aurora, was scarce risen from her old husband, and the Sun was
yet sleeping in his coolie bed, when I got me out of doors, trudging as fast
as I could, unto the same place, from whence, but the night before I parted.
Not being altered in affection, or thorough grief, any thing at all, both
which, I still entertained.

All the night long before I could not rest, which was the cause I composed
this Ode following: when being as then, come unto mine old place, and seeing
my selie alone, I began to sing the same with many a heavy sigh, having it
written fair in a paper, as thou see.

AN ODE.
Since that thou have Victory
Ore my dearest Liberty.
Why (with black Robe) beauty thine,
Do thou cloathe, sorich and fine?
If thou wear'st it for to witness,
(As a friend) my sad distress.
Happy I, since for my sake,
Thou the Colors sad do take.
(Sweet my life) content be thou,
That this black Weed, I bear now,
Hapless was my life, and so,
Sad my life, in the end shall show.
(Tomee) these sad clothes alone,
Appertain, as signs of moan.
Nature in one body (nere)
Black and White, (at once) does bear.
From my Black, all hate be wide,
With which I my Crosses hide.
He that in despair does rest,
Black does bear (for color) best.
(Cruel) this, not Colour's thine.
Since thine eyes, bright and dinine.
(Sacred as the hallowed day)
Chase the gloomie Night away.
One, that (over All Is) Victor brave,
Cannot rightly, this Black have.
Our barts wounded, thou deest make,
Then (of Conqueror) habit take.
And let me alone with this,
Since my fitting color it is.
Live thou in eternal glory,
Whilst I die, (at desperate) seric.
Whilst this Dye, thou putst on thee,
Thou depriu'st (of comfort) me.
For I doubt that thouart sad,
And thy grief, Death's (tome) bad.
Change then, this same weed of Dule,
Fit for dead folks, (O thou Cruel.)
Why, through it would thou impair,
Beauty thine, far more then rare?
Leave it, for I thee assure,
This, my sight cannot endure.
Give to me my Color black,
Or with Ghostes, I go to wrack.
If, my Color thou do take,
For to end my Crosses, make
Thou will not; for whilst I live,
More thou daily wilt me grieve.
That blind Goddess Fortune, (constant only, in inconstancy) having the day
before used me so hardly, thought now to flatter me a little, in making me
some amends, for the great wrongs she had done unto me. For my Mistress, (who
with the other Nymphs) had the night before fulfilled certain vows unto the
Goddess Diana, (who then shined most gloriously upon the face of the heavens)
was nigher unto me, then I had thought, and (in a luckie hour for me) heard
me thus heavily lament unto my self, after I had made an end of my Song.

(Alas, said I) into what a maze of wretchedness am I fallen? how woeful is my
Destiny, and how hapless my misfortune?

Of all worldlings living, some are but too too Fortunate, and some, but too
too miserable; but I am neither in the one, nor in the other, of these two
extremities. For to say that I am Fortunate, I cannot: and to term my self
miserable, I may not: in as much as LOVE, although it overthrows me, syet
making me affect so dinine a Dame as I do) is sufficient enough to he the upon
me all good Fortunes that may be.

This is the reason I am neither content, nor altogether quite displeased,
whilst I walk in the midst of these two extremities, as those base Cowardes,
who through faintness of heart, run from one Enemy unto another and so
serve neither of them rightly.

And yet (alas) I find, that the Balance in which my misfortunes are placed
in, weigh more then that wherein my good Fortunes be. And I feel the burden
of griese, more heavy and hard upon my shoulders then that of joy and pleasure.

For what joy can he have, that has not hope of any thing? Most sweet is
the sweat, that expects some fruit to come thereof. As that Husbandman
labors with delight, when he sows his ground, because he hops to reap
some gain of the same: whereas that travel that is void of all hope, ^^so
displeasing unto us, as the very thought thereof alone, makes a man miserable.

Such is mine estate, for how can I (being so wretabed a Caitiffe as I am)
attend or look for any favor from her, whom the Gods themselves secke unto
and honor? It is not likely, that she will leave the friendship of so high a
Deity, to like of so poor a Shepherd as I, in whom there is nothing worthy
of commending.

O beauteous Diana, enjoy, enjoy (I say) most happily thy Love, with that great
God, the father of all Lightsomnes, (as one whom thou art) worthy of) and
suffer me to pine away in grief, or at the least permit me to s^gris^ee my
heart upon your common Altar, to the end, that this oblation may content him
offered up by a true Lover, like himself.

Thrice blessed thou, to be adored and reverenced of so great a God, and most
accursed I, since that I dying, am not able to render any sufficient testimony
of the faithful service, which I have always vowed unto thee.

But (alas) what need have thou of my help? or which way can I stand thee in
stead, when thou may command so mighty and divine a power at all times?

Truly thou art right Fortunate, and heavens I pray, that (so) thou mavest
still continue: whilst I, as one that languisheth piece-meale away, will (for
thy s^ke) go and enclose my self within the bottom of some gloomy Rock,
where I will so long bewail my hard chance, as at the last, what with Famine,
and what with sorrow, I will resign this wretched life, tormented with a
number of calamities, only because I could no way pleasure thee, my sacred
Goddess.

Thus did I say, sighing and sobbing, as one resolved to die; when my fair
Mistress, (who with ^uch patience had heard this mine amorus complaint) upon
the sudden appeared unto me: not unlike a new Sun, breaking through the
thick gloomie Clouds, when they cover the Skies all over.

That wife that beholds her husband alive, whom she lamented for dead, is
not half so much astonished and amazed as I was, when I saw my Diana, whom I
supposed to have been (as then) with the God of the Day.

Pale was my color at that instant, my tongue was tied within my mouth, and I
stood as one confounded with fear: and although her presence was the only
preseruauation of my life, and that I had no other felicity then to look upon
her fair face: yet was I maruellously heavy and sad, because she (as then)
did show her self unto me, for I sore doubted, least she had heard what I
had spoken: and that she had been angry with me, (as indeed she was) for the
same.

I confessing (in my soul) my fault, and acknowledging my self worthy of no
small punishment, to have conceived so sinisterly of her, as I had done.
Nevertheless, I was wonderfully glad, that I was deceived in my expectation,
thinking within my self, how far more virtuous (then mine owneselfe) Diana
was; who for want of wit, judged her by mine own conceit, thinking she would
have done that, which I would have been willing to perform, if I had been in
her case. Shame made me hold down my head, remorse of conscience forced me to
shut mine eyes, and fear seized upon my senses. I knew I was but a dead man,
if she had understood me, when I lamented, and therefore I plaide as the young
Scholar, when (his Master having taken him tardie) expects every hour to
be corrected for his fault. Or as the Criminal, who dares not look the Judge
in the face, his adversary being present, whom he has so hainously offended.

I curse my tongue, and hate my self, for my ouer-rash belief, I die with
inward grief, knowing and acknowledging no torments (were they never so
terrible) to be sufficient to expiate this my heinous sin, which I had
committed against her, whom I accounted of, more then of my life.

Feign would I have washed eleane this foul spotte, with my dearest blood, but
as then it was not possible, for I saw there was no other remedy, but I must
attend the just judgment of my Lady pronounced against me, who with a little
Chollor, and yet smiling therewithal, began thus to expostulate the matter
with me.

What is the reason (Shepherd) that thou thus iudgest ill of me? and what
proof have thou seen of mine incontinencie, to think that I would so
quickly suffer my self to be abused by Love? what have I done (ever) unto
thee, that thou should suspect mine honor? and what outrage have thou
received of me, who never offended thee, to think me an enemy unto mine own
credit.

Ah Shepherd, let us not judge other men, unless we would be judged again:
and let us not seek the defamation of an other, lest we our selves be tried
by the same injurious order.

Do thou think, that I esteem not more mine honor, then I do the Empire of
the Gods, the one of which, being destroyed, may be repaired again: but the
other once lost and gone, can never be recovered any more.

It is possible for miserable wretches to change their bad Fortunes, and of
Beggars, to become mighty Kings and Monarks, as was Cyrus, Romulus, Denis of
Siracusa, Tratane, Tambarlaine, and diverse others: who from poor silly
Shepherds, have come through the favor of Fortune, to be Sovereign Princes.
But that woman, that has once lost her honor, can never attain unto the same
again, by any manner of means, what force or violence so ever she
pretends, or alleges for her excuse. This spotte being so black, as it
(never) can be brought to be white any more. For to make that thing which has
been, not to have been at all, exceeds the power of mortal men, only God
alone can do it.

Tell me then, do thou suppose, that I will change mine honor, for the
kingdom of the Gods? No, for Jupiter (although he be the master of the Gods)
yet is not he quite exempted from blame: and great personages oftentimes, err
sooner then meaner persons, whereas the virtuous woman is always commended,
and entertained by the wiser sort. Yea, far more then such a one as is
foolish, for all her birth and greatness.

Little be those Countries accounted of, where honor is not in request, and
such Princes smallie deserve to be magnified, who make no esteem of Virtue.
Better is it for a man to be poor, and well given, then to be rich, and full
of vices.

What good did the Signorie of Cicill, unto Denis the younger? but only to
make him the more miserable: yea, far more then the meanest of his own
subjects, and all because he was wicked. But virtue, quite contrary to the
other, stood Dion in great stead, who being but a silly fugitive, and a
forsaken bannished man (through her) got forces sufficient to drive away the
Tyrant, to set his Country at liberty, and to make him famous throughout the
wide world.

More highly prisd was Octania, the cliaste wife of Mark Antony, being in
poverty, then the shameless Cleopatra, for all her Realms and riches: in as
much as the one was modest and virtuous, whereas the other, was common and
infamous.

What renown or credit follows (now at this day) the infamous memory of
Semiramis, Messalina, of Faustina, and diverse such other Empresses? only this,
that they are registered for their immodest lives, in the black book of
reproachful shame, for ever. My life shall first end, before I will begin
to live in this bad order, so far from all good order.

No, no, never will I strike my Ship against such a Rock, neither will I
suffer shipwreck, in so ignominious a Sea, what Dietie soever shall entreat
me thereunto: For poverty joined with Virtue, may be counted great riches,
where Nobleness and wealth, being lincked with vice, cannot any way be said
to be other, then extreme and wretched misery.

Well (Shepherd well) thou have accused me, before I have done a fault, and
thou have laid a vice unto my charge, of which my foul is innocent. Then,
what punishment were due (of right) unto thee, if I should measure this thy
gross error, according unto the rigor of impartial Justice? and if (as
Arachne) was plagued, I should make thee bear the heavy burden of thine own
offense?

Long time agone, (amongst the Ancients) this was a Law, that he (who
causeless, had accused the guiltless) should have suffered the selfsame
punishment, which the person accused, should have endured, if he had been
culpable of the same offense, whereof he accused the other.

Think thou, I value not my credit at as high a rate as Daphne, Cassandra,
and such others, who could never be brought to veelde unto the dishonest
appetites of the Gods? Too precious and rate, is this inestimable Jewel, to
make so light account thereof: rather believe thou, that I will sooner loofe my
life, then let go mine honor unto any.

Change then thy speech, and seek not (hereafter) any more to defame so rich
a Treasor, as the honor of a woman is, unless thou have better proofs then
thou have had of mine: for more hurtful and pernicious is a slaunderer and a
false accuser, then a most mortal and deadly enemy, because the first seeks
to take away that, which the Gods themselves are not able to render back
again: whereas the other, bereaueth us, but of life only, which is subject
unto death continually.

Wretched are those persons that do ill, and yet reap no commodity thereby,
for what good comes unto the backbiter by speaking ill of any, but only
that in the end, he himself is hated of every body? Play not thou this
part, neither stumble thou into this foul ditch, especially, do not blame
her, whom thou make a show to love so much.

But thy speeches discover (sufficiently enough) what thy affection is, for if
thou had supposed me to be such a one, I cannot believe that ever thou
could have loved me, because commonly we ought to hate vice, and respect
and prefer virtue. For such as make the world believe that they bear
affection unto foolish women, do not love them indeed, but only seek to
enjoy part of those pleasures, as they participate unto others. So as it is
impossible, that a virtuous and a constant Love, can have any other foundation,
then Virtue it self.

Therefore it is but mere folly for thee, to make me believe (hereafter)
through thy fained tears, and dissembling speeches, that thou love me: For
is it likely, that one can love an other, whom he himself blames, and whom
he thinks worthy of reprehension and shame?

If thou have loved me for my Virtue, which thou imaginest I have now lost:
for what will thou love me hereafter? The cause being taken away, the effect
dies, and the foundation of a Building, being ruinated, the house whereon it
stands, must needs fall, because nothing can be without his cause or subject.
If the cause cease in me, which was the motive of thy Love: then needs thy
former affection must cease likewise.

And therefore (I pray thee) make me believe no more, that thou bear any
good liking unto me; for I never can, nor will give credit unto thee, nor will
believe therein. Or if thou did dest love me, then I must needs think, thou
did it to betray me, and so to corrupt mine honor. I say therefore, that so
far off, is thy love from being Amity, as (rather quite contrary) ^ esteem
it to be deadly hatred, and most furious rage. So as these bad conditions being
in thee, I can have no occasion to love thee, but rather have more reason to
loath and detest thee, as the most mortal adversary that I have, unto that
thing, which is far dearer unto me, then is my dearest life, that is, my
precious honor.

Thus said the Chollorike Diana, and to confess but truth, she had good reason
so to say. For there is no guilelesse soul, that (without being somewhat
moved) can hear herself ill spoken off, neither can the most virtuous person
that is, endure to be falsely slaundered, but that he must needs grow a little
in Choler.

As that child, who being already forth of the School door (thinking he is
already in the fields, and that he is playing amongst his companions abroad)
looks very sadly, and is wonderfully amazed, when upon the sudden, his
Tutor takes him by the chollar of his doublet, and brings him again,
correcting him with the rod, for his ouerbold and foolish hardines. Even so
found I my self to be confounded, with silent heaviness, and being wonderfully
afflicted, with inward anguish and sorrow.

Great is that Corsie and sharp which a man feels, when through overmuch
headdie rashness, he offen death that thing which he esteems most of all in
this world. Even so, unsupportable is that grief, when a man falsely accuses
his friend, whose credit he would seek to prefer, before his own dearest
heart blood.

Ah, why (then) did not the earth open, to swallow me up? and why (at that
time) did not the Sun obscure it self, as when he was three days without
appearing abroad, disdaining to behold so horrible a cruelty of an unnatural
father, committed by him, against his own young and pretty children.

These speeches of mine innocent Lady (justly incensed against me) was as a
poisoned darte, piercing quite through my poor soul. A chilly cold ran
through all my bones, a deep despite (against my self) seized upon my veins,
and my voice lay, as if i^ had been stopped within the palate of my mouth, my
color looked as dead Ashes, my tongue remained dumb, and my mouelesse eyes
were closed, bowing down toward the earth.

As then, no other answer could I give unto my Mistress, then salt tears,
trickling down along my cheeks, whilst from my breast (as from a Furnace)
issued forth great store of scalding sighs. O how happy had I been at that
time, if some one courteous God or other, would have transformed me into some
rock, some stone, or else, into some Tree. Nevertheless although I spoke not
all, well might she gather, that my exceeding grief was the cause thereof.

It is an old said Saw; One mischief never comes alone, but that it has
an other attending upon it. And so (by misfortune) it happened unto me. For
my new companion in Love (of whom long since I told you) comes in amongst us;
who having more wit in his head then I, in stead of blaming my Lady, (most
wrongfullie) as I (very foolishly had done) presented her with these Verses
following.

The heavens (for honors theirs) thee fair have made,
The heavens (for my mishap) me kind have framde:
Jove, (for his praise) infanted Virtue thine,
Gods, heaven, and earth, reap honor, through thy glory.
I only am accursed, but victory
It Is. to wage Combat with a Deity.
I love that sweet band, which enchaines my soul,
Living, I burn, yet honor I thee flame:
Lo, how rich Beauty can usurp ore m^e,
Medusa like, my Nature thou do channge.
But he his Time spends not, but gains honor,
Who branely fights, under a Goddess Banner.
O happy I, when I thy face behold,
More rare and perfect, than was Venus fair:
When I thine Eyes, see shining, like two Stars,
Gazing I die, whilst death brings life to me.
He happy dies, that his best life does end,
In loyal service of his beauteous friend.
More happy I, my self judge so to die,
Than Adon lived, whilst he the dainty Corpse
Of Venus ioyde, who wailde his death most sad,
He blessed was, but I, celestial.
Since Fortune mine, with his may well compare,
And bear away the prize, for ouer-Faire.
Beauteous, if only for to see thy stainelesse Feature,
More happy it is, than Gods, by many ways:
What should I be, would thou (to love me) dame,
But so great good, unworthy I, to have.
The Gods would jealous grow, that one poor wretch,
Ingratious favor (boue themselves) should stretch.
Yet (in despite of them) my joyful life,
Lives in contemplation of thy Thewes:
Whilst they like rolling Spheres, the Skies adorn,
Happy that Lamb, offered in Sacrifice,
To burn upon thy Aultars, Grace to gain,
Whose Tomb, and Ashes, winnes unto him, Fame.
Most graciously did she accept of this Present, and the rather, because she
would anger me the more, having read them, she thus came upon me. Thou only
(and none but thou alone) with thy rash conceit, taxest such of blame, who be
most clear and innocent of the same, whilst other extol and commend, what
deserves glory: But thy tongue is no slander, neither can thine ill words,
bring such, within the compass of discredit. If I hate thee, I do but what in
reason I may, for what occasion have thou given to me, that I should think
well of thee?

That Lord most severely punishes his Vassaile, who (like a periurde wretch)
would offer villainy unto the honor of his wife, (Law and Justice) both
depriving him of all his Lands and goods, whatsoever.

Even so, what can hinder me, to ^ lague thee, who terming thy self to be my
loving servant, seek to take that from me by force, which I prefer, before
all the wealth of the world? Hardly can I forbear, from forbidding thee my
presence (for worse thou have deserved) and yet because thou shall perceive,
that I am more ready to forgive (then thou art quit, in forging false
slanders) I will defer this my punishment until another time, mean space,
change thou thy mind, amend what thou have done amiss, and become a new man;
otherwise, it will be the worse for thee. And having so said, away she goes
suddenly, leaving me all alone.

As that passenger (who coming to the shore to refresh himself for his
travails past, and to take the air a little) is very heavy, much astonished,
and in a manner half dead, when he sees the Boat which should carry him
back again, to be launched far into the Seas, and tossed too and fro, by
the Tempest that over maistereth him.

Even so, sad and pensive did I become, when I found my self alone, and when I
saw my Lady was fled from me. More sorrowful was not Ariadne, perceiving her
self to be left on the Sea cost all alone, by her perjured Spouse Theseus More
doleful was not Olympia, vewing her self forsaken, and sitting upon a cold
Rock, by her disloyal Birreus: Neither were those Phrigian women so woeful,
when they found themselves to be left in a strange and uncouth I Will, by their
dissembling husbands, then I was (then) at that time.

Diverse passions tormented mine inward soul, one was, because I had offended
my Lady: another was, to see that she should grace my Corriuall so much: the
third, to see her go her ways, and I (yet) not to be reconciled unto her, and
the fourth, that I was not able to crave pardon of her, nor to excuse my fault.

This made me seem (for a pretty while) as one senseless, and without motion,
as if I had been a stone, mine eyes only stared after my Mistress, but the
other parts of my body, were in a manner dead, for feign would I have followed
after her, but that my legs had not power to stir: for as a sickness, takes
away the good will, the force, and the means from the sick patient, that he
is not able to do any thing: Even so, grief hindered me from going after mine
angry Saint, to crave pardon of her.

(O Father) the remembrance of this mortal misery, depriueth me (as yet) of
voice and sense, and therefore I pray thee, urge me not, to pass any farther,
but rather be content to have known the commencements of my misfortunes,
without being acquainted with the rest.

No answered (the Magitian) I must needs urge thee to make an end, as thou have
begun; Not unlike the good Physician, who forces the sick man to empty the
Goblet, and to drink up all the potion, the sooner to be healed. Forward then,
and let me entreat thee, to do so much; for thy Loves (resembling mine own
old ones) content me not a little. Courage (man,) and acquit thy self of thy
promise, without giving over so fair a ground, now thou have begun thy race
already.

Well then (replied the disconsolate Shepherd) seeing it is thy pleasure, I
will untie my tongue, that it may speak again, delivering unto thee, the rest
of my Disasters, and (I heartily wish, that when I have made an end thereof) I
may give up my Ghost, as that Pilot (after he has failed long up and down the
swelling Seas) finds his happy and comfortable Haven, wherein he rests.

Know then, that (for a long while) after her departure, I wailed and wept,
taking on like a madman, musing within my self what to do, and yet not being
able to resolve upon any thing certain. So much was my soul vexed and gaulled
within me, as it began to entertain black despair, banishing all hope
likely to come unto him.

Earnest was she to leave this loathed prison of my body, craving pardon to
depart from thence, and so importunate was she with me, as (in the end) I
granted her request, and resolved to die.

Thou shall die (cried I out) yea, thou shall die (accursed tongue of mine)
that durst presume, and that most injuriously, to abuse the good name and fame
of the most chastest Virgin in the world. Thou shall die (thou traitorous heart
of mine) in that thou did(...) dare, to think that she (who is the very
tipe of virtue it self) should become bad and vicious. Thou (wretched body of
mine) shall die, because thou have forgot thy self so much, as to think,
that, that comely corpse of my Mistress, was like unto thine own, and thou most
wicked thought, return shall thou into the damned deep of all hell, from
whence thou (first) did proceed, because thou have made me so miserable, as
none can be the like.

Come then, come let us die, whilst with one, and the selfsame grief, we
will extinguish both our sault, and our sorrow, all at one time. And therewith
being in a rage, ^ arose, running from thence with great fury, up unto the top
of a high Rock, which l^oked into the Sea; where being, I beheld the frothy
face of the mother of Ach^ies. the surges whereof roared, and made a ghastly
noise, by reason it was troubled with ^ Tempest. This did I think to be a fit
way, for me to dispatch and drown my self therein, for the more it did rage,
the more I thought it sufficient to take my life from me. And now was I ready
to leap down into the same, I having closed mine eres, stretched out my arms,
and bowed my head, to make this dangerous leap, when I hard a voice that called
me, it being a voice, that sounded like unto that of my Diana.

Whereupon I opened mine eyes, I lifted up my head, and looked backward, to
see if I could perceive the party that named my name; but I could find nothing
but Trees, Stones, and Bushes.

Whereupon I returned again unto my first course, offering my self most
willingly unto death, minding no more to defer, nor delay to put in practice my
cruel exployt any longer, when the same voice (which I hard but a little
before) put me off from my determination, I being very desirous to know who it
was, that thus (twice) had called me.

This made me to search (once more) up and down, although I could find
nothing (O fool said I unto my self) am I so mad, to think that she, whom I
have so hainously abused, will vouchsafe to do me good, and help me? Nay
rather, what reason has she to desire any thing (so much) as my destruction
and overthrow, to the intent she may be revenged of so vile an outrage, as
she has received at my hands.

No no, it is mere folly to look for any succor from her, when naught but
death can rid me of mine anguish.

This voice, which I hear is (no doubt) of some wicked Spirit, which would
have me turn back into the world, to live in continual wretchedness, as I
have heretofore done. But I mean not to be so deluded, for die I will, and so
rid my self from all miseries, as are like (henceforward) to light upon me;
and with this mind, I went (once more) up to the top of that Rock, from
whence (without all doubt, I had flung my self) but that I espied (a far of) a
ship tossed and tumbled with a great Tempest, which withheld me (as then) from
the same, for I took (me thought) a kind of compassionate pleasure, to see
how the winds, maistered the leaking vessel, causing it one while to reele one
on side, and then upon the other, tarning up and down, as a Barrel that is
empty; for the winds dryuing it with a contrary blast, cast great Billows of
water into the same, touching the tops of Rocks, and making the shore side
white and fomie, with a thick froth, striking a great terror in the minds of
the Sailers.

Mean space, a mighty wave came flowing over the ship, as if it would have
suncke it, which made the Sailers to bestirre themselves, plying the pumpe
until they did sweat.

And now the Sun began to be darkened, the Clouds to look gloomie and
black, and the storm to increase more and more, whilst reign and lightning
fell from heaven, as fast as water falls from the Mountains. The Passengers
within, lay all as if they had been dead, whilst most pittious outcries,
woeful complaints, and continual exclaimings were heard amongst them, every
body calls for succor, but none does help, the noise of the waters, and the
roaring of the winds, hindering the Sailers so much, as they could not
understand one another.

The Pilot, that held the stern, and guided the ship, with a pale and dead
color, one while cried out, another while made signs with his hands, to make
them understand what they should do, but what with the pittious wailing
within, and what with the terrible noise abroad, they could not know what he
said.

And (now) the stern grew so violent, as every one was appalled therewithal,
they being driven into such a fear, as they could neither hear, nor gather
what the master of the ship commanded, so as giving over to look unto their
ship, they (all) began to make a most doleful outcrie, wringing their hands,
and tearing the hair from off their heads, as if they had been mad.

Which the Pilot perceiving, he likewise gave over his charge, for to no
purpose was it for him to hold the Stern any longer, whilst some of them (not
many of them all well knowing what they did) ran to the Rudder, some to the
Mast, some set up Sails, othersome pulled them down, some ran up to the
Tackling, other tumbled down from thence, one ran to do one thing, and
another went to do another: and to be brief, they (all) labored so
confusedly, as they rather did hurt then good any way. To conclude, churlish
Boreus, blew more extremely then he had done before, whilst Eolus, gave leave
unto the blustering winds, to play their parts.

The Sea increased in raging, and the Monsters thereof appeared above the
water, the more to affright such as beheld them.

The Stern of the ship bursteth and falls in pieces. The Sails are all
broken and rent, the Deck or forepart of the vessel, turns up and down,
the sides of the same are left bare, whilst the ship (being as quite without
defense) and able any longer to resist the violence of the outrageous flotings
of the Sea, yields unto the mercy thereof, suffering the whirling Billows
to wind themselves within her; which the Passengers perceiving, cry out aloud
for mercy unto the heavens, expecting every minute of an hour, to be
swallowed down into the bottom of the Surges.

At last the ship runs against that Rock, upon the top of which I stood,
having all this long while, beheld this woeful spectacle, with the tears
streaming down mine cies.

The master and the rest of the Sailers, do what they can (poor souls) to
hinder her from splitting asunder, but all in vain, the fury of the storm is
so cruel and outrageous, whereupon every man seeks to save himself, a great
number of them being gotten into the little Skiffe that was tied unto the ship;
but the same being ouer-charged with multitude, because every one sought to get
therein, sunk presently, drowning all those that were within her.

Only one young man escaped, saving himself, through the strength of his
arms and legs; he swimming so lustily, as at last he got unto the foot of the
Rock, against which, the vessel ran, and so brake all in pieces. This youth
being (all over) durtie and foul, looked pale for very fear, and (yet) seemed
he to rejoice, in that he has escaped the fury of Neptune.

Great was the pleasure he took, to see himself delivered from death, and yet
by little and little he began to grow heavy again (seeing himself in such a
place) as was uninhabited and like a wilderness, shroadly doubting, least hunger
would make an end of that which the Sea had not, and that he hardly could get
pardon of the earth to live, as he had (before) of Neptune.

A new grief, and a novel terror of death assaileth him afresh, whilst being
(thus) alone, he sigheth to think of his hard fortune. He casts his eyes
here and there, and looks round about, to see if any would come to help him.
But he could not perceive no such sight, and he listeneth with his care, to
hearken if he could hear the sound of any voice, but all was in vain, it
would not be, he knows not whether the firm land will be more kind unto him,
then the unstable Seas, and doubts much the same. He is in dread, that he
shall die, either through drinking too much, or for eating too little, little
does he thank the heavens, to have saved him from shipwreck in the Sea,
seeing he is likely to die through famine, on the land. Now whilst he thus
sigheth and lamenteth, I (hearing his speech) straitwaies knew him by his
tongue, to be the miscrable Fortumo sometimes companion in my for mer Loves.

Whereupon, I holding up my hands unto the skies, thanked them, that it had
pleased them, to grant me so much favor, as I might be able to be a means to
save the lire of mine old friend, honoring my latest end, with so charitable
and compassionate a piece of work.

I blessed the voice, that before had hindered me from dying, being sorry that
I had blamed it so much as I had done, seeing I might preserve one of my best
acquaintance from death; not that I had altered my first determination, as if I
had been unwilling to perish, but that I had not done (so) before I had brought
to pass so good a deed.

Thereupon I came running down from where I was, as fast as I could, when the
poor soul, who hard me coming a far off, and yet had not seen me at all,
thinking I had been some wild beast, that came to devour him (choosing as the
Blackebird uses, rather to commit himself unto the mercy of a man, then to
endure the griping nails of the Sparrow-hawke, that follows him in flight)
leapeth again into the wide Ocean, striving with all the force he could, and
with the utmost of his cunning he had in swimming, to get as far as he might
from the shore side, which but a little before, he with much ado had attained
unto. I being come down, and seeing him in the maine Sea, called him
oftentimes by his name, but the surges thereof, made such a noise, as he heard
me not, carrying him still farther off from me, which when I perceived, I then
began to renew my plaints, grieuing as well at his misfortune, as mine own,
and the rather, because where I thought to have saved him, I was his utter
ruin and overthrow.

Whilst he, in the mean space, took great pains in swimming, blowing and
puffing through extreme wearines; and striving unto the utmost of his strength
to get unto some other landing place.

But Fortune, who in despite of himself, would needs save him, or perhaps
would show me so much favor, in lieu of so much, and such hard dealing as she
had used against me, caused the Sea, who went about to drown him, to be the
only means to save him. Strange is the belief of men, for God (oftentimes)
(that they may perceive most plainly how he disposes of every thing) makes
them to find succor, from such as they account their chief enemies,
expecting no favor nor courtesy at all from them: and so it fell out with
Fortunio, for behold (upon the sudden, a Billowe of the Sea, drove him
(although against his will) back unto the foot of the Rock, from which he
was of late parted, he being so ouertyred with labor, as he was in a manner
without wind or force, whereupon I came unto him, comforted him, reviving him
again, and putting life afresh into him.

That great unbelieving Prophet, was not more joyful when that huge Whale had
cast him forth safe, and alive, upon the Sea coast (after he had lodged three
days and nights in the belly of the same) as Fortunio was, when he then saw
me, and knew me for Arcas.

This made him to take heart a grace, and to pluck up his former Spirits, and
yet when he looked wistly upon me, and saw me look with so pale and heavy a
cheer, he could not choose but be marvelous sorry to behold me, in that
pittious plight, whilst he urged me often, and that with great earnestnes, to
bewray unto him the occasion of my sorrows, which I concealed from him. In the
end, when he saw there was no other remedy, and that I was loath to bewray my
mind unto him, he gave over to inquisitiue therein any more, not a little
comforting himself, in that he had so happily lighted upon me, who was the
cause, he had been reserved from a dangerous kind of death.

But I perceiving he had need of warm clothes, and other comfortable
necessaries, fit to nourish him, and to restore him unto his former health,
took him with me to walk homewards, toward my little cottage, demanding of
him (as we went) of all his Fortunes, since I last had seen him; which as he
was about to satisfy me, behold, whom should I meet withal, but my sacred
Diana, who with the other Nymphs (her companions) was walking abroad, to take
the open air.

As that Shehpeard is frighted with a sudden fear, when he sees to fall
before his eyes great flashes of lightning, which burns, spoyleth, and
blasteth some goodly huge Oak, that served as a shadow for his weary flocks,
to rest themselves therein: Even so was I astonished, trembling through every
joint, when I called unto remembrance my former fault, and how heinous the
crime was which I had done against her. Feign would I as then have taken
occasion by the hair of the head, that I might have excused my self unto her,
and so have pleaded for her gracious pardon: but alas, my speech fails me,
and I was quite without heart or courage.

The beauteous Virgin, perceiving in what a pitiful plight I was in (as one
very wise) quickly gessed, the truth of the respect I bare unto her, was the
reason why I was so confounded, and void of all my senses. Which was the cause
she now began to think the better of me, repenting (as it were) that she had
taken me up so roundly before, and therefore she thought it not amiss to put
courage into me again, by using some gracious speeches unto me, before she
would leave me. Whereupon she smiling, began thus to question with me. What is
the matter She; heard, that now thou art thus tongue-tied, who before had
thy voice at command, and could discourse so readily and well?

Speak man, and fear not to answer: for more good does he that speaks,
then another that holds his peace and says nothing. Courage, and fear not
any thing at all. It is not my nature to be angry long, I knowing it to be a
more commendable quality, to be courteous, then to be sorry and cruel.

If thy tongue has been the cause, that mine has spoken some sharp speech or
other, which perhaps may somewhat grieve thee, then blame thy self for the
same, and not me, for that woman argues her self to be culpable, that seeks
not to defend her honor, which she understands, is ready to be defamed.

This was the reason I meant not to take farther punishment of thee, I being
well satisfied, with the first check I gave in words unto thee. Why then, art
thou thus moved? do thou think thou shall commit an absurdutie, and shall
not be told of the same? If so, thou then should be in better taking then
the Gods themselves, who are not exempted from rebukes.

Hereafter learn to be more wise, and consider well of the circumstance of the
deed done, before thou iudgest thereof, for of the censure that is given in the
worser part, against the good name and fame of women, every one makes a
benefit (although it be false and scandalous) and the reason is, for that men
are more readier to dispraise, then to commend, whether it be that they do it
of mere malice and dispight, or because they are desirous to have many like
unto themselves, in their leaud and detestable kind of living.

But what is good and well done, that quickly is forgotten, not any, as much as
once reporting the same, because such as be ill given, will never commend any,
except it be much against their mind. Fear not then to speak, so thou speak
well, for so shall thou please the best kind of people, and displease none, but
such as are the worst; for the fruit of a good tree, is more commended, then
that which is bad.

Speak then man, and say one thing or another, otherwise I shall imagine, that
either disdain does shut up thy voice, or else that hatred hinders thee from
speaking.

As that Soldier is not a little joyful, when being ready to have his head
stricken off by the enemy, whose prisoner he is, he sees his friends arrived
and come to his aid, whereby he is rid from all danger: Even so, not a little
pleasant was I, when I hard so sweet a heavenly sound, proceeding from so
fair an Angel; which was of such power, as it revived all my dying senses in
me, it banished away all fear from me, it put new hope into me, and brought my
former fresh color into my cheeks again. Whereupon I did prostrate my self
in most humble wise, before the feet of my Lady (for well did she deserve a
greater reverence at my hands) but she not willing I should do so, took me up
by the hand, by that blessed hand, I say, which chased all despair from me.
Whereupon I thus returned condign thanks unto him.

Can you (most beauteous Saint) raise, and revive him, who has deserved so
much vengeance at your hands? and can you have pity upon his body, who would
not take no compassion upon your honor?

No Lady, no, rather let him die, as one unworthy to receive from you, the
least favor in the world: why should you vouchsafe to look upon him, with
those heavenly eyes of yours, not worthy of so great a grace: keep those
sweet and chaste glaunces for him, who shall deserve them better then my self,
who merit not, to see so much as the usual light of the heaven. Am I he
(beauteous Nymph) that have so much abused thee, if so, why then should thou
vouchsafe me, to approach thy wondrous presence?

Although thou of thy kind nature, shall forget this foul fault of mine, yet
shall mine own plain nurture, and bringing up, teach me not to forgive the
same: for mine own hand shall punish both my tongue and heart, the one for
speaking ill of thee, and the other for conceiving a sinister opinion against
thee.

Arcas, shall never surfer Arcas to go scotfree, he having so hainously sinned
against his sacred Saint.

Trouble me not then, in mine own business, but let me execute what I have
already determined to do; only I would entreat this Boon, that it would
please you to pardon my rash crime before I die, for never did I willingly
offend thee, only, I was too too credulous, and ouer-light of belief.

Too much credit did I give, unto that which one of thy companions reported
unto me, I thinking simply, thou might full well count thy self happy, to
be beloved of so great a God, but too sacred is thy virtue, and too modest
thine honor, to be overcome with any power of the Gods.

Pardon then this foolish conceit of mine, which I will wash clear with the
dearest blood I have, I thinking my self not a little happy in that I have
had the fortune to see thee before my death, and to have acknowledged before
thee, my more then gross ignorance, and vain folly. With great contentment
shall I die, seeing I have had the leisure, to have bewraied the secrets of my
soul, and showed how far I was fro doing thee any willing injury. Besides, I
beseech thee (by thy unspotted chastity) to think, that no ancient Love
heretofore, is to be compared unto that which wretched Arcas has borne thee.
Never could any faithful affection equal his, no more then any beauteous
feature living, may be compared unto thine.

Then pardon (once more) I beg of thee, thy most wretched slave, that he dying,
may not die in the disgrace of his Mistress.

I cannot deny, but that I have erred, but yet not so much, of my self, as by
reason of another, nothing so much grieuing me, as that I had so sinister an
opinion of thy matchless virtue, and therefore, for this fault only, will I
adiudge my self to die. Happy is he that dies in thy service, and for thy
sake: yea more happy then Piramus, that slew himself for his dear Thisbes;
for he cannot find fault with his death, that loses his life, for a rare and
worthy Subject.

The guilty person, being drawn unto the place of execution, is pardoned of
the party, who causes him to die, contenting himself with his death, as a
sufficient sat is faction for the fault he has committed.

Even so let me entreat thee, to discharge me a Culpa, though not a Pena, to
the end, my death may expiate the horriblenes of the offense, and that I may
with joy, descend into the Elizian fields, amongst those blessed shadows.
Grant me then, this my last request, otherewise, more wretched shall be my
death, then that of good old Priamus, who saw his own children massacred
before his own face.

More would I have said, but that courteous Diana interrupted me in my speech,
who being more merciful, then Justice it self, thus replied.

No, Shepherd no, I never will yield unto thy request, because I will not have
thee die. The Gods, although they be mighty and immortal, yet do they not
demand of such men (as have offended them) to have their lives in satisfaction
of their fault, but are contented with some lesser punishment: and do thou
think, that I am more cruel then they? If so, thou do me wrong.

Live then I say, and talk no more of death, I pardon thee of thy fault,
persuading my self, that it was thy over rash belief, and not thy mind,
which did commit so gross an oversight.

Be merry then, and assure thy self, that Diana was never cruel, but rather,
that she is as courteous, as she has, and will be chaste.

Take heed only, that thou hereafter do not so offend again, and let the
danger from which thou have (now escaped) make thee more wise against an other
time. For sometimes an offense stands in some good steed, when through
remembrance of the same, it makes others to be more wary and better advised.

As that Shepherd is joyful, who has chased away the Wolf, bringing back
again his sheep safe and alive, which the devouring beast was carrying away;
Even so, was I pleased and satisfied at full, with this her kind counsel.
And yet notwithstanding, the going away of my fair Diana, did somewhat abate
the sweetness thereof: for she presently left me, either because she would
not have the other Nymphs know that she had pardoned me (who were hard at
hand) or because she would not (as then) hear my answer, as if she looked
for thanks from me. But howsoever it was, away she went, and left me.

And thus we see, that the badde follows upon the neck of the good: and that
no good chance can long continue in his first pride and force.

Mean space, I began to cheer my self, and to comfort Fortunio, whom I had
saved from drowning, and who being (all the while) not far off from me,
protesting he never saw so exquisite a beauty: No, although his Cleomine had
been present, and therefore was not a little ravished therewithal.

Thus talking and devising from one matter unto an other, at length we got
home, where, after he had been shifted, and laid into his warm bed, and
that he had (for a while) refreshed his weary limbs, I desired him to report
all his Fortunes unto me, in which he willingly yielded unto me, delivering
unto me this pitious history following, which I will now make thee partaker
of. And having so said, he pawsed a while, to take his breath the better,
beginning thus.

Know then (my good Arcas) after cruel discord, meger envy, and inexorable
destiny had forced us to leave our sweet abiding in Arcadia, we flying (as
Melibeus did, from our own Country) which was seized upon and enjoyed, by a
company of cruel and barbarous men at Arms: I went and offered my service
unto a brave Spanish Knight, borne in the Kingdom of Arragon; he being not
inferior (unto any of his time) for valor, or for Martial stratagems
belonging to the wars. Such Heroical spirits as theirs, Fortune most
commonly uses to triumph over (as it were) to meddle with base and ignominious
people: because small conquest is gotten by conquering such a one, as has
neither force, nor power, to resist, and therefore yields presently.

This Caualier was called Don John of Toledo, being in years some five and
twenty, wealthy enough, and marvelous fair, and comely of personage. By
many brave deeds at Arms, he had gotten to be, in the number of the best
Soldiers of his time, and no doubt, he hud grown to have been as famous, as
that ancient Hector of Troy was heretofore: If cruel LOVE had not opposed
himself, against his notable victories.

There is no man that lives, but has his evil Angel attending upon him,
which darkeneth the fair weather of his good Fortunes, when he is likeliest to
rise unto great glory and renown.

Needs must he taste of some misery, for fear if he should be glutted too
much with pleasures, and never feel of adversity, he would quickly forget
his Creator, and so disdain to be obedient unto him. Not unlike unto that
leaud servant, who after he has gotten enough in the service of his Master,
makes no account of him, but leaves him, and follows his own delights and
pleasures.

I then being retained, and following this young Knight, followed his humor so
well, as he made more account of me, then he did of any of his other
servants, and the rather, because I would many times report unto him, some
Accident or other, of our first loves and merriments of Arcadia, in which he
delighted wonderfully.

But had the poor Gentleman known (at that hour) what great hurt and damage
he was like to receive by the selfsame Love, he would have stopped his
ears against the discourse of his might, neither would he (ever) have opened
the gate of his kind heart unto so bloody and periurde a Thief.

But what? men that are lusty and healthful is body, many times feed upon
such kind of meats, as they think (because they please their tuste) to be
good, and yet afterward they surfeit upon the same, and often die thereof.

But my master, as he was a brave Soldiour, so was he a gallant Courtier,
following the Court much, as many of our best Captains use.

Now the King of Arragon had (as then) no more Children, then one goodly young
Lady, of the age of fifteen or sixteen years, called Maria, beautiful in
favor, gracious in her behavior, (but above all) passing virtuously well
given.

Not long time after, it pleased God to send the Queen a young Son, by his
wife, which was the cause that great joy was made, throughout all the Court and
Country, and great Feasts and Tryumphs appointed for the same.

The King himself, causing solemn Iustes and Tiltings to be proclaimed. The
Prize being a marvelous rich and strong tempered Armor of proof, with a
dainty Courser of Naples, for the Victor, which should be delivered him by the
hands of his fair Daughter Maria: he knowing well, that a courageous Knight,
would receive such a reward, with a far better mind, from such a goodly
Princess, then from any other person whatsoever.

And now the time being appointed, and the day come, the Listes were open, and
the running at Tilt begun: where many worthy Knights were assembled, to give
lively proofs of their wonderful valor they not so much coveting the prizes,
for the richnes thereof, as they did for to have the honor of the victory,
before so Royal an assembly.

The King being placed, with all his Nobles round about him, the young
Princess his Daughter, sitting in a Throne of Majesty higher then the rest,
and every thing being in ordes, fit for such a meeting; Behold, the Trumpets
sounded, when the Challengers and the Defendants entered into the Listes,
bravely mounted, and richly apparelled, every one wearing the Favor of his
Mistress.

Now after many staves were broken, and diverse Runners overthrown, Don John
comes into the field, having a plain white Armor upon him: his Coat
Armor being painted with the flames of Cupids fire, and in his Shield, a
Phoenix, drawn in most lively colors. His manly countenance, his comely
stature, his gallant Port, and his stately presence, drew every man's eyes to
behold him, marking him from the top of his head, unto the sole of his foot:
so as none could justly find any fault in him, so excellently was he
proportioned in all parts.

Like to Achilles, seemed he strong and brave,
When he, into their Town, the Troyans drove.
Great hope and expectation was there, of the worthiness of this Champion, who
(as then) came luckily into the Lists. For all the Arragoneses, (who were the
Challengers) were overthrown by the other strangers, Knights.

But no sooner was he entered in amongst them, but that (suddenly) all of his
side, began to take courage again, hoping (by his valor) he would make
amends, for the foil which they had taken.

As Hector did, who beat the Orecians Back,
That had (before) the Troyans put to wrack.
Don John, placing his Spear in his wrest, one ountred his Foes with such
force, as either he made them to give back upon their saddles, or else turned
them out from thence, upon the bare ground. And so long did he follow them in
this chase, that in the end the Arragonians got the maistrie, and he was
adjudged to be victorious over all those that ran at Tilt, which was the
cause that he was highly commended of the King himself, and of all his
Nobility, and of the Courtly Ladies, as his virtue well deserved: receiving
the Prize, from the dainty hands of that saite Princeise, who (wondering at
his Chivalry) presenting the same unto him, used these gracious speeches.

Although this small reward is worthy of acceptance, in that it has been
won and brought away from so many gallant Gentlemen, to stand in stead of a
recompense due unto Virtue: yet is it nothing worth in respect of that, which
your valor has already won unto you, which has made you to be glorious,
renowned, and famous, amongst the worthiest personages of the world. This which
I here present you withal, is but a trifle, and of no weight, and yet of great
importance: in that you have so bravely purchaste it, by the undoubted proof
of your dauntlesse courage, which makes it worthy of commendation, and not
otherwise. Receive it then (brave Knight) from the hands of her, who wishes
all increase of glory unto you, and such worthy praise, as your virtue does
deserve and merit.

This little speech was of greater force to conquer this stout Knight, then
were all the Lances of his enemies, for he was overcome with the same. Whilst
the bright eyes of the Princess, served for fire to kindle affection in his
heart, and her speeches were as whirling darts, that pierced quite through the
same.

The exceeding great heat that he had gotten with sweating on Horseback,
and the bashful color that seized upon him, to see himself so highly
commended of this gracious Princess, had painted his face with so pure a
vermillion Dye, as he seemed far more amiable and lovely then before. In so
much, as she held him to be no less fair then valiant, highly commending him
within her secret mind, seeing him to have both valor and beauty, the more
to make him in every part right beautiful.

On the other side, Don John, viewing the sweet countenance, and marking the
sugared speeches of this young Lady, was greatly troubled inwardly, not knowing
how to answer her. Yet had it not been, but that he doubted he should be
noted, how his color changed too and fro, he had replied on the sudden.
Nevertheless, he thought (come what should of the matter) he would make her
an answer, which he did, with a low and trembling voice, in this sort.

Madame, there is no wood so wette or green, but fire will kindle it: So is
there no heart so soft or fearful, but your Virtue is able to make valiant
and courageous. It was neither my own proper strength or force, neither the
desire to carry away this Prize, that brought me to be victorious, but it was
the only glory which I promised (unto my self) in receiving it from your
Princely hands: From your Princely hands I say, who are not inferior unto any
in the world, for perfect beauty. For this subject only, do I make account
of it, desiring to keep it, as an immortal treasure, and not because I have
won it from so many courageous Knights, or that I highly esteem of their
valor, but only, because I knew that that glory would be most pleasing unto
me, when I might vaunt, that I had it bestowed upon me, by the hands of the
most rarest Princess that lives, of whom (in lieu of so great a recompense)
I do, and will, account my self for ever, the most faithful slave and
vassal, and her most loyal servant.

Thus spoke the brave Don John, (for more he could not as then speak, as he was
most willing) because he was compassed round about with many Gallants, all
which, came to honor him, and to rejoice with him, of his good Fortune: so as
he was forced to leave his Mistress for that time, and for that he was in great
Triumph, conducted unto the King, who caused him (only to grace him the more)
to sit by him, as if he had been his companion and equal.

Mean space the Reuells and Dancing began in the Court, in which sports my
Master would needs be one, where he showed him self as dainty a Reueler, as
he had (in the Lists) performed the part of a valiant Soldiour, whilst in these
Courtly sportes, the young Princess bare away the Prize, which so much pleased
him, as after that time, the fair Infant of Spain, was all his joy.

Achilles (nere so much) loved Briseis so fair,
For whom, (to quarrel so) he then, did dare.
His eyes were (still) fixed upon hers, he delighting in nothing so much, as to
gaze upon her Angelical face. And as the covetous mizer, can never turn his
looks from his gold, but must aiwaies be staring upon the same, so our knight
did nothing but conte^plate and behold his sweet Mistress. As that man who being
extremely hot, and calling for drink, thinks the same to be marvelous good
and pleasing unto his taste, although it prove afterward to be full of deadly
poison: Even so, this courageous follower of Mars, ouerheated with Love, sore
longing and thirsting after the heavenly feature of his Kings Daughter,
swallowed down most mortal poison sweetly, which by his eyes, slipped down
into his heart, and there impoysoned him.

As the wayfaring man perceives his force to fail, and his life to steal
away, as soon as ever the venomous Basilisque has looked upon him. Even so
this poor Captain, found his heart and soul to be reft violently from him,
through the darts which were glaunced at him, from the sparkling eyes of the
Princess.

Thus LOVE, having gotten the upper hand over Mars, learned Don John a new
lesson; making him to submit himself unto his laws, changing in him, his
former humor, his nature, and his complexion.

As the Horscourser, in breaking a young Colt, brideleth him of his wonted
liberty, forcing him to carry his head, to run, to turn, and then to stand
still again, and all as he thinks good, and at his own pleasure: Even so was
my kind Master brought under, to do what Love commanded him.

A sweet kind of humor, that he supped up, at his eyes, descended down into
his heart, a new desire or wish oppressed his soul, and strange and uncouth
passions continually tormented him: and yet he is so unfortunate, as he finds
his sickness to be passing sweet unto him, whilst he honors his enemy, and
refuses all help and remedy for the same.

Night being come, every one betaketh himself to his quiet rest. Only Don
Ihon who was both victor, and vanquished, was deprived of his sleep. At too
too high a rate, did he buy the Prize, which he got in the Lastes, and happy
had he been, if he had been overcome in running; so he had not been conquered
by the beauteous eyes of his Lady. For so he might perhaps have recovered his
credit another time, having many companions in his discomfiture: whereas now,
he was overcome for ever, because his loss was unrecoverable: and she, that
had conquered him, was not (again) to be ouecome by his power or might any way
at all. He finding his Prize to have cost him too dear, in that he lost his
former liberty, and the freedom of his heart for the same.

He resembled that Pilot, who sees his Ship to leake, and full of holes, by
which, the water enters, and therefore dispaireth of life. And such a one,
was our wretched Conqueror, who saw no remedy for him, to quench this fire,
which burned his inward entrails.

He was in love with a Princess, the only daughter of his King, and whom,
the greatest Monarks of the world, would have thought themselves fortunate, to
have had her for wise, and who was so virtuous and wise, as hardly could she be
induced unto Love.

Yet, his misfortunes take to them, a larger scope,
He gives not ore to Love, though he is without hope.
But after he has considered within himself (wisely) of the matter, he
finds, that it is but mere folly, to set up his rest at that game any
longer, and therefore he resolves to give it over. But the more he thinks to
forget his Love, the more Affection kindeleth within. Not unlike the Byrd, who
being taken in the lime-twigges, the more she strives to get away, the more
she is entangled.

Whereupon, one day he being alone, calls for me, and because he knew I had
some (experience in Love) he demanded my advise therein, discovering his wound
unto me, and craving my best counsel.

I ^ouing him dearly, persuaded him to chase away that venomous Adder, and
that he play not as that husbandman of the Country did, who kept a Snake so
long in his bosom, till at the last, he stung him for his kindness. Besides, I
discoursed unto him, of the bloody outragiousnes of Love (often) sighing, as I
reported the same unto him, because (as then) I remembered mine old love in
Arcadia.

He hearing me say so, strait believed me, determining with himself, not to
follow his fair Mistress any longer in chase: and with that resolution (willing
me to depart) he lays him down upon his bed, thinking to take his rest
for a while. But no sooner were his eyes closed, but that Love opened them
again, presenting the beau^^^ of (...) Lady before him, so that presently he
was changed in mind, minding (now) to lone her again.

As that Traveler, who being bound, by reason of some business of great
importance, to take Sea, no sooner arriueth at the shore, but that he, fearing
to enter the S^^pp^ because of drowning, retireth back again: but afterward
(remembering the weightine^ of the matter, and how much it imports him, for
his profit, to go onwards on his journey) marches back again unto the
water, hazardeth himself, and so in the end performs his voyage. Even so, my
perplexed Lord, after he has done what he can to subdue his passion, and yet
cannot: at the last, seeing no other remedy, he resolves to love, and to
submit himself, under the servile yoke of cursed Cupid. Or as the bondslaue,
having escaped in the night, determines with himself to be followed after in
the day time, changes his advise, and frighted with extreme fear, returns
home unto his Master.

Even so Don John, he is (in the end) forced to acknowledge proud LOVE, for
his sovereign Lord, and is glad to yield unto him.

Whereupon, he calls me again unto him, making me privy unto his
resolution, discoursing still of Love, (and flattering himself) he would
needs persuade me that Love was courteous and gentle, when he knew right
well (in his own conscience) that he did find him otherwise.

But I, on the other side, wish him not to believe so, but rather advise him to
banish Love from him, as one that is an adversary, both unto his life and
quietness; delivering unto him many proofs of the cruelty of that blind God,
and of his villainous nature.

All this he hears, although he knows not what to answer unto the same,
because I spoke but reason, and yet for all this (such was his mishap) as like
an obstinate and selfe-wild man) he stands still in his blind error stiffely.
As the robber by the high way side, being admonished by some faithful friend
of his, to give over that leaud kind of life, (telling him of the wretched and
wicked end he is like to come unto, if he continues still in the same)
listneth unto him very earnestly, and yet nevertheless, falls unto his old
kind of trade of robbing, is the same man still, and so continues: Even so
this Gaualier, although he gave good ear unto my reasons and persuasions, yet
did he persist as one obdurate in former folly and selfe-wilfulnesse. But yet
(to say truth) he was somewhat to be excused herein, seeing he was no more
master of his own self, but rather Love, under whose Banner he fought.

Long lay he upon his bed, and yet he could not sleep, by reason of such
strange visions as Love presented unto his eyes. Whose fashion it is, when he
has once conquered, he will seldom or never suffer him to be in quiet.
Whereupon, Don John arises from his loathed bed, taking his journey toward the
Kings Palace, where (by the way) he is saluted and commended of all men, but
yet all these honors abated his pain little or nothing, because he found by
experience, that he had lost more, then ever he was like to recover again.

Besides, if he had but known the mind of his Mistrisse, he then could the
sooner have resolved what to do, according unto her answer: which was, either
to die, or to follow his suite begun. But not knowing her will, he knew
not what to say, nor what to think of the matter. For Each Lover, that is
burned with this amorous flame,
In word and deed, depends on his lovely Dame.


Not long had he stayed in the Court, but that it was his good Fortune, to
have a sight of his Mistrisse, whom he thought to be wonderfully inereased in
Beauty, since (last) he saw her; so as if she then deserved to be honored as
a Lady, why now, she merited to be worshipped and adored, as if she had been
some Goddess indeed: And thus his affection increases more and more. On the
other side, the young Princess began to feel a kind of alteration within her
self, and found her heart to fancy Don John, above all men living: Yea, and
so much, as she thought he deserved to have her Love, before any other. And
yet when she remembered her Royal birth, whose daughter she was, and the
greatness of her honor, she began somewhat to forget him: so as her desire
was no sooner lightened, but that it was quenched again. Not unlike unto those
children, borne before their time, who no sooner are brought into the world,
but they straitway die.

Mean time, the Knight, who was not so bad a scholar in Loves school, but
that he had learned some lessons therein, began to gather, by the stealing
glaunces which she cast upon him, that she did not altogether hate him, and
therefore began to persuade himself, that he was likely to have some good
success in his amorous business.

Whereupon, he thought to venture to speak unto her. For (said he, unto him
self) what should hinder me that I should not bewray how much I affect her?
What though she be the Daughter of my King? is it reason therefore, that I
should die for her, and yet not make her acquainied with my death, and the
cause thereof?

What know I, whether Love has infected her, as well as it has poisoned me?
Fot as great Princes (as she) have felt his force, and have been brought under
by him: which (if it were so) I would not then doubt, but that she would be so
gracious unto me, as to take some pity upon me. For Love makes the hearts of
great Monarks to stoop, as well as those of poor peasants: forcing as well
the brauest minds to be subject unto his laws, as such as are baser persons.
Did not he make soft and gentle, the heart of proud and haughty Achilles,
compelling him to yield unto his prisoner Briseis to like her so well, as he
quarrelled with all the Princes of Greece, to have her good will?

And the self same Love, did it not take down the stubborn stomach of high
minded Angelica, who although she were a Princess, and sought unto, by all the
chiefest Paladines, and men of renown in the world: yet did she cast her
liking upon silly Medor, a simple Page or Lackey. Nothing can withstand his
mighty power, neither King nor Queen, Royalty nor Nobility, all are alike
unto him, and all must do as he pleases. Only, with surly and proud minds,
does he (most commonly) adorn his triumphant Chariot, disdaining (as it were)
the spoils of the meanest.

Again, did not Venus doat on a Shepherd? and Phoebus, upon a plain
Country Less? Yes, yes, and therefore nothing is impossible unto Love.

And seeing it is so, I will endeavor to see, if I can learn, whether he has
tamed the great heart of this lovely Princess: which if he has done, I hope
then, that it is stricken with a golden Dart, as mine is, and not with one of
lead.

Might I but once find that she affects me, I would do well enough with
the rest, hoping (in time) to bring every thing to a most prosperous end, and
happy issue.

Thus said my Master, being resolute to sound the depth of the Princess
thoughts, and yet he thought it was hard to wade through such a Foord, much
doubting the entrance therein, but far more, how to get out (thereof) again.

And as a General of an Army, after he has had many parleyes with the
Fort, which is enemy unto him, pitcheth his Tents round about the same: but
seeing his Soldiers to be beatten back again, with loss of many of his men,
dispaireth that he shall not be able to surprise it, doubting sore of some bad
issue in this his enterprise.

Even so, many doubts ran into Don John's head, which much troubled him, as
well, he knew not what to do. One while he fears lest he should offend his
Mistress, and loath he is to displease her: yet in the end, Fortune, who favors
such as be venturous, egged him forward, making the way plain for him, that he
might the better bewray his affection unto his Lady. For one day, the King
being willing highly to grace him, commanded him to sit down with him, at his
own Royal table, where his daughter fat, right over against him. Never can
Virtue be honored too much, whilst she does credit unto them, that thus
seek to do her reverence and duty.

I leave unto your advised considerations, to judge, whether (whilst the
Princess sat so nigh the Knight) he lost any time or no? And whether he
took his occasion, finding the opportunity so fit: if he had done
otherwise, he had done fondly.

But he, seeing his Saint so nigh (unto him) watching fit time, after many
troubled conceits running in his mind, with a blushing countenance, and a low
trembling voyee, he thus began to Court her.

What would you say (most excellent Princes) to hear, that your own knight
upon the selfsame day, in which he received from your royal self, the prize
for Tilting, became both victorious, and vanquished, and all at once? Victor
over so many brave Caualiers, but vanquished) through your most beauteous eyes.

And although every Conqueror, is proud of his conquest, and he that is
conquered, lamenteth for his loss: yet I (quite contrary unto them) esteem
less of my victory, then I do to be overcome: for, it is far more honorable
to be overthrown by a divine puyssance, then to be Conqueror over a week and
feeble force.

And what greater renown, or brauer fame, may so much beautify and adorn my
days, as to be called the vassal, and slave of her, and to be vanquished by
her, who by the same force, is able to overcome, even the Gods themselves. No
other glory will I seek then this, which is, to be accounted your Captive.

I know (good Madame) you may count me over arragant, and without discretion,
in that I dare presume, to use such speeches unto you, who are both my natural
Princes, and my Lady, purchased through your too beauteous eyes; yet though
the Gods be sacred and immortal, they for all that, refuse not the service of
worldly men their creatures, because nothing can hinder virtue from doing her
duty, inasmuch as she is without fault: and the rather, in that she is of
force, to make the fierce and wildest hearts that are to be in love with her.

I speak not this, that I would look for any recompense for my pains of you,
neither, that you should make any account of me at all: only I would most
humble entreat you, that you would vouchsafe to believe, that all my desires,
all my studies, and all my endeavors, are wholly vowed unto your secret service,
and that no person shall command over my soul, but only your sweet self.

Think not then gracious Princes, that I am ouer-rash, and too too bold, to
deliver such words, as these unto you. For it is impossible that any right
generous mind, or brave heroical thought, should see so rare and matchless a
beauty as yours is; but that he needs must be in love therewith; and loving
it, deuote himself unto the honor of the same for ever. Did not so many
divine virtues abound within you, and were you, not every way, endued with so
rare and exquisite qualities as you are, we then should not so earnestly seek
to serve you: neither should we be so curious to follow you, with so great
affection and respect as we do.

Sooner shall the Sun be without light, and the earth, without verdure and
greenes, for as the heavens (whether we will or no) gives unto us light: Even
so, despite of your self, shall you be honored and admired, as long as you
are so excellent and perfect a creature.

Then, if I place my self, in the order of such as reverence your rare
qualities, good Madam pardon me: neither think that any person, can bare more
loyal service unto you, then I my self do: for might my death testify the
same any way, I protest I would more willingly die, then line. I craving nor
wishing any thing so much in this world, as your pleasure and contentment.

Thus said Don John, trembling for very fear: so as he whom the valor of the
greatest enemy he had, could not so much as once daunt or terrify, he not
knowing what it was to fear a bloody adversary) does now quake and
lookepale, sitting before a silly Virgin, yea he stands more in awe of her,
then of a whole oast of armed men.

The young Princes, who was already persuaded by Love, to entertain him into
her amorous service, to the end she might the better taste how sweet a pleasure
it was, and what great credit, to be attended on, by noble Spirits (who most
commonly are conquerours over such as be haughty and proud) found her heart to
be more mollified and softened, by reason of this Oration, which my Master had
made unto her, whilst as the Bird is deceived with the sweet pipe of the
fowler, so was she overcome, with the pleasing harmony of his mellifluous
tongue.

But yet, as that Captain, who rendereth up his Sconce (to save his honor)
first suffers the Cannon to be brought thither to batter the same, because he
will not have the world to think, that timorous fear, but rather default of
succor, brought him unto this extremity. Even so, the Princes meant not to be
won so soon, but rather remembering her royal birth and calling, and
withal, her virtuous disposition and honorable bringing up, thought (first)
with some short speech to answer her Knight again, as if she had been angry
with him. Great personages (for the most part) use Laconicall brevity in their
discourses, their words being far more precious, and of more worth, then
those of the common sort of people are, and therefore ought to be the more
accounted of.

Thus then did the Princes Maria reply unto him. That man worthily is denied
of his desire, that demands a thing unjust, or what is contrary unto the
laws, being by the same law, condemned either to make some amends, or endure
some kind of punishment for the same.

The haughty mind, who like Phacton, would soar to high, is not lamented
when he falls, being plagued for his pride; seeing none should fly, that
have not wings, neither ought any to intermeddle with that which belongs unto
Kings, except he be royally borne. Should thou be chastised with so grievous
punishment, for this thy too much saucy, and rash enterprise, thou were but
served rightly: for I would have thee to know, that one of mine estate, of my
honor and reputation, is not so easy won, or changed, as every wind
changes and moves the waves of the Seas too and fro.

Neither had thou any such need, to make so long a preamble in thy speech,
in offering of thy service unto me, when in nature and duty, thou art bound
unto me, to serve me, and this thou do promise to do, upon hope (forsooth)
that thou may bring me to yield unto thy desire: but upon this condition, I
refuse both it, and thy self: for I will not only hate vice, but all
occasions, whereby I may be induced to be brought unto the same.

Henceforth, then learn to be more wise, and think thy self happy, that
thou may this once escape scotfree, for this thy presumptuous boldness.

This was the choke pear, which the Princes gave unto Don John to swallow,
notwithstanding, whatsoever she spoke, she meant far otherwise, wishing unto
him, as well as to her own self. Sage and prudent was that Philosopher, who
desired, that man might carry a window in his breast, the better to know: what
he thought, and what he meant in heart: which if it were so, there should not
then be so many horrible treasons committed, neither such damned deeds
perpetrated and put in practice as now they are. But here below is little or
no perfection at all, the most part of men passing away their lives, without
doing any commendable act at all.

But now our knight, thinking his Mistress had meant as she spoke (forgetting
that it is the nature of women now and then to dissemble) thought her to be his
mortal enemy, and was so daunted withal, as he sat like a mouelesse Rock,
not able to answer her one word, so much had grief seized upon his tongue,
despair assailing his heart, and shame (for being denied) making him look
pale and bloodlesse in the face.

As that master of a ship, is amazed and sad, when he sees the weather, on
the sudden to change, quite contrary unto the warrant, he had not long
before given unto his Passengers; whilst they in the mean time, cast in his
teeth the smaller skill and knowledge he has in his art, he not well knowing
what to answer them again: Even so it fared with my master, who was quite
blanke, and knew not what to say unto this matter. In so much, as had any at
that table known of his love, or but heard what she had said, they might
easily have gessed what the matter was, by his very countenance, but none knew
it, neither would be discover it unto any, but only unto me alone.

But the Princes, who doubted that either her looks, which she forced to show
frowning, and discontent, or else the sharp speech she gave unto him, would
(perhaps) make him to do somewhat, which afterward might cause her to beshrow
her self, chiefly because of the secret good will she bare him in her soul
(which was of more efficacy and force, then all other considerations
whatsoever) began now to repent her, that she had taken him up so short, and
therefore, determined with her self to make him amends with another, far more
cur teous then the first, when (as she beginning) the cloth was taken up, and
the feast done, so that she was constrained (though much against her will) to
rise, and leave her Knight.

As that woman, who being taken tardie in some fault by her husband, stands
heavy and sad, in some corner of one chamber or other, whilst the rest of the
household are merry and pleasant together: Even so, mine unfortunate Lord,
whilst all the other Gallants of the Court, were dancing, speaking, and
discoursing pleasantly one with another, he stood most heavily, lamenting his
hard fortune unto himself alone.

No marvel then, although every one was astomsht, and wondered to see so
sudden an alteration in him, looking so pitifully, especially, when there was
nothing wanting unto him, but that he might be rather more blyth and pleasant
then others, he having received so many honors (by reason of the prize he had
gotten) both of the King and all the Court.

But (to this) he might have answered them, as that noble Roman did, who
(having put his wife away) could give no other reason unto them, that although
his shoe was fine, and well made for his foot, yet did not any know,
whereabouts it wrung him, but only himself.

Even so, Don John, selt himself grieved, yet none could tell the nature of
his disease, but only she, who might if so she pleased, have been his
Physician, and yet was it not so grievous unto him, but that it was far worse
to her self: she repenting her self many times and often, for her froward and
tart words, and seeking all means possible, to make amends for the same,
although as then she could not. Alack, how soon and quickly, does speech
pass from us, and how terrible do it sting oftentimes, when a word is so
bitterly spoken, as it cutteth and pierces more deeper, then a sharp and
keen sword?

It was not for nothing, that the ancient Sages, had a certain Goddess, they
called Silence, which always held her finger upon her mouth, to give us to
understand thereby, that without long premeditating, and bethinking us well of
the matter, which we meant to deliver, we should not speak at all, for fear
least as the Poet says, That thy rash speech make thee for to repent,
Which at unawares most fondly from thee went.


That great Commander over the whole army of the Gretians, who overcame Troy
repented him many a time and often of his too rash promise, for he having vowed
most solemnly unto the Goddess Diana, to facrifice the fairest and goodliest
thing in all his Realm, upon condition she would beappeased, and plague the
Gretian Camp no more, was constrained (for performance of what he had so
religiously protested) to sacrifice his own daughter, then who, there was none
fairer. So likewise did those Fishermen, repent them of their words, who sold
unto that Philosopher, the counterfeit of a Virgin, in which they brought the
Trivet of gold, which was placed in the Temple of Apollo. And so was that good
Judge Iepha, sorry, in that he had so unadvisedly, promised unto God, to
sacrifice the first thing which he should meet coming from his own house, as
he should return homeward, if he should obtain the conquest over his enemies;
for his only child and daughter was she, of whom he first had a sight of, and
therefore was she put to death.

This was the reason our young Princes, being sorry that she had done amiss,
sought to amend the same, when though feign she would, yet then she could not.

And now the whole company being ready to depart, beauteous Maria cast a most
lovely look upon her Servant, to give him (in full fatisfaction of her former
injuries done unto him) a certain assurance, as well of her Love toward him,
as of her repentance, for what she had uttered before. But he, that now had
entertained black despair within his mind, and who dreamed upon nothing, but
on horror and death, never marked her, nor perceived any such gracious sign,
and therefore it did him no good at all: no more then a little weak potion, is
able to counterchecke and encounter, with a deadly poison, that is mortally
entered into the stomach, and every part of a man.

And as small and ordinary remedies, are sufficient to help a man to his
health, who being but newly fallen sick, but are of no force nor virtue at
all, when he is grown to be dangerously diseased indeed. Eeuen so, these
amorous gestures and signs of this Lady, which before the mortal infirmity
of my master, had been comfortable unto him, and had done him much good,
coming (now too late) stood him in no steed, he being as then, like one that
dispaired of his life.

Night being come, he comes home heavy and sad, none knowing the occasion
thereof but my self: he himself, not being able, or at lestwise, somewhat
unwilling to deliver his misfortune unto me, but I having known the same, came
(of mine own accord) unto him, seeking to comfort him, by all the devises I
could, therewithal telling him, that the first entering into Love, was the
hardest: and that if a brave General of a field, for one repulse or two, would
never give over his enterprise, but rather follow it harder, yea and that with
so desperate a courage, as in the end he returned conqueror, then much less
ought he to be daunted, or distrust his own good hap, although at the first
push, he had not made a breach into his Ladies heart.

Besides, I told him, that what is easy obtained, is not worth the getting,
whereas that, that is dearly bought, and hardly come by (as most commonly the
affairs in love be such) are not so quickly purchased, and therefore he must
not think much, although he endure some pain, or labor, before he attain
his so much desired suite: for the fruits thereof, are so luscious and sweet,
that if the Lover should gather them, without some danger, he would grow more
proud then the T^ans, and not stick to compare (for good fortune) with the
Gods themselves: of which Jupiter himself (although the mightiest of them all)
could not enjoy his love without great travail, no though they were but
mortal creatures, which he so much affected.

Again, say that women should love us, yet were it neither decent, nor just,
that they should suffer themselves to be entreated, at the first encounter; as
well, because their honor is still before their eyes, which they hold as the
dearest thing they have, as also, because they doubt, they shall be the sooner
disdained, and despised by us, (as fools and such as want discretion and
government) if they should (so soon) make a tender unto us of their friendly
love.

Besides that, a woman is but courted and attended upon by the man, but a small
time, and whilst he woeth her, in the way of marriage; for no sooner are they
become man and wife, but that then, she must attend, and serve him, and this is
the reason they are so long before they will yield unto these amorous pursuites
and persuasions. Withal, we must consider the birth, the calling, and the
quality of the person whom we seek to obtain, who the nobler she is, the
longer (must we think) it will be before she be brought unto our lures,
especially, when she is our better far; so, as if Briseus (although a servant
and Captive) stood so much upon her Pantophles, as she looked that she should
be sued unto by Achilles, her Lord and Master: much more should not he think
it strange (and not wonder thereat, at all) although his Mistress being a
Princes borne, would look for far more service at his hands; and therefore
he had no reason but to be of courage, to pluck up his spirits, and play as
that wise Captain does, who seeing himself discomfited, presently gathers
new forces together again, and once more ventureth his fortune.

These and many other persuasions did I use unto him, but the unfortunate
Gentleman, thinking the (task he had taken in hand) to be harder for to finish
(then it was) would receive no comfort at all, much less any hope to obtain
what he so much desired; in so much as he resolved, to give over the court for
ever, and to go and live in a house he had in the country, where he meant to
spend the remainder of his loathed life.

And that the sooner he might die with care,
Joy banishing, he entertaines despair.
Having this conceit in his head, the next morning he comes unto the Court,
where he takes his leave (in humble wise) of the King, and that he might have
a color for his departure, and that none might suspect his heavy countenance,
he makes them believe, his mother was at the point of death, and therefore he
being sent for, must needs away unto her.

Having been with the King, he comes unto the Queen, and to her fair
daughter, unto whom he tells this sad news, looking very sorrowfully, and so
most humbly takes his leave of them; but the young Princes, gessing shroadly
at the truth of the matter, and that there was no such thing, but only a mere
excuse, grieved mightily, to hear how she should lose his company, the only
cause whereof she knew her self to be; for which, although she was heartily
forie, yet knew she no way how to remedy as then the same.

Mean space, Don John, most pitifully consumed away, as well because he
wanted his Mistress, as also for that he was never likely to see her any more,
whilst he being retired unto his melancolike house resolved to die, and to
give over the world.

O cruel madness, O furious rage, O incomparable mischief, O misery, none so
great as Love. What worser misfortune can happen unto a man, then for want of
reason, to suffer himself to fall into the merciless hands of his murdering
foe?

And what unhappiness (be it never so great) can overthrow a man so soon, as
that which depriueth him of all sense, and understanding? for the loss of our
best friends, or chiefest goods, are easily to be borne, because seldom or
never they make us lose our right wits for them: but the torments we suffer in
Love, are insupportable and not to be endured; for it confounds our virtue
and constancy, as was too well seen by Don John, who would not take comfort
in any thing, but only in death: whilst lying thus dangerously sick, of a
secret disease of the mind, he was so much changed, as none could well have
known him; for his goodly and comely personage, was become pale, weak, and
earthly: his hair long, wild and feltred: his eyes, hollow and deep, settled
in his head: his face heavy and sad: his cheeks hollow and lean: his lips
dead like ashes, and dried up for want of moisture: his breasts lanke, and
without flesh: his hands, but skin and boane, and his arms brawne fallen,
and without any force at all: to be brief, he resembled rather a dead
Anatomy, then a living creature.

And although diverse have been of an opinion, that hardly or never any can die
for Love, because (as they say) this amorous sickness, tainteth the soul only
(which is not subject unto death) and not the mortal body; yet nevertheless
for all this, there is no doubt, but that many have so died, and that the soul
(as a companion of the body, in the selfsame functions) cannot feel any
grief, but that the body must feel his part thereof, and except he be
partaker of the same, even (as one day) both the one and the other shall be
partners either of eternal glory, or else of everlasting fire, in that they
have been companions in this world, either of good or else of evil. Such a
life then was this which our poor Arragonian Gentleman endured, a life
ordinary and common unto such, who deprived of all hopeful happiness, pine
away like one that is in a recurelesse consumption, for nothing makes us to
live, but only joyful hope, which if it be deferred long, it makes us
languish, but much more then will it plague us, if we once grow in despair,
never to obtain the same.

And therefore, there is none so wretched a life, as that which wears away
for want of hope: and so lived miserable Phedra, who seeing her dear
Hyppolitus dead (for want of hope) slew her self. For as the Poet says, Sweet
hope, the life of every one (what ere) does cherish,
And were it not for wished for hope, all men would perish.


This then was my Masters resolution, which no man could dehort him from. All
his house, and chambers were painted with black, our Liueries being tawnie,
and in the room where he lay, he caused diverse melancholicke and sad
sentences, to be drawn in great Characters, all which were the Infants of
despair. One day, he being somewhat better then his usual custom was, called
for pen and Ink, and thereupon composed these sad verses following, which he
would oftentimes sing unto his Lute.

My sighs, when give you ore to sigh then forth my pain?
Mine eyes, when have you done to wail my grief, though all in vain?
Was ere seen such strange cruelty, where Loyalty is found?
Whilst (through th'vngratefull) for to die, remorselesse I am bound?
I die, but in what sort, alas my woes so many be,
As never any heretofore, has suffered like to me.
Happy is he that to his end by one sure stroke does hie,
To languish (dying) is far worse, then quickly for to die.
My tears that in mine eyes do stand (with sihges) my griefs do show,
And yet there is none that pittieth me, whilst worse I still do grow.
I cannot cured be, and she that is Author of my grief,
(To slay my self) she weapous gives unto me (Sans relief.)
Like Captive am I led away, yet can I not behold
Her face, to whom I prisoner am, and who my heart controld.
He is no valiant Soldier right, nor any Conqueror brave,
Who to his prisoner dares not show himself, when he does crave.
But heavens I see conspire against me, this life I finish must,
Yet happy he, that in his love die loyally and just.
Sacred for ever,
Fail shall it never, This my Monument,
Since that Love so true,
Though none the same rewe Within it is spent.
But (cruel) thou too late shall find, untimely death of mine,
My Love was pure, my heart most just, and bare thereof the sign.
Yet i will not tax thee for my death, thy rigor hard to prove,
I Will say it was my destiny, and not thy nere gaind love.
But why (in vain) seek I in life, to have a farther scope,
He happy dies, who in the would has lived without hope.
Then lets dispatch by sweetest end to rid us of this pain,
Lets shun this troublesome sea, the port with Ancor ours to gain.
His death is blessed,
Of life disposessed, When by a sweet way,
Ending of his life,
He shuns care and strife, And in rest does stay.
This was the melancolicke Music, which my lucklesse Master sung unto his
Lute, making all those heavy, that were hearers of the same. O male-contented
sorrow, thou woundest our souls through sadness, never suffering us to rest
quietly; thou driest up the marrow in our bones, whereas joy delights and
comfort the heart.

Through thee, and through thy black sister despair, died constant Portia,
Cato the Censors daughter, and modest Octauia, the patient wife of that
luxurious Mark Anthony.

But to come to our former discourse, and leave all digressions by the way, Don
John had no sooner left the Court, but that the young Princes Maria, was ready
to leave her life, taking on most pitifully, now she had loft the sight of
him, whom she most affected.

For as the fire put under a heap of wood (although green) after it grows
to be dry and fit to burn, kindles most strangely, casting forth huge
flames, most dreadful to behold: Even so, the heart of Princely Maria, which
Love had not yet lighted but only a little (because it began to resist
somewhat at the first) after it was once thoroughly dried by desire, began to
kindle so extremely within her afterward, as she was mightily burned with the
same, insomuch, that she grew so strongly enamored of her loving Servant, as
she could no longer live without his presence.

Great is the danger of that man, that opens a gap unto his adversary,
whereby he may take advantage of him, especially unto that cruel tormentor
Love; who, worse then any barbarous Tyrant spoyleth us, overthrows us, and
treads us under his feet: for so did this comfortless Lady find him, who
now with tears from her eyes, and sighs from her heart, many a thousand times
repented her of her ouerfond oversight, in being the Author of so much misery,
as well unto her friend, as unto her own self. Feign would she now redeem
the speeches which (before) she had spoken, but it was then too late, although
she oftentimes cursed her tongue for the same.

A bitter Pill of digestion is Repentance, and thrice happy is he, that never
has had occasion to say (I Repent me,) only the ancient Sages, (few in
number) might justly speak the same. For that man needs not to be sorry at
all, who does not any thing without mature advise, and sound deliberation of
judgment.

But as a storm never comes without rain or hail, so never any misfortune
happens alone, but somewhat else comes with it. For during the time that
the Princess so much bewailed the absence of my loyal Master, it so fell
out, that the Prince of Lions, demanded her in marriage of the King her
Father, who presently gave his consent, so that there wanted nothing, but
(only this) that the Princess should agree unto this match her self.

But she, who could not dispose of her own heart, because she had bestowed
it on another, and was fully minded, never to be wedded unto any, except unto
Don John, thought within her self, rather to leave the world, then to yield
unto any such matter.

Nevertheless, her Father and Mother importuned her wonderfully; the amorous
Prince himself, not loosing any time or opportunity to win her, by all the
devises he could.

As in the midst of a terrible fight upon the Sea, the Admiral seeing his
Ship set on fire, his enemies got therein, and his people slain, knows not
well what to do, or what to resolve upon: whether it were best to die by the
^^rd of his Foe, or to suffer himself to be burnt, or else to leap into the
Sea, and there venture drowning, and in the end, imagining the water to be
far sweeter then the other twain, with desperate courage leapeth therein.

Even so, and in such perplexity, (if not worse) was royal Maria. Counsel
and advise she wanted, what to say or do she knew not, and which way to
turn her, she was ignorant; she waileth and weepeth, wishes to die, and
calls for death, and yet finds nothing to help her.

Hecuba, never bewailed her bondage so much, nor the murdering of her
Children, neither did Niobe moan so rufullie, for her misso: tune, as this
poor Virgin sighed and took on for her hard hap: whilst LOVE, one while
counsels her one thing, another while, wishes her to do another; and yet
in the end does not permit her to resolve upon any matter thoroughly. She in
the mean time standing doubtful, and wavering what to do, like a vessel
that is tossed too and fro with a Tempest. O how often did she wish and desire
within her self, to see (but once before she died) her dearest friend, that
she might crave pardon of him, for her fault.

Nothing does she covet so much as death, and (yet such was her ill hap) as she
knew not how to die. In the end, after she had bebated the matter within her
self, and beat her brains too and fro therein, she found no better means,
then to have recourse unto Don John, and to entreat him to have compassion on
her: but then she was (almost) at her wits end, to think how she might make
him acquainted with her purpose: When flattering Fortune, (for her ill luck)
showed her, how she might bring this her business about well, and as she her
self would desire.

For the young Prince of Lions, who was in the prime of his youth, and in the
heat of his chief blood, seeing he could not by fair means obtain the King
of Arragons daughter, thought to try what he could do by force: and
thereupon, sent an Ambassador unto the King, that if he would not willingly
yield his daughter unto his wife, he (then) would have her from him perforce,
and by bloody wars.

The King hearing this proud Message, as one that was loath to force his only
daughter, or compel her to marry against her will, and yet withal, fearing
(somewhat) the power of his arrogant Foe, thought to make as sure work as he
could in this matter; and thereupon, sen^ pursiuants, for all his brauest
Soldiers, and best men at Arms, amongst which, he accounted Don John as the
chief.

The Princess having espied so fit an occasion, sent a trusty Page of her
own unto him, with (her enclosed Letter) in great secret, but before he had
received the same, the Kings Officers had posted unto him where he lay,
certifying him of the Kings commandment; But he that had vowed unto
himself, never to return into the world more: and finding himself so feeble
and weak, as he was quite without all force or strength, denied the
Princesses request, minding to excuse himself by reason of his sickness, and so
to send them away: which he had no sooner done, but behold his Mistress Page
came presently, to enter into his Chamber, and to deliver her Letter unto him.

As that man (who thinking himself to be healthful and strong in body) is
daunted with fear, when suddenly (and in the best of his time) a strange
kind of Qualme, comes over his stomach, and an uncouth trembling is found to
run through all his joints and members: Even so, was this sick Knight,
wonderfully amazed, to see his Ladies Letter, in the midst of his misery,
and when he was deprived of all such hope, dispairing ever to have found such
kindness to come from her.

In the end he receives them, as a Cordial, to his heavy heart; and (after
he had kissed, and rekissed them often) he opens them, wherein he found
this written, which follows.

IF there be no greater Corsiue unto the mind of one then that which forces
us (despite of our selves) to seek unto those whom we before have (and that
without just cause) notoriously offended; then (certainly) am I the most
wretchedst Creature living. For (as now) there is no means left for me, to
escape from danger, but only by thy help (sweet Knight) alone, who have
more reason to wish mine overthrow, then my good Fortune or health, any way at
all: in that thou have found such extreme and barbarous discourtesie in me.
Yet nevertheless, if thy right generous and gentle mind, cannot feel this
injury (done unto thee, by a silly Maiden) then, I beseech thee, think no
more upon mine offense, but burying it deep under thy feet, do that for my
sake, which the bearer here of shall make thee privy unto. And then shall
thou quickly perceive, what great satisfaction I will make thee, for my fault
committed, granting unto thee, that, which thou shall most desire. Give
credit then unto this Messenger, assuring thy self that I am.

Thine most obliged, Maria.


As that Prince who being pensive and sad, (attending for news of the
fortune of the Battle, which his Lieutenant has given unto his enemy,
seeing a Messenger coming a far off (is amazed and confounded with fear)
one while hoping of the victory, and then another while, doubting least he
has lost the day, and so is utterly overthrown.

Even so it fared with our Arragonign Knight, for he knows not, what his
Lady would have with him, and say, that she would employ him in her service,
(yet thinks he) that it is not for any good will she bears him, but
only because she would serve her own turn: and that she had great need of
him.

Whereupon, he commands the Chamber to be voyded, when being all alone,
(except the Page) he demands of him what the Princess pleasure was; who
told him, that her earnest request was, that he would do her so much favor,
as to challenge the Prince of Lions, to Combat: and to maintain in quarrel
against him, that he ought not, against the oath and deuoire of a true Knight,
go about to seek to have her unto his wife, against her will, which victory
(if it please God that he obtain) he then should soon find, how thankful
she would be unto him for the same.

My master hearing this, was ready to leap out of his skin for very joy,
driving away all sadness, and becoming merry, as he was at the first, seeing
he had (now) some means to show himself, some way worthy of the good will
of his Mistress.

Whereupon he answered the Page, that (his humble duty first remembered unto
the Princess) he would be at the Court within ten days after, and so
willed him to signify, (and to assure her thereof: where, in his black
Armor) spread all over with burning flames, and drerie leaves, he would meet
his hot and importunate Lover, not doubting, but quickly to cool his heat
and courage: and so, bestowing a rich Jewel upon the Page, he sent him back
again unto the Princess, who was marvelous glad to hear this news from him.

But there is an old Saw, Haste makes waste; And Soft Fire makes sweet
Mauls: Even so, if this Traitor LOVE, had not blinded the eyes of my Master
(so much) as he could not see his own weakness, and if he had not been so
forward, but had stayed, and taken a longer time, to cherish and recover his
health (more thoroughly) then he did (by reason that he was brought wonderful
low, and almost unto deaths door, with very faintness and sorrow of mind)
no doubt, but it had happened better for him then it did: and he had been one of
the most fortunatest men living.

But alas, who ever has seen a Lover, that has not been half foolish? and
that would not think, but that he were able to perform things that were
impossible, for the Love of his Mistrisse? For as the Poet says: Nothing is
hard unto a Lovers mind,
When he does seek to please his Mistrisse kind.


For it was very strange, that Don John, having been so long sick, and
without being recovered, above three or four days, should be able to
encounter with one of the most brauest, lustiest, and strongest Gallants in the
world, and not to be the occasion of the loss of his own life, as afterward
it was.

Nevertheless, he thought nothing was impossible unto him, as long as it was
in the service of his Lady, he being of the mind, that in such a cause, he
was able to conquer all the world.

Mean time, the Kings Pursiuants returned back again unto the Court,
certifying his Majesty, how that Don John was deadly sick, and for that
cause, craved pardon of him to be excused, since he was far likelier to die
then to live.

Which when the King had heard, he was wonderfully sorry, but on the other
side, the Page warranted the Princess, that (what news so ever he had sent
unto the King her Father, because he would not as then, be known of the sime)
that (yet nevertheless) he would keep his word, and not fail of his
promise: and so he did indeed. Although LOVE himself, does but mock at the
Oaths and protestations of Lovers, they being for the most part, false,
deceitful, and oftentimes broken. And yet I say, That Louertrue, which to his
Mistrisse makes an Oath,
Will die before (to her) he will break his vowed Troath.


This was the reason that Don John, (according unto his word) kept his day, not
missing to be there, at the time appointed, and in such an Armor as he told
the Page of, although he was very weak and sickly, which if his fair Maria
had known, she would not have so lightly employed him in so weighty a
business, as concerned as well his life, as her own, and the welfare of them
both; but rather would have caused him, to take some longer time to recover him
self, and some good Physic to make him strong again.

And now the day being come, Don John, (as a Knight errant and unknown) Armed
(and disguised, as I told you before) presented himself before the King, and
having done reverence unto him, demands for the Prince of Lims.

The King hearing him say so, asked what he would have with him, and the
occasion why he enquired for him: (my reason is, answered the Knight, to
prove against him, (if so it shall stand with your Highness good liking) that
he does against the honor and laws of Chivalry, to go about to obtain
(the Princess your Daughters love) rather by force, then by other good means:
and thereupon, I denounce the Combat unto him. which if he refuse, I will
account him no better then a base Coward, void of all valor, and as as one
that is unworthy of that thrice Noble order of Knighthood.

Heerevpon the Prince was called, (for he was come but the day before unto the
Court, he having been sent for thither, by a train that the Princess laid,
who knew her faithful Servant would not miss his day,) before whom the
strange Knight repeated the former words: Which the other hearing, was so
incenst with rage and fury, as presently he called for his Horse and Armor,
being ready in a trice, and so went into the Listes to meet with his enemy.

The King was wonderfully astonished at this strange adventure, and yet
rejoiced much in his mind, wishing in his heart, and praying unto God, that
this new come Knight might have the upper hand, of his proud and insolent
adversary. But if he so much rejoiced, then must you think that the
Princess his Daughter, was much more pleased and contented, seeing her valiant
Knight to be so true of his word, and so ready to adventure his life for her
sake: and therefore thought him most worthy to be beloved.

And now every thing being in a readiness, the two Combattants entered the
field, both of them provoked, with one and the selfsame desire, and both
forced thereunto, through extreme Love.

The Trumpets sounding, they set spurs to their horses, meeting with such a
terrible encounter, as their Spears flewe all into shiuers, and both of them
fell upon the ground: but quickly got they up again, drawing their naked
swords, and the one most desperately seeking to assail the other.

As the Cyclops in Aetna, beating continually upon the Iron Forge, fill all
the bordering mountains thereabouts, with Thundering noise; Even so, the
blows that fell upon the Armours of these two Champions, made such frightfull
noise, as the sound thereof was heard far and near.

Don John is minded there to die, or to overcome, since he fights in the
houour of his Lady, so great is his courage: And yet, thee that was the
occasion of the weakening of his forces, cannot restore the same unto him
again, when he has most need of them for her sake.

On the other side, the young Prince mad for anger, that one should take his
Mistress away from him (and against his will) whom he beheld to be in place,
redoubled his strength and courage in this Combat. But yet it had stood him in
small stead, and to little or no purpose at all, if his enemy had been as
strong and lusty in body as he was, before LOVE had so much weakened and
taken him down. Little odds seemed there to be betwixt these two Caualiers,
so valiantly did both of them carry themselves, as every one wondered at them.

No running tricks in their fighting was forgotten, no Stockado, nor
Reuerschio, no giving place for advantage, nor no fast following, to serve
their own purpose was missing: each of them striving (as now) to show the
vemost skill they had, in this their dangerous play.

Don John hurt the Prince in the shoulder, and the Prince wounded him in the
thigh, which was the cause that the Battle began to begin a new between
them: whilst the lookers on, were even weary to behold them, only they which
fought, were so fresh and lively, as if they had (but as then) entered into the
field.

The Lists (with their traversing up and down the ground) are made deep like
furrows, and strewed all along, with the splinters and pieces of their
Armours. Upon part of which, Don John (by ill fortune stumbling) fell down,
and the Prince presently upon him, ready to have stabde him, with his dagger
into his throat, which he put in practice to the utmost of his force, but his
Corslet was of so good proof, as he could not do him much hurt. Thus as they
tumbled one upon an other, my Master plaide his part so well, as at length he
got up again on his legs, when as then, he began to find and feel, how much
his former sorrow and grief of mind had weakened him: besides, calling to mind
his fault, (of which he was so ashamed) he with such a fresh courage, assailed
his furious Foe, that he made amends for his fault before, although the Prince
had the advantage of him. For where he was but hurt in the shoulder only, our
Arragonian Knight was wounded, both in the Thigh, and in his inward mind too:
and yet nevertheless, he stood stoutly to his tackling, grieved at the heart,
that he could not rid his enemy out of the way, (in so long time) especially
fighting for his Lady, and now (although too late) often wishing he had taken
a longer time, to recover his former health. In the end, the blood ran so fast
down from Don John's thigh, as every one judged he would be overcome. For which
all the Assembly were maruellously sorry. When upon the sudden (and contrary
to all their expectations) he began so furiously to follow the Prince, as with
the often blows which he doubled, and redoubled upon him, he made him kneel
upon the ground, where (when he had him at the advantage, he lost no time at
all. For perceiving that his enemy was in a manner astonished with the many
strokes he had given him, without suffering him to have any leisure or time to
breath, he aimed so rightly at his head, and that with so mighty a violence,
as at one blow, he cleft it quite asunder: the senseless body falling down
upon the ground, and quite bereft of soul, of pride, and of valor. At what
time also, and with him (just at that instant) fell Don John himself likewise,
by reason he was wonderfully weakened through the loss of his blood, which
issued forth from his wounds. Whereupon every one supposed that he was dead,
as well as the other, which the Princess imagining to be true, and (heavy
above all the rest) for the same: returned home unto her Chamber, to bewail
his hard fortune, with her own.

To tell you what pitiful moan this poor Lady made, and what bitter tears
she shead, being retired into her privy Closet, would but move you to greater
remorse. No comfort would she receive any way: neither would she now rejoice,
although she had seen her enemy slain, considering her valiant Knight had run
the same course. She is determined not to live after him any longer, since she
had bin the occasion of his undoing. Neither cared she, although every one had
seen her thus to lament, because she hoped Death would rid her from all such
doubts. Nevertheless, her Gentlewomen much wondered thereat, maruelling what
the cause should be; most of them thinking it was for the death of the Prince
of Lions, whom it was supposed she should have married, and not for the black
Knight, although they were all deceived that thought so.

Thus lay she mourning unto her self, neither would she take joy at any
thing, until at the last, news was brought unto the Court, that Don John was
found to be that black Knight, that had been her Champion, who was not (as it
was before judged) dead.

Whereupon she began to give over her lamenting, but yet in such wise, and so
cunningly, as none of all her Attendants could perceive it was for his sake,
that she had taken on so before, although (God he knows) not any in all the
whole world was more joyful then she, to hear of so comfortable tidings and
news.

Whereupon, she called for her Coach, and went unto the Knight to visit him,
where, when she was come, she found a number of Ladies and Gentlewomen in the
chamber, who were comforting of him, and rejoicing with him, for his happy
victory.

No sooner was she entered into the Chamber where he lay, but all the other
giving place, she drew toward his beds side: when he (poor soul) no sooner
had spied her, but that he forthwith sounded: the company imagining that it
was his wounds, and not her sight, that was the cause thereof: whilst she in
the mean space, was not a little amazed, to see him so mightily changed, and
to look so meger, pale, and hollow, whom not long before, she had known to
be the goodliest and properest man living.

But this misfortune and sickness (happened unto him) she laid no body in fault
of, but her owneselfe, confessing in her conscience, that she was the only
cause thereof: and therefore resolved within her self, to make him amends with
the loss of her own life, if he should hap to miscarrie, or do otherwise
then well.

And now my sad Master being come unto himself again, and seeing his
Mistress to look so heavily upon him, and sighing, he held down his
countenance, not daring to behold her, whilst the (Chyrurgians that had him in
Cure, and others,) thought that it was the pain of his wounds, that made him
so ill: And therefore, desired every one to withdraw themselves from thence
(for a while) that he might the better take his rest.

Whereupon, fair Maria was forced, (though sore against her will) to leave
him: vowing unto her self (if it should please God, that her Knight might
recover his former health) to marry with none but him: Thinking she could not
be any man's (so rightly) as his, seeing he had (so bravely) revenged her
quarrel, upon her hateful enemy, and had engaged his life, for her dear
service.

Alas, how shall I be able to make an end of this pittious history? I know
not I, and therefore (good Arcas,) let this suffice, which I have already
reported unto thee.

Here the wretched Fortunio, powered forth whole fountains of tears, it being
a long time, before he could speak as much as one word more: but I pressed
him so much, and urged him so often, that in the end, he went forward with
his former discourse in this manner.

Don Ihon my Master, had all the cunning Physicians and Chyrurgions that could
be gotten, to look unto him, whereby he might recover his former health, and
have his wounds healed. But all was in vain, for there was no Medicine or
Balm, that could do him any good, by reason of the great sorrow, which he
had (before) conceived in his mind: And because the small virtue and strength
of his radical humor within him, which grief had overmuch weakened, was not
of power sufficient to nourish his grievous wounds, and therefore they became
both weaker and worser, every day then other.

They were not over mortal or deadly, and yet (because of diverse accidents)
and what through the badde disposition of his body, they became incurable:
which they that looked unto him perceiving, and finding that there was no way
but one with him, certified his friends thereof; who took on most
pittrouslie, when they heard such heavy news.

And now the last day was come, in which (most happily) he must leave this
world, at what time (although as then too late) his Mistrisse showed her self
most kind unto him. For, she having understood (by her trusty Page, of whom
I talked of before) that he was drawing toward his latest end, determined
with her self, not (long) to live after him: whereupon, she took a fit
time, to steal secretly unto his Chamber, where (being alone with him) and
causing the door to be boulted, she came unto his beds head.

But alas (Father) I am not able to proceed any further, for very anguish of
mind; my heart will burst, if without weeping, I go onward with my Tale. But
yet I will do what I can to make an end thereof, although for every word I
speak, I shall be forced to shead a tear.

The kind Knight, perceiving the young Princess to stand by him: whose eyes
were turned into springs of tears, whose heart was turned into another
Montgibell, with scalding sighs: and whose amorous locks lay all rent and
torn about her shoulders, with a hollow voice, and throatling in his throat,
spoke thus unto her.

If it be (sweet Mistrisse) for me, your faithful and wretched servant, that
you lament so much, then I beseech you give over the same, and reserve it for a
better purpose, and lessen not the glory which he feels, for dying in your
Royal service.

But (alas) what is this I say? Is it likely that you can bewail the loss of
him, who, (when he was living) you deprived of life, through your too extreme
rigor?

No, no, I know it is not for me that you thus take on: (for I confess) I am
not worthy thereof; but it is for the Prince of Lions, who is slain, that you
torment your self, whom (perhaps) you made account of, to have had for your
husband. If so, then (cruel Lady) know this, that it was thy only
commandment caused me to kill him: and had it not been thy will, he had been
yet alive. Nevertheless, if in this I have done amiss, I crave pardon of thee
before I die, as well for that, as for any error else, that I have most
unwillingly done against thee.

I die (beauteous virgin) yea I must die, only because I love thee: accounting
my self most unfortunate, in that I have not received one small favor at thy
hands before my death. Neither am I willing to live, seeing it is contrary
unto thy will and pleasure.

My dying lips had never that blessed hap, to touch those thy vermillion
checkes: No, not so much as to kiss those thy Princely hands; and all because
I was thereof unworthy.

Notwithstanding, if thou (most gracious Mistress,) do think that this my
death, (for loving thee) deserves any recompense, then I most humbly beseech
you, that you pardon all that is past, granting me to kiss, not your lovely
lips, but only that your most victorious hand.

O my soul, my soul, how insupportable is your anguish, not to love this my
body, but to abandon the company of my sweet Princes: I die happily, being
rid from all my grief, and yet most miserably, in that I lose thee, whom I
love, far more then my own self.

O fairest creature of all, that ever were fair, remember, remember, thy dear
Don John, after he is dead and gone, who now takes his last farewell of thee.

Having so said, he sinketh down into his bed, his fair Mistress falling hard
by his side in a sound, but in the end, coming unto her self again, she shed
so many tears upon the bloodlesse visage of the knight, as at length, life
began to come in him once more, that he might yet a little longer enjoy the
presence of her.

O what a pitiful sight was this to behold? These two faithful Lovers, who
never had received any solace, or comfort, the one of the other, in all the
time of their life, now at the last (hour of their deaths) begin to embrace
and kiss one another, sucking that sweet poison, which forced them to die,
mingling their tears upon their checkes, whilst they drown themselves in the
Seas of their own laments and wailings.

O happy Knight, to carry with thee the soul of thy Mistress, which with thy
chaste kisses, thou did suck from forth her body: and O blessed Princes,
to have received so faithful a proof of thy Loyal Lover, whilst thou do
comfort him, he lying at the point of death.

The one was whole, and without hurt, the other at deaths door, and wounded
mortally, and yet was she that was whole, no more able to speak, then the
other that was so fore diseased. Mute and dumb were both of them, they two
having (as it were but one body) (is but one will and mind was betwixt them)
yet, this slight pleasure which they drew with their sole breath lasted not
long, for so great was their inward griefs, as if they should not have spoken,
their hearts must (then) needs burst in sunder.

As the beauty of the Rose that is gathered, soon vadeth away, because it
quickly withers by reason of the heat of the Suune: Even so, as suddely were
those joys which they conceived, gone from them, whilst the young Lady
weepeth, and weeping dries up the tears of ner faithful Servant, she kisseth
his closed eyes, and with her tongue wipeth away the drops, as they fall upon
his cheeks, but (alas) in steed of those which she dries up, his own
distilleth and lights upon the same place, whilst heavy sighs make him to
groan, and thousand passions, interrupt and break the passage of his speech.

He cries out, and takes on most bitterly, to see her thus to lament, he
curses his hard fortune, and calls her cruel, in that she seems to envy,
at this his glory, which he conceiueth in his mind to enjoy by dying, and at
the last forces himself to use these few speeches unto her.

Alas sweet Mistress, what have I done unto you? what have I done unto you (I
pray you) that you should so much malice the small remainder of this my
hateful life? Let me alone, I beseech you, and suffer me to part out of this
world quietly, without troubling of me, now I am going away from hence.

Are you not content that mine own tears have (so often) drowned me, but that
I must needs be overwhelmed with yours also? O unkind and discourteous, even
until my latest end. If thou love me (as thou would make me believe) then
show some sign thereof, in appeasing thy sorrows, for my love sake. Will thou
make me so miserable, as that (now I am dying) I shall find my self to be the
Author of all thy care and sorrow.

Alack do not me that great wrong, and let it not be said, that I have
received so unjust an injury from thee. Go in peace, I pray you, and suffer
me to die according unto mine own wish.

O wretched carcass of mine, why did not thou breathe thy last, with the
corpse of thine enemy, when thou soughtest the other day in the lists, without
procuring (as now) unto thy self a worse then double death? Well (Lady) well,
I see thou will not cease from weeping, I see thou will still be sighing and
sobbing, and I plainly perceive thou will not give over to lament for the
loss of him, who is not worthy, that thou should let fall one tear in his
behalf.

Most gracious Princes, if my prayers cannot prevail for me, and although thou will do nothing in respect of me, ah yet at least, have some regard unto thine
own honor: for what would strangers think, if they should find, that thou
thus take on and mourn for me? Will thou make me so wretched, as to cause me
to be thought to be the occasion both of thy woe, and of thy discredit, which
(although wrongfully) shall be a blemish unto thy former renown?

Do not, O do not offer me, such monstrous injury, but rather (if thou
think that ever I have done any thing that has been pleasing unto thee, or
that I did fight against thine enemy in thy behalf) recompense me, with this
one good turn, which is, that thou bewail not the loss of him, who whilst
he lived, was thy most religious Votarie, to the end none may reproach or
defame thee (hereafter) in giving out, that thou did Love me.

But I perceive it will not be, I see my suite will not be granted, wherefore
O death, most kind and courteous death, make have, come, come, and make have
to rid me out of this too too servile thraldom, to the end, I may no longer
behold her thus to wail and weep, who is my chiefest joy and felicity in
this world.

Then (once more) gracious Mistress. But here, he was prevented by the woeful
Princes, who not being able to hear him thus to vex and torment himself,
interrupted him (in his speech) after this manner.

Now by that rare virtue, by that admirable valor, and by that comelines of
personage, all which were lately thine, yea and by mine own self, who will be
none but thine, I entreat thee (my dear and faithful Knight) and by that
admirable love which thou have heretofore borne me, and as yet do bear unto
me, I conjure thee, to pardon me, for this thy death, for I only have forced
thee to die: it is I have been thy utter destruction, and I only have brought
the (untimely) unto thy grave.

Ah let me but hear that sweet and comfortable word once pronounced by thee,
before I discover unto thee, the secrets of my heart, and that I bewray any
more of mine inward mind unto thee.

Lovely Lady (replied my Master) I pardon thee with all my heart: but why
do thou thus jest at my hapless miseries, requesting that of me, which I
(first) did beg of thee, because it belonged unto me, and for that it is I, and
not thou, that art (herein) culpable: nevertheless, if those words shall
please thee, for whom I lived only to serve and obey, and whom (now I am
dying) I would be loath to offend, I am content to speak them, saying; Fairest
and loueliest Lady, I most heartily pardon you.

The mestfull Lady, hearing him to say so, began to dry her eyes, whilst
flinging the hair of her head upon her shoulders, which before hindered her
tongue from speaking, she thus began to bewray her mind unto him.

I cannot deny (my dear heart) but that I was much too blame, when I first of
all refused thy chaste service offered unto me: but alas, did I think, that
for one only denial, thou would have given over thy enterprise, and
betaken thy self to live solitarily, as melancolicke person in a wilderness,
and never more to move me in this matter? God knows how often (afterward) I
cursed my tongue, and wished ill unto my mouth for the same: for I will
confess the truth, that even then, and before that time (as ever since I have
done) I loved thee most dearly.

Full little did I think, but that I should have heard from thee again ere
long, when thou (presently) did retire thy self from my presence, so that
although I knew thou louedst me, and that I was willing to show thee any
honorable courtesy, yet could I not as feign I would, by reason I knew not
how to send conveniently unto thee, whilst thou in the mean time, were almost
dead for grief, and I little better, because thou had forsaken me so
suddenly. Now whilst we both lived thus in great coffeehouse, the Prince of
Lions (as ill fortune would) came hither unto my fathers Court, and would needs
force me to be his wife.

But I, who had vowed in my mind, never to have any other unto my husband,
then thine own sweet self, entreated thee, to try the combat with him in my
behalf, not thinking that thou had been half so weak, as I perceived
afterward thou were.

At the length it was thy good fortune to be victor of the field, whereof I was
not a little glad; I determining with my self, whatsoever should have happened,
to have been married unto thee. But woe is me, I now perceive, death must cause
us to part in this world, although we will meet both together in another.

And now seeing (at this very instant) I am forced to behold thee, drawing thy
latest breath, and that thine eyes are ready to be closed up, with an
everlasting sleep, think thou that I either can or will, allay the heat of
my griefs? or that I will revoke my first word, which was to take part of such
fortune as should be allotted unto thee?

Do thou think I am so cruel, so hard hearted, or so much void of remorse
and pity, that thou dying before me, only for my cause, and in my quarrel,
I would not so much as lament, and bewail thy death? Ah my unkind friend,
great wrong is this thou do unto me. No no, one and the selfsame Tomb,
shall enclose both cur bodies together, and that which Love would not permit to
be thine whilst thou liuedst, gentle death shall put thee in possession
thereof, without any trouble at all.

Thy commandment in this point, shall be of no force with me, thy prayers to
no purpose, neither thy entreating of any power at all with me, but in any
thing else, do but bid me, and I will strait obey thee: only in this I must
deny thee, for (assuredly I will die, rather then live, to think that thou
were overthrown through me, and that I should live continually to sigh and cry
out, saying; Alas, where is (now) my worthy Knight? Can mine eyes shine, and
give light, when thine are dead and gone? Can I endure to see thee carried unto
thy grave, and I not be buried in the earth? And can I abide to live, to say,
Behold yonder, my sweet friends Tomb, and not be enclosed therein my self?
Never demand so unjust a request at my hands, neither be so hard hearted unto
me, as to wish me to survive thee, to the end I may be the more miserable.

But perhaps, thou think because I have been cruel unto thee, therefore
thou may repay me with the like recompense again.

To which I thus answer. First, the heavens know how much it was against my
will, and had thou not been too farewell and timorous, thou had saved
both thine own life and mine also.

Besides, I challenge the pardon which even now, thou did grant unto me
for this mine offense: and therefore (sweet friend) be content and pleased; for
with thee will I die, whilst our coarses shall lie one by another in one self
Vault, which when they were living, was not permitted unto us; and for this I
hope, mine honor cannot be called in question, seeing all ages have allowed
young Ladies, to love honesty, brave and valiant Knights, and such was my
love, and not otherwise, as God himself can witness. Who then can justly tax
mine honor?

(None my dear Knight) none, and seeing it is so; receive this last kiss,
from the most woeful woman living: receive her heavy plaints, and her
lamenting groans, and do not oppose thy self against that small remainder of
contentment, which is behind for her, in dying with thee, which she will take
as a requital, for so many miseries which have been afflicted upon her.

Needs must I tell thee, that I do envy at that glory thou have to die
before me, but (long) shall it not be, for I will follow thee, as fast as may
be: mean while, and when thou shall be in the heavens, remember I pray thee,
thy dear and faithful Maria. More would she have spoken, but that her heart
was so ouerpressed with grief, as she fell down dead upon my dying Master:
who seeing so pitiful a spectacle, knew not what to do, for help her any
way, he could not, so extreme and faint he was.

At the last, she came unto her self, when with a low and fumbling voice, he
spoke these few words (the last as ever he pronounced) unto her. My gracious
Lady, now I beseech thee, harbor no such unkind conceit within thee, more
good may thou do unto me (with thy honorable speeches) whilst thou art
living, then when thou shall be dead, or if thou should die with me.

No sweet Princes, no, live, yea live still, and happily, seeing nothing fairer
then thy self can live. For else what discredit would it be unto me, if it
should be objected against me, that I had darkened and extinguished the brightest
Son of this world: let not so foul a blot stain my memory, after I shall
be departed from hence alive, and seek not to shorten thy time, before the
will of God, cutting off thy self before he does appoint thee, and disposing
of thy body, not according unto his, but thine own pleasure.

An do not so, for so you may not do. Mortal creatures must be ruled by the
divine ordinance above, and expect their leisure, not doing any thing, but as
they shall appoint them. Live then (I say once more) and close these my dying
eyes, which whilst they lived, were thine: this Boon, if thou shall grant
me, I then shall think my self happy: but if not, then shall I account my
self as most miserable.

And now I feel that welcome death does approach toward me, through which all
my cares and troubles end. I my time is now come, my senses fail, and my
tongue begins to be speechless.

No more have I now to say to thee (my dear Princes) but only to recommend my
memory and thine own life, unto thee, of which two things I desire thee (as
ever thou louedst me) to have an especial regard.

Farewell, I can no longer speak: farewell the beauty of this world: farewell
the fair Sun of my soul: farewell my joy and only comfort, and if ever
thou thoughtest me worthy of any favor, embrace me once before I die.

And thou sweet Jesus, mine only Savior, have mercy upon me. Scarce were
these words forth of his mouth, when the most disconsolate Lady, embracing her
breathless Knight, laid her mouth so close unto his, as his soul seemed to
part out of his corpse into hers, which with a sweet (yet scalding sigh) she
drew in her own.

And now, he being without life, and cold as any stone, the Princes knew not
what to do, feign would she have murdered her self, but that she had no
weapon wherewithal to do the deed: besides, she durst not stay alone in the
chamber, least she might (perhaps) be espied by one or other, and yet again,
she was most loath of all, to leave the coarse of her kind friend so soon.

But in the end, reason took place, which persuaded her, to convey her self
as secretly from thence, as when she came thither: which she did so cunningly,
through help of her old trusty and assured Page, as she was not perceived by
any, until such time as she recovered her own lodging, where after she had
been settled a while, she locked the door unto her: and so, laying her self
upon her bed (after she had for a certain space, wailed and lamented for the
death of my Master) she held her breath so long within her body, and closed
her mouth so hard, as (at the length) she stifled her self for want of taking
wind, and so was found dead, not any doubting of any such matter, nor any
knowing what the cause should be of her death, but only my self, and her
foresaid trusty Page.

No sooner was she found thus dead, and the brute thereof noysed abroad, but
there was a general lamentation and crying out throughout all the court: not
unlike that which was heard in Troy, the same night the City was set on fire
(upon the sudden) by the subtle Greeks.

What great moan the King and the Queen made for their daughter the young
Princes, and how grievously the friends of Don John took the death of him,
being held to be one of the most valiants and brauest Knights of Spain, I hope
I need not to report unto you.

It shall suffice, their Funeral obsequies were performed, and set out, in the
most sumptuous and costliest manner that could be devised: which being past and
done, I took my leave of that country, minding to try my fortune in some
other place: and so taking with me some few Jewels, and certain gold (which
my late Master had bestowed upon me) I went my ways, when (as I travailed) on
my journey, some of the foresaid Prince of Lions men (by ill fortune met with
me) who knowing me to be a follower of Don John, that had overthrown him in
combat, laid violent hands upon me, meaning to carry me with them by sea into
their country, and there to put me unto some cruel kind of death. But God
knowing me to be innocent, took compassion upon me, so as after I was shipped
with them, a sudden Tempest arose, in which our vessel was sunk, all the
passengers within her drowned, and I only escaped, and was saved.

This (reverend sir) was the woeful Tragedy, which Fortunio, reported unto me
of his hard adventures. But it now begins to wax dark, let us be gone, then
(said the old man) and to morrow again, thou shall begin where thou have now
left. Agreed (quoth Arcas) and therewithal walked along with him, to bring him
on his way toward his lodging, which (as they were going, they might see this
riddle to be engraven within the bark of an ancient old Elm.

My fortun's strange, the wh^le world holds me dear,
And though I nothing am, of nothing made,
Yet I so spotless show, so fair and clear,
As noblest states, of me are well apaid.
What ere passes by me, I see the same,
Yet I no eyes have, and am formed so:
As smallest force does bring to me my bane,
Breaking me peece-meale, with a little blow.
My property most true is, what does breath,
I lively that present, in face and beauty:
And (which is more) I creature (nere) deceive,
Great personages to me bow, as it were of duty.
Yet I them faithful serve, whilst loath they are
To leave me, so well they my company
Do like Say then, who rightly can me bar,
From honor such, as all give unto me?
What think you of this Riddle (said the old man unto Areas) and how would
you expound the same? Marry thus answered the Shepherd. This Enigma,
signifies nothing else, but a right crystal Mirror which is a ^^ettall of
little or none account, and is little or nothing accounted of, in that they are
common and subject to breaking, with every small little fillip or touch of hand.

And yet nevertheless, they are set by in every place of the world,
especially, by the better and nobler sort, who lightly never pass by any of
them, but they look and behold themselves in the same. Not any one goes by
them, but (if he please) he may view and discern his own lively shape,
whilst the looking glass it self, sees every thing that passes before it,
although it have no eyes at all. So brittle is it of Nature, that (as I said
before) it breaks with any light fall, all in pieces. It shows the true
counterfeit of every one that looks in the same, dwithout eceiuing any, which
is the reason, they are in no small request amongst great states, especially
fair Ladies, and Gentlewomen, who (therefore) prise them very highly.

Well have thou said (quoth the old Magitian) and thou have hit the very nail
upon the head. I commending thy sharp conceit for the exposition thereof. But
now let us be walking unto our lodgings, seeing the sky begins to wax
dark, and the Sun is ready to repose himself, upon his wet and deway
coach. And herewithall they departed, every one unto their several houses,
where we will leave them, until the next morning, yet not leaving to conceal
from your conceits, an Ode, which a certain Nymph, sung unto them, as they
were going homewards. And this it was.

Since that Love is worse then death,
And suruies, when coarse wants breath:
I will chase away the same,
Leust I vexed be with that pain.
For she is fond that lives by Love,
And many plagues is like to prone.
What would every one report,
If I live should in such sort?
Hope in vain and to no end,
Mar myself, rather then mend.
Since she is fond that lives by love,
And many plagues is like to prove.
Yet I here protest, though I,
Mean to leave Loves cruelty.
Yet I Cupid honor still,
Whilst he works me none ill.
For she is fond that lives by love,
And many plagues etc.
I confess, there is passions sweet
In Love, for true Lovers meet.
Such as does them gently warm,
And their hearts most sweetly charm.
Though she is fond that lives,
And many plagues etc.
But when it is ore violent,
Then the soul with grief is rent.
Whilst it reaues us of our sense,
Therefore i will wish such dispense.
For she is fond that lives by love,
And many plagues is like to prove.
The end of the forth days meeting of Iuliettaes Shepherds.
THE FIFTH AND LAST DAYS MEETING OF IVLIETTAES SHEPHERDS.
THrice blessed is the Man, that (without having been allured with the vain
pleasures of unconstant Fortune,) A Sentence.
has never changed his estate; but being borne poor, remains so, all the
term of his life. For the continuance of a miserable estate, is not grievous
unto a man, but the alteration and change of good, unto that which is wretched
and badde, is that which makes him sad and heavy.

He that has nothing to loose, is not tormented at all, he weepeth not,
neither lan^enteth his loss, not knowing what it is to be undone: but that
disastred wight, that sees himself, through the injury of the heauons,
deprived of that Jewel which be held most dearest in this world: cannot choose
but lament and bewail his hard misfortunes. He that (never) has had any fair
Mistress, (the chief Nurse and nourisher of his life) makes not so pitiful
moan, as that poor, loving servant, who finds himself banished from so
sweet a Saint, through the malice of the despitefull stars.

A most lively pattern whereof, was the miserable Arcas. For what need had
he, (so often) to have sighed, and so much condoled the absence of his
beauteous Diana, (having lost her dear presence) if he had never been
acquainted with her, or never loved her before? The grief whereof, never
parted from his soul, being as green Iuie, that wreathed about him, as a
Serpent that entangled him, or as a chain that befettered him, and bound him
round about, in so much as he consumed away, as well by day, as by night.

Early in the morning does he rise, and gets him forth of his lodging,
trotting apace, unto the wonted Cave, where he thought to find the old
Magitian.

As he walked onwards on his way, he might discern the Sky to wax redder
and redder in the East, perceiving such a flaming fire, as the pure brightness
thereof, brought a clear light unto the whole world; he wistly looking full
against the same, though he could not long continue so. For his eyes were not
able^o abide the glimmering beams thereof, as the sick man's sight, that
fa^leth, when he falls in a sownd.

No marvel then, although our Shepherd had not power to behold the majesty
of the glorious Sun it self, when he was daunted and amazed, with the only
shadow of the same. And the rather, because he was troubled with other conceits
that ran in his brain: For there can be no right contemplation of the
heavenly works of the Almighty, where the mind is distraught, or carried
away, but only at such times, as our spirits are not troubled or hindered,
with the imagination of any thing else.

Arcas (therefore) could not ruminate upon this high and divine matter, being
withdrawn from them, by other subjects: Yea, so much was he ententiue, and
given to muse upon other things, as he (scarce) could call to remembrance what
he was, and where he then walked. Free (therefore) must his mind be, and
quite secluded from all other cares, and worldly thoughts, that means to
addict and deuote himself, unto the contemplating of the admirable works of
the eternal God, they giving sufficient te^timonie, as well of his great
puissance, as of his wisdom and prudencie. Of the one, because of their
wonderful creation: and of the other, by reason of their sacred and wise
government.

And now the pensive Shepherd, beginning to consider the rare beauty of the
handiworke of the Creator of all creatures, gave over all such ousie thoughts,
running in his mind (being as then, disburthened of other troubles) to the
intent he might the better meditate upon this new and worthy subject only.
So does the more violent poison expel the lesser; A Similie.
and the bigger nail (stricken with mightier force) (...) it the other.

After he had been ravished (a while, in his soul) wondering at the
straun^^nesse of these excellent things, he could not choose, but must needs
break silence, d^^^ous to make manifest by speech, what he thought in his
conceit.

The voice is the messenger of the will of the mind, both which ought to
concur and agree together: A Sentence.
but if they be contrary, then cannot man do any thing, that is either easy
or just. Our Pilgrim Arcas, walking fair and softly, (his gate being rather
the pace of sorrow, then of pleasure) fixing his eyes low upon the ground, as
one being in an Extrasie, began to discourse unto himself, after this
fashion.

If this thy glorious creature, o immortal LORD, this (beauteous Son) is
adored of the people which are called Aatipodes: how much more worthily then,
art thou to be worshipped of us, who art the only Father and Creator, both of
this resplendent, and all-seeing Lamp, and of all other things else
whatsoever? If any workmanship, may be accounted admirable in the eyes of
mortal wights, how much more then shall he be, that is the Architect, and
framer of the same? And if a Table or Picture be found worthy of commendation
amongst men, how much more, and what greater praise does the Painter himself
merit, that has so lively drawn it?

Wonderful are thou, (o GOD) in thy works? and nothing proceeds from thee,
but what is of that condition and number. Of nothing have thou made man, thou
have formed Woman out of man, without woman: and men, of men and women; thou
(thy self) being borne of a Virgin, without the help of man. Who therefore
can comprehend these thine excellent effects? Thou sufferedst man to sin, to
the end, he might be made more perfect; Afterward, thy self becoming man,
as he is (sin excepted) it being thy will, that sin should come, the more to
increase thy glory, and to make manifest thy Mercy and Justice.

Thou (sometimes) have permitted evil, that a greater and a more wholsomer
good, may arise of the same: not only for their sakes, who have committed it,
but also for others, that were strangers in the same. As may be seen, by the
offense which was done, against the inuocent and chaste Joseph, An Example.
by his hard-harted and malicious Brethren: and as we may find by that
horrible and inexpiable Treason, which that damned Judas wrought against his
dear Lord and Master.

To be brief, wonderful art thou, in all thy doings. Neither can any
comprehend thy divine Actions, no more then thy first being and beginning can
be known. For as we find and perceive, A Similie.
the lively heat of the fire, to come from forth the Stoue or Hot-house, and
(yet) see no flame nor fire at all: So, although we have not beheld over many
of thy s^cred works; yet have we found them to be most certain and true, by
reason of the fruits that have come unto us through the same.

Never has any man visiblie viewed the admirable conjunction of thy Deity, A
Sentence.
with humanity; and yet nevertheless, we ought to believe it, because of the
profit that it has brought unto us, which is, the Salvation and souls health
of us all.

Then, if thy works be so divine, so religious, and so far surpassing the
natural conceits of man: it is no marvel, although thou (after thine own
imitation and likeness) desire, that that which man does, should likewise
be perfect, (he being of thy making) to the end he may be found worthy of thy
heavenly Kingdom.

Thou have charged thine Apostles (most strictly) to be perfect, as thy Father,
who lives in heaven: and although they can never attain unto that good, so
much desired, yet (at the least) thy will is, that they make an assay and
proof thereof, seeking (as much as in them lies) to do unto the utmost of
their power.

Neither does this perfection (of which I speak) consist in any thing so
much, as in thy works. For by the work, the cunning and skill of the workman
is found: as by the sweetness and daintiness of the verse, the learning and
deep conceit of the Poet is known: And even so, those that will pass for
masters, in any Art or Handicraft whatsoever, give testimony of their skill,
by some rare piece of work devised by them, which is accounted the excellency
of their cunning: whereby we may perceive, either their sufficiency, or their
folly: their deep knowledge, or gross errors therein. So that we find the
perfection of eternal JEHOVAH, in nothing so much, as by his works, which are
every way right sacred, and most excellent; Our Savior himself commanding
us, that we should not seek to endeavor to approach unto his perfectnes, in
any thing so much, as by doing such excellent and heavenly deeds, as he has
done before us.

The Prentice that endeuoreth to learn some exquisite kind of Trade, or
Occupation, of his cunning Master, is he not properly said to imitate him, as
long as he is working some piece of work, that comes nigh unto that of his
Masters? If so, why then, by this perfection, is understood as well (good
works, as Faith.) For it is an easy matter to be brought to believe. And had
Christ meant (only of Faith) by those words, his doctrine (then) had been
superfluous, and to small purpose. For without Faith, his Disciples (unto whom
he spoke) could not have been his followers, because every Infidel is already
damned: and they all abounded in Faith, seeing that through the same, they
showed so many rare miracles, but not such good works, as the Son of God
commanded them, which approached and drew near unto the perfection of such, as
his heavenly Father had done before.

That great Apostle of his, Saint Paul, said he not afterward unto his
Companions, Be ye my followers, as I am the follower of Jesus Christ: and this
he meant, not alone by Faith, but as well, by good works also. For that godly
Disciple did somewhat more then believe, giving testimony of millions of
admirable good deeds, as when he raised some from death to life, healed other
some of their infirmities, Preached, and wrote many comfortable Epistles, and
ministered relief unto the poor, whom he calls Saints. Yea, he did more
then this, for he labored with his own hands, to get and purchase his own
living.

If then we will imitate this man of God, we must do as he did, who was not
only contented to believe, but also has given us great proofs, of many
godly works, and worthy Actions, meriting no little glory and praise.

This word (Follower,) is properly spoken of him that attempteth to do what
his Master has done before, as a young Scholar, that composeth an oration,
after the imitation of Cicero, (the father of eloquence) although he cannot
frame it so exquisitely, nor so eloquently, as his Author has done, yet does
he study, to do it as well as he can, striving to come as nigh unto his
Phrase, as possible he may.

And so must we do, laboring, traveling, and doing what good we are able,
to give testimonies of our selves, that we are followers of his Son, and of
his Apostles.

For, our Savior him self, living (here) upon the earth amongst us, did not
believe only, but did most religious works also: so as, if we will follow
his Commandment, we must imitate him, not in his Faith alone, but as well in
his good deeds, as the Apostles have done before us, who were dutiful and
just, doing (as their Master did) thousands of good deeds, unto the relief
and comfort, of the souls and bodies of many a one.

Faith then cannot be sufficient for our salvation, without good works. For,
were it good Justice, that such a one as had done millions of of cruelties,
cutting the throtes of the godly, and robbing, spoiling, and tytannizing, upon
the Commonwealth, both by sword and fire, should be saved, because (as a
Christian) he belieueth that there is a God?

Why? so to do, were to make God to be without Justice; and so consequently,
to take it from him: For take away the properties of the subject, and you take
away the subject it self; dismember a man, and you sever his body from him:
Even so, deprive God Justice, and you deny him to be GOD, for he can be no God
without Justice.

That man, who (because he shall term himself the near servant, and
follower of his Prince) shall, upon that security, exercise many massacres,
notable murders, and egregious villainies, shall not escape, but (for all that)
be punished by the Judge, because (as we hope) we are to receive good for doing
good, and not if we do what is bad and forbidden.

Now, if the recompense for doing good deeds, and the punishment for
committing evil Actions, are both taken away, to what end (then) should we
talk of Justice? and Justice being cashierde and banished from hence (upon
which the veriy Law it self is founded) all Religion, and Faith, all humane
society, and Commonwealths, must needs be ruinated, and quite overthrown for
ever.

Should every one be permitted to execute wickedness without danger, to answer
for the same; What then should we do with Justice? for then every one would
give himself unto evil and badnesse, seeing it is more sweet, and fuller of
profit then goodness: and the rather, because that men are more prone by
nature, to put in practice the same.

Besides, if the guerdon and reward of well doing were taken away, who would
endure any pain or labor, toyling and turmoyling his body, and sweating day
and night, when he shall find his travail to be without recompense; and that
his merit shall be no more, nor better, then his, which has done wickedly? But
let us rather say, that there is a reward for doing good, of the good: and a
punishment for the ungodly, by such as are wicked. For are there not Christians
that shall be damned? No doubt there are.

But wherefore are they so condemned? Is it because they believe not rightly?
or for that they had no Faith at all, neither for the one, nor for the other?
For there is no Christan, be he never so leaud or badde, but does believe,
otherwise he should be termed a Turk, and not a Christian: why then are they
adjudged unto such an accursed sentence? Even for their badde deeds and ungodly
actions.

For be they not the very words of the Almighty, when he shall sit in his
high Throne, at the last day in judgment? Depart from me, ye workers of
iniquity into Hell fire: and not, Away from me, ye faithless wretches, who
have not believed aright.

What ouerthrewe Lucifer? only his badde deeds. He presuming to dare to sit,
in the place of his Sovereign, and not his default of Faith. For he could nor
believe ill, seeeing that he visiblie saw, that which (Faith) commands us to
believe.

What drove our first father Adaw out of Paradise? what, but his badde
dealings: for which he was chastised? What damned Judas? even that horrible and
terrible wickedness, which he committed against his own conscience.

That there is a recompense for living well, and a punishment for doing ill:
the Holy one, himself instructs us, when he used this speech unto Caine:
If thou have done justly, shall thou not receive thy reward? and if ungodly,
shall not sin then stand knocking at thy gate? He using here this word
(Reward) which cannot be, without deserving of the same.

For upon what occasion should such a one be remunerated with a rich reward,
who has done nothing worthy of any recompense? And yet nevertheless, seeing
God does promise a guerdon unto him that does well: we must needs conclude,
that good works deserves it, and that without them, faith is dead.

The only Son of the everlasting Father, used the same words, when speaking
of the Scribes and Pharisees, (who made a show to do good works) he said
thus) Verily, verily, I say unto you, these people have received the reward
of their works already in this world.

By which we may conclude, that there is an other world to come, in which,
these wicked Hypocritas had been recompensed for their works: If, they had not
had their due, whilst they lived here upon the earth. And hereby we learn,
that there is a reward due unto good works, and that therefore, they are not
unprofitable (but (I say) not meritorious) although there have been such as
have denied this doctrine, because they might live without discipline, to have
the rain of liberty in their own hands, and not to be subject unto Justice: to
compass which, they have denied the commendations of good works; to the end,
that every body might do evil, without fear of punishment, seeing that
doing well, should be no more requited, then if they had committed evil.

But o ye hellish spirited, what wicked vices, what Tyrannous cruelty, what
open robberies, and what base villainies, have your fond and beastly errors
brought into this world? For (before these your gross opinions) were set
abroach, no disordinate leaudnes reigned amongst us, all Murder, Robbing,
Treason, Cosenage, and deceit, being quite banished from us: whereas (now) such
wicked minds, as you have seduced, covet, rather to do ill then well, because
they feared no punishment for the same, and that their good works were not (as
they thought) recompensed at all.

But many Authorities show you to Lie, yea, and natural Justice it self,
does tell you that you are in the wrong.

For wherefore did that Master command his bad servant to be punished, who had
not employed his Talent well, that was given unto him at his departure: but
that such as are workers of iniquity, shall one day be punished? And that
those, who like other good servants, have taken grrat pains, and labored
well, shall be rewarded most bountifully, as they were of their Master.

Daniel the Prophet teaches us the very same doctrine, when he advised
Nabuchedonozer, not alone to believe, (to the intent he may be pardoned for
his fault) but to show the fruits of good works: as to give Alms unto the
poor, and to do many other deeds of Charity, (which as the Apostle says)
is the most goodliest and holiest of all the other virtues. For this shall
never die, but always remain fresh and alive: whereas Faith shall cease, at
what time we shall behold that great GOD, face to face, in whom we have
believed; the hope whereof shall fail, when we enjoy that divine glory, which
we expect and look for. But divine Charity shall still flourish, because we
shall never give over to remember (our acquaintance and friends, with whom we
have lived here upon the earth, although we live in heaven, praising God for
them.

This was the reason that the Apostle said, Although I were able (through
Faith) to remove Rocks, from one place into an other: yet, if I be without
Charity, I am like unto on empty Cimball, which can do nothing but make a
confused noise.

Small good then does Faith without good works. Ananias and Saphira did
believe, nor were they void of Faith: and yet behold, how they were plagued
with death, by Saint Peter, because they had done a most wicked and dissembling
deed.

For only Charity and not Faith, covers the loathsomenesse, and the
multitude of sins, as a garment does the privy parts of man.

And as that King at the Marriage, commanded that fellow to be cast into a
dungion of darkness, where was nothing, but wailing and gnashing of teeth,
because he presumed to come unto the Feast, without his wedding garment.

Even so, he that will not attire him self with the comely roabe of Charity,
shall be delivered into the power of the Devil, as one unworthy to be admitted
to come unto the Banquet of Angels.

Of small force then is Faith, without Good works: which our Savior witnesses
to be true, when he attributes the remission of Marie Magdalens sins, unto
the good work which she had done for him, she having used such Charity unto
her Master: and therefore he said, Many sins are forgiven her, because she
loved much.

Now Love and Charity, are, as it were Twins, and but one body; for he
that loves not, cannot be kind unto his adversary: and therefore, the
foresaid Marie, by reason that she had loved, and had showed her self dutiful
unto our Savior, gained full forgiveness of her sins: of whose kindness,
Christ had spoken thereof (unto his Disciples saying; Wherefore are you angry
with this Woman? she has done a good work for me, and therefore deserves
well of me.

I see then, by these examples, that thou (most gracious Lord) expectest good
works to come from man, because thine are so admirable: thou having taught us,
by the example of that Prince, that put to death those wicked Laborers, in his
Vineyard, how thou will recompense such godly persons, as have done well, and
wilt punish the wicked, whom thou shall find to have done evil.

Let us then endeavor by our virtuous living, to be made partakers of that
immortal glory, which follows well doing, the sweetness of which, the
very Painims themselves found, in former time.

For, how famous is Hercules become in the world, only for doing well, and
for putting in practice many notable and brave enterprises? Where if he had
done otherwise, black shame, and perpetual infamy, had for ever attended
upon him.

Thus did the melancholic Shepherd discourse unto himself, walking fair and
softly toward the Cave, whilst as he went onwards on his way, he might hear
the melodious harmony of diverse sorts of Birds, to welcome the rising of the
Sun, which although they troubled him somewhat (considering his former deep
conceits) yet no doubt he took delight at the same, if it be possible for
wretched Lovers to take any pleasure, when they are exiled from the presence
of their beaution? Ladies, as I fear me, they do not.

Besides, he might behold a number of lovely Flowers, to show their
vermillion faces, at the first appearance of this glorious Lamp, all which,
were causes to comfort himself.

This journey being no more weary unto him, then it is unto such Travelers,
who when they walk abroad (devise of such things only, as may inuit them to
solace and joy) whilst he thought the heavens had changed their nature, willing
to yield him some recteation and contentment, considering the great number of
afflictions that he had suffered before.

But he was not long of this opinion, but that he quickly changed his mind,
finding it to be quite contrary, as soon as LOVE awaked him out of this
pleasant dream, and when he (once) bethought him of the absence of his froward
Mistress.

He that is troubled with a burning Fever, has many dangerous fittes. One
while, he is vexed with a hot sweat, and another while, with a cold. One
day it leaves him, and an other day it seazeth upon him again. So that still
the strength of the disease, does dominiere over his body.

Even so, this our wretched Swain, falls a fresh into the Sea of his
sorrows, suffering shipwreck (oftentimes) in this Charibdis, of his deep
griefs, all which proceeded through the want of his Dianas company.

And had it not been, but that he had heard the sound of a strange voice,
that drove away this sad thought from him, he had been far more oppressed
with heavy passions then before.

But he, (with an attentive ear) hearing this Song, (sung not far off from
him) took a Truce for a while, with his doleful wailings, and listened well
unto the same, as follows.

What but pale Death can serve as remedy,
To ease my more then cruel pain?
The Pilot that safe in the Haven does lie,
To fear the Seas tempestuous rage does shame.
She happy is, that in this wretched earth,
Can rid be from all woes, through gentle death.
But she that cannot die, (living displeasde)
Forced without aid, for to endure her smart:
Can no way have her endless torments easde,
But by her cries and sighs, sent forth from heart.
But who can make a Sauadge mind ore-wilde,
For to become calms, pitiful, and mild?
The Mother fair, of Cupid's, blinded Boy,
Could not her Corpse from soul see separate:
Yet for Adonis, she was full of noy,
Seeing him slain, by too untimely Fate.
Immortal powers, though freed from Death they be,
Yet (being grieved) they mourn as well as we.
Apollo that same faithful Lover true,
When he saw Daphne metamorphosed:
Died not, yet he her chance long time did rewe,
For Love makes Gods to wail, and tears to shed.
Death ends every amorous mortal war,
Yet in such wise to die, they happy are.
I am a Nymph, therefore (as Phoebus was)
From death exempt, so am I, yet am bound:
My time and years in sighs and groans to pass,
Whilst overmuch I against my self am found.
To honor him, who is my deadliest fee,
But where Love is, there ever bideth woe.
Yet does that cruel wretch (who me does scorn)
Not altogether live withouten grief:
Though for my love to wail he was not borne,
Whilst my hope's vain, and his without relief.
A Loyal Lover right is never seen,
Well of two Ladies, at one time to deem.
Thus do the heavens, reuengement (for me) take,
And yet alas, this does increase my cares:
For (me) his torments worser far do make,
And I am ill, because not well he fears.
She that loves faithful, makes far more mons
For her friends hard mishap, then for her own.
A beauty more then earthly sacred right,
The Subiect's of my everlasting dule:
Whilst I confess, I, like a mortal wight,
And yet the heavens, who all our actions rule,
Nothing more perfect then the same ere saw,
The bad, as well as good, to fancy does us draw.
Arcas, presently knew by the voice, that it was the mestfull Orythia, and
fearing least her importunate prayers might make him to give over his former
determination, he left her, turning by another way unto the Rock.

In the mean time, the Nymph perceiving him to fly from her presence, cries
out upon him, exclaiming against his stubborn mind, and calling him
ungrateful and unkind. Where we will leave her (as now) cursing her hard
fortune, and come again unto Arcas, (who being entered into the stony Cave,
and the old man (not as yet arrived there) began afresh to muse upon the sweet
graces of his Mistress, swimming with great delight in the Seas of her
perfections, and not a little wondering how it were possible, that one creature
alone should be possessed of so many favors as she was, and yet knows he not
well whether he dreameth or waketh, whilst he standing (thus) in a brown
study, his tongue is silent, his eyes shut, his body mouelesse, and his soul
as it were in a trance. Now if he was so much ravished, in the only
contemptation of his Lady, in what a taking had he been then, if he had been
before the true presence, and lively face of her indeed, when the only bare
conceit thereof, had so great power over him? He deuiseth within his heart of
the beauties of her, and with a dumb pen, writes them down in the of role of
his remembrance.

One while he thinks, he beholds those fair, long, and flaxen hairs, she
combining them, with a fine comb of Iuorie, and curling them in knots, making
the heavens themselves to blush for very shame thereat, although they have been
in steed of strong cords, wherewith his liberty was bound, yet had he not the
power to hate them, but (rather) honored and adored them, imagining that Venus
her self, never ware any so goodly, and that not any Goddess whatsoever she
were, could have the like, these Lovers being of this humor, that there is no
other deities but their Ladies. Another while he is busy, looking upon her
fair forhead (the right tipe of Maicstie) persuading himself, that Jupiter
(although he be Sovereign over all the Gods) had never one so stately, whilst
he marketh how it is large, and without wrinkle, as being the enemy of all
sorrow, cruelty, and dishonor.

Then he admireth her eyebrows, thin, lovely brown, and hating all care,
supposing verily that the Goddess Diana, had never any so pretty. Belike
then, this Nymph had berest all the Gods, and Goddesses of their best beauties?
No doubt in his conceit they had, so much did he doat on her Love.

This done, he comes down somewhat lower unto her eyes, apprehending the
brightness of them, although they were far off from him.

As that Captain that is overcome, knows well the valor of him that did
vanquish him, or as the Shepherd remembers the lightning which flashed upon
his flock as they fed in the Meadow, even so did he suppose he (still) felt
new darts, which she whirled at him: for grievous is the thought of sad and
heavy things, they being the Parents of all our disasters. Ah (said he unto
himself) how beautiful are her eyes? and yet not so beautiful, as piercing
and terrible, resembling those of Circes, fair to see, and beautiful to
behold, and yet, who looked upon them, was changed from a man, into a beast.

They are both fair and cruel, fair to view, shining as the Sun does in
the springtime, that drives away all bitter weather: and cruel as the
Basiliske, whose only sight, kills such as does but behold her.

There is the lodge of Love, with whom disdain and fiercenes soiourne, and
there sometimes does pleasure abide, but it is, when the other twain be
abroad, they having more interest in them, then she has. Hated they are, and
yet loved, as the young Scholar does his Master.

O sacred Love, that take religious fear with him, for his companion: and O
how just and goodly a thing is Amity, when it is married unto awful respect,
although (far from them) the flame is nevertheless felt, as those who stand
behind the foremost at a fire, perceive the heat thereof also, as well as they
that stand before.

So does the traitor Ixion thrown down with lightning into hell, fear and
suspect the flashy lightning of Jupiter.

Having left her eyes, he comes unto her nose, neither too big, nor too
little, but comely, and of a most excellent proportion, in the making thereof.

The eyes, nor nose of Palace, the Goddess of battle, are not more amiable,
nor more angry, although she be fierce and courageous in martial exploits.
From thence he comes unto her lips, where he is drowned in a poole of
sweetness, when he does but think of the dainty color, and the rare softnes
thereof, whilst desiring in his mind, but to touch them, through joy and
fear, he falls into a sownd.

The more sweet and soft he judges them to be, the more he finds his grief
to be bitter, because he cannot touch them. A man cares not to enjoy a matter
of sinall weight or value, but to be hindered from the possession of a rich
treasure, gaulleth him at the very heart.

Never were the Cloue Gilliflowers in June, half so dainty, neither the
Damask Roses of the spring, a quarter so beautiful as these, yet were they
ruddie like the Roses, but far more dangerous to be touched: for her pure
honor, and her chaste thoughts, were the pricking thorns, which would not
permit any to approach nere unto that peerlesse musk tree. More soft and
supple were they then the lips of Juno, when Jupiter did kiss them, and more
tender, and lovely, then those of bashful Europa, or blushing Alcest.

Now he remembers that goodly rank of orient Pearl, emprisoned between two
Rocks of right Currall, from which issued forth such hunnie words, as ravished
his soul, not unlike unto Orphens, who forced senseless creatures to follow
him, with the sound of his well tuned Harp.

Never did Mercury talk more gravely or more eloquently then she, although he
was appointed to be Ambassador for the Gods: great was his grief, when he
found himself deprived from so happy a place, from whence (sometimes) he had
heard so many wise and admirable speeches, to proceed from his Lady, he being
with the only remembrance thereof, so much enchanted, as his soul was not
willing to return back into his body again, not having power to leave her,
no more then the dumb stones and budding Trees were of force to retire from the
entising Music of the Thracian Poet.

From thence he came, unto her smiling and well formed cheek, no Queen Apple
drawn red, with the pensill of Phoebus, in the mouth of September, having so
lovely and natural a color. There was no need of cunning painting, nor
deceitful varnish, to abuse the eye, making the faces of women in time, far
more foul, then before: for what need has subtle Art (when courteous nature
has done her part) to find any devise, seeking to better, what she rather
makes worse?

The check of Semele, never came near in beauty, unto her pure die: not
unlike that dainty morning, wherein the Sun shines in his pride; or like
unto a piece of fair white Alablaster, mixed with a little vermillion red. Her
neck was slender and thin, rising up with state, like a curious small Turret
in a Princely palace. Her dimpled chinne was pretty and round. But her
beauteous breasts exceeded all the rest. There lay the mountain snow which
could never be dissolved with the heat of any Sun. There was the privy
chamber and closet royal, of honor and chastity. And there was that
crystal River of pure milk, where Cupid (being weary of playing the wanton)
used to bath and refresh himself very often. And there, the same God was wont
to repose himself, betwixt those two beautiful Apples, they being far more
precious, then that golden fruit of the Hesperides: yet were they hard as
Diamonds, although the chief glory of that race present.

Her hands pleased him much, seeing them so fair, so long and so supple, the
fingers whereof, were excellent Musitions, most divinely playing upon the
silver Lute, and well tuned Cytherne.

To be brief, never was there any creature so exquisite and excellent in all
points as she was (in his conceit) he comparing her first unto the three
Goddesses, assembled upon the mount Ida: then unto the Nymphs: and lastly, unto
mortal women: accounting her to be far more fair, then that great Lady so
often ravished: or more beauteous then the Love of Demetrius, or Mark Antonies
sweet Saint: yea, Flora and Angelica, were but homely pieces unto her, nor all
such gallant Lasses, as flourished heretofore, or should come hereafter.

Thus was our Swain ravished, with the rare feature of his worthy Mistress,
and as the covetous wretch sigheth, when he comes to count in small sums,
the great treasures he has been spoiled of, even so did Arcas take on and
lament, when he began to dream deeply of the greatness of his unsupportable
loss.

Mean space, the Sun began (openly) to appear, waking men out of their
drowsy sleeps, opening their eyes, and prying with his beams into their
chambers, when the old manrising, and coming into the Rock, found our
Shepherd so busy (about musing of his Mistress) as he perceived not, when he
was entered, and therefore he came near unto him, and saluted him, whilst the
other stood stone still, like unto a Rock, resembling that statue of salt,
into which the wife of Lot was turned; which the old Magitian perceiving, he
came and pulled him by the sleeue, saying; How now (man) what cheer? where is
your mind now? and why suffer you it so long, before it do his ordinary
duty?

That damage, which a senseless creature does (over whom his Master has
power) is laid upon him, and not upon the beast. We ought wisely to rule, what
is committed unto us to govern: which if it be so, then why do not thou
look unto thy soul, but rather do permit her to wander (thus) abroad,
seeing that without her thou see-mest as a dead creature? Call home for shame,
call home (I say) thy wits together, and resolve to submit thy self unto the
judgment of the Gods, and to do as they shall command thee: for our griefs
move not them, neither do our tears, appease their rigor toward us.

Ah Father answered the Shepherd, how can he who has no more power over his
slave (because he has past over his freedom unto another) dispose of him and
command him, as he was wont? and how will thou that I bear sway over my soul,
having none within me, since I have resigned it unto my Lady, who disposes
thereof, as she best pleases.

And herein I resemble that miserable merchant, whose ship being driven against
a Rock, scarce saves his naked self, having before seen all his goods and
servants to be cast away and drowned: or rather, I am like unto that hapless
Duke of Ithaca, who having but one poor leaking vessel, got a shore, through
the help of the Sea Nymph.

Can he whom the cruel Law has subjected under the will of another (and being
his poor drudge and slave) do as he feign would, and dispose of himself as
he lists? You know he cannot: neither can I do as I would, but as I may, for
I am my Mistress slave, and although she is not with me, yet my heart (which
serves in steed of a Table unto Love, to draw her beautiful conceit)
presents her every minute before me, so as I seem to see her lively, the
sight whereof does take away my senses from me: for worthy things causes us to
burn, in love of them, and with a sweet kind of force, draw us (of our own
accord) to come unto them.

Then marvel no more, though thou find me thus out of temper. If mere
grief, be of power to procure death, then what may Love do, which not only
seazeth upon the body, but likewise upon the soul? scarce had I wet the
soales of my feet, entering into this wide Ocean of sundry conceits, when thou
withdrewest me from the same, as that careful father does his harmless child
from the brim of some pit, wherein he might fall, and be drowned. But alas,
what would thou have me to do? Suffer me I pray thee, and let me alone in
my musing, for there is nothing more pleasant unto a woeful man, then to dream
of such delights as he has once tasted, because (as then) he thinks still to
taste them. I was dreaming of that contentment which the company of my Diana
has heretofore brought me, why then have thou disturbed me in the same? when
perhaps I shall not encounter with so sweet a thought I know not when again,
and the rather, for that a leven hours and three quarters of a day, are
destined for the mishap of man, and only one poor quarter appointed for his
contentment: of which small space of time, many have been deprived, in the
number of which I am the chief.

No no, replied the old man. Not to think of misfortunes, makes a man as
happy as if he had never been afflicted with any: for he cannot be said to be
sick, that lives without any feeling of grief or disease: so he is not
wretched, that never remembers his former disasters, the thought whereof is
the occasion that makes us so sad. Drive then these idle fancies out of thy
brain.

Hardly could courteous Dido entreat the wandering Prince of Troy, to repeat
and report the overthrow of his country, although he was much beholding unto
her, for irksome is the calling to mind of such matters.

Away then with these toys, and begin thy discourse, where thou last did
leave, which will like thee better, and the rather, when thou shall account thy
happy fortunes.

Ah good father (answered Arcas) never has my tongue been used to talk of any
good fortune, that has happened unto me heretofore (for few or none have I had)
but only to sigh forth my strange and woeful losses.

What Sun have these my drerie eyes ever beheld, without new floods of
tears? and what darkesome night has covered them with never so heavy a
sleep, but that fresh griefs have grown before the break of day within my
soul? My woeful pilgrimage in this unconstant world, has always been
unlucky, dismal and unfortunate, and therefore I would to God, that death had
abridged the same.

But why should you think that I could live (and languish thus) without
bethinking me of my loss? Nothing pincheth the heart more, then a man's
overthrow, because it is long before he can recover himself again, and for
that it will ask much labor and pain: yea, it is so deeply inprinted within
us, that although we have in time repaired and amended our selves, yet still
there remains some one mark or another, that galleth us, even at the very
quick.

Who ever saw man (having endured great hinderance and mishaps) but that he
sometimes thinks thereon, yea and now and then bewaileth the same, although
he have never so great a courage? We are (all) good registers of such
adversities as happen unto us, but not of prosperity: and sooner can we call
to mind an injury done unto us, then remember a benefit or good turn, which
we have received: for this old sin of our great grandlire Adam, draws us
always, rather unto bad, then good.

This is the reason, that men for the most part are naturally given sooner to
slander, then to defend the good name and credit of their neighbous: and so
likewise this is the cause, I so lively feel and apprehend the remembrance of
my calamities, not wishing any thing so much, as to be confined within some
Rock alone like a Recluse; to the end, I might the better meditate upon them,
and the more bitterly bewail them.

Now (quoth the old gray-beard) I see thou art in the wrong, for we must not
have our eyes always upon the earth, but sometimes we must as well look up
toward heaven.

Wherefore serves this divine reason, which makes us Lords over all other
creatures, if by her aid we repulse not such mortal passions, as come into
the world with us? And to what end does a father send his Son unto the
University, most willingly defraving his charges, if he should not learn and
enrich himself in knowledge? Even so, why should we be counted reasonable? and
wherefore has our God done so much for us, If we cannot through the aid and
help of reason, wade through the depth of these humane miseries?

To what purpose has a General of an Army Royal, hundreds of Captains, and
thousands of Soldiers, if he does not employ them in the wars, but rather
permits the enemy to overthrow them? As victuals, are set upon the Table,
whereon to feed, so is reason bestowed upon us, to vanquish our natural
passions, and most deadliest crosses.

Neither can any justly excuse themselves, when they shall confess to have
been overcome, through these mortal impediments, seeing they were armed with
weapons to resist them, which are discretion and reason. The brute beasts,
that have lost their little ones (although they have no wisdom) take not on
more, neither show more tokens of folly and rage, then that man does, who
suffers himself to be carried away with grief, and yet in the meant time he
is called their Lord and Master, because of reason only: but he is much
unworthy of this Sovereignty, if he knows no better how to exercise his
royal dignity then they: as he is unmeet and unfit to have the name of a
King, who as a Tyrant does most unjustly violate the Laws of the Realm,
overthrowing all Justice, and all good orders, belonging unto the same. Either
thou must be a man or a beast, if thou art a man, then carry thy self like a
man, rightly employing reason, which makes thee one.

If thou be a beast, never then steal away this quality belonging unto man,
contenting thy self with that which is fit for a beast, and so shall thy fault
be the less. For we wonder not so much at an offense done by a beast, neither
condemn him unto death for the same, because (as a beast) we know him to be
without reason. But man we punish severely, for that he (being a man) ought not
to commit any such heinous crime, but rather governing himself by reason,
seek to shun and avoid the danger thereof.

We cannot deem the opinion of an ignorant person, and one without knowledge,
to be cruel or bad, especially when he judges according unto his small skill:
but wicked and unjust, may we term the sentence of a wise and learned Judge,
if he shall give his censure, contrary to all reason and Law.

Show then thy self to be a man, and a right man indeed, choosing Reason for
thy guide, by which means thou shall tame thy senseless desires, and keep
under these more then extreme passions.

Good, and of great force (reverend sire) replied the Shepherd, were your
persuasions, if you spoke unto a free man, who because he is not bound unto
another, might easily through the help of reason vanquish his natural
imperfections.

But although the slave, may perhaps do a thing worthy of commendation, yet,
think you he dares attempt it, without the good will of his Master? Even so,
although Lovers were fit to bring to pass, as much as you speak of, and to
master their mortal passions, through reason, yet are they so shroadly bound
and tied unto this hard Law, as they are not able to do any commendable or
good thing, unless it please Love, who forces them to be slaves unto their
Ladies.

The Bear, by nature is wild and strong, yet, when he is taken, bound, and
made tame by a man, what great proofs of his strength can he show? Even so I
will not deny, but man is wise, and furnished with reason, and yet I say he
cannot aid nor help himself, as long as he shall be subject unto Cupids
Laws.

A King, that is a prisoner, is for all that a King still, his Realm is, where
it was before, and so is his Crown and Scepter, and yet notwithstanding all
this, during his imprisonment, he can do no act of a King, neither make proof
of his regal authority, because he is deprived of his liberty.

So fares it with men that are in love, they (still) are men, and yet
nevertheless, they cannot do the office of men, because they are Bondmen,
and subject unto the will of an other. Besides, if natural maladies, which as
thou say are subject unto the reason of man, oppress and overcome him many
times, causing him to fall mad and frantic; how much more easily may Love
enforce the same, who not only, is greater then these humane accidents, but
also then the Gods themselves?

Wonder not then, although you see many Lovers without wit or discretion; for
of two poisons, the less feeble, must yield unto the stronger: and where two
contrary enemies he, the field must needs remain unto him that is of most
force: so where two such great powers as Love and Reason meet together, the
weaker, must needs yield unto the other which is Love, that makes many Lovers
live with small or no reason at all.

To argue or dispute, that Love is of less force then Reason, were but a gross
error, (for the wisest next unto the Gods) have not only with reason confuted
this absurdity, but by experience it self, have tried as much, in their own
proper persons.

Let us then excuse Lovers in their unreasonable actions, which appertain
only unto men, as Jupiter winketh at them, for breaking their Oaths: and blame
me no more, if I (as a wretched caitife and slave) am forced (maugre my self)
to give over that, that is most excellent and rare in man, to follow the will
of my Master, at whose command I am.

Well then (said the Magitian) I will urge thee no more, for it is but reason
that he that is in health, yield gently unto the diseased in his conceit, and
that the fortunate, iump in opinion with such as are miserable, making show to
know of nothing, but what the other is willing; because they are already but
too much afflicted with their misfortunes, without galling them afresh,
crossing them in their speeches, and wringing out of them that, which they are
loath to bewray unto the world.

Let us therefore give over this disputation, yet with this conclusion, that
nothing can exceed the right wise man, and that no faults are to be excused
(through what extremities soever they shall proceed) in him, who will be
counted reasonable and wise, yielding somewhat unto Love, in thy favor: and
therefore prosecute thine old History, comforting thy mind with the
remembrance of such matters, as shall be more acceptable and pleasing unto
thee. Content answered the Shepherd, if there be no other remedy, and
thereupon after he had a while pawsed, he thus began.

What can be more gracious, unto a condemned person, then to hear of his
pardon? and what obligation is more dear unto a man, then that which does
cancel his debts?

Cruel and barbarous, ungodly and wicked were Brutus and Cassius accounted, in
that they slew Caesar (although they shadowed their fault under the color of
doing their common wealth good) because they had received their own lives of
him before, who might (if he so had pleased) have put them both to death.

So sweet was the pardon my Lady gave me, which quite changed my mind,
restored me to life, and drove away all desire of death from me.

Strange and extraordinary are the means, by which the Heavens lend aid and
assistance unto miserable men, especially, when they least expect any such
succor to be at hand. Thousands of dangers did constant Marius escape, and in
the end, came to be chief Ruler in Rome.

The Heavens are so courteous, as hardly will they suffer, that any man be
overthrown or undone, and few have there been, that have offered to lay
violent hands upon themselves, which they have not saved.

Being as then both iocund and merry, I feasted, and made much of poor
Fortunio, within my little Cabin, who upon a day, sitting at the Table with
me, began thus to talk.

Certainly, I will never marvel more, to see thy face portrayed forth with
grief, seeing thou love so fair a Lady. For far more dangerous and
difficult is his Travail who aduentureth beyond the Seas, to find such
curious marchandizes as be precious and rare, then the pains an other takes,
who is contented with such things as his own Country affords.

No more can thy enterprise be other then heavy and full of peril, thou
loving no ordinary Beauty, but such a one as is most peerlesse and admirable.
And therefore is thy mind more haughtier then other Lovers, who follow faces
less fair then thine by odds.

But yet let this be thy comfort, that the more thou do hazard thy self in
this so dangerous an Attempt, the more glorious shall the victory be, when
thou shall obtain the same. For not matters of small importance, but such as
be hard and unlikely to be achieved, deserve honor. Virtue oftentimes making
her self known amongst foul Vices, as the Sun does in midst of the
stars.

But I pray thee tell me, who set thee in hand with this second Task: and
what gentle God heated thee with this other flame? seeing thou so long time,
did vow service unto the divine Iulietta; who when she shall know hereof,
will condemn thee for changing, and account thee as one fickle and unconstant.

Ah Fortunio, (replied I) none can justly conceive such finister opinion of
me. For do not thou know, that my Loves were never other then honest and
commendable?

I never loved the Body of any woman, so much as I did her soul. It was the
beauty of the mind, and not the perfection of her personage that I esteemed,
and therefore do not thou (call to membrie) that only sighs, have been the
fruits of my loves?

He cannot be termed a Thief or Robber, that likes and seeks for all such
qualities, as Virtue makes amiable, in any subject, where they are found.

Neither will the wise be angry, or offended at all, that their equals are
accounted of, and that their perfections are honored and blazed abroad, as
well as their own be.

Long since, the ancient Sages of Sparta, never fell out amongst themselves,
nor were jealous, the one of the other, if many of them had cast their
affection upon one goodly child or other: because, they all striving to
exceed one an other in good will, endeavored within themselves, to bring up
the same youth, to be as perfect as might be.

How then, can my famous Iulietta condemn me, (or once think ill of me?) if
I (having heretofore exalted, carrolized, and blazoned abroad, her rare
Thewes,) do now take Truce with my Pen, to the end I might the more casilie
bestow a little time, in displaying, (by my writings) the excellent gifts of
an other Lady, who does participate with her Virtues?

The love that a kind Father bears unto one of his Children, does not hinder
him, but that he may make much of the rest. And the white color that one
esteems of, (in his own conceit) is no such let, but that he may (as well)
like, what is sable and black.

This word Unconstant, or Wanering, is meant by such sensual and voluptuous
Lovers, as seek and hunt after pleasure only, (delighting also in change)
and never making account of Virtue, as I do.

For of what Inconstancy can the fair and learned Iulietta tax me, if
(without having broken my word unto her) I honor her, as much as ever I did
before? Whereas, cruel should that honor be unto me, and hardly should she
deal with me, if she should forbid me to reverence and esteem of an other
Lady, who deserves the same dutious respect as she does: As a jealous
Husband is cruel and unkind unto his chaste wife, if he shall prohibit and
hinder her, to love such qualities as are commendable and praise-worthie.

Honest Affection is not like unto foolish Love, for the one bears and
endures many things with patience, it being possible for one man to love many
virtuous sparits, without reproach, and all at one time: where the foolish
Lover cannot love ante more, then one fond woman at once: except he be counted
a Cozoner and forsworn. He cannot be judged to be wise and of discretion, who
(for his own respect) will seek to hinder in what he may, that such things
as are virtuous and commendable, should not be liked, nor accounted of.

But such a one is not of himself, worthy of any (Love) at all: For to
oppose ones self against the honor which is given unto Virtue, is to be her
mortal enemiet Virtue being worthy to be reverenced and prised, in what
manner soever she is found, as a rich Ring, is to be accounted of, upon what
finger soever it is put.

Poor was Homer, and yet his Learning brought him to be respected, he having
had (bestowed upon him) thousands of Honors, worthy of eternal glory, yet if
he should have sought to have swallowed up all these great Favors done unto
him, and have studied by all the means he could to cross others that
deserved well, seeking to keep them back from such dignities, as were awarded
unto them: he not only should have been counted both gross and ignorant, but
also spiteful, malicious, and ill given.

And so would the world repute of the matchless Iulietta, if she should
stomach and take in ill part, that her equals should have such praise, as
they but worthily merit. For although now I love Diana, yet do I not (any
way) give over to like Iulietta.

But the Schoole-maister sometimes gives over teaching, granting leave unto
his Scholar to go play: not suffering him always to stand poaring upon his
book: Even so, I most humble must entreat her, to permit me for a while, to
sound forth the praises of Diana abroad, as I have (already) done hers.

But now repose thy self Fortunio, and take thy quiet rest, for I perceive
thou art as yet weary of thy great travail and labor, and we will hereafter
find a more convenient leisure, to talk of these our old matters.

Whereupon, the poor soul took me at my word, and being (very willing to
sleep indeed,) presently went and laid him down upon a bed, where he
rested soundly.

Mean while, (upon the sudden) I was joyful, as that Captain, who (having
with stood the brunts and hazardes of Fortune,) returns home, victour of the
field: composed these Verses following.

A fierce LOVE, that burned have my heart with mild flame,
In my Mistress sweet thoughts, thoughts for me too high, to reach too:
And with deep desire, do make me for to adore her.
Ah proud LOVE, that like our wailings, laugh'st for to see still,
Our Breasts wounded all with goare, through heavenly Beauty,
Through glaunce of such sparkling Eyes, as into our souls diue.
After so much done unto me, now have thou the courage
After so many hurts thou have done me, now for to help me?
And to abridge my pains? Speak (sweet Desire) I do pray thee.
Ah, but alas, what a Folly were it for me to thinkese?
Thy cruelty, thou nere gi^est over; Thou to the world comst
Our Faults severely to punish, as the Gods Hangman.
Mars, by (their sufferance) knew thy too wanton a Mother.
When thou into the world wast brought forth, like to a Bastard.
Of Female bloodshed the art Son, and of bloody murder:
Foul fall thee therefore, that have most shamefully cousned
Thousands of Heroic spirits, whom we do Gods call:
Can thou then falsely breaking the laws of thy Byrth-right,
Courteous (now) become, and be not like to thy Father?
Can thou prove better then thy Mother, who was an Harlot?
No, no: for ripe Grapes from Thistles, never can we gather:
Nor can I hope (once) well, that thou being proud, ever after
Have mind Gentle, to turn for my good, good for to do me.
No (LOVE) I confess, I not deserve, whom I do honor,
Worthy sh^e is for the Gods, and too too fure is she, for me.
Too too unworthy I am, to enjoy her, whom I do love so,
Only to think that I love so fair a soul, does appease pain.
All my pain, and my torments, though they be as immortal,
When I remember, that in her lives, what is adorned;
How that the wisdom is in her of Pallas, abounding,
How that portly Gate of Juno, is in her walking.
And how for Beauty (as Venus, she is a Goddess.
Then go thy ways (Cupid,) pack hence, for well am I pleased,
Thy help, nor thine aid to assist me, ought do I care for.
Happier I can never be, then when I behold her.
Whom I do highly prise, reverence, and obey, above all things.
And far more then pleasures false, (Lusts chiefest Allurings)
Which fond Loners buy full dear, joys, which soon do away flitte,
And likewise kill us, long, long before our time's come.
I do not honor her, (for to dishonor her) for her
Virtues are that I like, so they her mind have adorned.
For where Virtue is, there is a mind, Unconquered ever.
Nor will I crane any other guerdon, whilst I do live here.
What Is divine will I love, and what is worthily steemed,
For such praise has she won, as she shall live everlasting.
These Verses I kept, to present them unto my Diana, hoping to find her in the
same good mind, as I left her, and to gain some one small favor or other for
my reward of her. But things that are framed slightly, are of little or no
account of all: and war it self, has not so many devises and sundry
effects, but LOVE has far many more.

And yet no marvel, for he being a tender and delicate child, cannot choose,
but by nature must needs be mutable and unconstant: And therefore it is no
small misfortune unto men, that are forced to obey, not a grave, and well
experimented Master.

But this peevish Boy, from whom want of years, takes away all knowledge of
Reason, which as we grow in body, so does it sprout forth in us; For
wretched is that Realm, that is governed by a Child: because very hardly
without stumbling, can a blind man lead another, without a light.

Now I being merry at the heart, and as iocund as might be, went to see if I
could find out my Mistrisse, when thinking to have no reason, nor occasion at
all to fear, I then found her quite contrary unto my hopeful expectation.

As Mowers are wonderfully amazed, when as (the Sun shining fair and
clear) they see upon the sudden, great showers of rain to stream down,
with many horrible flashings of Lightning and Thunder, (and much like unto a
blustering Tempest) a terrible Whirle-winde, breaking forth of the prisons of
Aeolus, carrying away their green heaps of grass, and other things, (as a
troop of Wolves do bleating Sheep) so that in the end, they are forced to
throw away their sickles and Sithes, not once dreaming of any such pitiful
chances before: Even so happened it unto me, I not looking for any such hard
fortune.

Never went any thing more nearer unto my heart then this did, I being so
daunted therwithall, as I was almost at the point of death. For having sought
out my Lady, whom: I expected should be as courteous and debonaire, as I had
left her the day before, I found her quite and clean altered from her former
disposition; she looking upon me with a most fierce and disdainefull
countenance, not vouchsafing so much as to speak one mild word unto me, or to
accept of my Verses, which I (in humble wise did offer unto her.

Alas (thought I) what means this? and how contrary are the proceedings of
LOVE, unto all other things? For they change always, and this their sudden
alteration, alters still against the hope of Lovers.

Other men seeing their business to fall out well, look for some happy issue
thereof. But in Love, when our matters are prettily well, and likely to prove
best, then are we driven most of all to fear; and when they are past all
hope, then have we the chiefest cause to expect the best.

If this encounter was not far more bitter and unfortunate, then the meeting
of a Thief is unto the wayfaring man, judge you (good Father,) for it is too
grievous a Corsiue unto the innocent person, to be condemned unto death, and
yet not so much as once to hear nor understand his just defenses in the same.
But in the mean time, I must perforce swallow down this unwelcome Potion.

As the Slave that is run away, being taken and brought back again unto
his Lord, trembles and fears sore, being forced to endure what punishment
soever, shall be inflicted upon him.

Even so, there was no other remedy, but that I must needs abide the
displeasure of my Misters, and take patiently, what it should please her for to
impose upon me. I know not whether any old conceit coming afresh into her
mind, had changed her former humor, or whether some other new opinion
(conceived without reason,) had made her so outrageous or disdainefull toward
me. But whatsoever it was, never did I see her to look so angerlie upon me
before.

As the Master of a Ship is passing sad and heavy, who having gotten
very nigh unto the Haven, and beginning to cast Anchor, perceives himself to
be carried back again into the maine Sea, by a sudden storm, his Ship
being ready to run upon every Rock, and so to sink and drown.

Even so it was my luck to perish even in the Havens mouth, and being escaped
of a sickness, then to die upon the sudden.

And thus you see how just my complaints were. For more cruel are those darts
which unlooked for pierce us, then those that we know of: and more sharp is
the pain, that comes upon the sudden, then when we did (before) expect it.

Being then fallen into this sudden mischaunce, I knew not what order to
take, nor what resolution to resolve upon, but only such as desperate wretches
use, which was to make away my self, and to have recourse unto the selfsame
death, which I had heretofore chosen, whereby I might rid me of my torments.

And now I was entering into that great and beaten path of desperate caytifs,
hoping by this means to bring an end to all my troubles: which dangerous course
I had quickly taken, had not the curreous heavens, been more pitiful unto
me, then I was unto my self, making vain and frustrate my former intention
and meaning.

O how hard is it (sometimes) for a man to die, and sometimes again, how
easily may he dispatch himself?

The wise man says, that man's life is as brittle as glass, that is, quickly
broken: and yet notwithstanding, many live longer then they would, wishing to
die, although they cannot. For such as go merrily unto their deaths, because
they hope their miseries shall end with their lives, lament not at all for the
loss thereof, but rather think, they have a happy turn. As the sick
Patient that courageously swalloweth down his bitter Pills, which if he were
well and in health, were never able to do it.

Being thoroughly resolute what to do, I now gave over weeping and sighing,
only I accused my Destinies; making me one while fortunate, and then again
miserable. Whilst in the mean space, I did a little complain of my Mistrisse,
but yet with such respect, and in such a reverend manner, as she could take no
exceptions against me at all.

This done, I went to die for her, and yet durst I not term her to be the
occasion of my death: Not unlike unto these holy and devout persons, (who
although they be plagued with all sorts of miseries,) neither dare, nor will
venture to call the Gods the Authors of their wretchedness.

Me thought I was but too fortnnate, to die for so worthy a subject, and that
I was ouer-bountifully recompensed (for all my troubles) to have that glory, as
to have seen my cruel Saint, for whom I dyed.

O faithful and loyal LOVE, that will not permit (what pains soever I
endured) that I should not complain of mine enemy.

So Pyramus dying for his Thisbes sake, thought not himself unfortunate:
neither accused her for his death. And so was I as willing to follow the same
course, as that brave Caualier of Rome was, who boldly leaped into the
swallowing Gulf: or like his Countryman, that with as great courage thrust
his fist into the fire.

A matter that is already well determined of, (be it never so hard,) is half
dispatched at the first: And there is nothing that loses more time, then
uncertain resolution.

I had now got up, upon the top of the same Rock (where I was before,)
minding to finish my loathed life, and was ready with a brave manly heart, to
fling my self down headlong into the bottom of the Sea, thinking to make my
self a Citizen of the kingdom of Thetis: when the Nymph Orythia, (who still
haunted me, but in vain, for my Love) caught hold of me by the arm,
hindering me from drowning my self, in those salt Ocean waves.

As that Traveler is astonished, who sees the Skies to change and skowle,
whilst the Clouds look dark and big with rain: even so was I amazed, when
I saw my self so strangely prevented of my purpose.

I knew not whether I should take this which she had done, in good part, or
in ill, she having disturbed me in my desperate Action: Whereupon, I looked
upon her, and sighing, as one that had been awaked out of a dead sleep, at
what time he dreamed of some pleasant matter, spoke thus unto her.

What is the reason (cruel as thou art) what is the reason I say, that thou
should thus oppose thy self against my good? What injury have thou
received at my hands, that thou should thus be a let and obstacle, unto the
ending of my miscries? and wherefore should thou bear so spiteful a
disdain, to see me rid of all my griefs and troubles?

Hard is my hap above all others, that when I am ready and willing to die,
to avoid these my more then insupportable torments, I am still crossed and
barred in this my chiefest desire.

Alack, Alack, how unlikely is it, that I shall find comfort whilst I live,
when being at the very point to die, I cannot find help to dispatch my self?

Go, go, hard-harted as thou art, withdraw thy self from me, (the chiefest
foe I have unto my rest) and let it suffice thee, (that my plagues abound too
much already) without thine aid, to make my wounds more mortal and deadly,
then they were before.

The Nymph (hearing me say so, replied thus.) Shepherd, Shepherd, if in the
old world there have been any, that for casting away themselves, have
deserved fame, (although they were far unworthy thereof,) yet was it for
some great occasion, and by reason of some laudable subject, and not for a
vain and trifeling matter, as thine is. And yet I will tell thee one thing,
that so far off is that man that murthereth himself, from true glory, to
challenge unto himself the name of Constant, as quite contrary to thy
conceit, he rather deserves shame and infamy. For he that is constant,
endures adversity, with the same countenance as he did prosperity, without
being moved or passionated, one iotte at all, as that worthy Roman Marius was.

Such as having not this resolute virtue of Constancy, and because they want
true courage of the mind, A Sentence.
to resist these worldly afflictions, (seek straitwayes how to rid
themselves of their lives) deserve no praise or commendations at all, but ought
to be accounted as most abject, and white-liuered Cowards.

Does he merit to taste of pleasure, that never suffered pain? to be a
commander, who never did obey? or to be partaker of honor, who never did
hazard himself to win the same? I think not.

Even so, such men deserve no grace nor favor of the Gods at all, who cannot
patiently bear out such tribulations, as are sent them from above, by reason
of their sins: A Seatence.
and therefore (thinking to escape them) go about to murder themselves.

Tell me I pray thee, shall the Governor of that City be excused from
blame, who whilst the Citizens thereof prospered, and all things went well
with them, is content to continue and rule amongst them? But no sooner does he
see Fortune, to turn her smiling face from them, then he gives them the
slip, putting them to shift as well as they can for themselves.

Cato is rather condemned then commended for killing himself, at what time his
Country had most need of him. Neither can he be rightly termed magnanimous,
having chosen so easy a death, to avoid a far greater evil; of which, he
seemed to acknowledge and confess to be vanquished and overcome, seeing he
durst not stay to make proof, An Example.
and encounter with the same. And yet is he worthy of far more praise, then
thou art. For he had a better color to shadow his death then thou have, whom
soolish LOVE, has thus overthrown.

Such cannot be called valiant and resolute, who for fear of suffering a
greater evil, cunningly choose the less, yielding themselves unto an easier
punishment, to avoid a far more cruel. As Sceuola cannot be said to have a
right brave mind, although he burnt his arm, escaping by that means Death,
which otherwise, he could not eschew, A Seatence.
being a far greater torment, then the firing of his fist.

Again, say that a man had all the occasions in the world, whereby he might
seem to have reason to massacre himself, and that it were impossible for him
to support and endure, the anguish and agonies of his ever increasing sorrows;
yet ought he still to expect and look for grace and favor from the heavens,
who after they have powered down upon us reign and storms, send us most fair
and comfortable weather.

There is none so wretched, but that at one time or another, tastes of the
goodness of the Gods, and though it be not by and by, yet comes it ere it be
long, so that, we ought always rather to hope the best, then to fear the
worst; for death is the last refuge of mortallmen, which nevertheless they ought
not to entertain, without leave of the superior power, A Searence.
the Law for bidding such to be capable of Christian burial (but having a
stake knocked into their bowels, to be laid in the common high ways) who as
Judas shall lay violent hands upon themselves, proclaiming them abroad, to be
worse then murderers and homicides, and making them infamous for ever.

Take heed then, that thou fall not into this labvrinth of shame. For if one
must needs die, he must have a great care of the preservation of his honor,
and so to order the matter, that after his death, his memory be not foully
sported with some black fault; for then is the time (when he is out of the
world) that a man is talked of, either well or ill: if well, then every one
lamenteth his absence and loss, declaring how necessary and profitable he was
unto his country: If ill, then do they speak the worst they can of him,
because they now fear him no more, knowing that dead men cannot bite at all.

It is to small purpose, A Sentence.
although we have carried our selves uprightly all our lifetime, if the
Catastrophe and end thereof be dishonest and wicked. For the end does make
perfect the work, and the goodliest building that is, is nothing worth, if the
foundation thereof be not firm and sure.

Live so, whilst thou staiest in this world, as when thou shall be dead, none
may be able to lay reproach unto thee.

Do so I pray thee; for it would be a double death unto me, although I cannot
die my self (if I suruiuing thee) should hear thee ill spoken of, whom I have
always so dearly loved.

And to give thee a most certain and kind taste, how much I account of thee,
now thou art in this woeful perplexity (although thy love is the thing I most
desire, and that my chiefest happiness consists in seeing thee without a
Mistress) yet to the end I may do thee good, I am content to hurt mine own
self; esteeming my self happy, in that I may redeem thy life, with the
loss of mine own chiefest pleasure: promising thee, to entreat thy
hard-harted Diana in thy behalf, to plead unto her for thee, and to succor
thee (to the uttermost of my power) in thy love, which is the tormentor of my
rest and quietness.

O great proof of a most perfect amity in a Nymph! O rich witness and
testimony of her fervent affection! certain was the assurance of her loyal
friendship toward me, most beautiful was that virtue in her; most chaste was
her desire; and as commendable was her willingness therein: he is highly to be
prised and set by, that dies for his friend, A Sentence.
yet, that man, is far more worthy of praise, who resigneth all the interest
he has, in that thing which may make him most happy, to pleasure another
therwithall, whilst he in the mean time for want thereof, lives in perpetual
misery: especially, if it be in the affairs of Love, which are so nice, and
so full of jealousy, as the Lover thinks he loses nothing, although he
loose his life and liberty, so he be not cousoned of his Ladies favor.

Mean space, poor Orythia is content, (so she may help me) to overthrow
her self, being resolute to be most wretched for ever, to the end she may
rid me from all my griefs and sorrows: whilst I stand admiring her right
generous mind, amazed at her constancy, highly prising her affection, and
wonderfully applauding her brave and strange conceit.

Whereupon, I humbly thanked her for her kindness, accepting of her gracious
offer, vowing unto her, that I will not die (as now) but rather expect some
happy issue of her employment: And therwithall I protest, that I am the
willinger to live, because I would satisfy her request, not daring to refuse
her courtesy, because I found my self so much beholding unto her; and not for
any certain hope I did conceive, that I should find grace at my Mistress hands.

For how could I think to find succor from her, who without occasion given,
had delivered me over unto death? whereas I might well have been counted
barbarous and ungrateful, to have denied the request of this Nymph, especially
when it proceeded from an affection so loyal and perfect, Ingratitude being as
foul a vice, as bloody Murder.

Unthankful persons in the old time, were condemned unto death, An Example.
as the unnatural Sons of Sophocles were disinherited (loosing all their
father goods) because they accused their aged father to doat for very age.

Do, as thou please (most gracious Nymph said I) for I promise thee I will
prolong my life at thy command, not that I expect thy enterprise may bring me
any comfort, but only, because I fear to disobey thee. Too much already have
thou bound me unto thee, and therefore I beseech thee, think I will sooner
dispend my heart blood for thy sake, then for mine own.

Go then thy ways, and the heavens prosper thee in thy voyage, yet if this my
business shall chance to be any hinderance unto thee, let me then entreat so
much at thy hands, that I (depriving my self of this loathed life) may be rid
of these corsiues which still torment me, and thou, be freed of this tedious
charge, which so much troubles thee. Not so answered Orythia: Let me alone,
and I dare warrant thee all shall be well.

Castles besieged, yield not at the first parley, and things that are brought
to pass, process of time, and with mature deliberation and advise, continue
longer, and seem more sweet afterward; for a man knows not the delightfulnes
of pleasure aright, if he have not a taste of pain before, and that which we
have most dearest bought and hardliest come by, we always hold most precious,
and of most account. Live then in peace, and suffer me to try my fortune,
which I persuade my self, shall prove most happy in thy behalf.

So saying, the Nymph leaves me, to take her journey, minding to help me,
although she hurt her self, taking more care to heal my sore, then to cure
her own wound.

I could not choose but follow after her fair and softly (yet aloof) when by
chance I met Fortunnio in the way, all to be blubbered with weeping, who
thought verily that I had been dead, he roming up and down the Forest like a
man distraught, crying out, and calling still upon my name, whom none (save an
Ecco) answered.

Much did he bewail my loss, making greater moan for me then I deserved,
whilst (most unwisely) he blamed Love, as the Author of my death, and envied
most bitterly against the stony heart of my fair Mistress.

But no sooner had he a sight of me, but that he came running most cheerfully
unto me, and most tenderly embraced me, changing his former sad and heavy
countenance, not unlike to him, who having found some precious Jewel, which he
before accounted as lost, begins to revive, and to be merry again.

Then did he tell me how my Lady had hard I was dead, she believing the same
for most certain truth (for Orythia had for my good) spread abroad this report
with as much speed as possible she could, which coming unto my Dianas ears,
was not a little unpleasant unto her, as was found by the number of salt tears
which she shed, as a sure restimonie of her true grief.

Which when I knew, I began to take comfort again, and to revive my self with
a fresh hope of some good success to come: and thereupon I compiled these
verses following, upon the tears which my Mistress shed in my behalf, whilst
I attended with great devotion the often wished for return of kind Orythia.

Examitor and Pentamitor verses.
(Sweet) do not think thy pearly tears, my pains can assuage ought,
Not death, but thy tears, bring to my soul his adue:
For thy grievous plaints in steed of one only shert death,
Thousand deaths and more are to me, pain to enerease.
I not deserve that thou for me should woefully weep thus,
It Is not death, but thy tears, take from my self my delight:
Death alone this silly corpse commands, when it iskes him,
But thy griefs doeforce, soul for to fly to the sky.
After so many pains in our love, leave unto me give none
Hence to depart in peace, rest that I may in my grave:
Long enough have I lived, since that so gentle a liking,
Tide has thy heart to mine, and to thy soul joined miue.
Then this my exceeding torments (Fair) do not envy,
Since that I desire life (then thy self) for to leave:
Farewell, pleased he dies, who dying, finds a favor,
When that his Ladies hand, close up his eyes at his end.
What more sacred Tomb, to be interd can I choose me,
Then to die in thy arms, where my desire ever lived?
If whilst I lived, thou care did take for my poor life,
At my happiness then, ah be not envious now.
Leave I beseech thee, tears to shed, since tears cannot help me,
For my soul once gone, thou by thy tears cannot have
Cruel death to relent with sighs, you never entreat can,
Blessed that Lover dies, who by his Love makes an end.
Only this I beg at thy hands, before that I die here,
Those fair beauteous eyes, kiss that I might but a while:
Might I but find this kindness rare, then blessed would my soul be.
Nor would it are forget, thanks to requite in his mind:
(Fair) too much it were for me to die in thy sweet arms,
He that dies content, death never feels, or his dart:
Who to his Mistress, does deuote his heart as a present,
Leaves the same in his breast, royally laid in a Tomb.
Gloomie night for to close mine eyes fast, can never have power,
Nor can I die as long as (what I like) I may see.
Then do but think on me, whose soul was only devoted
Unto thy self, and which lived in thy breast that is chaste.
In the bottom of my dark grave, shine shall thy bright eyes,
Whilst with a new fire, death shall me revive once again.
For if (heretofore) the same could into my soul pierce,
Who can hinder it now, brightly to shine on my coarse?
Then dear Saint) to leave these wailings let me request thee,
I do not sigh, cause I die, but thee to see to lament.
For since (of thy grace) I am not worthy, but unfit,
Then as much as a tear, why for my sake should thou shed?
Under the yoke of amorous service, whilst that I lived,
What good once did I thee, what have I done for thee ere?
It Is no sense to bewail the loss of one that deserves not,
Who to none but himself, whilst that he lived did he love.
This is the cause my soul force my coarse to relinquish,
For that he service small did (whilst he lived to my dame.
Yet since this my wished for death most happily happens,
Since by my parting now, I from my grief now do part:
It Is my fortune (for me too good) ah fair do not envy,
Since that alone through death, happily, live does the soul.
Wipe then thy fair eyes, and without show of a mourner,
This my breathless Trunk, unto the grave do thou bear:
Thrice happy Tomb, since he again reuiues with a new life,
Who (dead) leaves his Love ravished, him for to joy.
This was the mestfull Dittie I made, I being then so troubled in my mind, as
I knew not well how to express my grief, although I used many scalding sighs
and salt tears, to make manifest the same: I being of conceit, that it was
impossible for me to blazon forth the cruelty of Love in his right colors:
and yet did I seek to comfort my self, in that I had many companions in my
misery heretofore. O victorious Caesar, for all thy valor, thou wast
conquered by lovely Cleopatra, who had a son by thee called Cesarion.

And thou, grave Emperor, and divine Philosopher, did thou not doat upon
thy most dishonest Faustina, whilst thou thy self becamest Loves prisoner,
notwithstanding all thy wisdom and greatness?

Hanniball found his force too strong for him, who although he had so often
given the foil unto the Romans, yet when he lost his precious liberty,
through lying in Capua, and making Love unto a woman there, was overcome by
that temperate Roman, Scipio. Demetrius likewise, was so bewitched, with the
fair Curtezan of Athens, as he stood in awe of her, as if he had been her
bond-slaue.

And if we should leave the earth, and fly up into the heavens, we shall
find the Gods themselves have been scholars in Cupids school. For did not
Jove love Europa: Lida, Alcumena: and diverse others? Phoebus, Cassandra,
Daphne, and many more? Mars, Venus: Venus Adonis: Diana, Endimion: and I know
not whom besides.

Why then, if it be so, I must needs say, that thy power extends far and
near, thou being as mighty in the heavens, as thou art here upon the earth.
Fortunio seeing me in this humor, began thus.

How now man? but even now thou shewedst thy self to be conqueror over thy
passions, setting a good face on the matter, whilst thou did bare out the
brunt thereof: And now again, thou seem as a recreant, to yield unto thy
anguish and sorrow, crying out and vexing thy self, as if thou would die
upon the sudden: what is the reason of this alteration and change? It is a
credit for a man to change from vice to virtue, and of bad, to become good, but
not to go on still, growing worse and worse.

David is praised for amending his wicked life, and for becoming a new man,
where his Son Solomon is condemned, in that he forgot himself in his latter
days, becoming an Idolater, and a whoremonger, amongst his concubines.

Think thou, that it is enough for thee to say, thou art not able to resist
the force of Love, and that other men's faults are sufficient to excuse and
defend thine? That thief is not exempted from punishment, who excuses
himself (having robbed from others) that he has but done, as an other has
done before him; for though it be lawful to imitate such actions as are
commendable and virtuous, yet is it not tolerable, to do what is wicked and
villainous.

This color then will not serve thee, and therefore if (as thou not long since
did affirm) thou love the inward qualities of the mind, without
coveting that fleshly pleasure (which Lovers so much study to obtain
(although with great labor and loss) but what is the reason thou take on
thus?

And why should thou seem to despair, being ready every hour almost to
go about to give over the world? For loving the soul, (only) the body,
which is but a closet for the same, cannot hinder thy affection, neither can
thou hope to receive any other contentment or pleasure of thy love, then in
conceit: whereas thou doing thus (as thou do) thou will make the world
believe, that thy love is of another manner of nature then thou would
persuade us, it being the common fashion of sottish Lovers, and such as desire
sensual delights, to cry out and lament, as if they were ready to die, when
they cannot taste the sweetness of the same: as the sick Patient dies for want
of physic, that should expel such superfluous humors, as hurt him.

Now if thy Love be such (as thou say) that it neither demands nor
expects in any sort this pleasure, what makes thee for want of enjoying the
same, to run still unto death? wringing thy hands, and making such pittious
moan, as is strange to behold?

Therefore are such men far more furious and mad, then those senseless
Bedlems are, who without cause, seek to offer violence unto themselves,
imitating the heathen people of Egypt, who used to burn themselves, without
any cause at all, but only when the toy took them in the head: for most dear
ought we to hold our life, because it is unrecoverable: neither must we forgo
it, unless for some great occasion, as either for the benefit of our
commonwealth, or for special good and advancement of all our friends. I
seeing Fortunto to be so earnest, replied thus.

O Fortunio, I cannot see how a man can lose a lesser loss, then the shortning
of his days: for loosing them, he lights upon a path that leads him into
eternal rest, and therefore he is not hindered at all: resembling that
merchant, who exchangeth bad merchandise, for such as are most precious and
rich. For a smaller matter then mine, thousands of wise men have shortened their
lives. A witness whereof, is that wise man, who following Alexander the great,
and much favored of him, gave not over for all that, to erect a great pile of
wood, which he setting a fire, most cheerfully leapt therein (without sturring
once) and so was there buried. But perhaps you will ask me what was the cause
that urged him thereunto: truly none; but only because he would leave this
mortal life, to inherit a life everlasting.

But say, that no lively apprehention of intolerable grief did force a man to
this desire, yet are the very defects of Nature, and the desire to become
immortal, sufficient enough to imprint most deeply this conceit in his soul:
especially, if (after death) we shall be free from feeling of any pain,
according unto the gross error of the voluptuous Epicure. For is it not far
better never to be borne, then to live and endure misery?

But we fly higher in our thoughts, the^ those Philosophers: for we by this
means, set not only an end unto our wretchedness, but we change them into
glory and contentment, and our frail and fleshly body, into an immortal
state, free from all corruption.

Therefore my conclusion is, that seesing the only maimes of Nature, without
any other accident of evil, are of force enough to imprint within us this
desire of death, we are not to be reprehe^ded, if we die, in as much as we are
stirred up unto death, as well because of these imperfections, as also by
reason of such a subject of deadly grief, as can no way be remedied nor helped
but by the fatal Destinies; and those that do contrariwise, cannot be
compared for constancy and virtue, unto those women, who (one striving with
another) leaped into the flaming fire, wherein their dead spouses were burned:
a deep passion of true sorrow, and a vehement desire to follow their husband,
being that which did animate them unto this death.

Besides, such as are in despair, for ever seeing joyful days in this world,
have not they the greatest reason of all to die? which (if any such) shall
refuse, they are of a more base and timorous disposition, then those women
before said, seeing that in death only, a man incountreth with quiet rest, as
(whilst we live) we are yoaked and tied unto troubles.

The sage Hebrew King, praises in his proverbs, the dead, more then he does
the living, death being the securest harbor of all other, where when we are
arrived, we are exempted from rowing any more in the dangerous barge of this
turbulent world. Fond is that Pilot, who (through the favor of the heavens,
having gotten into a safe creake and bay, will needs venture back again into
the maine Sea, at what time a tempest arises, and so suffers shipwreck.

Those great personages in times past, in steed of being afraid of death, took
death as the chiefest remedy against all their crosses and misfortunes.
Tryumphant Casar, who enjoyed all the delights that might be, although he had
reason to covet to live (being blessed with so much happiness) was so far off
from being afraid of death, as he would needs entertain the same, although he
might have avoided it, if he had so pleased. And shall we then (who quite
contrary to him) are ouercharged with thousands of plagues, being (in respect
of him) most vile, base and abject vassalles, to whom disgraces are common, and
all pleasures, hateful adversaries, sear that, which he in the chiefest of
all his felicities never once so much as doubted?

So to do, would argue us to have small courage, and we should be like unto
the base minded Macedonian King, who rather then he would die, suffered
himself to be carried alive in triumph, through the streets of Rome, being
afterward starued to death in prison. Yet far more generous, and of a brauer
resolution, was Cleopatra (although a fillie woman) who deceived the
expectation of Augustus, by killing her self, and so hindering him thereby,
from beautifying his glorious tryumphant Chariot, with the lively show of her
own proper person.

No, no, before this mischief shall seize upon me, and that disgrace shall
still triumph over me; I will end both my life and my lamentations all at once,
like that gallant Egyptian Princes.

Neither is this argument forcible enough, to say, that because one loves
only the inward qualities of his Mistress, therefore he should not die; for
far greater is the despite, and the distress is more violent, which
proceeds from those, who have loved chastely, without offering any outrage or
unseemly behavior to discredit themselves, then it is amongst other vain
Lovers: and therefore thy Mistress have the less reason to be so hard-harted
and unkind toward them, when they are urged unto no such villainie.

This therefore is my opinion, that death is an hundred times more sweeter then
life, and that the only defaults of Nature, without other reasons that proceed
from sorrow, are of force sufficient to make us wish and venture upon the same.

For the free man is only happy, and free can none be, whilst they are
entangled in the nets of the miseries of this world, death only being of power
to infranchise us, and therefore is it most happy, and most necessary for man.

While I was (thus) disputing with my old acquaintance and friend; courteous
Orythia, was nothing forgetful of me, who coming before my Lady, pleaded
hard in my behalf, she beginning thus. Certainly (beauteous Diana) most cruel
is that man, that seeks the life of an other who never offended him.

The Gods who are without beginning, A Sentence.
and therefore more to be respected then men (although not so soon moved to
wrath) demand sildome or never the blood of mortal creatures to expiate their
faults, but being more kind then so, are content with the warm sacrifices of
beasts.

How then can he purge himself, who having never been abused by such a one,
yet works all the means he can to cut his throat?

It is the property of Tyrants (banished from the company of men) from whom
through rigor of their own law and wills, they take both life and living
without any reasonable cause given them, to bath their murdering hands in
giltlesse blood, but such as be godly and just Princes, will never commit so
heinous an act: much less ought Ladies to acqaint themselves therewithal,
they being the very patterns of compassion, of pity, and of mildnes; and not
of blood, of murder, or of vengance. O what pain does Lydia prove in the
pitchy bottom of hell, for causing her loving Servant to be murdered?

What sharp punishment do the daughters of Danaus endure, for cutting their
husbands throats? and with what violent plagues is Clytemnestra scourged, in
dying her hands with the lukewarm blood of her dear Spouse and bedfellow
Agamemnon? for if we be cruel, then cruel shall we find those, into whose
power we shall chance to light to be chastised, because the same evil we do,
shall be done unto us again.

Do not you think, that it were better for a woman to loose (somewhat that
belongs unto her, then to destroy the life of a man (not to be recovered any
more) the life I say of a man, which the Gods themselves have first breathed
into them, bestowed upon them?

Above all vices, A Sentence.
cruelty is the most insupportable; intolerable is shedding of blood, and
horrible is beastly murder. None can make themselves more strange, or more
contrary unto the Gods, then in setting abroch this damned vice, they
themselves hating cruelty, abhorring nothing so much as bloodshed.

If we would be willing, that they should pardon us, let us then after their
example be courteous and mild, toward such as shall implore our aid, when
they have need of us: for the self same mercy we shall show unto strangers,
who have offended us, the same shall we find returned home to us by the
immortal powers themselves again.

Let us then shun this Sauadge mind, and barbarous fault, as a deadly
pestilence, and let us drive it from us, as we would do a mortal poison from
our bodies, for it kills our good name and renown, which ought to be dearer
unto us, then our precious lives by odds.

And since it is so, what then has moved thee (most Fair, yet cruel Nymph)
to pursue so egerly the life of wretched Arcas?

Alack, why would thou have him die, what fault, what crime, or what
offense has he committed against thee? but (perhaps) thou will say he loves
thee, and how then? what? do not we love the Gods, and are they not glad and
contented we so should love them?

Think thou that any goodly thing, or whatsoever sauoureth of the beauty of
the Gods, An Example.
can be here below upon the earth, and not be loved, and highly prised by
mortal men? If the Law commands us to pardon our enemies (as Caesar is more
commended for his clemency toward his foes, then for his notorious victories)
how much more then, ought we to make account of such as fancy and affect us?
If for killing our adversaries, in steed of showing them grace and favor, we
are condemned as faulty, how much more shall we be, if we go about to murder
our friends?

Then (gracious Diana) fall not into so horrible a sin; Thou art too fair to
be froward and unkind, neither will any wise woman, ever refuse the chaste and
modest Amity of a virtuous spirit, who is able to make her memory immortal,
and to live for ever. What outrage or discurtesie does a young man unto a sweet
Lady, in loving her, as long as he goes not about to offer violence unto her
honor?

For as that woman is not to be excused, who at the earnest prayers of her
Lover, suffers that goodly Flower to be slipped, wherein consists her
reputation and credit: so cannot she choose but be blamed, who seeks the
utter ruin and overthrow of such as chastely honor her, without impeach of
honor. So does Arcas love thee, and why then do thou force him to make
away himself?

Cruel is the wrong that one receives of his friend, but far more piercing
is that, which comes from a man's own self, (seeing none can be greater
friends unto us then our own selves.)

Be not then the cause that this poor wretch should massacre himself, least
it be hereafter cast in thy teeth, that thou have slain him, which if thou
do, it may fall out with thee, as it did with proud Narassus: who dyed,
falling in love with his own self, after he had disdained the friendship of
diverse fair and courteous Nymphs.

But I will say no more, for thou art wise, and to such, few words are
sufficient: thou art fair, and therefore I hope wilt not be oner froward: and
thou art religious, which makes me persuade my self, that thou will have a
conscience, especially in a matter of so great importance as this is.

Thus did the pitiful Oryth^a plead for me against her own self, willing
is she to die, so she may save my life, not caring what sorrows she endured,
so she could rid me from out my troubles.

Diana having heard her, was ready to make answer, for they that are fair
spoken, and can speak with discretion, have always the best and readiest
wits, and so had she, Mercury lodging in her tongue, and purest houie,
dropping from out her mouth. Hark then how wisely she replied.

If any man vexed with a furious spirit, shall (without being proucked or
urged, by any other then by their owneselu^s) ru^ne wilfully unto death, can
any be blamed for the same, but only their own selves? Or is it reasonable,
that such as be guiltless shall be punished, and answer for the faults that
others commit?

Juno is the occasion of the plagues that that luxurious Ixion endures, and
yet it was his own offense that was the cause thereof, and not she her self?
If these vain and fantastike Lovers, who are weakened in their right wits
through Cupid, shall murder and make away themselves: are therefore those
Ladies unto whom they offer their service, the cause of their ruin and
overthrow?

He only rightly may be called the author of mischief, who either has done
it, or has caused it to be done. But women, do they force men to love them?
and do they compel them (in despite of themselves) to deuote themselves unto
them? What they do, they do of themselves, and through their own follies
does this madness proceed, and therefore, who is the cause of their undoing,
but their own selves?

If the envious person, dies for very grief and rage of mind, because he
sees his neighbor prosper and do well: who but himself is the occasion
thereof? None forces any man to love. And so no woman ought to be urged to
loose that (which is as precious unto her, as her own life) which is her
honor, to satisfy and please such, who through their own vainness, and
mec^e fondness, shall work their own hurt and decay.

That desperate wretch, that drowneth himself, is he to thank any other then
his owneselfe, for his drowning? And say, that Shepherd of whom thou talkest
should die, through his own peevish sollie, think you that ^ fear, least the
world would count me to be the cause thereof? or that I shall be blamed in that
he has done amiss? I warrant you no: For I never brought him into this narrow
straight, which if he follow, it is his own fault, and not mine.

Besides, to say I seek to covet, or to be the cause of his death, you do me
wrong: for I delight not in cruelty, the contentment and well fare of another,
being as dear unto me, as mine own health. Yet nevertheless, this I must
tell you, that I would be very loath he should live, to be so hurtful unto
me, as to destroy the goodly building of mine honor, which being once
overthrown, can never be repaired, or built new again.

That he live, I most heartily wish: but yet, with the conservation of my
good name and fame. For otherwise, I desire vengeance to light upon him, as on
my most mortal foe, although I will never be but a friend unto his chaste
Amity: provided always, that he give sufficient testimonies it be such, by
his good carriage and modest behavior.

For I am not so ignorant, but that I know pure and chaste Love, to be a most
divine and beautiful Virtue, and the honest affection of right generous, and
Gentlemanlike spirits, to be commendable and prasse-worthie: seeing they are
of power to make famous our memories for ever.

All Portraitures, Tables, Counterfaites, and Pictures, soon loose their
colors and decay, be they never so excellently well drawn, quickly are they
spoiled, and soon does Time devour them. No Picture of Achilles now remains,
and yet his praise does, through Homers Muse. None of Alexander the great,
although both Apelles and Lysippus, two exquisite Painters had often drew him.
And yet although their famous works be consumed and gone, the brave writings of
Quintus Curtius (blazoning forth the life of this mighty Monark) live and
flourish. Neither is the verse of Virgil dead, ringing out the virtues of
AEneas, although the counterfaites of that Troyan Prince, be all turned unto
dust.

And so, if that Arcas, be (yet) alive, I wish he so may still continue; thy
only entreaty and request being of force to command more of me then this,
seeing it is thy pleasure he should be entertained.

But if he will so unadvisedly, rashly, and so foolishly offend his own self,
I here wash my hands, as clear from this matter, protesting here before
all, that I am innocent of his death, because I never gave him any such
occasion of coffeehouse: If perchance he have found me, that I have not
been so courteous, nor so affable unto him at one time, as I have bin at an
other: Or if that I have looked more heavy and sad now and then, then I have
used to do heretofore. Thinks he therefore, that he has just reason to lay
all the blame upon me, as if I had been she, that was the Author of his
overthrow? If so, he is deceived. For our bodies (which are subject unto the
influences of the celestial Signs) are either joyful or sad, according
unto their motions.

This being the cause, that when we meet (by fortune) with one of our
acquaintance, and he is (as then) troubled with many thoughts in his mind, or
some bad celestial Planet is predominate over him: we then, (by his sower
countenance) would take him for our enemy, but no sooner is his humor past
and gone from him, but he is our good friend again, and as kind unto us, as
ever he was before.

The weaker must always yield (somewhat) unto the stronger, because the one is
never distraught, nor carried away with our public affairs, where the other
are drawn abroad with much business, and diverse cares (which hinders them
oftentimes) to remember, or think upon their inferiors.

Let him then live, if he be (as yet) living: For never let Diana wish to live,
to see that day, wherein she shall be reproached to have been the cause of his
death, who by his writings does eternize the Virtuous, especially, when I may
preserve his life, and that he seeks not to have any thing of me, that is
prejudicial unto mine honor.

This was the answer of wise Diana, unto fair Orythia, who most kindly
thanking her in my behalf, came merrily away, seeking to find me out: Who no
sooner saw me, but that she delivered unto me my Ladies mind, and
therewithal, advised me to go presently unto her, and to present my self
unto her.

How to requite this courteous Nymphe for so exceeding a favor done unto me, I
know not; Whilst I was framing a set speech in my mind, to show my self in
some sort grateful unto her. How now (quoth she) it is no time now to study?
away, and get you gone unto your Mistress. As for thanks, I look for none at
your hands, I having done but what was my duty, seeing such as are bound,
must needs obey: yet I beseech the goddess of Love, to make thee once to
pity me, who wish thee no worse fortune, then I do unto mine own soul,
although thy chief happiness, must needs be my bad overthrow.

And having so said, casting a pittious eye toward me, and sighing most
heavily, as if her heart would have burst, she went away from me, and so left
me. I could not choose but weep, thinking upon her: When (remembering my Ladies
message) I set forward speedily to wend toward her, carrying in my hand a
certain Sonnet, which I had made in her praise not long before, meaning to
present it unto her. Being arrived where she was, I found her accompanied with
other Nymphs, sitting by the side of a Fountain, which issued forth from out
the veins of a stately Rock, the water whereof, was far clearer then any
Cristall, in whose bottom was a dainty yealow Sand, such as that of Pactolus,
intermixed with a number of precious stones, of sundry colors, and had a man
been able to have thrust his nimble hand deep enogh, he might (without wetting
of his arm) with exceeding great pleasure, have taken a number of little
fishes, running up and down, and playing most wantonly there: one while,
hyding themselves within the entrails of the gravel, and another while, in
sundry corners and holes of the Fountain.

Whilst being slipperie, and skipping too and fro, they would most cunningly
get out of the fingers of him that had caught them. From this Fountain, there
came forth two sweet Rivers, which growing into a great water, ran round
about the whole Country, loosing themselves as they fell into the Sea
adjoining.

This Fountain was shadowed over with beauteous Cipresse, and lovely Orange
ttees, the sweet buds and blossoms whereof, was able to ravish the minds
even of bruit Beasts: within the Rock, were many seats to rest on, framed by
nature so artificially, as no cunning could any way come near them, they
being always covered with pleasing Camomell, the more to delight the sense of
man.

The ground all along was full of green grass, and other pretty herbs,
which the teeth of Cattle had never spoiled, nor ouer-heate of the day,
scorched or burned.

Many sweet Rose-trees sprung forth, from out the sides of that Rock, in
diverse places, and that in so iustand seemly an order, as you would have
thought they had been planted, and set by the handy-labour of some curious
Gardener: whilst all sort of Roots sprouted out in their right colors, the
odoriferous sent whereof was such, and the situation of the place so
delightful, as you would have thought your self in Paradise, as long as you
had continued there. Never was there Palace more beautiful.

That Fountain which the warlike Horse caused to spring out of the ground, An
Example.
with the hoose of his foot, was nothing so dainty, (although more commended,
by such as drank of the water thereof) they being inspired with the gift of
Poetry ever after.

In this so pleasant a seat then, did I find gracious Diana, passing away her
time, one while, with washing her beautiful face: an other while, her Diamond
eyes, and then again, her long and slender hands. No care as then troubled
her, neither was she busied in canuasing in her brains, A Similie.
any serious matter of weighty importance.

As that great Sacrificer, who thinking to sacrifice to Juno the goddess of
Riches, (finding her Image either bloody, or sweating) suddenly withdraws
himself from thence, consulting with his fellow-Priest, about the strange
chance, before he begin his Ceremonies again; Even so, I seeing so rare a
beauty, stood as one amazed, without speech, and as if I had been in a sound.

And now I began to consider within my self, whether I were best to go
forwards on my journey, and offer my Present unto this Nymphe, or whether
without speaking unto her, I should turn back again, and go from whence I
came.

For although such only find Fortune to favor them, who are venturous, and
of bold spirits, (yet thought I) it were far better, not to try all,
(especially, when a man's life or credit lies thereupon) then like bold Bayard,
to run bluntly onwards, and so to take repulse, and be denied of his suit.
For more sure and certain is the mean life, and estate, then is the richest
and highest in authority, wherein there is nothing but trouble and danger.

This was the cause I stood so long debating of the matter within my self,
whether I were best to pursue my first enterprise or no: A Sentence.
For hardly dare a man speak to such a one as we fear and respect, but in the
end, the same thing that made me most to doubt, did rid me out of the same,
stifling my fear, and driving away all sorrow from me. For my Mistress having
espied me, (who was near ready to go back again) called me unto her.

O how sweet and comfortable was that sound unto me? I thinking I had been
called by some God there-abouts. Gracious and full of courtesy was her speech,
insomuch, as I counted my name most blessed, because it was pronounced by my
lovely Goddess.

No longer will I marvel now, although the voices of Saints heretofore, have
been of power to call up dead Coarses, from out the bottom of their graves,
(where they lay buried) restoring them unto life again: since that of my fair
Mistrisse was able to drive away all sadness and sorrow from me, and to
revive fresh hope within me.

This made me draw near unto her, when after many dutious Ceremonies done by
me unto her, I presented her with my Paper, which the opening, with a cheerful
countenance, read this Sonnet following.

(Fair) thou the heauen^ (like to thy self) make fair,
So thou my Fortune blessest (thee) to love:
He vanquished is not, though of Armor bare,
When with the Sun, his strength Mars dares not pr^^ut.
If I (thy Beauties stine) my self right call,
Who (thee to adore) can blame my loyaltse?
The self same God, that Lovers worship all,
Is that sweet God, which breeds their miseris.
(Fair) then I love thee, ah what is it I say?
Nay more, I worship thee, and thee admire:
M^verse, and voice, shall honor thee for aye,
Sing still thy praise, thy glorse still desire.
(Fair) it is much, the Gods for to resemble,
But more to be, like Virtue; yet without
Sage Pallas help, Jove nere had made to tremble,
Offurious Tytans, that rebellious Rout.
To thee then like to Gods, to Virtue like,
All praises we will ascribe, as guerdon right.
As she read these Verses, she seemed to smile, A Similie.
giving me a very kind look, and many thanks for the same. As the
Vine-worker rejoices, when coming into the field, (betimes in the morning)
he finds his Vine sprung forth, and ready to budde all over, which
promises him a bountiful Largess, to come from Bacchus: Even so began I to
be light for joy, to see so cheerful a countenance to come from her, hoping to
have some good fortune afterward.

O how sundry and sudden, are the alterations in love? One while a Lover is
dead, and then again, he is alive: now he is merry, and then by and by, he
is sad: a small matter, being able to make him hope or despair, as a little
Leven, makes a great deal of Paste sower.

But as I was most unfortunate before, so began I now to be most happy of
all: For no sooner had my Mistress read what was written, but she began thus.
It is great grief and heart unto a gallant Courtier, who can, and feign would,
make some excellent proof of his valor: when he cannot meet with a fit
place, or field, wherein he might exercise and put in practice his Chivalry.

Even so, it is great pity (Shepherd) that thou can not encounter a
subject, worthy of thy pen, which might be able, and of sufficiency enough,
to make thy Muse show her self abroad, in her right colors. For this
Poetical vein of thine, without having some rare, or divine matter to animate
it, and to set it forward, is like unto a goodly body that has no soul:
which, although it show fair and beautiful, yet can it do little good, A
comparison.
because it wants life. Or it may be compared unto a large and fat field,
bringing forth much grass, which is a testimony of his fertile richness: But
yet for want of labor and sowing, yields not any Corn at all.

I assure thee, I am right heartily sorry, that thou want an excellent
subject, whereon to work. For then, I verily persuade my self, we should see
most admirable conceits to come from thy Muse.

As for my self, I neither will, nor dare refuse these Verses, which thou have
bestowed upon me, they sanouring of the same sweetness, for then worthily
might thou judge me to be more prouder then the Gods, who thankfully
accept of the smallest gifts, that mortal men do offer them.

But yet I could wish with all my heart, that they had been meant unto some
other more virtuous Saint: For worthy things belong unto such as are worthy
personages, great matters unto great and mighty Potentates, and what is
honorable, is due unto the virtuous: no otherwise, then shame and reproach do
belong unto the infamous, and such as be wicked.

Notwithstanding all this, I will not give over to account of thy Muse, seeing
that (for all she has taken so lean and barren a subject as my self) she
does so well, by reason whereof, she shows herself to be the more worthy of
commendation and praise.

But far better, and more perfect (by great odds) would she appear, if the
foundation whereupon she had built, had been but as goodly, as she her self
is fair. For then no doubt, but she would bring forth most strange and
matchless works, as of beautiful parents, sweet and well-fauoured children
are borne.

Ah, say not so, most sacred Nymph (replied I) although these your speeches are
like unto a lowly virtue, wherein (the more you humble your self) the more
you are exalted; For what Goddess is there reigning in the Skies above, that
meriteth more praise then thou do? And what mortal woman is there living,
that carries a mind more chaste, a heart more virtuous, a beauty more
excellent, or a judgment more perfect, then thou thy self do?

Although great persons are by the benefit of Fortune, raised and advanced
unto many Titles of honor, and are enriched with Treasures mightily, we
cannot therefore say, that for that only cause, they are more worthy of
praise, then such meaner creatures, as are barred from such great wealth and
authority, so long as they be as courteous as the others: For true glory is not
given to blind and cheating Fortune, but unto divine and heavenly Virtue.

He is worthy of little praise, who has nothing of his own, but is feign to
borrow of others: and such are rich men, who through the advancement of nature,
A Sentence.
and not of their own industry, enjoy that which they have: whereas such as are
wise, (who of their own selves, without the help of others) show many proofs of
virtue, deserve to be commended indeed. Poor Homer is more accounted of, then
rich Agamemnon: laudlesse Maro, then covetous Crassus: and poor Solon, more
then golden Croesus. And so (fair Nymph) although thou have not the name of a
Goddess, (seeing in desert, thou do merit the same) why should thou
refuse that praise, that is rightly due, and belonging unto the sovereign
powers above.

But I know thy mind, and by thy speech do gather what thou meanest. Thou
seem to refuse the fruits of my Muse, (and not without great reason) because
they are too weak, and unable to display, and set abroach thy virtues. For as
those that are excellent Poets, greatly honor wise and worthy spirits: so such
as be gross and unlearned, rather bring discredit, then credit unto them, by
their harsh and foolish vorses; It being far better for a brave Heroical
mind, not to be praised at all, then to hear himself commended, by the mouth
of an illiterated and simple Poetizer.

This is the cause thou refusest my verse, but it is certain, that the more
Virtue flies from glory, the more does glory follow her. The Sages in times
past did well, An Example.
to reject the praises, which were attributed unto them, and because they would
not be seen; when they put in practice many rare and admirable exploites, they
hid themselves close, within some unfrequented Desert or other.

And yet nevertheless, they had their due in the end, and when they least
dreamed of any such matter. Glory passes through the pikes of all
difficulties, A Sentence.
yet it descends down into the Tombs of the dead: sounding like a Trumpet,
the due praises of many when they are buried, who whilst they lived, would not
accept of any such matter. For as the Clouds, although they show thick,
dark, and gloomie, cannot for all that, hinder the brightness of the Sun, but
for all their foggie vapors, he will break out, and appear in his splendent
Majesty; Even so, (maugre the cruel times, yea, and in despite of their own
selves) the virtuous are ever honored, whom glory it self, does never
abandon or forsake. And therefore (gracious Nymph) reject not what my Muse in
most humble manner bestows upon thee, seeing she does the best she can. For
the good will of the giver, and not the richnes of the gift, does perfect, and
make better the present. Poor folk give as much (although it be of little
value) considering their ability, as the mightier sort do, A Sentence.
although they bestow never so much: and the silly widows Mite, was as well
accepted, as the richest men's gold, which in the Temple was offered.

Dainethen to make me so fortunate, as to vouchsafe to accept of me to chaunt
forth thy praises; And doubt not, but so earnest a desire shall so much animate
and encourage my Muse, as she will think nothing can see me to be too hard for
her. For this cause only do I live: nothing so much keeping life within my
body, as a zealous desire (Herald-like) to blazon forth thy virtues, which If
I thought I might not obtain, I would choose rather to die then live.

My gifts are but small, and yet more commendable shall thou be, for accepting
of them, then if they had been richer: because the world shall see, that not
any covetous humor of gain, nor any worth of the present, moved me to make a
tender of the same, but only an humble mind, and the right noblenes, of thy
more then courteous own nature.

Thus did I argue for my self, when my fair Saint, who took some pleasure in
my speech, began to answer me in this manner.

Never ought any honest praise to be rejected, because it proceeds from good
will. The Gods themselves taking in good part the praises of the simple, as
well as of those that are more mighty. I therefore accept of thine, if thou
think there be any thing in me, (as I doubt me there is not) worthy of thy
study, but yet with this condition, that like a faithful Hystoriographer, and
not as a fawning Poet, thou set down the truth.

For as that Crow, An Example.
when she was despoyled of her feathers, which she had borrowed of the other
Byrds, became naked and bare; and as that face is found to be more foul, and
fuller of wrinkles, which is used to be dawbed with paintings, then that which
never has any other, then her natural beauty; So when one is praised, and
afterward his defects and vicious life comes to be known abroad, he is more
disgraced with infa^^ie and discredit, then if he had not been spoken of
before, and only because of his own imperfections.

Be then just and true in thy writings, and then no doubt, but the labor which
thou shall take, shall be much lessened and abated, and small shall be the pain
thou put thy pen too, because thou shall find little or nothing in me,
worthy to be commended.

But above all, I would wish thee, to have special regard unto this: that thy
works (if by chance thou shall find, I be worthy of thy Invention) breed
neither jealousy of me, nor malicious envy against me, the two common plagues
amongst all men.

For it were far better to live bare and poorly, and without being made
famous abroad, then to be rich, and be envied of all, and so to purchase the
ill will of every one.

This only desire, was Casars death, his enemies bearing malice at his
virtues: and this was the loss of the life of Alexander the great, who was
hated for his exceeding great victories.

So said the beauteous Nymph, and that with so good a grace, as (although she
seemed to make a show, that she was unwilling to accept of the praises of my
Muse) yet did she so wittily order the matter, as I found by the circumstance
of her discourse, she did not altogether reject mine offer. A Sentence.
Quickly did I find her meaning, for (who marketh so narrowly the manner and
fashion, the gesture, and the countenance of his Mistress, as does the Lover,
seeing he finds either good or hurt, in the least glaunce of her eyes?

Soon did I conceive that she did not differ much from my mind, and I made my
self ready to answer her: when behold, we might suddenly hear a great noise a
far off, as if it had been of foam wild Beast, that brake through bushes, past
through hedges, and forced the very trees to stoop and shake, with his furious
running against them.

This noise made my Lady, and all her company maruellously afraid, for it was
most terrible in their cares: whereupon, they began to take their flight, and
that they might run the swifter, the fear of this strange accident, lent
them wings.

I seeing this, took my worthy Diana under the arm, (the greatest favor
that ever I had before received of her) and yet was it not willingly granted
by her: For never would she have suffered me to have done so much, but that
the danger, and her present necessity was such, I helping her the better to
get up unto the top of the foresaid high Rock, at the foot of which, was
(as I told you before) a most fair and clear Christiall Fountain. When
being there, we thought our selves to be quite out of all peril and danger:
and that if it were a Bear, or a Lion, or any Tiger, it could not over easily
get up to the top of the same: or at least, that we could not be discovered in
so high a place: but yet nevertheless, my Lady still quaking and trembling,
as one that could not abandon her pensiuenes upon the sudden.

She endured, that I should hold her under the arm, whilst in the mean
time, I ventured to touch her white and dainty hand, which was to me, as if I
had been in Paradise, for so much did fear possess her, as she never thought
of any such matter. O what a happy time had I as then? and how much was I
beholding unto that wild beast, although the terror thereof, did make me to
shake? A right holy day was that day unto me, and the happiest that ever I had
in all my life.

Great was the pleasure my poor heart felt as then, when I had that liberty
to touch those rare and victorious hands, as long since these desperate Pirates
had, An Example.
who came from far, only to kiss the fist of Scipio, surnamed Affrican,
after he had taken his farewell of ungrateful Rome. Never was there so lilly
a white hand, never one so soft and supple, for many brave minds had they
brought under their yoke, they not once daring to refuse her command.

Although this favor was but small, yet stood I so much in awe to displease
her, as I trembled more for fear of her, then I did of the Monster. For twice
had I made trial of her anger already, which I felt more hot then fire it
self, doubting greatly least I should fall into the like danger again.

Thus, whilst I now and then touched her sweet hands, she never perceived what
I did, whether it were, either because she made show that she knew it not, or
because fear had so hindered her, that she could not conceive of any such
thing: for where dread seazeth upon one, there can be no other thoughts, she
driving them away, and making her self only Mistress of that place. But
howsoever it was, it fell out well for me, to enjoy so great a happiness.

But if the only touching of her hand, was of force to bring me into an
Ecstasy of joy and pleasure, what then (think you) would the kissing of the
same have wrought in me, if I had had license to have done so much unto her?

No doubt I had died through extreme delight, as that Roman Gentlewoman did,
An Example.
when she saw her son returned home safe and alive, from that bloody
battle of Cannas, where she thought he had been slain.

But I was not worthy of so great a good, and therefore was well contented with
the fortune I had before. Mean space, this beast comes with a most strange
boldness, there not being his like in all the world, affrighting not only the
Gods of the woods, but men, and other senseless creatures also.

The Serpent Python was never so horrible, the Hydra that Hercules slew, not
half so terrible: nor that great Crocadile, that was taken upon the banks of
Nilus, and presentted unto King Ptolomie by his fishers, was half so hideous
or fierce.

He had the head of a wild Boore, having sharp and great prickles round about
his throat, as red as any blood: his hair, his skin, and his ears, were as
a Lions: his belly as a Leopard. His tail as a Serpent, his feet as a
Griffon, and he had wings as an Eagle, The description of that ugly Monster
PRIDE.
with great proudnes did he come to drink at that clear Fountain, I wondering
much, that the very spring thereof did not dry up, at the sight of so ugly a
Monster.

He drink at his pleasure, whilst very dread kept us within a little hole,
which we by chance had found out upon the top of the Rock, into which we had
gotten, because we would not be seen of this odious beast, but when we saw
him winged, we then began to fear, more then ever we had done before; for then
we thought verily, that he would take his flight up, unto the Rock, and so
devour us, who stood trembling and shaking, because we imagined it could not be
but that he had seen us: for always fear turns euerything to the worst,
judging sinisterly of the same.

To be short, he had seen us indeed, and (no doubt) to our great hurt, had he
made after us, to find our fear true, The description of Humili. tie.
but that there arrived upon the sudden a young Damozell plainly apparelled,
in white linnin, with a comely kind of attire upon her head, fair in face,
sober in countenance, lowly in gate, and yet most lovely to behold. In her hand
she had a Bow which bent when she pleased, and seven arrows, well headed and
sharp, and though she were otherwise naked, not having other weapons at all,
yet did she not stand in doubt of this fierce Monster, but boldly marched
toward him, whilst though her pace was soft and humble, yet did it seem this
hugie beast did fear her, and feign would have been gone from her.

Diverse were our opinions as concerning this Dame, some thought she was Diana,
others that it was June, some Minerna, and some Venus. But to say truth, she
resembled none of them, being more fair, then some of them, and less
beautiful then the other: and yet more mild and courteous then any of them all.

To conclude, we all agreed, with a general consent, that she was some divine
creature, seeing she addressed her self to go against the Monster so boldly,
who perceiving her to approach toward him, turned toward her, vomitting forth
so great and flashing a flame, as all seemed to be on fire thereabouts, we
thinking that she had been consumed with the same.

But as gold taken out of the burning Furnace, A Similie.
is far more bright and fierce, then when it was first flung in, and as
Camomill, the more it is trod upon, the thick and better it grows: even so,
might we see this fair Archeresh to show more clear and beautiful, when the
flame was once past and gone then she had been before.

No hurt had she at all, which made us to wonder, whilst putting one of her
arrows into her Bow, she aimed so right, as she planted it within one of the
eyes of this monsterous beast, who for very rage and madness, cast forth a most
horrible roaring, mingled with fire, blood, and frothy foam; whereupon, he
flies up into the air, thinking to come down with great violence upon her,
and so to gripe her within his Tallents, but she quickly shot another shaft
into his belly, as he was about to fly upon her, who slipping a little aside,
suffered him to fall with great force upon the hard ground.

This made him to leap up hastily again, and with strange fury to run
toward his enemy to devour her, who never gave back one foore for the
matter, but quickly let fliean other arrow, which lighted just upon one of his
ears, which made him so outrageous through very grief and pain, as he flew
upon her with great violence, and with his sharp paws (in despite of her)
snatched her Bow and Arrows from her: which done, away he runs with them
through the wood, leaving the flight, and the fair Virgin, that followed after
him. I seeing this, made all the have I could to get down, to the end I might
know what she was, and thereupon followed her hard.

Having overtaken her, I was given to understand by her, that this Monster was
PRIDE, having the head of a wild Boore, proud and greediet: he skin, the
hair, and the color, of a roaring Lion, stately and high minded, more then
other beasts: the belly of a mutinous Leopard, wonderful insolent, the claws
of a Griffon, by nature arrogant.

The tail of a Serpent, subtle, perverse, and impudent: and the wings of an
Eagle, who is by kind, lofty, and high minded. This Monster was borne before
all time, proceeding from the Excrements of heaven and earth, Of the Original
and first beginning of Pride.
when the Eternal Jehovah, first divided them, since when it has haunted men
continually.

The everliving Son of the everlasting God, coming amongst us, drove him
away, since which time, he being returned into the world, has done more hurt,
then ever he had done before, as the thief does, that has once escaped out of
Gaile.

Never was there any so wise, that has been able to resist him, no not the old
Philosophers themselves, who composed many famous works in disgrace and
contempt of vainglory, setting down their names in the forefront of their
books, but were overcome by him.

All Christians (for the most part) were in the same predicament, especially
such, who term themselves to be Masters of the Law, and teach the same: for
so sweet a thing is glory, as every one desires, and runs to have it.

But (as I told you before) our Savior Christ, being borne in an old rotten
stable, within a Manger upon haie, and betwixt two harmless beasts, chased
away this cruel Monster, unto the shame of all other mortal creatures. For
his Palace royal was a stable, his Princely Chariot, a Manger: his fine
sheets, haie and straw: his Seruitors, an Ox and an Ass: and his Princes,
poor and silly Shepherds.

After this, the good Constantiue, having given so much lands unto the Popes,
as they began to dispute with armed weapons, what right they had unto the same,
he (...) in amongst the Clergy, and so by little and little, amongst all
sorts of men else.

Thus has he long time run up and down, till at the length, An example^
discouri^^^t (...).
I my self who a^^ called Humility, obtained so much, as either I might kill
him, or at the least drive him out of the world.

But the Traitor perceiving himself to be vanquishit, withdraws himself
from me, and closely hides himself, one while in Monasteries, an other while
in women's breasts, now in the Court of Princes, and then again amongst
Soldiers and men of war, so as I can never chase him away, by reason be
has so many sure and common places, whereunto he does retire.

In the end (by chance) I found him in this Desert (a thing most miraculous)
for sildome or never, was he wont to haunt solitarily places, his chief
dwelling, being always in the proud Palaces, of haughty and high minded
Monarks.

And if I had been able to have fastened all mine Arrows which I brought with
me, he had been dead ere this, but the damned wretch (being encouraged by the
succors, which great personages lend him) has grown insolent and bold, as he
has ventured to snatch four of them from me, which he never durst to have
done, if he had fought with me only of himself, and had not been assisted and
countenanced out by the aid of others.

If thou have well marked and considered of my carriage, and mine attire, thou
ma^est easily guess I am Humility, his deadly enemy, but (at this day) so
hated of all men, as they reject me, suffering me (as thou see) to walk (in
a manner) naked, as miserable and starued creatures void of all relief,
whereas Pride, is well and richly clothed, full fed, and much made of, and
well entertained of every one.

If thou remembrest well our combat, thou saw me, to shoot three Arrows at
him, all which did hit him right. The Arrows that Humility shot at the
Monster Pride. The first Artowe was shame^ aft^es.


The first, was the shape of Shamefastnes, which struck out the eyes of Pride,
for never shall any bashful and modest man or woman be subject unto Pride. as
simple and debonaire, was chaste Hyppolitus, courteous, Alexander the great, and
affable and mild the valiant Scipio.

Of women, humble was Cassandra: Lucretia, meek and gentle: Oclatoia, and
Cornelia, lovely and sweet in behavior.

The second Arrow, was the Arrow of Truth, for never can a just or upright
conscience, The Second Truth.
be trouched with Pride, and this flewe into his ears, which shows, that no
true man, will ever importune or abuse the cares of any, with false tales, and
deceitful lies: as most true and just of their word, was Arist^des, Ph^cion,
and Cato the elder.

The third, which hit his belly, was the Arrow of Sobriety, for what man
soever shall use to fast, and give himself to abstinence, shall never wax
proud, The third Sebrictie.
because wine and gluttony engenders Pride, discention, quarrels, and strife;
Witness, Epanondas, Cincinatus, Cate, Ci^^r^, and diverse other. And these were
the three Shaftes, with which he was wounded.

The other four, which he took away (perforce) from me, were these following.

The first was of Justice, which should have hit into the Muzzle or snout, for
a just and upright Judge, will never take delight in the sent of gifts and
presents, The four other Arrows, that Pride took away from Humility. The
first was of Justice. The Second of Fortitude. The third of Patience.
least he should be corrupted thereby; neither will he be insolent and high
minded at all. A president we have of Samuel the Prophet, of Daniel, and diverse
others.

The second was that of Fortitude, which should have pierced quite through his
neck, for never was a valiant Conqueror proud, but rather courteous and mild,
witness Alexander, Casar, Edward the third, King of England: and Charles the
fifth, with diverse others beside.

The third was that of Patience, which should have deprived him of his wings;
for the Patient man that can stay the good hour, has the advantage of these
proud and ambitious persons, remaining master of his own will, where haughty
minded spirits fall soonest, when they seek to fly highest.

Of the number of such as have been patient, was that grave Camillus, who being
exiled from his country, which he had so often offended, patiently attended
her leisure, until at the length, she acknowledging her fault, called him home
again.

So likewise was Cicero another, choosing rather to live as a banished man,
enduring with patience his unjust injury, then his City should for his cause,
grow to civil Discention and utter overthrow, his stayed forbearance giving
him in the end the victory, against all his proud enemies.

The fourth and last, being seven in all, was that of Mildenes, for never was
mild or friendly person, proud, and this Arrow should have struck off the
legs of this Monster. For meek and humble minds, shall by little and little
take down and tame the high courages of the proud: and such was Dyon, surnamed
the courteous, who brought low the audatious boldness of the Tyrant Dennis: and
such another was Scipio the gentle, who brake the insolent proceeding of
haughty Hanniball.

These be the Arrows by which this ugly beast might have been tamed and
subdued, The forth, and last was of Mildnes.
but he having taken four from me, I doubt mesore, that he will never be
brought under Subjection by any. As for my self, I can no more (now) hunt, nor
chase him away, sithence I am abandoned of men, and disarmed as thouseest, and
therefore, seeing I find my self hated here in the world, and quite without
armor, I must be forced to take my journey up to heaven, unto the other
virtue: where I doubt not, but I shall be better entertained, then I have been
here upon the earth.

Mean space, I admonish thee, and all such as thou shall think worthy to
make acquainted with this matter, to detest and aborre this shameless Monster,
and to follow me in my course of life; otherwise they shall be afflicted with
like punishment, as those proud Giants, the Titanois were, for their more then
audatious presumption. Having made an end of her speech, I might perceive wings
to issue out of the sides of this beauteous Damozell: wherewith I saw her to
fly up toward the element, passing through the airie Regious, until she came
unto the heavenly Court of the Eternal King: since which time, she never
descended, nor never (as I doubt) will she any more.

This accident drove me into no small amazement, not unlike him, that sees
many strange enchantments done by a Magitian, whereupon, with more have then
good speed, I went to find my Mistress, to declare this adventure unto her, but
the fear she had of the foresaid beast, had driven her from thence, so as I
found nothing but the corner within which we had hidden our selves.

But O me unhappy wretch, that reported that, which afterward was my utter
ruin and overthrow. An Example.
O what evil sometimes this little tongue of ours does unto us, for that of
Demosthenes overthrew the liberty of Greece.

And therefore thrice wise was that Philosopher, that thought nothing in this
world to be worse then the tongue, because it not only brings calamity unto
him that speaks, but also unto the whole commonwealth besides.

And therefore, well said that old Sage of Greece, who affirmed, that silence
was commendable, and without blame, whereas speaking, was subject unto
reprehention and reproach.

The ancient wise men in times past, did offer Sacrifice unto dumb Silence, as
unto a sacred Deity, adoring her with great reverence, for many a one have
been cut short of their lives, because of their ouer-rash and bold speech: and
this found I, to be but too true, by mine own experience, and unto my no small
grief.

Well, I not finding my Mistress there, went seeking of her up and down, not
making account of any pain, so I might once have a sight of her, love making
that labor, to seem but easy and sweet, which Lovers undertake, when they
follow in pursuit their fair and beauteous Ladies, for the desire which they
have to see them, makes them to think it is no travail at all, and that man
thinks that he rather plaieth then works, who expects some worthy
recompense when he has brought his work unto an end.

This made me to run up and down to see if I could find her, whilst being
earnest in this business, I might hear a certain voice coming forth of a
thick quickset, whereupon I stayed awhile to harken if it were hers or no, but
I knew quickly it was not, as soon as I hard the Song, which was as follows.

Withouten scope,
To have the hopen
My Lady any more,
Since cannot be,
That I may see,
To death i will fly therefore.
Sweet death now come,
And to me run.
Since I to thee do cry,
Be thou my friend,
That I may end
These dates of misery.
Whilst I do line,
I naught but grieve,
Deprined of all joy,
How can that heart,
Of case have part,
When Love does him annoy?
My sorrows sour,
My cries each hour,
My soul does pinch with pain,
My heavy moanes,
My sighs nor groans,
Can never move my dame.
Why then, so long,
(Death) do me wrong?
That yet I am not dead,
That man does rest,
Happy and blessed,
Whose soul from hence is sled.
No worldly strife,
No ill so rife,
Can hurt who is in graus,
Die he does not,
But life has got,
That such a good may have.
Thus was the Shepherd (amorous of my Diana) of whom I told you before, who
reaped no more sweet fruits of his love, nor found any more courtesy at her
hands, then I had done, which was in effect nothing, so that we being borne
(both) under one Plannet, became to become partners and companions in our love
and misery together. He sighed and sobbed as I did, he wailed and wept as I
used to do, and yet neither his sighing nor his tears, were any more
profitable unto him then they were unto me.

After his Song was finished, he began thus afresh to complain. O Cupid, how
well have the Gods chosen thee to be the bloody butcher of their cruelties,
since they could not bestow this office upon any that could discharge the
place so well as thou, by reason thou art more cruelly given, then any one
that is in heaven above, or else in hell below?

There is no tortor or torment, no Corsie or anquish, of what Nature or kind
soever, that is without hope, Love only excepted: for to miserable Captains,
there is some hope of their freedom, to poor and beggarly wretches, a conceit
to become rich again: and to sick persons, some comfort to recover their
former health; but love is without all likelihood or belief of hope whatsoever.

Who then is more cruel then he, who more to be doubted, and who so hurtful
and dammageable unto mankind? and therefore when the Gods mean to punish us
most cruelly, then do they send this cruel executioner unto us, he being
far worse then the flashing lightning it self, for that (without
languishing) quickly dispatcheth us, where this, after it once begins with
us, never makes an end, driving us to linger in a worse then deadly
consumption.

Too well find I this, and feel it to my smart, loving in despair, and yet
in such sort, as death, which is hateful unto men (and is of force to rid me
out of this agony and insupportable passions) is forbidden me, I not daring to
die, for fear to loose the wished for presence of her who daily kills me.

So does the Merchant allured with profit, scowre so often the swelling Seas,
that in the end, both he and his ship, with all his Merchandise is swallowed
therein.

And so I love, and yet will not give over that which in the end will drown
me, and be the cause of my pittious overthrow: but as the Gods harden the hearts
of such men whom they mean to chastise, who when it is too late begin to
think how they might have aunided the same, so the more rigorously to punish
me, the heavens have forced me to love, depriving me of all means how to help
my self, because they are desirous of my fall.

O thrice blessed Leander, Piramus; and Paris, in respect of me, who for love
left their lives, and yet had this good hap, that before they died, they
enjoyed their Mistre^es company, and were beloved of them: where I on the
other side, am hated and loathed of mine.

But diverse, and of sundry effects are the shafts of Love, some are of lead,
and they rather cool and freeze, then heat: others, ^^hedded with gold, which
pierce into our hearts, setting a fire many flames within the same.

With the Leaden Arrow has Cupid struck my Lady, which makes her cold and
cruel unto my mischief: and with a gold enoue, is my poor heart wounded,
burning the same incessantly, and making it to die remediless.

As the waifairing man, who percei^in^ two or three wolves devouring a sheep
most greedily in the corner of a field, goes his way fair and softly, that he
may not be perceived by them.

Even so, I having he^rd what this Shepherd said, stole softly by him without
any noise, because he should not see me in quest of my Lady; and yet had I no
great need so to do; for Love takes a man's sight and senses away from him, in
such wise, as they become Rocks or Trees, as Myrrha was. And thus was I rid of
my fellow in Love, whom I left alone to meditate thereupon, this musing,
working mischief, not alone to his thoughts, but unto h^ eyes and body also.

Mean space, I seek up and down for my Diana. Never did those two brethren
being Twins, wander more carefully to seek all about for their ravished
sister, then I sought here and there for her, whom at the last I found
dancing amongst other Nymphs, who to drive away the fear from her, which as
yet held her, had devised this sportfull pastime, to see if they could make her
merry.

One thought drowneth another, one exercise makes another to be forgotten, and
nothing sooner drives away a Tempest, then the bright beams of the Sun, his
chiefest enemy. Still and hushed did I stand to se^ this trim daunsing, not
being a little proud to behold my Saint, who excelled all the rest (whi^^h they
trod the measures) as well in beauty as in behavior and good grace, as the
Phoenix does all other Birds.

And now she had quite forgotten the foresaid Monster, and her fear was past
and gone, when no sooner she espied me, but that her color began to change,
she showing not that liuelines in the Galliard, as she had done before, for my
presence brought the danger before her eyes, which she had but lately sc^^ed,
putting her in mind afresh of the foul deformity of the M^^rster. Accursedd,
that should be occasion of grief unto her, upon whom my whole life and
liberty did depend. But this was but a preamble or a beginning of my sorrows,
the end whereof was more then lamentable and Tragical.

Well may I say, too true is that poverty, which learneth us, that one
pleasure engenders a thousand cares, and that nothing is so much subject unto
change, as is the prosperity of man.

Quickly did I perceive how my D^^na was altered, yet knew I not well the
occasion thereof, for one while I thought it was for mere pity of my pains
that she looked so, who beholding me, began to bethink her self of the same:
another while I doubted, least some sinister conceit, was come into her head
against me, she being loath to utter it with her own mouth unto me.

Being thus troubled in mind with two contrary opinions, I thought it best to
stay, until they had made an end of their pastime, the better to be resolved
therein, being greatly moved, in that upon my first arrival, I saw her change
her countenance, and therefore longed the more to know the cause thereof.

It is strange to see, how we are always more desirous and curious to
understand what is bad in our own behalfes, then that which is good for us, as
if we our selves and not others, would become murderers of our own healths.

Mean space, many things ran in my brains, whilst my Mistress (passing by)
cast now and then a glaunce upon me, which sometimes I took for the best, and
then again I doubted the worst.

To be short, I resembled the guilty Fellon, who stricken cold with fear,
attends his last sentence, either of life or death, whilst I listened unto
their singing, and amongst diverse other Sonnets, I brought this away with me,
which one of the Nymphs warbled forth, and therather did I learn it by roate
so soon, because it did somewhat answer unto my humor.

AN ODE.
Worthy's he of the bright Day,
Who does loyal LOVE obey.
CUPID only I do love,
Him I worship stillaboue:
Happy is he that by the same,
Wisdom to himself does gain.
Worthy's he of the bright Day,
Who does loyal LOVE obey.
O how sweet is that warm Fire.
Which our hearts heates with Desire?
To our souls no sweetness is,
Half so dulcet as is this.
Worthy's he of the bright Day,
Who does loyal LOVE obey.
Blessed LOVE, withouten crime,
Two Sonles pleases at one time:
Then does LOVE, his Lover right,
When his love he does requite.
Worthy's he of the bright Day,
Who does layall LOVE obey.
Of two Souls he makes but one,
In two Bodies all alone:
LOVE more happy cannot he,
Then we loving Couples see.
Worthy's he of thy bright Day,
What does loyal LOVE obey.
Pleasure none upon the ground,
Like to LOVE is to be found:
Pieasures pass as transitory,
LOVE (still) lines in great glory.
Worhy's he of the bright Day,
Who does loyal LOVE obey.
After the Nymph had made an end of her Song, which charmed my spirits, my
Lady (as another Caliope, answered her. Ah renowned Father, how sweet, (and
yet sower withal) was that voice of hers unto me? Empoysoned Ipocras is not
half so dangerous unto the health of man, as that Dittie was cruel unto my
very soul.

Never was those bewitching tunes of the alluring Sirens, half so gracious and
delightful, which the prudent Duke of Ithaca, feared more then Death it self.

One of the fairest parcells of a woman's beauty, is her voice, whilst it does
ravish the hearts of the stauders by, with true Harmony, and whilst her
warbling Accents, pierce and enter into the very depth of their souls.

By our ears, does it enter down into our hearts, but it comes not from
thence, without spoil and riches. For it carries away the mind of man,
playing as the subtle warlike foe does, who marching upon his enemies
Country, sets upon the same violently, and never returns home again,
until he be laden with great prey and treasure.

So sweet was her voice, and so bright her Sapphire eyes, as I could not choose
but cry out, (although softly, and unto my self,) Ah woe is me, I die. But
now I pray you, harken unto my Ladies Song, which was quite contrary unto that,
that went before. For thus it was.

Worthy is he of dark Night,
That in Cupid does delight.
Nothing in this World can be,
Sweeter then our Liberty:
Which LOVE often takes away,
And then all our joys decay.
Worthy is he of blaeke Night,
That in Cupid does delight.
LOVE does never sorrow miss,
(Who grieves) malcontented is:
But LOVE (thus) does Lovers sting,
Does not LOVE, then sorrow bring?
Worthy is he of Black Night,
That in Cupid does delight.
Who that soul has ere seen oasde,
Upon whom fierce LOVE has soasde!
The Mistress and the Sernant both,
Often through LOVE, their lives do loath.
Worthy is he of blaeke Night,
That in Cupid does delight.
Gods from heaven have chast'e and some,
This vile wretch, us to torment:
Nor are we him to endure,
That such plagnes us, does procure.
Worthy is he of blaoke Night,
That in Cupid does delight.
Then most wretched him I deem,
That of this blind Boy does steeme:
Worser Plague there is not of ills,
That consumes still, yet (nere) kills.
Worthy is he of black Night,
That is Cupid takes delight.
If this Song did astenne me, driving me into a heavy dump, you may caslly
judge; For I assure you, I began now to give over all hope to have any more
joyful days in this world, and I was of this opinion that my Ladit had (for
the nonce) delivered the same in my presence, to the end I should not look for
any favor at her hands, and that by this Song, she had as it were bidden me
farewell.

For such women as are wise and of diseretion, have a thousand devises to take
their leaves, and to be rid of their Lovers, whom they esteem not: as well to
shadow their cruel minds with the same, as to be free and clear from them,
without reproach or blame. For what need had my Mistress to bid me Adieu, since
I never was worthy, nor accounted to be one that she should love?

No, no: I was not a man good enough, to hear (of a beauty so perfect) so
much as this one small word (Go thy ways.) But haughty and high minded LOVE,
uses to distribute his pride amongst his followers: in such sort, as you shall
seldom or never, see a Lover, but that he is insolent and proud, promising
far more unto himself, then he is like to obtain. He that is a servant,
will be always sure to have one quality or other of his Masters, as a new
vessel retains still the sent of that liquor, with which he has been first
seasoned.

And so I (before this time) began to think better of my self, then I had
cause, but my vainglorious humor was quickly taken down, resembling the
Lightning flash, which no sooner is borne, but that it dies: or a buble of
water, which is no sooner come, but that it is gone again presently.

The Dance ended, my Lady came straight toward me, demanding, and enquiring
of me, what that Monster and that Maid were, and what became of them? I told
her all (as I did unto you, without forgetting any thing) describing unto her,
(with all the best cunning I had) both the ugliness of that deformed beast,
and the beauty of the Damsel that did encounter with him.

As that brave Caualier whom his enemy does dare to Combat, stands musing
within himself (sometime) before he does answer, debating in his mind,
whether he should accept or refuse the Combat, so stood my Mistress mute and
still at my speeches, studying a great while, before she spoke any one word. In
the end she sits her down, when having willed us to sit by her, she
begins with a most sober and sad look, thus to deliver her mind.

Seeing (Shepherd) that this Monster is called Pride, thou could not
describe so foul a Beast (and so horrible) bad de enough, neither must thou
speak too much in the praise of so sweet, so fair, and gentle a Virgin as
that Damsel was, because she is Humility: For what thing is there in the
world, more ugly then Pride? What more disagreeing from the Nature of Gods and
men? what so great an aduerfarie unto Virtue? and what more contrary unto the
glory of mankind?

Pride, was first placed in heaven amongst the Angelical spirits, which the
Almighty God had made beautiful, immortal, and without corruption: An
excellent discourse against Pride.
but this Monster having defamed and disgraced them, was (with them) thrown
downefrom thence, from whence he came to inhabit in the terrestrial Paradise.

There did this damned wretch, poison our first Parents, persuading them, The
fall of Lucifer through Pride.
that they should be like unto their Creator, if they would (by transgressing
his sacred Ordinance) cate of the forbidden Tree.

These poor souls believed him, but they overthrew themselves, for having
hearkened unto him, God driving them out of that dainty Paradise, condemned
them to die, The fall of our first parents Adam and Eve, through Pride.
after they had (in much sorrow and care) finished their natural live With
them, was this Serpent hunted away, who retired himself amongst mortal men,
living here in the world, and few were there of the sons of men, which did
not entertain and make much of him.

Caine nourished this hell-hound a long time, being induced through him, to
kill his humble and meek-harted brother, who could not abide this insolent
Dragon. Afterward, The fall of Caine through Pride.
as men grew and increased, so has this Monster done, both in power and
credit: insomuch as he counseled the children of the earth to build a Tower,
which might reach up into heaven. These vain fools believed him, busying
themselves about their high Turret, and taking great pains to accomplish and
effect this rash and haughty enterprise.

But the HOLY ONE of Syon, overthrew their building, The overthrow of the
Tower of Babylon, through Pride.
destroyed the work of their own hands, and brake their audacious attempts,
driving the Monster himself, almost out of his wits, to see such an
alteration and change.

Hereof was it, that the first Poets fained: That those huge Giants, the
Tytans, being sons of the earth, went about to set hill upon hill, and
mountain upon mountain, that they might scale up to heaven, and that
(therefore) Jupiter destroyed them with Lightning, by the aid and assistance
of Minerua, the Goddess of wisdom: overthrowing their prefumptuous action,
with his foresaid Thunderbolts.

Since when, this Monster has entered into the Courts of Princes and Kings,
impoysoning them so strongly with his accursed venom, The overthrow of the
Pe^sian Kings, through Pride.
as they grew to be exceeding proud, causing themselves to be worshipped and
adored of men, as the Kings of Persia did, he giving address unto some of
them, that they should imitate Iupster, making his Thunder to roar, and to
cast Lightning abroad, as he used.

This proud Conceit was entertained in the Palace of Alcxander the great,
after he had brought the Empire of Persia under subjection: The overthrow of
Alexander the great through Pride.
For he grew so arrogant and so high minded, as he would needs be adored by
his people, but death (quickly) extinguished both his glory and his life, after
he grew to be odious amongst his own followers, through his insolent Pride.

So would Nabuchadonozar be worshipped, causing his Image to be set up, he
commanding every one to offer sacrifice and prayer unto it, The fall of
Nabucadnezar, through Pride.
as unto a God. But the three Children of the Iowes refused this unjust law:
who for that cause, were cast into a hot burning Oven, they being
nevertheless taken forth from thence, without having any hurt at all, through
the help of an Angel, which their God had sent to succor them. Yet the same
God, being jealous of his Glory, which he will not have attributed unto any,
but unto himself, scourged that proud Monarke, for forgetting himself so
much. In so much as he made him to live (the space of seven whole years)
amongst bruit Beasts, eating the like pasture that they did, and having in a
manner, the selfsame skin, and very form as they had, so as he became
both hairie and rough as an Oxt.

This hellish Monster seeing so mighty a Potentate brought so low, so
miserable, and into so pittious an estate, left him, and went to seek out the
Romans, who being Lords of the whole world, received him with great joy, but
he infected their minds upon a suddrine, making them so proud, as (one not
being able to endure the greatness of another) they took up Arms, revenging
upon their own selves, those great wrongs and outrages which they had done
unto other strange Nations.

Thus was their Peacocks plumes taken down, and their pride assuaged, haughty
Pompay, The fall of Pompay the great, through Pride.
being worthily murdered, because he refused such honest conditions of peace
which Caesar offered him, who desirous to be a Monarke, and to reign as
absolute, bragged that he was able to leauie and make a thousand Legions of
armed Soldiers out of Italy, with holding up his hand only.

The Romans being overthrown through Civil dissension, and this subtle
Serpent seeing them at so low an Ebb, that they could not at that time, be
any longer at charges with him: The overthrow of the French Nation, by the
valiant Englishmen, through Pride.
he comes over the Mountains, and so into France, unto the Frenchmen, whom
likewise he undid, through his wicked poison: for (they forsooth) would needs
be Monarkes of all the world, but their brave courages were quickly cooled, for
they were brought so low, and had so many terrible overthrows, by their
ancient enemies, the valiant ENGLISHMEN, as they lost all, not having so much
as a little ho^e, wherein to put their heads, after they had seen their Kings
taken prisoners alive, and all the flower of their Nobility discomfited and
slain.

Which this Monster perceiving, and that they looked so pale and lean, as they
could not cherish him as they had done heretofore: away he flies unto the
Ottomans, who as then began to lay a foundation of their Tyranny in Asia the
less, The fall of Bajazet the great Turk, through Pride.
whom he so infocted, as they would needs be kneeled unto, as unto Gods, but
small time did their vainglory last; For Tamberlaine came, who spoiled their
Empire, took Bajazet, Prince of the Turks, prisoner, and the more to Eclipse
and abase his haughty stomach, he caused him to be fed in a Cage of gold,
making him to serve in steed of a footestoole, when he went to horseback.

Which this Monster seeing, he takes his lean of the Turks, following him,
who had overcome them, who grew so insolent and proud, as he termed himself
The Scourge of God.

Neither would he take any City or Town which he had besieged, unto his
mercy, if they had exceeded three days before they had surrendered themselves
unto him.

But this insolent man was punished of God, his children within a while after,
The fall of Tamberlaine, through Pride.
losing all that he had gotten before, which the old Serpent espying, back
he returns once more to Rome, thrusting himself amongst the Roman
Emperors, whom he likewise did ruinate.

For Sopor King of Persia, overthrew one of them in battle, The fall of the
Roman Emperors, through Pride.
and taking him prisoner, used him in steed of a form or thresholde, when he
would get up upon his horse.

And yet for all this, did not this Monster give over Rome, Pride lodged among
Ecclesiastical persons in Rome.
but get him self amongst the Ecclesiastical persons, whom he sorely
indaungered, and that done, he comes back into France, where in the time of
Charles the great, he was honored, was bid welcome, and was entertained
with great credit in his Court.

He passing the Alps, to place the Pope in his Pontifical chair this wicked
Monster followed him, remaining long in Italy, Pride amongst Heretics.
insomuch as the Devil began to raise up new Teachers and Sowers of false
doctrine, with which he acquainted himself, pussing up these turbulent
Spirits with such pride, as they disdained, both Saints, Angels, and
Princes. From thence he took his journey unto the Switzers, who called
themselves, the Correctors of Princes.

But Francis, the first of that name, and King of France, abated their
Surquedrie, Pride amongst the Zuitzers, and they plagued for the same.
bravely overthrowing them, and learning them unto their cost, that they might
be tamed and beaten. From whence he went to dwell amongst Heretics, where he
yet continues, and so will do still, and this has been the life of this
horrible Monster Pride, so much hated and detested of good men.

But now (quite contrary unto him) there is nothing more sweet, more sacred,
or more devout, then is fair HVMILITIE, which gave victory unto chaste
Judith, against Holofernes: to religious Hester, aganst Aman: to simple David,
A praise of HVMILITY.
against huge Goliath: to kind Judas Machabeus, against fierce Antiochus: and
to courteous Godfrey of Bullion, against the Turks and Sarracins: to Charles
the great, (the honor of France) against Painims, and unbelievers: to Charles
the fifth, against the High Dutchmen: and to Great Francis, the French King,
against Italians and Spaniards.

Then let us follow Humility, and chase from us Pride: For never shall any
proud person find the gates of Heaven open unto him. God has not driven from
thence those proud Angels, that others, (as proud as they) should be
entertained there. Only the humble and lowly minds shall mount up thither, as
our humble Savior JESUS CHRIST did most gloriously, and so his mild Mother,
that blessed Virgin, S. Mary, his single-hearted Apostels, and those meek and
patient Martyrs, they shall inhabit that glorious Kingdom for ever.

The proud man, may be resembled unto the Cedar of Libanon, A Similie.
which a sudden Thunder cracketh, bends, and breaks in pieces: or as a
sharp edged Axe does heaw asunder; Eue^ so shall a proud man quickly fall, but
shall pass away, as if he had never been.

This was the cause the high judge Celestial, caused the earth to open, and
swallow down Corah, Dathan. and Abyram, in that they durst rise up against
their guide Moses: This was the death of mutinous Absolon, taking Arms against
his own Father. An Example of Pride.
This made insolent Jeroboam so miserable, who would pill and pole his
harmless subjects. This overthrew impudent Iezabel, suffering her to be
devoured of Dogs. And to be brief, this punished ambitious Antiochus:
high-minded Senacherit, with ten thousand more.

His Parable is most true, who sent home the poor Publicane (being humble and
meek) more justified unto his house, then he did the proud Pharisie, who
stood vaunting so much upon his own good-works, with this sentence, Free that
bu^^ (...) himself shall be glorified: and he that glorifieth himself, shall
not be exalted. O how much better and comelier is it, that a man should say
unto one, Friend sit up higher, at the Table, and take a more honorable place
unto you: then to say, Come down, and sit lower, that a worthier person then
thy self, may sit where thou do.

Hence then Pride, and fie upon Haughtines, pack hence Ambition, and away with
vainglory. these being most dangerous plagues unto men, infecting as well their
consciences, as their minds within them.

On the other side, sweere and profitable is Humility, for so does the wise
man teach us, when he says, Boast not thy self of to morrow, for little
do thou know what tuill this day may bring unto thee.

Amilcar, Amilear deceuted through Pride.
chief General of the Carthaginian forces, besieging Syracusa, had an answer
from his false Gods, that he should suppe the day following within the same
Town: whereupon, he straightwaies began to wax proud, and yet did it fall out
otperwise then he expected, for although he supped the same night within the
City, it was not as a Conqueror, but as a prisoner, he being taken in a
Skirmish, which they of the besieged Town made against him.

Let us not therefore vaunt our selves overmuch, least we be taken down
sooner then we look for: for he only that is lowly in mind, shall be
accounted of. Let us then shun all Prids: to avoid the same, we must leave
all companies, all Cities, and all Courts of Princes.

So did the devout and mortified Marie Magdalene, leave the world, retiring her
self into a Rock, The death of M. Magdalen.
where being all alone, she lamented her sins past, with great contrition and
repentance, passing the rest of her life, in this devout manner.

To leave this Monster, the Ancient good Fathers, ran into Woods and
Deserts, leaving their Towns and Cities, as Paul, Anthony, Hierome, and diverse
more, because Prsde seldom or never haunteth solitary places, for fear he
should be starued for hun, ger, (but rather runs amongst the Rich, and where
there is good store, and plenty of every thing, and thither likewise must we
withdraw our selves, if we mean to live devoutly indeed.

The Almighty Son of the everliving God, chose a Wilderness for his field
of war, A solitary place better for Meditano of heavenly matters, then
Cities, or company of men.
at what time he did combat with the Devil, after that he had fasted forty
days, and forty nights.

O thrice happy they, who giving over the world, pass the rest of their lives
in true holiness and virtue, in some secret and remote place, as if it were
an Hermitage, where neither Ambition, nor Envy, neither Covetousness, nor vain
Love, trouble them not at all, whilst they with great contentment and pleasure,
pass the rest of their lives, free from all dangers whatfoeuer.

There they grieve not to see their enemies wax rich, and themselves to grow
poor. There no brawlings at the Bar about Law matters, no confused noise for
the profit of Cities, no toyling and moyling like Drudges in the Country,
does trouble or molest them at all, whilst they only live unto their God, not
regarding or once minding any matters or business of the world.

After this manner of life, A proof of the Contemplatius life.
mean I to end mine own, and I will study to find out this sacred
Humility, which never deceives any. For hardly can he miss of his purpose,
or be frustrated of his enterprise, who goes willingly about the same, not
being troubled with any thing else in his mind at all.

Hence then all Ambitious creatures, for I must needs leave you, since you
soil our souls, as oil does stain a garment. A solitary and sequestered
kind of life is best, Pride is never in poote and virtuous places.
more pleasing, and more secure then any other. So will I live, and such a one
will I be, to ^uoyd that furious Monster Pride, who never comes in chaste and
private places, which are well governed, and where good exercises are used, in
all laudable sort that may be.

And therefore here I protest, that from hence forward, I will leave this wicked
world, and that most willingly, with all the vain pompes, and flattering
greatness of the same, wishing every one that is wise to follow me, taking
the same course I am in hand to do.

So horrible and terrible is the foulness of that Beast, as it makes me
(yet) to tremble for very fear, and never shall I think thereof, but that I
shall find my self the worse a long time after: Therefore to prevent the
worst, and not to fall into his gryping paws, I am resolved to forsake all
company of men, shutting my self within some uncouth and unfrequented place,
like unto a Recluse, where without ever seeing any body, I will end the
remnant of this my too long life, far from Pride and ambition, and void of
all love and envy.

This is my constant and certain resolution, which I propose to such as
(minding to follow me) are willing to be partakers of true Humslitie, gaining
thereby rest in this world, and in the world to come peace everlasting.

Therefore (my dear and sweet companions) although I be loath, yet must I needs
leave you, to seek out this rough and austere kind of abode, where my drerie
eyes shall be exempted from the view of this strange Monster, which would make
me to die for very fear only, if they should by chance once more have never
so little sight of him: yea, yea, I will seek to avoid his loathed prefence
by this good means, whilst following the steps of humble Humility, I shall
imitate that great vessel of election, who rejoiced in nothing so much, as in
the cross of Christ.

That religious S. John the Baptist, who called himself, the voice of a crier
in the wilderness, and that godly Elias, who termed himself to be a feather
blown up and down by the wind, all which three, were lowly and humble
aduersries to Pride, and void of all ambition.

Therefore have I set up my rest to cast Anchor in this Haven, after my sailing
through so many and dangerous mortal Seas, desiring you all (my dear and
loving sisters) most humble entreating you, that none of you do me that great
wrong, as to seek to dehort me from this so holy a resolution, which if you
should, yet were it but in vain, and to no purpose at all: he is accursed,
that seeks to lead astray that sinner, who is entered into the path of his
salvation, he having a sorrowful heart, and being penitent in his mind for
the same.

Now (reverend Sire) judge you if this Oration was pleasing unto me or no, I
stood mute and still, as that huge Gretian Horse made of wood, wherein were
hidden the enemies of Troy, for never (until then) did I feel the piereing
darts of sorrow aright.

In respect of this, all my other pains were but pleasures, nay mere toys
(to speak of) in a manner, compared unto this Corfie, which so violently
seized upon me, as I felt most bloody pangs, and cruel conflicts to make
war within me, the anguish thereof being so insupportable, as I looked every
hour when my soul and body should have parted asunder. Ah most unlucky
tongue, who taught thee to talk so much?

Alas, that man should be so vnwife, as to make way unto his own overthrow,
whilst he thinking to do for the best, it falls out unto him for the worst,
and where he looks to have praise, there oftentimes he purchases most blame
and discredit. Full little did I think, but that whilst I reported the
filthiness of the Monster, she would have given me great thanks for the same,
and that made me with the best terms I could, to set out my tale, but it fell
out quite contrary, for I seeking to get somewhat, lost all. Well do I see,
that the prudencie of man is nothing, whilst God scosteth at their wisdom,
changing their dissignes, quite contrary unto their desire.

Great reason had I to curse that lucklesse Monster, unto the bottomless pit
of hell, although (before) I had praised him so much, because through him I was
permitted to touch the fair hand of my froward Mistress.

And thus Lovers, either hate or love, what their blind God puts into their
heads, they being still wavering and inconstant in their opinions.

Diverse were the heavy thoughts, which as then seized upon me, I being grown
(in a manner) to follow black despair, because I saw I was like to be
deprived of the presence of my Lady for ever, if she (going onward as she
began) would seclude her self from all companies, like unto an Ankresse. An
other while, I imagined that I my self was culpable of all this woeful
mischance, fearing shroadly, that all such as should deplore or lament the
loss of her, would lay all the fault upon me. And therefore had I great reason
to mourn and sorrow as I did, I showing by many signs, and expressing by
diverse ways, how my feeble heart was wounded, with an incurable fore.

But whilst I stood (thus) sighing, and lamenting unto my self, and whilst
all the sad Nymphs had fixed their weeping eyes upon the ground, not knowing
what to say unto the speech which their Lady made, the Shepherd who was
amorous of her, arrived there, who after he had with a dutiful Conge, saluted
her, and all her troop, presented her with these verses foilowing.

My pittious eye (in mailing) nothing more,
Bell oldeth fair, then thy diuinest grace:
Nothing I see more sacred to adore,
Then that pure virtue, that shines in thy face.
For thee I live, for thee I (willing) die,
Wishing no Sun to see, but for thy sake:
But should I thee offend, then wretched I.
Thus good, and ill, alike for thee I take.
For so rare subject as thy self divine,
My heart can never suffer overmuch:
Although these cares knawe this poor heart of mine,
And (to the quick) in every part me touch.
Happy is he that suffers for pure Love,
For whilst he loves so, he himself does find
Transformed into such beauty, as does move
Life, whereas death before to him was signds.
A Deity, then beauty is aright,
When it such wonders works in her sight.
Another.

(Cruel) for loving thee, i will end my days,
Since (dying) I shall live still in thy beauty:
Who dies Conqueror merrits double praise,
But far more be, who dies for loving duty.
Immortal glory Piramus did gain
For this; besides his loyal chastity
Was much commended, when by death the same,
Freede Thisbe from most woeful misery.
As he for her, so I for thee will do,
For thee i will die, of my chaste Love the honor:
And as the Phoenix i will consume for you.
I (as himself) consuming, in that manner.
Whilst of my bones so burned shall revive,
Thousands of Lovers created by this fire:
Who for their constant Love shall be alive
World without end, renowned through true desire.
Of these Sonnets she made no account, but having read them (which she did
rather to be rid of him, then otherwise) she gave them back again unto the
Shepherd (contrary unto her wonted custom) with these words. Little has she
need of praise, who because she should avoid the same, makes her self of a
live creature, but a deadly coarse, and yet of her own valuntarle will and
pleasure.

Wretched are such men as take pleasure to have their ears tickled with
praises. God only, who is immortal, infinite without sin, and everlasting,
deserves glory alone.

Then (Shepherd) talk no more unto me of such vanities as these are, for I am
no better then a most miserable caitiffe, who am going to die, and to give over
the world, if that ancient Greek, refused all titles of honor, affirming
that he knew only one thing, which was, that he knew nothing: think thou
then, that I can deserve it, I who am as brittle as glass, descended from that
first woman, yea, and from her own sex, who through her pride, ouerthew all
the world?

O Shepherd, Shepherd, if as (now) our first Grandmother Eve lived, so far
would she be from looking for honor and reverend duty to be done unto her,
as she would do nothing but weep continually, whilst her hair (with which
we set out and beautify our faces) should serve her to do nothing else, then
dry and weep those drerie tears of hers.

Away then withal vainglory. Behold, Saladine Emperor of the Infidels, who
dying, commanded that this Epitaph should be set upon his Tomb. An excellens
Epit aph.
Here lies famous Saladine, who of so many Kingdoms, victories, Riches, and
Titles of honor, which he had whilst he lived, has carried away with him,
nothing but a plain sheet into his grave.

All is mere vanity that man does, every thing passes away like wind, and
after they are dead, there is no more remembrance of them. That deserves no
glory at all, A Sentence.
which is subject unto ruin, and corruption: nothing is more mortal, or
declining then man: why then would thou have him commended, seeing he
perishes, and being perished, the cause of his honor (which thou so much
chauntest) does perish also? But God, who is without beginning, without middle,
or ending, and who decaieth not at all, does merit praise only, because he
cannot fade, and therefore the subject of his glory is always living, which
we sing continually unto his name.

Away then, away with these foolish verses, rather flattering, then true, and
let me never hear nor see any thing that has never so little a taste or show
of this misshapen Monster Pride. Is it possible that man should presume, that
he merriteth praise, who being made of earth, is no better then earth, and yet
before he can return to be the same again, he is found to be so miserable, as
he must feed the worms which are his brethren, as prudent Job wisely did
acknowledge as much?

Does he think that he has greater force then wild beasts have? if so, why
then he is deceived: for many a thousand of them is there, that are stronger
then he: does he think he is more lively in body then they? no he is not: is
he longer lived then they? neither: is he wittier or more provident then they
be? no: Or does he think that he is better able to withstand the weakness of
Nature better then they? nor that neither: for they are brone, armed with a
skin, with hair, and with paws, whereas he is brought into the world naked,
crying and howling for hunger and sickness.

Away then Vainglory, hence. Can thou (poor earthly creature) magnify
thy self in thy malicious mind, because thou art mighty in sin, and in
iniquity? God shall destroy thee, and root thee out from the earth, as the
good Gardener plucketh up the bad Grafts. God shall disseuer thee from his
children, and thou shall not enjoy that Land of promise, which is appointed for
such as are simple, godly, and just.

Ah subtle Poesy, how many good spirits have thou abused? Mean commonwealths
having been brought unto nothing, by reason of Poets and Orators, Against the
abuse of Poets and Orators.
because they have both wittingly and willingly done injury unto Truth.

The Orators of Athens, overthrew their city, because they incensed Phillip,
Against Demosthenes.
King of Macedon, against them, through their smooth and flattering Orations,
whilst they concealed the verity of the cause (for the nonce) from the
people: and that Roman Orator, how often did he blind the eyes of the Judges,
Against Cicero.
persuading them to condemn the guiltless, and to set at liberty the
guilty, as he himself (although most impudently) has not be ashamed to
confess? O rather wicked, then right wise and learned men, that bestow these
good gifts which are given you from above, to so bad use, and to so ill an end,
you making your Auditors believe, that black is white, wresting their honest
minds, quite contrary unto their just and upright meaning.

And yet although you are bad, yet are Poets far worse. For thou (Homer)
being a notable Liar, have made Hector to be vanquished, and Achilles victor,
Against Homer.
the Greeks to be Masters of the field, and the Troyans to be overthrown;
but herein thou errest, and lie mightily, for all was quite contrary; and
thou bring a Ulysses to be prudent, valiant, and a perfect, and an
accomplished man every way. But here again thou fainest, for a base coward was
he, and of no reckoning nor regard; his wife being far worse, and of a most
shameless life, whom thou set out to be the only flower of chastity.

Cruel and lying Virgil, Against Virgil.
thou writest of one Aeneas, father of Gods, and of his country, one that was
full of valor, of Justice and of piety. Ah false and dishonest Poet, do not
we all know, that he was a Traitor unto his country, that he sold his own
city, delivering it up into the hands of the Greeks his mortal enemies, like
another Judas, there being nothing worthy of commendation in him, but that he
was a periurde wretch, a white liuered Caitiffe, and a most notorious impudent
villain.

Besides, thou have left us one Dido, to be a harlot, and amorous (forsooth) of
this fugitive: but here thou lie again, for never did she (poor soul) see
him in all her life, being a most honorable Lady, and far more virtuous,
then either thou, or thy forsworn Troyan were. O shameless and deceitful
Poets, how happy is that city, that entertaineth no such Monsters as you: As
was Sparta sometimes, when it had neither Poets nor Orators, nor gold nor
silver, and all because they would not be abused.

Unfortunate then and foolish are such, as make account of you, devising how
they might be extolled and lifted up with praises unto the skies, through your
dissembling Pens Away then I pray thee (my friend) and take thy verses
again, and never hereafter venture to present me any more with such trash as
this: but rather call to mind, that fond Poet, who made a bargain with
Alexander the great, that for every good verse he should present unto him, he
should have a crown in gold: and for every bad, a box upon the ear: but so
often was he stricken, and so many blows had he, as in the end he died, he not
having been able to have made any verse worthy of reward.

Think of this silly Poet, A foolish Poet.
when thou go about to endite, for better were it for one to hold his peace,
then to talk without reason. And therefore let no person hereafter be so bold,
as presume to write any verse concerning my name, for I make account rather to
purchase blame then credit any way thereby: and it will sooner hurt me, then be
a help unto me. Let us then go unto some far secret and solitary place,
and there let us enclose our selves as it were in a Religious Monastery, and
with us, let us imprison our youthful desires and motions, our Ambition and
Vainglory, and there let us so live, as the dark clouds of Pride may never
eclips the Sun of our Humility.

And you (my Masters) who have been nourished and fed with this foolish
study, loosing most vainly your young and golden time, Young Scholars ought
to use their gifts, and time well, and not vainly and ill.
go your ways, and sing your Sonnets unto others, and seek some other
Subject then my self, on whom you may bestow them. Heavens grant my name may
never be heard of more in any mouth, and that giving over the world, I may give
over all worldly affects, since he only is right happy, that is exempted from
mortal vanities, being gotten alone to dwell by himself in some uncouth
wilderness, through which, he is free from thousands of mischances and
encombrances, which bring much trouble unto our souls.

This is the course I mean to take, from which before I will be turned, I will
endure the torments and tortors of any cruel death whatsoever. O how bitter a
Pill was this unto my stomach, and what anguish and sorrow did the other
Shepherd conceive in his mind, when he hard this irreuocable sentence of his
utter undoing pronounced by her.

He stood confounded and amazed, as Diomede the Greek did, when fighting with
brave Hector, he might see the lightning of heaven to fall before his eyes. His
speech failed him, his tongue faltered in his mouth, and being ashamed to see
he had the repulse, he knew not what to say.

And no marvel, for the worthiest Philosophers in the world, have become
mute, before meaner persons then she, witness Demosthenes, with diverse others.
And now I found my self deprived of all hope to describe the rare virtues of
my Mistress, seeing she so constantly refused the praises which (and but of
right) was attributed unto her: therefore I esteemed my self rather the more
unfortunate, because I had but only this one way to show my loyal mind unto
her, of which when I was hindered, I felt my self to die, a more then
languishing death.

As that messenger, who perceiving his Master to be angry with him, presents
him with some pretty gift or other, hoping thereby to pacify and appease his
choler, but when he sees that he rejects the same, he falls presently
into despair, and dies for very griese and anguish of mind: Even so I, when
I saw a counter-maund, whereby I was forbidden to blazon forth the rare parts,
and matchless qualities of my Mistress, I became as one senseless, through
pure sorrow of the same, because I was barred of my will in that which I so
much desired.

Long time did I stand like a dumb Image or Idol, whilst I perceived, that
none durst control the proceeding of unkind Diana, so wise and prudent, did
every one hold her: and in the mean time, the other Nymphs, did as the
followers of that wise Philosopher, who never gave any other reason for the
opinions which they held, but this; Ipse Dixit.

Pi^hagoras said so, they not daring for their lives to contradict their chief
head in any thing, such awful respect, and dutiful fear did they carry
toward her.

A lively apprehension of a most passionate and sudden sorrow hindered my
speech, so as I could not answer as I might; confuting her former resolution,
with most lively and apparent reasons. It is easy for poison that is entered
into a man's body, to work as it list, urging him to his end, if no remedy be
sought to resist the same: Even so, the opinion of my Mistress (not being
refelled) whereby she might be persuaded to give it over, made her to continue
the more firm and resolute therein.

And now feign would I have spoken, although (before) I wished I had never
opened my mouth, but I durst not, for fear of offending her whom I coueted to
please more then my self. Every one of the Nymphs (without daring as much as
once to reply against Diana) stood stone still, holding down their head s, as
if they allowed of her proceedings; which was the matter, that the more
afflicted me, I thinking that they were of the selfsame conceit, and that they
had persuaded her first, to leave and give over the world: yet if I might have
had but that liberty as but now and then to have seen her in her solitary
Receptacle or Cell, I would not have cared half so much: but that was
impossible, for I knew none but women might come there (all men being banished
from that place) as they were from those sacrifices, which the Roman dames
used to solemnize and offer secretly and in the night, unto the Goddess. Bona
Dea.

These were the reasons that made me so sad, and these the occasions, that
wrought me such sorrow, yet in the end may heart was so great, and I longed so
much to speak, to see if I could dehort her from her former determination, as
grief forced me to burst out yet with a woeful gesture and a heavy look, in
this manner. Most sage and prudent Nymph, God has not forbid us to honor
those that be his creatures, but rather the more to induee us to do the more
reverence unto them, calls them Gods, for the glory that others give unto
them, returns back unto him again.

That King, whom his Subjects obey, does not hinder, neither is he angry that
they bear respect unto his Leftenants, because the same duty reboundeth back
again unto him who is their Sovereign, and for that without him, no such
reverence should be done. He has promised unto those that are his children,
that they shall sit as Judges upon his Throne at the last day, to judge the
twelve Tribes of Israel. Is he then jealous, if mortal men be honored? No
doubt he is not. For if this were true, then would he never have given them so
great power (as he has done) here in this world, neither have set them in the
place of his own authority and government, wherein they are installed,
because he knew well, that they had never been able to execute their office,
nor to have done such miracles as he suffered them to do, unless they had
been honored and admired by them. Therefore is he not angry, that good men
are highly accounted of, but rather punishes such as will not be obedient and
dutiful unto them, as he did the Jews who mocked and despised Moses, who
praying to him for them, he made this answer. Nogro, it is not thou, whom they
have despised, but mine own felfe.

By which we may gather, he will have his elect to be respected. Wherefore
(most gracious Nymph) if that great and everlasting God, to serve him here
below upon the earth, has reigned down upon thee thousands of goodly and
beautiful virtues, being willing thou should be honored and esteemed of
every one, why then should thou refuse such favors offered unto thee?
Judith after she had overcome cruel Holofornes, and delivered her country
from tyranny and Bondage, refused not the honors which were done unto her,
knowing that glory is the daughter of Virtue, and that the one can never be
parted from the other.

So likewise, let us humbly beseech thee, to accept in good part our small
praises (although I confess far unworthy for thee) seeing they are all we
can bestow upon thee, for so doing, thou shall not fall into suspicion of
Pride, as long as thou do but what is the pleasure of God, whose mind was,
that some creatures should be more perfect then other some, to the end he would
have himself glorified by them, and because they should be more admired and
wondered at, then the rest.

In which number, you (fair Lady) may place your self, for you were formed
and made, that the wonderful workmanship of the Eternal Jehovah might be the
more admired: and therefore you have no reason to hinder that honor which is
done unto him through your means, he himself speaking of the worthiness of his
Elect, says thus. If any one shall follow and administer unto me, my father
who lives in the heavens, shall honor him again. If God himself disdaineth
not to do honor unto those that are his, who dare (then) oppose himself
against that which he commands us?

Ought not we to imitate the Eternal Father, who is the Author of all
wisdom, in doing of which, we must as he has taught us, give reverence and
respect unto the just and best worthy, who are not to refuse it, seeing it
proceeds from his divine ordinance?

Contemn not that honor which is due unto you, least you show your self an
eneynto his sacred will, it being done unto you, by the father of all wisdom,
because he will have you to be commended amongst mortal men.

And whereas you condemn and disdain both Orators and Poets, yet have there
been many of them that have not done good unto their private friends only, but
also unto their whole country and commonwealth.

Besides, A praise of Cicero.
that famous Orator of Rome, did he not preserve his city through his prudent
Eloquence, from being utterly spoiled and overthrown, when Cateline, Cethegus,
Lentulus, with diverse other of their accomplices, had conspired together, first
to cut the throats of the chief Citizens, and then to set Rome on fire; he
alone bringing to pass through his prudent policy, that which the brauest
Roman Captain amongst them would never have effected, without the effusion of
blood, of millions of Citizens?

Therefore did Cicero show himself more stout and more profitable, then the
greatest Commanders and brauest Soldiers of them all, Cicero preserved Rome
from the cons^itacie of Careline and other noble Romans.
who with the loss of many a man purchased a Conquest unto their country,
whereas he, without the death of any one, overthrew his adversaries, who were
the more dangerous, in that they kept within the city it self.

Besides this notable exployt of his, how often has he saved many a good
Citizen, and worthy Gentlemen from death, as that Roscius, most unjustly
accused before the Tyrant Scilly, Ligarius, and Deioterus, with many more, all
which (through his divine Eloquence) he restored unto life: yea, he did more
then all this; for he rather chose to go into voluntary exile, then to
encounter and withstand the force of his unjust enemies (although he might very
easily have done the same) and so by that means saved Rome, which otherwise
was ready to take his part (if so he had pleased) he having the mayor part of
the greatest persons, and in a manner the whole youth of Rome to be on his side.

Many other good deeds did this worthy man, leaving diverse learned pieces of
works behind him, to the no small profit and benefit of that royal city.

Where you blame Homer, A praise of Homer.
you do that which never any in the world has done before, for so highly was
he accounted of, as there were diverse goodly cities, which falling at debate
and contention amongst themselves, committed their whole business unto his
judgment, they receiving for an irreuocable Sentence, but only one of his
verses, and after he was dead, they fell out, and striued, who should have his
body to interre the same. He is counted the Author of all Arts and Sciences.

But say he should (sometimes) spare the truth now and then in his writings (as
if he seemed to be a little partial) yet was he nevertheless to be borne
withal, and could do no otherwise then he did, in speaking (somewhat) in the
praise and commendation of his own Country: For, for our Country we are
borne, and are bound to do more for it, then for our selves.

Again, you must consider, he was a Poet, and no Hystoriographer, and that
Poets have more liberty, to write according unto their own fancy or
affection, then Hystoriographers have, who (without great reproach) cannot
abuse sacred Verity it self.

But howsoever it is, the works of Homer, are full of judgment and Learning,
from whence, as from a deep Fountain, every great Scholar draws forth his
learning, and without his books, gross Ignorance had darkened the whole world
with her black gloomie Clouds.

As for Virgil, how could he do less, than what he did, seeing he did but
praise such, from whom he had received so many benefits, and good turns, and
who had restored him, unto his former living and Lands, all which he (before)
had lost? The ungrateful man is as bad, and as worthy to be punished, as is
the Homicide.

Besides, it is better (now and then) to strain courtesy with Truth, then to
murder a man, for there may be amends made for a lie, but not for ones life,
when it is gone, and taken away.

And therefore that great Mantua Poet, is more to be excused, in that he
somewhat dissembled the verity of the story, which he wrote, praising his
benefactors, because he would not be unthankful unto them, then, if he had
spoken the Truth, and so concealed those great kindnesses which he had
received, whereby he should be taxed of ingratitude.

But for all this, he is reputed for the Prince of Latin Poets, his Aeneidos
showing to be a most learned and beautiful work, in so much as he dying
(before he had sufficient time to make a final end thereof, especially of
those verses which he left imperfect) Augustus the Emperor, would not permit
that any of his own Poets should take the same in hand to correct it. Being
loath that so famous a Poem should be iniuried any way, he choosing rather to
leave it unfinished, as he found it, then that it should be perfected by the
hand of any other. Not unlike that picture, which excellent Zeuxis began to
make for Venus, no Painter daring (after his death) to take upon him to end
the same.

Cicero, (before Octanius his reign) coming (by chance, before he dyed) to
have a sight of some of Virgils verses, cried out with great admiration:

Behold another hope of Rome^ for I know not how the wit of man can devise a
greater work then this.

Poets then, are not so much to be blamed, as you imagine, for without them,
we should be deprived of many goodly Inventions, and grave Moralls: ^ca, and
from many divine praises, which we attribute unto God, as are the Psalms of
David, which are in verse, proceeding from that sacred Prince and Poet of the
Jews.

Contrary unto your mind, was Alexander the great, who made so great account
of Homers verse, as he had always his Iliades under the pillow of his bed,
lying hard by his sword, affirming oftentimes, Achilles to be most fortunate,
because he was renowned by so famous a Poet, wishing that he had been as then
alive, to the end he might have graced him so much, as to have set forth his
valiant exploits.

Where you allege Demosthenes, to have made the Macedonians and the Athenians,
to wage battle together; I answer you, that he could do no less, then
persuade his Contrymen to defend the liberty of their Country, it being
the greatest Treasure that free people esteemed, especially the Grecians, who
continually were up in Arms, to conserve their ancient Liberties.

In so much, as it is reported of Demosthenes, that if he had had as much
force, power, and valor, as he had of good affection, and true zeal toward
his Country, the Macedonians had never conquered Athens.

But he cannot be blamed, who fights until the last gasp of life, dying
with the first and chiefest, for the health of his Country: as did that stout
Orator, who lost his life for that cause, having done many good services, and
brought much profit unto the Athenians before. For being banished from
amongst them, he went presently without loosing anit time at all, up and down
such Cities as belonged unto the Spartanes, who were deadly enemies unto
Athens, whom he persuaded so vehemently, and with such exceeding rare
Eloquence, as he brought them to be willing to yield, and to be under the
government of his Country.

The valiant Pir^^us king of the Epirotes, was not of your advise, he being
wont to say, that his Orator Cineas, got more Towns by his Eloquence, then he
could do by his Army Royal, and Soldiers.

Thus do you see, that whom you have disliked, the greatest Monarks in the
world have accounted of, and so should you do (most beautiful Virgin) if you
did well. But least reason of all have you to be of opinion to leave this
Active life, for to follow the Contemplative; because he that labors most,
is worthy of the greatest hire: he that aduentureth most dangerously,
deserves most praise: and he that effects, and brings to a good end, a
work more admirable, and more excellent, then others, does merit greatest
reward and honor.

Now in the Active life, there is more travail, more profit for our Country,
and more labor in the same, which if it be so, then are they worthy of more
guerdon, and commendation, that live in this world, then such (as retiring
themselves, to live in a corner) only profit themselves.

Our Savior Christ, the right Mirror of Christian virtue, took upon him this
course of life: living, conuersing, and dwelling amongst men, without
withdrawing himself altogether into the Wilderness, to the end he might be
profitable unto himself only.

After him followed his Apostles, who gave not over the world, to seek some
uncouth place of dwelling, to live privately unto themselves: But rather chose
to come abroad into the face of the world, where they labored, travailed,
sweat, and suffered much affliction for others, and not for themselves.

God will not have that any should hide his Talent under the ground, (and so
put it to no use) seeing he has lent it him, for the public commodity of all
men. Neither will he, that a Lamp be hidden under a bushel, unto no end,
but rather that it shall give light abroad. For in what does that man stand in
steed of, (who fearing to be employed about the public good) seeks only to
profit himself?

If every one were of your opinion, what Magistrates, what Governors, or what
Officers, should we have to rule and govern Commonwealths? For so none would
willingly take upon him the business of his Country, remembering the troubles
belonging unto the same, but rather withdraw themselves from thence, to live
quietly, and at their own contentment. But the Laws both of God and man,
forbid such kind of dealings. For they will, that such, whom God has made
sufficient and fit for the Commonwealth, shall serve the same: yea, though
against his will, and not live idly, at his own pleasure, in as much, as it
is not reasonable, that the Master of a Ship shall sleep and take his rest,
whilst the Vessel is tossed with the storm and Tempest upon the Sea, and the
passengers therein, stand in danger to be drowned.

Even so, it is a most unjust thing, that the business of the Weal public, and
those that may profit them by their virtue, should live quiet and at ease,
without doing any thing at all, but lie at pleasure, in some one odd corner
or another, privately unto himself; and the rather, because our Country (most
justly) claims to have interest in our bodies, and in our souls.

Also this was the reason, Many great Princes forced to take upon them the
government of the Commonwealth, for eag^n^^ their ^als.
that long agone, the Romans constrained Cincinnatus and Fabritius, to leave
their Country Houses, and the delights they found abroad, to make them take
charge of the Commonwealths affairs, and to fight against their enemies. So
was grave S^neca. called from his study (maugre himself) and from his sweet
liberty, to trouble himself, with his Princes business.

So in times past did the Frenchmen, use to take their Kings out of
Monasteries, to follow the charge of the Commonwealth and Kingdom.

And so was that cruel Amurath, Emperor of the Turks, withdrawn from out a
certain solitary place, which he had chosen to finish his life in, (having
before installed his son, that bloody Mahometh, in his Estate royal) to
encounter with the Christian Army,) so much feared of those Pagans, and which,
(for that cause) craved the presence of old Amurath himself.

So you, (most lovely Nymph) who by your prudent behavior, are able to do
much good service unto the Weale-publike, ought not to refuse so honorable a
labor, but rather be the more willinger, when you may do good unto your
followers and friends. For what shall become of this goodly company of
Nymphs, which are committed unto your charge and conduct, if you shall leave
them? They shall be like unto a fair flock, that has no Shepherd, and
therefore in great danger to be devoured of ravenous Wolves.

Change then, change I beseech you, this your late conceited opinion, and if
not for love of your owneselfe, yet at the least do it, in favor of these
sweet Nymphs, who, without you, are most miserable creatures, abandoned and
given over unto the rage of most unfortunate mishaps.

Thus did I plead mine own cause, every one of the Nymphs commending and
applauding my persuasions, being glad of my discourse, and allowing of my
speeches, whilst they all (with one consent) made the same suit unto her, they
themselves being now become bold, (since I had broken the ice before them) to
deliver in effect, as much unto her, as I had done already; And the more to
move her unto pity, no tears, nor sighs were spared, no mournful
complaints forgotten, neither any pittious intreatings left unremembered.

After this followed a long narration of the dangers which her absence was like
to bring unto them (after they had a little blamed her) first to take them as
her charge and guide, and then to leave them thus upon the sudden.

To be brief, there was nothing left unspoken, whereby she might be dissuaded,
A Similie.
to give over this her enterprise. But as an old Beech tree, deeply rooted in
the ground, being strong and huge in growth, is not moved any thing at all,
with the small blastes of Summer winds; and as the stubborn Rock that
stands in the midst of the Sea, never stirs for all the waves, that
beat and flash against him: Even so, my cruel Lady, was not moved at all,
although with tears, with cries, and with laments, we called still upon her,
she being resolute in her first purpose and determination, affirming the
heavens themselves, not to be sufficient to alter her mind.

For (said she,) it is to those (whom the sovereign of all Kings, has given
force and power to serve their Commonwealths) you should address your
speeches and not unto me, who am but a poor silly Maid, who stand in no other
stead, then to eat the fruits which proceed from the earth, and who can no
way be beneficial unto my Country, but only by my prayers, which I shall
far better deliver and present before the divine Majesty, I being in some
remote place, separated and alone, then if I should live, where I should behold
the fond vanities of worldlings continually.

As for you (my dear companions) a worser guide then my self, Heaven never
can bestow upon you. That Goddess Diana, whom you serve, shall take care of
you, neither will she leave you unprovided of some one or other worthy
protectresse, that may always defend you. Should I have stayed with you still,
(yet could not you have hoped, that I could have done any good for you, by
reason of the small power and ability, which unconstant Fortune has bestowed
upon me. And yet I must needs confess, that your absence will be an exceeding
corsie and grief unto me, and that losing you, I shall lose the chiefest stay
of my joy and contentment. But notwithstanding all this, so sweet and
comfortable is the thought of spiritual things, as I must leave all mortal
pleasures for them. This only is my comfort, that the separation of our bodies
shall never part our former affection, which we have borne one another. Then I
beseech you all, forget not me, as I will ever remember you. You shall have
parcel of my prayers, and I will think upon you in my soul when I am alone.
Weep not then for her, who goes away to lead a most blessed life: otherwise,
I shall take you to be my mortal enemies, envying my good fortune, neither
bewail her loss, who never could be half so profitable unto you, whilst she
lived with you, as she shall be, when she is sundred from you.

Flintie Rocks sometimes are divided, through Lightninges and Thunders, much
more may earthly creatures be severed one from another.

All Companies and all Acquaintance, must needs (one day) break off, whereas
their true Friendship and loyal Amity, never departs, nor dies at all.

If ever you have loved me, then rejoice with me, and wish unto me that glory
and felicity, which I prepare for my life, to finish the rest of these
wretched days of mine. But it now draws on toward the evening, I therefore
will trouble you no more at this time, but bid you all good night, and let
every one withdraw themselves unto their lodgings

Whereupon, they all went homewardes, whilst I my self stayed all alone
behind, for I was not able to rise up from the ground whereon I sat, by reason
of the exceeding grief I felt within me.

Mouelesse I lay, like unto a Tower, cold I was as any stone, and senseless I
seemed, resembling a dead Coarse, which is laid in a Tomb, without moving,
speaking, or sighing at all.

All that long night did I spend, falling into cold sweats, and heavy
soundings, weeping and sobbing until my heart nigh burst, without either sleep
or rest, no not so much as once closing mine eye-liddes.

The day being come, I found my self a little, and (God knows, it was little
indeed) amended, whereupon, with much ado, I got up, and went to my lodging,
where finding paper and Ink, sheading thousands of tears, and sending forth
millions of sighs, I wrote these doleful verses following.

Since far exilde from me does wound my soul,
And that a mortal desperate strange disease,
Does stealing seize upon my bloudlesse Coarse,
What should I longer linger for to ate?
Since Death alone can cure this uncouth flame,
Mine eyes hane wept, mine heart has sighed too much,
My soul is wearied with enduring pain,
He dies not, that in dying ends all grief.
Those lonely Eyes are now debasht from me,
So is that gracious Favor, more then fair,
For whom I breath, and feed upon this Air,
Blessed is that man that then yields up his Ghost,
When as he finds himself in heavens disgrace,
And sees the Welkin for to wound him still,
With me shall wend into my Fatal Tomb,
My bloody griefs, and more then doleful Dule,
And all those thoughts of her, who, when I lived,
Made me to prove a worse then trebble Death.
Let no man then seem for to wail my loss,
Since friendly Death by it my cares does cross.
It is enough, since for my worthless Death,
My Mistress fair, forbeareth to lament,
Nor grieves that I should part (so soon) her fro,
Dead I should please her, better then when life
Did soiourne in this earthly Inn of mine,
And therefore I will end my loathed days.
My prying Eyes, first authors of mine ill,
My gentle heart, ore loyal in his love,
(As they deserved) sharp pain shall first endure,
Reason it is, that they who first offended,
Should be inflicted with due punishment,
For so the heavens will guerdon each aright.
Cupid, does use for to abridge our days,
Nor, for our woes, does quit us otherwise.
First he does wound, and then he heales again,
By two Devises, and both contraries:
The first our heart burns, the other kills our strength,
The One cruel is, the other's amiable.
Blessed is he, that LOVE serves, since (in one day)
He happy, or unhappy, make him may.
Having made this sorrowful Song, I determined to present it unto my Lady,
(come of it (whatsoever could) for my last farewell, that ever she should have
of me; whereupon I went to seek her, and such was my good fortune, as I found
her all alone, walking under the shadow of a number of sweet Cipresse trees.

No sooner had I a sight of her, but that a certain timorous respect, joined
with a kind of amazement, seized upon me, so that I became upon the sudden,
as cold as any Ice.

Whereupon I began to be astonished, quite forgetting my former resolution,
whilst I remained as a Pillar fixed in the ground, not being abe to do any
thing, but to gaze upon her more then Angelical face.

My vital spirits, were all flowen into mine eyes, who held them very
earnestly busied in contemplation of this her more then peerlesse beautiful
countenance.

Whilst I thus beheld her, I remembered the unsupportable loss I was like to
endure, losing her divine presence, knowing that the more I viewde her, the
more was my grief, when I thought I should be deprived from her: and yet
nevertheless, I took a wonderful great contentment, to lose my self in this
sweet River, as the fly does, when he is drowned in sweet milk.

Minerua, never seemed more grave, nor fuller of majesty, unto poor Arachne,
(when she was punished by her) neither did Diana show more amiable or lovely,
when she accompanied her Shepherd Endimion, then my Mistress did in mine eye.

Being thus ravished with so heavenly a sight, I could not withdraw my self
from the same, desiring no other death in my mind, but in beholding her, so to
give up the Ghost, which the Virgin perceiving, thus saluted me.

What is the matter (Shepherd) that you are up so early this morning? what
seek thou here, and why look thou so sad and heavily? Away with this
dumpish melancholy, the butcher of man's life, for he lives not, but rather
languisheth, as one dying, who being over sad and heavy, cannot shake this
pensive humor from him.

What (man) be of good courage, we must he ordered by the will of the Gods, and
(without killing ourselves, with these inward passions) must attend the good
hour, until it shall please them to call us: For neither weeping nor wailing
can alter our Destinies, neither can they be mended thereby, because it lies
not in our hands, but in the heavenly Powers, to amend what is amiss.

This is my advise, in that I wish thee well, for we are given by nature, to
wish well unto those whom we know are our friends and wel-willers, whereas
otherwise we should be worse then bruit beasts, who acknowledge courtesies which
they have received.

Then take this counsel from me, although I was borne rather to learn
counsel, then to give counsel unto others. But the Gardener sometimes can
give good herbs for Physic, and a wise man now and then, may be advised, by
one that is simple and without learning: as Moses did, who took the opinion of
his Father in law, being far less skillful then he.

I doubt not, but thou know by experience, that this which I have said,
will be profitable unto thee, and that thou will hereafter remember me, for
the good advise which I have given thee.

Thus spoke the Nymph most kindly, her courteous speeches, putting life into my
body again, making me blush with a vermillion color, which she seemed to
like well of. Whereupon, I taking heart at grass, (although still crazed with
inward heaviness) began thus to answer her.

Oh sacred Goddess, is it possible that he, that is stiffened and benommed in
all his limbs and joints, with an extreme cold, should be warm without
Fire?

Even so, can he comfort and delight himself, who without having the least
subject of joy in the world, has all his Body attached with a wonderful
strange and heavy sadness?

Amongst all the wise Sages of the world past, there have been very few, that
have been able to have dissembled and concealed their inwdard griefs and
sorrows.

Elias, that great Prophet, could never do it, but rather flying into a
Desert, to avoid the fury of wicked Achab, most pittiously desired to die.
Neither could Job, the pattern of all patience, smother the same, but rather
weeping, and taking on most lamentably, wished to be rid from his miserable
life.

And think you, I that am so poor a wretch (in respect of them) am able to
hide mine anguish, and drive away these inward afflictions which so much
torment me, especially when I have so great reason to lament my Disasters?

Wonder not then (gracious Nymph) that I seem thus to wail and weep, but
rather suffer me to go through with the same, to the end I may the sooner be
brought unto my grave, for that is the only comfort of such forlorn and
forsaken Caitiffes as my self, yea Death, sweet Death, is the Port and Haven,
of all such distressed minds as I am.

O that I were blind, that I might not see the mischief that is ready to take
hold upon me: or that I were senseless, and void of all passions, to the
end I might be exempted from such dangerous plagues, as are already ready to
infect me.

Must I be well in body, and yet deadly sick in mind? Must I be sick in
mind, and yet not consume away? And must I consume away, and not yet die, but
languish thus in horror, worse then in hell, yea, and that continually?

O unjust Heavens, o too unkind and barbarous LOVE, what have I done unto thee
Cupid, that for all my loyal love, thou (thus) should reward me. Have I
ever defied or denied thee, as Apollo did, after he had slain that huge
Serpent Python, when he mocked at thee, and at thine Arrows, as thou flewest
in the Air; that thou should thus wound me, with so incurable rigor, and
exasperate thus, thy worse then sauadge Tyranny against me?

Ah Mistress, dear Mistress, behold here before you, the most wretchedst
creature that ever lived under the Cope of heaven, the very Anatomy of
misery, and the true Mirror of all misfortunes: And believe I beseech you,
that the terrors which every minute of an hour, affright his inward soul, is
far worse then ugly Death it self.

But justly am I punished, seeing (as over presumptuous) I durst be bold to
fly so high, like unto another Phaeton, presuming to adore your more then
druine and sacred Beauties.

Yet (sweet Lady) pardon me, because LOVE is the cause, who was assisted by
your fair eyes, to make me his base prisoner, and abject bond slave for ever:
against whom, no force, neither heavenly, nor humane, is able to prevail.

Thus was I bold to plead like an earnest suter for grace, unto my Lady, I
knowing well that I was never like to find so fit an occasion again, as
then I had, because I saw she was resolute to enter into a kind of life, far
worse, and harsher, then any Monastical living whatsoever. And therefore I
thought with my self, that seeing I was fully bent and purposed to die, I
knew the worst, and worse then Death, I could not be adjudged.

Thus you see how desperate persons sometimes help themselves, although quite
contrary unto their own expectation.

So fought that sick and diseased Soldier, being full of valor, under his
General, king Antigonus, only because he would be rid of his disease, which
did so much afflict him; but no sooner was he cured thereof, then that he
became a notable Coward, as one that was desirous to sleep in a whose skin,
and never after would venture in the wars again.

The fair Virgin, hearing me thus earnest, were it, either because she was
loath to leave behind her (she being now ready to depart from us) any cause to
conceive hardly of her, or whether it were that my pitiful speeches had moved
her unto remorse, and to have compassion upon me, I know: not but I found her
nothing so austere nor sower toward me, as she was wont to be, which I
gathered by her indifferent mild answer, she replying thus.

If thy disease (Arcas) be incurable, and that as thou thy self think, it
will hardly be healed, why then have thou been so obstinate, as thou would
not in time seek what thou might to have been rid of the same?

Very simple is he, who undertakes to transport a huge Rock from one place to
an other, when it is not by nature to be removed. So if thou see that my love
can no way be profitable unto thee, why then, will thou be so selfe-wild, as to
persist therein, it being such an other piece of work, as those Giants took
in hand, when they went about to scale up to heaven? for say I were willing to
show thee what favor I might, yet could I do thee no good, because of my
credit, assuring my self, that if thou love me indeed, (and as thou so often
have protested) thou will not desire any thing of me, that might overthrow me,
in doing of thee good.

True love is of this nature, that it will never suffer any injury to be done,
unto that which it loves, neither can it (rightly) be termed Love, but rather
furious rage, if it be cause of any such wrong.

But I pray thee tell me, what is it that thou would have of me? would
thou that in saving thee, I should utterly undo my self? or would thou
have, that thy contentment should be built and founded, upon the ruins of my
discontentments, and dishonor? I cannot tell, neither know I what thy meaning
is, and yet this good conceit have I of thee, that I am persuaded thou
harborest no such bad thought within thee, and therefore let me entreat thee,
that thou will be content, since I grieve at thy distress, and that I would
most willingly ease thee of thy pain (if possible I could) so it did not stand
with the loss of mine honor. Then if thou love me, I do not think thou
would suffer me to endure such an inestimable damage.

Consider well of this matter, and thou shall find that I can no way pleasure
thee as thou desire, and as I my self covet, unless I would overthrow my
estate for ever. Of two evils the least is to be chosen. It is far better to
cure a little hurt betimes, then standing obstinate therein, permit the same to
grow to be incurable, and so to die.

Therefore show now the loyal affection which thou have always protested to
have borne me, insatisfying thy self with these m^^e honest reasons, without
seeking any more by saving the self, to be the cause of my fall, and utter
ruin: but if this will not content thee, then must I needs (...) lust, and not
modest Love that is in thee, and that as a ^^orcallene^ne, thou ^^^est about to
undo me, and therefore have great cause to fea^e thee, unto thy rash (...),
without going about to excuse me unto thee any way, but to fly from then, as
from a deadly foe.

Having so said, she held her pea^e, seeming to be much troubled in her mind,
as I might casily gather by her color, which did often go and come in her
face, and yet these speeches so much pleased me, as I was confounded
therewithal, as I knew not what to say.

Never was that alluring song, of the daughters of Acholous more charming,
neither the love potion of subtle Circes, more swept and pleasant, then that
was.

No heart, were it never so hard, but her tongue was able to mollify, it being
of power to take down, and make gentle the proudest mind that ever man bare.
And now I made account I was sufficiently satisfied for all my travails past,
and that I had a full and large recompense for all my former aflictions, in
that it had pleased my Lady to con^^^^ my meaning with so great favor:
whereupon I presumed to reply thus upon the sudden.

Virtuous, and peerlesse Diana: what testimony have I ever given you, and how
have I ever carried my self toward you, but that my Love was always chaste
and modest? If so, why then should you now mistrust me?

Alas, if I be now changed, (my miseries being so wretched as they are, and
that you think I am worse then I have been) why then do you not quickly
pronounce the sentence of Death against me, without permitting me to live any
longer?

No; no: my desires were never others then thine. Never did I think to disobey
thy commandments, nor offer injury unto thine untainted honor, rather shall
this body of mine be swallowed up by wild and savage beasts; and think not
(I beseech you) otherwise of me, but that I would take revenge upon mine own
proper self, for your honors sake, if through my default it should happen to
receive the least hurt or damage that may be.

Nay, should I go about but to cross thee in thy will, and not do as thou
biddest, I should think the worse of my self as long as life shall last;
whilst living so, I would commit it no life, but rather worse then death it
self. Sufficient enough, and too much am I pleased for my pains, enough am I
recompensed for my travails, and am satisfied at the full, for all my labors
past, seeing thou have so much vouchsafed to abase thy worthy self (in
striking a Sail so low) as to speak to me so much thine inferior. Only
this only small boon, let me entreat of thee, which by thy facred Virtue, by
thy rate prudencie, by thy excellent wit, and by thine exquisite beauty, I
shall desire thee not to deny, that is, to give meleaue, to kiss thy fair
and victorious hand, which shall content me as much as if I were Monarch of the
whole universal world, the remembrance whereof shall make the rest of my days
to prove most happy and fortunate.

Advise you then, if this my prayer be just and civil, which if it be so, then
grant me so much grace. But if not, thy will be fulfilled, thy pleasure be
done, and thy desire be accomplished every way. It is the first that ever I
begd, and it shall be the last that ever I will crave.

Thus did I boldly put forward my self, urging my Mistress with great
vehemency for the same, who stood still studying upon the matter a while,
whilst she blushed like the damask Rose in May: I in the mean time houered
between hope and scare, half dead and half alive, to hear what she would
answer, who in the end replied thus.

Ah Shepherd, how easy a matter is it, to find a small thing, that may hurt
much? and how quickly may we obtain and purchase that, which happens most to
our displeasures afterward?

This natural appetite of ours, which inuiteth us to desire so many things,
which we imagine to find sweet and pleasing, passes away as does a flash of
lightning in the air, leaving us never a whit the richer, nor the more
contented then we were before.

What profit does that pleasure bring unto Lovers, which they so earnestly
covet to enjoy, but a most heavy and sad repentance, when it is once gone and
past? Things that are virtuous, ought to be desired alone, because they last,
and not such as are mortal, weak, and frail, although they seem sweet at
the first beginning.

This which thou demandest of me, will do thee no good, and though perhaps
thou supposest thou shall feel some shadow thereof, yet will it so soon
vanish and be gone, as thou shall not have leisure to have so much as a true
taste thereof.

Ah Arcas, Arcas, did thou but know, how much this honor is recommended
unto us, what great care and heed there is given unto us, to accompany it, and
how much we are bound and obliged to look: most narrowly and straightly unto
the same, I verily believe, thou would not wish me that I should break the
least duty belonging unto the conservation thereof, not for all the living in
the world.

But perhaps thou will say, it is very true and yet I answer, that he that
offends in any small matter, is suspected to be culpable of greater: and the
first opening of a fault, is difficult unto a virtuous mind, but very casie,
when he shall be permitted to take an habit in the same.

For so small a trifle, and such a thing as can do thee no good, be not (I
beseech thee) the cause that I be esteemed or taken for other, then hithereto I
have been: for hare and lean, should that triumph be, which thou should
purchase by mine honor, because my blood should presently make satisfaction
for the same. Content thee then, with what I have said, and think that I will
not deny thee any thing, which may stand with my credit: but considering that
this which thou requirest, may some way impeach the same, I cannot justly yield
unto thy demand. Leave (then I say once more) to importune me for that, which
will do thee no good, yet will hurt me much, and then shall I think that thy
speeches are true, and that thy love is chaste and virtuous, as thou have
hitherto protested.

This was my Ladies sharp reply, which drove away all my former joy I had
conceived of hope, by reason of her first kind words; so as now my complaints
began afresh again, my tears renewed, and my sighs came forth faster then
they had done before.

I was so galled with sorrow, and so much griped at the heart with this her
unexpected denial, as I could do nothing but weep, holding down mine eyes
toward the ground, as not daring to look upon her.

In the end, surcharged and oppressed with contrary passions, I burst out into
these woeful terms, having before sent forth thousands of scalding sighs, as
precursors of the same. O cruel Love, O miserable Stars, jealous of my good,
O dismal day wherein I was borne, and more then thrice accursed life of mine,
since I am more wretched then any whatsoever living.

After much labor taking, and many a years sailing, the Pilot at length
arriueth unto his Haven, but I (Caitiffe that I am) find no end of my
torments: None gives succor unto me, neither does any as much (as a little)
ease me, my sickness increases with the day, continues all night long, and yet
never amendeth.

Alas, alas, why died not I at the first, when having offended you (my dearest
Lady) you exild me from you lovely presence? Unfortunate Shepherd that I was,
to persuade my self to live, and hope the best, when I find no cause but of
despair and death. Ah had I then taken that ready course, I had been (now)
free from these hellish panges which every minute oppress my heart, and I had
been partaker of those rare beatitudes, which the souls of happy Lovers enjoy
for ever.

Sacred and Religious Diana, since you adiudge me unworthy of any small favor
at your hands, and that without yielding to agree unto so little a matter, you
are desirous of my end, yet at the least do thus much for me, as to permit me
to die (in leiu of all my troubles) before thy beauteous face.

This I beg at your hand, for default of that other courtesy which you judge me
unworthy of: for although you have denied me the first, yet I hope you will
agree unto the second: otherwise I vow, after I have a hundred thousand times
termed you by the name of Cruel, I will most desperately lay violent hands
upon my self, crying out that you have been the cause of mine untimely
overthrow.

Grant me then one of my requests, the last of which you cannot well deny,
because it costeth you nothing. What hurt can this be unto you any way, but
rather good, when you shall do so charitable a deed unto the commonwealth, as
to permit him to die, who is unprofitable unto the same? Without license from
you, I neither may nor will take this bloody course in hand, seeing I hold my
life from you, and that you alone and none but you, have puissance over me.
Linger not then, to yield unto my desire, for if you think, that my travails
past, have merited any reward, you cannot better recompense them, then to
grant me death, which is the only thing I covet, seeing I must be deprived of
your cheerful presence, as one not worthy to enjoy it.

As the Hunter is amazed, having lost the tracing of the Dear which he hunteth
(his dogs being at a bay) knows not which way to go, nor well what path to
take, whilst his Hounds barking upon some dich side round about him, he
stands musing what to do.

Even such a one my Lady seemed to be, she seeing her self charged with two
contrary demands, both which she judged adversaries unto her honor, which to
take she knows not well, and therefore stands studying (as one sad and
pensive) what to say unto this matter.

If she should give me her hand to kiss, she fears least I should foolishly,
and without wit, speak something that might discredit her: and if she should
suffer me to die (she being now ready to give over the world, and to become
(as it were) a Religious Nun, she doubted least the world would say, she had
done it for grief of me.

Besides, she was unwilling that I should die, unto whom (despite of her self)
she thought her self somewhat beholding, knowing that death was but a cold
recompense, for so great love as I had borne her. Much was she perplexed in her
mind about this business, my hard fortune did somewhat soften her stony heart:
but then again, the respect of her honor did harden it as much, but had Love
had but some interest or power in her, she had quickly brought these two
contraries unto an agreement: but alas, he then had not, neither is he like
(ever) to have. What should she do in these two extremities, and how should
she thoroughly satisfy and content her honor?

One while she puts forth her hand for me to kiss, and then (upon the
sudden) puts it back again: one while she is about to casshire me with
rough speeches, and then again, she seems willing to yield unto my request:
one while she cares not although I die, and then by and by she cannot endure
she should be counted so cruel. Mean space, she sees me to rain whole
rivers of tears, and to send forth black clouds of scalding sighs, whilst
with a sobbing heart I thus (once more) follow mine old suit unto her.

What is the reason (fair Goddess) that you thus stand lingering through
delays, and not suffer this forsaken and abject wretch to die?

To what end does he live? which way can he profit his country? and what
reason have you to lament his destruction? Pronounce, pronounce thy faithful
sentence quickly, for he attends for nothing else, to the end he may with a
more brave courage wend his way, to put in practice the same.

Speak then, and give our this musing: when the Judge sits upon the life or
death of an offender, he stands not studying upon the same, but soon
pronounces his final judgment. Deliver (then) my sentence, as a fatal
Oracle, without delaying any longer: for to what end is it to win time, for
that which cannot be avoided. Free and discharge my doubtful soul, from
farther care, and seem not to envy at the good fortune which I am like to
have by laying violent hands upon my self.

Diana seeing me look so pale and ghastly, began to be a little moved with
compassion toward me, whereupon she thus answered.

Ah Shepherd, why dealest thou so hardly with me? and why do thou
constrain me to do that which is against my will? and why (to save thy self
do thou seek that I may perish? Hard hap had I, to be borne under so
unlucky a Plannet, sithence (inaccording unto thy request) I shall leave unto
the world a bad opinion of my chaste mind, and in resusing to yield unto thee,
I shall be counted the murderer of thy life.

Ah would to God that that day wherein I first saw thee, had been the last
hour that ever mine eyes had seen thee any more.

But seeing there is no remedy in extremities, come what will, I will rather
engage mine own life, then venture thine, and if it be my fortune to die for
this fault, yet will I think to find my death more sweet unto me, then if I
had put thee to suffer the same, seeing thou have endured so much for my sake
only.

Take then this accursed hand (accursed because of mine honor) and do with it
as thou shall please, yet with this solemn protestation, that if this my
courtesy, shall bring the least suspicion or scandal of my good name and fame
unto me, the self same hand that has been the cause thereof, shall make
amends by shedding the purest blood which is within this body. Whereupon she
presented me her fair hand to kiss.

But in this exploit, I behaved my self as that brave Cauailier, who does
swear to be the death of his enemy, whilst he keeps him close and stands
out against him; but no sooner does he submit himself unto him, but that he
receives him most courteously, forgiving all displeasures that is past: Even so
played I, for holding this pretions pawn within my power, and perceiving that
it grieved my Mistress to give the same as she did, I utterly refused her kind
offer, resolving with my self, rather to languish still like a miserable
creature, then to give her the least displeasure that might be, and yet
nevertheless, I disputed of this question a good while, before I let her hand
go from me.

One while the great delight which it presented unto mine eyes, longing sore as
a starued man for food to possess this rich Jewel, pressed me very much to
take that happy occasion, not unlike unto that man, who having not of long
time eat any thing (and finding a Table furnished with great store of meat)
falls unto his Victuals, and cannot for his life forbear from eating that,
though he would never so feign.

An other while, the extreme Love which I bare unto my Lady, compelling me to
seek and prefer the contentment of her, above mine own quiet, opposed it
self against me, counterchecking my desire; And therefore well might she
perceive how far I was from seeking the purchase of her dishonor, when I
resolved to endure millions of torments, before I would be an occasion that she
should grieve or be discontented any way at all.

Having long time debated within my self about this matter, in the end I did
as that prudent King of the Spartans, who being almost dead for thirst, caused
all his followers to drink their fills, he himself refusing to taste as much
as one drop of the water (although he sat upon the Fountains side) to the end
he might save his people from servile bondage: and so did I refuse this worthy
gift, seeing I saw how dearly my Mistress accounted of the same; and therefore
taking her by that fair hand, I said thus unto her. No, no (my sacred
Goddess) never shall it be objected as a foul reproach unto wretched Arcas
that he went about to force the virtuous Diana.

Death shall be more agreeable unto me then life, before I will constrain or
compel thee to any thing, that is against thine own will.

Suffer me I pray thee to continue the same, as I am, and let neither the one
nor the other of my requests be granted: I will not offer to touch thy
beauteous hand, with my polluted lips, seeing I perceive) thou think that it
will be some disparagement unto thee; neither will I die at all, seeing my
death is not agreeable unto thee, but rather living (as I do) a most
languishing life, I will still attend thy last will and pleasure. First shall
my soul fly forth from out this body, rather shall my heart burst in sunder
within my breast, and sooner shall this vital breath of mine be stopped on the
sudden, before I will do any thing, that shall any way mislike thy mind. If
I demand ought that is unlawful, pardon me I beseech you, seeing Love is the
cause thereof.

As for my self, I will meekely bear, and patiently endure my tedious
troubles, and still vexing corsies, without lodging any more such two unwelcome
guests within me, as you shall dislike of. Then O ye miserable wretches, all
you that sometimes have lived here upon the earth; come, come, and rid your
selves of all your cares, and lay them all upon me, who am ble and of force to
bear them. And now you my drearie eyes, everlasting let your tears be; my
scalding sighs, never give over to smoke from out my breast, whilst thou my
tongue shall do nothing else, but pitteously report thy heavy Martyrdomes.

Alas, when will that hour come, wherein (after I have sufficiently wept and
wailed, sighed and sobbed)! may depart this veil of misery. Ah (Lady) must
mine eyes endure to behold thine absence? and shall my tongue be able to bid
thee farewell? No no, rather let mine eyes be blind for ever, and let my tongue
never pronounce word more.

Ah kind death, gentle death, courteous death, if ever thou have brought
succor unto any sorrowful wight, then come and help me. Behold I call thee,
hear how I cry unto thee, nay more, I summon thee in Justice to appear.

But is it possible that a solitary place, shall seclude so sweet a Saint from
my company? and must I be feign (loosing the substance) to feed upon the
shadow? No it cannot be, I first must die, not being able to endure her absence.

Madam, your most wretched, and yet more loyal Servant Arcas, cannot leave
your presence, but he must (withal) leave his own life: he must die before
your eyes, before he depart from you: and feign would he sacrifice his heart
upon the Altar of your beauty, if he might have but your good will and leave.

But I see it will not be, for I am yours and not mine own, you may not be
without me, and therefore I will follow you wheresoever you go, and when I can
go no farther, then will I shorten my days to end mine endless sorrows. For
many Lovers have there been, less faithful then I am, and nothing so zealous
in love as my self, that have finished their lives when they were deprived of
their loving dames: and shall not I be as fortunate as they, every way as
virtuous as they? especially when I have deserved more then they have? which
when I have done, I hope (gracious Virgin) your chaste soul will do no less
then testify, what great respectand dutious affection I bare unto you, until
my latest gasp, having long served you, and yet never had any reward at all.

But what talk I of reward, when I desire to die, were it only for this thing
in that I durst presume to love you? and yet, it is not death that daunteth not
at all, only I grieve, because I fear, I never shall find so sweet a face in
the other world, with which I may delight me.

But I am not the first Lover has been sent away unrewarded of his Mistress,
and yet too great has my recompense been, in that I have had that great good
hap, as to have seen you whilst I lived, and now I must loose you, can I do
other then loose my self? you go your way, and think you, I shall stay
behind? Ah then how much are you deceived, for I will die, yea I will die,
although not by your commandment, yet because I shall see you no more: and
this I here protest, I am most resolutely minded to do, come whatsoever will
thereof: mean space, withdraw thy hand from me, which I desire not to kiss,
since it is with thy displeasure: whilst I lived I sought to please thee, and
now I die, I will not seek to cross thee.

Away then with this thy hand, too fair for me to touch, assuring thee that I
am as much contented with thy good will, as if I had enuoyed the greatest
pleasure in the world.

Then once again (I beseech thee) let me alone, and trouble me no more, I bid
the world adue, and take my last farewell of thee, for die I will, since it is
the only thing which I desire.

Diana, seeing me look so ghastly, began to be afraid of me, doubting least I
would presently have laid violent hands upon my self, as I swear unto you
(reverend father) I had done, but that I found her more tractable and more
kind, which was the cause, that after she had many times sighed (beholding me
with a most pitiful and courteous aspect) and mourning (as it were to see me
in so heavy a plight) she spoke thus mildly unto me.

Ah Arcas, most faithful Arcas, if thou will die for my sake, there is no
reason but I should be miserable for thee, to requite this thy great kindness
toward me. So will I be for thee, and such a one do I wish my self to be, as
long as I shall live.

Say not then, that thou art the most miserable wretch alive, since Diana is a
partaker of thy miserable fortunes, who to have regard unto her honor, and for
the love she beats unto thee, shall live most miserable all the rest of her
sad life, being somewhat comforted in this only, that she cannot suffer for
two more worthy subjects.

As sweet shall be my griefs, when I shall think of thee, as my joy shall be,
when displeasing I remember thee not at all: I see it is the will of the Gods,
that things should thus fall out, and I will not be repugnant against the same:
more proofs I have not to manifest my good meaning unto thee (being hindered
through mine honor) in leiu whereof, I will give thee a taste of the rest, by
my continual Martyrdomes.

Therefore I conjure thee by that chaste Love, thou have so long borne me,
offer no violence unto thy self, but stay the will of the heavens, for it may
so fall out as (thou may) perhaps (see me once more) before thou die, and
seeing the hour is now come (that without seeing me more) I must absent my
self from thee, I will not conceit mine affection from thee, for I know thou will not seek thy profit by my hi^derance.

Too well do I know, and must needs acknowledge thy faithful and infinite
Love toward me. If ever man has been worthy of a Ladies Love, then it is
thine own self, therefore think that nothing in the world has hindered me,
to make requital unto thee, as full well thou have deserved, but chaste
honor, and seeing I cannot do otherwise, let me increate thee, have patience.

Besides, if the assurance of my amity, may comfort thee (seeing thou can
not receive any other consolation at my hands) assure thy self I love thee
deerly, yea (dear Arcas) dearly do I love thee; and to give a most plain
testimony of the same, I will and command thee, upon that power and authority
which thou have given unto me over thee, that thou kiss my hand as thou before
desire: and I pray thee most heartily, to believe that I am wonderful sorry,
because I cannot give thee a more ample sign of my Love unto thee: content
thee then with this small favor of mine, and think it is greater then it is,
because it comes from so willing a mind, (and from her) who wishes unto
thee more happiness, then she does unto her own self.

O sweet words, which as a lushious kind of poison, infected my soul with
true joy, although afterward they cost me dearly, I having bought them at too
high a rate, and yet what could I now desire more!

But as the fall from an high Tree, is far more dangerous, then from a
lower: and as the afflictions of rich men spoiled of their goods, is far more
grievous then those of the poor, because they never had any such wealth to
loose.

Even so, these delightful speeches wrought my miseries to be far more
cruel afterward unto me, then if my Lady (never) had pronounced them. Yet
did they me great good (as then) in respect I enjoyed her company, and in
that she showed her self so kind unto me. But alas, it was my Fortune, and
not her fault, since none can withstand his hard destiny.

Mean time, I being astonished and amazed (trembling like that wayfaring man,
when he beholds a Snake, winding about his leg) took my Lady by the
Lilly-white hand, going about (with great reverence to kiss it) when a
sudden fear, coming freshly into my head, that my Diana, would mislike of
the same, made me to forbear a while.

Whilst I thus said unto her: Sweet Lady, I beseech you forbear, and let me
after (my wonted manner) languish away secretly in my sorrows, rather then any
coffeehouse should trouble you at all. For too great a plague would that be
unto me, if I should live to behold the overthrow of her, whom I esteem more
pretiousthen mine own life, and the rather, sithence I am predestinate to be
unhappy.

Let me I pray you be pardoned in this, because I know my self every way
unworthy of so rich a courtesy, having received but too much favor already
at your hands, in that you have vouchsafed to permit me to enjoy your more then
Angelical presence, thus long and all alone. Nevertheless, I most humbly thank
you, as much for the proffer thereof, as if I had enjoyed the same, I being
every way contented and satisfied, as I would my self. Thus did I excuse my
self, as one unworthy of so great a kindness, (making dainty of the matter)
when my Lady, seeming as it were (to be angry, that I refused the same) and
somewhat blushing through Choler, thus replied.

Well shepherd, well, I now perceive that you will not accept of this small
favor, because vo^ would have some color to complain of me, after my
departure from you. Willingly I offer it, then willingly accept it: for say
that any thing otherwise then well, should happen unto me about this matter,
yet would not I have thee to think I love thee so ill, as I would lay any
blame upon thee at all. More pleasing is a hurt come (by chance) from a
friend, then a pleasure or good turn done unto us, proceeding from an enemy.

Then if I may do any thing with thee, let me entreat thee, to do as I will
have thee, which if thou will not, then will thou make me to think thou never
did affect me.

The refusal of a gift, presented in good will, argues a perverse mind of
him against the giver, that does refuse the same: Even so, I cannot imagine
otherwise of thee, but that thou rather hate me, then love me truly, and
therefore do as thou please. But I will call the heavens to witness of mine
offer, proceeding from a pure good will, to the end the blame shall be thine,
and not mine, (if hereaster without cause) thou shall exclaim against me.

Therefore, if ever thou meanest that I shall remember thy love, and that I
shall think thou have ever affected me, with a chaste and an unspotted heart,
then let me entreat thee, to accept of this gift, which as I know it will be
pleasing unto thee, so shall it be no way hurtful unto me at all.

Seeing then, (said I) lovely Diana, that such is thy pleasure, I will obey the
same whether I live or die: and not a little will I glory herein, that I have
lived to fulfill the will of so great and gracious a Lady as your self:
swearing by those your Diamond eyes, that what mischaunce so ever shall
hereafter light upon me, I never will accuse you for the same.

Whereupon, I gently took her Iuory soft hand, which I kissed, bedeawing it
with many a loving tear. O sweet thought thereof, o pleasing remembrance of
that good Fortune, and o sacred memory of that blessed time, although they cost
me dearly, not long after. That poor vassal who finds himself punished,
for presuming to have hunted within the Parkes of his Lord, receives not half
so deep a conceit of his displeasure, as this Favor made me afterward to
endure.

So much was my delight, as I seemed to be ravished therewithal, nothing in
the world being able to have contented me so much, as that did. That thing
which a man loves, and has a mind unto, he thinks can never be too deerly
bought: Even so, I found nothing so precious in my thoughts, as was those
kisses, which I then enjoyed: Alas, never do I think thereof, but that I am
ready for to sownd.

That wicked Tyrant Dennis, being driven out of his kingdom of Sicile, never
thought himself so wretched, (when he remembered his utter overthrow) as I do,
when I call to mind my former life and happiness.

I stood still as a stone, sighing and crying out, as indeed I had reason, for
two causes especially. The one was the absence of my Lady, the other, the
loss of that sweet contentment, which I then enjoyed, and was to give over
presently.

But the day now begins to be late, and therefore I will briefly make an
end of this my more then woeful Tragedy.

No sooner had I let go my Ladies hands, but that the whole troop of Nymphs
were arrived, they all saluting Diana their Gouernesse, who was not slow to
return them the like kindness again.

Alas, this was that dismal day, which did me both good and bad, and all at
one time together: wherein I may compare her unto the Viper, which being
venomous, does sting deadly, and yet nevertheless, serves for many necessary
helps and uses; For then was it, when my Mistress, (still settled in her first
resolution) took leave of all the Nymphs, her companions, to go and enclose
her self within some solitary Cell, for none could dissuade her from the
same, although with sighs and tears she was persuaded to the contrary.

Whilst I poor wretch, being not able to endure to behold so pitiful a
departure, weeping and crying out, like an other Niobe, conveyed my self
behind a Rock, to bewail my loss at the more leisure.

O how heavy were the complaints I made as then? how doleful the mournings?
how bitter the laments? and how pitiful was the moestfull sound of my dying
voice?

I must needs make you acquainted with some part of them, because I have no
other delight, then to call to mind these my forepassed miseries. Be these
then (cried I out) the last speeches, that ever I shall make unto my dear
Mistress? and thou (most glorious Sun) is it possible that I should be able to
behold this black gloomy day, when thou thy self have hid thy head before
times, for less matter then this? If so, why then do thou not now hide thy
self? to the end thou may not view the most wretched Caitiffe that ever
lived.

Who ever knew a body to live without a soul, breath, or blood? no more shall
mine do, for thou hold my soul and heart (lovely Diana.) The cruel
Destinies shall not deprive thee of me, but of my life also. In losing of
thee, I will lose my self: neither shall mine eyes see any more, since they
cannot behold thy gracious presence.

Unfortunate I, that did not a while since go kill my self, before I was
deprived from my chiefest joy, I now living to be but a common receptacle for
all mischaunces whatsoever.

As possible is it for a man to support upon his shoulders, the huge weight of
the Heavens, as for me to bear the absence of thee my sacred Diana. Since the
nourishment of my life is gone, what can mine Eyes behold to see? seeing their
Sun is Eclipsed, who shall give light unto mine heart? and how shall my hope
flourish green, since all comforts be quite blasted and gone?

How many Lovers have there been, that have either dyed with grief, or else
have slain themselves, with their own swords, only because they have lost
their fair Mistriffes? What then should let or hinder me, but that (in like
manner) I may follow their examples?

The Merchant that has no merchandise, shuts up his shop, and lives
idly: Even so, I having lost my Saint, must shut up mine eyes, with the sweet
slumber of death.

O blessed Eyes, in that you have beheld so perfect a beauty, but far more
blessed, if being deprived of her, you likewise deprive your selves of all
light. O royal Recluse, that shall enjoy the company of my Diana; Ah, why am
not I transformed into thee? what shall I do, or what shall become of me?
whither should I go, or what should I say? and what can I hope for, that may
please me in this world?

Too long have I lived, since the longer I live, the more my pai^e increases:
Dispatch then (forlorn and forsaken Shepherd) seeing thou art exiled, from
what thou most of all did delight in, whilst ye mine Eyes, who of late
served to contemplate so divine a countenance, shall now stand me in stead, to
rain down bitter tears: and thou my Tongue, who of late were an instrument
to commend such rare and divine virtues, shall serve me (now) to lament their
loss, and bid them all Adien.

Must I then bid Adieu unto those golden locks, which served as bands to tie my
heart must I bid Adieu to those fair and dainty tresses, curling in cirkles,
and wauing with the wind, resembling those of the Paphian Goddess? shall I
never see you more, after you are enclosed within those vnooth walls?

Must I needs bid Adieu unto that goodly and spacious Forhead, smooth as Get,
and free from every wrinkle and frown? that For head whereas all Virtue
lodges, the seat of Justice, and receipt of all Chastity? Must I needs
languish and pine away, without seeing you any more? Oh unhappy day of my
birth, o miserable my chance, and unfortunate the time wherein I live.

Must I needs bid Adieu unto those thin and slender Eyelids, the foes of
care, and enemies unto grief, descending (vault-wise) like a fine Arche of
Ebonie, delightful to behold, but far more pleasant to touch? Is it possible
I can live, and not see you? I cannot. Now woe is me, I cannot: needs must
ye take my life away, my sorrowful life must you take away with you.

But chiefly you fair Eyes, must I needs bid you Adieu? my two glorious
Suns, have you resolved never to shine more? and must I needs still live in
darkness?

O Sapphire Eyes, the throne of LOVE the bright lamps of Chastity, the lodges
of virtue, and true mirrours of honest and maiestike modesty, must I needs
beforsaken of you? Cruel as you are, you first inflamed my heart, rauishing the
same, whilst it consumed with the fire of desire; yet think not for all this,
that I will leave you: your glaunces shall be my guides, and your looks the
paths, wherein I will trace; I can no more lose or leave you, then the
Traveler can walk in the thick dark wood, without the light of the day. O
fair Mouth, and must I needs bid thee Adieu? woe is me, and shall I never see
thee more?

Ah sacred Mouth, wherein my soul reposed, the happy chair of my chaste
Desires, resembling a garden of Musk roses, and Cloue gilly-flowers, from
whence proceeded so many wise and hunnie speeches, charming our ^indes, as the
great Priest of Thracia did the stones and Trees, with the sound of his
bewitchitching Harp: shall it be said I shall never see you more? it cannot be.

Arcas shall never be seen to joy in this world, when he is deprived of the
heavenly sound of thy Harmonious voice. And ye fair lovely Cheeks, shall I
bid you Adieu? Cheeks vermillion, without cunning or painting, whose natural
Die is the Lilly, sweetly mixed with the Damask-rose, never can I part from
you, without parting from life and all. Ah beauteous Breasts, and must I needs
bid you Adieu? where reposed the nine Muses, with their sage brother. Breasts
more fair then Summers day, and far more white then Mountain snow: sweet lobby
of virtue it self, and pleasant prison of my entangled heart. Never shall I be
able to bid you Adieu? sooner must my days be shortened, and my wretched self
cut off, before my time appointed. In the mean space (live thou my peerlesse
Saint) in all happiness, full of joy, and freed from all annoy: live to be
honored, both of Gods and men. Adieu for ever and a day, the light of my
soul, and life of my mind: farewell and Adieu, my gracious, sweet, chaste,
virtuous and religious Mistress: Heavens grant thee all happiness, according
unto thine own contentment, whilst I take my course to die, despite of the
maleuolent stars, that have so long prolonged my life. But yet before my
death, leave ye mine Eyes (some tears) to accompany (in weeping) so many
fair and goodly Nymphs, (who as well as your self, mourn for the loss of
their best Gonernesse, and yet it is not for brave and generous minds to shead
tears, but rather for base Cowards, weak Women, and little powling Children.

Cato when he died, never wept at all, so we without lamenting, will give up
the Ghost: it shall suffice, that the goary drops of my purple blood, shall
be in stead of salt tears.

Too much have I sighed and sobbed, too much have I wailed and wept, and
overmuch have I lamented and cried out.

And yet before my fatal hour approach, I will leave some pittious signs of
my griese behind me, that the world may see after my death, how rare and
constant my love has always been.

Hereupon, I made an end of my speech, falling down (through very faintness)
all along upon the grassie ground, whilst holding mine arms acrosse, (as a
token of my gricuous cares) and lifting up mine eyes toward the heavens, I
began afresh to weep most bitterly.

That done, I began to apprehend so lively a passion of exceeding bitter
sorrow, that the very conceit thereof, made me to sownd, and so, for a long
time, I lay, (as it were) berest of all my senses.

At the last I revived, and therewithal rose up, when taking my knife, I
engraued in the Rock, these mournful Verses following.

Unto the soundlesse Vaults of Hell below,
I Will wail noy griefs (remediless) amain:
Whilst frightfull Ghosts, as pitiful shall show,
And Fli^tie Rocks, remorse take of my pain.
Yea Death it self, my bitter pains shall know,
To witness that my life in noy has lain.
For Lovers true, can never die indeed,
Whose loyal hearts, a beanenly fire does feed.
My Course being laid along within my Grave,
Shall show his tears, his torments, and his love?
And (for his mind; did never change nor wave)
Far brighter then the Sun, the same shall prone,
By him the picture of his Lady he shall have,
Which (he being dead) afresh shall make him moan.
Like to the fire, in ashes contred,
Which (though at show no flame) yet is not dead.
LOVE is not tarn'de by Death, but still does live,
Although that life does flit and pass away:
Then (Lady) think not though by death (thou grieve
My body) that thou LOVE can make decay,
As long as Fancy, ^oth thy beauty drive,
Into my soul? No, this will bide for eye.
Within my heart, thy beauty printed is,
LOVE in my Tomb, to harbor will not ^^isse.
Think thou, I Will leave to love thee being dead,
When thy fair portraiture reuiues my sight?
If mortal voice, from Tombs, have some men lead,
Restoring unto them their senses right.
Then how much more, ought LOVE be houonred,
Whom (then the greatest Gods) is more of might?
Then think not though my Corse in Vault thou see,
That from thy love, (as thou would) I am free.
Below in Monument still shall thou hear,
How I will sigh, for (without soul) thy Fire
Shall hold me up; whilst living I Will appear,
(Being dead) as fore my death, I did desire.
Nor deadly pangs thereof, will I once fear,
Nor part from thee, as thou would feign require.
For in thy life, so cruel thou have not been,
But in my Death, as loyal I Will be seen.
Yet is my Fortune better far then thine,
For, without breach of Faith (as thou have done)
I shall have leave to plain of sorrow mine,
Thou think (in killing me a Martyrdom,
More tedious (then before) me to assign,
But thou art deceived, a wrong Race have thou run.
For whilst I lived, thy Rigor was my bane,
But now being dead, I freed am from the same.
Death then, both thee and me preserues from ill,
Thee, that no more thy Beauty I molest:
Me, that I feel not now thy cruel will,
O happy Death, that two desires has blessed.
Then let me die, thy mind for to fulfill,
Yet first I will, this Rock shall be possessed,
Of this my doleful verse, true witness,
How (undeserved) I brought was to distress.
For though (to die) it shall me mickle please,
Yet must I grieve at thy lost Company:
Then Rocks, Caves, Woods, Groves, Springs, and greenie Leaze,
Witness you all, LOVE Arcas made to die.
To noise this in the world, do never cease,
If I report shall, where as dead I lie,
How all of you (although by Nature wild,
Yet (then my Mistress) are more meek and mild.
No sooner had I engraven these Verses, but that I got me up unto the top of
the same Rock, minding to cast my self down into the swelling Seas, when upon
the sudden, an other new conceit came into my brain, which was to see, if I
could devise a mean, how I might restore Diana again, not only unto my
self, but also unto the other Nymphs, who (as well as I) sore lamented the
loss of her departure.

Whereupon (I knowing that she would not be persuaded, by any reasons
whatsoever, to be reclaimed or altered from her first determination) I went and
sought out her Friends and Parents, unto whom I bewrayed the intention of
their fair daughter, persuading them, with all the earnest speeches I could,
and by all the lively reasons as might be devised, that they should not in any
wise permit her, to have her will therein.

They hearing me tell so strange a Tale, were wonderfully amazed and daunted
therewith: (For Diana never meant to have made them privy, in this her secret
business,) promised me, that they would so work, as they would (if they
could) cross her in this her resouled purpose, they themselves being much
unwilling she should take upon her any such Austere and Melancholic course.

Whereupon, I being glad, that they iumped with me in opinion, (having
received hearty thanks from them, for my kind Intelligences,) came away
wonderfully well pleased, in that I had spedde so well. And not long after,
they took so good an order, as the fair Nymph, (although very much against
her will) was constrained to obey their hests, and giving over her former
resolution, living amongst us, as she had used before.

But alas, as he that builds goodly houses, oftentimes erecteth his grave,
it being his chance to be slain therein:

Even so I, thinking to prolong mine own life, framed mine own proper death,
and over throw. For my Mistress (who before time) was wont still to use me
kindly, showing me good countenance when she saw me, (although for the most
part, she was sad and heavy in her mind, because she was barred from her
most wished for Design) came at the length to know that I only was the chief
cause that her Parents had so much hindered and crossed her against her will.

As that Master, who bearing great affection unto one of his servants
(particularly) both hates and detesteth the same man, after he finds how he
is runaway, and has robbed him of his goods and Treasure.

Even so, no sooner came these dismal news unto her cares, but that suddenly
she began to alter her mind toward me, hating me unto death; yea, and that
in so cruel a manner, as she began (now) to loath me, a thousand times
more then ever she had loved me before. Whereupon she vowed in her mind to be
revenged upon me, imagining and devising in her self, how she might best do
it. But alas, what need had she, to have troubled herself so much? For she
needed no other to execute this spiteful malice toward me, then her own
poor self.

Thus we see, how chaungeable and uncertain, the fortunes of Lovers are in
their Loves. For one morning, I finding her alone, began (as I was wont to
salute her: when she presently) looking as red as any ^^re, (with extreme
choler) began thus to requite my kindness.

O cruel and ungrateful wretch, out of my sight, if thou meanest that I shall
live: Is this the reward for so many courtesies as thou have received at my
hands, to seek most Traitreously to hinder me in my sacred and religious
intention?

Away I say, and out of my sight, for I forbid thee my presence, and think (or
else It shall go hardly with me) but that I will most grievously plague thee,
for thy unthankful and leaud dealing.

In the mean while, I command thee upon pain of death, that thou never
presume to come (again) before me; Cruel, ungrateful, false-harted, and
wicked Creature as thou art, that have thus requited me with evil for good,
most injuriously opposing thy self against my most just and godly desires.

And having so said, away she flung, swelling for very rage and anger, and not
so much as (once) staying to hear what answer I could make in mine own
defense.

That woman whom her husband has taken tardie, as guilty of some heinous
faculty, is not half so heavy and sorrowful, neither so confounded with
fear and shame, as I was then. Long did I stand stone still, as if my feet
had grown unto the ground, neither was I able, or had the power, to open or
lift up mine eyes, so much had grie^ seized upon me, as I thought verily, I
should have dyed (as then) in that place.

In the end, coming unto my self again, and remembering the more then cruel
threatenings of my dread Mistress, without wailing any more, or bethinking me of
any other devise, how to excuse my self, I ran up unto the top of the Rock,
upon which I had been so often before.

That done, I closed both mine eyes, flinging my self down from thence into
the maine Sea, resolving to drown me within the bottom of the same. No sooner
was I in the water, but I began to repent me of my rash enterprise, whilst the
fear of death (being not far off) so terrified and affrighted me, as I
began to swim most lustily in the waves to save my life.

Thus as I was tumbled and tossed too and fro by the churlish Surges, a
certain Ship (by great good fortune, sailed by) the Mariners and Sailers
whereof, being moved with pity, took me up by a rope, being very heavy
and sad, as you may well suppose.

And within a while after, whether it were by reason the inward grief I
conceived for my Ladies unkindness, or because of the great pain and labor
which I had taken in swimming, I know not, but I fell to be most extremely
sick in the Ship, upon the sudden. They doubting least I would die, as
those who were very unwilling to have any diseased folks in their vessel
(although forie for the same) yet forced, and as it were half against their
wills, set me on land in this desert, leaving me some victuals to live upon,
until better foretune should happen.

In the end I recovered my health again, and am miserable ARCAS, confined to
five in this comfortless wilderness, and deprived the company of my dear
Mistress for ever: my comfort is, that my days will soon be shortened, and that
I have not long to live. And thus (good Father) have you heard the true and
doleful discourse of my more, then wretched misfortunes, which will never end,
until my life shall part, from this his unwelcome mansion.

I doubt I have troubled you, in being over long, but (alas) it was sore
against my will, for sooner (if I could) would I have sinisht the same.

Not a whit, (answered the old Magitian,) for you rather have pleased me very
much, and I like your discourse maruailous well. And God (I pray) comfort you,
for great need have you thereof. But it is (now very near night;) Let us then
go (replied the Shepherd) seeing I have (now) set down, and reported the
restless lives, the pitiful complaints, and the most lamentable kinds of
such as have loved.

FINIS.
Nec morte, moritur Amor.
LONDON PRINTED BY THOMAS Creed, dwelling in the old Change, near old
Fishstreete, at the Sign of the Eagle and Child, 1610.


