The answer to the first part of the poysened book, which a namelesse
heretyke has named the souper of the lord.

By sir Thomas More knight.

The preface. Sir Thomas More knight to the christen reader.
Would god good chri sten readers as I have often said, ye every good christen
man, ye man and woman both, which are of that inward good and graciouse mind,
that they would not for all this world forsahe the true faith them self,
had as much burning zefe and fervor in their hearts, to se it outwardly
kept and preserved among all other, as these that are fallen in false (...)
and have forsaken the faith, (...) an hot fire of hell in their hearts, that
never can suffer the^ to rest or ceace, but makes them both day and night;
by sily labor and work, to subuerte and destroy the catholyke christen
faith, with all the means that ever they can devise.

For surely if all such as believe well them self, were as loath to here any
word spoken wrong against the faith, as they would be to speak it them
self: there should neither feles^hyppe of their matchys, nor fere of any such
as are after the worldly compte accounted for their betters, any thing let
or wythstande them both by word and countenance to show them self
plainly, to hate and deteste and abhor utterly, the pestylent contagyon of
all such smoky co^munycacyon.

The time has been ere this, when honest christen people would walk so far
of from al lecherouse living, that they would not come so much toward it as
to abide the talhynge but followed thaposties precepte (...). 5.
that says, let not (...) or any uncleanness be so much as named among you.

In that while was there myche honest clennesse, and by shame fastness much
was chastyte conserved. But after time ye in word, folk fell unto more
lybertye / and such as would forbere the doing, would yet be well content to
fall in the feleshyp of foul and fylthy talking: than began clennesse
greatly to dekaye. For as 1. (...). 15
thapostle also reherseth, evil communicacyon marreth and corrupts good
manners.

But this dekaye from chastity by declynacyon into foul and fylthy tal king,
has bygonne a great while agoo, and is very far grown on. But the time has been even until now very late, that albe it of fleshly watonesse men have not
let to use them self in words both lewd and very large: yet of one thing
ever would every good man be well ware, that heresye would he no man suffer to
talk at his table, but would both rebuke it and detecte it to, all though the
thing touched his own borne brother. Such has been till of late ye comen
christen zele to ward the catholyke faith.

And albe it that I dowte not, but that (god be thanked) the faith is it self
as fast roted in this realm still as ever it was before (except some very
few places, and yet even in those few, the very faithful folk many mo than
are the faythlesse to) yet sith good men have of late not let to here the
evil talk, and vnco^trolled to speak blasphemouse worcester des in their company,
the cowrage thereof has out of all questyon much geuyn occasion yt heretics
have spread their errous much ye more abroad.

For it is not only lechery yt (...) 1. (...). (...)
word are verified of, where he says ye evil co^municacyo^ corrupts good
manners (albe it thereof be they veryfyed to) but specially be they verifyed of
heresye. And against the co^municacyon of heretics did saint Poule specially
speak them in his first pystfe to ye Corynthyes / among whom some began homely
than to talk against ye general resurrection, as some begin among us now,
to talk against the blessed sacrame^te.

And such co^municacion it is therefore that thapostle speaks against / of
which he says also ye the co^tagion 2. Timo. 2
crepeth forth and corrupts ferther, after ye manner of a corrupt cankar.

And therefore he byddeth us that we should have none other co^munyca cyon with
(...), but only of reprouyng their heresye and geuyng the^ warnyng to seue.
And yet not every man be bold, to task to long with the^ not even thereof
neither, nor over often to medfe with them / fest as the pe stylence catches
sometime the leche that fasting comes very nere and long sytteth by the syke
man bysy about to cure him: so some folk faint and feeble in the faith matched
with a fellow stoburne and strong in heresye, may sooner him self take hurt
than do the the other good.

Saint Poule therefore inspyred with the spiryt of god, co^pendiousely touches
in very few words, both these two points at onys, where he writes unto
Titus: That man yt iti. (...).
is an heretyke after onys or twyse warning ((...) here the co^municacyo^ that
he would we should have with him) void and esce we him. So here ye se so that
after onys or twyse war nynge of them, the bishop should as folhe incorrigihte
expel them / and we should if we well did, keep no more company nor no more
co^munycacyon with them / no says saint John, not 2. (...). (...).
so much as bid them good speed or good morrow when we mete them.

These bydddynges of these bles sed appostles, if all catholyke (...) would
follow (which either of neclygence or fere, or for synful ciuilyte, while we
follow not, we never dyscharge well our conscience toward god). There would
without any great suyt or trouble be shortly far fewer heretyques than there
be. And they yt are, should shortly perceive in eve ry place where they wene
the^ self ma ny, how very few they be / which as few as they be, would god yet
they were yet far fewer than they be. For all be yt there are of heretyques
far fewer than those that are would have it seem there were: yet are there
vndoutely by such dyssymysyng suf feraunce, many mo than else there should
have been.

And this is also the cause, that of these heretyques books there be so many
now brought in as there be. For while men may so boldly speak out their
heresies, even among them whom they know none heretykes: this makes many
folk yt else durst not meddle with such books, to bye them and look on
them, and long to se what they say.

But some there are that first begin but of such a vain curyouse mind,
whom the devil dryueth af ter forward, and first makes them doubt of the
truth. And after brings them out of doubt to a full belyefe of heresye.

And thus of such books, as fore as they be forboden: yet are there ma ny
bought. Nor the parel refrayneth not myche people from the byenge, sith there
is none house lightly that has so little rome, that lacks the rome to hyde a
book therein.

But when they had the books, if men would abhor their talkyng gone were
all the pleasure that they take therein. But now while men con trolle them not,
but laugh and let them babble, pride makes them proceed, and they procure
mo, and sprede the books more abroad, and draw mo brethren to them.

There is no small number of such erronyouse english books prented of which
if few were boughte, there would not of lykelyhed so many be put in prente /
saving that some brethern there are in this realm, that of their zele to
their sects, being of such substance that they may forbere yt, give some
money thereto before hand, content to abide thaduenture of the sale, or give
the books about for naught to bring men to the devil.

And in this wise is there sent out to be prented, the book yt Fryth made
last against the blessed sacrament, answering to my letter, wherwyth I
confuted the pestyle^t treatyce that he had made against yt before. And the
brethren looked for yt now at this bartlemew tide last passed and yet look
every day, except yt be come all redye, and secretly run among them.

But in the mean while, there is come over a another book aguynst the blessed
sacrament / a book of that sort, that Frythes book the brethren may now
forbere. For more blasphemouse, and more bedelem ripe than this book is, were
that book hard to be / which is yet mad enough as me say that have seen yt.

This book is intytled, The souper of our lord. But I beshre w such a she were,
as so serves in the souper, that he conuayth away the best dyshe, and
brings yt not to the board / as this man would if he could, convey fro the
blessed sacrament Cri stes own blessed flesh and blood, and leave us nothing
therein, but for a memoryall only bare bread and wine.

But his hands are to lumpyshe and this mess also to great for him to co^uey
clean / specially sith ye dishe is so dear and so dayntye, that every chryste^
man has his heart bent thereto and therefore his yie set thereon to (...) where yt
bycometh.

The man has not set his name unto his book / nor whose yt is I can not surely
say. But some reken yt to be made by Wyllyam Tyndale / for that in a pystle of
his unto Fryth, he writes that in any thing that he cando,' he would not
fail to help him forth.

Now be yt some of the brethern report that the book was made by George Jay.
And of troth Tyndale wrote unto Frith, that George Jay had made a book
against the sacrament, which was as yet partly by his means partly for lack
of money, retained and kept fro the prent. Now be yt what George Joy would do
therein afterward wha^ his money were come / that could he not (he says assure
him.

Now of truth George Joye has long had in hand and ready lyenge by him,
his book against the sacrament. And now if this be yt / he has somewhat
enlengthed yt of late, by a pyece that he has patched in against me, wherein he
would seem to soil mine arguments, which in my letter I made in that matter
against the deuely she treatyce of Fryth.

And in very deed, diverse that are learned and have read the book, reken yt
verily to be the book of George Jaye, whereof Tyndale wrote unto Fryth /
specially by certain words that were in that letter, For therein writes
Tyndale, that if George Jay did put forth his book, there should be founden in
it many rea sons and very few to the purpose.

Now be yt me thinks by that mark, that this book should not be that. For
in this book be there very few reasons, and of them all never one to the
purpose.

The maker of the book in ye end of his book, for one cause why he put teth
not his name thereto, writes in this wise, Master mock whom the veryte most
offends, and does but mock it out when he can not soil it, he koweth me
well enough.

This sad and sage ernest, man that mockyng at mine name calls me master
Mock, does in these wise words nothing but mock the readers of his book /
save that his reason is so rude and folysh, that the mock returns to him
self.

For sith he writes not his book to me, nor sends me none of them, but the
brethren keep them fro me as closely as they ca^: what if I wist never so well
who he were that wrote yt, what were this to the brethren that read yt? know
they thereby who yt is to?

Now for my self also, though I know Tyndale by name, and George Jay or
George Joy by name also, and twenty such other fond fellows of the same sect
mo: yet if ten of those would make ten such folysh treatyses and set
their names to none, could I know thereby which of those mad foles, made
which folyshe book?

Diverse there are in deed, of those that are learned and have read the book,
that think for the lack of learning and of wit also, that they find every
where therein, the book should neither be made by Tyndale nor by George Jay
neither / but rather by some young unlearned fool.

Now be it as for me, I think the book might be for all that made by Tyndale
or by George Jaye either. For the matter being dyuysed against the blessed
sacrament, the wy sest or the most fool, the most learned or the least, is all
in manner one, and in that matter makes little dyfference. For I never found yet
any man so well learned, and so naturally well wytted wythall, but after that he
fell ones to ye defense of heresies, and specially of this abomynable here sye
against the blessed sacrament: ney there lernyng, nor wit, never well ser ued
hymafter.

For as for Tyndale the captain of our English heretyques (who before he
felto these fransyes, me^ had went had had some wit, and was taken for full
pretyly learned to) ye se good christen readers plainly tried by his books, that
an unlettered man might be ashamed to write so vnler nedly / and a mad man
would all most wax read for shame, to write in some things so frantykely.

As touching friar Barons and George Jay, the brethren and systern them self
se their wits so wasted and their lernyng waxen so slender, that the
bretherhed has little list to read them. And some of the bre therne that say
this new work was made by George Jay, think that the cause why he set not
his name thereto, was because he wist well the brethern did not regard him. And
Tyndale had in his letter also decla red him for a fool, by reason whereof he
thought yt if yt came under his name, the stimacyon thereof were but lost.

Fryth was lo a proper young man and a toward, till he fell unto these folyes.
After which to what dekay both his wit and his learning came, every wise man
myche meruayled, that in his open examenacyon herd and considered his answers.

For all be yt that in the book that the brethren that are here have sent
over to prent, Tyndale and his fellows to bydylde the world with all, purpose
to make many chaunges, and amend and advance his part, vnderpropyng yt with
their own proper lies: yet shall ye means be metely well founden to control
their falshed I trust, and to take away their clokes, and live his folly
bare. And than shall men plainly se, that of one whom the brethren boste for
so wise, there never dyed in Englange before, any false heretyque so folyshe.

But now as touching this new come over book, which the maker has entitled
The super of the lord: though the man have named yt the souper of our savior
Christ, yet has the man made yt the souper of the devil.

The special effect of all his whole purpose is to feed us with the most
poisoned heresye that laboreth to kill the catholyque christen faith,
concerning the blessed sacra meant of the autare / all be yt by the way he
puts forth diverse other heresye beside.

This vsauerye souper of his, without any corn of salt, and spyced all with
poison, he dyuydeth as yt were into two courses / that is to wit into the
treating and (...) of two special things spe cyfyed in the gospel of
Christ, whereby christen people plainly perceive, that in the blessed
sacrament of thaulter, is the very blessed body of Christ, his very fieshe
and his blood.

In the first part which I call here his first course, occupyenge the tone
half of his book, he treats the words of Christ spoken in the syxte
chapyter of saint John^ / why che words our savior speaks, of the eating of
his flesh and drynkyng of his blood.

In his secunde part, which I call his secund course, he treats ye maundye
of Christ with his apostles upon shere thursday, wherein our savior actually
did instytute yt blessed sacrament, and therein verily gave his own very flesh
and blood to his twelne apostles him self.

I shall therefore diuyde this work of mine into two parts in like wise, of
which twain this shall be the first, wherein I shall detect and make every
man perceive this mannys evil coquery in his first course, concerning the
treating of Christ's words in the syxt chapyter of saint John^.

And all be yt yt I shall afterward send you forth my secunde part also
against his secunde course: yet shall I so handle this man's myscheuouse
heresye in this first part, that though I never wrote word more herafter of
the matter, yet to the perceiving of the troth, and deteccyon of his falsed,
this first part might suffyse for all the whole matter.

In his first part, he forste expowneth the later part of his syxte chapyter
of saint John^ / and by his declaracyon laboreth to draw men from the
perceiving of the troth, and sets forth also both his pryncypall heresye,
and over that diverse other.

Also in the same part he argues against all men in general that expowne
any of those words of Crist there spoken, to be meant by Christ of the very
eating of his flesh (as the catholyque church byleueth) in the blessed
sacrament.

In that first part also he argues against me by name in special / and
pretends to soil such arguments as I made in my letter against the
poisoned treatise, that John Fryth had before made in that matter against the
blessed sacrament.

In that part also the man brings in two placys all in great, which he has
pyked out by long leysoure among all my books / in either of which two
places, he shows that I have notably contraryed mine own writing, that I have
written my self in other places before and shows also the places where.

I shall therefore good readers in this first part of mine give you five books
/ and some of them very short.

In the first will I give you the exposycion of the self same words of
Christ, mencyoned in the syxte chapyter of saint John / by which who so
confer them and consider them together, shall I trust perceive well the
fashed of his exposycyon, and not be deceived thereby. And for mine exposycyon
ye shall not give me the thank. For I have but pyked it out here and there out
of the wrytynges of diverse old holy men.

The second shall show you for a sample, some of the fawtes both in folies and
errors, that the man has made us in his exposycyon.

The third shall answer and soil his wise reasons, with which he would make
all men folys, that have expowned that place before, contrary to his here sye
now / that is to wit, all the old holy doctors and saint from thapostses
days unto our own time.

In ye fourth shall ye se what wit and what sernyng he shows, in soysynge of
mine arguments made be fore in that matter against his fellow John^ Fryth.

The fyfth shall declare you the dylygence that the man has done, in sekyng
out my negligence, leuynge some places in my writing, repugnau^t and contrary
the tone place to the the other. And of such place ye shall (as I said) se him
with dylygent search of three year, at last bring you forth twain. And there
shall you se good christen reders, that in those twayn, my negligence shall for
all his dylygence prove him twyse a fool.

But in the treatyng of this matter with him, I shall lack somewhat of the
commodyte that the man has in dysputynge with me. For he has a great
pleasure of tetymes, now in one manner, now in another, now to talk of me, and
now to speak to me by name, with, thus says More, and, (...) master More,
and sometime, maysier Mock, and, let More mock on and lie to / and many such
goodly garnyshynge mo. But he will be for his own part sure that I shall not
dyspute with him by name, and therefore he keeps it away.

And therefore what folly and what falsed be founden in his book, he forces very
little. For shame he thinks he can none take thereby, while folk know not
his name.

Wherein he fares myche like to some bestely body, yt would not care to sytte
down with his face to the walwarde, and ease him self in the open street /
and though all the town at onys tote in his tail, take it for no shame at
all, because they se not his face.

And verily as we se sometime, that such as walk in visours, have much the
less fere and shame, both what they do and what they say, because they
think them self unknown: so do these folk oftentimes little force what
they write, that use to put out their books, and set not their names unto
them. They think them self unseen while (...) name is unknown / and
therefore they fere not the shame of their folly. As some have I seen (...) this,
full boldly come dance in a mask, whose dauncynge bycame the^ so well; that
if their visours had been of their facys, shame would not have suffered them
to set forth a foot.

And master (...) under his (...) face forces not myche to shyfte a false
cast among, with a pair of false dyce.

And therefore sith this man by wythdrawynge his name from his book, has done
on a visour of dyssimulacyon, dyssimulynge his person to void the shame of his
fashed, and speaks to much to be called master (...), which name he were else
well worthy for his false dyce: I shall in this dyspicyon between him and me,
be (...) for this onys (sith by some name must I call him) for lack of his
other name to call him master (...).

And thus finishynge (...) preface, we shall begin the matter.
The first book.
The. i. chapyter.
Master (...) has in this his poysened treatice against Crystes hole some so
(...) xxxii. leuys. In ye first. xiiii. whereof he expowneth us the later part
of the syxte chapyter of saint (...). And incidently by the way, the man makes
as though he answered the reasons which I made in my letter, against the
pestylent treatice that fryth made first against the blessed sacrament. And in
the same. xiiii. leuys also, he brings forth two things for special
notable, wherein he says I have openly co^traryed mine (...) writing.

I will good reader peruse the re manau^t of his book after this first part
answered. In which conteynyng these three things that I have (...) you / the
first has he so han desed, yt all were there not (as there are in deed)
diverse false (...) interfaced therein, yet it were for the matter of very
sleyght effect. For in his exposicio^ he nothing touches nor comes nere to
the thing wherein the point of all the matter stands.

The secund point has he so well treated in his argumentacyon, that the
reasons which I lay against Frith, master Masker first falsely reherseth,
and after so folyshely soyleth, that he leueth the^ more stronger against him
when he has done, (...) he fownde them when he bygan.

And as for the third point concerning his notable notys of such things as
he says to mine ouersyghte, them he so garnessheth and sets out so semely
to the show, that I would no man should ever after this day trust any word
that I shall write, but if ye se master (...) pfaynesy proved therein, either
so folyshe as no man should trust his wit, or so false that no man should trust
his troth. Let us therefore now come to the first point, that is to wit his
exposicyon.

The. ii. chapyter.
THe whole sum of his (...) is, that our savior (...) those words taking
occasion of the miracle that he so late before had wrought among them, in
fedyng fyut thousand of the^ with five barley louys and two fysshes, did in
those John^. (...).
words upon their new resort unto him when they followed him to Capharnaum,
first rebuke and blame them because they sought him not for the miracles that
they had seen him wurke, but because they had been fed by him and filled their
belyes / and that therefore our savior exhorted them to labor rather to get
that meat that never should perysshe. Op pon which exhortacyon when the Jews
asked him what they should do whereby they should wurke ye wur kes of god /
Christ said unto them, that the wurke of god was, to believe (...) him whom the
father had (...)

Tha^ goes he ferther and she weth, that upon the words of the Iewis askyng
our lord what toke^ he showed for which they should believe in him, sith their
forefathers had given the^ the bread of Ma^na in deserte, of whi (...). 15
che it was written, he gave them bred from above / our lord showed them that
Moses gave them not that bred from heaven, but his own father had given them
the very bread that was descended from heaven, and that our lord there by all
the remanaunt of those words in the said syxte chapter of sait John^,
declares that him self is that very bred, and is to be (...) by the faith and
the byliefe yt Christ's (...) and body was broken and his blood shed for our
sins. And so expowneth he forth all these words of Christ, applyeng them
only to the declaracyon of his passion to be suffered for our redemption / and
that our savior would have them by leave that point, and that the byliefe of yt
point was meant by the eating, and that that faith and byliefe is ye (...) of
our souls.

The whole sum of his exposicyo^ is this in all his said. xiiii. (...). I mean
not that this is all that ever he says therein / for I leave out his cir
cumstaunces, his garnysshynge, his notes, his argumentacions, his contencyons
with me, his mokkes, his tauntys against all catholyke folk, and his many
fold heresies also, with all which here and there he furnyssheth all the
progress of his painted process / all which things I shall after touch by
them self. But the sum, the substance, and the end whereto all the whole
process of his exposicyo^ comes, is this that I have rehearsed you.

The. iii. chapyter.
BUt now good christen readers all this exposicyo^, were it never so true,
never so comely, nor never so cunnyngly handeled / yet were it (as I told you
before) very far from the purpose, For this exposicyo^ might be good enough,
and yet might Thryste in those words teach the thing that we speak of (...),
that is to wit beside the teaching them that him self was the very bread yt
was descended from heuyn to give life to the world, and that he should suffer
death for the sins of ye world and that they should believe these thyn ges, and
so eat him (...) by faith / he might I say teache in those words also, that
he would give unto men his very body and his very (...) to eat, and his very
blood to drink, and that he would that they should believe that lesson also. And
wrth ye spy rituall eating thereof, by farth receive and eat also his very
blessed body flesh and blood by the mouth not in his own flesshely form as
ye flesshely Jews mysse took it, but (as him self than meant it and part
there expowned it, and by his institu (...) did after more clearly declare it)
inform of bread and wine in ye blessed sacrament of the altar.

It is I trow good readers to no man almost unknown, that the holy scripture
of god is in such marvelous manner, by the profound wisdom of his holy
spyryte, for ye more plentuouse profit of his church, de uised, indyghted,
and written, that it has not only that one sense true which we call the
litterall sense (that is to wit that sense which for the first lesson
thereof, god would we should perceive and learn) but also diverse other sensys
spirytuall, pertaining to the profit of our manners, and instruccio^s in
sundry virtues, by mean of (...), openyng of mysteries, and lyftynge up of
the soul into ye lively light and inward high sight of god. And all those
manyfold senses (diverse in the way and all tendynge to one end) may be
convenient and true, and all by one spyrxte provided, and in to diverse
spyrites by the same one spyrite inspyred, for spyrituall profit to be by many
means multyplyed and encreaced in (...) church.

But never has any good ma^ben accustumed to play the pageaunt yt master
Maskar plays us here, with a spyrytuall exposicyon of allegoryes or parables,
to take away yt very first sense that god would we should learn of the letter
/ and because of some allegories, turn all ye plain word for ye first right
understanding, into a secundary sense of allegoryes.

Of this manner (...) of scrip ture I make mencyon in my letter against Frythes
false handesynge of this same place of saint Johan. And there I showed in what
wise yt false heretics ye Arrianys used by ye same meanys, to take ye godhed
from Cry stes person / as fryth and these fellows by the self same manner of
ex pownynge the scripture, do take away Christ's manhed from Chry stes blessed
sacrament.

In that pistle I showed also that I would in allegorical exposycyons find no
fault, but be well content with them, so that men mysse use the^ not, to the
taking away of the true litterall sense bysyde.

This thing I there showed good readers in the self same pystle, that master
Masker makes here as though he could and would answer. And yet as though he
had never herd my words but slepte while he read them, he plays here the
self same pageaunt him self, while with his allegorycall exposycyo^ of
spyrytuall eating of Christ's godhed and of his body by byliefe of his
passion, he goth about to take away from us ye very lytterall truth, of the
very eating and bodily receyuynge of Christ's own very flesh and blood

Now will I not say any manner blame at all, to any man that will exspowne all
the whole process of Genesis, by allegories / and teache us certain conuenyent
virtues, understood by the four floodes of paradys, and tell us that paradyse
is grace, out of which all the flodys of all virtues flow, and water the
earth, calling the earth mankind, that was made thereof, being barayne and
frutelesse but if it be watered with ye floodes of virtue / and so forth in
some such manner expowne us all the remanaunt. Or lo that thus does, does in my
mind right well. But mary if he would do it in the manner and with the mind,
that master Masker expowneth us Christ's words, all in allegoryes here, and
would teache us such a spyrytuall sense, to make us believe that those words
were to be none other wise vndersta^de^ bysyde, but that there were no such
floodes flowynge forth of paradyse, nor no such paradyse at all / I would wene
verily that he were a very heretyke.

I find no fawte also with them, (...). (...)
that expowne the story of Sampson tayenge the foxes together by ye taylys, and
setting a fire in them, and sendynge them so in to the field of ye Phylistyes
to burn up the corn / in those I say that expowne that story by the devil,
sendyng his heretykes in to the corn field of god the catholyke church of
Christ, with ye fire of false words to desiroye ye corn, both of (...) we
farth and good wutkys, tayed together by the tails, in token that all their
here sies be their hedes never so far a su^der, yet are their tails tayed
together in that ye all tend toward one end, that is to wit to the
destruction of all manee grace and goodness / and that the tayeng of the fire
and their tails together signiifeth also yt for their foxly false head, finally
in the end the hot fire of hell shall be so fast tayed i^ all their tails
wrabelynge there together, ye never shall they get ye fire fro their taylys,
nor fro the bands of hell be severed or break asundre: with this al legorye of
those good men that thus expowne yt story, I find no fault at all. But on the
the other side if any man would expowne it so by that spiritual allegorye against
these heretykes, yt (...) word therewith enforce him self to take away the
sytterall sense, and say the text signified nothing (...), and that there was
no such thing done indede / him word I (...) for an hereiyke to.

And in (...) wise good readers if master Masker here did only expowne all
those words of Christ, as things spoken of spyrytuall eating by way of
allegory / that way word I well allow / for so does not only: such as he is,
but also good faithful folk to. But now wha^ he draws all Christ words to
those allegoryes of a false wyly purpose, to make men wene (and so says him
self for his part) yt they signifye none other thing: this is the point ye
proves master Masker an (...).

And therefore as I said, all his ex policyo^ is (...) of fro the purpose, and
approaches not to the point. For the questyo^ is not whither those words may
be well veryfyed and expowned of spyrituall eating by way of an allegory / but
whyther it may bysyde al ye, be trewly expowned of the very bodyly eating of
Christ blessed body indede. For (...) it so may / than (...) there no man of so
sie^dre wit, but he may well se, ye all master Maskers allegorycall
exposicyon of his only spiritual eating, (...) fro the pue pose quite, and
dare not come (...) ye point

Wherefore to thente^t ye ye may (...) rely se, ye in this exposicyo^ of his
((...) holy as he would have it seem) he does but clearly mokke (saving that it
is myche worse thanne mocking, to make men fall fro the faith) I shall give
you of the same words of Christ wryte^ in the syxt chapyter of saint Johan,
another exposycyon my self / in which I shall bysyde all such spyrytuall
exposicyons, as this man uses therein by way of (...) or parables, declare you
ye very lytterall sense of those words: My flesh is verily meat and my
blood verily drink. So that ye may se thereby, yt our savior verily spoke
and meant, not only such a spyrytuall ratyng as master Masker says he only
meant / but also the very bodyly eating and drinkyng of his very flesh and
blood in deed. which exposicyo^ of mine, if it be in that point true / than
must it needs follow (ye se well) that his exposicyon is far fro the purpose.
For all though there were not one false word therein / yet were it in
dyssemblynge of the troth, very lewd^ and falsely handelyd.

And now that mine exposycyon shall be trewindede, that shall you ere I seue you
so clearly perceive and see, that I trust there shall never any such heretyke
as thysis, be able to blind any man after that redeth it / except some such as
wyllyngly list to wynke, or (...) he put out theyeyen, will hold their heddes
to him them self.

Now to the intent ye may the bet ter perceive and mark, whyther mine
exposycyon agree with the text, and whyther I leave any thing unto wched: I
shall first give you the worcester des of the text it self in english all to
gyther, and than expoune it you piece by pyece after. And yet had it not been
evil to begin somewhat before at Christ's dyscyples going in to the ship in
the evening, and Christ's own walking after upon the sea, and after ye on
the morrow the people coming after to seek him in other ships / which piece
maistee Masker left out and word not meddle with, because it has an hard
allegory declared by holy doctors, which she we that the ship in which the
discyples went, (...) the church which was but one / and the other diverse
ships that came after, betokened the diverse chyrches of herety kes. And yet
in that one ship that sygnyfyed the church, there were as appeared after, both
good and badde to gyther. But let this piece pass for this onys / I will
begin ye text but there as master Masker begins himself. So good christen
readers these be the words.

The. iiii. chapyter.
Ueryly verily I say to you you seek me, not because ye have seen my racles,
but because ye have eatyn of the loves and are filled. work you, not the meat
that perishes, but that (...) into everlasting life, which the sone of man
shall give you / for him has good ye father sealed. They said therefore unto
him what shall we do that we may work the works of god? Jesus answered and
said unto them. This is the work of god that ye believe in him whom he has
sent. Than they said unto him, what token she west thou, therefore that we may
se and believe the? what workest thou? Our fathers have eaten ma^na in the
deserte as it is written / he gave them bread from heuyn to eat. Than said
Jesus to them, verily verily I say to you Moses has not given you the bread
from the heuyn, but my father gives you the very bread from the heuyn. For the
very bread is that that is descended from heuyn, and gives life to the world.
Than said they to him, lord give us all way this bread. Tha^sayd Jesus to
them, I am the bread of life / he that comes to me shall not hungre, and he
that byleueth in me shall never thyrst. But I have said unto you, that ye have
both seen me and have not byleued. All that my father gives me shall come to
me / and he that comes to me I shall not cast him out. For I am (...) from
heuyn, not to do mine own will, but the will of him that has sent me. This is
verily the will of him that has sent me, that is to wit the father, that all
that he has given me I should not lose any thing thereof, but should reyse it
again in the last day. This is verily the will of my father that has sent
me, that every man that sees the sone and by leueth in him, should have
everlasting life, and shall reyse him again in the last day. The Jews
murmured there fore of that that he had said, I am the lively bread that am
descended from heuyn. And they said, Is not this man the sone of Joseph, whose
father and mother we have known. Now says he therefore I am descended from
heuyn? Jesus therefore answered and said unto them, murmr not among your
self. There can no man come to me but if the father that sent me draw him, and
I shall reyse him again in the last day. It is wry ten in the prophets: And
they shall be all taught of god. Every man that has herd of the father and has
learned comes to me / not because any man has seue the father, but he that is
of god has seen the father. Ueryly verily I tell you, he that byleueth in me
has life everlasting. I am the bread of the life. your fathers have eaten
manna in the desert and be deed. This is the bread descendynge from the heuyn,
that if any man eat thereof, he should not dye. I am the living bread that am
descended from the heuyn. If a man eat of this bread he shall live for ever,
and the bread which I shall give is my flesh, which I shall give for the
life of the world. The Jews therefore strove among them self saying, how can
this man give us his flesh to eat. Than said Jesus to them. Ueryly verily I
say to you, but if ye eat the flesh of the sone of man and drink his
blood, ye shall not have life in you. He that eats my flesh and drynketh
my blood, has life everlasting, and I shall reyse him in the last day. My
flesh is verily meat and my blood is verily drink. He that eats my
flesh and drynketh my blood, dwell leth in me and I in him. As the living
father sent me, I also live for the father. And he that eats me, he shall
also live for me. This is the bread yt has descended from heuyn / not as your
fathers have eaten manna and are deed. He that eats this bread shall live for
ever. These things said he in the synagoge, teaching in Capharnau^. Many
therefore of his dyscyples herynge, said, This is a hard saying, and who may
here him Jesus therefore knowing in him self that his disciples murmured at
this, said unto them, does this offend you if ye shall than se the sone of man
ascendynge up where he was before. The spyryte it is that gives life / the
flesh avails nothing. The words which I have spoken to you, be (...) and
life. But there be some of you yt believe not. For Jesus knew from ye beginning
who should be yt byleuers and who should bytraye (...)/and he said, Therefore I
have said unto you yt no man can come to me but if it be given him of my
father. From yt time many of his discyples went back, and now walked no more
with him. Tha^ said Jesus to the. xii, will you go your ways to. Than answered
unto him Simon Peter, lord to whom shall we go. Thou have the words of
everlasting life, and we believe and have known that thou art Christ the sone
of god. Jesus answered unto him: Have not I chosen you. xii. and one of you is
a devil. He said yt by Judas I (...) ye sone of Simon. For he it was that
should betray him, being one of ye. xii.

The exposycyon of the said text.
The. v. chapyter.
WHo so read and consider well good christian reders, the doctrine and ye doing
of our savior Crist, shall by sundry places of holy scripture perceive, yt of
his heuynfy wisdom his (...) usage was, in ma ny great thing yt he purposed
to do, before the doing of the same (beside the fygures of the old testament
fore fygurynge the same / and beside the pro phecyes of the old prophets fore
prophecyeng the same) for me^nes more redynesse toward ye things when he would
execute them by his deed, to give them some warnyng and informa cyon thereof
before by his words.

Thus before he made saint Peter his chyefe shepeherd over his flock, iii.
times at ones, specially (...) dynge him to fed his sheep, he first said unto
him, thou shall be called stone / and after said also to him, when he confessed
him to be Christ: Thou art stone / and upon the same stone shall I byeld my
church, and the gates of hell shall not preuayse against yt.

Thus before he made him his ge nerall vicare, he gave him the name of stone /
which stone he said after he John^. 1
would byelde his church upon. Matt. 16


Thus he gave his apostles and dys cyples warnyng of his betrayeng, of (...). 9
his taking, of his death, of his resurreccion, of his ascensyon, by his word
before the things were done in deed. And of his coming agaynge to the dome
also at ye general resurreccyon, which things surely shall be and (...) not yet
done in deed. And always the more strange the things were / the more he
opened them with words. And yet had he for all that, some of those thing
for that while not very well byleued, not even of some of his own dyscyples.
But yet neither were his words fully frutelesse at the time, but that they
took some hold in some folk, and wrought in some sowles, though not a full
faith, yet an inclynacyon and a disposycyon toward^e yt / and now serve, and
ever sins have served, and ever while the world lasts shall serve, to the
plantynge, rotynge, and waterynge of the says, in all christen nacyons all the
world about.

Now as our lord did in many things / so did he specially in the two great
sacraments / the sacrament of baptysme, and in this high blessed sacrament of
the altar.

Of the tone he talked with Nicho (...). (...)
demus that came to him by night, and durst not be seen with him by day for
dread of the Jews.

And of the the other, that is to wit of the sacrament of the awtre, he talked
here, and taught the very thing but not the very form thereof unto the Jews
and his dyscyples among them.

And as he found Nichodemus far of fro the perceiving of the spyrytuall
fruit that ryseth in the sen syble ablucyon and faithful wasshyng of baptysme
/ so found he the substance of these folk very far fro the perceiving of
the spyrytuall fruit, that grows of the bodyly receyuynge of Christ's own
blessed body, to them that faithfully receive it in the blessed sacrament under
the sensyble form of bread.

Our savior also good reder because the thing that he now went about to
tell them, was a meruesous high thing and a strange, used in the proponynge
thereof unto them, di uers ways devised of his divine wisdom.

First to make them the more mete to receive the doctrine of that point and to
perceive it / he did two miracles before he began to speak thereof. One (which
though they were not at it, yet they perceived well as the gospel (...). (...).
she weth) in going over ye water without a vessel / and another that he did
not only in their presence, but also made them all parteners of the profit,
that is to wit when he fed (...). 14
them all being five thousand in nombre, of two fysshes and five souys / and
yet when all their (...) were full, gathered and filled twelve baskettes of the
fragmentes.

Upon the occasyon of this myra cle good reader of these five louys by such a
miracle so multyplyed as a thing very convenient, he took his beginning to
induce theruppon the feste that he would in this world leave perpetually with his
church; by fedynge of innumerable thousands with that one lofe that is his
blessed body in the form of bread. Not for yt ye miracle of yt fedyng of the
Jews and this fedyng of Christ's church, is in every thing like / (between
which twain there are incomparable differences) but because the less miracle
and in some part like, is a convenient thing for an enter and a beginning
wherwyth to draw them ferther. And unto his apostles at ye time so was it and
yet unto this time unto all good christen people so is it.

Our savior also to enduce them the better to the bylyefe of his great
kyndnes, in that he would vouch saufe to give them his own body to be received
and eaten in to theyrs, he did tell the^ two other thing / the tone yt he was
very god, the the other that he would dye for their sakes. Of these two points /
the tone might make them sure that he would do it, and the the other that he could
do it. For what could he not do that was god almighty? or what would he
dysdayne to do for us, that would not dysdayn to dye for us.

Now good readers remembryng well these things, mark what our savior has
said in this gospel, and consider well what he meant.

The. vi. chapyter.
When that after the miracle of the fedyng so many people with so few louys,
our lord had (as it follows in the gospel) withdrawe^ him self aside into the
hill, because he saw the people were minded to make him their king, the
dyscyples had entered in the evening after into a ship, and Christ
apperynge to them walking upon the sea, and calmynge the tempest, when they
would have taken him in to their ship, the ship was suddenly comen to the
land. The people on the morrow longyng to find our lord again, took other
little ships that came thither after, and followed his dyscyples, from whom
they thought he would not long be, allthough they knew that Christ went not
in the ship with them. And when they came on the the other side of the se to
Capharnau^, and found not only them there but him to / tha^ merueylynge much
thereof, they said unto him, Master when came ye hither? Our lord answered
again and said unto the^: syrs I tell you very truth, the cause that you seek
me now, is not the miracles that you have seen, but it is because that of the
louys yt I gave you you have well eaten and well filled your belyes.

In these words our savior well declared his godhed, in that he told them
their minds and thoughts, which is a property belonging only to god. For
as the scripture says: Regum. 2
our lord beholds the heart. And specially sith he told them their minds
being such as reason would have went their minds had been the contrary. For
sith that after that god had so fed and filled them of that bread, and that
they had seen so much left yet beside, they did upon the syghte of that
miracle say, This is the very prophet that shall come in to the world / and
by those words declared clearly yt they thought he was Christ, that is to
wit Messyas, whom they looked for by the pro phecye of Moses and other prophe
tes, that should come to save ye world, and that theruppon they would have made
him king: who could have went that they could have had so soon upon the
morrow so cold a mind toward him, as to go sail and seek him for none other
deuocyo^ but for the fedynge of their belyes. But our savior (whose deep
syghte entered into their hearts, and labored not upon any fallible
coniecturys) both saw the sykenesse of their vnperfait minds, and as a perfyt
phisicyon against their disease, divised them a good and perfyte medecyn,
saying unto them thus, wurke syrs and labor for the meat, not the meat that
perystheth, but for the meat that abides into everlasting life / which
meat the sone of man shall give you / for him has god ye father sealed. As
though he would say, ye labor hither and seek me for such meat as I fed you
with ye the other day / but yt meat is soon gone and perysheth. Labor and
wurke, and make you meat that you may eat the meat yt shall never be gone nor
never perysh, but shall last with you for ever in everlasting life.

By these words of the meat everlasting our savior did as the old holy
doctors declare, insumate and secretly sygnifye to them the meat of (...),
both the spiritual eating of his godhed by fruicyo^ in heuyn, and the bodyly
eating of his very body here ierth / of which both meats he more declares
after.

For the better perceiving whereof ye shall understand that ye materyall meat
that men eat here, has two manner of peryshyngs. One by which through the
natural operacyo^ of the body that receives yt, it is altered and changed,
and leseth his own form, shape, nature, and substance, and is turned into
the nature and substance of the body which it norisheth. And in this manner of
peryshynge perysheth all the meat that every man eats, or else it nothing
nurysheth.

The the other manner of perysshyng by which the meat perysheth, is that
peryshynge, by which the meat that is taken thorough glotony, is for the
inordynate appetyte and use thereof / destroyed and punyshed by god, and the
glotonous belly to. Of which manner of peryshynge saint Poule says, The meat
for the belly, and the (...). Lorin. 6
belly for the meat / and god shall destroy both the tone and the the other.

This is spoken against those that eat not for the conseruacion of their life
and their health, to preserve them self to the service of god, but eat and
drink only for the voluptuouse pleasure of their body.

Now taught our lord the Jews in these few words adoctryne short and
compendyouse, that they should neither be glotons in laboring for the meat
that perysheth of that secunde fashyon, nor so very hyghly esteem the meat
that perysheth of the first fasshyon, that is to wit any manner of meat that
only nurisheth the body / but that they should labor and wurke and endeavor
them self, that they might be meat to receive and eat that meat that shall
abide and endure with the^ in everlasting life / that is to say that as them
selves were both bodies and souls, so spi rytually to receive and eat of his
own godhed, with the fruicyo^ whereof they should after this life be
euerlastyngly fed among his angellys in heuyn / and for the mean while in
this world bodyly to receive and eat his own blessed body into theyrs, as an
ernest penny of their perpetual co^ iu^ccyon and incorporacyon with him
afterward in the kingdom of his eternal glory / where our bodies shall also
be fed for ever, with the farpassynge pleasure of the bodyly beholdynge of
his glorious body there in his own bewtyfull form, which we now verily
recepue here, hid in the blessed sacrament in likeness and form of bread.

This is the meat that Christ in those word meant, and would they should labor
to make them self mete for. For this meat will in no wise perish. But where as
the bodyly meat that the man eats of the sheep in the nuryshynge of the man,
perysheth and leseth his own nature, not turnynge the flesh of the man in to
the flesh of the sheep / but being turned from the own proper nature of
shepys flesh, in to the natural flesh of the man / this meat is of such
vigor and strength; that in the nuryshyng of the man it abvdeth whole and
unchanged / not being turned into the flesh of the man, but afterynge,
turnyng, and tra^sformyng, as holy saint Austayn says the fleshely man from
his groce (...) into a certain manner of the pure nature of it self, by particy
pacyon of that holy blessed flesh and immortal, that is with his siuely spy
ryte imedyately joined and unseparably knitte unto ye eternal flowyng fou^tayn
of all life, ye godhed. This meat therefore Christ byddeth them labor and wurke
for in those words: wurke you not the meat yt peryssheth but that abides into
everlasting life

But yet though Christ to^mauded them that they should not be idle slougardes and
slothful of them self, but that they should wurke and labor for their own
part to get this meat, and make them self mete therefore: yet he let them
know that no man could by his own only power attain it. And therefore he
added these words, which meat the sone of man shall give you / tellyng them
thereby that him self which had fed them before with that other meat which
was peryshable, would also (if them self would wurke and labor for it) give
them the the other meat, that is permanent in to life everlasting to. And
therefore (as diverse holy doctors say) when the priest minystreth us this
mete, let us not think that it is he that gives it us / not the priest I say
whom we se, but the sone of man Christ him self, whose own flesh not ye
priest there gives us, but as Christ's mynystre delyuereth us. But ye very
geuer thereof is our blessed savior him self, as him self in these words
witnesses, where he says, que^ filius hominis dabit vobis, which meat the
sone of man shall give you.

Now lest the Jews might have cause to mystruste, that he yt were the sone of
man could^ give the^ yt meat, that were fre from all peryshynge and permanent
into everlasting life: he takes away that obieccion, and shows them that
he is not only ye sone of man but also the sone of god / and no more verily
man by that that he is the sone of man (that is to wit not of Joseph but of our
forefather Adam the first man) than he is verily god in that he is the sone of
god, as verily and as naturally begotten of god the father by generacyon, as he
was verily and naturally descended of our forefather Adam by liniall dyscent
and propagacyon. Which thing our savior showed them in these words: Hunc
enim pater significauit deus. For him has god the father sealed. This is to
say, that him has god the father specially sequestered and severed and set
aside out of the number of all creaturs, and has sent him in to ye world^,
anointed, sygned, and marked with the very prent of his own seal. For (as the
old holy doctors declare, and among other saint Cyrill and saint Hilary) the
seal of the father with which he sealed his sone is nothing else but him self
his own very nature and substance And therefore has god caused these words to
be written in holy scripture, that god the father has sealed his sone, as our
savior said here to the Jews / and that Crist is the image, prent, and
character of the father, as says saint Poule, because we thereby should learn
and understand, that as a true seal trewly prented, leueth in the the other the
very whole express thing that it is it self, not as it is iron, stele, or
coper, silver, brass, or gold, but as yt is a seal, that is to wit this
fasshyoned figure or ye, and yet hepeth it whole still (...) the less it
self, so did god the father in the sealyng of god the sone, that is to wit
in his eternal bygettynge, give him all that ever was in him self, all his
whole will, all his hole wisdom, all his whole might and power, and finally
all his whole nature substance and godhed, and yet keep never the less all
the same still him self.

And thus the sone of god so sealed by his father and not onele expres sely
representynge, but also verily being one equale god, in nature, sub staunce,
wisdom, will, might, and power, with almighty god his father being sent in
to the world by his father and him self, and their both holy spyryte equale
god with them both, took upon him the manhood, the very flesh, and the
very soul of our savior Christ, Psalm. 44.
anointed above all other creaturys with fullness of all graces, by the co^
iunccion of his manhed in wonderful unite with his omnipotent godhed,
meruelousely making one perfyt person and one farpassynge perfyte person of
god and man together.

Thus has our savior not only she wed them the great gift of ever lasting
lively meat, that if they would wurke for it he would give the^ / but has also
she wed them that him self is equale god with his almighty father, and thereby
well able to give it them, and also sent into the world for the nonys, because
he should to such folk as would be well wyllyng to labor and wurke therefore,
wurke with their good will and wyllyngly give it them.

The. vii. chapyter.
When that the Jews had herd our savior speak of such a meat that would
not perysshe, but should abide and endure with them into everlasting life /
glad men were they. For yet they hoped to have some meat that so should fill
their belyes and so satysfye them, that they should never need to labor for any
more.

Now were those jews yet somewhat less glotons tha^ are many chry sten people
now a days. For they could have been content so that they should never have
felt hunger more, to have forborne eating for ever. As the woman of Samary, so
that she might have had of our savior one draught of such water as might
have quenched her thyrste for ever, was well contented in her own mind, to
have forborne drink for ever.

But many christen men there are, ye would not I wene be content to take either
such meat or such drink, though god would offer it them. For many men have
such a pleasure in eating and drinking, that they would not gladly live but
even to eat and drink. And for the pleasure thereof, they love better hunger
and thurst tha^ the harmless lack of the^ both though god would give it
them. For we se that they seek means to make their apppetyte gredy. And some
will eat salt meat, purposely to give them a courage to the cup. These
folk do not long to eat and drink to live the longer, but long to live to
eat and drink the longer. These be those therefore of whom (...) (...). Lorin.
8
apostle says, Esca ventri et venture (...) deus et hunc et illam bestruet. The
meat for the belly and the belly for the meat, god shall destroy both the tone
and the the other.

And surely besyd the puny she me^t of god in another world, and beside all the
pains that even in this world thorough sykenesse and sorys arise and spring
of such glotonye / they that gladly would endure a gryese perpetually, to have
the pleasure of the con tinuall swagyng, have in their best wealth but a
dysplesau^t pleasure / except men be so mad as to think that he were well at
ease that (...) be ever a hungered and ever eating, ever a thurst and ever
drynkyng, ever lowly and ever clawig, ever skoruy and ever scrat chyng. These
jews I say therefore (...). (...)
and the woman of Samary, were not of this mind / but so yt they might have
lacked ye grief of hunger and thurst they would have been co^te^t as it seems to
have for borne meat and drink.

Now be it to say the treuth, their word well wayed, it seems yt their
affeccio^s were wurse than they seem at ye first syghte. For as me thinks
they were not so glad to put away their fawte, as to make a change of one
fawte for an other / not so glad to lose the pleasure of ye meat that is ye
mayntenaunce of glotony, as to get them to rest and idleness that is the
mayntenaunce of slowth. And our lord to wched thappetyte of sloth in these
Jews, when he bad them, Operamini non cibum qui perit etc. Work you for the
meat, not yt that peryssheth but that that abides into everlasting life /
notynge therein as says saint Chrysostom ye slothful appetyte by which they
would said have had him feed them stylle by miracle, without any labor of
John^. 4
their own. And the woman of Samary said unto him: Lord give me of yt water
that I need no more to la boure hither, and draw up water here at this deep
well.

But surely who so put not away his vice but make a change, may soon hap
to take as evil as he le ueth, and not a wurse lyghtely than sloth. Which
vice god saw so noyouse unto mankind, that even wha^ he set him in paradyse,
he bad him be occupied in the keeping of that pleasant gardayn. And after
ward Genesis (...).
when he should be dreuynthense into the earth, he gave him a necessyte to
labor / making the earth to be such as without mannys labor should not bring
him forth his living.

And therefore an evil and a perylouse life live they, that will in this world
not labor and wurke, but live (...) in idelnesse or in idle by sinesse,
dryuynge forth all their days in gamyng for their pass time, as though that
else their time could never pass but the sone would ever stand even still over
their hedes and never draw to night, but if they drove away the day with
dauncynge or some such other goodly gaming.

God sent men hither to wake and wurke / and as for sleep and gaming (if any
gaming be good in this vale of myserye in this time of terys) it must serve
but for a refresshynge of the weary and forewatched body, to renew yt un to
watch and labor again not all men in bodyly labor, but as the
cyrcumstaunces of the persons be, so to be bysyed i^ one good bysines or other.
For rest and recreacyo^ should be but as a sawse. And sauce should ye wot well
serve for a faint and weke stomach, to get yt the more appetyte to the meat,
and not for encreace of voluptuouse pleasure in every gredy gloton that has in
him self sauce malapert all ready enough. And therefore like wise as it were a
fond fest yt had all the table full of sauce, and so little meat therwyth that
the gestes should go thense as emptye as they came thither; so is it surely a
very mad ordered life that has but little time bestowed in any fruit full by
synesse, and all the substance idely spent in play.

And therefore to the end that the Jews should know that he would not murysshe
them in their sloth and idelnesse, he bode them wurke. And yet lest they
might wene that he would have all their wurke about worldy by synes, he bode
the^ wurke, not for ye meat yt peryssheth, but for the meat that abides into
everlasting life. whereby he meant not to forbede them to labor for the tone,
but to teache the^ to labor much more for the the other.

The. viii. chapyter.
But they as I told you (their mind set upon their belly joy, and therefore
not understanding his words) hoped by that word to have their belies so wef
filled ones, that they should never need more to la boure for their living
after. And therefore they said again unto him: what shall we do that we may
wurke the wurkes of god? For they thought (as it seems) that some thing there
were that Christ would have them do / after which ones done, tha^ should they
have that merry feste of yt meat that he spoke of / and therefore would they
feign wit what wurke that were that they might shortly rydde it out of hand
that they were at dinner, for they waxed a hungered.

Our savior than upon that questyon of theyrs, showed them what work it was
that he would have the^ do for that meat, and said unto them: This is the
wurke of god, that you should believe in him whom he has sent. As though he
would say, This is the work that god will ye shall work, before he will I
shall give you this lively meat that I told you of / he will ye shall first
believe in me whom he has sent unto you.

Christ here for the getting of that spyrituall meat, (...) them about a
spyrituall wurke / (...) labor to believe. Why is it any labor to believe? ye
verily good (...) to believe welis no litest wurk / and so great a wurke, that
no man can do it of his own strength without the syecyall help of god.

But here shall you se clearly that Christ truly told the^ their thought, when
he said unto them / that they sought him not for his miracles but for their
belyes. For when our savior here had shewedde them, that if they would have yt
lively meat, they must first believe in him / their mine des were so set upon
their belyes that they thought they would make him by craft come of and give
them some meat a pace for their dinner. And therefore they said unto him: what
miracle than she west thou that we may se it and thereby believe the? what
thing wurkest thou? Our fathers did eat manna in deserte as it is write / he
gave them bread from heuyn to eat.

Here you may se that where as Christ told them they must believe in him before
they should have yt lively meat yt he told them of, they thought they would by
craft before they would wurke toward yt bylief, cause him to give them some
other meat in the mean while / and therefore they not only said yt it were
reason he should wurk some miracle before the^ ere he should look yt they should
believe him, but also they assigned him in manner / what ma ner a miracle they
would have him do, yt is to wit give them some meat by miracle by and by one or
other without any work or labor of theyrs. And therefore they put him in mind
of the meat of manna yt their fore fathers had from heaven while they were i^
wilderness and wurked nothing therefore.

But against this our lord told them again, that the bread that they did
eat in deserte was not given the^ by Moses, nor given them verily from heuyn
neither. For though that Moses was their prophet and their guide / yet was
that bread of Manna given them by god. And it came not also verily down from
he uyn, but from a far lower place of the eyer. But he showed them that god
his own father that gave them that bread tha^ out of the air, gives them now
verily down from heuyn that bread, that is for spyrituall sustinaunce and
lively nurysshynge such manner of very bread, that in comparyson and respect
thereof, the the other bread of manna might seem no bread at all. For verily verily
said our lord unto them, not Moses gave you that bread from heuyn / but my
father gives you the very bread from heuyn. For the very bread is that that
comes down from heuyn, and gives life to the world.

Now when they herd this, wenynge yet that Christ spoke of some such bread as
manna was, that god would at his request give the^ down from heuyn, as manna
was geuyn down in Moses days, and that this bread should feed the body as
manna did, and yet be far better to / they prayed him and said, Lord give us
this bread always / as though they would say, Good lord give us this very bread
that thou spekest of that thy father sends down from heuyn, that we need not
to labor and toil for bread in tyllynge of the earth / and give it us good
lord always, not for a season as our fathers had the the other in desert, but give
it us for ever, and let us never lack it, nor need no more to wurke and labor
for it.

The. ix. chapyter.
THan was our lord plain with them and said, I am the bread of life / he you
comes to me shall not hunger, and he that believes in me shall never thyrste.

Lo says our lord the bread of life that I speak of is my self whom my father
gives down from heuyn, to give not only nuryshynge, but also life to the
world.

The comen bread does but help to keep and conserve the life that the man has
all ready. But my father has sent me down / me I say the very bread whereof
angels feed, not only to conserve and keep the life of the body / (all be it
that do I to, and hele of your syke folks full many) but also to quycken them
that are deed, many in body and all the whole world in soul / whereof none can
have life but by me.

And therefore he yt comes to me, that is to wit, who so will wurke the wurke
of god that I told you, ye is to wit come by faith un to me, and believe in
him whom the father has sent, that is to wit in my self, his hunger and
thyrste shall I take away for ever.

Good is it good readers to consider well these words, lest by these words
wrong understood, some men might wene (as these heretyques teache, that now
a days renew that old heresye that both saint Iamys and saint Poule by
plain Iacobi. 2.
express words reprove) that our Gala. 5.
lord would ask no more of any chri sten man but only bare faith alone.
Which heresye / (whereof they so myche bosted a while) these heretykes now feel
so fully confuted, that though they live still like those that believe it, yet
in their words and writing they be feign to retrete for (...), and to seek
such gloses to save their old writing, as might make unwise men wene that
they never meant otherwise than the whole catholyke church comenly techeth and
precheth. Which if they had meant none other in deed (as in deed they meant and
yet mean far other still) than had they ye wot well made myche bysynes
about naught.

But lettynge these heretyques pass / ye shall good christen readers
understand, that like as if a man would teache a child to read, he must first
begin at his A B c (for without the knowledge of his letters he can never go
forward) so for as mich as no (...) can come unto Christ without faith, but
faith must needs be the first enter toward all christen virtues, sith no man
can either hope in him or love him whom he knows not, and Christ can no man
chrystenly know, but by faith (for as (...) Poule says he that comes unto
(...). 11a
god he must needs believe) so did our savior therefore as a good and a wise
master of his christen scole, bygyn there with ye Iewys that there offered them
self as his scolers, he began I say with faith. But yet he meant not that to
salvation they should need no thing else but only bare faith / so that if
they would believe all things that he should tell them, they should thereby be
surely saved, though they would do nothing that he would bid them.

But than what say we to these words of our savior? He that byleueth in me
shall never thyrste. By this word of never thyrstynge, he meneth everlasting
saluacyo^, which he promyseth here to all those that by leave in him / wherefore
it may seem yt who so ever believe though he do no thing else, shall by this
promise of our savior be saved.

Saint John^ the baptyst at such time as people came to him, and asked (...).
(...)
what they should do whereby they might avoid da^pnacio^ he bode the^ give
almoyse. And when the Publicanys asked him what they should do to avoid
da^pnacyon, he bode them forbere brybys, and take no more tha^ the dew
custumes and toll. And to the souldyours asking him the same questyon for
their part, he answered that they should pyke no querellys, nor do no man no
violence, nor take (...) by force, but hold them self content with their
wagys. (...) did he not mean that any of all thesse lessons was enough to save
the^ without any more / but he told them for the while, each of them the thing
that should be most metely for them / and most proprely pertayne to their
persons, and therefore most metely for them to learn first / and the remanau^t
should each of the^ after learn, (...) and little at length, so that at last
they should each of them do that one thing with all other things necessary
also, and without which that one thing could not save them.

Thus did our sauyoure also, because the Iewys were full of infydelyte and full
of incredulyte / which vnbylyefe endurynge, they could not enter into the way
of salvation. He therefore first taught them first the lesson of bylyefe and
faith / which onys had, they should be mete to learn on the remanaunt, and
encreace both in hope and in well wurkyng cheryte / so that faith ones had, he
told them they should not (...). For if they onys byleued his word / it was a
mean to make them hope in him and love him both, and those (...) things would
make them obey him and wurke in such other virtuous, as he would for their
own (...) command them.

There are also good readers diverse holy doctors, that say that in these
words by which our savior said unto the Jews, he that byleueth in me shall
never thyrst / he meant not him that had a bare faith alone (which is as saint
Iamys says but (...).
adede faith) but him that had faith well formed with hope and cheryte.

And therefore says holy saint Au stayne thus: Christ says not believe him, but
believe in him. For it follows not by and by that who so believe, him, byleueth
in him. For the deuyls byleued him, but they byleued not in him. And we believe
saint Poule, but we believe not in saint Poule. To by leave therefore in him, is
with byleuynge to go into him, and to be incorporate in his membrys. This is
the faith that god requires and exac (...) of us / that is to wit the faith
that by love will wurke well. yet is faith dyscerned and severed from workys /
as the apostle says a man is iu stifyed by faith without the wurkes of the
law. And there are wurkes that seem good without the faith of Christ, but
they be not / for they be not referred unto that end of which all good
things come. For the end of the law is Christ unto justice unto all that
believe. And therefore our savior would not dyscerne and deuyde faith from the
work / but says that the faith it self was yt work of god / that is to
wit the faith that by love wurketh.

(...) ye perceive good readers, that to believe meritoriousely, so as (...)
shall be rewarded with salvation, may not be faith alone, but faith with a
wurkynge love. Nor it may not be a bare byleuynge of Christ, but it must be a
byleuynge in Christ / that is as saint Austayn says, not an (...) deed (...)
bylyefe, but a bylyefe lively, quycke, and styrynge, and by cheryte and good
wurkes ever walkyng and going into Christ. And than they that so believe in him,
not with the bare only faith that these heretykes preche, but with the well
wurkyng faith yt the catholyke church techeth / they shall be saved says our
savior from eternal hunger and thyrst.

The. x. chapyter.
BUt than goth Crist ferther, and she weth them yt they lack this meat though
it stand before the^.

And she weth the^ also by what mean they may get it. Lothus he said un to
them. But I have told you yt both you have seen me and you have not byleued /
as though he would say, you have seen me done miracles, and yet it has not made
you believe.

He bode the^ before yt they should wurke to get the lively meat / and he
told them after yt the wurke which they should wurke to get it with was faith
and bylief. And he wrought (...) cles which they saw, to make them believe. And
now he she weth the^ yt for all this they have not ye bylief yet, but yet must
wurke and labor to have it.

Than might they have asked him, which way may we come to it? But because they
asked him not / he of his high goodness told them the mean unasked and said,
All that my father gives me shall come to me. As though he would say, Though
my father have sent me down to caae you to me, and though I preche to you and
tell you the troth at your ear, and work miracles before you that you may se
the^ at your eyes, ye and feed you by miracles, and put them even in your
belly: yet can you never come to me by faith, but if my father bring you. Never
can you be mine by faith, but if my father give you me. Now if ye know of any
good guide that could bring you to the place whyther ye would feign go, where
you should find the thing that ye would feign have: what would you do / would
you not labor to him / would you not pray and entreat him to go with you and
guide you thither? Now have I told you who ca^ bring you to me by faith, that
is to wit god my father / and therefore labor to him to guide you to me, pray
him to give you to me, without whose help ye can never come to me. It is I
tell you no small thing to believe in me. For but if the grace of my father
first prevent you, ye can never begin to think thereon. But he has now
prevented you by sendynge me to call upon you. Now be it yet for all that, but
if he go forth with you and help to lead you forward, you may faynte and
fall and (...) stylle by the way, and come no ferther forth toward me. But now
he helps you forward by mine outward miracles which him self works with
me. But yet except he wurke with you inwardly / with his inward help to draw
you, you ca^ for all this (...) come at me. Call well upon him there fore, and
pray him to draw you and bring you and give you to me. which if you do and
endeavor your self for your own part, as I bode you before to wurke and walk
with him toward me, be shall surely bring you in to faith, and by faith in to
hope and in to cheryte both, and so give you gracyousely to me. And than shall
I give you the lively meat that I spoke of, if ye will abide with me. For him
that comes to me will I not cast out. Let him look that he cast not him
self out / For surely I will not if him self will abide. For it is my fathers
will that I should not, and I am descended from heuyn, not to do my will but to
do the will of him that has sent me. And this is verily the will of the father
that sent me, that all that he has given me I should lose nothing thereof, but
that I should reyse up that again in the last day.

The. xi. chapyter
THese words might good readers seem to an vnchrysten man or to a false
christened Arryane, to sygnyfye that our savior were not (...) god with his
father, in that he speaks so often (as in ma ny mo (...) of scripture he
speaks more often) that he is obedyent to his (...), and that his father sent
him, and that he is less than his father / and many such other placys, by
which the old Arriane (...) defended their (...) against the godhed of
Christ in his person as these Lutherane heretyques / and these Huyskyns,
zuynglians, and Tyndalyns, draw now diverse other textes to ye mayntenaunce of
their false heresies, against the precious body and blood of Christ in his
blessed sacrament.

But as good christen men well know that these new heretykes are falsely now
deceived in the tone / so know they to, that those old heretykes were falsely
than deceived in ye the other.

For all the minorite and the obedience that the scripture speaks of in
Christ, is all meant of his manhed (which was less in (...)) and not of his
goodhed, for they were both equale.

For how could they be in godhed vnequale, when that in godhed they were both
one, though in persons di uerse. And therefore (...) savior by his godhed has
the self same will that his father has and none other / as he has the same
wit, and the same might, the same nature, the same substance, and finally
the same godhed and none other. And therefore what so ever the tone does the
the other does / and as the sone was sent by the father, so was he also sent
both by him self and by the holy ghost to. And when ye holy ghost was sent,
he was sent both by the father and ye sone and by him self also. But
incarnate was there no mo but the sone alone / who as he had by his godhed none
other will but the very self same that his father had and the holy ghost, so
had he by his manhed another several will and propre unto the person of his
manhede it self as every man has his own. And of that will is it that he
says, I am descended from heuyn, (...). 6
not to do my will but ye will of him that sent me / for in the will of his
manhed he obayed the godhed.

But now if this obedyence be understood of his manhed, how can it stand
with these words of his, I am descended from heuyn not to do my will but the
will of him that sent me. With that point good reader shall no man need to be
moved. For sith both the godhed and manhed were joined and vned together
both, in the one person of Christ, that whole person might say of it self
such things as were veryfyed and true in any of the both naturys. For like
as a man may say of him self, I shall dye and return into the earth, and
yet that shall not his soul do but his body only / and I shall after my death
go forth with to joy or to pain, and yet that shall not his body do by and by
but his soul: so might Christ say of him self, I am descended from heuyn,
because his godhed descended from thense though his body did not / and he
might say I shall suf fre and dye because his manhed so should, and yet was
his godhed neither mortal nor passyble. And for all that, might it be said
of Christ, God dyed for us, because he dyed that than was god. And of Christ
niyghte it well be laid, This man made heuyn and earth, and yet his manhed
made it not, but was made by his godhed as other creaturys were. But those
words are well veryfyed by the reason that he, which of the person of Christ
says this man, sygnyfyeth and means not his only manhed but his whole
person, which is not only man but very god also,

This thing and this manner of speaking expressed our savior very plain him
self, when he said unto Nichodemus in talking with him of the sacrament of
baptism, No man has ascended into heuyn but he that descended from heuyn,
the sone of man that is in heuyn. In these words he shows unto Nichodemus,
that there was more credence to be geuyn unto him self alone, than un to all
the prophets that ever were before. For him self more perfytely (...) we all
thing than all they did. For never man had there ben in heaven but he. For
never man said our lord has ascended into heuyn, but he that descended from
heuyn, the sone of man that is to wit I my self that am in heuyn.

Here he said that yt sone of man had been in heaven, and had descended from
heuyn, and was yet in heuyn (...). Now was not his godhed the sone of man but
the sone of god, nor his manhed the sone of god but the sone of man. But now
though the godhed and the manhed were not both one, but two distinct naturs
still / yet sith the sone of god and the sone of man were both one, that is to
wit both twain one person Christ / Christ therefore might well say than of
himself, I the sone of god am the sone of man, and I the sone of man am ye
sone of god, and I the sone of god am walking among men on earth, and I the
sone of man am sitting with my father in heuyn.

Now that ye may good readers the better conceive this matter, and more easily
perceive the sentence of these words of Christ, All that my father gives me
etc. I shall expoune you these words of his in order, as it were in bys own
person, speaking the words of this exposycyon him self.

No man can come to me by hye own labor alone. But all that my father gives
me shall come to me. Labor therefore to my father and pray him to give you to
me, geuynge you occasyon and helping you and (with your own will wurkyng with
him) making you believe me, and so shall you wurkyng with him by your own good
will, in subdueng of your reason to ye obedyence of faith, by bylief come to
me, and with good will of well wurkynge also with the bylief / shall not only
believe me, but also by leave in me, and go into me, by being a membre of mine,
and incorporatynge your self in me / and I shall by the gift of mine own body
to be eaten and received of yours, incorpo rate my self in you, and I will not
cast you out from but be still incorporated with you, but if you cast me out
from you, and so by sin cast your self away fro me / else of all that
comes to me by my fathers bringing, I will cast none out. For if ye came
to me by my father through faith, and that I would not than suffer death for your
salvation, than did I cast you out. For none can come in to my bliss of
heuyn, but by his rawnson paid by my death and passion. But I will not refuse
that, but I will suffer and dye for the world, to give the deed world life by
my death. For I am descended from heuyn sent by my father not to do mine own
will, but the will of him that has sent me. But I mean not by these words
that I will dye against mine own will, but that al be it the sensual part of
my manhed would of the nature of man abhor, shrink and withdraw from the
gre uouse pain of such an intolerable passion: yet shall my will both of my
godhed be all one with the will of my father, and thereby in such manner
obedyent unto his father, as we say a man is obedyent unto his own reason, and
yet is not his own reason another power superior above him self. And my will
of my manhed shall also be so confortable to ye will of my father, ye will of
the holy ghost and the will of mine own godhed (all which three wylles are in
deed one will as all our three persons are in godhed one god) that I will
wyllyngly dye for them all that so come to me by my fathers bringing thorough
the well wurkynge faith, and will abide and persevere. And like wise as I will
by mine own body given unto them by eating in to their own, give the^ an
ernest penny of our incorporacyon together, and a memory all of that death and
passion, by which I will wyllyngly give my self for them, by being slain
and sacryfysed for their sin, and made the raunso^ of their redempcio^: when
god shall for this obedyence of my manhood unto the death the (...) death of the
cross, lift me up and ex alte me, and give me the name that is above all
names, than shall I by my resurreccion again to life, give them a sample and
make them sure, that I shall in syke wise at the last day leave none of them to
be lost, no more in body than in soul / but shall so resuscitate and raise
again their bodies, that like as I shall my self asce^de into heuyn again
from whe^se I came, so shall they as members of my body ascend thither with me,
and there be fed of this everlasting lively bread that I tell you of, that
is to wit of the fruycio^ of my godhed and byholdynge also of my gloryouse
manhed for ever, each of you that have use of reason after thanalogye and
proporcyon of the well formed faith, with hope and well wurkynge cherite that
you shall have had in this life here before. For this (...) as I before told
you, the will of my father that sent me, that every man that sethe his sone as
you do, and not only sees him as you do, but also by leueth in him as you do
not, shall have (if he persevere in that well wurkynge by lyef) the meat that I
speak of that shall not peryshe but abide in to everlasting life. For though
ye se every man dye here for the while / yet I shall (as I told you) being of
egall power with my father, reyse them all up egayne my self at the last
day, and than shall my faithful folk be fed with this everlasting lively
bread of mine own person both god and man for ever. And lo now have I
plainly told you what bread I mean.

Where as I have good reader in the xposycyon of these words of our savior,
inserted the incorporacyon of him and us together, by the recey uynge and
eating of his own body into ours: I have not done it to make any man wene
that that point appeared and were proved by any part of those words, but
because yt is a very troth in deed / and not only to wched and signyfyed in
other words of (...) before, but also plainly expressed and declared by other
words of his own after, as you shall hereafter se. Therefore so plain a
troth, and so necessary, and so necessaryly parteynynge to that place of ye
matter, me thought it not metely for to be left out.

The. xii. chapyter.
But now shall you here how Christ's audyence that came to seek him, were
affeccyonate to this everlasting lively bread, wha^ they had herd him declare
it.

All the while that he spoke those other words before / they were yet in good
hope, yt what so ever he meant beside, he would give the^ some meat for their
belyes. And as they were groce / so had they at the first went. And so had
they lever that he would have given them some such groce bread made of
erthely corn for their erthely belyes, such as he gave them and multiplied for
them before, than any manna that came down from ye air. But afterward when
they herd him tell them of far better bread that should come from heuyn,
than ma^na was which their fathers did eat in desert / than were they bet ter
a paid / and prayed him that they might have of that. But than when they
perceived in conclusyon, that he meant all of such bread as should feed their
souls, and gave them no good comfort after their groce minds, of any groce
fedynge for their groce bo dies than like as some of their fore fathers
murmured in desert against Moses for manna, and said that (...)
their stomach wambled against that light meat, and wyshed their old boundage
again, of which they were before so weary while they were in Egypt / yet
thought they now that they were well than, because they might than sit over the
pottes yt had the sodden flesh in the^, of such flesh yet some of such bond
slauys had happily than but the savor. when these had herd him now speak all
of such spyrytuall fode / their hartys so fore arose against him, that their af
(...) were clean fallen from him suddenly. For a day before they had him in
high estymacyo^, and called him the prophet that should come and redeem ye
world / and would have made him king, because they thought he would feed them by
miracle without their labor / where their other king used to pyll them and
poll them and keep them under trybute so bare, yt with great labor they could^
scant find the^ self meat. And therefore wold^ they as I say after that
fedynge that he fed them so by miracle, so feign have made him hyng, that he
was feign to withdraue him self a side and fle from them, till that mind of
theyrs were gone. And that was not long as ye se. For now yt after their great
hope of such another fest for their (...) dies, they herd him turn all to the
fedyng of their souls / and that for yt fedyng of their belyes, he went not
about to give the^ so much as one lofe among the^ all to their break fast /
they murmured against yt that he had said of him self, I am the quycke bread yt
am descended from heuyn. And tha^ they said: Is not this Iosephes sone? Know
not we his father and his mother both? How says he than of him self I am
dscended from heuyn.

So here they called him a carpenters sone, and therein they bylyed him unware /
but far were they now fallen fro the making him a king.

Then said our savior to them: Murmur not among your self, no man comes to
me, but if my father draw him. As though he would say: leave your murmuring
and fall to prayour, and wurke and walk with my father in coming to me by
faith. Men are so weyke of them self in ye walking of this way, that there
can no man come to me but if my father not only come to him and take him by
the hand and led him, but also draw him to. And therefore sith he must do so
myche for you or else you can not come / so myche have you the more need to leave
your murmuryng, and apply your self to pray him (if he draw you not) to draw
you, and as the prophet says to pray him strayn Psalm. 31.
your iawys with a bytte and a bridle and draw you by the chekys, magry your
teth, and make you turn your wylles from your belly joy, to come to the soul
fode with me. For where as your belly meat shall peryshe belly and all / he that
thus shall come to my feste, he shall not perysshe. For I shall raise him up
again in the last day unto everlasting life. And if ye merueyle at this that I
say, that my father must bring you and draw you, that is that he must
beside all outward techynge teache you within by ledynge and drawing you into
ye truth of faith, by his inward operacion joined with the towardness of
your wylles prevented moved and set a wurke with occasions of his formare
grace / if ye merueyle of this manner of drawing and of my fathers inward
techynge, remember (...). 54.
that your own prophet say, that all folk shall be taught of god. And now god
techeth you / for I tech you, which am as I told you ye bread of life that am
descended from heuyn. And surely there shall no man be taught ye faith but if
god tech him. Nor every man is not full taught that hereth it, but he that
hereth it and lerneth it / which no man can do by any outward voice, without
god wurkyng within. And he will not wurke, nor Sapie^. 10
his wisdom will not enter into an evil wylled heart. And therefore leave your
murmuring, and pray my father to tech you / not only outwardly as he techeth
you now by me, but inwardly also, that you may be learned by his wurkynge to
faith, with you and within you. But why do I tell you so often that you can not
come to hisgyfte of faith (without which you can not come at me) but if my fa
there give it you. Verily because I would you should pray him for it.

For though he prevent you and give you occasyons toward the gettyng of that
gift: yet sets he not so sytell by this great gift of lerning and faith
that he list to cast it away upon them, that when it is she wed them set
not so myche thereby as to desire it and pray therefore.

And therefore I would have you desire it of him that may give it you And yet is
not that my father only but my self also. Now be it if I should bid you ask
it of me, and pray me give you this grace: you be so far from the bylyefe in
me that ye would not do it.

And therefore not speaking of mine own power / I tell you all of the power of
the father, yt without him ye can not come to me / because I would have you
pray to him, that he would give you the grace, that as ye know by faith and
knowledge him all (...) for god, so ye may know by faith and knowledge him for
my father to / and than shall you by the same faith, know and knowledge me also
for his sone. And than shall you not murmur at my words, but humbly come to
me, as to the sone, not of Joseph but of god / and knowledge me for the quyche
bread ye is descended from heuyn. For every man that has herd this lesson of
my father, and has not only herd it but also learned it / he comes(as I have
told you) to me. But yet this will I tell you, that never man saw my father
yet. But he that is of god (that is to wit my self ye. am his own sone) he
has seen the father, and so has no man else.

And therefore the lesson that any man hereth and lerneth of my father, he must
here of him by me, and learn it by the in ward wurke of my father with whose
wurke I wurke also.

And so shall he come to me / thoro we perfyt well wurkynge faith in me. And I
tell you very troth, he that so byleueth in me, and perseuereth at his death in
that perfect bylief, is sure of eternal life. For I am (as I diverse times now
have told you) the very bread of life. your fathers that murmured as you do
now, did eat the bread of ma^na in desert, and they be deed and perysshed.
Leave therefore that wrong way of your fore fathers, leave your grudge and your
murmur, and labor to my father that he may bring you to me by such faith as
ye may eat this bread that is my self. For this bread is bread descendyng
from heuyn for the nonys, that who so may eat and be fed of that, shall not
peryshe by everlasting death For I tell you yet again yt I am the quyche bread
that am descended from heuyn. Who so ever come to me by my fathers bryngyng, so
that by perfyt perseuerau^ce and well wurkyng faith, he may eat and be fed
of this bread, that is to wit attain the fruicyon of my gloryouse godhed,
with the gloryouse sight whereof the angels are fed in heuyn: he shall be sure
of everlasting life.

The. xiii. chapyter.
WHere as our saurour good readers in the beginning upon accasyo^ of his
miracle wrought upon the multyplicacio^ of the bread, to wched both the bread
of his godhed and also of the geuynge them of his own body to be eaten in
form of bred, and that he some what did insinuate and set forththe same in
those words, wurke you not the bred yt peryssheth but ye bred yt abides into
everlasting life, which ye sone of man shall give you as I some what told you
before, not of mine own mind, but of ye mind of diverse holy doctors,
Alcuinus, saint Thomas, Theophylactus, and saint Cyrill: Ye se that our
savior in many words wpych I have now declared you, has opened and showed
unto them the bread of his godhed.

And now good readers take heed how in those words that now follow he declares
unto the^ the bread of his own very body, which he gives us verily to eat in
the blessed sacrament. Wherein that exposicyon, that I shall give you shall be
none inuencyon of mine, but the clear faith and sentence of all the holy
doctors of Christ's chirch old and new both, from Chri stesdeth to this day.
Of whom I shall for a sample give you ere I make an end, the names and the
sen tences of some, as such as your self shall well se and perceive for other
manner men than I am or master Masher either / and that if they were good men
and true, ye shall than your self say, that master Masher is naught and
false, and that his exposicion (though it were true as is both folysshe and
false) yet sith it comes not nere the purpose, is (as I told you before) very
falsely han deled.

Let us here now therefore of the (...) of Christ's own blessed body verify to
(...) to eat in the blessed sacrament, what Christ him self says.

After his declaracion of the bread of his glorious godhed, these are his
words. And the bread that I shall give you, is my flesh which I shall give
for the life of the world.

where as before they murmured at the light spyrytuall bread of his godhed / he
tells them now that he will not only give them that bread to feed upon, by
fruycyon of the by holding face to face when the time shall come, as he has
also given yt them in one manner all ready by his in carnacyon to feed them
spyrytually in the mean whyse by spyrytuall doc tryne / but that the bread
that he will give them to feed upon, shall beside that be his own flesh,
even the very same that he will give for the life of the world / menynge that
he would verily give men the same very flesh to eat and feed upon, both
bodyly and spyritually in (...) braunce of his death, that he would for mannys
redempcyon verily give to death, and verily for a sacryfyce offer up to god by
death.

But now says master Masher the adversary of the blessed sacrament yt our
savior meant no more in those words, And the bread yt I shall give you is my
flesh which I shall give for the life of the world, but that he would give it
for the life of the world by hysdeth / and meant no thing at all of the geuynge
of his flesh before his death, or after his death / nor nothing in these
words or any that in the same chapyter follow, intended to speak of any such
manner of geuynge his body to eat, as he is received and eaten in the blessed
sacrament, nor nothing meant in this chapyter any thing to speak of that matter.

Thus would master Masker that all men should wene, as it appears plainly by
his exposicion. And thus also says Luther, and thus says Fryth also / and
affermeth this saying so boldly, that he says it twyse in his one book
wherein he answers me. There in says he twyse, that all ler ned men are full
and whole agreed in that point.

And therefore will these adversaries of the sacrament say, that in this
exposicyon of mine, all that ever I say whereby it may apperc that our savior
in these word written in this vi. chapter of saint John^, any thing spoke or
me^t of ye geuyng of his body to be eaten in the blessed sacrament, is an
imaginacio^ of mine own head / (...) master Masher argues and speaks (...) way
of master More his faith, as though it were no man's essys but mine.

But to the intent good readers that ye may cleresy perceive maystes Mashers
malycyouse fafsed therein, I shall in diverse places of this exposycyon,
concerning specially this point of Christ's spekyng and menynge of the gyuynge
of his own very body in the blessed sacrament, (...) you the namye of some of
those whom I follow therein, and some of their words to / by which ye shall le
that I deceive you not as master Masher does, that through all his exposycyon
flytteth all fro the point, and dysimuleth all ye words of those old holy
men ye expowned it in such wise as he would we should wene that no good man
ever did.

Upon these words therefore of our savior: And the bread that I shall give
you is my flesh, that I shall give for the life of the world: thus says
Theophysactus.

Consider that that bread that we ^
eat in the sacrament, is not only a figure of the flesh of our forde / but
it is also the flesh of our lord it self. For he said not: ye bread that I
shall give is a figure of my flesh, but he said it is my flesh. For the
same bread by secret words, through the mystical benedyccpon, and by the
cummyng also of the holy sppryte thereunto, is transfourmed and changed into
the flesh of our lord. And lest that any man should be trowbeled in his
mind, wenynge that it were not to be byleued yt bread should be flesh / this
is well known that while our lord washed in his flesh, and of bread received
his noryshynge, that bread which he than eat was than changed into his body,
and was made such as his holy flesh was, and did sustain and increace his
flesh after ye comen manner of men. And therefore now also is the bread
changed into the flesh of our forde. And how is it than (will some man say)
that it appears not to us flesh but bread. That has Christ provided, to
the intent we should not (...) from the eating of it. For if it were given us
in likeness of flesh, we should be dysplesauntly dysposed toward the
receyuyng of our howsle. But now by the goodness of god condescendynge to our
infyrmytye, this sacramental meat appears unto us such as we have at other
times been accustomed with.

These are not my words so good christen reader, but the word of that old^
holy cunnyng doctor Theophilactus, which was also no satyn man but a greek /
because master Masher speaks so much of papyst as though ye catholic faith
whereby the catholic church byleueth, yt in the blessed sacrament is the very
blessed body of Crist, were a thing but made and imagyned by some pope of rome.

Now if master Masker will say yt mine exposicion is in this point false: here
you se good readers that mine exposicyon is not mine, but the exposicio^ of
Theophilactus. And the fore let him leave dau^cynge with me and dau^ce another
white with him.

But mark well two thing now good reader i^ these words / one yt this good
holy doctors calls ye blessed sacrament bread as saint Paul does, 1. (...).
11
and our savior him self also, in these words of his in this syxte chapyter
of saint John^, and so does also every doctor of the church almost. Upon
which calling of it bread, friar Luther and Melancton and their fellows, take
their hold to say and affirm that it is very bread still, as vell after the
consecracyon as before. And friar Duskyn, with zuynglius, George Joye, Johan
Fryth, and Tin dale turn forth ferther to the devil and not only say that it
is very bred still; but also that it is no thing else.

But now consider therefore as I say, that Theophilactus here calls it bread
as well as they / saying, the bread that we receive in the mysteries or
sacrament, is not only a certain figure of the flesh of our lord, but it is
also the flesh of our lord it self. But than expresses he plainly that
though he calls it bread, he meneth not that it is very materyall bread still
as it was / but that the bread is transformed, gone, and changed into the very
flesh of Christ. And he sets it out also with an ensample of the bread
that is eaten and turned in to the flesh of the man whom it nurysseth, which
every man well woteth that any wit has that it is no longer bread than.

And therefore Theophilactus call leth it bread, because it was bread / as in the
scripture the serpent in to which Aarons rod was turned is called a rod
still, while it was no rod but a serpent. For there is it thus wri (...). 7
ten. The rod of Aron did devour the rods of the magycianis. And as the
scripture calls the serpent there a oodde: so calls it the (...) bread. And
as Theophilactus calls here the blessed sacrament by the name of bread, and
yet declares that it is no bread: even so do all holy doctors that call it by
that name of bread both mean indide, and also do clearly declare, that though
they call it bread, they know well it is no bread but in likeness and form of
bread under the sacramental sign, ye very blessed body of Christ, flesh,
blood, bonys and all, and neither without the soul nor the godhed neither.

Mark also good reader, ye Theo phylactus says, The bread which we eat in
the misteryes or sacrament, is not only a figure of the flesh of our lord,
but it is also the flesh of our lord it self.

In these words good readers mark well that he says it is a figure and yet
for all that the very flesh of Christ.

This thing I specially desire you to note, because that by the markynge of
this one point / ye may void almost all the craft, with which master
Masker, Fryth, and Tyndale, and all these heretykes la bour to deceive you in
the writing of all the old holy doctors.

For where so ever any of the^ call the blessed sacrament a figure, there would
these fellows make us wene that he meant it were nothing else. But here you se
that Theophylactus says it is a figure as it is in deed / but he tells us
that it is also (as in deed it is) the very flesh of our lord.

And therefore mark well these. ii. points in this one place, yt wha^ these
heretics prove that the blessed sacra me^t is called bred, they prove nothing
against us. For they that call it bread declare yet that in deed it is not
bread but the body of Christ. And when they prove that it is called a figure /
they prove no thing against us. For they that say it is a figure, say it is
not only a figure, but also the flesh of Christ. But when we prove that the
blessed sacrament is not only called the body and blood of Christ, but also
ye the old holy doctors and the exposytours of holy scripture do plainly
declare that it is so / than prove we plain against them. For we deny none of
ye the other two points / but this point do they deny.

The. xiiii. chapyter,
YEt to thentent that ye may se that master Masker in his exposicyo^, does but
plainly mock you: consider yet again these vordes well, Et panis qnem ego
dabo caro (...) est, quam ego dabo pro mundi (...). which text, albe it that
in the latin it be some what otherwise, that is to wit. Et panis quem ego dabo
caro mea est pro mu^di uita, without these words, quem ego dabo, in the secu^d
place / which laten text were yet more for my purpose, yet sith not only the
greek text is as I rehearsed you first, which was the language wherein the
uangelyst wrote, but that also both the greek expositours and many of the
laten exposytours to, do so expowne it / and that though those words were out,
yet they be such as the sentence would well require to repete and understand /
and finally because I find that master Masker him self does in his
exposycion take that text in the first fasshyon, only chaungynge one word
in the secund place, ye is to wit this word (give) into this word (pay)
which change he makes as for an exposicyon: I am content to take the text
as him self does, that is to wit after the first manner thus, And the bread
that I shall give you is my flesh, which I shall give for ye life of the
world.

Consider now good reader that in these words, our savior here spe keth of
geuynge his flesh twyse, by which he meneth, that in the tone ge uyng he
would give it to them / and in the the other geuynge he would give it for them. The
tone geuynge was in the blessed sacrament / the the other was on the cross.

And look now whyther the very words of Christ agree with this ex posycyon or
not / the words ye wot well be these: and the bread that I shall give you is
my flesh. Mere is lo the tone geuyng, by which he shall says he give his
flesh to them.

Than says he ferther, which I shall give for the life of the world. So here
he tells them of the the other gyuynge, by which he should give it for them.
And because his geuyng to them should be a memoryall of his geuynge for them,
therefore he spoke of them both to gether. But yet because his princypall
purpose was to speak in that place, not of his geuyng of his flesh for them,
but of his ge uynge it unto them: therefore of his geuynge it to them he makes
after a very plain and express declaracyo^ in many plain open words / but
of his geuynge it for them, he spoke but a little, and as is were but for a
declaracyon of the the other geuynge. For when he had said, and the bread which I
shall give you shall be my flesh / than to declare that he meant to give them
his very flesh, he added thereto these words / which I shall give for the
life of the world. As though he would say, will you wit what flesh this
bread is that I will give to you: veryfy the self same that I will give for
you / and not only for you, but for the life of the whole world to, that is
to wit for as many of the world as when they here it preched, will not
refuse to take it. And therefore wha^ ye know hereafter which flesh of mine I
shall have given for you upon the cross / tha^ shall you not need to do (...)
which flesh of mine I shall give you in the bread of the sacrament, except
you (...) not to believe me. For now I tell you as plain as I can, that it
shall be the fame flesh.

This exposycyon good readers ye se is euydent open and plain. But now se good
readers for godde sake the falsehed of master Masker in his exposycyon upon
ye same words. Where as our savior as you se speaks in these few words of
these two geuynges, the geuynge to eat and the geuynge to dye, the ge uynge in
the sacrament and the geuyng on the cross / comes me now master Masker, and
expowneth Christ's words all to gether of the tone geuynge, that is to wit
the geuynge by death on the cross / and lets the the other geuynge go by, as
though he saw it not, albe it that Christ speaks of that gyuynge both first
and most.

Now if master Masker will say that I do but feign these two ge uynges, and
say as he says often that Christ meant there but one geuynge, that is to
wit by his death, and will say that Christ speaks there no word of the
sacrament / I shall tell him again that so might master Masker mar all his
own exposycyo^ utterly. For Christ when he says, which I shall give for the
life of the world, speaks no word in the world neither of his cross nor of
his death. If he say that they be un derstanden, tha^ must he give me leave to
say the like for my part, that as death and the cross are vnderstonde^ in ye
tone giving, so eating and the sacrament is vnderstonden in ye the other geuynge.
Now be it for my part yet touching the first geuyng, I may say yt Christ speaks
of the sacrament, and signyfyeth his menyng in this word, bread, wha^ he says
the bread that I shall give you is my flesh. And of the eating thereof he
speaks expressly after. And therefore shall master Masker never wade out
thereof, but that I ha ue the words of the scripture much more clear for the
first geuyng, than he for the secund. And ye may se that of the two geuynges
master Masker to mock us with, has in his exposycion of a folysh wylynesse
wynked and dyssembled the tone.

But yet if master Masker strive with me still upon this point, whither our
savior speak of two geuynges of his flesh, or but of one / albe it ye I have
proved my part therein metely plain my self, yet am I content that a better
than we both shall break yt strife bytwen us. I shall therefore name you yt holy
cu^nyng doctor sait Bid, whose word I trust every wise man will believe a
little better tha^ either master Maskers or mine. So thus says saint Bede upon
these S. Bid.
words of Christ, And the bread which I shall give is my body, which I shall
give for the life of the world. This bread (says saint Bid) did ourforde
give when he gave the sacrament of his body and his blood unto his dyscyples,
and when be offered up him self to god his father upon the awtre of the
cross.

Here you se good readers that saint Bid tells you plain the same tale
that I tell you, that is to wit that our savior in those words speaks of
two geuynges of him self, the tone to his dyscyples in the sacrament, the
the other to death for his dyscyples on the cross. And therefore while master
Masker with his heresye does utterly deny the tone, and by his exposicio^
affermeth that Crist in this place did speak but of the the other / saint Bid
hereth me record that master Masker lies, and has made his exposicyon
false. And the ferther ye go in the words of this gospel, the more shall
master Mas kers false dyceappere.

The. xv. chapyter.
When the Jews hard our lord say, that bysyde the spyrytuall meat of the
bread of his godhed, the bread that he would give them should be his own
(...) / than began they to contend and dyspute among them upon that word, as
one of the most meruelouse and strange words that ever they had herd
before. And therefore they said how can this man give us (...) flesh to eat?

(...) Bid says here, and so says saint Austayne both, that they had
conceived a false opinyon, that Angust. in (...) in psalm. 98
our lord would cut out his own body in gobettes, and make them eat it so, in
such manner of deed pieces, as men bye byefe or (...) out of ye bouchers shoppys.
This thing they thought that he neither could do / and also that though he
could, yet would they not eat it as a thing foul and loathsome.

We find good readers of one or (...). 3
two mo bysyde these Jews here, ye at the word of god asked how. For both
our lady asked how, and (...) also asked how.

Our blessed lady when thangell (...). (...)
told her that she shold^ conceive and bring forth a child, asked this
questyon, how shall that (...) For man I know none / not for that she any thing
dowted of the truth of godde word sent her by godde messenger, but because she
would know the meanis, for as much as she had determined her self upon
perpetual virginite / and thereof a promise had passed and a vow was made, and
Joseph well agreed therewith; as it may welbe gathered upon the gospel.

For thangell said not ye have conceived, but thou shall co^ceyue. And therefore
wha^ she answered, how shall yt be sith I know no man, this answer had not ben
to the purpose, if she had meant no more but yt she knew none yet / for he said
not yt she was conceived yet but should conceive after. which she might after do
by ye knowledge of her husband after, though she knew no man yet. And therefore
we may well gather of his words and hers together as I have showed in my
dialoge, yt when she said how shall this be for I know no man, she meant therein
not only that she knew none already, but also that she had promised and vowed
that she never would know man afterward / using therein such a manner of
speaking, as a mayed might say by one whom she would never have, we may well
talk together but we wedde not together.

Now that her determinacyo^ was not with her self only, but confermed also
with ye consent of her spouse, it may well appear. For without his agreement
she could not reken her self to be sure to keep it.

And that her determynacyon of perpetual vyrginite, was a promise and a vow to
god, it may well appear by this, that else when she had word from god by the
angel that she should conceive and bear a child, she had had no cause to ask
ye questyon how. For if she were at lyberty to lie with a man, than had that
reuelacion ben a commandment unto her to labor for the concepcyon, while
there were upon her part no let or impediment, neither of nature nor
conscience.

And very like it is that if she had been in that point at her liberty / than
though she had minded perpetual virgynite, yet sith she had intended it
neither for auoydyng of the bodyly pain of the vyrth, nor for any abo minacyon
of gods natural ordinance for procreacyon (for such respects be both
unnatural and sinful) but only for gods pleasure and of devotion, it is
well lykely that he ring by the messenger of god, what manner of child that was
yt god would she should have, she would have made no questyon of the matter, but
gladly gone about the getting.

But here may some man happily say, that this reason by which I prove ber vow,
will serve well enough to soil it self, and prove that it appears not that
she had made any vow at all, but had only some mind and desire of perpetual
virginyre, but yet still at her lybertye / without any promise or bond. For
sith she had now by reuelacyon from god, that his pleasure was she should
have a child / a bare purpose of virgynyte and a vow of virginyte were all of
one weight. For god was able as well to dispense with her vow, as to bid her
leave of her vnuowed purpose.

Of troth if our lady had wayed her vow as light as happily some light vowesse
would / this mind she might have had. ye and some vowesses peradventure there
are, which as yet never entend to break their vow but think they would not
with the brekyng of their vow fall in ye dyspleasure of god, though they wist
to win therewith all this hole wretched world which yet would be peradventure
well content, yt god would send them word and vyd them go wedde and get
children.

And those vowesses lo that hapen to have any such mind / let them at the
first thought make a cross on the yrb rest and bless it a way. For though
it be no breking of their vow yet is it a way well to ward it, and draueth
(if it be not (...)) very nere the pyttys brynke of sin, wha^ they would be
glad that god would send the^ their pleasure without any sin.

And surely if upon ye delight in such a noughty mind, god would suffer ye devil
to illude such a vowesse, and tra^s figure him self into the sykenesse of an
angel of light, and call him self Labuel, and tell her ye god greteth her well
and sends her word that she shall have a child: though he there with went
his way and never told her more whyther it should be good or bad, her secret
in ward affection to ward her flesshely lust lurkynge in her heart unknown
unto her self, covered and hyd under the cloak of that mind, that she would
not for all the world take her own pleasure without gods will, would make her
understand this message for a dyspensacyon of her vow, and for a commandment
to brehe it / and so go forth and follow it without any ferther questyon, and go
get a child, and make the (...) a prophet.

But (...) blessed virgyn Wary, was so surely set upon the keeping of her
vowed virginyte, that she never neither longed nor looked for any messenger from
god, that should bid her (...). And therefore was she so dyscrete and
cyrcumspecte, that she would not only consider who spoke to her (...) dyscerne
whyther it were man or spyrite, and also whyther it were a good spyryte or an
evil / but she would also way well the words were the spyryte never so good,
lest her own mysse taking by neglyge^ce, might mar the reuesacyon. And
therefore at Gabrielys first apperau^ce, because he was goodly, and his words
were fair and plesau^tly set and spoken somewhat like a (...)/ she was somewhat
abashed and troubled in her mind at the manner of his salutacyon. But after
upon his ferther words when she aduysed him and his message well / than
perceiving him to be, not a man but an angel, not an evil angel but a good,
and specially sent from god; and (...) matter no worldly wowyng but an he uynly
message: she was not a sytell joyful in her heart. And as I said had she not
vowed virgynyte, but had been at her lybertye, she had as me seems had no
cause to do wte what god would have her do / namely having an husband allredy.
Nor never wold^ she have thought that it had been better for her to live still
in virgynyte, than to go about yt generacyo^ whereof god had sent her word. But
now for as much as she was by her vow (...) den to virginite, whereof she wist
well she might not dispense with her self / and the angel bode not her go about
to co^ceyue, but only told her as by way of prophecye, that she should con
ceyue / and well she, wist god from whom the message came, could make her
co^ceyue without man if he would: therefore she neither would tempte god in
desyryng him to do that miracle, nor by mysse taking of his message for have
and ouersyght, offend his master by the brekyng of her vow / but dyscretely
did ask the messenger, how and in what wise she should conceive. where upon he
showed her that she should be conceived by the holy ghost.

Here you se good reders that the cause of her question in her asking how,
rose of no diffidence, but of very sure faith / because she surely byleued yt
he could make her co^ceyue and her vir ginite saved. For else had she not had
fermely yt faith, she had had no cause to ask the questyo^, but might have
rehened clearly / that he would have her conceived by her husband.

And therefore was her questyon Luce. (...).
farte fro the question of zachary, the father of saint John^, which asked not
the angel how, but what token he should have that he said true / for else it
seemed that for all his word, because of their both agys, he was minded no
more to meddle with his wife, sith he thought possybylite of generacyon passed.
And for that dyffydens was he punyshed by loss of his speech till the birth of
ye child.

And her questyon was also very far fro this questyo^ of the Iewys here, and
from their asking how / while the cause of her questyon was faith, and the
cause of their questyo^ dyffydens.

Nichodemus also when our lord John^. 3
bygan to tell him of the sacrament of baptysme, and said unto him, verily
verily I tell the, but if a man be born again he can not se the kingdom of
god / answered our savior and said how may a man be borne again wha^ he is
old: may he enter again into his mothers vely and be born again?

Lo. here the man was deceived in that he thought upon a bodyly birth, where
as our savior meant of a spyrytuall birth, by faith and by the sacrament of
baptysme. And therefore our lord told him forthwyth, that he meant not that a
man should be bodyly borne again of his mother, but meant of a spyrytuall
regeneracyon in soul, by the water and ye holy ghost.

Now be it he told him not for all that all the form and manner of that
sacrament, but what the substance should be, and by whose power, and whereof it
should take effect.

Now these jews here, to whom Christ preched of the geuyng of his body to
them for meat, were not fully in the case of Nichodemus, but in some point they
were nerer ye truth than he was at the beginning. For they took our saviors
word right in that they understood that he spoke of his own very flesh, and
that he would give it them to eat / where as Nichodemus understood no part of
the generacyon and birth that Christ spoke of. But they myssetoke the ma ner how
he would give it them, and ran forth in the deuyce and imagynacyon of their
own fantasy. But in dyffydence and dystrust they were like Nichodemus which
said, how may a man be borne again when he is old? And peradventure the
farther of from endeavor to ward byseuynge. For in Nichodemus though I find no
consent of faith in conclusyon / yet ye gospel speaks not of any final
contradyccyon in him, nor of any desperate departing, as these Jews and these
disciples did. And Nichodems spoke in his cause after, but these discyples
never walked after with him.

Now Christ there unto Nichodemus, because he was slene fro the matter, told him
yt it should be no bodyly birth but a spiritual / and bode him marvel not
thereof no more tha^ of ye spiryng or mouyng of the spiryt or of ye wynd (for yt
word diverse doctors take diuersely) whose voice though he herd, he neither
wist from whens it came nor whyther he would go. But now wha^ yt Nichodemus
perceiving what ye thing was, did yet wonder on still and said: how may these
things be.

Tha^ our lord did no more but leave him with ye same tale still, and bid him
believe, and tell him why he so should; sith him self yt so told him came from
heuyn, and therefore could tell it / and gave him a sinificacyon of his death,
whereby that sacrament should take the strength. But as for his questyon how this
might be, other wise tha^ ye it was by the power of god, that questyon Christ
left vnsoyled.

Now did he like wise with these ie wys here. Sith it was so that they
perceived all ready that he spoke of his very flesh, and yet for all that word
not byteue he could give it the^ / but thought the thing so strange and
wonderful, that they thought he could not do it, and therefore asked how he
could do it: he did no more but still tell them that he would do it, and that he
verily would give them his flesh to eat and his very blood to drink / and
told them the profit that they should have, if they byleued him and did it,
and what loss they should have if for lack of bylyef they would seue it undone
/ and that he was come from heuyn, and therefore they ought neither to
myssetruste his word nor his power to perform his word. And (...) for
otherwise how and in what manner he could or would do it, he left their questyon
and their how vnsoysed.

But now lest master Masker Masher make men wene, that I make all this matter
of mine own head, ye S. (...). (...). (...). (...). (...).
shall here good readers upon this questyon of the Jewys what saint Cyryll
says.

The Jews (says he) with great wyckednes cry out and say against god: How
may he give us his flesh? and they forgete that there is nothing impossyble to
god. For while they were fleshely, they could not (as saint Poule says)
understand spyrytuall (...). (...). (...)
things / but this great sacrament and mystery seemed unto them but folly. But
let us I beseech you take profit of their sins, and let us give ferme
faith unto the sacraments, and let us never in such high things either
speak or thing that same how. For it is a Jews word that same, and a cause
of exterme ponysshement. And Nicodemus therefore when he said: How may these
things be, was answered as he well was worthy, Art thou the master in Isra ell
and know not these things. Let us therefore (as I said) be taught by other
folks fawtes, i^ gods worcester ke not to ask: How: but leave unto himself the
science and the way of his own work. For like wise as though no man knows
what thing god is in his own nature and substance, yet a man is justified by
faith when he byleueth that they that seek him shall be ryally rewarded by him:
so thowgh a man know not the reason of goddys workys yet when through faith he
dowteth not but that god is able to do all thing, he shall have for this good
mind great, reward And that we should be of this mind, our lord him self
exhorts us by the prophet Esaye, where he says (...). 55.
thus unto men.

My deuyces be not as your deuyces be nor my ways such as your ways be faith
our lord: but as the heuyn is exalted from the earth, so be my ways exalted
above yours, and my deuyces above your deuyces.

Christ therefore which excels in wisdom and power by his godhed how can
it be but that he shall work so wonderfully, that the reason and cause of his
works shall so far pass and excelle the capacyte of man nes wit, that our
mind shall never be possible to perceive it. Doste thou not se oftentyme what
thing men of hand craft do. They tell us sometime that they can do some
things wherein their words seem of the^ self icredyble. But yet because we
have seen them sometime done such other things like, we thereby believe them
that they can do those things to. Now can it be therefore but you they be worthy
extreme torment, that so co^tempne almighty god the worker of all things, that
they dare be so bold as in his words to speak of how, while he is he, who^
they know to be the geuer of all wisdom, and which (as the scripture
techeth us) is able to do all thing. But now thou Jew if thou will yet cry
out and ask how, than will I be content to play the fool as thou do, and
ask how to. Than will I gladly axe ye, how thou came out of Egypt, how
Moses rod was turned into the serpent, how the hand strykken with lepry, was
in a moment restored to his formare state again / how the waters turned into
blood / how thy fore fathers went through the mydde sees as though they had
walked on dry ground / how the bitter waters were changed sweet by the tree
/ how the fountain of water flowed out of the stone / how the runnyng river of
Iordane stood still / how the inexpugnable walls of Ieryco were ouerthro wee^
with the bare noise and clamor of the trumpettes. Innume rabble things there
are in which if thou ask how, thou must needs subuerte and set at naught all
the whole scripture, the doctrine of the prophe tes, and Moses own writing
to / whereupon you Jews ye should have byleued Christ / and if there seemed you
than any hard thing in his words, humbly than have asked him. Thus should ye
rather have done, than like dronken folk to cry out: Now can he give us his
flesh, do ye not per ceyue that when ye say such things there appears anon
a great arrogaunce in your words.

Nere you se good readers, that S. Cyriss in these words psaynesy showed yt
Crist here in these words, The bread that I shall give you is my flesh which I
shall give for the life of the world, meant of ye geuyng of his flesh in the
sacrament. And that the Jews wondered that he said he would give them his
flesh, and asked how he could do it, because they thought it impossyble. And
in reprofe of their incredusyte and that folyshe mind of theyrs (by which
they could not believe that god could give them his own flesh to eat) S.
Cyriss both shows that many hand crafted men do things such as those that
never saw the like would wene impossyble, and also that in any work of god it
is a madness to put any dowt and ask how he can do it, sith he is asmyghty
and able to do all thing. And to the intent that no chry sten man should dowt
of the change and conuirsyon of the bred into Cry stes blessed body in the
sacrament, Saint Cyriss here by way of obieccyon against the Jews, puts
us in remembrance (for us he teaches though he spoke to the^) among other
miracles he puts us I say in remembrance of diverse conuersyons and
chaunges out of one nature into another, that god wrought in the old saw. As
how the hand was turned from hole to sore, and from sore to hole again
suddenly.

Now the waters were suddenly tur ned from bitter into sweet / and how the
waters were turned from water to blood / and how the deed rod of Moses was
turned into a quyche serpent.

The. xvi. chapyter.
BUt yet shall ye se that upon the words of Christ following,

Now saint saint all way more and more declares that Christ spoke there of
his very body, that he would give men to eat in the blessed sacrament. For it
follows in the text of the gospel.

Than said Jesus unto the Jews, Ueryly verily I say unto you, but if ye eat
the flesh of the soue of man ye shall not have life in you. He that eats my
flesh and drynketh my blood, has everlasting life.

Upon those words thus Lyrissus si. 4. ca. I + in eud. (...).
says saint Cyrill.

Christ is very merciful and mylde as the thing it self she weth. For he
answers not here sharply to their hot words, nor falls at no conten cyon
with them / but goes about to inprente in their minds the lively knowledge of
this sacrament or mystery. And as for how (that is to wit in what manner) he
shall give the^ his flesh to eat, he teaches them not. For they could not
understand yt. But how great good they should get by the eating if they eat
it with faith that thing again and again he declares them to dreue them to
faith by the desire of eternal life / and faith first onys had, they should be
than the more easy to be tawght. For the prophet Esal. 7.
Esaias says, But if ye believe ye shall not vnderstaude. Therefore it was of
necessyte requysyte / that they should first fasten the rotes of faith in their
mind, and than ask such things as were metely for a man to ask. But they
before they would believe, would out of season ask their importune questyons
first. And for this cause our savior declared not unto them how it might be
done / but exhorts them to seek the thing by faith. So unto the the other side,
to his dyscyples that byleued, he gave the pieces of the bread saying: Take you
and eat this is my body. And in like wise he gave them the cup about
saying, drink you of this all, this is the cup of my blood, which shall
be shed for many, for remyssyon of sins. Here thou see that to the^ that
asked without faith, he opened not the manner of this mystery or sacrament. But
to the^ that byleued, he expouned it though they asked not. Therefore let them
hear this, those folk I say that of arrogaunce and pride will not believe the
faith of Christ.

Here ye se good readers that saint Cyrill plainly declares you, that our
saliyour would not teach them at that time the manner of the eating, because
of their infydesyte for all their asking / but after ward he told and taught
it his faithful dyscypses at his fast (...) and mau^dye, when he took them
the bred and bode them eat it, and told them that the same was his body / and
the cup and bode them drink thereof, and showed them that that was his
blood. And thus you se well by saint Cyrill that master Masker here, which by
his exposycyd would make us wene that our savior in all his word here to the
jews, meant only to tell them of ye geuyng of his flesh to the death, and that
he meant nothing of the geuynge of his flesh to eat in the blessed facrament,
does in all his exposycyon but play with false dyce to deceive you.

Now as for that saint Crrif here calls it by the name of bread, that is I
trow the thing that can nothing trouble you, For I have showed you before by
the words of that great holy doctor Theophylactus, that it is called bred,
because it was bred, and because of the form of bread ye remains / and yet
is no bread in deed, but is the very blessed body of Crist his very flesh and
his blood. As you se also by saint Cyrill here, whi che of this blessed
sacrament so often reherseth and inculketh the miracle, exhorting all folk
that no man be moved to mystruste it, though the thing be meruelouse, nor ask
as ye Jews did how such a wunderfull wurke can be wrought / but mekely believe
it, sith he is god that says it / and therefore as he says it, so do with not
but he (...) do it / as he does other like things, and did ere he were born in
to this world / of which things saint Cyrill has here rebersed some. As the
turnynge of the water into blood, as he turns in the sacrament the wine into
blood / and the turnyng Exodi. 7
of Aarons rod into a serpent / and that into such a serpent as deuowred up all
the serpents of the Egypcyane wytches. Like as our savior in the blessed
sacrament turns the bread into his own body, yt holy wholesome serpent that
deuowreth all the poysened serpents of hell / and was therefore figured by the
brasyn serpent that Moses did set up in the manner Nume. 21.
of a cross in the desert / the byhol dyng whereof deuowred and destroyed the
venym of all the poysen serpent that had stongen any man there.

The. xvii chapyter.
ANd all be it that I she we you good chryste^ readers, saint Cyrilles words
and his exposycyon upon the place, because master Masker shall not make men
wene you I make all the matter of mine own head: yet seems me that our savior
declares this matter with plain words bym self. For what can be playner
words than are his own, when that upon their wunderynge and their murmuryng
question, how can he give us his flesh to eat, he said unto the^, Ueryly
verily I say to you, but if you eat the flesh of yt sone of man and drink his
blood ye shall not have life in you. He yt eats my flesh and drynketh my
blood, has life ever lasting / and I shall raise him up again in the
last day. For my flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily drink. He
that eats my flesh and drynketh my blood, dwells in me and I in him.

In these words ye se good readers how plainly that our lord shows them,
both the profit of the receyuynge, and the peril of the refusing / and also
both that he not only speaks of his very body and blood (which thing
master Masker agrees) but over that also that he more plainly and more
precysely says, that they should verily eat it and drink it (which thing
master Masker denies) and yet is that the thing that our savior in these
worcester des most specially laboreth to make them believe. For that he spoke of his
very flessh, they perceived well enough. But that he would have them verily eat
it / that they thought such a manner thing that they neither would do nor
could byseue, because they myssetoke the manner thereof, wenynge that they
should eat it in deed pieces cut out as the bochers cut the bestes in the
shammellys.

And Christ therefore would at this time for their arrogaunt infydelyte (as saint
Cyrill has told you) no thing declare them of the manner of his geuynge it to
be verily eaten, not in the proper form of flesh (as they flesshely
imagyned) but in the form of bred in the blessed sacrament because (as
Theophilactus declared you) men should not abhor to eat it. But leuynge that
untaught till the time of his maundy souper (where as saint Cyrill has also
she wed you he taught it his faithful dyscyples at the instytucyon of that
blessed sacrament) he laboreth as I say in these words here most special,
with as plain words as can be de (...), to tell them and make them by leave
that they shall verily eat his flesh. Which thing for any thing that he
could say to them, they were so hard hearted that they would not believe him.

And yet is master Masker here much more obdurate now, and much more
faythlesse to, than all they were than. For both he having herd what Criste
said to those (...) than, and also what he taught his faithful dyscyples at
his maundy after, and what all holy doctors and saints have said thereon and
byleued ever synnys: yet will he with a few fond heretykes, take a folysshe fro
ward way, and believe the contrary / or at the least wise say that he
byleueth ye contrary. But in good says yt they verily believe as they say that
can I not believe, except that of ye scripture and the christen faith these
folk by leave nothing at all. And so upon my faith I fere me that you shall se
it prove at last / as appears by somof them that so begin all ready, and
have in some places put forth such poysen in writing.

But surely though neither any man had ever written upon these words of
Christ, nor our savior bym self never spoken word thereof after, that ever had
in writing come^ into me^nys hands: yet are these words here spoken so plain
and so full, that they must needs make any man that were wyllyng to believe him,
clerly perceive and know that in one manner or other, he would give us his own
very flesh verily to be recey ued and eaten. For when the Iewys said; how can
he give us his flesh to eat? He answered them with no sophims, but with a
very plain open tale told them, they should neither dystruste that he could on
his part give them his flesh to eat, nor yet refuse upon their part to
eat it, if ever they would be saved. As though he would say: Maruayle you and
mys trust you my word? and ask how I can give you mine own flesh to eat? I
will not tell you how I can give it, nor in what form or fasshyon ye shall
eat it / but this I will tell you, neither in tropis, allegories, nor
parables, but even for a very plain troth, ye eat ye shall my very flessh in
deed, if ever ye purpose to be saved, ye and drink my very blood to. For but
if you be content to eat, and with a true faith to eat, the flessh of the
sone of man, and drink his blood: ye shall not have life in you. But who so
with a true well wurkynge faith, eats my flesh and drynketh my blood, he
has everlasting life. Not only because he is as sure to have it when the
time shall come as though he had it all ready, by reason of the promise that:
Christ here ma keth, where he says, And I shall re suscitate and raise him
(...) at the last day / but also for that the very body of Christ that he
receives, is very life everlasting of it self / and such a life, as to them
that well will receive it, in true faith, and purpose of good living, it is
the thing that is able to give life and quyknesse ever lasting. For as the
godhed is of his own nature (...) life: so is the flesh joined in unity of
person to the godhed, by that immedyate co^iunccyon and unity, made both ever
lastyng and lively in it self, and also everlasting life to the geuyng of life
euerlastyngly to all other, that well and wurthely receive him, and will
persevere and abide with him. For though every man here naturally dye for the
while: yet shall Christ as he promyseth here, reyse and resuscytate him again
to everlasting life in the last day.

The. xviii. chapyter.
ANd to show more and more that he meneth plainly of very eating and very
drinking: he says, my flesh is verily meat, and my blood is verily
drink. (...) (...). 4. ca. (...) in (...). (...).
these words says saint Cyril thus Christ here declares the dyfference
again, between the mystycall benedyccyon, that is to wit the blessed
sacrament and manna, and between the water flowynge out of the stone, and the
communion of the holy blood. And this he repeteth again, to the intent they
should no more merueyle of ye miracle of manna / but that they should rather
receive him which is the heuynly bread and the gyuer of eternal life. your
fathers said our savior, did eat ma^na in the desert and they be dead. But
this bread is descended from heuyn, that a man should eat thereof and not dye.
For the meat of manna brought not eter nall life, but a short remedy against
hunger. And therefore manna was not the very meat / that is to wit manna was
not the bread from heaven / but the holy body of Christ that is the meat that
noryssheth to immortalyte and eternal life. ye says some man: but they drank
water out of the stone. But what wanne they by that for dead they be, and
therefore that was not yt very drink / but the very drink is the drink of
Christ, by which death is utterly turned up and destroyed. For it is not
the blood of him that is only man, but the blood of that man, which being
toyned to the natural life (that is to wit the godhed) is made also life him
self.

Therefore we be the body and the me^bres of Christ. For by this blessed
sacrament we receive the very sone of god him self.

Here you se good readers that saint Cyrillus plainly declares here, yt
these words of Christ, My (...) is verily meat etc. are spoken and meant of
his holy flesh in the blessed sacrament / of which master Masker in all his
exposycyon and in all his hole wise wurke, telieth us plainly the contrary.

But saint Cyrillus is here open and plain, both for that point and for the
hole matter. For who can more plainly declare any thing tha^ yt holy doctor
declares in these words, yt in the blessed sacrament is verily eaten and
dronken the very blessed body and holy blood of Christ. And yet does not saint
Cyrillus say it more openly than (...) our savior in his (...) words himself.

And now ferther to show that it must nedys be so, that he which eats his
flesh and drynketh his blood, must needs be resuscytate and raised again in
body to everlasting life: our savior adds thereunto and says, He that
eats my flesh and drynketh my blood, dwells in me and I in him.

Upon which words also, thus says holy saint Cyrill.

Like as ill a man unto molte^ wex put other wex, it can not be but that he
shall through out mengle the tone with the the other: so if a man receive the
flesh and the blood of our lord worthily and as he (...), it can not be but
that he shall be so joined with, Christ, as Christ shall be with him and, he with
Christ.

Thus may you good readers se, how verily a man eats in the sacra meant the
(...) body of Christ / and by that eating how each of them is in other. And
than if he so persevere, how can it be that that body shall have everlasting
death, in which there is (...) everlasting life? For as ye have herd, the body
of Christ is by the co^iunccyon with his godhed made everlasting life.

But this is meant as I say (and all the holy doctors do declare the same) of
them that receive the sacrament, not only sacramentally, but also effectually.
That is to wit, of them that not only receive the body of our savior by the
sacrament into their bodies, but also by true faith and true repentance and
purpose of good living, receive his holy (...) there with into their souls, and
be made thereby very lively members of that thing that the blssed sacrament
signifies and betokens, yt is to wit of the mystycall body of Christ, the
church and congregacyon of saints.

For as you have herd by Theophilactus before, this blessed sacrament is not
only the very flesh of Christ, but is also a figure. And that is it in diverse
wise, as I shall ferther declare you in my book against Frithis answer to my
pystle. With which book (were his onys come in prente which is allredy sent
over to be (...) ted) I shall god wyllyng well make (...) his english
brethren se and perceive his folly, yt list not wyllyngly to co^tynue folys and
wynke.

But as I was about to say, they that receive our lord by the sacrament only,
and not by faith and purpose of amendeme^t: though they receive him yet they
receive him not / and though they eat him they eat him not.

For though his blessed body be received in to their bodies: yet his holy
spirit is not received into their souls / and therefore he (...) not in them
nor they in him, but they eat and drink their judgment, and receive him to
their dampnacyo^, for that they receive him without faith and dew reueuere^ce /
and therefore do not as says sait Poule, discern ye body of our lord. 1.
(...). 11.


And therefore says saint Austayn as Prosper reherseth i^ lib. (...) psperi, He
receives the meat of life, he drynketh yt draught of eternyte, yt dwells i^
Christ, and in who^ Christ dwell leth. For he yt discordeth from Christ neither
eats yt flesh of Christ, nor (...) his blood, though he receive every day
indyfferentely the sacrament of that great thing to the judgment and
dampnacyon of his presumpcyon.

This text of saint Austayne alleged Fryth for his purpose in a cer tayne
communycacyon / wyllyng to prove thereby that the very body of Christ was not
always verily received and eaten in the sacrament, as yt church says. For here
(said Fryth) saint Austayne says plain yt evil men though they receive the
sacrament, eat not the body of Christ.

But here Fryth either had not ler ned or else had forgoten, that saint
Austayne meant of the effectual receyuynge, by which a man not only receives
Christ's blessed body into his own sacramentally, but also vir tually and
effectually so receives there with the spyryte of god into his soul, that he
is incorporate thereby with our savior, in such wise, that he is made a lively
member of his mystycall body that is the (...) of saints by receyuyng it
wurthyly, which evil folk do not, that receive it to their dampnacyon.

For that saint Austayne meant not to deny that ye blessed body of Christ is
verily received and eaten in the blessed sacrament, both of evil folk and
good, it appears plain by that that in mo places tha^ one, he speaks of the
traitor Judas. For all be it that in some places he puts it in dowte and
question, whyther Judas received the sacrament among the apostles at Christ's
maundy, or else that ye morcell that he received were not it: yet-in diverse
places he affermeth that he did. And in those places be affermeth plainly that
in the sacrament he received Christ's blessed body, as evil and as false as
the traitor was, as in his fyfth book de baptismo he clearly declares in
these words.

Like as Judas to whom our lord gave the morsel, not by receyuynge any evil
thing, but by evil receyuynge of a good thing, gave the devil a place to
enter into him self: so every man yt unworthily receives the sacrament of
Christ, makes not ye sacrament evil because he is evil, nor makes not thereby
that he receives nothing because he receives it not to his saluacyo^. For it
was never the less the body of our lord and the blood of our lord, even unto
them of whom the apostle said, he that eats it and drynketh it unworthily, he
eats and drynketh dampnacyo^ to him self.

Here sait Austayn good readers expressly declares, yt not only good folk
but evil folk also, receive and eat in ye sacrament ye very body and blood of
Christ, though the tone to salvation the the other to da^pnacyo^. And therefore you
se yt saint Austayn here plainly reproves Fryth.

And that ye may plainly se also August. in epist. 163. (...) Eleusiu^
Glorium^ Felicem.
that saint Austayn in calling ye blessed sacrament the body of Christ, meneth
not to call it only a figure or a memorial (beside his other plain words in
many sundry places) he writes in a pistle unto Eleusius, Glorius, and Felix,
declaryng the great excellent goodness yt Christ showed to the false traitor
Judas, he writes I say yt Christ gave unto Judas at his last souper ye price
of our rede^pcyo^. And what was the price of our rede^pcio^, but his own very
blessed body.

How be yt Frith was on every side deceived in the perceiving of saint
Austayns mind / which mysse happed him as I suppose for lack of redynge any
ferther in saint Austayns wurkes, than those placys yt he found falsely drawn
out into friar Duyskyns book.

For saint Austayne in very many places plainly declares, that every man good
and badde both, receives and eats in the sacrament the very body and blood
of Christ. And also those words in which he says, that evil folk eat it
not, he means yt they eat it not so as they receive the effect thereof, that
is to wit to be by the receyuynge and eating thereof incorporate spyrytually
with him, as a lively member of his mystycall body the socyete of saints, so
that he may dwell in Christ and Christ in him / but lacks yt spyrytuall
effect of his eating, because he is evil and eats not Christ's flesh in
such manner as he should do, that is to wit worthyly in true faith and purpose
of clean and innocent life, as saint Austayne in his book de blasphemia
spiritus sancti, declares well in these words.

This also that Christ says, he that eats my flesh and drynketh my blood,
dwells in me and I in him. How shall we understand it. May we understand
those folk therein to, 1. Co. 11
of whom thapostle says yt they eat and drink their judgment, when they eat
the same flesh and drink the same blood? Did Judas the traitor and wicked
seller of his master though he first with the other apostles as saint Luke
theuangelyste very clearly declares, did eat and drink the same sacrament of
his flesh and his blood made with his own hands, did he abide yet in Christ
and Christ in him? Finally many men which with a feigned heart eat that flesihe
and drink that blood, or else when they have eaten and dron ken it, bycome
apostataas after / do they dwell in Christ and Christ in them? But there is
undoubtedly a certain manner of eating that flesh and drinking that blood,
in which manner he that eats it and drynketh it, dwells in Christ and
Christ in him. And therefore not who so ever eat the flesh of Christ and
drink his blood, dwells in Christ and Christ in him / but he that eats it
and drynketh it after a certain manner, which manner Christ saw when he spoke
the words.

Here you se good readers that saint Austayn she weth, that Judas in the
sacrament received and did eat yt body of Christ, and declares also the very
whole thing that he meneth co^ cernyng the understanding of this word of Crist,
He yt (...) my flesh and drynketh my blood dwells in me and I in him / that
is to wit they you eat it in a certain manner by which he meneth they yt eat it
well and in yt state of grace / as he plainly declares both in his exposycyon
upon saint Iohn^s gospel, and many sundry pla ces bysyde.

And those that receive him other wise with a feigned heart and in purpose of
deadely sin / they folo we Judas and shortly show them self. For such as
they were wont to be, such will they be still, or yet rather much wurse if they
were before very naught. And therefore says saint Au stayn, yt a man to eat ye
flesh of Crist is to dwell in Christ, and to have Christ dwelling in him. For he
yt dwells not i^ Crist, well declares yt though he have received and eaten
his flesh into his body by the sacrament, yet has he not received and eaten
his spirit as I said into his soul / and therefore has not received and eaten
his fiesshe effectually, but without theffecte of the spyryte and life, which
is the thing whereby the flesh geuyth the life, and without which as our
savior says, his flesh avails us nothing. And so for lack of the
spyrytuall eating, the flesshely eater of his flesh though he receive the
sacrament, receives not theffecte of the sacrament the thing that the
sacrament sygnyfyeth, that is the partycypacyon of ye mystycall body of
Christ, that is to wit the church and congregacyon of all saints, which
church and co^ gregacyon is gathered together as many me^bres into one body
Christ / as the bread which our lord in the sacrament changes into his
blessed body, is one lose made of many gray nes of whete / and the wine which
he changes into his blood, is one cup of wine made of many grapes as
thapostle declares.

And verily to be a quycke lively member of that body does no man attain that
receives the sacrament without faith and purpose of good life / but waxes a
more weke membre and a more lame, more astonished, and more losely hanging
thereon than he did before / and by such often receyuynge so rotteth more and
more, that finally it falls quyte of, and is cast out into the dunghyll of
hell, and shall never be resuscytate and raised again to be made a membre of
that body in glory.

But as saint Austayne says, if a man after the receyuynge of the sacrament do
dwell siyll in god, that is to wit abide and persevere in true faith and good
wurkes: than is it a good sing and token that he has effectually eaten the
flessh of Christ in the blessed sacrament. And thereupon must it needs good
christian reader follow, yt he that receives the blessed sacrament well, and
eats therein ye flesh of Christ, not only verily, which every man does good
and bad, but also (which only the good foske do) effec tually, and so dwells
in Christ and Christ in him perseuerauntly: that man or woman without dowt, it
must needs be that they can never euerlastyngly dye / but Christ dwelling in
them, shall conserve their souls and resuscytate again their bodies that so
dwell in him, into everlasting life.

The. xix. chapyter.
(...) the surety and vnfallyble proof whereof, our savior said forth with upon
his word before reme^ bred forther unto the Jews, as the living father sent
me, so also do I live for my father. And he that eats me, shall live also for
me.

The father of heuyn being the orygynall substance of life, before all
beginning begat his coeternall sone, and gave unto him his own whole
substance, and therefore his own whole life, as to him whom he begat one
equale god with him self, in nothing dyfferent but in only person.

The father I say gave all his own whole life to his sone, and yet none
thereof from him self. And there fore says our savior Christ, that him self
lives for or by his father. And so yt man says he that eats me, shall live
through me. For sith that by the very eating of his very blessed body, the eater
(but if him self be the let,) is joined with the flesh of Christ (as holy
saint Cyrill has declared) and thereby with that holy spyryt of his also which
from that holy flesh is inseperable, and so joined unto the very substance
of life, that is life and gives life to: he can not but live through Christ.

(...) this our savior finally for conclusyon tells them, that this bread
also is come from heuyn saying, This is the bread that is descended from heuyn.
Not meaning that his flesh was first in heaven, and so sent down from thense
as some heretyhes have ere this holden an opynyo^ / but that his body was in
the blessed virgyn his mother, by the heuynly obumbracyon of the holy ghost.
And also sith his godhed and his manhed were joined and knytte together in very
unite of person: our savior used that manner of speaking by the tone, that he
used by the the other. And therefore as he said unto Nichodemus, the sone of man
descended from heuyn: so says he here of his flessh, this is the bread that is
descended from heuyn.

And because that the Iewys had in the beginning of this co^municacyon, bosted
unto him the bread of manna, bringing forth for ye preyse thereof the words of
the prophet, Psalm. 77.
Thou have geuyn them bread from heuyn: Our lord here showed them that this
bread that he would give them to eat, that is to wit his own very flesh (as
him self very plainly declared them) is of an other ma ner descended down from
heaven, tha^ the manna, whose descendynge from heuyn they in the beginning
bosted so. And therefore he said, This is the bread that is descended from heuyn
/ not as your fathers did eat manna and are deed. He that eats this bred,
shall live for ever. As though he would say. This is another manner of bread,
otherwise come from heuyn than manna was that ye boste of so. For that bred was
given you but for the sustenaunce of the life in this world / but this bread
yt is mine own body, conceived by the holy ghost, and in unity of person joined
with my godhed, as verily as it is joined with mine own soul, is another manner
of heuynly bread, and shall be given you to eat for another manner of purpose For
manna that was given your fathers to eat for the only sustinau^ce of their
te^porall life, was but a figure of this bread thus geuyn you to eat, as I
shall begin to give it at my mau^dy souper, the manner whereof I will not tell you
now. And therefore as the figure or ye shadow of a thing, is far fro the
propertye of ye thing it self: so was the bread of manna far fro the
propertye of this bread yt is my flesh. For like wise as because it was a
figure of this bread that is very life, it served for the sus stynaunce of
life: so because it was but a figure, and not the very life it self, it served
therefore not to give life, but to sustain life / not for ever but for a while.
But this bread that is my flesh / (which I shall give you as verily to eat
as ever your fathers did eat manna) because it is not the figure only of the
thing that is life, but is also (by co^iunccio^ with the godhed) the very life
it self that was figured: I shall give it you to eat in such a manner, that it
shall not only mayntayn, feed, and sustain the body of the eater in this
present life, but it shall also give life, ye and that euersastynge life in
glory / not only to ye soul, but also to the body to, in time mete and
conuenyent, raysynge it vy again from death, and setting it with the soul in
eternal life of everlasting bliss.

The. xx. chapyter.
This communycacyon with the Hewys had our lord, techynge in the synagoge at
Caparnau^. And many therefore of his dyscyples herynge these thynger said, This
word is hard, and who can here him.

The more and more that our savior plainly told them that he would give them
his very fsesshe to eat, the more and more meruelouse hard they thought his
saying, and rekened that it was impossyble for any man to believe it. And
therefore for lack of bylyefe they lost the profyt. And these that thus
thought this matter so meruelouse hard and strange that they would not believe,
but for lack of bylyefe lost the profit, were not only such Jews as were
his enemies, but many of those also that were his own dyscyples.

But our savior knowing in him self (as he that was god and neded no man to
tell him) that his dyscyples murmured at his words, because he told them so
often and so plainly that men should have no life, but if they would be content
verily to eat his own flessh he said unto them, Does this offend you? do you
stumble at this? what than if you shall se the sone of man ascend up where
as he was before? The spyryt is that that quyckeneth, the flessh avails
nothing. The words that I have spoken to you be spirit and life.

In these (...) our lord (...) tely to (...) all their objectyo^s gro wynge
upon their infydelyte, and also confuteth their infidelyte / and in his word?
after following, puts them yet again in mind of the medicine yt might
remove their unfaithfulness and give them the very fast faith.

The Jews had before murmu red against that that he had said, yt he was
descended from heuyn. Against which they said, Is not he the sone of Joseph
whose father and mother we know? And how says he tha^ that he is descended
from heuyn? And a great pyece of their murmr therein arose as ye se, upon
that point that they had mysse conceived, wenyng yt Joseph had been his father.
For had they believed that his ma^hed had been conceived by ye holy ghost, they
would have murmured yt less. And had they byleued yt his godhed had descended
in to it from heuyn, they would not have murmured at all.

In Like wise they murmured at the secu^d point, in that he showed the^ so
plainly yt he would give them his very flesh to be their very mete, and said
how can he give us his flesh to eat. And many of his dysciples said also, this
is an hard word, and who may here him. And a great part of their murmr was,
because they thought that they should have eaten his flesh in ye self fseshly
form / and because (as August. (...) enatta. in psalm. 168. et in sermon. 2 de
verbisi (...).
sait Austayn says in sundry (...)) yt they thought they should have eaten his
flesh in deed gobbettes, cut out piecemele as the meat is cut out in ye
shamelles / and also because they knew him not to be god. For had they known
that the manner in which he would give them his very flesh to eat, should not
be in the self same fleshelp form, but in the pleasant form of bread: though
they would yet have meruayled, because they woide have thought it wonderful,
yet would they have murmured the less, because they would not have thought it
lothely. But tha^ had they ferther known that he had been god / than would they
not I suppose have murmured at the matter at all. For I wene verily that there
were neither of those disciples nor of those Jews neither, any one so evil as
now be master Masker, and fryth, and his fellows, that seeing the receyuyng
nothing lothesome, and byleuynge that Christ was god (if they believe it) will
not yet believe he can do it / but murmur and grudg against it still.

For though master Masker say that if Christ said he would do it, than him self
would believe he could do it: yet it shall appear ere we part, both that Christ
says it. And he will not believe that Christ though he say it meneth it. And
also that the cause why he will not believe that Christ meneth it, is because he
byleueth that god can not do it.

But now said our savior unto them in answering all this gere. Do you stumble
at this? what if ye se the sone of man ascend up where he was before? what will
you tha^ say? For than could they have no cause to distruste that he descended
down, when they should se him ascend up. For that thing seems in mennys
mad eyes such as they were that would not take him but for a man, far the
gretter maystry of the both.

Also when they should se him ascend up to heuyn whole / than should they well
perceive that they mysse took him by a false imagynacyon of their own deuyce,
when they constre wed the geuynge of his flesh to eat, as though he meant to
give it the^ in such wise, as him self should lose all that they should eat.

And when he said they sholdse the sone of man ascend up there as he was
before / he gave them again a sygnyfycacyo^ that him self ye sone of man was
the sone of god also, and thereby him self god also, and into the world comen
and descended from heuyn.

In these words our savior she weth that his ascensyo^ should be a sufficient
cause to make them know his power and leave their murmuryng. And therefore they
that leave not murmuryng at his blessed sacrament yet, show a great token that
they believe not his wonderful ascensio^ neither. For if they byleued well that
he had power of him self to ascend up in body, and sit in heaven one equale
god with his father and the holy ghost: than would they (...) wene as they do,
yt god lacked power to make his own body to be in dyuer se places at onys, and
be both in heaven and earth.

The. xxi. chapyter
BUt now for as much as (...) part of these folks diffydence and distrust,
rose of that that the respect of the lothsomnes made the^ the less willing
to believe, in that they thought that he meant to give them his flesh to eat
in gobbettes cut out deed without life or spyryte: our savior answered them
to that point. And though he would not at that time tell them the manner how he
would give it them to eat: yet he told them that he would not give it them
so. And therefore he said unto them. The spirit is it that quycketh or gives
life / the flesh avails nothing. The words which I have spoken to you be
spyrit and life.

As though he would say unto the^. I told you before that who so would eat my
flesh should have everlasting life. And therefore why be you so mad as to
wene that I mean my flesh cut out in gobbettes deed without life or spyryt? it
is the spirit that gives life. And therefore without the spirit the flesh
should avail you naught. But being knytte with the spirit of my godhed, which
is the substance and very fou^tayne of life / so it shall (to them that
worthyly eat it) give everlasting life. And therefore the words that I speak
be not only flesh / for yt will no more give life alone, tha^ will faith
alone give life that is deed without ye will of good wurkes. But my words
therefore that I have spoken to you of my flesh to be eaten, be not flesh
alone, but spyryte also and life.

Therefore you must understand them not so fleshely as you do, that I would
give you my flesh in gobbettes deed / but you must understand them
spyrytually, that you shall eat it in an other manner animated with my soul,
and joined with the spyrite of my godhed, by which my flessh is it self made
not only lively but also geuynge life.

Thus meant our lord in those worcester des. Wherein lest master masker might make
men wene that I run all at ryotte upon mine own (...), holy saint Austayne
shows that in these words, The spyryt it is (...). in (...). (...).
yt quyckeneth, the flesh avails no thing. Our savior meneth that his flesh
deed and without ye spirit avails nothing / as cu^nyng nothing avails
without cherite, without which as sait Paul says it does but puff up a man
in pride. But on ye totherlide (...). (...)
like as cu^nyng much edifyeth and profits joined with cheryte: so ye flesh
of our savior much avails joined with his holy spyryte.

Saint Cyrill also upon ye same words declarynge them by a long process to
the purpose that I have showed you, says among many other things in this
manner, as it were in the person of Christ spekyng to those Jews, and to those
dyscyples of his, that said his words were so hard that no man could abide to
here him / which they said as says saint Chrisostom for their own excuse,
because (...). (...). 46. in (...).
them self were about to walk their way. To them therefore says our sa uyour
thus in saint Cyrilles exposi cyon. wene you wha^ I said that who so eat my
flesh shall have everlasting life, that I meant therein, that this erthely body of
mine does give life of his own proper nature? Nay verily. But I did speak to
you of the spyryt and of eternal life. But it is not the nature of the flesh
that makes the spyryt give life / but the power of the spyryte makes the
flesh give life. The words therefore yt I have spoken to you be spirit and
life / that is to wit they be spyrituall and spoken of the spirit and life /
that is to wit of ye spirit yt is the natural life, ye gives life. But yet
the thing yt we have all ready said, it shall do no harm though we repete it
again. The thing that I have said is this. The nature of the flesh can not of
it self give life. For what had tha^ the nature of ye gddhed more? But tha^ on
ye the other side, there is not i^ Crist only flesh / but he has ye sone of god
joined with it which is ye squale substau^s of life with his fader And therefore
when Christ calls his flesh a geuer of life / that power of geuynge life he
does not attrybute unto his flesh and unto his holy spi rite both of one
fashyon. For the spirit gives life by it self and of his own nature. But
the flesh asce^deth unto that power of geuynge life, by reason of the
coniunccyon and unity that it has with that holy spyryte. How be it how and by
what mean that thing is done, we neither are able with tongue to tell, nor
with mind to imagyne / but with silence and ferme faith we receive it.

Thus have you herd good readers that the thing that I say, do not only I
say, but saint Austayne also and saint Cyrill both. Which is enough to you to
perceive that I dyuyse not mine exposycio^ all of mine own head / and may be
enough to any good christen man also, to perceive clerefy that our savior in
these worcester des did speak, not only of a spyrytuall eating of his flesh by
bylyes and remembrance of his death and passion, as master Masker and fryth
and these fond fellows styffely bert us in hand, but spoke also and meant it of
the remembrynge of his death and passion, by the very eating of his very
blessed body as it is eaten in the blessed sacrament.

The. xxii. chapyter.
BUt these heretykes are so set upon myschyefe and wysfulnesse, that they
will not in any wise understand the truth. And how could they understand the
troth, when they will not believe. For (as the prophet Esaie says) but if you
(...). 7.
believe you shall not understand. And therefore these heretykes can not
understand. For they be in the case now that those dyscyples and those Jews
were, with whom our savior found that fault than, in his words next
ensuenge and said: But there be some of you that byseue not / as though he word
say as plainly as I have told it you and as often, yet are there some of you
yt believe it not. But he knew from the beginning who should believe, and who
also should betraye him.

And so knows he like wise now to, who be good and who be naught, and who
shall amend and who shall never amend. Not that his fore knowledge sorceth
them to be naught / but for it is impossyble for them to be naught, but that
his infynite foresyght must needs from the beginning fore se it. And yet when
he forseeth that it so shall be / it shall so be indede, and can not otherwise
be but that it shall so be if he fore se that it shall so be. For he should not
forese that it shall so be, if it so were that in deed it should otherwise be.
But syhewyse as if I se one sit, it must needs be that he sytteth, for else
should I not se him sytte / and that therefore it well follows I se him sytte:
ergo it must needs be that he sytteth. And yet my syghte forces him not to
sytte / nor of that argument the consequent proposycyon of his nature
necessary but contingent / though of the tone proposycyon inferred upon the
the other, the consequency, or consecucyon be necessary. So being presupposed
that god forseeth such a (...) whyth he should not forese but if the thing should
be, yet his fore syghte no more forces the person that does it in the thing
that is yet to come, than my syghte forces him to sytte whom I se sit / of
whom no man can say but that he must needs sit in the while in which he will
presuppose that I se him sit.

And therefore because his preseyence and his providence, forced them not to
continue in their wylfulnes to their dampnacyon / he puts the^ onys again
in remembrance of the means whereby they may void yt wylfull ignorance and
infrdelyte and thus he says unto them:

Therefore I have told you all ready, that no man can come to me but if it be
given of my father.

Think not says saint Crysostom (...). (...) 46 (...).
upon these words, that every man to whom the father gives it, has it as by
way of a special pryuylege / so that they yt have it not given them la cke it
only therefore, because god will not give it them. God(says S. Chrysostom)
will gladly give it the^, if they would not by their own delynge make them
self vnwurthy to receive it. And therefore says saint Cyryll upon the same
words, that those that among the Jewys lived well and were of good
condycyons, had the faith given them and came to Christ. But they that were stu
berne, arrogant, malycyouse, and wylfull, as were the scrybes and the pharyseys
and the styffenecked bysshoppes they let them self from the gift of faith.

This gift of faith without the help of god can not be had / nor no man can
come to the sone but if the Aug. in (...) 26. (...).
father draw him. And whom he draws, and whom he draws not, and why him,
and why not him, let us not seek nor search as saint Austayne says if we will
not err.

But yet that he rejects no man that will seek for his soul health, but
rather calls upon to be sought upon, that does the scripture well witness,
where god said him self, (...) I stand at the door knocking, if any man
hear my voice and open me the door, I will go in to him and suppe with him and
he with me. And the prophet Esaie says, Seek you Esaie. 55.
our lord while he may be founden. Call you upon him while he is nere. Let
the wicked man leave his way, and the vnrightuouse man leave his deuyces, and
let him turn to our lord and he will have pytie upon him. For he is great
in forgiveness. Our savior says him self Matthew. 7
also. Ask and you shall have. Seek and you shall find. Knock and you shall
be let in. And finally that no man should take these words of our savior,
that no man can come to him but if it be given him of the fa there, and these
words of his also, No man can come to me but if my father (...) him, that no
man I say should so take these words in such a presumptuose way of eleccyo^,
that wenynge he were drawyn into such a felyng faith that could never fail
and so should as Tyndale teaches, make him self so sure of his own salvation
by his sure and infallyble eleccyon, that he should stand out of all fear and
wax slothful: ye scryp (...) cries, Let him that thinks 1. (...). 10
he stands, beware lest he fall. And un the the other side, that no man shold^
upon these words, take that imagi nacyo^ that these heretykes also tech, of
desperate inevitable destyny of dampnacyon, and sytte still and do no good him
self, wenynge that his own devour were in vain, because he felyth not god
any thing draw him: holy saint Austayn (whose words these heretykes for
eleccyon and August. in (...). 27 in (...).
destynye against the (...) of mannys fre will most lap for them) byddeth every
man for all their babeling if yt be not drawn pray god to draw ye.

And therefore to that intent did (...) savior Christ put them again in mind
of that he had said before, yt they could not come to him but if it were
given the^ by his father, because he wold^ yt they (...) for their part labor
to remove ye (...) yt on their own part, let his father to give the^ yt
gift. And that is that they should have less cure and care of their (...)/ the
desire of whose fleshely fyllyng with perishable meat, made the^ angri to here
of ye spiritual fode of his own holy flesh / by the well eating whereof they
might have euerlastrng life.

(...) taught the^ also by those words to perceive (if they would) that Joseph
was not his father. For wha^ (...) said that they could not have that great
gift but of his fader, nor could not come to him but if his fader drew them:
they might well wit he meant not Joseph, but his father of heuyn. And therefore
would he by those words give them warning, that they should leave their
murmuryng, and pray his father give them the grace to believe him.

The. xxiii. chapyter.
BUt where as they should have ta ken this way and walked forward with him, they
took the (...) way / not only the other Jews but many also of his own
discyples, and went away bakward from him, and as ye gospel says walked no
more with him

But though that many of his dis cyples went away from him, because his father
brought them not unto him: yet as him self said before, all that my father
gives me shall come to me / all went not away. His apostles tarried. And yet
among those twelve tarried one false shrew. And in the stead of those dyscyples
yt went away, which were as saint Austayn (...). 10
says about three score and ten / he hose soon after other. iii. score and
ten, whom he sent to preche about as he had sent his twelve apostles before.

But than seeing there were at yt time so few left and so many gone, he said
unto his. xii. apostles, will you be gone to? He neither bode the^ go as though
he would be glad of their going / nor yet bode them abide, as though he had
need of their abydyng but only asked them whyther they would go or not /
sygnifyeng that for all their (...) they were in the liberty of their own fre
will, either to go after the the other / or to abide still with him. Than answered
Simon Peter and said: Lord to whom shall we go. Thou have the words of
everlasting life. And we believe and know that thou art Christ the sone of
god. As though he would say if we love life, to whom should we go fro the? For
only thou have (...) not of life only but also of life ever lasting / for
all thy words and thy doctrine draw men thereto. And we believe, and by bylyef
we know, that thou art Christ the very sone of god. And thereby we know that
thou art not only very man, but also very god. And we perceive well therefore
that thou art the bread that is descen ded from heaven, and that thou shall
ascend thither again, and (...) thou art able and of power to give us that
meruelouse meat of thyn own holy flesh to eat. And that thou so wylt do, we
believe and wot well, because thou so doste promise. And we perceive well yt
thou wylt not give it vsin deed gobbettes that could not avail us / but alive,
and with thine holy spyryte ye fou^tayne of life, whereby thy flesh shall give
us if we will eat it everlasting life, when thou shall resuscytate our bodies
in the last day. But in what meruelouse manner thou wylt give it us to eat,
that haste thou not yet declared us / nor we will not be to boldly curyouse or
inquisytyue of thy meruelouse mystery. But therein abide the time of thine own
determy nacyon, as to whose high heuynly wisdom the season mete and (...) is
open and known, and un known to mortal men. And we will therefore obedyently
receive it and eat it, at what time and in what wise yt thy gracious pleasure
shall be to command us.

When saint Peter as head under Christ of that company, had made this answer,
not only for him self but also for them all, not saying I but we: our lord
to let him se that he was somewhat deceived, and had said more than he could
make good. For one false shrew was there yet still remaining among the twelve
/ whereof. xi. were not ware / our savior therefore said. Have not I chosen you
twelve and of you twelve yet is there one a deuell? This he spoke by Judas
Iskariot the sone of Simon for he it was that should (...) him being one of the
twelve Our lord here good (...) she wed him self not deceived. For though
Judas falsed was unknown to his fellows, yet was it not vnkno we^ to his
master / which though he showed him self not ignorant of his servants
(...) mind, and traytorouse purpose toward his own person (to ward which
purpose as it seems Judas heart had at this time conceived some inclinacyon)
yet had he pacyence with him, and continually did use ye ways to reform and
amend him / never castyng him out, till he clearly cast out him self,
according to the saying of our savior, (...). 6.
He that comes to me I will not cast him out.

The. xxiiii. chapyter.
BUt here do many men (...) not only that our savior would heye him so long
knowing him so false, but also that he would take him to him for his (...) in
the beginning, fore knowing by (...) godhed from the beginning that he would
after be false. And diverse holy doctors hold also, that he was never true nor
good, but naught and false fro the beginning. And in this matter whereof god has
not so fully (...) unto men the certeynte, that we be preasely bounden to the
(...) of either other part / every man is at lybertye to believe whyther part
that him self thinks most lykely by natural reason and scripture.

And therefore though some good holy men and saints have thought that Judas was
never good, but yt our savior took him to his apostle, and so kept him in all
his masyee still, for thaccomplysshement of the great mystery of his passion,
well vsyng thereby ye evil of man, as (...) evil uses the goodness of god: yet
thinks me that as Theophylactus says, and saint Cyrill, and saint
Chrysostom (...). 4. ca. 30 in (...). (...). (...).
to, Judas was ones very good when our lord did chese him for his apostle, and
was at that time geuyn unto Christ by his father. For proof whereof that godly
cunning (...) M. (...), well brings in ye (...).
words of our savior him self, saying to his father a little after his
(...). 17
maundye finished: Them that thou haste given unto me I have kept, and none of
them has perysshed but the (...) of perdycyo^. Which he meant by Judas being
than yet alive in body by nature, but deed in soul by dedely sin. Him our
lord took unto him for his apostle while he was good / and not of the comen
sort of good men but also very special good as these holy doctors do divine
and guess.

And though Christ foresaw the wrechednes that he would after fall to: yet
would he not forbere ye right order of justice, but take him in such degree for
the time, as his present goodness of good congrue^s deserved For being at that
time more mete for thoffyce of an apostle tha^ another man / if Christ should
have rejected him as unworthy and unmeet, for the fawt yt him self knew he would
after do, to ward which fawte he was at yt time nothing minded: tha^ should he
have reproched him at such time as he was not worthy to be reproched. And than
were it some what like, as if a man because he makes him self very sure that
his wife and his chylderne will one time or other not fail to dysplease him
afterward at some one time or other, be angry therefore with the^ all, and
(...) them and beat them before. Our savior therefore when Judas was very good,
after such rate of goodness as is in mortal men, took him and promoted him
to the office and dygnyte of his own apostle after that order of justice / by
which he re wardeth one man above another after the rate of their merytes, and
yet every man of them all far above al his merytes.

Now when he was afterward through couetyce waxed naught / yet our lord kept
him still, and would not by taking his office from him dysclose his secret
falsed, and put him to shame / but used many other means to mende him, and
keep there with the honestye of his name / not lettynge to procure his
amendeme^t on his part though he well knew the wreche would never amend
upon his part.

But like wise as though a man have an incurable syknes, it yet becomes the
physycyon all the time that he lives therwyth, to do his part still to ward
the curing thereof: so bycame it our saunour to do it as he did, and not to
leave of or slake his goodness to ward the cure and amen dement of the mannys
incurable malice.

For though Judas was with all that goodness of Christ used unto him, not only
nothing the better, but also very far the worse, and fell far the deper
into death and dampna cyon: yet sith there came of his traytorouse delynge none
harm, but unto. Crist whose goodness was for our well very glad to suffer it,
and unto the traitor him self and such other as wylfully would deserve it:
it had been neither right nor reason, that for to save them from hell that needs
would walk in to it, he should have left any of his goodness and sufferaunce
undone, whereby he procured the saluacyo^ of so many thousands as should be
saved by his byt ter passion.

And much more reason it was, yt our savior should have respect and regard /
to procure the bliss of those that should be saved, than to care for the pain
of those that should be dampened. For it had been (as it seems) not consonaunt
unto right, if our lord should for avoiding of their pain yt for all his
calling back to the contrary would yet wyllingly ru^ne forth into dampnacyon:
have kept away the reward of bliss fro them yt would with his help deserve it.

And therefore our lord as I say took Judas and made him his apostle, being
very good / and after had long pacyence with him while he was very naught,
(...) that through his imedicable malice he fell of him self, and so was cast
out and perysshed. But by his peryshynge our sa uyour lost not but wan. For of
his evil came there much more good, and his own place of apostleshyp was
(...). 1.
afterward fulfilled with saint Mathy.

And in like wise the other dyscyples that departed now, which were (as saint
Chrisostom says and as ye Crisosto. hom. 46. in (...).
gospel seems also to say) all that than were present save only his. xii.
apostles, and were as saint Austayn says in number above three score and ten:
all they lost them self when they wyllyngly lost their savior.

And he found better to succeed in their places. For soon after in the Luce.
10
stead of those three score and ten, he chose other three score and ten dyscy
ples as I before showed you, whom Math. 10
he sent about to preche as he had sent his. xii. apostles before.

And unto Judas yet at this present time he gave a secret warnyng that he
might well wit that his noughtynesse was known, which thing might make
him the less bold to sin / and yet he dysclosed him not openly, because he
would not shame him, and thereby make him happily shameless, as many such
wreches wax / and after that, sin the more boldly.

The. xxv. chapyter.
This word also so spoken to Chrisosto. hom. 46. in (...).
all twelve, was (as saint Chri sostom says and saint Cyrill both) a
meruefouse goodly warnyng for them all. These are lo the word of saint Cyrill.
(...). 4. ca. 30 super (...).


Our lord here with sharp words confermyth his apostles and makes (...) the
more dylygent, by puttyng before their eyes the perell of their ruin. For this
he seems to say unto them. O my dyscyples, much need have you to use much
watch and great study about your salvation. The way of perdicyon is very
slyper, and not only wythdraweth a feeble mind from thinking of their fall, by
making them to forgette them self, but also sometime deceyueth the^ by vayn
delectacyon and pleasure that are of mind very fyrme and strong. And that
this tale is true that I now tell you, you may se well prouyd, not by
thensample only of them that are gone abacke, but among your self also that
tarry and dwell still with me. For I have you wot well chosen you twelve as
good, well knowing that in deed you were so. For I was not ignorant / but
being god (as I am) very well knew your hearts.

How be it the devil has deceived one of yon with auaryce, and so pullyd him
away. For a man is a free creature, and may chose his way as he will, either
on the right hand or else on the left if he will.

Our lord therefore makes them all the more vygylant, because that who should
betraye him he does not expres by name. But telling them all in a generalty /
yt one of them should work such wickedness, he made them all stand in fear.
And by that horror and dread, lyfted them up to more vygylaunt dylygence.

Here have you herd good reders the words of saint Cyrill. Now shall ye
somewhat here what says laynt Crysostome.

when saint Peter said, we believe: our savior not causeles, out of the in
(...).
number of them excepted Judas and said: have not I chosen you twelve and one
of you is a devil. This thing he said to remove the traitor larre from his
malice. And where he saw that nothing did avail him / yet he went about still
to do well for him And se the wisdom of Christ / for neither would he bewraye
him, nor let him lurk vntowched. The one, lest he should have waxed shameless
and swear nay / the the other lest wenynge that none were ware, he should be the
bolder in myschyefe.

And afterward this in effect he says. It is not the custom of god by force
to make me^ good whether they will or no nor in his eleccion he (...) not
folks by vyolence, but by good aduyce and mocyon. And that ye may well
perceive that his calling is no constraynt of necessyte, meny whom he calls
do wyllyngly for all his calling perysh. And therefore it is euydent, that in
our own will is the power set to chose whyther we will be saved or lost. By
these admonyssyons therefore, let us labor to be sober and vigylant. For if
Judas which was one of the number of that holy company of thapostles, he that
had opteyned so great a gift, he that had done miracles (for Judas him self
was sent among other to cure the lepres, and raise up deed men to life) after
that he was ones fallen in to the grievous disease of auaryce: neither the
benefits, nor the gifts, nor the company of Christ, nor the service, nor the
wasshyng of the let, nor the felosshyppe of his own board, nor the trust in
keeping of the purse, any thing auayled him / but all these things were with
him a passage and away to his ponyshement.

Lo good reders, here have ye herd both by saint Cyrill and saint Chrysostom,
that our savior gave that secret warnyng of Judas falshed, and said that one
of the twelve was adeuyll, to the intent that all folk of what holiness so
ever they were, such stand ever in dread and fere / and not do as these
heretykes teache, upon boldness of any feeling faith or fynall eleccyon, presume
them self so sure of salvation / but that whyse Judas fell after to naught yt
was onys a holy apostle, there shall no feeling faith nor proud hope upon
fynall eleccyon, set any man in his own heart so sure, but that with his
good hope he shall all way couple some fear, as a brydyll and abytte to
refrain and pull him back, lest he fall to myschyefe, and follow Judas in
falshed, and wax a devil as Christ called him. Which name our savior gave
him not without good cause For yt deuyllys servant (says saint Cyril) is a
devil to. For like wise as he yt is by godly virtues joined unto god, is one
spyryt with god / so he that is with deuylysshe vices joined with the devil,
is one spyryte with him.

And therefore good readers, he yt in such plyght receives the blessed
sacrament without purpose of amen dement, or without the faith and by lyefe,
that the very flesh and blood of Christ is in it: he receives as saint
Austayne says notwythstandyng his noughtynesse ye very flesh and blood of
Christ, the very price of our redempcio^. But he receives them to his harm as
Judas did, and eats and drynketh his own judgment and dampnacyon (as says
saint 1. (...). 11
Poule) because he discerns not our lords body. But who so does on the
the other side (which I beseech god we may all do) cast out the devil and his
wurkes by the sacrament of penance and than in the memory all and remembrance
of Christ's passion, receive that blessed sacrament / with tree we faith and
devotion with all honor and wurshyppe, as to the reverence of Crystes blessed
person present in it apperteyneth: they that so receive the blessed sacrament,
verily receive and eat the blessed body of Christ / and that not only
sacrame^tally, but also effectually / not only the figure, but the thing also
/ not only his blessed flesh in to their bodies, but also his holy spyryte
into their souls, by par tycypacyon whereof he is incorporate in them and they
in him and be made lively members of his mystical body the congregation of all
saints / of which their souls shall (if they persevere) attain ye fruit and
fruicyo^ clean and pure onys purged after this transytory life / and their
flesh also shall Christ resuscytate unto the same glory, as him self has
promised. Of which his gracyous promise, his high grace and goodness so
vouche save to make us all perteners through the merytes of his bitter passyo^.
Ame^.

And thus end I good readers my first book, conteynyng thexposycyon of those
words in the syxte cha pyter of saint John^, whereby you may both perceive by
these minds of holy saints, whose words I bring forth, the truth of our
faith concerning the blessed body and blood of Christ verily eaten in the
blessed sacrament, and may also perceive and controlle the wyly false folyshe
exposycyon of master Masker to the contrary, such as have his book, and they
be not a few. And yet that all men may se that I neither blame him for naught,
nor bylye him, I shall in my secunde book she we yous as I promised, some part
of his fawte both in falshed and in folly, and his own words therwyth.

Here endethe the first book.
The secunde book
The. i. chapyter.
I have good reders i^ my first book here before perused you thexposicyon of
all that part of ye syxte chapyter of saint John^, which master Masker has
expowned you before. And in the beginning of this exposicyo^, I have not
brought you forth the word of any of the old expositours, because yt (as I
suppose) mine (...) will not much (...) tend with me for so far. But
afterward concerning those words in which our savior expressly speaks of
the geuyng of his very flesh and blood to be verily eaten and dro^ken, there
have I brought you forth such authorytees of old holy doctors and saints, yt
ye may well se both that I feign you not the matter but expowne it you right /
and also ye se thereby clearly, that master Masker expowneth it wrong. For
though a man may dyuersly expoune one text and both well: yet when one
expowneth it in one true manner, of a false purpose to exclude another troth
that is in that writing by the spyryte of god (...) and immedyately meant, his
exposvcyon is false all though every word were true, as master Mas kers is
not.

And therefore sith you se mine ex posycion proved you by excellent holy men,
and by their plain words, ye perceive that the words of our savior him self
do prove against all these (...), the catholyke faith of Crystes catholyke
church very faithful and tree we, concerning the very flesh of Christ verily
eaten in the blessed sacrament / of which eating master Masker would with his
exposycyon make men so mad, as to wene yt Christ spoke nothing at all: now I
say by this exposycyo^ of mine ye se his exposycyo^ avoided clearly for naught,
and all the matter clear upon our part, though no man wrote one word more.

And yet will I for all that, for yt ferther declaracyon of master Mas kers
handelynge, she we you some pieces of thexposycyo^ in special, by which ye
may clearly se what credence may be given to the man, either for honesty, or
learning, virtue, (...) or troth.

The. ii. chapyter.
IN the beginning of the second lefe of his book, these are master Maskers
words.

Consider what this meat is which he bad the^ here prepare and seek fore,
saying: work take pains and seek for that meat etc. and thou (...) se it no
another meat than the bylyefe in christ.

Wherefore he concludes that this meat so often mencyoned is faith. Of the
which meat says the prophet, the iufte lives. Faith in him is therefore the
meat which christ prepares and dresseth, so purely powderynge and spycyng it
with spyrytual allegoryes in all this chapyter following, to give us
euerlasiynge life through it.

I will not lay these words to his charge as heresye / but I wylbe bold by
his license to note in them a little lack of wit, and some good store of
folly. For though a man may well and with good reason, call faith a meat of
mannys soul: yet is it great folly to say, that the meat that Christ speaks
of here is (as master Masker says it is) none other meat but faith.

For master Masker may plainly se, and is not I suppose so poor blind, but
that he sees well in deed that the meat which Christ speaks of here, is our
savior Christ him self. Which thing he so plainly speaks, that no man can
mysse to per ceyue it / when he says, I am my self the bread of life. And when
he says, I am the lively bread that am descen ded from heuyn, he that eats
of this bread shall live for ever. And wha^ he says also. That ye meat should
be his own flesh (which promise he performed after at his maundye) which
thing he told them plain in these words, And the bread which I shall give
you is my flesh. And he that eats my flesh and drynketh my blood, has
everlasting life, and I shall resuscytate him in the last day. And when he
said, My flessh is verily meat.

Thus you se good readers how often and how plainly that he declares that the
meat which he speaks of here, is him self. And now says master Masker
very solemynely, and with authoryte byddeth every man mark it well and
consider it, that ye meat that Christ speaks of here is nothing else but
(...).

And upon what color says may ster Masker (...) because (says he) that our
lord bode them labor and wurke for the meat that would not peryshe but abide
into everlasting life / and afterward told them that the wurk of god by which
they should wurke and labor for that meat, was nothing else but faith and
bylyef in him.

First in this construccyon master Masker lies very large. For though Christ
said, that to believe in him was the wurke of god / he said not (as master
Masker makes it) that nothing else was the (...) of god but only bylyefe.

But now suppose that Christ had said as master Masker would make it seem, that
is to wit that the wurke of god were nothing else but the bylyefe: yet ye se
well good readers that Christ in saying that the bylyefe in him is the wurke by
which they shall wurke to get the meat, says that the bylyefe is the mean
to get the meat, and not that the bylyefe is the meat.

But master Masker because yt bylyefe is the way to this meat, therefore he
calls the bylyefe the meat / as wisely as though he would call the kings
street Westmynster church, because it is the way (...) if he come from charing
cross And because men must spyrytually eat this meat with faith: therefore he
calls the faith the meat as wy sely as if he would, because he eats his
meat with his mowth, therefore call his mowth his meat. what wit has this man?

But now will master Masker wax angry with my words, and call me M. mokke as
he does onys or twyse in his book.

But now good readers I will not adjure you by godde holy names to judge
justly / but even only desire you that in way of good company, that you will
say but even indyfferently. Were it not wene you great pytye that a man should
mokke master Masker, when every fool may perceive him in so great a matter
write so wisely?

And yet you may se that I dele with him very gentylly. For in this point
wherein by co^traryeng of Cristes own words he writes plain heresye / I
minyshe his borde^ of that odiouse crime / and because the matter in this place
so serves me, do cover the both of his (...) heresye, with this pretty plaster
of his pleasant frenzy

And yet I wene the man has so little honesty, that he will never can me thank
for my curtesye / specially because that (as far as I can se) the man had
lever confess him self an heretyke, than be proved a fool.

And that appears well in this. For this little scabbe of his folly he labo
reth somewhat to hyde and cover, so that a man must pull of the clowte ere he
can spy the boche. But as for ye boch of his cancred heresies with out any
clowt or plaster he lays out abroad to show, to beg withal among the
blessed brethren as beggars lay their fore legs out in fight that lie a
beggynge a frydays about saint savior and at ye. Sauy gate.

But as for raylynge against ima ges, purgatory, and (...) to sayn tes, and
against the holy cano^ of the mass: all this he takes for tryfles / and would
we should reken all these heresies of his for points well and suffycyently
proved by that that he goth so boldly forth on biyond them and denies the
blessed body of Christ it self in the blessed sacrament to.

And where as he not only mokketh and iesteth against the old (...) and
saints of (...) catholyke church, but against our savior him self in his
holy sacrament to: yet the sage sad ercnest holy man all made of grauite,
sadness, and seueryte, must him self be reave rently reasoned with / and may
have no mokke of his, matched with no merry word of mine in no manner wise.

But yet like as if a right great man would wantonly walk a mummynge, and
dysguyse him self, and with nyce appareyle dyssemble. his personage, and with
a fond visour hid and cover his visage, he must be content to be tau^ted of
every good fellow that he meteth, as merely as him self list to ieste with
them: so till master Masker here put of his maskers visour, and show forth
his owue venerable visage, that I may se him such an honorable personage, as it
may become him to say to me what he list, and me to requyte his mockes with
no merry word in this world, but stand still demurely and make him low
curtesy again, I will not let in ye mean time, while I wot nere what he is,
and while his wytteles writing makes men wene he were a wild gose, to be so
bold and homely with his maystershyp (as sorry as I am for him wha^ he plays
the blasphemouse best) to laugh yet and make merry with him where I se him
play the fool.

Yet will I now let pass his re pugnaunce, another folly of his. For if ever
he defend his folly yt I have showed you / than shall he be feign to declare
his repugnaunce him self. And therefore I leave that point for him self, that
in defendyng his folly he may show his repugnaunce / and so for defense of a
syngle folly, prove him self thryes a fool, first in writing folly, secundly in
writing repugnaunce, thyrdly to be so folysshe (...) in defense of that one
folly, to bring in the totherto.

Making therefore for this time no senger tale of his folyes, which would make
mine answer over long to bring them in all / let us se some pyece of his
fruytefull exposycyon.

The. iii. chapyter.
IN the second lefe these are his words,

I am the bread of life, and who so come to me that is to say, who so is
gryffed and joined to me by faith, shall never honger, that is who so believe in
me is satissyed. It is faith therefore that stanncheth this honger and thyrste
of the soul. Faith it is therefore in Christ that fylleth our hungry hearts, so
that we can desire no another if we ones thus eat and drynk him by faith / that
is to say if we believe his flesh and body to have been broken, and his blood
shed for out sins, for tha^ are our sowles satysfyed and we be iustyfyed.

The word of Christ good reader with which he begins, is well and fully
fulfilled, if it be vndersta^ den as I have before declared, that is to wit,
that who so come onys by well workynge faith, and perseueraunce therein, unto
the meat that is Christ, and attain the possessy o^ and fruicion of him in
bliss, he shall never hunger nor thyrste after.

And bysydes this, diverse good holy doctors expoune these words of yt eating
of our savior in the blessed sacrament also.

But surely I believe that it will be very hard for master Masker to veryfye
the words of his holy ex posycyon / ye scant of some such piece thereof as
seems at the first syghte well laid as where he says yt faith so fylleth
our hungry hearts, and so stauncheth the hunger and thurst of our soul, that
we be satysfyed.

For I suppose that men are not sa tisfied here, neither with faith alone, nor
with faith and hope and cheryte to / but yet they hunger and thirst Eccle. 24.
still. For as our savior says, He that drynketh me shall yet thyrst still,
and long sore as he drynketh him in grace, so to drink him in glory.

But than te^pereth master Mas ker his words of never thurstyng, with that
that he says, that if we eat and drink god by faith, we shall ne uer hunger
nor thyrste / but we be satisfied / for the faith so fylleth our hungry
hartys, that we can desire none other thing, if we ones thus eat him and
drink him by faith. And than what it is to eat him and drink him by faith,
he forthwith declares as for the whole sum and ex posycyon of faith and
says.

That is to say if we believe his flesh and his body to have been broken, and
his blood shed for our sins, for than are our sowles satysfyed and we be
iustyfyed.

Lo here youse good readers that he says that who so byleueth this, here is
all that needs. For he that thus byleueth is iustyfied, and eats and
drynketh Christ, and so his soul satysfyed / because he that so eats him
ones, can never after hunger nor thyrst. And why? For he can desire none other
thing

First I wene that all men are not agreed, that he yt longs for none other
thing, is not a thurst / if he long still for more of the same. For if a man
drink apynt of ale / though he found him self so well content therewith, that
he do not desire neither bear, wine nor water / yet if his appe tyte be not so
fully satisfied, but that he would feign of the same ale, drynk a quarte more,
some man would say he were a dry soul and were a thyrste again.

But now if this man meant any good in this matter, and would say yt who so so
eats god as he has him well incorporated in him, shall so have his hunger
and his thirst slaked, that he shall not hunger and thirst after the pleasure
of his body, nor after the goods and riches; nor after the pomp and pride of
this wreched world: I would have suffered him go forth with his exposicyo^, and
not have interrupted it. And yet it could not (ye wot well) have well and
fully served for the text, sith the text is, he shall never hunger nor
thirst, which signyfyeth a taking away of desire and longing. And by this
exposicyon though there be taken a way the desire and longyng for other
things / yet remains there a desire and longing for more and more of the
same.

But yet I would as I say have let it pass by and wynke thereat, if he meant
none harm therein. But now comech he after and declares by ensample, what he
meneth by this his saying, that he that eats and drynketh god by byleuynge
that he dyed for our sins, shall thurst and hunger for none other. For he
says, He shall desire none other, he shall not seek by night to lone another
before whom he would lay his gryefe, he shall not run wanderyng here and
there to seek deed stocks and stones.

(...) good readers here is the end of all this holy mannys purpose / for which
he draws ye word of Christ from the very thing that Christ prin cypally spoke
of, unto another spyry tuall understanding, in turnyng the meat that Christ
spoke of, that is to wit the meat of his own blessed person, his godhed,
and his manhed both, in to the meat of faith, to the intent that under the
pretexte of praysyng ye true faith, he might bring in slily his very false
wreched heresies, by which he would have no prayour made unto saints, nor
their pilgry mages sought, nor honor done them at their images.

It is evident and plain that our savior meant in this place to speak unto the
Jews, neither against images nor saints / but rather against the sensual
appetyte yt they had to the fillynge of their belyes with bodily meat / the
inordinate desire whereof made them the less apt and mete for spiritual fode.
And there (...) he bode them that they should less care for that peryshable
meat, and labor and wurk to win faith by prayour, and by faith to come to
him. And because they so myche hated and fered hunger and thirst, he would
give them him self for their meat his very flesh and blood, ve cily here to
eat, not dead but quick with soul and godhed therewith in this world /
which if they would well eat here, with a well wurkyng faith, he would give
them the same, so in another world, that than should they never have thirst
nor hunger after.

And he meant not that they should never when they had ones received him,
thirst nor hunger after in this present world / in which byside that they
must both hunger and thirst, or else be ever eating and drynking to prevent
their hunger and thirst, bysyde this I say they shall hunger and thirst
still after god, if they be good.

Now if men will say that the pain of that hunger and thirst is taken away
with hope, which greatly gladeth the heart: surely they that neither hunger nor
thurst for heuyn, nor care how long they be thense so that they may make merry
here the while, and yet have an hope that they shall have heaven to wha^ they go
hens, they feel in their faint hope neither great pleasure nor pain. But he
that hops well of heaven, and not only hops after it, but also (...)
thyrsteth for it, as did saint Poule when he Philip. 1.
said I long to be dyssolued, that is to have my soul losed and departed fro
my body and to be with Christ / such a man so, as he finds pleasure in his
hope, so fyndeth he pain in the delay of his hope. For as Salamon Prouer. 13
says. The hope that is dyffered and delayed, payneth and afflycteth the
soul. But when men shall with (...) eating of this meat of Christ's blessed
person, make the^ mete to eat it, and shall eat it by very fruicyon in heuyn
/ than all though they shall never be fastidyouse or weary thereof, but as they
shall ever have it, so shall ever desire it(so that of yt state may be said
also, he that drynketh me shall yet thyrste) yet because they shall not only
always desire it, but also always have it, and so by the contynuall
everlasting having thereof their everlasting desire everlastingly fulfilled,
their desire shall ever be without any gryefe and pain, and ever full of
everlasting pleasure / so that of yt state only the prophet Dauyd says: I
shall be saciate or satysfied, Psalm. 16.
when thy glory shall appear.

And this meant here our savior Christ / and not that a man shall by his
faith be fully satysfyed in this wreched world, and never hunger nor thyrste
after here, as master Masker makes here by his exposycyon, in turnyng ye
saturyte of heuyn into a saturyte in this life / and turnynge the very meat of
Christ's blessed person, into the only bylyefe of Christ's bitter passion /
and than brings all in conclusyon to thauansynge of his heresye against the
blessed saints / as though Christ in those words had meant to speak against
the honourynge of his saints, wherewith he was so well content, yt Math. 29
he promised saint Mary Mawdeleyn a perpetual honor in earth, for her devotion
toward him in bestowynge her costely glass of oyntement upon him / and
promised his Math. 19
twelve apostles the honor of.xii. seats, to sytte with him in judgment
upon the world, for the dishonor and penury that they should sustain for
him before in the world.

The. iiii. chapyter.
ANd se now good reader also, how myche pestylent poison master Masker has
in this pyece of his exposycyon put here, by this one syllable onys.

For it is not enough to him to say, that who so eat Christ by faith shall
never hunger (which words he might expoune by perseuerau^ce and abiding
still with him after his onys coming to him, as Christ meneth by his) but he
says who so come to him by faith onys, he shall never hunger nor thyrst. And
yet this word onys, is not there in the text of Crystes words, but added by
master Masker in his gloss.

And yet if master Masker were a good catholyke man, I would not myche mark
his word, onys.

But sith he she weth him self well, that he is of master Tindals sect, or is
peradventure master (...) him self, one of whose false heresyesis, that who
so have ones ye faith can never after fall therfrom, nor never fall after into
dedly sin: therefore I can not let master Maskers onys, this onys pass
vnmarkyd by me, by which he says / that who so come onys to Christ by faith,
that is to say says he, who so believe onys that Crist suffered his passion for
our sins, he shall never hunger nor thyrste / but that is he says to be
understood that he shall never after desire none other.

But now would I wht of master Masker onys again, what he means by this
word none other.

If he mean that no man that onys byleueth that Christ suffered (...) for us,
shall after at any time desire any other savior, bysyde yt he says one false
heresye in that word onys. (For that faith may be onys had and afterward
lost again, as testyfye (...). 6.
not only all holy doctors and Roma. 11. 1. (...). 10
the catholyke faith, but the plain scripture to) he has in those words I
say bysyde that false heresye, a very false wyly folly. For the catholyke
church of chrystcndome which he to wcheth in prayenge to saints and going in
pylgrymages, do seek no saint as their savior / but only as them whom their
savior loves, and whose intercessyon and prayour for them he wylbe content to
here, and who^ for his sake he would they should honor, and whom while for his
sake they do honor, the honor that is done them for his sake, specially
redowndeth to him self / as him self says, he that hereth them hereth him,
(...). 10
and he that dyspiseth them dyspyseth him, and in like wise he that wurshyppeth
them for his sake wurshyp peth him.

Now if master Masker will say that by these (...), who so onys byleueth that
Christ dyed for us, shall never after desire none other: he meneth that he
shall so mind and desire ever after only Christ, that he shall not hunger nor
thyrst nor desire after that any other thing but god. Than sith master Masker
in this book of his, asks me so many questyons, and says so often, I ask
master More this: master Masker must of reason give M. More leave to ask
Master masker some questyons again.

Now might I ask him ye se well, whyther he that has had onys that bylyefe,
should never after in such wise be an hungered, that he should desire his
dinner. But than would master masker call me master Mokke, and say that it were
but a scoffing questyon. And yet out of all questyon that same scoffing
questyon would quyte overthrow his ernest exposycyo^. But now because I will not
anger him, I will let that scof fyng question go, and I will ask him now
another manner thing `a thing of yt wayght and grauite, that it wayeth some
sowlys down unto ye deep pyt of hell. For if master masker be master
Tyndale, than will I ask him whyther he being a priest, desy red none other
thing but only god, when synnys yt he said he had onys that bylyefe, he has
being a priest broken his promise made onys to god and gone ofter than onys a
wooing.

And if master Masker be master (...) Joy / than would I ask him whyther that
after that bylyefe onys had, he desired nothing but god, when being a
priest he brake his promise to god / and wedded a wydowe, and by such wedding
never made her wife, but made her a prestys harlotte.

If master Maysker be neither of these twayn, yet sith what so ever he be, he
is a dyscyple of Luther and (...) Huyskyn both (as contraryouse as they be both
each of them to other) I shall ask him than, whyther both his masters being
both professed frerys, and having both vowed perpetual chastyte to god, did
after that faith onys had, never after desire any other thing but only god,
not than when they brake both their solemn vowys made unto god, and ran out
of relpgyone and wedded, the tone a single woman, the the other a nonne, and made
them frerys harlottes both? did not than friar Luther and friar Huyskyn both
contrary to master Maskers words, desire another, and each of them go seek by
night to love another, before whom he would lay his gryefe? what answer shall
master Masker make M. More to this? he must either confess against his own
exposicyon, that after that bylyefe had onys, his own masters the
archeretykes them self, thyrsted in the desire of some other thing beside god,
or else must he fall to blasphemy and call a frerys harlot god, or say that
for goddys sake they wedded, and than for his sake they wedded against his
will, or else afferme finally that the masters of his faith had never the
faith yet, not the self same faith that they teache. And why should any man
than be so mad to give ear to such beretykes, and believe their faythlesse
talys?

The. v. chapyter.
NOw handelynge his exposycyon and his doctrine of faith not only thus falsely
but also thus folyshely to, as ye do now perceive: yet as though he had
wonderful wisely declared some high heavenly mysteryes that never man had herd
of before, in ye fourth lefe he bosteth his great cunning in co^paryson of
mine and says.

Had master more (...) understood (...) sentence, who so believe in me has
life everlasting, and known what Paul with the other (...) preched,
especyally Paul being a year and an half among the Lorinthyes, determining
not neither presumynge, not to have known any other thing to be preched them
(as him self says) then (...) Christ, and that he was crucyfyed: had M. More
vnderstoden this point, he should never thus (...) Christ and his suffycyent
scryptures, (...) have so belyed his euangelystes and holy apostles, as to faye
they wrote not all things necessary for our salvation, but left out things
of necessyte to be believed / making gods holy testament insuffycyent and
imperfyte, first reveled unto our fathers, written efte sonys by Moses and
then by his prophytes, and at the last written both by his holy euangelystes
and apostles to. But turn we to (...) again and let More mock still and lie
to.

Had master Masker understood the self same short sentence of Christ yt he
speaks of, and had master masker well understood also the the other short
sentence of saint Poule yt he now to wcheth / and after those two textes well
understood, had looked upon his own book again: he would rather have eaten his
own book but if he be shameless, tha^ ever have let any man se his false folly
for shame.

For first as for the first text to wchyng the bread and the bylief, his false
and folysh ha^delyng ye perceive more than plain, in yt he says it is nothing
but faith, where Christ says it is him self.

Now the place that he to wcheth of saint Pouse in his first pystle to the
Corynthyes, I marvel me much to se the madness of this Mas ker, that
brings it forth for his pur pose here. For as you se, he meneth to make men
wene, that by that place it were proved against my confutacyon, that thapostles
left no necessary thing unwritten.

Now of any other apostle ye se well he brings not one word for yt purpose
of his, nor of saint Pouse neither, but this one place / which place sith he
brings forth for the proof of their heresye, that there is nothing
necessaryly to be byleued but if it may be proved by plain and euydent
scripture: it appears plain that master Masker there mysse takes saint
Pouse, and weneth that he preched nothing to them of Crist but only his
passion. For else he might notwithstanding the words of that place, preche
to them diverse things of Christ by mouth, and leave it with them by tradycyon
without writing to, which neither him self nor none of his fellows never wrote
any time after. And of troth so he did, as I have proved at length in my work
of Tyndals confutacyon. Of which things one is among diverse other, the
puttyng of the water with the wine in ye chalyce which thing Christ did at
his maundy when he did instytute the blessed sacrament / and after he taught
the order thereof to saint Pouse him self by his own holy mouth / and saint
Poule so taught it again to ye Corynthyes by mouth, and left it them first
by tradycion without any writing at all. And when he wrote unto the^ afterward
thereof, he wrote it rather (as it well appears) upon a certain occasyon to
put them in re membrau^ce of their dewty in doing dew reverence to it, because
it is the very blessed body of god, than in that place to teache them the maser
and the form of consecratyng the sacrament. For he had taught them that myche
more fully before by mouth, than he does there by that writing. For as ye wot
well though he tell the^ there what it is when they drink it, that is to wit
the blood of our lord: yet he tells them not there whereof they shall
consecrate it. For he neither names wine nor water. And yet says in the end
that at his coming to them again, he will set an order in all other things.
And where will master Masker show me all those thing wryte^, and prove it to
be al (...)

But here you se how madly may ster Masker understands yt place of saint
Pouse, when he takes it in that wise, that he would thereby prove us that we
were bounden to believe no more but that Christ dyed for us.

And of troth you se that speking of faith before, this is his very
conclusyon. In which when I read it and confuted it here now before: yet
marked I not therein so myche as I do now. For though he said there, if we onys
eat him and drink him by faith, that is to say if we hyleue his flesh and
body to have been broken, and his blood shed for our synnys, than are our
sowlys satysfyed and we be instyfyed: I marked not as I say that he meant so
madly as all men may now se he meneth, that is to wit that men be bounden to
believe nothing else, but that Christ was crucyfyed and dyed for our sins.
Master masker makes us a pretty short creed now.

But that he thus meneth in deed, he now declares plainly, when he would
prove against me that no necessary thing was left unwritten, by those words
of saint Poule by which he writes to the Counthyes, 1. Corin. 2
that he preched nothing among them but Jesus Christ and that he was
crucyfyed.

And as master Masker mysse understands those words of saint Poule: so I
perceive that long be fore master Masker was borne, there were some such
other folys that mysse took those words after ye same fond fasshyon than /
and therefore affermed yt aduowtry was no dedely sin / as these folyshe folk
afferme now yt it is no dedely sin for a friar to wedde a nonne. And there
argument was that if auowtry had been dedely sin, saint Poule would have
preched that point unto the Corynthyes. But he preched as him self says in his
pystle nothing unto them but Christ and him crucyfyed / and theruppon they
concluded yt auowtry was no dedely sin.

But saint Austayne answers those folys and this fool to, that he preched not
only Christ's crucyfyxion. For than had he left his resurreccyon vnpreched,
and his ascen cion to, which both we be bounden as well to believe as his
crucyfyxion, and many other things mo beside. And therefore as saint Austayne
says to preche Christ, is to preche both every thing that we must be bound
to believe, and also every thing that we must be bounden to do to come to
Christ. And not as those folys and this fool techeth, that we be justified if
we believe no more but only that Christ was crucified and dyed for our synnys.

And when master Masker says yt by affermyng any necessary point to be left
unwritten in the scripture I make gods holy testament insuf fycyent and
imperfect, for all that it was first reveled unto our fathers, and efte written
by Moses, and than by his prophets, and at last written both by his holy
euangelystes and apostles to: to this I say that gods testament is not
insufficyent nor imperfyte, though some necessary things be left out of the
writing. For I say that his testament is not the writing only, but all the
whole thing reveled by god unto his church, and resting and remaining
therein, part in writing and part without writing still, as it was all
together first without writing given. And se now good readers the wit of
master Masker in this word of his. For if I make the testament of god
vnperfyt and insuffycyent, because I say yt some necessary points thereof be
not yet written: does not he good readers say and afferme thereby, that it was
all together imperfect and vnsufficyent, all the while that god taught it him
self by his own reuelacyon of spyryte, and that our savior taught it him
self by his own blessed mouth, till Moses and the prophets and thapostles
wrote it with the pen?

And when so ever that master Masker is able to prove that al these things
which we be bounden to by leave more than that Christ dyed for our synnys, are
so fully written by Christ's apostles, that they left none of them all
unwritten: when he shall have proved this, let him than come hardely and bid
master More mock on and lie on to. But now while he says so, so far out
of season: while my work of Tyndalys confutycyon has proved my part so
plainly, that neither him self nor all the heretics of them all shall well
avoid it while they live: now may master More be bold to bid master masker
go mokke on and lie on to.

And this may I now say to master masker the more boldly, sith you se that
he understands not, or else wyllyngly mysconstre weth the place of thapostle
that he brings forth him self, and saint (...) gospel to, and would make us
went that it were enough to salvation, to believe no more but that Christ was
crucyfyed for our synnys. And than should we not need in deed to believe that we
should do penance for our synnys our self, nor to believe the presence of
Christ in the blessed sacrament neither. Which point they would have now taken
for indyfferent, and many necessary points mo. whereof master masker would
take away the necessyte, because saint Poule says he preched nothing to the
Corynthies but Christ and him to be crucyfyed. Which argument of master masker
were not even very strong, all though saint Pouse had at that time preched
them nothing else, because he might than have bygonne with that, and preche
them many mo things after, or send it unto them by writing.

But now would I feign that master masker had gone a little ferther in the
same pystle. For (...) within three lines after it follows, My prechynge was
not among you in persuasyble words of man's wisdom.

these words I lay not against master Masker / for he keeps him self sure
enough for that point, and is ware well enough that he speak no persuasyble
word of man's wise dome. But than says saint Poule ferther. But my prerhynge
was among you in showing of spyryt and of power, to thentent that your faith
should not be in the wisdom of men, but in the power of god.

Here may master Masker se that saint Poule because he taught strange
doctrine, proved his doctrine not by subtle phylosophycall reasonyng, nor by
rethorike and goodly fresh eloquence, but by miracles and the mighty hand of
god.

Now if master Masker therefore wild byleued / reason is that he do as saint
Pouse did, sith he teaches as hard things and as strange to chryste^ men,
and as far against the christen faith as saint Poule and the other apostles
taught either Jews or Paynyms, thrnges hard and strange and far from ye
fashyon of their false persuasion.

For setting aside all the whole hepe of his other heresies: this one that he
sets forth in this pestylent book of his, against our savior him self in
the blessed sacrament, is as strange and as execrable in all good christen
earys, and ever has been synnys Christ's days, as ever was the prechyng of
Christ's godhed among ye gentylys or ye Jews either. And therefore if he will
look to be byleued as saint Poule was: reason is that he do miracles as saint
Poule did.

If he say that he needs not, for he proves his doctrine by scripture:
thereto first we say and say true, yt in his so saying he lies. And bysyde
that we say that though he proved his doctrine by scripture in deed: yet sith
it seems to the whole christen nacyons, that the scrypturs proves not his
part but the contrary, and so have thought so long / therefore as our savior
him self and his apostles after him, which by the scripture proved their part
very truly to the Jews, did yet for all that prove the truth of their such
exposycyon by miracles: so must master masker prove his exposicio^s by
miracles to be true. For else sith our savior though he would not wurke
miracles at every man's bydding, said yet of the Jews, (...). (...)
that if him self had not done among them such wurkes as no man else had
done, their infydelyte should not have been imputed unto them: we may well be
bold to say to master masker, that except he wurke myra cles to, he can of
reason blame no man, that in thexposycyon of holy scripture believes better all
the old holy doctors and saints, and all the hole catholyke church than him.

And therefore while master mas ker would seem to play saint Poule and be an
apostle here, to teache english men a new faith as saint Poule did the
Corynthyes / and than techynge thing as strange and as vncredyble to christen
men, as his were to the Paynims, and can not do miracles for his doctrine as
saint Poule did for his / but has against him for our part such a multitude
of miracles, that for the proof of any one thing there were never showed so
many / and when master Masker instead of miracles proves his exposycions of
scripture so folyshe him self and so false, that to such as mark him well he
may surely seem to mean nothing else but to mokke: we may go forth in the
matter, and let master Masker yet again mokke on still and lie on to.

The. v. chapyter.
IN the third lefe thus he says, And the cause of this your blyndenesse is
(and will not say over hardly to you) that the father has not drawn you into
the knowledge of me or else ye had received me. For all that the father gives
me must come to me.

Master maskers exposycyon of these words (I will not say over hardely to
him) is I promise you good readers very bare, and left of so shortly, and
ha^deled so slenderly, that his own friends could here scant think any
other, tha^ that lever than he wold^ lay hardely to ye Jews charge the fawte
of their own infidelyte, he had lever lay it in the neck of the father of
heaven, and there leave it.

Those words and all the word of Christ, in which is any hardness, his
exposycyon so smothely walks over them, that he gives no light unto the
understanding of them no more than if he never touched them.

The brethren can not bear that my writynge is so long. But surely it is no
maystry for a man to be short, that can find in his heart to do as master
masker does, leave all the hard places vndeclared.

For he no where stycketh but upon the places, in which he falsely laboreth
by the color of his exposycyon of a spyrytuall eating by faith to hyde and
withdraw the very lytterall truth and the very faith in deed, by which, our
savior techeth us to believe / that the thing which in the blessed sacrament
we spyrytually must eat and bodyly both, is his own very flesh in deed.

The. vii. chapyter.
IN the end of the fourth lefe he expouneth these words of Crist, And this
bread that I shall aeue you is mine own flesh, which I shall give for the
life of the world. And for as myche as at those word specially bygynneth
bytwen him and me the way to part in twain, and he to go the tone and I the
the other / he drawing it all to that point as though Christ there began to show
them none other thing of his flesh, but the geuynge it upon the cross, and
that he nothing in all those words meant to tell them of the geuynge of his
flesh to eat, that he gives in the blessed sacrament / and I there
expownynge it that he there tells them of both, but specially of the geuynge
of his flesh to be eaten, which ge gives in the blessed sacrament: therefore
at those words good readers begin to take special good head to master
Maskers fyngers. For there he specially begins to play a mummers cast with
his false dice. And therefore confer his exposycyon upon the same words with
mine, and than shall ye bid him cast again, for that cast goth for naught.

The. vii. chapyter.
IN the fyfthe lefe thus he says, No marvel was it though these (...) Jews
abhorred the bodyly eating of Lhry fles flesh, albe it our flellhefy papyftes
being of the Jews carnal opinion, yet abhore it not.

What thing more false, more folisshe, or more blasphemouse could any brute
best say than this? For the Jews had an opinion that he would have them eat
his flesh in the very form of flesh / and (as saint Austayne August. in
enarra. in psalm, 98.
says) they thought they shod eat it deed cut out in gobbettes as sheprs
flesh is in the shamellys.

And now is not master masker ashamed to rail, upon all good chry sten
people under the name of papystes, and say that they be all of the Jews
carnal opinion. Does any man that receives the blessed sacrament, think (as
ye Jews thought) that the flesh of Christ that he re ceyueth, is in form
of flesh, cut out in gobbettes as shepys flesh is sold in the shamells, and
not in form of bread? If master masker were now bare faced him self, he were
wonderful shameless if he could endure to look any man in the face for shame.

Now as this was good readers written (as you se) most falsefy that he says we
be of the Jews opinion: so where he says yt we abhor not to eat Christ's
flesh in the sacrament / that is yet written ye se well as folysshly.

For the wise goodness of god has as the old holy doctors declare, ge uyn us
his flesh not in form of flessh, but in form of bread, because we should
not abhor it. And therefore what horrible syghte sees this fool in ye
blessed sacrament, for which he should abborre to receive it?

But where was there ever a more blasphemouse bestely word spoken, than this
frantyke fool speaks here: yt mocheth and rayleth upon all good christen
people in this. xv. C. year. because they do not abhor to receive the blessed
body of Christ in such wise given us by Christ, that no creature can abhor
it, but either deuyls or deuyls fellows (...)

The. ix. chapyter.
THan says master Masker ferther in the same place, Neither ceace they
daily to crucylye and offer up Christ again, which was onys for ever and
all, offered up as Poule testyfyeth hebre. 9.

To what lewd boldenes it gives, when a man may walk about in a vysor
unknown? Master masker cares not what he says while his vysor of
dyssymulacyon is on, that men know him not. For who says that Christ is daily
new crucyfyed? Troth it is that the church says that Christ is at ye awter
every day offered, his own blessed body in the sacrament. This of troth the
church says, and that Christ is our daily sacryfyce. But no man says that he
is daily crucyfied of new, and daily put to new pain. But as he was vnys
crucyfyed and killed and offered on the cross, so is that one death oblacyon
and sacrifice daily represented, by the self same body ye only quick
sacryfyce and oblacyon that god has left unto his new christen church,
instede of all the manyfold sacryfyces and obsacyons of this old synagoge the
Jews. And that ye may know yt I feign you not fantasyes: (...) declares it
very plainly, whose words are these. what is that than that we do? Do Chriso.
hom. 17 in epist. ad (...).
not we offer daily? yes forloth. But we do it in remembrance of his death. And
this hooste is one hooste and not many. Now is it one hooste and not many? For
because that hooste was onys offered, and was offered into (...) holiest
tabernacle, and (...) sacryfyce is a copte or example of that. we offer always
the self same, Nor we offer not now one lamb, and to (...) ano there, but
(...) the same. This sacryfyce (...) one. For else because it is (...) in many
places at ones / ate there many (...) verily. For it is but one Crist every
where, being both here hole, and there hole one (...) For in like manner as he
that is (...) every where, is but one body and not many bodies: so it is also
but one sacryfyce. And he is our bishop that (...) the hooste that cleanses us
we offer (...) also the same hooste (...) was than offered, and can (...) be
consumed. And this that we do, is done in remembrance of that that was done.
For (he faith) do ye this in remebraunce of me. It is none other sacryfyce / as
it is none other bishop but always we do the same, or rather we make a
remembrance of that same sacryfyce.

what words can there he (...), to prove master Masker a very fond
blasphemouse (...) thanne these? by which this holy doctor saint Crysostome,
against master Masker mocking here the mass, (...) his false folly clearly.
And not only shows that it is a sacrifice and an (...): but also she weth
that it is the daily (...) of (...) fame offryng and sacrifisyng, by which he
was sacrifysed and offered up on the (...). And yet to stop master mas (...)
mouth in ye hole matter: he she (...) yt this (...), this blessed sacrifice the
sacrament of the awter, is all one oblacyon, all one host, though it be offered
at onys in never so many places. And he she weth also, that it is ye very self
same body that was offered on the cross. And that in this sacryfyce of
offering up the self (...) body in the (...), (...) the (...), as a (...) is
(...) after a (...) and do (...) the (...) same sacry fyee, by which Christ the
very self same body was (...) on the croffe.

Now can master Masker and more plainly (...) and (...), than saint (...)
foundeth him, upon (...) of (...) folly she (...) he mouse (...) of his? with
which be realeth (...) the church, and says (...) not (...) to (...) as
though the church at this day (...) put Christ to new pain, because his death is
represented in the mass, and of his goodness his very blessed body offered up
daily a sweet sacryfyce for our synnys.

Lracian also recyteth in ye decrees for our purpose in every ponnt, as
effectual words of saint Ambrose de consecrat. distinctione 2. cap. In
Chrysto semef.

Saint Austayne also in the. xvi. Augu. (...). 16. (...) ciuitare del.
book de ciuitate dei, says of the holy mass in this wise.

That sacryfyce is succeeded into the place of all those sacryfyces of the old
law, which sacryfyces were offered for a shadow of the thing to come. And
for yt cause also we know that voice in the. xxxix. psalm, the prophe cye of
our medyatour Christ, where he says, Sacryfyce and oblacyon thou would not
have, but the body thou have perfyted me. For in the stead of all those
sacryfyces and oblacyons, his body is offered and mynistred unto them that
wylbe part takers of it.

What speak I of saint Crysostome and saint Austayne, all the old holy doctors
and saints of christ church, without any excepcion, were ever more clear in
this point that master Masker here now denies and thus iesteth on, that the
blessed sa crament in the mass is a sacry fyce and an oblacyon.

And this can not master Masker him self deny. For his own first master
Martyn Luther, the late well spring of all this flode of heresies, in his
pestysent book of babilonica, puttynae forth this heresye that master Masker
towcheth here, yt the blessed sacrament in ye mass is no sacrifice, nor none
oblacio^, obiec teth agarnst him self and says thus.

Now must we take away another Martinns Luther in capt. babi.
occasyon of ruin, that is that the mass is every where byleued to be a
sacryfyce, that is offered unto god.

And for that opynio^, semen to sown the canon of the mass, where it is said,
these gifts, these holy sacryfyces, this oblacyon and offrynge. And therefore
is Christ called the host or sacryfyce of the awter. Than comes there also
on this part the sayenges or sentences of the holy fathers and than so many
exemples.

Against all these things because they be very fastely received, we must very
constantely obiecte the words and ensample of Christ at his mau^dy.

And afterward he says again, what shall we say than to the canon of the
mass and to the sayenges of the old holy doctors and saints: I say that if
we have nothing else to say: let us yet rather deny them all, than grant
that the mass should be any good wurke or any sacryfyce, lest we should deny
the word of Christ, and cast down faith and (...) and all.

Thus you se good readers that Luther him self confesses, that in this
heresye against the sacryfyce and oblacyon of the mass, which master Masker
with two other he resyes to, brings here forth now, the old holy doctors
and saints are against him / and than were we wise, if we would wene that
Martyne Luther and master masker evil christen heretykes understand Chri stes
words better, than euerdyd all the holy doctors of christ's church before.

And thus you se good readers what a compendyouse writer master masker is,
that has in less than three lines, compacted up together such three abomynable
blasphemouse heresies, as the devil him self never devised vurse.

In the syxte the. vii. the. viii. the ix. the. x. lefe, he has certain
arguments against all men in general, that expoune those words of Christ in
the syxte chapyter of Iohin^, to be spoken and meant of the very eating of his
blessed body in the sacrament, and not only of a spyrytuall eating by bysyefe
of his death. And some solucyons has he there such as they be, against mine
argument in specyaff made unto Fryth: All which things I will sort into
their places a part from his exposycyon, so that ye may se some of the fawtes
of his exposycyon by them self, and his arguments answered by them self, and
his solucyons avoided by them self, and the notable notes that he makes of my
notable repugnau^ces last of all laid open to you by them self, because I
will lay all thing in order plain before your eyes / so that when ye se the
thing in such wise before you without interlacynge, ruffle, and confusyon: ye
shall the more easyly judge whyther master Masker in his mummery be an honest
man, or else a false haserder and play with false dyce.

The. x. chapyter.
IN the. xi. lefe, after that in the the other ten before he had spoken many
times of faith alone, and that the only byliefe of far fewer things than we
be bounden in deed to believe, when it were onys had, should both satysfye
the soul and also make us saufe forever: it appears in that lefe yt either
his own mind began to mysse give him, or else some other wyly brother gave
him warning, that this manner writing of faith alone would make all the world
to wonder on him. For Luther him self writing first on the same fasshyon.
that faith alone was suffycyent for salvation, though it pleased idle
unthriftiness ve ry well, that were glad to be by bare faith dyscharged of al good
wurks: it was yet so sore abhorred among all honest men, yt both him self and
all his sect were feign to seek some plasters of false gloses, to hele ye
foul marmole of their skabbed shynnys, that they had gotten by that text of
their false faith alone.

And than they said yt they meant that manner faith, that had always both
hope and cheryte with it.

But than could not that gloss serve them. For that manner faith taught ever
the comen catholyke church (...) che they reproved. And also yt gloss marred
their text, and was clean co^ trary to all their tale. For all the text of
their prechynge had been of faith alone, and their gloss was of faith not alone,
but encompanied with two good fellows perdye, ye tone called hope and the
the other cheryte.

Now therefore either upon this fere of his own mind, or upon this
aduertysement of some other man: master Masker to mende his exposycyon with,
and to make all the matter saufe, has at the last in the end of the. xi.
lefe, plastered his marmoll of his only faith on this fasshyon. By love we
abide in god and he in us. Love follows faith in the order of our
understanding, and not in order of succession of time, if thou lokest upon the
self gifts and not of their fruits. So that (...) pally by faith whereby we
clean to gods goodness and mercy, we abide in god and god in us, as declare
(...) following, saying, (...) the (...) father sent me, so live I by my
father. And even so he that (...) me, shall live because of me or for my (...).
My father sent me, whose will in all things I obey, for I am his sone. And even
so verily must they that eat me, that is believe in me, form and (...) after
my ensample, mortefyeng their (...) and chaungynge their living, or (...) they
(...) me in vain and dyssemble their bylyefe. For I am not comen to redeem the
world only, but also to change their life. They therefore that believe in me,
shall transform their life after mine (...) and doctrine, and not after any
(...).

This plaster good readers has some good (...). But it is both to narow by a
great deal to cover his scalde shyn, and has also some (...) poticary druggys
put in hit that can do no good, and some thing also (...) to his remedy.

But (...) us now consider his words. First where he says, that by (...) we
(...) in god and god in (...): he says troth, for so says the scripture /
but that is to be understand as long as we love him, and not dwell so still
in him. But when we break his (...), and thereby declare that we love him not as
ye scripture also says / against which scripture master Tyndase says that
he that has onys a felyng faith, can never fall therfrom, and against the
same scripture master Masker says that faith onys had suffiseth for salvation.

And master Masker makes yet his matter much wurse than (...) Tyndase. For
Tyndase did yet at the least wise make some bumblyng about a color for the
matter, with a long process of hystorycall faith and felyng faith. whose false
wyly (...) therein, I have so confuted in my (...) futacyon, yt though he write
again therein, as long as ever he lives he shall never shake of the shame.

But master Masker handeleth the matter both more wylyly than Tyndale does,
and yet much more folysshely to. For seeing that his saying can not be defended:
he ruffleth up all the matter shortly in a few words, both for sparynge of
labor, (...) also because he would not have his words well understood, but
that his words might stand for a short text, which he would leave for every
other good brother to make some good gloss thereto to maynteyne it with.

For in his next word following where he says, Love follows faith in the
order of our understanding, and not in the order of (...) of (...), if thou
lokest upon the self gifts (...) not upon their fruits: in these few dark
words he would both show his (...) before unlearned men, and leave them also
vndeclared, because he would have them wene yt his high (...) passes their low
capacitees

But yet in these words he iugleth with us, and may with his wylynes begile
them that will take none head. But who so look well to his hands shall perceive
where his galls goo well enough.

For true it is that when so (...) god infou^deth either thabyt of (...), or
ye full perfect quycke lively (...) that is called fides formata: infoundeth in
like wise hope and cheryte both. But this is not the faith alone. For faith is
never such faith, but while he has his two fellows with him. But faith may be
(...) tarry to, before his two fellows come to him. As a man may believe well
long ere he wull do well. And (...) may tarry also wha^ both his fellows be
gone from him, as he that has had all three, may by dedely (...) from the
(...), and (...) faith alone remain. And faith may come and continue still,
and neither of both his fellows never come at him at al. As where a man
byleueth truly every article of the faith / and yet has never ye will to
wurke well nor never wylbe baptized, but after dies in dyspayre. And in all
these casys is it faith alone. And because it neither wurketh well, nor has
will to wurke well, neither in act nor in habyt: therefore is it called fides
informis, and a deed faith. Not deed in the nature of faith or bylyefe / but
deed as to the attaynynge of everlasting life.

Now would master Masker iugle and make us believe, that he meneth the first
manner of faith that is quycke and lively, by the reason that it has good hope
and cheryte therewith.

But I can not suffer you good christen readers to be so be gyled, (...) such
a fond falfe iugler For if ye take heed unto him / ye shall soon perceive
that he is even but a very bungler.

For when that he first tells (...) what bylyefe is suffycient, and (...)
that if we ones eat and drink (...) by faith, and than expouneth ye hole
sum of all that faith saying, that is to say, if we believe his flesh and
his body to have been broken, and his blood shed for our synnys, tha^ ate our
souls satisfied and we be iustyfied and now adds thereunto, that love
follows faith in the order of our un derstandynge and not in the order of
succession of time, by which he meneth ye every man has cheryte (...) more as
soon as he has faith: (...) may clearly se that he says yt a man has
cheryte ever as soon as he has that faith. So that by him who byleueth ever
byleueth that Christ dyed for us: he has both faith hope and (...), though he
believe nothing else.

But now is this a very false deuelysshe doctrine. For this is no full faith.
For a man may believe this, and yet leave many a thing vnbyleued, which we be
bounden to believe bysyde. And therefore you may well se, that though the
theologycall virtue of full and perfayt faith, have al way cheryte together
infounded with it: yet master Maskers faith that is neither perfyt nor full,
may be not in the beginning only, but also ever after without any cheryte at
all.

Also where he says, that ye faith yt he describes onys had; is sufficient /
and speaks of no perseuerau^ce: a man may, well se yt his saying is insuffycy
ent. For both yt faith sta^dynge, a man may well fall fro cheryte. And than
though he had onis cherite as soon as that faith (if that bare faith without
more were possible to have cheryte with it) yet might it lack cheryte after.
And also that faith might it self fall quyte away to. For he that onys
byleueth every article of the faith, and than can fall from any, as master
Masker is fallen from many: may little and little fall from them euerychone.
For I dare well say that master Masker byleueth no point that he byleueth
most surely, any thing more surely now, than he has byleued ere this, diverse
of those points which he now byleueth lest if he believe as he writes.

And thus good readers you se, yt where as his marmose is more than an
handefull broad: this plaster of his passes not the bredeth of apeny. For I
dare say the devil byleueth at this day as much as master mas her says that
is suffycyent, that is to wit that Christ dyed for our sin, and yet has he
no cheryte. Nor no more has no man that will believe no more but that / or
though he do believe more than that, will yet think that he byleueth all the
remanaunt but of his courtesye, and not one whyt more of de wty.

The. xi. chapyter.
NOw where he says ferther, So that pryncypally by faith whereby we (...) to
gods goodness and mercy, we abide in god and god in us, as declare his words
fo (...), saying, As the living father sent me, so live (...) by my father.
And even so he that eats me, shall live because of me or for my sake.

This is a very false noughty de claracyon of Christ's words. For where as the
holy doctors do declare those words as I before have showed you, that like as
our savior had his eternal life of his father before any beginning of time in
that his father eternally before all time begat him and his flesh, not of
his own nature but by the coniunccyon that it had with the godhed, had now the
same life and so lived for the father, so should he that eats that flesh
according to Christ's iustytucyon with dew cyrcu^staunces of faith and good
hope, and cheryte well wyllyng to work, attain ever lasting life also, by
reason of his (...) and incorporacyon with his everlasting flesh, so I say
(...) way if the eater eat it with (...) de we cyrcu^staunces requisyte / so
yt like as they receive not his holy flesh deed as the Jews had went, but
quycke with holy spyryte joined thereto, so their souls may join with his
spyryt as their flessh joins with his: where as the holy doctors I say do
expoune these words thus, now comes master Masker and says, that in these
words Christ techeth us yt we abide in him and he in us, not pryncypally by
cheryte but pryncypally by faith.

Now good reder what one word of those words of Christ, any thing so (...) to
the mayntenau^ce of master Maskers (...), that god is in us and we in him,
pryncypally by faith? The scripture says, God is cheryte, and he that dwells
in cheryte dwells in god, and god in him.

Now if master Masker would have (...), ye by faith a man might eat the
flesh of Christ, and by faith might dwell in god: if master Masker were a
good catholyke manne, I would for so far find no fawte in his exposycyon.

For it might have a menynge good enough, bysyde the lyterall sense of
Christ's words. But now when he contendeth that this is the lytteral sense,
and therewith would shake of the very eating that our savior meant in ye
blessed sacrament, and bear us in hand that our savior mente not so, but meant
an only eating of his flesh by a bare bylyefe of his death, and not the very
bodyly eating at all / and that in those words he meant that though we dwell in
god by love, yet not pryncypally by love, but pryn cypally by faith, as to
which virtue the virtue of cheryte were but a follower and a perpetual hand
maid, where there is in those words of Christ not one syllable sownynge
toward it: what good christen man can abide it? namely while the scryp ture by
plain words condempneth it, and says, fides, spes, charitas, tria 1. (...).
13
hec mayor horu^ charitas. Faith, hope, and cheryte, these three, but the
pryncypall of these is cheryte.

The. xii. chapyter.
NOw where he goth good reader forther forth yet upon these words, and says,

My father sent me, whose will in all things I obey, for I am his sone. And
even so verily must they that eat me, that is believe in me, form and (...)
them after my ensample, (...) their flesh and chaungynge their living, or
(...) they eat me in vain and dyssemble their bylyefe.

Though these words here seem very good: yet while they be all written unto
this one intent, that this gay floryshe should so glytter in our eyes, that we
might thereby be blinded and not beware of the perylouse pytte into which he
goth about to cast us, that is to make us wene that our savior in saying
that we should eat his flesh, meant no very eating thereof in yt blessed
sacrament but only a spyrituall eating by byleuyng that he dyed for our
synnys, as here he declares again, they that eat me that is believe in me etc:
while all draws I say to that end, his tale is naught all together.

And yet it is a world also to se, the blyndnesse that the devil has dreuyn
into him, by which he can not be suffered to se, that by these self same
words with which he would auaunce his purpose, he very plainly destroys it.

For his purpose is ye wot well, to make us wene that faith were not only the
pryncypall / but also that faith has ever love waytyng upon her, and following
her as her inseperable servant / as hete ever follows the fire. And now you
se that he says here, that who so do not form and fasshion them after Chry
stes ensample, do eat him in vain. And than to eat him he says is but to
believe in him. And so he says without good living, that is to (...) without
cheryte, the bylyefe is but in vain. Now to believe invayne, is ye wot (...)
to believe, and yet have his bylyefe frutelesse for lack of that love, that is
the theological virtue called cheryte.

And thus ye se good readers how well and cyrcumspectely master Masker looks
to his matter, that when he has told us that faith never lacks cheryte
forgetynge (...) self forth with, tells us him self within ten lines
after, that faith may lack cheryte, and therefore be but invayne.

Now where he says, or else they dyssemble their bylyefe: I will not dyssemble
with him, but tell him very plain, that as great a dyssembler as he is, he
woteth not as it seems what this word dyssemblyng meneth, or else wot I
nere what he meneth thereby. For a man dyssembleth the thing yt he has and
will not be a known thereof / as a man dyssembleth his ha tered, when he hates
one and fayneth him self his friend to cover his hatered with. And so we say
that a man dyssembleth a thing yt he secth it and will not se it, but makes
as though he saw it not. But no man dis sembleth the thing that he sees not
in deed, nor the thing that he has not in deed, but makes as though be saw
it or had it. For he fayneth or lies, and not dyssembleth. As in the latyne
tongue (whereof this english word comes) ille simulat non dissimulat. And
therefore if master mas ker mean here by these words, or ellye they dyssemble
their bylyefe, any other thing than they feign a byleyfe, making as though
they byleued and do not: let him not dyssemble with me, but tell me what
other thing he meneth. And if he mean by those word none other thing than
that: than will I not dyssemble with him, but tell him the plain truth that
he may peradventure mean wisely enough, but he speaks but like a fool. For by
that word he says the clear contrary that is to wit that they make as
though they byleued not, but yet they do.

The. xiii. chapyter.
BUt now at last he concludes all together thus.

For I am not comen to rebeme the world only, but also to change their life.
They therefore that believe in me, shall transform their life after mine
ensample and doctrine, and not after any mannye tradysyone.

I will not here hold a long dyspycyon with master Masker upon man's
tradycyo^s, by which word he would have all the laws made by men utterly
set at naught / and would have man bound but either by the plain word of
scripture, or else by his own express agreement and consent. For Luther says
that neither man nor angel can make the bond of any one syllable upon any
christen man, without his own express consent / so that no saw can be made
by that wise reason, by the prince and the people, to hang up either these or
murderer, or to burn up an heretyke, but if the theuys, murdeters, and
heretykes will consent and agree thereto them self. Nor no law made this day,
can bind him that shall be borne to morrow, till he come to good age and
agretherto first him self, as our sovereign lord the kings grace most
prudentely laid against Luther.

But I let this folly of master Masker pass / and this also that the
tradycyons, which these heretykes be wurste content withal, be the tradycyons
of the apostles, which they delivered to the church, as Christ not by
writing but by tradycyo^, delivered the things to them. For which saint
Poule says, Ego enim 1. (...). 11
accepi a (...) quod tradidi vobis, For I have received the thing of our
lord by tradycyon, without writing the which I have also delivered unto you.
As though he would say, as I have received it by tradycyo^ or delyuery of our
lord, so without writing I have delivered it by tradicio^ to you

I will let pass all these auau^tages (which I might as ye se take against
master Masker here) and I will well allow these words of his for this onys,
so that him self will stycke and stand by them styffely, and confess that
they that trans form not their life after Christ's ensample and doctrine, have
either their bylyefe in vain, or else make as though they byleued, and have no
bylyefe at all.

This onys agreed between him and me: I if he will rail upon the prestes and
prelates of the cathosyke church for doing of the contrary, let him name who
they be and wherein they do it, and by my troth in such evil doing / they
shall never be defended for me.

But than of reason must master Masker give me leave again, to put hrm in
remembrance of the prestes and prelates of their heretykes sects / and I will
speak of none but by name. Friar Luther I will name him the chyefe and
pryncypall author of their heresies. I will name him friar Lambert / dane Oath
the cartusyan, zungtius the priest, and the priest Pomeran, and friar Duyskyns
the friar brigittane. These be lo the very prelates and bysshoppes
metropolytanys and postles of their sects.

Now will I than ask master Masker what ensample of Christ or what doctrine
of Christ he can show, by which those holy prelates of these new sects
evil chryste^ caytyffes that have so wed all this sedycyo^, have broken their
holy vows and promyses made unto god, and run out of their orders / and to
the shame of matrymony and holy orders both, speak of the spyryte, and fall to
the flesh? which while they have all done, against the doctrine and ensample
as well of Christ as of all holy doctors and saints, and of al good christen
people sith the death of Christ unto this their own wreched time; and now teache
it forth for a doc tryne, reason it is that master Masker confess, that all
the prelates of his sundry sects, erther have but a vain says, or (...) make
as they had faith and have no faith at all. And than are there no man's (...)
so evil as are their own, being them self so evil men as they be. And why
should we than here master Masker preche, either their faith or tradxcyons
either, while their faith is either vain faith or else false and none at all,
and their doctrine as deuylysshe doctrine as them shelfe are deuylysshe men /
and more deuelysshe I wene is scant the devil him self.

Thus have I good readers noted you certain pyeces of master Maskers
exposicyon, by which as by a taste of a draught or twain, ye may se what
poysened drink is in the whole vessel. And now shall I come to his
arguments, which he makes in general against all them that expowne this
place of Christ words in the syxte chapter of saint John, to be spoken or
meant of that eating, by which we eat Christ blessed body in the blessed
sacrament.

Here ends the second book.
The third book,
The first chapyter.
IN the fyfthe lefe upon his exposycyon of these words, and the bread which I
shall give for the life of the the world thus he argues.

And even her sith Christ came to teache, to take (...) way all dowt and to
break strife, he might ((...) words otherwise declared than he has declared
and will hereafter expoune them) have soluted their questyon: saying (if he
had so meant as More expouneth) that he would have been conuayed and connerted
(as our iuglers sleyghtly can conuaye him with a few word) into a singing
lofe, or (...) (as the Chomystycall papystes say) ben inuisyble with all (...)
dymencyoned body under the form of bredetranssubstancyated into it. And after
a like Chomistycall mystery, the wine transsubstancyated to into his blonde, so
that they should eat his flesh and drink his blonde after their own carnal
(...) andynge (but yet in another form) to put away all grudge of stomach. Or
sith saint (...) (yt he had thus understood his masters mind, and took upon
him to write his masters wordee) would leave this sermon unto the world to be
read, he my (...) now have delivered us and them from this dowte. But Christ
would not so satysfye their questyon, but answered, verily verily I say unto
you, except ye eat the flesh of the sone of man and drink his blood, ye
shall not have that life in your selves. He that eats my flessh and drynketh
my blonde, has life everlasting, and I shall steve him up in the last day.
For my flesh is very meat and my blood the very drink. He says not here
that bread shall be transsubstancyated or converted into his body, nor yet the
wine into his blood.

(...) good christen readers this man here in a folysshe jesting and much
blasphemouse raysyng manner, against the conuersyon of the bread and wine into
the blessed body and blood of Christ in the hlessed sacrament, in conclusyon
as for a clear confutacyon of me and of saint Thomas both, upon which holy
doctor and saint he folly shely iesteth by name, he argues as youse, that
(...) Christ had intended to have given them his flesh and his blood in the
sacrament, than might he have decla red it more openly with mo words and more
plainly. And than master Masker deuiseth Christ the words that he would have
had him say if he had so meant. And therein the blasphemouse best deuyseth, that
he would have had our savior say, yt he would play as iuglers do, and slyly
convey him self into a singyng lofe / and that our savior so does, he says
is mine opinion. wherein the man is shameless and shamefully bylyeth me. For I
say as the catholyke faith is, that he not conuayeth but conuerteth the bread
into his own body, and changes it therein to / and neither conuayeth (as he
speaks) his body into the bread (for than were the bread and his bles sed body
both together still, which false opinion is Luthers heresy and that knows
this man well enough, and therefore shows him self shameless in layenge
that opinion to me) nor also conuerteth not his blessed body into bread, for
that were yet much worse. For tha^ remains there nothing else but bread
still / and that is ye wot well master Maskers own heresy for which he
writes against me / and therefore is he dowble shameless (as you se) to say
any such thing of me.

But in conclusion theffecte of all his fond argument is, that euynthere in
that place to break strife and to soil all their dowte, our lord might and
would have done at the self co^municacio^, or else at ye lest wise (...) at ye
time of his writing, might and would have told the^ plainly that they should ete
it, noti form of flesh but in form of bred. But neither our savior than
told them so, nor theuangrelyste has told us so in the reportynge of his
words spoken to them: ergo it must nestes be that Christ meant not so.

This is master Maskers argu meant which he lyketh so specially, that
afterward in another place, he harpeth upon the same string again. But
surely if the man be in scripture any thing exercysed, than has he a very
poor remembrance. And whrthet be be scryptured or not he has a very bare
barayne wit, when he can wene that this argument were aught.

For first (as for the scripture) can he find no mo places than one, in which
our savior would not tell out plainly all at onys?

Could Christ of the sacrament John. 3
of Baptysme have told no more to Nichodemus if he had would? Math. 12


Could he to the Jews that asked him a token, have told them no more of his
death, sepulture, and resurreccyon, but the figure of the prophet Jonas three
days swalowed in to yt whalys belly?

When his dyscyples asked him Actu. I
(...) the restytucyon of the kingdom of Israel, and mysse took his kingdom
for a worldely kingdom: did he forth with declare them all that ever he
could have told them? or all yt ever he told them thereof at any other time
after? nay nor theuangelyste in the rehersynge neither.

(...) this man either never read or else forgotten, that all be it our
savior came to be known for Christ and sometime declared him so him self: yet
at some other times he forbode his dysciples to be a known thereof? So that as
for ye scripturys (except he have either little read, or little reme^bered of
them) would have made master Masker to forbere this folysshe argument for shame.

But now what wit has this man that can argue thus, when he should (if he had
wit) well perceive his argument answered, by the like made against him self
upon the very self same place.

For master masker says here that our lord meant nothing else, but to tell
them of the geuyng of his flesh to ye death for ye life of the world, and to
make them believe that. Now ask I therefore master Masker, whyther Christ
could not have told them by more plain words than he did there (if it had
so ben his pleasure) that he should dye for the sin of the world, and in what
wise also. If master Masker answer me no: I am sure every wise man will tell
him yes. For he spoke there not half so plainly of the geuynge of his body to
be slain, as he did of geuynge it to be eaten. For as for his death, not so
myche as onys named it, but only says, And the bread that I shall give you
is mine own flesh, which I shall give for the life of the word. In which
words he not onys names death. But of the eating, he spe keth so expressly by
and by, and so spoke before, all of eating, and much more afterward to, that
he gave them little occasyon to think that he meant of his death any word there
at all, but of the eating only.

And some great holy doctors also, construe those whole words, And the bread
that I shall give is my flesh which I shall give for the life of the world,
to be spo ken only of the gyuynge of his bles sed body in the sacrament, and
neither the first part nor the second to be spoken of his death. But that in
the first part Christ shows what he would give them to eat, that is to
wit his own flesh, and in the second part he showed them why he would
give the world his flesh to eat, and what commodyle they should have by the
eating of it / saying, yt he would give it men to eat for the life that men
should have by the eating of it. And therefore he pursues forth both upon the
eating thereof, and upon the life that they shall lack that will not eat it,
and of the life that they shall have that will eat it. So that as I say
Christ spoke and meant after the mind of some holy cunning men, but of the
eating only / but by all good men of the eating specially, and without any
manner questyon of the eating most plainly, as of which he speaks by name
expressly. And of his death (if he there spoke of it as diverse holy doctors
think he did) yet he spoke it so covertly, yt he rather meant it than said it /
as the thing whereof he nothing named, but only the ge uynge to eat. So that
where as master Masker argues, yt Christ nothing meant of geuynge of his
flesh to be eaten in the sacrament, but only of his flessh to be crucified
because that if he had meant of his flesh to be eatyn in the sacrament, he
could and would have told them plainly so: ye se now good readers very
plain proved by the self same place, that sith master Masker can not say
nay, but that of his body to be geuyn by death, Christ could have spoken myche
more plainly than he did in that place, as well as he could have spoken more
plainly of the geuynge of his body to be eaten in the blessed sacrament,
master Mas kers own argument (if it were aught as it is naught) utterly
destroys all his own exposycyon whole. And therefore ye may se that the man
is a wise man and well over seen in arguing.

The. ii chapyter.
IN the. xi. lefe he has an other argument, toward which he makes a blind
induccyon before. And because ye shall se that I will not go about to begyle
you: I will rehearse you his induccyon first, and than his argument after. These
arre his words

When the Jews would not understand this spyrytuall saying of the eating of
Christ's flessh and drinking of his blood so often and so plainly declared:
he gave them a strong tryppe, and made them more blind for they so deserved
if (such are the secret judgments of god) addyng unto all his sayenges
thus. who so eat my flessh and drink my blood, abides in me and I in him.
These words were spoken unto the (...) into their farther obstynacyo^, but
unto the faithful for their better instruccyon. Now gather of this the
contrary, and say, who so eats not my flessh and drynketh not my blood,
abides not in me nor I in him / and join this to that foresaid sentence,
except ye eat the flesh of the sone of man and drink his blood, ye have
no life in you. Let it never fall (...) thy mind christen reader, that faith
is the life of the ryghtwyse, and that Christ is thye living bread whom thou
eatest that is to say in whom thou byleuest.

Here is master Masker fall to iuglynge so / and as a iugser lays forth his
trynclettes upon the table and byddeth men look on this and look on that and
blo we in his hand / and than with certain strange words to make men muse /
whurseth his iuglynge stycke about his fyngers to make men look upon that /
while he plays a false cast and conuayeth with ye the other hand some thing
slyly into his purse or his sleue or some where out of sight / so fares
master Masker here / that makes Christ's holy word serve him for his iugling
boxes and says them forth upon the board before us / and byddeth us lo look
on this text / and than soke so upon this / and when he has she wed forth
thus two or three textes and bid us look upon them he tells us not wherefore /
nor what we shall find in the^. But because they be so plain against him he
lets them slynke away / and than to blere our eyes / and call our mind fro
the matter / up he takes his iuglynge stycke the co^mendacyon of faith / and
whyrleth that about his fyngers / and says, Let it never fall fro thy mind
christen reader that says is the life of the ryghtuouse, and that Christ is
this living bread whom thou eatest, that is to say in whom thou byleueft.

What are these words good chry sien reader to the purpose. All this will I
pray you remember to. But I will pray you remember there with all, where about
this iugeler goth, yt would with bryddynge us look up here upon faith /
iugle away one great point of farth from us / and make us take no head of
Christ's words plainly spoken here of the very eating of his holy flesh.
And therefore let us remember faith as be byddeth. But let us remember well
therewith specially this piece thereof yt this iugler with bidding us remember,
would feign have us forgette.

But now after this induccyon / forth he comes with his wise argu meant in this
wise,

For if our popystes take eating and drynkyng here bodyly as to eat the
natural body of Christ under the form of bread / and to drink his blood
under the form of wine / than must all young children that never came at
gods board departed, and al lay men that never drank his blood be dampened.

If our savior Christ which is the way to troth / and the troth it self,
and the very true life also / could and would say false, and break his promise
by which he promised Math. 18
his church to be therewith him self unto the worlds end, and to send it
also the spyrite of troth, that should John. 16.
teache it and sede it into al troth: than would there of troth / both of
these words of Christ and these other words of his also, But if a man be
John. 3
borne again of the water and the holy ghost he can not se the kingdom of god
/ and of many other words of his mo many great dowtes arise / right hard and
inexplycable. But now am I very sure / since troth can not be but true /
Christ's promise shall ever stand and be kept, and there Psalm. 67.
fore shall his church ever more by ye John. 16.
mean of his holy spyryte which makes men of one manner and mind in the house
of his church / so fall in a concord and agreement together upon the true
sense / and so be led into every necessary truth / that by miss taking of
any part of scripture, it shall never be suffered to fall into any dampnable
error. Which thing what pratynge so ever master masker make / I have so
often and so surely proved for the comen known catholyke church of good and
badde both / against Willy a^ T indale / yt neither he nor all these heretics
among the^ all, shall never be able to void it.

Now as for his argument concerning lay men of age, it were alytell more
strong / if the blessed body of our lord were in the blessed sacrament under
form of bread with out his blood / which while it is not / nor their
receyuynge is not the sacryfyce nor oblacyon, which to the integrite thereof
requires both the formys / that the thing should agree with the figure / the
figure I say of the bread and wine that was offered (...). 14
by Melchysedech / master Maskers argument is of a feeble force. Of which
thing because I purpose onys to touch god wyllyng in answering to doctor
Barons treatise specially made of that matter / I will hold here master Mas
ker for this time with no long tale thereof. But to thentent ye may shortly se
how little wit is in his wise argument with which upon Christ's general
words, but if you eat the flesh of ye sone of man and drink his blood ye
shall not have life in you / he argues universally of all men and women and
chyldrenthat dye, and never eat his flesh or never drink his blood shall be
dampened / by the self same form of arguyng upon these general words, But
if a man be borne of water and the spyryte, he shall never se the kyngedome of
god. Master Masker may argue generally, that who so dye before he be baptized
by water and the spyrite, shall be dampened. And therup pon conclude that many
martyrs be dampened for lack of baptysynge in water, for all their baptysynge
in their own blood. And thus you se good readers how substancyall his
argumentis.

The. iii. chapyter.
IN the. xii. lefe to prove, yt Christ meant nothing to give his body to be
eaten, master masker upon these words that the dyscyples which were
offended with his words said, This is an hard word who may here him,
brings in an other wise argument under color of expownynge ye text in this
wise. These words did not only offend them that hated Christ, but also some
of his dyscyples. They were offended says the text and not meruayled as More
tryfleth out of troth. These words good reader of offendynge and meruaylynge
I shall answer anon in a more conuenyent place. which dyscyples said, This
is an hard saying who may here him? These dyscyples stoke no less in
Christ's visyble flesh, and in the bark of his words, than does now More
byleuynge him to have spoken of his natural body to be eaten with their teth

Here master masker makes as though the catholyke faith in the bles sed
sacrament, were but my faith. But like wise as I do confess that his heresye
is not only his, but that he has fellows in the same falsed / not only fryth
and Tyndale, but Wicliffe also and zuinglius, and friar Huyskyn to, bysyde a
lewd sort of wreched heretykes moo: so must he confess if he will say true,
that my faith is not only my faith, but that I have fellows in the same faith
/ not only the comen hole multitude of all good christen cuntrees this
fyftenne hundred year, but specially by name those holy sai^ts whose words I
have rehearsed you before upon this same matter / as Theophylactus, and saint
Bid, saint Hyrineus, and saint Hilary, and saint Austayne, saint Cyryll,
and saint Chrysostom / the plain words of every one of all whom, I have
here all ready brought you forth against master Masker, proving them self
fellows of mine in my faith all ready, now in this answer of this first part
of his. And yet keep I for master Masker matter enough bysyde, of holy saints
autho rytees, as well the same saints as other, to fill up the messys at the
second course. And where he brings forth for him in his second part,
Austayne, Tertullyan, and saint Chrysostom (For in all this his first course
he brings forth never one) those three dysshes I warraunt you shall when I
come to them, but barely furnysshe his board.

But where master masker says that More stycketh in the vysyble flesh of
Christ, to beaten as those dyscyples and those Jews did: he is hold to say
what him list because he goth inuysyble. For else how could he for shame say
that we yt are of the catholyke chyrth, think that Christ gives us his
visyble flesh to eat, as those dyscyples and those Iewys thought / when
every man (...) woteth, that those dyscyples and those Jews, thought that they
should receive his flesh visyble cut out as saint Austayne declares in
visyble deed piecys / and every man as well knows and master Masker to, that
we think that we do (and so in deed we do) receive and eat his flesh
inuisyble, not in deed pyeces, but his quycke blessed body whole, under the
visible form of bread. And therefore you se good readers what troth is in this
man.

But now goth he forth and comes to his wise wurshypfull argument and says.

which offense Christ seeing said, does thye offend you, what than will you
say if you se the sone of man ascend thither where he was before? If it
offend you to eat my flessh while I am herre: it shall myche more offend you
to eat it when it shall be gone out of your sight ascended into heuyn, there
sitting on the right hand of my father, un till I come again as I went, that
is to judgment.

The exposycyon of these words of Christ, I have good readers showed you
before, according to the minds of holy doctors and saints that by those
words of his ascencyo^ he gave them warning before, that be would by his
ascendyng up to heuyn, make them a plain proof that they were deceived wha^
they thought it could not be that he was descended down from heuyn, and by his
ascen dyng up with his body hole and vnminyshed, make them a plain proof yt
they were deceived, when they thought he would in pyeces cut out, and so give
his flesh to them as he should give it from him self, and thereby lose it him
self. For his whole body ascendynge, should well prove yt though his apostles
had every one eatyn it: yet had he it still whole him self / yt they should
thereby not dowt afterward, but that as each of them had it and did eat it, and
yet him self had it still, and all at onys in. xiii. diverse places in earth,
and him self ascended after whole therewith into heuin: so should ever after
all good christen folk receive it whole here in earth, and him self never the
less have it whole still with him in heuyn.

This being good christen readers ye mind of our savior in those words, as
by the holy doctors and saints well does appear of old: now comes this new
dronke^ doctor master masker, and with a wise exposycyon of his own brain,
would make us wene that those words with which (as the old doctors
testyfye) Christ confermed the sacrament, in declarynge his power by which he
wurketh that wonderful miracle in the sacrament, our savior had him self
spoken against his miracles in the sacrament. For thus lo does master Masker
make Christ expowne his own words and say, If it offend yon to eat my (...)
while I am here: it shall much more offend you to eat it when my body shall be
gone out of your sight ascended into be upn, there sitting on the right hand
of my father until I come again again (...) I went.

There were good readers two causes, for which those Jews and those dyscyples
were offended at the herynge of Christ, when he said they should eat his
flesh. One was, the strangeness and the impossybylyte that they thought was
therein / yt the other was the lothsomnes that they had thereto. Now if master
Masker mean here for the impossybylyte by reason of the dyfference of his pre
sense and his absence: I can not se why they should be more offended after his
ascencyon than before. For if it be possible for him to make his body to be in
many diverse places at onys in earth: than it is as possible for him to make it
at onys in those two diverse places earth and heuyn. For the marvel stands
not in the far dystaunce of the two places a sunder, but in the dyuersyte of
ye two places having in them both one body be they never so nere together. And
as for the dyfference of his presence here in earth, and his absence hense, by
his ascensyon into heuyn: master Masker is more than mad, to put that for a
dyfference, as a cause after thascensyon to make them more offended to here of
the eating of his body. For if he make (as he can and does) his body to be as
well here in earth as in heuyn: than is his body no more absent from hense tha^
from thense, as for the veryte of his presence in the place, though it be more
absent in consyderacyon to us that se not his body here, but in ye form of
bread. But the blessed (...), se that one blessed body of his in heuyn and here
in the blessed sacrament both at onys. And thus you se that master Maskers
argument has no pyth or strenght, if he mean for impossybylyte.

Now if master Masker here mean, that after Christ's ascensyon into hyuyn, it
should be a thing that should of reason more offend the Jews to eat his
flesh, than at ye time while he was here, as a thing that would be than a
much more loath some mete: what devil reason has master Masker to (...) that
mad mind with all, and to think that his gloryfyed flessh should be more
loathsome to receive, than if it were vngloryfyed.

And yet either he meneth thus / or else he lacks the way to find the
words, with which he would express his mind. For these are the words, that
he makes Christ to say, If it offend you to ente my flessh while I am here:
it shall much more offend you to eat it when my body shall be gone out of your
syghte.

You se now that he says it shall more offend you to eat it when it is gone
out of your sight into heuyn. Now if he had meant in the the other manner for
thimpossibylyte, he would have said (except he can not speak) that it should
more offend them to here it told them that they should than eat his flessh,
wha^ his flessh were so far absent from them, than to here it told them that
they should eat it while it were present with them / and not say it should
than more offend them to eat it. For they shall not be offended with the
eating if they eat it not. And therefore (if he can tell how to speak and
express his own mind) he meneth here while he says it shall more offend you
to eat it, he meneth I say that they should of reason think his flesh than
more lothely to eat after his gloriouse ascencyon, than it was ere he dyed.
Thus it appears that master Masker meant. And verily if he so mean, he has a
mad menynge. And if he mean not so: than has he a mad manner of speaking.
And yet hysyde that his menynge is as mad that way as the the other.

For as I have showed you, the thing is no more impossible to Crist, to give
them his body to eat after his ascensyon than before / and therefore is master
Masker a fool to say, that it should more offend them to here that they should
eat it after his ascencyon than before. For by their eating he should not
lose it / but both men may have his body here in earth with them, and ye angelys
may have it in heuyn with them, and him self may have it both in earth and in
heuyn with him, and all this at onys.

Wherein lest master Masker might make some wene, that I do as he (...) I do,
and as in deed may ster Masker does him self, that is to wit mock in this
matter and lie: ye shall good readers here what holy saint Chrysostom says,

Helyas left unto Heliseus his man (...). hom. 2. (...) popu (...). m
tell, as a very great enherytaunce. And in very deed a great enheritau^ce it
was, and more precyouse than any gold. And Heliseus was a dowble Hely / and
there was than helyas above and helyas beneth. I know well that you think he
was a just and a bles sed man / and you would feign each of you be in his case.
what will you say than, if I show you a certain other thing, that all we that
are seasoned with the holy sacraments, have received that far excels
helyas mantell. For helias in deed left his dyscyple his mantell. But the sone
of god ascendyng up, has left vntovs his flesh. And as for helias leuyng
his mantell to his dyscyple, left it of from him self. But our savior Christ
has both left it still with us, and yet in his ascensyon has ta ken it with
him self to. Let never therefore our hearts fall for fere, nor let us not
lament and by wayle, nor dread the dyffycultees of the troubelouse times. For
he that neither has refused to shede his blood for us all, and has also
bysyde that, given un to us all his flesh to eat, and the same blood again
to drink: he will refuse nothing that may serve for our salvation.

How say you now good christen readers? does not saint Chrysostom with these
words, afferme you plainly the substance of that that I say and as plainly
destroy all that master masker says in his heretycall ex posycion of these
words of Christ / which he constre weth so as he would thereby make a
repugnaunce bytwen the being of Christ's blessed body in ye blessed sacrament,
and the being of his body by his ascension in heuyn? For though master masker
say they can not stand together, but is utterly repugnaunt that his body
should be here in earth before domysdaye, because that until domysdaye it
shall be still in heuyn: yet says saint Chrysostom plainly, that master
Masker in his exposycyon lies. For he says that Christ blessed body is both
in heuyn and also in earth in the blessed sacrament in deed.

And therefore let master Masker leave his jesting with me, and go ieste and
rail against saint Chrysostom. For he confuteth you master Masker you se
well, a little more clerer than I. And than whyther of them twain ye shall
believe and take for the more credyble man, master Masker or holy saint
Chrysostom, every mannye own wit that any wit has, will well serve him to
se.

The. iiii. chapyter.
BUt master Masker to show you a ferther declaracyon of his wit, forth with
upon his wise and wurshypfull exposycyon of those words of Christ, he repeteth
that fond argument again, that Christ meant not of eating his flesh in the
sacrament / because that if he had meant it, he could and would have de
clared his menynge more plainly. And in that matter thus master Mas ker says.

Here might Christ have (...) his (...) the troth of the eating of his
fieshe in form of bread, had this ben his menynge. For he (...) them never in
any perplexite or dowt, but sought all the ways by symylytudes and famylyare
examples, to teache them plainly, he never spoke them so hard a parable, but
where he perceived their feeble ignorance, anon he helped them and declared it
them.

ye and somtymes he prevented their asking with his own declaracyon. And
think ye not that he did not so (...) verily. For he came to teach us and not
to leave us in any dowt and ignorance, especyally the chyefe point of our
salvation, (...) stands in the bylyefe in his death for our synnys.

Wherefore to put them out of all dowt as concerning this eating of his flessh
and drynkyng of his blood, that should give everlasting life, where they (...)
it for his very body to be eaten with their tethe: he said, It is the (...)
that gives this life. My flesh profyteth nothing at all to be eaten as
(...) mean so (...): It is spyrytuall meat that I here speak of. It is my
spyryt that draws the har tes of men to me by faith, and so refreshes them
gostesy. ye be therefore carnal to think that I speak of my flesh to be eaten
bodyly. For so it profyteth you nothing at all. How long will you be with out
understanding? It is my spyryte I tell you that gives life. My flesh
profyteth you nothing to eat it, but to believe that it shall be crucyfyed and
suffer for the redempcyon of the world it profyteth. And when ye thus believe,
than eat (...) my flesh and drink my blood / that is ye believe in me to
suffer for your sins. The veryte has spoken these worcester des: My flesh
profyteth nothing at all: it can not therefore be false. For both the Jews
and his dyscyples murmured and dysputed of his flessh, how it should be eaten /
and not of the offering thereof for our sins as Christ meant. This therefore is
the fure anchor to hold us by, against all the obieccions of the (...), for the
eating of Christ's body as they say in form of bread. Christ said, My flesh
profyteth nothing, menyng to eat it bodily. This is the key that solueth all
their arguments and opens the way to show (...) all their false and abomy
nable (...) lies upon Christ's words, and utters their sleyght ingesynge
over the bread to maintain (...) kingdom therwyth.

And thus when Christ had declared it, and taught them that it was not the
bodyly eating of his materyall body, but the eating with the spyryte of
faith: he added saying, The words which I here speak unto you (...) spyryte
and life / that is to say, this matter that I here have spoken of with so many
words, must be spyrytually understood, to give ye this life everlasting.
wherefore the cause why ye understand me not, is that ye believe not.

Here is lo the conclusyon of all his sermon.

Many a fond process have I read good christen readers, but never read I
neither a more folysshe nor a more false than this is. For the effect and the
purpose of all this pro cesse is, that Christ in all his words spoken in this
syxte chapter of saint John^, meant nothing of the eating of his blessed body
in the blessed sacrament, but only of an all gorycal eating of his body / by
which he meant only that they should believe that he should be crucyfyed (...)
shed his blood and dye for redempcyon of the world.

Now that our saniour bysyde al such allegories and other spiritual
understandings, plainly meant of ye very eating of his blessed body in the bles
sed sacrament, you have good reders all ready seen by so many holy doctors and
saints / whose plain worcester des I have rehearsed you, that no man can dowte but
that in the whole conclusyon of his argument and his exposycyon, master (...)
has a shameful fall / except any man dowt whyther master Masker be better to
be byleued alone, or those holy doc tours among them all.

But now this false conclusyon of his, how febly and how folyshely he
defends, yt is even a very great pleasure to se.

In this process has he. ii. points The first is that Christ could and
would have made it open and plain in this place by clear and euydent word, if
he had meant of the eating of his flesh in the sacrament.

The second is, that by these words It is the spyryte that gives life, my
flesh profyteth nothing at all, The words that I have spoken to you be
spyryte and life: Christ does plain and clearly declare, both that he meant not
the eating of his flesh in the sa crament, and also that he meant only the
bylyefe that he should dye for the sin of the world.

Now touching his first folysh point, I have confuted it all ready, and showed
you some samples, where Christ could at some time have declared the matter
much more openly than he did, and that in great matters of our faith.

For I think the sacrament of baptysme, is a pryncypall point of our faith.
And yet Christ taught not Nichodemus all that he could have told him therein
as I said before.

And longs it nothing to ye faith to believe the remyssyon of mortal sins?
I suppose yes. And yet could Christ if he had would, have decla red more
clearly those word of his, Matthew. 12
who so blaspheme the sone of man it shall be forgeuen him. But he that
blasphemeth the holy gooste, it shall neither be forgiven him in this world nor
in the world to come.

No good christen man thinks other, but that it is a pryncypall article of
the christen faith, to believe yt Christ is one equale god with his father. And
yet Christ (albe it that by all places set together, he has declared it
clear enough in conclusion, to them that will not be wylfull and contencyouse)
yet did he not in every place where he spoke thereof, declare the matter so
clearly as he could have done if he than had would. which appears by that
that in some other places, he declared it more clearly af ter. And yet in all
the places of the scripture set together, he has not, nor would not, declare
it in so plain words / as he could have done. For than should there never
have neded any of those comme^tes, that all the holy doctors have made upon
it synnys. And surely so says Luther and these other heretykes, that there
neded none. For all the scripture (they say) is open and plain enough. And
therefore they put every manne and woman unlearned in boldness and courage, to
be in the scripture suf ficyently their own masters them self. But while
they thus teach them, they forgete that by their own techyng they should hold
their peace the^ self. And indede so were it good they did, but if they taught
better.

And thus for his first point; you se good readers that master Masker makes
men perceive him for a dowble fool when it was not enough for him to come forth
with this folly onys, but he must a gods name bring in this his one folly
twyse.

The. v. chapyter.
NOw as to wchyng his second point, in that it is a world to se how strongly
the man ha^deseth it. For where as Christ has by so many open plain word
before, taught and declared, that he would give his own flesh to be eaten,
and his own blood to be drunken, and so often repeted it, and in such
effectual wise inculked it, and as who should say bette it into their hedds,
that (saving for the form and manner of the eating which he declared by his
word and his deed at his holy maundye) (...) as for to make men sure that
verily eat it and drink it they should, there could never more clear words
have been of any man desired, nor by master Masker him self devised: now comes
master Masker forth with certain words of Christ, by whithe he says that
Christ clearly declares, that he meant clear the contrary that is to wit
that his flesh should not be eaten / and also that by this word eating of his
flesh, he meant nothing else, but the bylyefe of his death for mennys sins.

Now the words of our savior that (as master masker says) prove these two
things, are these. It is the spyryte that gives life, my flesh profyteth
nothing at all. The words that I have spoken to you be spy ryte and life.

These words have good reders in them self neither any thing in dysprofe of
the very eating of his flesh, nor for the proof that he meant the bylyefe of
his death. For these worcester des as saint Austayne declares, speak not precysely
against ye eating of his flesh, as he meant to give it them wrth the spyryte
and the life therein / but against the eating of his flesh alone, deed and
cut out in gobbettes, as they conceived a false opinion that he meant to make
them eat it. And as I have showed you before, saint Cyrill expouneth these
words after the same manner, and other holy doctors to. And now if ye read
again master maskers worcester des here: ye shall find that all that seems to
prove his purpose, is only the words of him self, and nothing the words of
Christ / but him self expounyng Christ's word in such wise, that (as I have
showed you) saint Austayne and saint Cyrill and other holy doctors, expoune it
clear against him.

If his own argument were aught worth that he lays against the inter
pretacyon of all that expowne those words of Christ, to be spoken of the very
eating, by which we eat his blessed body in the sacrament, it would make
against no man so sore as against him self even here in this place.

For if it be true that he says, that if Christ had meant of the eating of his
flesh in the sacrament, he might and would have in this place told it them
plainly / and because he told them not that point out plainly, therefore it is
clear that he meant it not: than say I that sith in these words / which
master Masker says, is the very anchor hold, Christ does not so plainly
declare, that he (...) by the eating of his flessh the bylyefe that he should
dye for our synnys, as he could if he had would, and would as master Masker
says if he had so meant. This is therefore a plain proof by master Maskers
argument against master Maskers mind, yt our savior meant not so / and than
is all master Maskers matter go.

Now that our savior does not here declare that point clearly / that he meant
nothing but that they should believe that he should dye for them: I will have
master Maskers own words to bear me record. which will I wene make master
Masker somewhat wroth with him self, for writing them in him self, so folyshely
against him self.

For where he says that both the Jews and the dyscyples, murmured and
dysputed of his flesh how it should be eaten, and not of the offering thereof
for our sins: this declares and witnesses well for our part against his
own / that our savior declared more plainly his mind for the eatyuge of his
flessh, than for the offering thereof to the death for our synnys. And of very
troth so he did in deed, though master Masker say nay an hundred times. For
of the eating of his flesh as I have before said, he spoke very precysely, and
plainly, and often / and of his offering up upon the cross, he never spoke
plainly so much as one word.

For as for these words which master masker calls ye anchor hold: It is the
spyrite that gives this life my flesh profyteth nothing at all, has not one
plain word for his pur pose at all. For all the uttermost that he could take
of these words, were no more but that Christ should tell them that the
spyryte is the thing that gives his flesh the life, with out which of it
self it could not profit them at all / and therefore the words that he spoke
were spyryte and life, and to be understood spyrytually, that they should
eat his flesh with his spyryte, and not carnally that they should eat his
flessh alone without his spyryte, cut out in deed pieces of flesh, as they had
conceived a fond opinion thereof, out of which he said all this to bring
them, but yet not so much as he could have said and he had would, nor would not
because of their unworthiness to here it / and yet that they should eat his
flessh, he told them clear enough.

But as I say, what one word is there in all these words of his anchor hold,
whereby master Masker may take one handefull hold, yt Christ here showed them
so clearly, that he meant the offering of him self for our synnys? he speaks
i^ al these words not one word of offering; nor of crucifyeng, nor of death.
And by master Maskers own argument if he had meant yt way, as he well could,
so he would also have told them plainly thus: Sirs I mean not that you shall eat
my flessh, but yt you shall believe yt I shall dye for your synnys. And sith he
said not thus, master Maskers own argument has cut of his cable rope, and
lost his anchore, and run his ship him self against a rock. For he says
that if he had meant it, he would have told them plain the tale to put them out
of all dowte.

And here you se now good reders by mo meanys than one, as well by ye
exposycyons of old holy doctors and saints, as by the wise argument of
master masker him self, to what wise wurshypfull end, this ryall brage of his
is come to pass, in which he triumphs over the catholic church and the
blessed sacrament, where he bosteth thus. This therefore is the sure anchor to
hold us by, against all the obieccions of the papystes, for the eating of
Christ's body as they say in form of bread. Christ said, My flesh profyteth
nothing, menyng to eat it bodily. This is the key that solueth all their
arguments and opens the way to show us all their false and abomynable
blasphemouse lies upon Christ's words, and utters their sleyght ingelynge
over the bread to maintain Antichrystes kingdom therwyth. And thus when
Christ had declared it, and taught them that it was not the bodyly eating of
his materyall body, but the eating with the spyryte of faith: he added
saying, The words which I here speak unto you are spyryte and life / that is
to say, this matter that I here have spoken of with so many words, must be
spyrytually understood, to give ye this life everlasting. wherefore the cause
why ye understand me not, is that ye believe me not. Here is lo the conclusyon
of all his sermon.

Sith your self have seen good readers, that in this matter and in this whole
exposycyon, there are against master masker not only the catholyke church of
our time, but also all the old holy doctors and saints, which with one voice
expoune these words of Christ to be spoken and meant of that eating of
Christ's flesh, by which it is eaten in the blessed sacrament / against
which point master masker here rages in this his furyouse boste, raylynge up
pon them all that so teache or believe, under his spygstuff name of papystes: I
would wit of master masker, whyther saint (...), saint Austayn, and saint
Ambrose, saint (...), and saint (...), Theophilactus, saint Cyrill, and saint
Chry sostome, were all papystes or not? If he answer ye, and say the were:
than shall he make no man (that wise is) asshamed of the name of papyste (as
odyouse as he would make it) if he grant us that such good godly men, and
such holy doctors and saints were papystes.

Now if he answer me nay, and say that they were no papystes: than he makes
it plain and open unto you good reders, that he plays but the part of a
folyssh rayler and aiester, and does but deceive and mock all his own
fratexnyte / when by raylynge against papystes, whom he would have taken for
folk of a false faith, he dyssembleth the troth, that his here sye is not
only dampened by them that he calls papystes, but by them also whom he
co^fesscth for no papists, and whom he cannot but co^ fesse for old holy
doctors and saints / nor cannot so blind you, but that you plainly perceive
by their own worcester des / which I have rehearsed you, and yet shall hereafter more
plainly per ceyue, by mo holy doctors and saints of the same sort, and by mo
plain worcester des also of ye same, yt they do all with one voice expoune these
words of Christ mencyoned in the syxte chapi ter of saint John, to be spoken
and meant of yt eating of his flesh, by which we eat it in the blessed
sacrament.

And thus have I good reders answered you all master Maskers ar gumentes, by
which he reproves in general under the name of papyste, all those, that is to
wit all the old holy doctors and saints, that contrary to his heresye
expowne the said words of Christ to be meant of the very eating of his
flesh, and not only of the byleuynge of his death for our sin.

And now will I come to his subtle dysputacyo^s, that he makes against me by
name in special, to soil such things as I in my letter wrote against John
Fryth.

Here ends the third book.
The fourth book
IN the syxte lefe thus he says.

Here makes M. More this argument against the (...) man. Because the Jews
merueyled at this (...): my flesh is very meat and my blood drink and not
at this: I am the door and the very vine, therefore this text (says he) my
flesh (...). must be understood after the lytterall sense, that is to wit
even as the carnal Jews understood it murmuring at it, veynge offended,
going their ways from Christ for their so carnal understanding thereof / and
the the other textes, I am the door etc. must be understood in an allegorye and
a spyrytual sense, because his hearers merueyled no thing at the manner of
speech.

I have good readers before this argument that he speaks of, another argument
in that pystle of mine against fryth / which all though it went before and was
read before this, yet because it would not well be soyled, master Masker was
content to dyssemble it. But I shall afterward anon lay it before him again,
and set him to it with a festue, that he shall not say but he saw it.

But now as for this argument of mine, that he makes the first, I mysse
fortuned to make so feeble, that he takes even a pleasure to play with it /
and therefore he soyleth it and soyleth it again / and that (...) wisely ye may
be fast and sure / and so shall you say your self when you se all. But yet
though he win him self worship in the soylynge, yt was no great wisdom to
lose his worship in the rehersynge, with false beryng in hand, that I say
that those words of Christ must be understood after that lyterall sense
that the carnal Iewys took therein, that mur mured and went their way therefore.
For they took yt of his fseshe, to be eaten in the self same fleshely form and
as holy saint Austayne says that they should have eaten his flesh dead
without life or spyryte, as befe or motten is cut out in bochers shoppys.
And I am very sure, that master Maskar has no such word in my letter, whereof
he may take hold to say that I say that Christ's word should be taken so. But
this is no new fashyon of these folks, to rehearse other men's arguments in
such manner as them self list to make them, and the^ they make them such, as
them self may most easily soil them. which while master Masker has done
with mine, yet has he little advantage thereby. But to thentent that all thing
shall be the more open before your yien: I shall rehearse you first the thing
that he would be content you saw not, ytis to wit mine own word as I wrote
them, which he reherseth as him self makes them new.

These were good read^er my word. And over this the very cyrcu^stau^ces of the
places in the gospel, in which our savior speaks of that sacrament may well
make open the dyfference of his spech in this matter and of all those other /
and that as he spoke all those but i^ an allegory, so spoke he this plainly
menyng yt he spoke of his very body and his very blood beside al (...). For
neither when our lord said he was a very vine, nor when he said he was the
door / there was none that herd him that any thing meruayled thereof. And why?
for because they perceived well that he meant not that he was a materyall vine
in deed, nor a materyall door neither. But when he said that his flesh was very
mete, and his blood was very drink, and that they should not have life in them
but if they did eat his flesh and drink his blood / than were they all
most all in such a wonder thereof, that they could not abide. And where fore?
but because they preceyued well by his words and his manner of cyrcumstaunces
used in the speaking of them, that Christ spoke of his very flesh and his
very blood in ded. For else the strangeness of the words would have made
them to have taken it as well for an allegorye, as either his words of the
vine or of the door. And than would they have no more merueyled at the tone
than they did at the the other. But now where as at the vine and the door they
merueyled nothing / yet at the eating of his flesh and drinking of his
blood, they so sore merueyled, and were so sore moved, and thought the matter so
hard, and the wonder so great, that they asked how could that be, and went
almost all their way. whereby we may well se, that he spoke these words in
such wise, as the herers perceived that he meant it not in a parable nor an
allegorye / but spoke of his very flesh and his very blood in deed.

Lo good readers here I speak of Christ's very flesh and his very blood (as
the troth is in deed) But here I say not as master masker says I say, that
Christ meant of his flesh and his blood, in such wise as the Jews thought
that forsook him therefore which thought as you have herd, that they should
eat his flleshe in the self fleshely form, and also pyecemele in lothly deed
go bettes, without either life or spiryt.

And now that you have seen his troth in rehersynge: you shall se a shewof his
sharp sotle wit in the soy lynge. wherein first after his iuglyng fashyon, to
carye ye reder with wonderynge fro markynge well the matter, thus he begins
with a great grauyte, geuynge all the word war nynge to be ware of me.

To christen reader, here haste thou not a taste but a great tun full of
Moris myschyefe, and pernycyouse peruertynge of gods holy word. And as thou
see him here falsely and (...) destroy the pure sense of gods word: so
does he in all other places of his books.

To good readers, now have you a great high tragycall warning, with not a
little taste but a great tu^ne full at onys, of my myscheuouse pernycyouse false
pestylent peruertynge and destroyeng of ye pure sense of gods holy words in
this one place, which he will shall stand for a playnte prose that I do the
same in all other places.

Now good readers alde it that yt might mysse hap me by ouersyght to mysse
handle this one place, and yet i^ some other to write well enough: yet am I
content to take the cond^ycy on at master Maskers hand, that if mine hadelyng
of this one place, be such an heyghnouse handlyng, as ma heth it such a
pernycyouse pestilent, not only peruersyon, but also destruccyon of the pure
sense of gods holy word: never make examynacyon of any other word of mine
farther. For I than forthwyth confess even here, that I have in all other
places written wrong every whyt.

But now on the the other side, though you should hap to find that in this
place, I have somewhat over seen my self, in mysse taking of some one word
for an other, without thecfecte of the matter changed: than will I require you
to take my fawte for no greater than it is in deed / nor mysse trust all my
writing for that one word in this one place mysse taken, without thempayrynge
of the matter. For such a manner mysse taking of a word, is not the dystroyeng
of the pure sense of gods holy word.

And therefore if you find my fawte good readers no ferther than such: ye will
I dowte not of your equity, bud master Masker leave his iniquite, and change
his high tragical ter mes, and turn his great tun full of pernyciouse
pestilent false peruer tynge poysen, into a little taste of wholesome enough,
though some what small and rough rochell wine. And therefore let us now se
wherein he lays this great high hepe of myscheuouse peruertynge. To thus good
readers he says

First where More says, they merneyled at Chry stes saying, my of is very
meat (...). that is not so. Neither is there any such word in the text,
except More will exponne murmurabant id est mitabantur. They murmured, that is
to say they meruayled / as he expowneth oportet, id est expedit et conuenit,
he must dye, or it behooves him to dye / that is to say it was expedient and
of good congru ence that he should dye etc. This poet may make, a man to
sygnifye an ass, and black white, to blete the simple eyes.

Now good readers, I wot well that you consider that the cause where fore I
spoke of the meruaylyng that they had, which herd Christ speak of the eating
of his flesh, was by cause that none of those that herd him at other times
call him self a vine or a door meruayled any thing thereat / so that by the
great difference of the behauour of ye herers, it might well appear that there
was great dyfference in the speaking / and that the the other two were well
perceived to be spoken only by way of allegorye, and the third to be spoken
of his very flesh in deed / where as Fryth held opinion yt this was none
otherwise spoken, but only by way of an allegorye as the the other twain were.

Now good readers, if you read my words again, and in every place of them
where I write they meruey led, it would like you to put out that word they
merueysed, and set in this word, they murmured, in the stead thereof: ye shall
frnde no change made in the matter, by that change made in the words. But you
shall se mine argument shall stand as strong with that word, They murmured / as
with this word, they merueyled. John. 6.
For when at the herynge of Christ words speaking of the eating of his
flesh, the euangelyste shows that many of the herers murmured / John. 15.
and neither at the calling of him self a vine, nor at the calling of (...).
10.
him self adore, none of his herers murmured for yt manner of speaking: it
appears as well the dyfference in Christ's speaking, by the dyffere^ce of
diverse his herers at ye tone word murmuring, and at the the other two not
murmuring, as at the tone meruaylynge, and at the the other two not meruaylynge.

To thus you se good readers, that in this matter in which master mas ker
makes his great out cry upon me, for chaungynge of this word murmuryng, into
this word meruay sing, sith there is no change in the matter by the change of
the word, but mine argument as strong with the tone word as with the the other:
I neither have done it of any fraud for advantage of mine own part in the
matter / nor yet sith the change is but in the word without change of the
matter, I have not thereby pernycyousely and pestylently by the whole tun full
of falshed at onys, perverted and destroyed the pure sense of gods holy
word. But it appears well on the the other side, that master Masker has geuyn
us here, I will not be so sore to say a tun full, but at the least wise a
little pretty cast of his little pretty falshed, with which a little he pretyly
belyeth me.

The. ii. chapyter.
BUt yet shall you now se his wit and his truth both a little better tried,
even upon this same place, in which with his huge excsa macyons he makes his
part so plain.

As for oportet of which he speaks here, we shall talk of after in another
place. But now to wchynge this word they meruaysed / master Masker says
thus. That is not so, nor there is no such word in the text. So you se good
readers that he says two thyn ges. One that it is not so, and another that
there is no such word there in ye text. As for the word good reader I will
not greatly strive with him. But where he says it is not so, and therein
affermeth that they meruaysed not: I think the words of the text will well
(...) my saying. For good reader, when they said, How can he give us his flesh
to eat? And when they said, This word is hard and who can here it: Do not
these words prove that they meruayled and thought it strange, wha^ they
called it so hard yt no man might abide to hear it, (...) how he could do it,
because they thought it impossible? Now you se good readers, yt gospel says
the self same thing that I say, thought it say not the self same word / and
therefore lies master Masker in saying it is not so.

But by this wise way of master Masher, if I had written that Absolon was
angry with Amno^ his 2. Reg. 13.
brother for violatynge his sister Thamar: master Masher would say, so good
reader here thou have not a taste but a tun full of Morys per nicyouse
peruertyng of goddys holy word / and as thou see him here falsely and
pestilently destroy the pure sense of gods word, so does he in all other
places of his works. For where he says yt Absolon was angry with Amnon, it is
not so, neither is there any such word in the text / except More will expoune
oderat (...), id est irascebatur ei / he hated him, yt is to say, he was angry
with him / as he expouneth murmuraba^t id est mirabantur / they murmured, that
is to say the meruayled. And thus may this poet make a man to sygnyfye an
ass. For the bible says not as More says, that Asolon was angry with Amnon.
For the text says no more, but that Asolon hated Amnon, and caused him to be
killed.

Now like you now good reders this wise solucyon of master Mas ker? This
proves not him a poet that can make a man signyfye an ass but proves him
rather instead of a poet, and instead of a man, a very stark ass in deed.

The. iii. chapyter.
BUt of very troth good reader, not without a good cause and a great, I did
rather touch the thing yt was the cause of the Jews murmur and their
dyssensyon when they dysputed upon the matter, than I did their murmr and
their dys sensyon. For of troth where he said of him self that he was a door:
there John. 10.
grew dyssensyon among his herers upon that word of his, and upon other
words that he spoke there with at yt same time / so yt the gospel says, And
there was dyssensyo^ among the John. 6
Jews upon these words / some saying that the devil was in him and some
saying nay, and that the devil was not wont to make blind men se / as there
was here dissensyon and dys putynge upon these words of eating of his
flesh. But inthe. x. chapyter they nothing meruayled of his calling him
self a door for he expowned ye parable at length so that they perceived well
that he called him self a door, but only by way of an allegory. And therefore
of calling him self a door they mer uayled not of that word when he declared
yt, for they perceived it for a parable. But they dysputed upon that word and
upon his other words also, wherein he said that no man could kill him
against his will, John. 10.
and that he would dye for his sheep, and that he had power to put away his
soul and take it again. Of these things they dysputed, and thought them
strange and meruay louse to. But not for the words or the manner of speaking,
but for the very matter. For all they understood the words metely well / but
many of them byleued them not. But not one of them did so take that word, I
am a door, as that they meruayled how that could be. And therefore none of the^
for any such marvel said there, how can he be a door? as these Jews said
here, how can he give us his flesh to eat? And therefore as I say, therein
appears well that our savior in the tone place called him self a door by
way of a parable / and in the the other spoke of the catynge of his own very
flesh yt self, besides all parables. which well appeared I say by his
audyence. For the tone word they perceived for a parable, and therefore none of
them meruayled of the manner of the speaking of that word, though they
meruayled and murmured and dysputed at the thing that the parable meant. But in
the the other place, many meruayled at the thing by the self same name that he
gave thereto, saying, how can he give us his flesh to eat? whereby yt well
appe (...) that they perceived that he spoke of very eating of his flesh in
deed / and in yt the other place appears not yt they thought he meant that he was
a very door in deed, but the contrary plain appears. For Christ by his plain
and open exposycyon of that parable, delivered them clean from all occasyon of
thinking that he meant him self to be a very door in deed.

But in these words of eating of his flesh, because he would give his very
flesh to be eaten in very deed, therefore he more and more told them still the
same / and also told them him self was god, and therefore able to do yt / and
over that gave them warning that they should not eat it in deed gobbettes,
but should eat it quycke with spyryt and life. For his words were spyrit and
life. For his flesh should else anayle nothing. And that though his body
should be eaten by many sundry men in many sundry places, yet should yt never
the less be also still whole and sound, where so ever he would beside. which
he declared by (...). 6.
his (...) with his body perfyte into heaven, not withstanding that it should
be before that, eaten of many men in earth.

And thus have I good reders as for this solucyon of master Masker, made open
and plain unto you / his falsed and his folly both / and made rt clear for all
his high pernycyouse pe stylent words, both that I have hand led this place of
the scripture right, and also taken rather the sentence than the word. And I
have also by occasyo^ of his wise solucyon, caused you to perceive that in mine
argument was and is more pyth and more strength, then peraduentur every man
perceived before. And therefore thus much worship has he won by this his
first solemn solucyon.

The. iiii. chapter.
BUt in his second solucyon, he specially shows his deep in syghte and
cunning, and mine ouersyght to shamefully. For there in lo thus he says.

But yet for his lordely pleasure, let (...) grant him that they murmured, is
as myche to say as they meruayled, bycanse perchance the one may follow at
the the other. And than do (...) ask him whyther Christ's (...) and his apostles,
(...) him not and understood him not, when he said I am the core and the vine,
and when he said my flesh etc. If he say no or nay, the scripture is plain
against him Ioh. 6. 10. 15. If he say ye or yes; then yet do I ask him
whyther his dyscypfes and apostles, thus herynge and understanding his words
in all these three chapyters, wondered and meruaysed as mays ter More say the,
or murmured as has the text at their masters speech what think ye More
must answer here? here may you se whither this old holy vpholder of the popes
church is brought, even to be taken in his own (...). For the discyples and
his apostles neither murmured nor meruayled, nor yet were not offended with
their master Christ's worcester des and manner of speech.

(...) good readers, here master Masher because he thinks yt not enough for
his worship, to show him self ones a fool by his first solucio^, conieth now
farther forth to show him self twice a fool, ye thryse a fool, by the secnnde.

And first for away to come there to, he says he will grant me for my
sordely pleasure, that they murmured is as much to say as they (...) (...). In
which granting he does me no great fordly pleasure. For I have as you have
herd well, proved him al ready that I need not his granting therein. But
verily in the cause that he adds thereto, when he says because perchance the
tone may follow at the the other, therein he does me a very great lordely
pleasure. For yt is even a pleasure for a lord and for a king to, to se him
play so far the fool, as without necessytie to write in that word him self,
which helps mine argument against him self, and makes all his wonderynge yt
he has in his first sosucyon upon me, fall in his own neck. For if their
murmuryng followed upon their meruaylynge, as him self here says that
peaduenture yt did: than plays he first peradventure the fool, to make such
an out cry upon me for saying that they meruailed, where the text says
they murmured / as though I with that word utterly destroyed yt pure sense of
gods holy word. For that word does not so pestylently peruerte the sense, if
yt may stand with the sen tence, as yt may in deed, if master Masker say
true that peradventure the tone may follow upon the the other / that is to wit
the murmuryng upon the meruaylynge, for so he means thereby. For as mad as
he is, he is not I think so mad yet, as to me ane that the meruaylynge fo
lowed upon the murmuring. For they meruayled first and murmured after. And
now sith this one word of his therefore, over throws all his wondering, that
he has made on me, and proves him self willyngly and wyttyngly in all his
high tragycall exclamacyon against his own conscience, and his own very
knowledge to bylye me: he has therein as I say done me a very special
pleasure, to se him so far play the fool, as to bring forth that word him
self / specially where there was no need at all, but even for a garnyshe of his
induccion, with a show of his cunning, to make men know that he had not so
little learning, but that he wist well enough him self that he had shamefully
bylyed me in all that ever he had cried out against me, concer cernynge any
mysse constrewyng of that place of holy scripture.

The. v. chapyter.
Now after this his double folly well and wisely put forth at ones, he
brings me to mine opposycyon. And therein he handeleth me so hardly, yt I ca^
not escape, which way so ever I take. whether I say that Christ's dyscyples and
apostles herd and understood their may sters words in all the three places, or
that I say that in any one of those three places they understood him not. For
here to be sure to hold me in on both sides that I escape not, he show eth what
dau^geour I fall in, which way so ever I take. For he says that on the tone
side I deny the gos spell if I answer no or nay, and on the the other side I am
taken in mine own trappe, if I say ye or yes.

And surely here he plays the wysest point and the most for his own
suertye, that I saw him play yet. For ye shall understand that in the first
part of my Confutacyon in the third book the. clxxx. side, for as myche as
Tyndale has been so long out of England, that he could not tell how to use
these english (...), nay and no, ye and yes: I gave him a rule and a certain
samples of ye rule, whereby he might learn where he should answer nay, and
where no, and where ye and where yes.

Now master Masker when he wrote his book, neither having my book by him,
nor the rule by heart thought he would be sure that I should find no such
fault in him / and therefore on the tone side for the answer, assygneth ye and
yes both / and on the the other side both nay and no / leuynge the choice to my
self, which he durst not well take upon him, lest he might show therein such
congruytie in the Englyhhe tongue; as he shows in some other things wherein he
speaks english as congrewe, as a man might that had learned his english in
a another land.

But now must I answer him to his subtle questyons. His first questyon is
this.

He asks me, whether Christ dyscyples and his apostles, hard him not and
understood him not, wha^ he said, I am the door, and when he said, I am the
vine, and when he said, my flesh is verily meat etc. Master Maskar is so
wyly that I must needs take better head what I answer him, tha^ I should need,
if I were to answer a good plain man of the country. For master Maskar in
ye. 29. lefe bosteth him self of his conning ryally and says.

It (...) verily the thing that I desire even to be wry ten against in this
matter. For I have the solucyone of al their obieccyone ready.

Now sith therefore this man is so cunning, and has his answerys so ready for
all obieccyons that men may lay to him: he can not be by lyklelyded but
wonderful sure and ready, with subtle replycacions, against all answers that
men may make to those opposycions that he deuiseth against other men him self.
I will therefore be as ware of him as I ca^. And first I say that his questyon
is captiouse. For he asks one answer to three things at onys / and in each
of the three he asks me two questyons at ones. For he asks of ye door, and
the vine, and of his flesh, all three at ones. And yet of each of these not a
double q^stio^ as I told you / but a qua treble questyon at ones. For he asks
both of his apostles and the disci ples / and not only whether all these herd
Christ at all three times, but also whyther all these understood him. And all
twelve questyons master Masker wylyly to bygyle such a simple soul as I am,
asks in one questyone at ones. And therefore lest he betrappe me, I shall
some what at the least wise dyuyde them.

And than I say to the first que styon whyther Christ's dyscyples and
apostles hard him not and understood him not, when he said I am the door:
because the questyon is yet double and captyouse, I purpose to make sure work
and answer, that I can not tell, I think that some did and some did not, for
some of them I wene were not there.

Now if he say that he means only them that were there: so would I to have
taken him, if he were a good plain soul, and not such a sotle sophystre that
longs to be arguing, and has all thing so ready upon his fyngers ends.

But go to now, though I could yet have other answers for him if I would: yet
for his lordely pleasure I (...) content to grant him, that they both herd
him and under stood him / wherein I grant him more yet I promise you, than he
can precysely bind me to by the text.

All this granting for this place gives him no ground yet. (...) here I am
well content, not only to say all that he says, that is yt his apostles and
dis discyples understood that Christ calls him self the door but by a
parable / and therefore meruailed not at yt manner of speking. But I say more
to, that so did also the Jews that reproved him and repugned against him. And
say also that they repugned so myche the more against him, and so myche the
more murmured and disputed against the matter, in how myche they more understood
the manner of ye speaking and that parable. For they wyste well that word of
the door, was spoken by a parable, for Christ plainly expowned it. But they mur
mured myche at that yt no man might well come in but by him. Let us now to ye
secund than. And where he asks me whyther Christ's dys cyples and his
apostles, herd him not and understood him not, when he said, I am the very
vine: here I would for mine own suertye ask (...). 15.
him, whyther he mean by Christ's discyples and apostles, some of both sorts,
or else those disciples only that were both dyscyples and apostles, How be it
if I should ask him thus he would say I did but tryfle / and that every man
may well wit by the putting of his questyon, that he meneth of either sort
some. For else he would have said no more but apostles which had been enough if
he had meant but them. And also it were against his purpose, if Christ's other
dysciples understood him not, though his apostles did. well I am content than
to take it so. And than unto the questyon, whyther his discy ples and apostles
hard not Christ and understood him not, when he said I am the very vine: to
this questyon copulatyue I answer no. But than master Masker replyeth, that
the scripture is plain against me. But unto that replyca cyon I say nay. For
I say that the scripture there with saint Mark and saint Luke set unto it,
proves mine answer true. For it appears well among them three, that bysyde
thapo stles, none of his other dyscyples un derstode him, for none of his other
dyscyples herd him, for none of his other dyscyples were there, nor yet all
his. xii. apostles neither / for Judas was gone before. So that in this part
of his first questyon, master Masker has given him self a fall in the
subtle proponynge of his que styon. As to the understanding, I agree that they
that were there under stood him, which makes nothing against me.

Now to the third place when he asks me whyther Christ's dyscyples and his
apostles herd him not and understood him not, when he said, my flesh is very
mete etc. First as for his dyscyples I say no not all. Than says master
Masker that if I say nay or no, the scripture is plain against me. John^. 6.
But to that say I again, that when I say no, ye scripture is even there with
me. For as the gospel there plainly tell leth, many of his dysciples though
they herd him well, did understand him amysse. For though they under stood him
right, in that they perceived that he spoke of the very eating of his very
flesh: yet they understood him wrong, in that they took him that they should
eat it in the self flesshely form and in deed pyeces with out life or spyryte
/ and therefore they went their way from him and left him, and walked no more
after with him. Here has master masker an other fall in this place to, to
wchyng his first que siyo^ as for ye dyscyples.

But what say we than for thapo stles? did not they understand him? what if I
here would say nay? than except master Masker could prove yes, ellysis not
only his first questyon gone, which he makes for a way to the secunde / but
his secunde que (...) is clearly gone to, wherewith he would make me be taken in
mine own trappe. And therefore first for argument sake, I deny that
thapostles them self understood Christ word. Now will now master Masker
prove me yt they did, Mary says he; for they were well acqnaynted with such
phrases. And answered their master Christ when he asked them, will you go
hense fro me to? Lord said they to whom shall we go, thou have the words of
everlasting life / and we believe that thou art Christ the sone of the
living god.

Now good reader I think there be some textes in scripture that may ster
Masker understands not no more than other pore men. But yet if he will not
agree that, but say that he understands: yet if we would put ye case that
there were some such one text, he would I think admytte the case for possible.
Let us than put him hardely none other, but even the same words of Christ
that we be now in hand wythall. For no man understands any word wurse than
he understands those, even yet while he writes on them. If him self had been
than of that flock, and had seen all other things in Christ that his apostles
saw, and had byleued in him, and had not mysse trusted Christ, but ben ready to
do what he would bid him do, and believe what he would bid him believe / but had
yet as for those words of eaiynge Christ's flesh thought them hard to
perceive what Christ meant by them / but though he fully understood them not
as he thought, yet he dowted not but that good they were that god spoke, and
that Christ if he tarried his time, would tell him ferther of the matter at more
leysour: if now when other went their way, Christ would have said unto him,
will thou master Masker go thy way fro me to? whyther would than master
Masker have let to say even the self same words that the apostles said
with other like, whyther should I go fro the good lord? Thou haste the words
of everlasting life, and I believe and know that thou art Christ the sone of
the living god, and art able to do what thou will, and thy words be holy and
godly whyther I understand them or no / and thou may make me perceive them
better at thy ferther pleasure. would master masker have been contented to say
thus: or else would he have said? Nay by my fay good lord, thou shalt tell
me this tale a litel more plainly yt I may bet ter perceive it by and by, or
else will I go to the devil with yender good fellows, and let them dwell
with the that will.

Now if master Masker would (as I wene he would but if he were stark mad)
have said the same him self that saint Peter said / or be content at the
lest that saint Peter should say it for him, though him self had not well
and clearly perceived what Christ meant by those words: Now can he now prove
by the same words of theyrs, that thapostles understood his worcester des than.

Thus you se good readers, that of his two questyons; the first have I so
answered that it is come to no thing / (if I would stycke with him still at
his answer) till he have better proved me than he has yet, that thapostles in
the syxte chapyter of saint John^ did understand Cristes words. And now
therefore till he have better handeled his first que styon, he can against me
never use his secunde, whereby he bosteth that I could make none answer, but
such as should take my self in mine own trappe. From which sith I am clean
ascaped all ready, by the answering of his first questyo^, you may good
readers se, that master Masker goth as wylyly to work to take me, as a man
might send a child about with salt in his hand, and bid him go cache a
bird, by layenge a little salt on her tail / and when ye byrd is flowen,
comfort him than to go cache another, and tell him he had caught yt and it
had tarried a little.

The. vi. chapyter.
BUt yet to se now how craftily he could betrappe me if I would let him alone:
Let us grant him for his lordly pleasure, that the dyscyples and apostles
understood Christ's words well in all three pla ces, not only when he said he
was John^. 10.
the door / and when he said he was John^. 15.
the vine / but also when he said, my flesh is verily meat. What now? Mary
than says master Masker, If More answer ye or yes: than do I ask him
ferther, whyther Christ's dyscyples and apostles thus (...) and understanding
his words in all the three chapyters, wo^dered and merueyled (as More says) or
murmured (as has the text) at their may sters speech. what think you More
must answer here? here may you se why there thie old holy vpholder of the
(...) and church is brought, even to be taken in his own trappe. For the
dyscyples and his apostles neither murmured nor metuayled, nor yet were not
offended with this their master Christ's words and manner of speaking.

In what trappe of mine own or his either; has master Masker caught me here?
Mine argument was John^. 10.
ye (...) well, yt at the herynge Christ say, I am the door, and I am the very
John^. 15.
vine: no man meruayled at the manner of speaking, because that every man
perceived his words for allegoryes Ioh. 6.
and parables. But in the third place where he said, My flesh is verily
meat, And the bread that I shall give you is my flesh. And ex cepte you eat
the flesh of the sone of man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life
in you: so many meruayled because they perceived well it was not a parable but
that he spoke of very eating of his flesh in deed, that of all his herers
very few could abide it, but murmured and said how can he give us his flesh
to eat. And his own dyscyples said, This word is hard, who may here him /
and went almost all their way. Now when theffecte of mine argument is, that in
this point many meruayled at the thing, as a thing plainly spoken, and not a
parable, but a plain tale that men should verily eat his flesh / and that
no man meruayled at the the other two manner of speaking, because they perceived
them for parables: what makes it against me, that in the third place there
were some that meruayled not nor murmured not sith that though some did not,
yet many did, and both meruailed and murmured and went their war, and that
far the most part, and save the apostles almost euerichone. And verily the
the other dyscyples as saint Chrysostom says, those that than were present
(against master maskers saying) went their ways all the maynye.

Where is now good readers this trappe of mine own making, that I am fallen
in? has master Masker cast me down so deep, with proving me that some
meruayled not, where I said many did? Be these two proposicions so sore
repugnaunt and so plain contradyctory: Many meruayled, and some meruailed not,
that because I said the first, and he proves the secund, therefore I am quyte
cast and caught in mine own trappe? This man is a wyly shrewe in argument I
promise you.

The. vii. chapyter.
BUt now that I have good readers so fair escaped my trappe I trust with the
help of some holy saint, to cach master Masker in his own trappe, that his
maystershyppe has made for me.

Ye wot well good readers, that the trappe which he made for me, were these
two wyly capcyouse questyons of his, with which he thought to cache me / that
is to wit, first whyther the dyscyples and apostles hard and understood our
savior in all three places / and than upon mine answer ye or yes, his other
questyo^ ferther, whyther they meruayled or murmured. Unto which while I have
answered no: now by the trappys of his questyons he rekeneth me dreuyn to be
caught in mine own, because I said that many merueyled / as though many other
might not because the apostles did.

Now before I show you how him self is taken in his own trappe ye shall here
his own gloryouse worcester des with which he bosteth yt he has taken me, and would
make men wene it were so. (...) these are his, words.

Here may you se, whether this old holy vpholder of the popys church is
brought, even to be taken in his own trappe. For the dyscyples and his (...)
neither murmured nor meruayled, nor yet were not offended with this their
master Christ's word (...) and manner of speech. For they were well acquainted
with such phrases, and answered their master Christ when he asked them, will
ye go hence fro me to? Lord said they to whom shall we go (...) thou (...)
the words of euevlastyng life, and we believe yt thou art Christ the sone of
the living god. Lo masters more, they neither merueyled nor murmured. And
why? For because as ye say, they understood it in an allegorye sense, and
petceyued well that he meant not of his materyall body to be eaten with their
teth / but he meant it of him self to be byleued to be very god and very man,
having flesh and blood as they had, and yet was he the sone of the living
god. Thye bylyefe gathered they of all his spyrytuall sayenges, as him self
expouneth his own words saying, My flesh profyteth nothing, meaning to
be eaten: but it is the spyryte that gives this life. And the words that I
speak unto you are spyryte and life. So that who so believe my flesh to be
crucyfyed and broken, and my blood to be shede for his sins, he eats my
flesh and drynketh my blood, and has life everlasting. And this is the life
wherwyth the ryghtuouse lives even by faith. Abacuk. 2.

Lo good reader here have I reher sed you his words whole to the end. And yet
because you shall se that I will not hyde from you any pyece of his, that may
make for any strength of his matter: I shall rehearse you fer there his other
words written in his 13. lefe, which I would have touched before, saving that
I thought to reserve it for him, to strength with all this place of his, where
it might do him best service / where he would prove against me to trappe me
with, that the cause why the dyscyples and apostles merueyled not, nor murmured
not, nor were not offended, was because they understood Christ's words to be
spoken not of very eating of his flesh, but only of the bylyefe of his
passion by way of a parable or an allegorye / as he spoke those other word
when he said, I John^. 10.
am ye door, and when he said, I am the John^. 15
vine. The word lo of M. Masker with which he sets forth the proof of this
point in his. 13, lefe be these, in the end of all his exposycyon upon the
syxt chapyter of saint John^.

Here is lo the conclusyon of all thye sermon. Christ very god and man had set
his flesh before them to be reteyed with faith, that it should be broken and
suffer for their sin. But they could not eat it spi rytually, because they
byleued not in him. wherefore many of his dyscyples fill from him and walked no
more with him. And than he said to the. xii. will ye go away to? And Simon
Peter answered: Lord to whom shall we go? Thou haste the words of
everlasting life, and we believe and are suit that thou art Christ the sone
of the living god. Here it is manifest what Peter and his fellows understood
by this eating and drinking of Christ. For they were perfytely taught that
it stood all in the bylyefe in Christ, as their answer here testyfy eth. If
this matter had stood upon so deep a miracle as our papystes feign, without any
word of god not comprehended under any of their comen senses, that they should
eat his body under form of bread, as long, deep, thycke, and (...) broad as
it hangs upon the cross, they being yet but feeble of faith not confermed
with the holy ghost; (...) here needs have wondered, stonied, and staggered,
and have been more inquisytyue in and of so strange a matter, than they were. But
they neither dowted, nor merueyled nor murmured, nor nothing offended with
with ma ner of speech, as were the other that slypte away / but they answered
fermely: Thou have the words of everlasting life, and we believe etc. Now to
the exposycyon of the words of our lords sowper.

Lo good readers, ye will I trow now bear me record, that I dele plainly with
master Maskar here, and hyde nothing of his a side that may do him any
substancyall service / toward the proof of his purpose. And I warraunt you yt
shall be long ere you find him or any of all that sect, deal in such plain
ma ner with me.

But now good Christen reader, read al these whole words of his in both ye
places as often as you list, and consider them well / and than shall you
perceive in conclusyon, yt he proves his purpose by none other thing in all
this word, than only by his own words expownynge al way the words of
Christ as may ster Maskar list him self. And upon that that him self
says, that the cause wherefore the disciples and apostses (...) not, not
murmured not at these words of Christ, The bread yt I shall give you is my
flesh etc. was because they per ceyued that Christ spoke yt in a pa table (as
I say of his other words, I am the door, and I am the very vine) upon these
words of master Maskere own, master Maskar concludes for his. purpose, the
self same thing that he first pre supposes the thing that he should not
presuppose but preue, that is to wit that Christ spoke yt but by way of a
parable.

But against master Maskar and his presumptuouse presuppo sing, the matter
appears plain. For as I have before said, our savior John^. 10.
John^. 51.
when he said, I am the (...), and when he said, I am the very vine, did so
psecute and declare in both the places his own words, that there could no
man have cause to marvel at the manner of speaking for his own declaracyon in
prosecutynge his own words was such, that it must needs make any man (but
if he were an idiote or an ass) perceive that Christ spoke in those two
places yt he was the (...) and the door but by way of a parable.

And this may every man sone se yt syst to (...) on ye places. And therefore no
man said how can he be a vine, nor how can he be a door, as many said in the
third place, How can he give us his flesh to eat. which words if they were
so (...) spoken but by way of parable, as the the other twain were, yt were
far (...) that so many wise men would have taken it so far other wise ever
sins, that take the the other twain / for none other. And namely such holy
doctors and saints, as are well acquaynted with Christ's phrases and parables
/ and in the study thereof, have spent the great part of all their lives. And
therefore master Maskar against so many wise men and so good, going about now
to prove this point but a parable, by none other substancyall mean, than
only by thauthoryte of his own worshypfull word, proves (...) purpose very
faynte and slender, for all his (...) Master More, as though his purpose
appeared very clear.

The. viii. chapyter.
How be yt for to furnyshe his matter with, and to set it the better forth,
because he would not have yt seem to stand all upon his own only
exposycyon, that (...) to wit upon his own only word: he sets unto his
own bare word, his own bare balde reason, and says.

If this matter had stood upon so deep a miracle as our papystes feign,
without any word not compre hended under any of their commen sense, that they
should eat his body being under the form of bread, as long, deep, (...), and
as broad as yt hanged upon the cross: they being yet but feeble of faith, not
confyrmed with the holy ghost, must here (...) have wondered, stonned, and
staggred / and have been more inquysytyue in and of so strange a matter than
they were. But they neither meruayled nor murmured / nor nothing offended with
this (...) of speech / as were the other that slypte away, but they answered
fermely. Thou haste the words of everlasting life, and we believe etc. Now to
the (...) of the words of out (...) souper.

Here has master Maskar given us a mayor of an argument, and a minor to. His
mayor is his first part unto these words, But they etc. and his minor is at
the remaunt.

But we may now ask him ergo what? For conclusyon he sets none unto
them. If he think the conclu syon follow so clear that he neded not, but
every man must needs se what follows upon his two premysses: in good faith
for my part if I should set ergo to yt, that is the comen note of the
consequente, I se not what would follow any more then the common verse of the
compute manuell, Ergo ciphos adrifex, he has made his mayor so folyshely.

In which that first yt pleases his mayfter ship to tryfle and mock in this
great matter, and make us pore people wene / that every thing that any doctor
says in dyspycyons, or holds by way of problem, were delivered us to believe
as a necessary point of our faith: he does but play the false fool for his
pleasure. For as for the manner how the blessed body of Christ is in the
blessed sacrament, whyther with his dymensy one, as song, thycke, and broad, as
he hanged on the cross, or with his dymensyons proporcionable to the form of
bread, as his blessed body was as verily his body in the first moment of his
holy concepcyon, as yt ever was at his passion / and yet was yt than neither so
thycke, so song, nor so broad / or whyther his body be there in his natural
substance, with out any dymensyons at all / or whyther he be there in all his
distyncty o^s of the members of his holy hodye, or there have al his members
without any distinctyo^ of place at all: these things and such other in which
learned men may moderately and reverently die spute and exercise their wit and
learning, the catholyque church in such wise leueth at large, that yt vyndeth
not the people to any such strayghtes in the matter, but only to the points
that we be bounden by certain and sure reuelacyon, to believe / that is to
wit, that under what manner so ever yt be there, veryfy there yt is, his very
flesh and his very blood. And in the form of bread verily eat his very body
there we do, when we receive the ve ry blessed sacrament. Thus (...) have we by
certain and sure reuela cyon, both by holy scripture, and by the tradycyon
also, by which Christ taught yt to his apostles and they to the church, as
saint Poule did to 1. Cori. 11.
the Corinthyes, and the church to the people by succession from age to age
ever syn thapostles days unto our own time.

And therefore with those mockes and iestes, master Mashar mocketh no man but
him self / save that under the name of papystes, he mocketh all the catholyque
church of this. xv. hundred year both clergy and temporaltye, men and women,
and (...) / and among the remanaunt, all (...) holy doctors and saints that
have without doubt or questyon both byleued and taught, that Crift meant not to
speak those words: My flesh is very meat, by way of a pa table, as master
Masker says he only meant / but that he verily spoke and meant of the very
eating of his flesh in deed.

But now shall you se that as I said, his mayor is so folishely made, that all the world may wonder where his wit was when he made yt.

For he says that if the matter stood in deed, upon such a great miracle as
the catholyque church (which he calls the papystes) believe, that is to wit
that his very body should be eaten in form of bread / and that also (which
he puts for a necessary part of our says) as long, as deep, as thycke,
and as broad as yt was when yt hanged on the cross: than the dyscyples and
apostles (because they were yet but feeble in the faith) must needs have
wondered, stonned, and stagerd, and have been more inquysytyue therein then
they were. Now woteth well every child good reader, that Christ did not in
that place, plainly tell them in what manner that they should eat yt / that is
to wit that they should eat yt in form of bread. For though he gave them an
insynnacyon and sygnyfy cacyon thereof, in that he said, And John^. 6.
the bread that I shall give you is my flesh / which wordis coupled with his
deed when he did instytute in deed at his maundy, might then make Mat. 26.
them clearly perceive that they should eat flesh in form of bread: yet at
the time when the word was first spoken, yt was not so plain for that matter,
but yt might seem to them that he used that word bread but by manner of
allegorye to sygnyfye there his flesh, because they should verily eat yt as
men eat bread.

Now se than good reader the mad nesse of master Maskar, that says here,
that that thing must nedeshaue made thapostles wonder, stonned, and stagger, at
the time when Christ spoke those words in the sext chapypyter of saint John^ /
at which time every child knows, yt they though they well perceived that they
should verily eat his flesh, yet they knew not that they should eat it in
form of bred. And how could it tha^ have made them wonder (that thing I say
that he speaks of, and so sore exaggerateth to increase the wonder) that is to
wit that his flesh should be eaten in form of bred, and that as long as
thycke, as deep, and as broad, as yt was when yt hanged on the cross. Now
could this thing I say have made them wonder at that time, at which time
they thought not of the eating thereof in the form of bread? Nerd ever any
man such a mad argument, as master Maskar has made us here.

Now if Christ had there told them in deed, all that master Mas kar has
here put in so folyshely, to make the matter the more wonderful: than would I
deny his mayor. And so will I do if him self put all that out again, and
leave no more in his mayor than Christ said in deed, that is that they should
verily ease his flesh and have life thereby, and yt they should not only eat
it bodyly but also spyrytually / nor in deed gobettes without life or spyryte,
but quycke and joined with the lively (...), by which yt should give life, and
without which his flesh of his own proper nature to the geuynge of life,
could not avail.

Now say I that if master Mas ker had made his mayor of this: all this had been no cause for his apostles to wonder, nor to be stonned and stagger, nor to
murmr and grudge as they did that slypte away.

For as feeble as master Maskar ma keth thapostles in the faith of Crist: yet
at that time without any such manner of marvel, as might make them stonne
and stagger and slyppe away from him, they byleued such other things as were
as hard to believe as this, and that without any farther inquysycyon at all.

For else why shode they not at the same time have meruayled of his ascensyon
up to heaven, and been more inquysytyue thereof. For that was no little marvel
neither, and was one of the things / that made ye Jews and those disciples to
stonne and stagger, that there slypte away from him.

Also they byleued yt he was god / and had no such wonder thereof, as made
them stonne and stagger or be more inquisytyue thereof, which was as strange
a matter as was all the the other / and which point ones byleued, yt was (...) to
believe the the other with out any such manner of meruaylyng, as should make them
either stonne or stagger thereat.

No we as for being inquisytyue thereof: holy saint Chrysostom says, that as
strange as the thing was of eating his flesh. For yt men had benrysen from
death they had herd of in ye scripture before / but yt one should eat a nothers
flesh says saint Chriso stome, that had they never herd of) yet they byleued
Christ's word and followed forth still, and confessed yt he had the words of
everlasting life, and would not be by and by curiouse and inquisytiue as master
Maskar says they would, if they had byleued him that he meant of eating of his
flesh in deed. For saint Chrysostom says, That is ye part of a discyple,
what so ever his master affermeth, not to be curyouse and inquysytyue thereof,
nor to make search therein, but to hear and believe, and if they would any
thing forther be informed / abide a conuenyent time. For they that did
otherwise and were inquisytyue, went (...). (...). 45. 6. cap. (...).
away back, and that through their folly. For says saint Chrysostom, when so
ever it comth in the mind, to ask the questyon how the thing may be done:
than comes there in to the mind incredulyte therewith. So was Nichodemus
troubled and asked, Now may a man be borne again (...). 3.
when he is old? May a man enter again into his mothers belly and be borne
again? And so the Jews said here to: how can he give us his flesh to eat? But
thou Jew if thou ask that, why dydest thou not ask that in like wise in the
miracle of the five louys: why dydest thou not tha^ ask how can he feed so
many of us with so little mete. why dydest thou not ask, by what mean he
would and did encreace it so much. The cause was because they cared but for the
meat, and not for the miracle. But thou will peradventure say, the thing at
that time declared and showed it self. But than I say again, that of that
manifest open miracle that they saw him there wurke, they should have byleued
that he could do these things to, that is to wit these things that they now
murmured at wha^ they said, how can he give us his flesh to eat. For
therefore (says saint Chrysostom) did our savior wurke the the other miracle of
his live louys before, because he would therewith induce them that they should
not dystruste those things that he would tell them after, that is to wit good
readers of his godhed, and of the geuynge of his flesh to eat.

The. ix. chapyter.
NOw good, Chrsten readers here you se by saint Chrysostom, that though
thapostles. under stood well that Christ spoke of the very eating of his
flessh: yet there was no cause why they should either dowtfully wonder, stonne,
or stagger or be by and by curyouse and inquysitiue thereof / and so destroys
he plain master Maskers reason / but if it be to such as are dysposed for
their pleasure, better to believe master masker than saint Chrysostom.

For every man may here well se, that saint Chrysostom meneth here, that
Christ in those words bysyde all parables and allegoryes, spoke and meant of
the very eating of his very flesh in deed. which thing lest master Masker
might as he is shameless, bring yet in question and controuersye: I shall
rehearse you a few lines ferther of saint Chrysostom in this self same place.
Lo thus there says he ferther.

Those Jews at that time took no commodyte / but we have taken the profit of
that benefyte. And therefore is it necessare to declare how meruelouse are these
mysteryes (that is to wit of the blessed sacrament) and why they be given us,
and what is yt profit thereof. we be one body and menbrys of Christ's flesh
and his bonys. And therefore they that are christen, are bounden to obaye his
precepts. But yet that we should be not only by love, but also in very deed
turned in to yt flesh of his, that thing is done by the meat that his
lyberalyte has given us. For while he lon ged to declare and express his love
that he bore toward us, he has by his own body mengled him self with us,
and has made him self one with us, that the body should be vned with the
hedde. For that is the greateste thing that lovers long for (that is to wit
to be (if it were possible) made both one) And that thing lygnyfyed Job of hio
servants, of whom he was most heartily beloved. which to express the vehement
love that they bare toward him, said who could give us the gift, that we
might have our bodies even fulfilled with his flesh: which thing Christ
has done for us in deed / both to thentent to bynd us in the more fervent
love toward him, and also to declare the fervent love and desire that him
self bare toward us. And therefore has he not only suffered him self to be
seen or looked upon by them that desire and long for him, but also to be
touched and eaten, and the very teth to be infyxed into his flesh, and all
folk to be fulfilled in the desire of him. From gods board therefore let us
rise like lions that blew out fire at the mouth such as the denyll may be
aferde to behold us / and let us consider Christ our head, and what a love he
has showed us. The fathers and the mothers oftentimes put out their children
to other folk to nurse. But I (may our savior say) nuryshe and feed my
children with mine own flesh. I give them here mine own self / so favor I
them all. And such great hope I give them all, again the time that shall
come. For he that in such wise gives us him self in this life here: much
more will he give us him self in the life that is to come. I longed (said our
lord) to be your brother.

And for your sakes I have communycated and made comen unto you my flesh and my
blood. The things by which I was joined with you, those things have I
exhybyted again and given to you (yt is to say the very flesh and blood, by
which I was made natural man with you, that same have I in the sacrament ex
hybyted and given again unto you)

This blood causes ye kings image to flower in us. This blood will not suffer
the bewty and the noblynes of of the soul (which it ever waters and
nuryssheth) to wyther or fade and fall. The blood that is made in us of our
other comen meat, is not by and by blood / but before it be blood it is
somewhat else. But this blood of Christ out of hand waters ye soul and
with a certain meruelouse might and strength seasoneth it by and by. This
mystycall or sacrame^tall blood (that is to say this blood of Christ in the
sacrament) dryueth the deuyls far of and brings to us not angellys only,
but the lord of all angellys to. The deuyls when they by hold and se the
blood of Christ with in us, they fle larre from us, and the angellys run as
fast toward us.

And yet saint Chrysostom ceaceth not with all this, but goth forth with a
longer process, declaryng the great benefyte of this blood, both by the
shedyng on the cross, and by the receyuyng in the sacrament / which whole
process I shall peradventure hereafter in some other place rehearse But for
this matter good christen readers thus much does more then suffyse. For by
less than this ye may more than plainly perceive, that this old holy doctor
saint Chryso stom, manyfestely declares and shows, that our savior in those
words that he spoke to the Jews, mencyoned in the syxte chapyter of saint
Iohst, verily spoke and meant of the very eating of his flesh. which thing
he promised there, and which promise he performed after at his maundy, when he
there instituted the Math. 26
blessed sacrament.

The. x. chapyter.
ANd now good readers to fynyshe at last this matter of may ster Maskers
against my secunde argument (which he calls my first, because my first is
such as he is loathe to look upon) I return ones again to master maskers
two sore captyouse questyons / and likewise as he has asked them of me, and I
have as you se so well avoided his gynnys and his grinnes and all his
trymtrams, that he has not yet trained me into no trappe of mine own, as you
se him sole^pnely boste: so will I now be bold to ask of him first, whyther
saint Chri sostome, here, ye and saint Austayne to, and saint Cyrille, saint
Bid saint Nyreneus, and saint Nilary, were of the mind, that thapostles
understood their master Chry stes words when he said, And the (...). 6.
bread that I shall give you is my flesh etc. And my flesh is very meat etc.
And I tell you very troth, except you eat the flesh of yt sone of man etc. If
master masker answer me to this questyon nay or no, than shall he make me
bold to answer ye same to him. For than shall he not fere me with his own
saying, that the gospel says contrary in the syxte chapyter of saint (...),
if he grant and confess him self / that all those holy doctors say therein
against his own saying / which among them all, understood that gospel as
well as him self alone, ye and though he take Fryth and friar Nuyskyn to him
to. And therefore if he answer nay or no: than is he quyte overthrown as you
se / and his secunde questyon quyte gone to, for than can he never come to it.

Now on the the other side, if he answer me ye or yes: than se good readers
whereto master Masker brings him self even to be taken in his own trappe.
For than he marreth all his matter. For sith you se clearly good readers, that
all these holy doctors and saints, openly do declare by their plain word
which your self have here all ready herd, that Christ in those word verily
spoke and meant of the very eating of his very flesh in deed: it must needs
follow against master Maskers mind (in the earys and the hearts of al such as
believe better al those holy doctors than him) that this is the right
understanding of Christ's words / and that thapostles if they understood his
words, understood them after the same fashyon / that is to wit, that he spoke
and meant of ye very eating of his very flesh in ded. And so serves him his
secunde questyon of naught. For the cause why they meruaysed not in any
murmuring manner, was because they byleued it well at their masters word,
which master masker does not / and ye cause why therwere not by and by
curyouse and inquisitiue, was asyou have herd saint Chrysostom declare',
because they were meke and obedyent, and not so presu^ptuouse and malapert; as
master Masker would have been.

(...) master masker here may you se lo, what wurship you have won with your
questions / with which you have not only missed of trayning me into mine own
trappe, as you triu^phe and boste, but are also dreuyn into your own trap your
self, out of which you can never clymbe up your self nor all the bretherhed be
able to draw you up, as long as the devil the very father of your living
bretherhed, lies in the deep den of hell.

Thus have I good readers my first argument (as he calls it) that he bosteth
to have twyse so substancially soyled, that he makes me therein such a feeble
babe, that I were not able to stand in his strong hand: that argument have I
so strongely now de fended, and geuyn him in his own turn so many great and
foul fallys, in every part of his process, that if this great clerk had so
many so great fall lys given him at Clerken well at a wrestelynge, he would have
had I wene neither rybbe, nor arm, nor leg left him hole long ago, nor at
this last lift, his neck vnbroke^ neither. And now therefore let us look how
he soyleth my third argument, which him self calls my second, because he
would have yt first forgote^

The. xi. chapyter.
LO thus good readers goes master Masker forth.

The secunde argument of More.

After this text thus wisely proved to be understand den in the lyfter all
sense with the carnal Jews, and not in the allegoryke or spyrytuall sense
with Christ and his apostles: The whole sum of Morys co^ (...) of the young
man, flandeth upon this argument, a posse ad esse / that is to wit, God may
do it, ergo it is done. God may make this body in many or in all places at
onys, ergo it is in many or in all places at onys. which manner of
argumentacyon how false and naught it is, every Sophyfter and every man that
has wit, perceyueth. A like argument. God may show More the treuth and call
him to repentance as he did Paul for perse cutyng his church, ergo More is
connerted to god. Or god may let him run of an indurate heart with Pharo,
and at last take an open and sudden vengeance upon him for persecufynge his
word, and burning his pore me^bres: ergo it is done allredy.

In all this tale good reders you se, that master Masker is yet at the least
wise constant and nothing chau^geth his manners. For as falsely as he rehearsed
mine other argument before (wherein what falshed he used you have your self
seen) as falsely now reherseth he this other. For read good readers all my
letter through your self, and when you find that fashyoned argument there,
than believe master masker in this matter / and in the mean while believe but as
the troth is, that with his lies he mocketh you. And since he makes us first a
loud lie for his fundacio^, and buyldeth after his arguments upon the same,
where with he skoffeth so pleasau^tly at me, yt it as properly becomes the man
to taunt, as it becomes a camel or a bear to dance: I will not with him
argue, a posse ad esse / and say he can lie ergo he does lie / but I will turn
the fashyon, and argue abesse ad posse / and say that he does lie, ergo he can
lie, and so commend his wit. Lo this form of arguyng can he not deny. And
thantecedent shall you find as true when you read over my letter as him felf
can not say nay, but that the consecucyon is formal.

But than goth master Masker forth on and says.

Master More must first prove if us by express words of holy scripture,
and not by his own unwritten dremys, that Christ's body is in many places or in
all places at ones. And than though our reasyn can not reche it, yet our faith
measured and (...) with the word of faith, will both reche if, receive it, and
hold it fosie to / not because it is possible to god, and impossyble to
reason, but because the written word of our faith says it. But when we read
gods words in mo than twenty places contrary, that his body should be here:
More must give us leave to believe his unwritten vanitees, very tees I would say,
at laysour.

Here ye se good reders how many thing master masker has told us here, and
how fresshely he florys sheth them forth.

The first is that I must prove it him, that the body of Christ is in many
places at onys, or in all places at onys.

The secunde is, yt I must prove it by express words of scripture.

The third is, that I may not prove it by mine own unwritten dremys.

The fourth is, that if I prove it so by express words of scripture, than he
will both reche it, and receive it, and hold it fast to.

The fyfth is that he fyndeth. xx. places of scripture and mo; to the contrary,
proving that his body is not here.

The syxth is, yt therefore I must give him leave to believe mine unwritten
vanytees, verytees, he would say, at laysore.

Now for the first good readers where master Masker says yt master More
must first prove it him, that Christ's body is in many places at once or in
all places at ones: I say that as for all places at ones, master More must
not prove at al. For (since ye sacrament is not ta al places at ones) whyther
his blessed body may be in all places at ones, is no point of our matter.

Now as touching the being of his blessed body in many places at ones, where
master Maskar says that ere he be bound to believe yt, I must prove yt: he
is very far out of reason and out of the right way. For is master Maskar
nor father Frith before him, bounden to believe no more, than master More were
able to prove them? I say again to father fryth and master Maskar both, that
if either of them both, or any such other fond fellow as they be, begin
to deny now any such plain article of ye faith, as all good christen nacyons,
are and long have be full agreed upon, so long and so full as they have been
upon this, and so long rekened the contra rye byleues for heretyques: either
master More or any man else, might well with reason reprove them thereof, and
rebuke them therefore, and only answer the folysh arguments that they make
against the troth, and should not ones need to go about the proof of the full
received and undone ted troth, as though it were become douteful upon every
proud heretics blasphemouse folyshe argument.

For if master maskar would now brxng up the Arrianes heresre again, against
the godhed of Christ, which he might as well as this fra^tike heresye of friar
Huskyn and wycleffe against the blessed sacrament / or if he would now begin the
the other folysh herely, where of the prophet speaks in the psalter. Dixit
insipiens in cord Psalm. (...).
suo no^ est deus. The fool said in his heart there is no god, which he might
as well begin as any of the the other twain: if he would now for the furnyshynge
of this heresye, come forth with such vnreasonale reasons, as some folysh
folosophers brought in therefore of old, were yt not enough for me to confute
those folyshe arguments wherwyth he would (...) sym ple soulis? Must I need
beside yt go make myche a do, and prove yt there were a god, or else grant this
gose yt there were no god at all, because him self would say so still, when his
found rea sons were soyled? Now to his second point, where it is not enough
for him to say that I must prove it (wherein as ye se I have proved him a very
fool) but he assygneth me also what manner of prose I must make / and none may
serve him, but such as him self list assygne / and that there fore I must
prove it him by express words of holy scripture: I ask him than whyther he
wylbe content if I prove yt him by express word of Christ written in all the
four euangelystes, saint Matthew, saint Mark, saint Luke, and sait Iohu^? if
he say ye as I suppose he will, than ask I him farther wherefore he will
believe the writing of them four. whereto what will he answer, but because yt
those gospel of theyrs are holy scripture. But than shall I farther desire him
to she we me, how he knows that those four bo kes or any one of all four,
is the book of him, whose name yt bears, or is the holy scripture of god at
all. To this questyon lo (but if he can go far there than holy saint Austayne
could, or the master captain of his own heresies Martyne Luther either) he
must say that he knows those books for holy scripture, because the common
known catholic church has so told him. Now when he shall have ones answered
me thus: every child may sone se what I shall ask him again. For than shall I
say, tell me than master Maskar I beseech you, sith you believe this commen
known catholyque church in that one great verytie, whereupon by your own
saying all the other writers depend: why should you not as well believe yt in
this other article, which yt as plainly tells you, and yet you do deny yt?
why should you not I say master Maskar believe the church as well, when yt
tells you god has taught his church that this is his very body, as you
believe the same church when yt tells you, god has taught his church that
this is his very scriture, namely sith there are written in ye same scripture
other things, to man's reason as hard to conceive and as incredyble to
believe as that.

Here you se good readers, to what point I have brought master Maskar. I have
set him here so fast in the mire, that therein shall he stycke and never clean
wade out while he lives.

Moreover master maskar can not deny me this, but that the right bylyef in ye
sacrament / and diverse other things mo, were ones taught and byleued, and
christen men bounden to believe them to, without express worcester des of holy
scripture laid forth for the proof, before any word of ye new testament was
written and after per adventure to / where tharticles were preached, and written
gospelles not there. Now if such things were at one time not only byleued,
but men also bounden to the belief thereof without express words of scripture
for the proof: master Maskar must than, though there be come writing sins,
yet either proof us by exp^sse words of scripture, that of all that god will we
shall believe, there is nothing left out / but every such thing there written in
with express words, or else may he never make him self so sure, and face in
out a this fashion with express word, that saving the very plain express
words of scripture, we be no man of us bounden to believe nothing else.

Now this am I sure enough, that such express words shall he never find in
scripture, that tell him expressly that all is wryte^ in. And than sith be can
not prove us this point by scrypturer, but that at the least wise we may be
bounden to believe some such things as in holy scryp pture is not expressly
written / which things those may be and which not, of whom will god we shall
learn, but of his known cathylyque church by which he teaches us which be
the very scripture?

Now as for the third point, master maskar touches, in which he will
allow for no suffycient proof mine own unwritten dremys, he ge ueth my dremys
I thank him of his courtesye, myche more authoryte than ever I looked for. For
while he rejects none of them, but such as are unwritten, he she weth him
self ready to believe them, if I would vouchesaufe to write them.

In the fonrth point he promises, yt if I do by express words of scripture
prove that it is so: tha^ (though yt be above the reche of his reason) yet will
he by belyefe, both reche yt, and receive yt, and hold it fast to. Would god
master Maskar would abyd by this word. For now I ask him again, whyther he
will be content, if I prove it him by express words of some one of the four
euangelystes. And if he be content with express words of any one, than will I
do more for him, prove yt by all four.

For saint John^ reherseth, that our savior said him self he would give them
his flesh to eat. And that he meant of the sacrament, you se all ready proved
here before.

And the the other three rehearse, that Christ said him self when he gave them
the sacrament, this is my body that shall be broken for you. What words ca^
there be more plain and express than these?

But here says master Maskar that these be not express words. For he says
that these words be spoken but by way of allegory. And he proves it as Frith
does, by yt our savior said of him self, I am the door, and I am the vine.

Now remember good readers, that master Maskar bylyed me right now, and said
that all my second argument was, a posse ad esse, it may be so, ergo yt is so.
But now consider good christen reders your self, why there this argument of his
be not a posse ad esse in deed. For by those places, I am the door, and I am
the vine, and such other: he concludes that these other places of eating his
flesh and geuynge of his body, was spoken by an allegorye to.

And how concludes he that yt is so? but because yt may be so.

And thus ye se good readers, that the self same kind of arguing which
master Maskar fayneth him self to find with me, and falsely belyeth me therein
(for I neded there none other thing to do, but answer the things that Fryth
laid forth against the catholyque faith) the self same kind of arguing I
say master Maskar uses him self / and so does young father Fryth his fellow
in folly to.

But than again when they argue thus, These places may be so understood by
an allegorye only, as those other places be, ergo they be to be so
understood in deed: I have proved already that his intent is false, and that
they may not be understood in an allegory only as the the other be / but the
plain and open diffe rence between the places appear up pon the cyrcumstaunces
of the text. This have I proved against Frith alredye / and that in such
wise, as your self has seen here, that master Maskar can not avoid yt / but
in going about to defend Frythes folly, has with his two solucyons of mine
one argument, ofter than twyse over thrown him self, and made mine argument
more than twyse so strong.

But yet good readers, because I say that those words of Crist, The bread yt I
shall give you is my flesh, (...), 6.
which I shall give for the life of the world / and my flesh is verily meat, and
my blood verily drink / and, But if you eat the flesh of the son of man, and
drink his blood, you shall not have life in you / and so forth al such wordis
as our savior spoke him self, mencyoned in the syxte chapyter of saint John
/ and those words of our savior at his maun dye written with all the the other
three euangelystes. This is my body that shall be broken for you, be plain and
express words for the catholyque faith / and master maskar says that the be
not words plain and express, but expowneth them all another way: therefore
to break the strife therein between him and me, I have brought you forth for my
part in mine exposycyon, the plain express words of diverse old holy
saints, by which you may plain and expressly se, that they al said as I say.

And master maskar also can not him self say nay / but that against other
heretyques before his days and mine, diverse whole general counsayles of
chrystendome, have plainly and expressly determined the same to be true that
I say.

And all the countries chrystened can also testyfye, that god has him self by
manyfold open miracles, plain and expressly declared for the blessid sa
crament, that this is the true faith which master Maskar here oppugneth / and
that god has by those myra cles expowned his own words him self, to be plain
and expressly spoken for our part. And therefore now good christen reders, if
master mas kar will make any more stickyng with us, and not grant Christ's
words for plain and express / and according to his promise, reche and
receive ye true faith and hold it fast to: ye may plain and ex pressely tell
him, there shall never true man, trust his false promise after.

Now touching the fyfth point, where he says that he finds. xx. pla ces in
scripture and mo to, prouyng that Christ's body is not here in earth: remember
this well good reder against he bryna them forth. For in his second part when we
come to the tale, ye shall find his mo than twenty, far fewer than fyftene,
and of al yt shall well serve him, ye shall find fewer than one.

Then where he concludes in the last point upon these five points before
(which five how well they prove good christen readers you se) that I must
give him leave to believe mine un written vanyties (veryties he would say) at
seysour: if the thyn ges that he calls un wryte^ verities were i^ deed un
written and inverted also by me, tha^ he might be ye bolder to cast he^ mine un
written vanities, and (as he call leth the^ before) mine un written dremis to, But
on ye the other side sith you se your self, that I have showed you them writem
in holy saints books, and that a thousand year before that I was borne / and
your self sees it wri ten in the plain scripture to, proved plain and
express for our part against him, by tholde exposycyon of all the holy
doctors and saints, and by ye determinacyons of diverse general counsayles
of Christ's whole catho lyque church / and proved plain for our part also, by
so many plain open miracles: master maskar must needs be more then mad to
call now such written vetyties mine un wry ten vanytes, or mine un written
dremys either / except he prove both all those things to be but an inuencyon
of mine / and over that all those wri tynges to be yet un written / and that
holy doctrine both of holy saints and of holy scripture vanities, and also
that all the while that al those holy folk (...) awurke there with, they
neither wrote nor studied nor did nothing but dreme.

Now while master More must therefore upon such consyderacio^s, give master
Masker seue to believe this unwritten vanyte, which is in all the. iiii.
euangesystes an express written verite: while I must I say therefore upon such
folysh false co^ (...), give him seue to believe the tree we faith at leysour /
if he had put it in my choice, I would have been soth to give him any senger
seysour therein, for he has been to long out of right bylyefe all ready. But
sith he says I must, I may not choice. whereof I am as help me god very
sorry. For except he take him self that leysour bytyme, seuynge the business
that be daily takes in writing of pestyle^t books to the contrary: he shall eis
not fail to believe ye true faith at a long leysour over late, yt is to wit
when he lies wrechedly in hell / where he shall not write for lack of light
and burning up of his paper, but shall have everlasting laysour from all other
work to believe there that he would not believe here, and lie still and ever
burn there, in everlasting fire, for his formar ungracious obstinate
infydelyte / out of which (...) I be (...) god give him the grace to crepe and
get out by time.

And thus you se good readers what a goodly piece master masker has made you
/ which pleased him I warraunt you very well, when he wrote it. But it will not
I wene please him now very well, when he shall after this mine answer read it.

The. xii. chapyter.
BUt now goth he ferther against me with a special goodly piece wherein thus he
says.

Here may thou se christen reader wherefore More would so feign make the
believe that (...) lest aught unwritten of necessyte to be byleued, even to
stablysshe the popes kingdom, which stands of Morys unwritten vanytees / as
of the presence of Christ's body, and making thereof in the bread, of
putgatory, of inuocacyon of saints, wurshyppyng of stonys and flockys,
pylgrymages, halowynge of vows and (...), and crepynge to the cross etc.

If ye will believe what so ever More can feign without the scryptures: than can
this poet feign ye another church then Christ's, and that ye must believe it
what so ever it teach you / for he has feigned to that it can not (...), though
ye se it err and fight against it self a thousand times / ye if it tell you
black is white, and good is badde, and the (...) is god, yet must ye believe
it or ellye be burned as heretykes.

Still ye se the wisdom good reders, and the troth of master masker, in
every piece of his matter. For here you se that all these things / that he
speaks of, as that the church can not err, and the crepynge to the cross,
with all other ceremonies of the church, inuocacyon of saints, going on
pilgrimage, wurshyppyng of images, byleuynge of purgatory, byleuynge the body
of our savior present in the blessed sacrament: all these thing he calls
mine unwritten vanitees, and makes as though these things were all of my
faynynge. Is not this wene you wisely feigned of him, that the things comenly
used this. xiiii. C. year by fore I was borne, should now be feigned and
imagyned by me. But yet shall it be as long after my days and his to, ere
master Masker and all the mayny of them shall among them all, be able to
confute the things ye my self have in the matters written. And yet hang not
the matters upon my writing, but upon the treuth it self, reveled unto
Christ known catholyke church, both by Christ him self and his apostles
after him, by tradycyon and by writing both, and by many miracles confyrmed,
and with the secret instyncte and inspyracyo^ of his holy spyryte, wrought and
brought into a full and whole catholic agreement and consent, as necessary
points of the true we christen faith.

This is also by master masker wonderful wisely feigned, yt More has feigned
all these things, even to the intent to stably sshe the popes kingdom. But
now what great cause should move me, to bear that great affection to the
pope, as to feign all these thing for stably shement of his kingdom: that
thing master masker tells you not, as ye thing that is so plain and
euydent that he needs not. For he thinks ye every man knows all ready, that
the pope is my godfather, and goes about to make me a cardynall.

But now good christen readers, they that would at the counsel of this evil
christen caytyfe, cast of all such manner thing as all good chry sten people
have ever taken for good, and now neither crepe to the cross, nor set by any
hallowed thing, dyspute pylgrymags, and set holy saints at naught, no more
reverence their images tha^ an horse of wax, nor reke^ their relykes any better
than shepys bonys, scrape clean the letany out of every book, with our lady
motens and the dyryge to, and away with our (...) plaster, and cast the bedys
in ye fire and beware also yt we wurshyp not the sacrament, nor take it for no
better thing than unblessed bread, and believe that the church erreth in every
thing ye it teaches, and all that holy saints have taught therein this. xiiii.
C. (...) (for all they have taught all these things yt this man now
dispyseth) than would there wax a merry world, ye very kingdom of ye devil him
self.

And verily it seems yt they would set the people upon (...). For penance
they shake of as a thing not necessary. Satisfaccio^ they call (...) sin /
and co^fessyon they call ye devils dryft. And of purgatory by two meaues they
put me^ out of dread. Some by slepyng till domys day, and some by sendyng all
strayt to heuyn, every soul that dies and is not dampened for ever. And yet
some good comfort give they to the dampened to. For till they se sometime to
deny hell all utterly, they goo about in the mean season to put out the
fire.

And some yet boldly forthwith to say there is none there, that they dred a
little / and therefore for the season they bring the matter in questyon, and
dyspute it abroad and say they will not utterly afferme and say the contrary /
but the thing is they say but as problema neutru^, wherein they would not force
whyther part they should take / and yet if they should chose, they would rather
hold nay than ye / or though there be fire in either place, that yet it
neither burns so wle in hell, nor payneth so wle in purgatory.

But Christ I wot well in many places says there is fire there / and his
Math. 13. 18. and. 25.
holy saints after him afferme and say the same / and with that fire he
frayed his own dyseyples, byddyng them fere that fire, that they fell not
therein.

Now though that clerks (...) in scolys hold problems upon every thing: yet
can I not perceive what profit there can come, to call it but a problem
among unlearned folk, and dyspute it out abroad; and bring the people in
dowte, and make them rather think that there is none than any / and that this
word fire is spoken but by parable, as these men make the eating of Christ's
blessed body. Thus shall they make men take both paradyse, and heuyn, and god,
and all together, but for parables at last.

Though fere of hell alone be but a seruyle dread: yet are there all ready to
meny that fere hell to little, even of them that believe the truth, and think
that in hell there is very fire in deed. Now many will there than be that will
fere it less, if such words onys may make them wene, that there were in
hell no very fire at all, but that the pain that they shall feel in hell, were
but after the manner of some beuy mind, or of a troublous dreme.

If a man believe Christ's word, that in hell is fire in deed, and make the
fear of that fire, one mean to keep him thense: than though there were no
fire there, yet has he nothing lost / sith good he can get none there,
though the fire were thense. But if he believe such words on the the other side,
and catch thereby such boldness that he set hell at light, and by the
means there of fall bosdely to sin, and theruppon finally fall down unto the
devil: if he than find fire there as I am sure he shall, than shall he lie
there and curse them that told him those false talys, as long as god with his
good folk sytteth in the joy of heuyn.

And therefore good christen readers, wisdom will we believe Christ's own
words, and let such unwise words and deuelyshe deuyces pass.

The. xiii. chapyter.
BUt now after this pleasant dyscourse of his into the rehersall of this hepe
of heresies that you have herd, for which as for little tryfyls his heart
freteth sore, that any heretyke should be burned: he goth on against me and
says.

But let us return to our propose. To dyspute of gods almighty (...) power,
what god may do with his body, it is great folly and no less presump (...) to
More, sith the pope which is no hole god but half a god, by their own
decrees has decreed no man to dyspute of his power. But christen (...) be thou
content to know that gods will, his wordand his power, be all one, and
repugne not. And ney there wylleth he nor may not do any thing includynge
repugnaunce, imperfeccyon, or that should derogate mynysshe or hurt his glory
and his name. The glory of his godhed is, to be present and to fill all places
at onys essencyally, presently with his almighty power, which glory is denied
to any other creature / him self saying by his prophet: I will not give my
glory to any other creature. Now therefore sith his manhed is a creature, it can
not have this glory which only is appropryed to the godhed. To attrybute to
his manhed that pro pertye / which only is appropryed to his godhed / is to
confonnde both the natures in Christ. what thing so ever is every where
after the said manner / that must needs be infynyte / without beginning and
end / it must be one alone / and almighty: whithe propertyes only are
appropryed unto the gloryonse majesty of the godhed. wherefore Chrysted body may
not be in all or in many places at onys. Christ himself saying as
concerning his manhed: He is less then the father / but as towchynge his
godhed the father and (...) be both one thing. And Panle recyfynge the Psalm.
affyrmeth: Christ as concerning his manhed to be less then god / or less
than angellys as some text has it. Here is it plain that all things that
More imagyneth and fayneth / are not possible to god / for it is not possible
for god to make a creature egall unto him self / for it includes repugnaunce
and derogateth his glory.

Now have you so good christen readers herd a very special piece, wherein
master masker (as you se) solempnely first rebukes the folly and ye
presumpcyon of me, for that I was so bold in my letter against his fellow
father Fryth, to dyspute of gods almighty absolute power. But now good
readers when you shall se by the matter, yt it was Fryth which argued against
gods almighty power, denyenge that Christ could make his own body in many
places at onys / and that I did in effect nothing else but answer him, and
(...) and affermed that god was able to do it, and that Fryth was but a fool so
to strayte and to limite the power os almighty god, but if he could prove
repugnau^ce (which against gods own word plain spoken in his hosy gospel,
father Frith could never do) when you se this good readers, I dowte not but ye
will say, that it is neither folly nor presu^pcyon for the symplest man or
woman in a town, to maintain that god may do this thing or that (namely the
thing that god has said him self he does) against him that is so folyshe as
to presume, against the plain word of god, to determine by his own blind
reason the contrary / and specially sith the thing is such in deed, as though
god had not spoken thereof, yet had he none hold to say that god could not do
it, for as myche as it implies no such repugnau^ce as should make the thing
impossyble unto god.

But now se ferther good reders the wisdom and the meekness of master
Masker here. which as soon as he has scant fynysshed his high solemn (...)
of me; for such disputyng of godde almighty power, that I said he was in deed
so mighty that he could do the thing that we dysputed upon against him that
said nay, falls him self forth with in ye same fawte that he fyndeth / and
yet not in the same fawte (for the fawte that he found was none) but in the
fawte that he would seem to find. For he dysputeth and takes the part against
gods almighty power in deed / and argues as you se that god in deed can not
do it.

And this point he argues in such manner fashyon, that in my syfe I never saw
so folyshe an argument, so solempnely set up an high. First he makes his
reason thus. It is ye glory of the godhed and appopryed only thereunto, to be
present and to fill all places at onys, essencially, presently, with his
almighty power / and is denied to any creature. But Christ's (...) is a
creature. Ergo it can not have this glory that is appropryed to the godhed.

Here is a wise argument. God has many gloryes. And his chyefe glory stands
not in being present at onys essencyally in every place.

And though he will not give his glory from him, yet of his glory he makes many
creaturs in many great parts of it, to be partiners with him It is one part
of his glory to live and endure in eternal bliss / and though no creature be
without beginning, yet makes he many a thowsande possessours of joy without
ending.

How proves master masker yt to be present at onys in all places, is such a
kind of glory so appropred unto god, yt god can not give yt gift to any
creature. The scripture seems to appropre unto god alone, the knowledge of
man's secret thought. And yet can I not se but yt god might give yt knowledge
to some creature to and yet abide god still him self.

The. xiiii. chapyter.
THan makes master Maskar an other argument, wherwyth he would as it seems
somewhat strength the first, as yt has of troth no little need, being as yt is
so feeble of yt self.

His other argument therefore is (as you have herd) this. what thing so ever is
every where after the said manner, that must needs be infynyte without be
gynnynge and end. It must be one, and alone, and almygh tie. Which
propertees are appropryed unto the gloryouse majesty of the godhed. But
Christ's manhed is not such (as him self witnesses in holy scripture) ergo
his manhed can not be in all or in many places at ones.

First (that we labor not about naught) we must consider what master
Maskar means by these words, after the said manner. He said you wot well
in the the other argument before, that the glory of god, is to be present, and to
fill all places at ones, essentyally, presently, with his almyghtye power. And
therefore when he says now, what so ever thing is every where at ones after
the said manner, he means (you se well) present, and fyllynge all places at
ones, essencyally, presently, with his almyghtye power.

I let pass here his word presently, whose presence needs not in that place
for ought that I can se. For when he said before, present and fyllynge all
places at ones essentyally: his other word presently may take his leave and be
absent well enough. For how can he be present and essentyally fill the place,
and not presently? But now when he says by his almyghtye power: what is this
to the matter? For yt is enough against him, if any creature (...) be present
in every place at ones, and essencyally fyl the place / not by his own
almyghtye power, but by the almighty power of god / and yet not so fill the
place neither, but that yt may have a another wysh yt in the same place. For I
trow he will not deny, but that there be many creatures in those places,
which god with his own presence essencyally fylleth full.

Therefore as for these words ofter the said manner which he puts in to
make us amassed: master Maskar must put out again. Now yt being put out,
rehearse and consider well master maskars argument, what thing so ever is in
every place at ones, that thing must needs be infynyte with out beginning
and end / it must be one, and alone, and almighty / which propretyes are
appropryed to the gloryouse majesty of the godhed.

But the manhed of Christ is a cre ature and not god: ergo Christ's manhed can
not be in all places or in many places at ones.

And yet consider here that though he leave out that odyouse word: yet must
his co^clusyon be indede, that god ca^ not make yt so, as you se plain by his
beginning, where he she weth that yt implies repugnaunce, and that therefore
god can not do yt.

Now good readers consider well his first proposycyon, which we call the
mayor, that is to wit that god can not make any thing created to be every
where at ones. Let us pray him to prove yt, and give him one years leysour to
yt. But here he takes upon him to prove yt, and lays for the reason, that
god ca^ not make any creature to be in all places at ones, because yt should
than be infynyte, and thereby god almyghties mate and high fellow. Let him as I
say prove us this in two year, that yt should than be infynyte, without
beginning, and without end, and almighty. In good faith either am I very
dull, or else does master Maskar tell us here in a very mad tale.

I think he will not deny, but that god which could make all this world,
heaven, and earth, and all the creatures yt he created therein, could if yt so
had pleased him, have created only one man, and let all the remanaunt alone
uncreated, and have kept him still, and never have made heaven nor earth nor none
other thing, but only that one man alone. The soul now that than had been
crea ted in that man, had yt not than ben in all places at ones? I suppose
yes. For there had been no mo places than that mannys body / and therein
had there ben many placesin many diverse parts of the man / in all why che
that soul should have been present at ones, and the whole soul in every part
of all those places at ones. For so is every soul in every man's body now.
And yet had that soul not ben infynyte, no more than every soul is now.

If god would now (as if he would he could) create a new spyryte that should
fulfill all the whole world heuyn and earth and all, as myche as ever is
created, that in such wise should be whole present at ones in every part of
the world, as the soul is in every part of a man, and yet should not be the
soul of the world: I will here ask may ster Maskar, were that new created
spyryte infynyte? If he answer me nay: than has he soyled his own wise
reason him self. For thanne no more were the manhed of Christ, though yt were
present in all those places of the whole world at ones. If he answer me ye:
than sith that spyryte were no more infynyte than the world is, with in the
lymytes and bounds whereof yt were contained, yt would follow thereof, that the
world were infynyte all redye, which is false.

And also if yt were true, thanne would yt follow by master Maskers reason,
that god almyghtye had a mache all ready, that is to wit a another thing
infynyte beside him self, which is the inconvenience that ma keth master
Maskar afferme yt for impossyble, that god could make Christ's manhed to be in
all places at ones.

Thus you se good readers upon what wise ground master Maskar has here
concluded, that god can not make Christ's body to be in all places at ones.

But yet is yt a world to consider how madly the man concludes. His
conclusion is this ye wot well, Wherefore Christ's body can not be in all
places, or in many places at ones. All his reason ye wot well goth upon
being in all places at ones, because that theruppon would yt by his wise
reason follow, that yt should be infynyte. And now is that point of truth no
part of our matter. For we say not that Christ's body is in all places at
ones, but in heuyn, and in such places as the blessed sacrament is. And
therefore where as his reason goes nothing against being in many places at
ones, but only against being at ones in all places: he concludes sodaynely
against being in many places, toward which conclusyon no pyece of his
premises had any manner of mocyon. And so in all this his high solemn
argument, and his far fet reason, neither is his mayor true, nor his argument
touches not the matter, nor his premysses any thing prove his conclusyon. And
yet after this goodly reasonyng of his, he rejoices in his heart hyghly to se
how iolyly he has handeled yt, and says,

Here yt is plain that all things that More yma gyneth and fayneth are not
possible to god. For if is not possible to god to make a creature egall to him
self, for yt includes vepugnaunce and (...) teth his glory.

Master maskar speaks myche of mine unwritten dremys and vanytees. But here
have we had a written dreme of his, and therein this folyshe boste also so full
of vayn gloryouse vanytie / that if I had dremed yt in a fyt of a fever, I
would I wene have been a shamed to have told my dreme to my wife when I woke.
And now shall you good readers have here a another pyece as proper.

God promised and swore that all nacyons should be blessed in the death of that
promised sede which was Christ: god had determined and decreed yt before the
world was made: ergo Christ must nedys have dyed / and to expowne this word
oportet as More mynseth it. For it was so necessary that the contrary was
impossyble: except More would make god a (...), which is impossyble. Paul
concludes that Christ must needs have dyed / using this latin term Necesse.
Saying where so ever is a testyment, there must the death of the testyment
makes go between: or essys the testament is not ratyfyed and sure / but
ryghtuousnes and remyssyon of sins in Christ's blood is his new testament,
whereof he is medyatour: (...) the (...) maker must needs have dyed. Wreste not
therefore (master More) this word opor tet (though ye synde potest for oportet
in some corrupt copy) unto your unsavory sense. But let oportet sygnyfye, he
must or yt (...) him to dye. for he took our very mortal nature for the same
decreed counsel: him self saying John. 2. a. 12. Oportet exaltari (...)
hominis etc. It behooves, or the son of man must dye / that every one that
believe in him peryshe not etc. Here may ye se also that yt is impossyble for
god to break his promise. It is impossyble to god which is that verytie to be
found contrary in his deeds and words: as to save them whom he has damned /
or to dampne them whom he has saved. Wherefore all things ymagyned of Mores
brain are not possible to god.

And when More says, that Chrystie had power to let his life and to take yt
again, and therefore not to have dyed of necessyte: I wonder me, that his (...)
here failed him, so conning as he ma keth him self therein: which grants
and affermeth (as true yt is) that with the necessary decreed works of
gods forsyghte and prouydence stands right well his free lybertye.

The. xv. chapyter.
IF this pyece were good readers any thing to the purpose of our pryncypall
matter, concerning the blessed sacrament: master Mas kar had here geuyn me
hold enough to give him four or five such foul falls on the back, that his
bones should al to burste there with. But for as myche as you shall perceive by
the reading of my letter, that all this gere is but a bye matter, risen upon a
certain place of saint Au stayne which Fryth alleged imperfytely: I purpose
not to spend the time in vain dyspycyons with master Maskar, in a thing out
of our matter. And namely sith the man has after his long bablyng against me,
yet in the end answered him self well and suffycyently for me.

For when he has said a great while, that yt was in such wise ne cessarye
that Christ must dye, that the contrary thereof was impossyble: at last as
though he would mock me there with and show mine ignorance, he brings in his
own, and she weth that for any thing that god has either forsene or decreed
and determy ned therein, he had left Christ at his lybertye to dye or live if he
would. And than if he was at his lybertye not to dye but if he had would: than
was it not impossible for him to have lived if he had would.

But the keeping of his life was the contrary of his dyenge: ergo his dyenge
how necessary so ever yt was for man's redempcyon, that is to wit so
behofull thereto, that without yt we should not have been saved: yet master
Maskar here to she we him self a great scoles man in respect of me,
confesses him self against him self, that Christ to dye was not in such
wise necessaryly constrained, that the contrary thereof, that is to wit Christ
to live, was impossyble to him if he had would / while master mas kar can
not say nay, but must needs give place to the scryptures that I laid him,
and therefore must confess and so he does, that Christ could by no
constraynte be compelled to dye, but was offered because him self so would.

But the dyspytyons of this point is as I say good reader all beside our
pryncypall matter / and therefore I will let his other folyes that I find in
this pyece pass by.

Than goes master Maskar forth and says.

But master More says at last, if god would tell me that he would make each
of both their bodies to (meaning the young mannys body and Christ's) to be
in fyftene places at ones / I would believe him I, that he were able to make his
word true in the bodies of both twain / and never would I so myche as ask
him whether he would gloryfye them both first or not: but I am sure,
gloryfyed or vngloryfyed, if he said yt, he is able to do yt.

Lo here may ye se what a fervent faith this old man has, and what an ernest
mind to believe Cry ftes words if he had told him: but I pray ye master
More, what and if Christ never told yt you, nor said yt nor never would /
would ye not be as hastye to not believe (...) if he told it you / I pray ye
tell us where ye speak with him, and who was by to bear ye record: and yet if
you bring as false a (...) as your selse to testyfye this thing: (...) by your
own doctrine, must ye make us a miracle to conferme your tale / ere we be
bound to believe you, or yet to admytte this your argument, God may make his
body in many places at ones, ergo yt is so.

The. xvi. capyter.
Read good readers in my letter the. xxi. lefe, and thanne consider master
Maskars goodly morke that he makes here, and you shall find yt very folly she.
But now master Maskar asks me, where I spoke with Christ when he told me yt
he would make his own bo dye in two places at ones, as though Christ could
not speak to me but if I spoke to him, nor could not tell me the tale but if
he appeared to me face to face, as he did after his resur reccyon to his
dyscyples. This que styon of master Maskar comes of an high wit I warraunt
you. I answer master maskar therefore, Crist told yt at his maundy to other
good credyble folk, and they told yt forth to the whole catholic church,
and the whole church has told yt unto me / and one of them that was at yt,
that is to wit saint Matthew, has put yt in writing as the same church
tells me.

For else were I not sure whyther that gospel were his or not, nor whyther it
were any part of holy scripture or not. And therefore I can lack no good and
honest witness to bear me record in that point that will depose for me, that
I feign not the matter of mine own head. And I have a testymoniall also of many
old holy doctors and saints, made before a good notary the good man god him
self, which has with his seal of many an hundred miracles, both testyfyed
for the troth of those men, and also for the troth of the pryncypall matter it
self / that is to wit that Christ's very body is in the blessed sacrament,
though the sacrament be either in two or in. x. thowsande places at onys. And
thus master Mas kers questyons concerning Christ blessed body, that Christ
has told me that he would make it be in two places at onys, is I trust
suffycyently answered. But now as for Frythys body (which writes that
Christ's body can be no more in two places at onys than his) though I would
have byleued yt Christ could have made it in two placys as onys if Christ had
so told me: yet sith Christ has now told me, by his whole catholyke
church, and by wry tynge of the old holy saints of the same, and by his own
holy scripture to, which scripture by the same church and the same holy saints
I know, and also se declared and expowned, and over that has by many
wonderful miracles many festly proved and testyfyed, that thopinions in which
Fryth obstynately and there with very folishly dyed, were very pesrylent here
syes, whereby he is perpetually severed from the lively body of Christ, and made
a ded member of the devil: I believe therefore and very surely know as a thing
taught me by god, that the wreched body of that fellow shall never be in two
placs at onys / but wha^ it shall rise again and be restored to that wreched
obstynate soul, shall there with lie still ever more in one place, that is to
wit in theuerlastyng fire of hell. From which I beseech our lord turn Tyndale
and George Iay, with all the whole bretherhed, and master Masker among other
(who so ever he be) by time.

Now upon his aforesard such a proper handeled mock as you have herd,
master masker goes on, and gives me right holsom admonicyo^, that I meddle no
more with such high matters, as is the great absolute almighty power of god /
and therein thus he says unto me.

Sir you be to bysy with gods almighty power, and have taken to great a
burden upon your weke shuldren.

The. xvii. chapyter.
HEre he should have rehearsed what one word I had said of gods almighty
power, in which word I was to bysy. Read my letter over, and you shall
clearly se that I say nothing else, but that god is almighty, and that he
therefore may do all thing. And yet (as you shall here master Masker him self
confess) I said not that god could do things that imply repugnaunce. But I
said that some things may seem repugnaunt unto us, which things god sees how
to set together well enough. Be these words good reader over hyghly spoken
of godde almighty power? May not a pore vnserned man be bold to say that god
is able to do so myche? And yet for saying thus much, says master Masker that
I am to besy, and have taken to great a burden upon my weke sholdren, and have
over faded my self with mine own harneyse and wepons, and many gaye worcester des
mo to vttre his eloquence with all. But master Masker un the the other side is
not him self to bysy at all with gods almighty power, in affermynge that god
has not the power to make his own blessed body in many places at onys. His
mighty strong sholdren take not to much weight upon them, when instead of
omnypotent, he proves god impotent / and that by such impotent arguments, as
you se your self so shamefully haste, that never sambe cryple yt lay impotent
by ye wallys in crepyng out unto a dole, halted half so sore. But than goth he
ferther for the praise of young Dauyd and says: you have ouerladen your self
with your own harneyse and weapons / and young Dauyd is like to preuayse
against you with his slynge and his stone.

As for master Maskers young master Dauyd, who so look upon his first
treatice and my letter together shall sone se yt his sfing and his stone be
beten both about his earys. And wha^ so ever his new sling and his new stone
(which is as I now here say very lately come over in prent) come onys into my
hands, I shall turn his slynge into a cokste we, and his stone into a fether,
for any harine that it shall be able to do, but if it be to such as wyllyngely
will put out their own eyes, to which they never need neither stone nor
slynge, but with a fether they may do it and they be so mad.

But an heavy thing it is to here of his young folyshe Dauyd, that has thus
with his stone of stobburnesse, stryken out his own brain / and with the
slynge of his heresies, slon gen him self to the (...).

yet master Masker can not seue me thus, but on he goth ferther in his (...)
rethoryke and thus he says. God has infatuated your high subtle wy sdome /
your crafty conuayaunce is espied. God has sent your church a mete cover for
such a cup, even such a defender as you take your self to be, that shall
let all their whole cause fall flat in the mire, unto both your shames and
utter confusyon. God therefore be praised ever amen.

The. xviii. chapyter.
AS for wisdom I will not co^ pare with master Masker therein / nor would wax
myche the prowder in good faith though men would say that I had more wit
than he. I pray god send us both a sytell more of his grace, and make us
both good.

But where as he iesteth concerning my defense of the church: who so look my
books through, shall find that the church, in the treuth of whose catholyke
faith concerning the bles sed sacrament I write against fryth and Tyndale, and
master Masker and such false heretykes mo, is none other church but the true
catholyke church of Christ, the whole congregacyo^ of al true christen nacyo^s
/ of which church I take not my self to be any special defender, how be it
to defend it / is in deed every good mannys part. And as for hitherto, the
things that I have written are (I thank god) strong enough to stand, as it is
plainly pued against all these heretykes yt have wrestsed therewith, whereof
they could never yet ouerthro we one line / and no man more shamefully sowsed
in ye mire / than master Masker here him self that bosteth his victory while
he fieth in the dyrte. But the catholyke church has another manner defender
tha^ is any erthely man. For it has god him self therein, and his holy spyryt,
permanent and abydyng by Crystes own promise to defend it from falshed unto
the end of the world. And therefore it can not fall flat in the mire / Math.
(...)
but god makes heretykes fall flat in the fire.

Yet to thentent good readers / that you should well se that I left not unto
wched the point of repugnau^ce, with which master Masker has all this while
set out his high solempn reason against godde almyghtynes: him self she weth
here at last, that of repugnau^ce I did speak my self. Now be it in deed,
somewhat more moderately than he / as ye shall not only perceive by the words
of my letter, but also by the words of master Masker him self which be
these.

Then says master More / though it seems repugnaunt both to him and to me /
one body to be in two places at onys: yet god sees how to make them stand
together well enough. This man with his old eyes and spectacles sees farte in
gods sight / and is of his preuey counsel: that knows belyke by some
secret reuelacyon how god sees one body to be in many places at onys /
includes no repugnaunce. For word has he none for him in all scripture no
more the^ one body to be in all places at onys. It implies first repugnau^ce
to my sight and reason / that all this world should be made of nothing: and
that a vyrgyn should bring forth a child. But yet when I se it written with the
wordys of my faith / which god spoke / and brought it so to pass: then
implies it no repugnaunce to me at all. For my faith recheth it and receives
it steadfastly. For I know the voice of my herdeman / which if he said in any
place of scripture that his body should have been contained under the form of
bread and so in many places at onys here in earth / and also abiding yet still
in heuyn to / verily I would have byleued him I / as sone and as fermely as
master More. And therefore even yet / if he can show us but one sentence truly
taken for his part, as we can do many for the contrary / we must give place.
For as for his unwritten verytees, and thautoryte of his antichrysten (...),
unto which (the scripture forsaken) he is now at last with shame enough
co^pessed to flee: the^y be proved stark (...) and very deuefrye.

The. xix. chapyter.
Is not this a wise invented scoff that master Masker mocketh me wythall /
and says that with mine old eyes and my spectacles I se far in goddys
syghte, and am of goddys pryuy counsel, and that I know bylyke by some
secret reuefacyon, how god sees that one body to be in many placs at onys
includes no repugnaunce. It is no counsel ye wot well that is cried at the
cross. But Christ has cried and proclaimed this him self, and sent his
heraldys, his blessed apostles, to cry it out abroad, and has caused his (...)
also to write ye pro clamacio^, by which all ye world was warned that his
blessed body, his holy flesh and his blood, is verily eaten and dronken in
the blessed sacra meant. And therefore either all those places be one in which
the blessed sacrament is received at onys, or else god may do the thing that is
repugnaunt, or else he sees that his body to be in diverse places at onys, is
not repugnaunt. For well I wot / he says he does it, in all the. iiii.
euangelystes. And well I wot also, that he can not say but soth. And therefore
neither need I to see very far for this point, nor need no secret reuelacyon
neither, sith it is the point, that to the whole world, god has both by
word, writing, and miracles, reveled and showed so openly. where is master
Masker now?

For where he says I have no word of fcrypture for Christ's body to be in
many places at onys, no more than to be in all placys at onys (...) I had
not, yet if god had other wise than by writing reveled the tone to his church
and not the the other, I would and were bound to believe the tone, and would not
nor were bounden to believe the the other / as I believe and am bound to believe now
that the gospel of saint Iohu^ is holy scripture, and not the gospel of
Nichodemus. And if god had reveled both twain unto the church: I would and
were bound to believe both twain / as I believe now that the gospel of saint
Iohu^ is holy scripture, and the gospel of saint Matthew to.

But now of troth master mas ker abomynably bylyeth the word of god, when he
says that we: have not the word of god, no more for the being of Christ's
body in many places at onys, than in all places at onys. For as for the being
thereof in all places at onys, we find no word plainly written in the
scripture. But for the being thereof in many places at onys, Christ's words in
his last souper, and before that in the syxte chapyter of saint John^, be as
open, as clear, and as plain as any man well could with any reason require /
except any man were so wise as to wene yt diverse mennys mowthes were all one
place. And therefore when master Masker in his word following, makes as
though he would believe it, as well as he byleueth the creacyon of the world,
and Christ's birth of a virgin (which seem also to his reason repugnaunt) if
Christ in any plain place of scripture said it, the troth appears
otherwise. For unto him that is not with his own fro wardnesse blinded by the
devil, the thing that he denies is as plainly spoken, as are the the other
twain that he says he by leueth. And some other wreches such as him self is,
in folly and stoburnnesse deny both the the other twain, for the repugnaunce; as
well as he does this / which thing you have herd him al ready, with very
folysh reasons declare for so repugnaunte, that he says that god can not do
it, because it were as he says a geuyng away of his glory. And therefore his
heart onys set and fyxed on the wrong side the devil causes him so to
delight in such fond folysshe ar gumentes of his own inuencyon, that he can
not endure to turn his mind to the trowthe / but every text be it never so
plain, is dark unto him / through the darkness of his own brain.

The. xx. chapyter.
BUt now for because he says, that he wylbe content and satysfyed in this
matter with any one text truly taken: while I shall say that the textes that I
shall bring him, be by me truly taken, and he shall say nay, and shall say
that I take them amysse and vntreuly: while he and I can not agree upon the
taking, but vary upon thexposycyo^ and the right understanding of them: by
whom will he be judged, whyther he or I take those textes truly? If by the
congregacyon of thrysten people: the whole christen nacyons have this fyftene
hundred year judged it against him.

For all this while have they believed, yt Christ at his mau^dy, wha^ he said
this is my body, meant that yt was his very body in deed / and ever have
byleued and yet do, that yt was so in deed. If he will have yt judged by a
general counsel, yt has been judged for me against him, by mo then one all
redye, before his days and mine both. If he will be judged by the wrytynges of
the old holy doctors and saints: I have al redye showed you suffycyentely,
that they have al redye judged this point against him. If he and I would va
rye upon the understanding of the old saints words, bysydes that you se
them your self so plain, that he shall in that point but show him self
shameful and shameless: yet the general counsayles (which him self denies
not) having read and seen those holy doctors them self, and many of those
holy saints being present at those cou^sayles them self, have thereby judged
that point against him to. For no wise man will doubt, but that among them
they understood the doctors than as well as master Maskars does now. If he
say that he will with his other mo then twenty textes of scripture of which
he spoke before, dysproue us the textes one or two that I bring for the
blessed sacrament: than comes he (you se well) to the self same point again,
wherein he is overthrown al redye. For all the corpse of chrystendome of thrs.
xv. hundred year before us, and all the old holy doctors and saints, and all the general cou^sayles, and all the meruaylouse miracles that god has showed
for the blessed sacrament yearly almost, and I wene daily to, what in one place
and other / al which things prove the textes that I lay, to be meant and
understood as I say. Al they do thereby declare against him also, that none of
his mo than twenty textes, can in any wise be well and right understood as he
says. For else should yt follow, that diverse textes of holy scripture, not
only seemed (which may well be) but also were indede (which is a thing
impossyble and can not be) co^ traryouse and repugnant unto other.

Now good christen readers here youse, that in his shyft that he uses, where
he says that he will believe any one text trewly taken: we bring him for the
true taking upon our part, all these things that I have here shortly
rehearsed you / of which things him self denies very few / that is to wit,
the old holy doctors to hold on our part / and the people of their time.
But therein have I showed you diverse of ye best sort against him. And the
faith of the people of the diverse times appears by their books and by the
cou^ sails. And than that the general counsayles and the miracles are on our
part, of these two things he denies neither another. But sith he can deny
none of them, he dyspyseth both. And the holy counsayles of Christ's church
he casseth the Anti christen synagoge. And gods miracles both fryth and he be
feign to call the works of the devil.

And therefore good christen readers, while you se all this: ye se well enough
that the textes of the gospel which we say for the blessed body of Christ
in the blessed sacrament, be clear and plain for the purpose / and master
Maskar will not agree yt so, but says that we take them not trewly, only
because he will not perceive and confess the troth.

Now where as master Maskar says of me ferther thus.

As for his unwritten verytees, and thou foryfe of his Antichrysten synagoge,
unto which the scripture forsaken he is now at last with shame enough
compelled to fle: they be proved stark lies and very deuylrye.

Consider good christen readers that in these words master maskar tells you
two things. First that I am with shame enough compelled to fle fro the
scripture to mine unwritten veryties, and to thauthoryte of thantichrysten
synagoge, by which he means the tradycyons and the determynacyons of the
catho lyque church.

The the other that the tradycyons and determinacyons of the church, be all ready
proved stark lies and very de uylrye. For the first point you sethat in this
matter of the blessed sacrament, which is one of the things that he means,
he has not yet compelled me to fle fro the scripture. For I have well all redye
proved you this point, and very plain and clearly, by the self same place of
scripture, which master Maskar has expowned and falsely would wreste it a
another way, that is to wit the words of Christ written in the syxt chapyter of
saint John^.

Now if I do for the proof of this point, say the tradycyon of ye whole
catholyque church beside, which thing is also suffycyent to prove the matter
alone: is that a fleing fro the scripture?

If that be a fleing fro the scripture, than might the old heretyques very
well have said the same unto all the old holy doctors, that this new heretyque
says now to me. For this woteth well every man (that any learning has) that
those old holy doctors and saints, laid against those old heretykes not the
scripture only, but also the tradycyons unwritten, byleued and taught by the
church. And if master Mas kar when he shall defend his book, dare deny me
that they so did: I shall bring you so many plain proves thereof, that be he
never so shame less he shall be ashamed thereof.

And he can not say nay but that they so did, as I wot well he can not: than
you se well good reders yt by ma ster maskers wise reason, those old he retikes
might have said against each of those old holy doctors and saits as master
Maskar says against me now, that they had made him with shame enough, fle
fro the scripture, because he beside the scripture proved the true faith and
reproved their false heresies, by thauthoryte of the catholyque church. Such
strength have always so, master mayhers ar gumentes.

Now touching the secund point, where he calls the catholyke church the
antichrysten synagoge, and the un written veryties stark lies and deuylrye: he
has al ready showed and declared partly which things they be that him self
means by yt name. For he has before specyfyed purgatory, pylgrimages, and
prayenge to saints, honourynge of images, and crepynge to the cross, and halo
wyng of belles against evil spirits in tem pestes, and boughs on palm sone
day, and byleuynge in the blessed sa crament. And Tyndale that is either him
self or his fellow, mocketh under the same name the sacrament of anelyng / and
calls the sacrament of consyrmacyon the butterynge of the boys forhed, and
had as lyefe have at his chrystenynge sand put in his mouth as salt / and
mocketh much at fasting. And as for lent, father frith under name of Bright
well in the re uesacyon of Antichrist calls it ye folishe fast / which ieste
was undoubted ly reveled father fryth by the spyryt of the devil him self, the
spiritual father of Antichryste.

So that you may se good readers that to say the latenye, or our lady
matens, and crepe to the cross at Ester, or pray for all christen sou les:
these things and such other as I have (...) you, master Maskar says are all
ready proved starcke lies and very deuylrye. But he she weth us no such proof
yet, neither of lies nor of deluylrye. (...) But every man may sone se, that he
which says so myche and nothing proves, makes many a stark lie / and that
thus to rail against god and al good men / and holy saints, and helping of
good christen souls / and raylyng against the blessed body of Christ in the
blessed sacrament, calling ye bylyef thereof deuylrye: if such raylyng in
master maskar be not (as I wene it is) very plain and open deuylrye, yt can
be no less yet at the least wise than very plain and open knavery.

The. xxii. chapyter.
MAster Maskar comes at last to the mocking of those worcester des of my pystle,
wherein I she we that if men would deny the co^uersyon of the bread and wine
into the blessed body and blood of Christ, because that unto his own reason
the thing seems to implye repugnaunce, he shall find many other things both
in scripture, and in na ture, and in hand crafts to, of the truth whereof he
nothing douteth, which yet for any solucion that his own reason could
find, other than the omnipotent power of god, would seem repugnant to / of
which manner things, other good holy do, ctours have in the matter of the
blessed sacrament used some ensamples before.

Now for as myche as in these words I speak of the apperynge of the face in
the glass, and one face in every pyece of the glass broken in to twenty:
master Maskar has caughte that glass in hand and mocketh and moweth in that
glass, and makes as many strange faces and as many pretye pottes therein, as
yt were an old ryueled ape. For these are his words so.

Then says he, that ye wot well that many good folk have used in this matter
many good fruitful ex samples of gods other works: not only myra cles,
written in scripture / vnde versus? (where one I pray ye?) But also done by the
comen course of na ture here in earth. (If they be done by the come^ course of
nature: so be they no miracles) And some things made also by man's hand. As
one face beholden in diverse glasses: and in every pyece of one glass broke
into twenty etc. Lord how this pontyfy call poet plays his part. Because
(as he says) we se many faces in many glasses: therefore may one body be in
many places / as though every shadow and symylytude representynge the body /
were a bodyly substance. But I ask More / when he sees his own face in so
many glasses / whyther all those faces that appear in the glasses be his own
very face having boldly substance skin, flesh, and bone, as has that
face / which has his very mouth, nose, yien etc. wherwyth he faceth us out
the truth thus falsely with lies? and if they be al his very faces / tha^ in
very deed there is one body in many places / and he him self bears as many
faces in one hoode. But according to his purpose / even as they be no very
faces / nor those so many voices, sownes, and symylytudes multyplyed in the
air between the glass or other obiecte and the body (as the philosopher
proves by natural reason) be no very bodies: no more is yt Christ's very
body, as they would make the believe in the bread in so many places at ones:

Now good reders to the end that you may se the custumable manner of master
Maskar in rehersynge my matter to his own advantage / sith my words in my
letter that touch this point be not very long / I shall rehearse them here
unto you my self / so good reders thus shall you find yt there in the. xxvi.
lefe.

I wot well that many good folk have used in this matter many good fruitful
examples of gods other works, not only miracles written in scripture, but
also done by the comen course of nature here in earth and some things made also
by mannys hand as one face byholden in diverse glasses and in every pyece of one
glass broken into. xx. and the merueyle of the making of the glass it self
such matter as it is made of. And of one word coming whole to an hundred earys
at onys and the syghte of one little eye present and beholdynge an whole great
country at onys with a thousand such other merueyles mo, such as those that se
them daily done and therefore merueyle not at them, shall yet never be able no
not this young man him self, to give such reason by what mean they may be
done / but that he may have such repugnaunce laid against it that he shall
be feign in conclusyon for the chyefe and the most euydent reason to say that
the cause of all those things is because god that has caused them so to be
done, is almighty of him self and can do what him list.

Lo good Christen readers here you se your selse, that I made none such
argument as master Maskar bears me in hand. Nor no man uses upon a
symilytude, to conclude a necessary consequence, in the matter of the blessed
sacrament / unto which we can bring nothing so like, but that in deed it
must be far unlike, saving that it is as seems me some what like in this,
that god is as able by his almighty power, to make one body be in twenty places
at ones, as he is by come^ course of nature which him self has made, able to
make one face keeping still his own figure in his own place, cast yet and
multyply the same figure of yt self, into xx. pyeces of one broken glass / of
which pyeces each has a several place. And as he is able by the nature that
him self made, to make one self word that the speker has brethed out in the
speaking to be forth with in the ears of an whole hundred per sons, each of
them occupyeng a several place, and that a good dystaunce a sundre. Of which
two things (as natural and as comen as they both be) yet ca^ I never cease to
wonder, for all the reasons that ever I read of the phylopher. And like wise
as I verily trust, that the time shall come, when we shall in the clear sight
of Christ godhed, se this great miracle soyled, and well perceive how yt is,
and how yt may be, that his blessed body is both in beuyn and in earth, and
in so many places at ones: so think I verily that in the sight of his godhed
than, we shall also perceive a better cause of those two other things than
ever any phylolopher has hitherto showed us yet / or else I wene for my part
I shall never perceive them well.

But now where as master Maskar mocketh mine argument, not which I made, but
which him self makes in my name / and makes yt feeble for the nonce, that he
may when he has made yt at his own pleasure soil yt, as children make
castelles of tyle shardes, and than make them their pass time in the
throwynge down again: yet is yt not even so, so feeble as his own, where he
argues in the negatyue, as I say the sample for thaffyrmatyue. For as for the
tone that he makes for me: though thargument be naught for sack of form, yet
holds it somewhat so so, by the matter in that the consequent that is to wit,
that god may make one body to be at ones in many places, is what so ever
master masker babble, a troth with out questyon necessary.

But where he argues for him self in the negatyue, by that that the bodyly
substance of the face is not in the glass, that therefore the bodyly
substance of our sauyoure Christ is not in the blessed sacrament: that
argument has no manner hold at all. For thantecedent is very true / and
(except goddys word be untrue) else as I have all ready by the old holy
expositours of the same, well and planely proved you, the co^sequent is very
false.

Now if he will say that he makes not that argument, but uses only the face
in the glass for a sample and a symylytude: than he she weth him self to
play the false shrewe, when of my bringing in the self same sample, he
makes that argument for me. And therefore now wha^ upon those facys in the
glass, he makes and faceth him self that lie upon me, and than scoffeth
that I face out the troth with lies, and tha^ proves never one: he does but
show what pretty words he could speak, and how properly he could scoff, if
the matter would serve him.

And yet I pray you good readers consider well the words of that argument that
he makes in mine name. we se many faces in many glasses: therefore may one body
be in many places. Now spoke not I you wot well of many faces seen in many
glassys (as he both falsely and folysshely reherseth me) but of one face seen
at onys in many glassys.

For that is like to the matter. For like as all those glasses, while only one
man looks in them / he sees but his own one face in all those places / so be
(as saint Chrysostom declares) all the hosts of the blessed sacrament being
in so far dystaunt several places a sondre, all one very body of our blessed
savior him self, and all one host, one sacryfyce, and one oblacyon.

And as properly as master mas ker scoffeth at that sample and symy sytude of
the glass: I would not have mysse lyked mine own wit therein, if thinuencyo^
thereof had been mine own. For I find not many samples so mete for the matter,
to the capacite of good and unlearned folk, as it is. For as for the point of
which master Masker makes all the dyf ficultye, that one substance being
but a creature might be in many places at onys: every man that is learned sees
a sample that satisfyeth him shortly. For he sees and perceyueth by good
reason, that the soul is vndiuisyble and is in every part of the body, and in
every part it is whole. And yet is every member a several place. And so is
the blessed substance of the spyrytuall body of Christ's flesh and his
bonys, whole in every part of the sacrament.

But this sample of the soul can not every man vnserned co^ceyue and imagyne
right / but of the glass bath for his capacite a more me tely symisitude, and
that yt in one point also does more resemble the matter. For the soul forsakes
every member yt is clean divided from the body. But the blessed body of our
savior abides still whole in every part of the blessed sacrament, though it
be broken into never so many places / as the image and form of the face
avydeth whole still to him that byholdeth it, in every part of the broken
glass. And thus good readers as for this sample and symylytude of the face in
the glass, master Masker may for his folyshe facynge yt out, be myche
ashamed if he have any shame, when so ever he looks on his own face in the
glass.

And for conclusyon, this being of the body of Christ in diverse pla ces at
ones, sith the old holy doctors and saints saw and perceived, that the
soul of every man why che is a very substance, and peradventure yet of less
spiritual power, than the flesh and bones of our savior Christ be now, and
yet very flesh for all that and very bonys also still: they rekened not that
the being thereof in diverse places at ones, would after their days begin to be
taken for so strange and hard a thing as these heretykes make yt now. And
therefore they made nothing so great a matter of that point / but the thing that
they thought men would most meruayse of, was the conuersyon and turnyng of the
bread and the wine into Christ's very flesh and blood. And therefore to make
that point well open, and to make it synke into mennys breasts: those old
holy doctors and saints (as I said in these words which master maskar
mocketh) used many mo good samples of things done by nature.

But than were they no miracles says master Masker. And what than good master
Masker? Might they not'serue to prove yt god might do as much by miracle, as
nature by her comen course? Those words so were by master masker (you se well)
very well and wisely put in.

The. xxiii. chapyter.
(...) this toward the perceyuyng and bylyefe of that point of conuersyon of
the bread and the wine into the very flesh and blood of Christ: I said that
those holy doctors and saints, used ensamples of other miracles done by god,
and written in holy scripture.

Now at this word master masker asks me End versus? where one I (...) your
you have herd all ready good readers in the. xv. chapyter of the first book,
the words of that holy doctor saint Cyryll, in which for the credence of
that point, that is to wit the chaungynge of the bread and the wine into
Christ's flesh and his blood, he brings the miracles that god wrought in
the old law, as the chau^gyng of the water into blood, and the chaungyng of
Moses rod into a serpent, and diverse other chau^ ges and mighty miracles mo.

You have herd also before, how saint Chrysostom against them ye would
dowte, how Christ could give them his flesh to eat, lays forth the
miracle of the multiplyeng of five louys so suddenly, to. xii basketes full
more than the fuffycyent fedynge of five thousand folk.

Here be lo some verses yet master Masker, and mo than one miracle perdye,
that those holy doctors and saints have used in this matter of the blessed
sacrament. And yet such other mo shall I bring you at another leysour, ere I
have done with your second course, that it shall grieve you to se them. And
surely where properly you scoff at me with my many facys in one hode: I have
here in this first part all ready brought you for the true says of the
catholyke church, against your false heresye, wherewith you would face our
sauyout out of ye blessed sacrament: I have brought against you to your face,
saint (...) and Theophilactus, saint Austayne, and saint Hylary, saint
Hyreneus, saint Cyryll, and saint Chrysostom, so many such good facys into
this one hode, that all the shamefullyes yt your shameless face can make, shall
never against these facys be able to face out the troth. And thus end I good
readers my fourth book.

Here ends the fourth book.
The fyfth book and the last of the first part.
The first chapyter.
Now come I good christen readers to the last point that I spoke of, the two
contradyccyons of mine own, that master Masker has hyghly laid unto my
charge / whose words I shall good reders first rehearse you whole to these they
be god save them.

At last note christen reader, that master More in the third book of his
confutacyon of Tyndale, the 249. side, to prove saint (...) gospel imperfect
and in suffycyent, for leuyng out of so necessary a point of our faith, as he
calls the last souper of Christ his maundye: says that John spoke nothing
at all of this sacrament. And now se again in these his letters against Fryth
/ how him self bryno geth in John 6. cap. to impugn Frythes writing / and to
make all for the sacrament, even thus / My flesh is verily meat, and my
blood drink. By like the man had there ouershette him self foul / the yenge
man here causynge him to put on his spec tacles and poor better and more
wysshely with his old eyes upon saint Iohn^s gospel to find that thing
there now written, which before he would have made one of his unwritten
verytees. As yet if he look narowly he shall espy that him self has proved
us by scripture, in the 37. lefe of his dyaloge of quod he and quod I our
ladies perpetual virgynyte expownynge non cognosco, id est, non cognos came /
which now written unwritten veryte he uombereth a little before among his
unwritten vanytees Thus may ye se how this old holy vpholder of the popes
church / his words fight against them self into his own confusyon, in
finding us forth his unwritten written vanitees veritees I should say. But
return we unto the exposycyo^ of saint John^.

Now have you good christen readers herd his whole tale, concerning my two
contradyccyons. Of which twain I will first answer yt last, that concerns
ye perpetual virginite of our lady. which point I have towched toward the end
of the. xxv. chapyter of the first book of my dyaloge, wherein master masker
(...) me for quod I and quod he / and would I se well in no wise; that in the
rehersyng of a co^munycacyo^ had between my self and another man, I should not
for shame say quod I and quod he / but rather rehearse our two talkings, with
quoth we and quoth she.

I have also spoken of that point in mo places than one of my wurke that I
wrote of Tyndals (...), cyon / which places who so list to read shall find
this point of co^tra dyccyon answered all ready, yt (...) masker now layth to my
charge dyssymulynge such things as I have answered it with.

And of this contradyccyon I am so sore ashamed, yt for all (...) maskers
words even here before in my first book of this wurke, I have not let the
best that my wit will serve me this unwritten veryte, to prove yet again by
the self same place of saint Lukes holy writing.

For why, to say the troth I do not so myche force to have that article taken
for an unwritten veryte, with good catholyke folk for the mayntenau^ce of my
word, as to have it for the honor of our lady, taken and byleued for an
undoubted trowth, with catholykes and those heretykes to, that will take it for
no such troth but if it be written in scripture.

Now does the clear certayntye of this article in deed depend upon the
tradycyon of thapostles, continued in the catholyke church. For all be it that
my self think, that I find some words written in scripture that would well
prove it / and upon those words let not to write mine own mind, and diverse
old holy doctors to: yet while I se that holy saint Hierome him self, a man
far otherwise seen in scripture than I, arguing for the defense of that
article against that heretyke Heluidius did only soil the scryptures that
Heluidius laid against it, and lays no scripture him self for ye proof of
his part, but rests therein to thauthoryte of Christ catholyke church,
which master Masker here calls ye antichryssen synagoge: I neither dare nor
will take so (...) upon my self, as to afferme surely that it is proved to be a
written veryte. And this lack of taking lo so myche upon my self, is the
thing yt master Masker calls so shameful repugnau^ce to my great co^fusio^.

And therefore in that place of my dyaloge, though I upon that word of our
lady, In what wise shall this thing be done for I know not a man do reason and
show my mind, that it proves for this part, as in deed me thinks it does:
yet I am not so bold upon mine own exposicion therein, as to afferme that the
scripture says there openly and plainly, that she was a perpetual virgyne.
For if it had been a very precyse plain euydent open proof of that matter,
mine own mind gives me, yt saint Hierom would not have failed to have found
it before me.

I shall also for this point have master masker him self to say some what for
me, though he do therein (as he is often wont to do) speak somewhat against him
self. For he says here him self, yt if a man look narowly than he shall espy
yt I have my self proved our ladies perpetual virginite. Now sith that
master Maskar says that a man can not spy yt but if he look narowly: he
says you se (...) him self, that yt is no plain open proof. And than is yt
no proof to them you wot well. For they receive no scripture for proof of any
purpose, but only plain open and euydent.

And therefore by master Maskars own tale, though I proved yt suffycyently a
written verytie unto good catholyques: yet rested yt unproven still a written
verite, unto such heretyques, and against them ye wot well wrote I.

Now be it here will I demand of master masker touching the perpetual
virgynyte of our lady to be plainly written in holy scripture, whyther I prove
that pornt well or not? If not / tha^ may I well enough notwithstanding any
such proof of mine, say still that it is an unwritten veryte. If he will
confess that I prove it well: I wylbe content with that praise of him self to
abide his rebuke of that contradyccyon. For I set more as I said by the pro
fyt of his soul in falling from the contrary heresye to the right bylye fe of
our ladies perpetual vyrgynyte, than I set by mine own praise and
commendacyon of abiding well by my words.

But yet if he will allow my proof made of that point: I marvel me much but if
that he allow now my proof made for the blessed body of Christ present in the
blessed sacrament. For I am very sure I have proved much more clearly, by myche
more open and plain words of the scripture, and the sense of those worcester des by
diverse old holy doctors other manner of men than my self, tha^ I have pued or
any man else, ye perpe tuall vyrginyte of our blessed lady.

Now be yt of truth though I proved well that point of the perpepetual
vyrginyte of our lady, to be a verytie written in scripture, and that many
other also proved yt much better than I, as I think there do / and that my
self had affermed yt never so strongely for never so clear a written verytie:
yet sith wyllyam Tyndale against whom I specially wrote, takes yt, as in his
wry tynge well and plain appears, for no written veryte, and yet agrees that
yt is to be byleued, but not of ne cessyte / and yet after upon his own
words I prove him that of necessyte to: I may without any contradyccyon or
repugnaunce at all, lay yt against him for an unwritten verytie, for as myche
as him self so takes yt.

Moreover all the proof that I make of our ladies perpetual vyrginyte, is no
more, but that she was a perpetual vyrgyne except she brake her vow. And
surely as I say, yt seems to my self that I prove this very clearly. And
this being proved, is in deed enough to good christen folk, for a full proof
that she was a perpepetual vyrgyne. But yet unto these heretyques against
whom I wrote, sith they set naught by vows of vyrgynyte, but say that they
that make them do both unlawfully make them, and may when they will lawfully
break them / and yt therefore freres may ru^ne out of relygyon and wedde
nuns: this proof of mine is to them no manner proof at al. And therefore I
may to them without contradycyon or repugnaunce, lay yt for an unwritten
verytie still.

And thus I trust you se good rea ders, that as for this repugnaunce turns to
master Maskars confusyon and not mine.

The secunde chapyter.
Now come I than good readers to the the other contradyccy on that he lays
against me, his worcester des wherein, before mine answer I pray you read ones
again. And lest ye should be loath to turn back and seek them / here shall
you have them again, lo these they be.

At last note christen reader, that master More in the third book of his
confutacyon of Tyndale, the 249. side, to prove saint Iohn^s gospel (...) and
insuffycyent, for lenyng out of so necessary a point of our faith, as he
calls the last sonper of Christ his maundye: says that John^ spoke nothing
at all of this sacrament. And now se again in these his letters against Fryth
/ how him self brings in John^ 6. cap. to impagne Frythes writing / and to
make all for the sacrament, even thus / My flesh is verily meat, and my
blood drink. By like the man had there ouershette him self foul / the young
man here causynge him to put on his spec tacles and poor better and more
wysshely with his old eyes upon saint Iohn^s gospel to find that thing
there now written, which before he would have made one of his unwritten
verytees.

when my self good reader read first these words of his, all be it that I
was sure enough, that in the thing that I purposed there was no repugnaunce in
deed: yet seeing that he so dylygently laid forth the lefe in which my fault
should be found, I very plainly thought that I had not so circumspectely seen
unto my words as wisdom would I should. And taking therefore mine ouersyght for
a very troth, I never vouchefaufede to turn my book and look.

But afterward yt happed on a day I said in a certain company, that I was
somewhat sorye, that yt had mysse happed me to take in this one point no
better head to mine hand, but to write therein two things repugnaunt and
contrary. Where unto some of them made answer, yt such a chance happeth
sometime (...) a man be ware in a long work. But yet quoth one of them a
gentylwoman, have you considered well the place in your book, and seen that he
says troth. Nay by my truth quod I that have I not. For yt yrketh me to
look upon the place again now when yt is to late to mende yt. For I am sure
the man would not be so mad, to name the very lefe, but if he were well sure
yt he said true. By our lady (...) she, but sith you have not looked yt your
self, I will for all the lefe laid out by him, se the thing my self ere I
believe his writing, I know these fellows for so false. And therwyth al she
sent for the book, and turned to the very. 249. side, and with that number
marked also. And in good faith good readers, there found we no such manner
matter, neither on the tone side of the lefe nor on the the other.

Now be yt of troth I can not deny, but that in a side after mysse marked
with the no^bre of. 249, which should have been marked with the number of. 259,
there we found the matter in that place. But therein found we the most
shameful, either folly or falysed of master Maskar, that ever I saw lightly in
any man in my life. which because ye shall not seek far to find: I shall
rehearse you here the very words of that place. Lo good readers these they be.

But now because of Tyndale, let us take some one thing. And what thing rather
then the last souper of Christ, his maundye with his apostles, in which he
instytuted the blessed sacra meant of the altar his own blessed body and
blood. Is this no necessary point of faith? Tyndale can not deny it for a
necessary point of faith and though it were but of his own false faith,
agreynge with Luther, Huyskyn, or Suynglyus. And he can not say that saint
John^ speaks any thing thereof, specially not of the instytucyon. Nor he can
not say that saint John^ speaks any thing of the sacrament at all, sith that
his sect expressly denies, that saint John^ meant the sacrament in his words
where he speaks expressly thereof in the. vi. chapyter of his gospelli

Where have you ever good christen readers seen any fond (...) before this,
handle a thing so (...) ly or so folyshely, as master maskar here handeleth
this? Ne tells you that I said here, that saint John spoke nothing of the
sacrament at all. Now you se that master Maskar in that point bylyeth me.
For I said not here that saint John spoke notkynge thereof / but first I said
there that Tyndale against whom I there wrote, could not say that saint
John^ wrote any thing of the blessed sacrament, specially not of the
instytucyon thereof. And this is very truth. For as touching thinstytucyon
thereof at Chry stes last souper and maundye, neither Tyndale nor no man else
can say that saint John^ any thing wrote thereof in his gospel.

Than said I farther there (as you se) not that saint John^ speaks nothing
of the sacrament, but yt Tyn dale can not say that saint John^ speaks of the
sacrament any thing at all. And that I meant not in those words, to say mine
own self that saint John^ spoke nothing thereof: I declare plainly there
forthwyth, by that I show the cause why Tyndale can not say that saint Iohu^
spoke any thing of the sacrament at all, that is to wit because that al his
sect expressly denies, that any thing was meant of the sacrament in the
words of Christ written in the. vi. chapyter of saint John^.

By this ye may se plainly good readers, that master Maskar plain ly belyeth
me. For I said not my self that saint John^ spoke nothing of the sacrament /
but that Tyndale because of thopynyon of all his (...) in that point, could
not say ye saint John^ spoke any thing thereof. Which was enough for my
purpose, while Tyndale was the man against whom I wrote, though my self
would for mine own part say the contrary. For yt is yt hyude of argumte^
that is in the scoles called argumentu^ adhomine^. And thus you se good re
ders, master Maskar in this thing either shamefully false, or very shamefully
folish / shamefully false, if he perceived and understood my worcester des, and than
for all that thus (...) me / shamefully folly she if the thing being spoken by
me so plain, his wit would not serve him to perceive it.

But now as clear as ye se the ma ter all ready by this, to the^tent yet that
master Maskar shall have no matter left him in all this word to make any
argument of for his excuse therein: read my words again good reders, and bid
master Maskar mark well my words therein, where I say expressly that saint
John^ spoke expressly thereof in the (...) chapyter of his gospel. For these
words are as you se there the very last word of (...) Nor Tyndale can not
say, that saint John^ speaks any thing of the sacra meant at all, sith that his
sect express ly denies that saint John^ meant the sacrament in his words
(where he speaks expressly thereof) in the. vi. chapyter of his gospel.

whose words are these? where he speaks expressly thereof? Are not these
words mine? And do I not in these words expressly say, yt saint John^
expressly speaks of the blessed sacrament in the syxt chapter of his gospel,
in which place Tindals sect says expressly that he nothing spoke thereof. And
now sath M. mas kar that I said there, that saint John^ spoke nothing thereof
at all. And lays it' for a foul repugnau^ce in me, that in my letter against
Fryth I say thereof the contrary.

But how (...) we master maskar? What have you now to say? with (...)
shameful shyft will your sham less face, face us out this folyshe lie of
yours, that you make upon me here? If you lied so loud wyttyngly: how can
you look that any man should trust your word? If for lack of understanding:
how can you lake than for shame that any man should trust your wit? Why
should we think that your wit will perse into the perceiving of hard word
in the holy scripture of god, when yt will not serve you to perceive such pore
plain words of mine.

Ye write that the young man (...) here made me done on my spectacles and look
more wyshly on the matter, to find now written therein the thing that I said
before was not written therein. But now must you look more wyshely upon my
words, on which you make here so loud a lie, and pore better on them with
your spectacles upon your Maskars nose.

I wyste ones a good fellow, which while he daunsed in a mask, upon
boldness that no man could have known him, when he perceived that he was
well espied by his evil favored daunsynge: he waxed so ashamed suddenly, ye he
softly said unto his fellow, I pray you tell me does not my visour blosh read?
Now surely good reders, M. maskar here, if he were not utterly paste shame,
has cause enough to be in (...) point so sore ashamed, that he might wene ye
glowyng of his vysage should even perse through his visor, and make it read for
shame. Thus have I now good christen readers, answe red at the full in these
five books of my first part, the first part of mays ter maskars work / and
taken up the first course of master maskars souper, which he falsely calls
the last souper of the lord / while he has with his own poysened cokery,
made yt the souper of the devil. And yet would the devil I wene dysdayne to have
his souperdressed of such a rude ruffyn, such a scald Colyn coke, as under the
name of a clerk, so rybaldyousely rayleth against the blessed body of Christ
in the blessed sacra meant of thauter.

The. iii. chapyter.
BUt one thing will I yet rehearse you, that I have hitherto dyfferred, that is
to wit my first argument against fryth, which (as I showed you before)
master Masker let go by, as he has done many things mo; and made as though
he saw them not. That argument good readers was this,

In this heresye beside the common faith of all catholyke christen regyons, the
exposycyo^s of all the old holy doctors and saints be clear against Fryth, as
whole as against any heretic that ever was hitherto herd of. For as for the
words of Christ of which we speak touching the blessed sacrament / though
he may find some old holy men that bysyde the lytteral sense does expowne
the^ in an allegorye, yet he shall never find any of them that did as he does
now after wicliffe, Ecolampadius, Tyndale, and Sutnglius, deny the lyterall
sense / and say that Christ meant not that it was his very body and his very
blood in deed / but the old holy doctors and exposytours bysyde all such
allegoryes, do plainly declare and expoune, that in those words our savior
as he expressly spoke, so did also well and plainly mean, that the thing
which he there gave to his discyples in the sacrament, was in very deed his
very flesh and blood. And so did never any of the old exposytours of scripture
expowne any of those other places in which Christ is called a vine or a door.
And therefore it appears well, that the manner of speaking was not like. For if
it had / tha^ would not the old exposytours have used such so far unlike
(...) in the expownynge of them.

This was lo good readers the first argument of mine that master Masker met
with, and which he should first therefore have soyled.

But it is such as he lysted little to look upon. For where as he makes much
a do to have it seem that both these words of our savior at his last
souper, this is my body, and his words of eating of his flesh, and drinking
of his blood, written in the syxte chapyter of saint Iohu^, should be spoken
in a like phrase and manner of spekyng, as were his other words, I am the door
and I am the very vine: I showed there unto Fryth (whom master masker makes
as though he would defend) yt by thexposycyo^s of all the old holy doctors
and saint yt have expowned all those. iiii. place before, ye difference well
appears, sith none of them declare him to be a very material door, nor a
natural very vine. This says no man not so myche as a very natural fool. But
that in the sacrament is his very natural body, his very flesh and his
blood, this declare clearly all the old holy exposytours of the scripture,
which were good men and gracious, wysw and well learned both. And therefore as
I said the difference may sone be perceived, but if master masker list better
to believe him self than all them. which if he do (as in deed he does) than is
he myche (...) fool than a natural fool in (...).

For as for his. iii. places of saint Austayne, Tertulyane, and saint
Chrysostom, whom he brings in his secunde part: I shall in my secunde part
in taking up of his secund course, when we come to fruit, pare him I warraunt
you those three perys so nere, that he gets not a good morcell among them.
And yet peradventure ere I come at it to.

For so is it now good reders, that I very certainly know, that ye book which
Fryth made last against the blessed sacrament, is come over into this realm
in prente, and secretly sent abroad into the bretherns hands, and some good
systers to. And for as much as I am surely informed for troth, that Fryth has
in to that book of his, taken many textes of old holy doctors wylyly handeled
by false friar Nuy skyn before, to make it falsely seem that tholde holy
doctors and saints were fauerouse of their false heresye: therefore will I for
the while set master maskers secund part aside till I have answe red that
pestylent peuyshe book of John^ Frith / about which I purpose to go as soon
as I can get one of them / which so many being abroad, shall I trust not be
long to. And than shall I by the grace and help of almighty god, make you, the
(...) and the fashed of Fryth and friar Nuys kyn both as open and as clear, as
I have in this wurke made open and clear unto you, the falshed and the folly of
master Masker here.

And where as I a year now passed and more, wrote and put in prynte a letter
against the pestylent treatise of John^ Fryth, which he than had made and
secretly sent abroad among the brethren against the blessed sacrament of
thaulter, which letter of mine as I have declared in mine apology, I nathelesse
caused to be kept still and would not suffer it to be put out abroad into
every man nes hands, because Frythes treatise was not yet at that time in
prente: yet now sithe I se that there are comen over in prente, not only
Frythes book, but over that this maskers book also / and that either of their
both books makes mencyon of my said letter, and would seem to soil it, and
laboreth sore there about: I do therefore now suffer the prenter to put with
this book my said letter also to sale.

And for as myche also as those authorytees of saint Austayn, saint
Chrysostom, and Turtuliane, which master maysker lays in his secunde part,
I shall of lykelyhed find also in Frythes book, and therefore answer them
there, and all master Maskers whole matter to, before I return to his secund
part, which yet I will after all this (god wyllyng) not leave nor let go so: in
the mean while may master mas kar (sith it is ash says so great plea sure
to him to be written against, ha uynge as he bosteth all solucyons so redely)
look and assay whither he can soil these things with which I have in this
first part ouethrowen his whole heresye, and proved him very plain, a very
false fool all redye. Of whose false wyly folly to be ware our forde give us
grace / and of all such other like, which with folyshe arguments of their
own blind reason, wresting the scripture into a wrong sense, against the
very plain words of the text, against the xposycyons of all the old holy
saints, against the determynacyons of diverse whole general counsayles,
against the full consent of all true christen nacyons this. xv. hundred year
before their days, and against the plain declaracyon of almighty god him
self, made in eve ry christen country by so many plain open miracles, labor
now to make us so folyshely blind and mad, as to forsake the very true
catholic faith, forsake ye socyetie of the true catholyque church, and with
fundry sects of heretic fallen out thereof, to set both holy days and fasting
days at naught, and for the deuyllis pleasure to forbere and abstain from all
prayer to be made either for souls or to saint jest on our blessed lady ye
immaculate mother of Christ, make mockes at all pylgrymages, and crepynge of
Christ's cross, the holy ceremonies of the church and the sacramen tes to,
turn them into tryflynge, with lykenynge them to wine garlandes and ale
polys / and finally by these ways in the end and conclusyon, forsake our
savior him self in the blessed sacrament / and instead of his own blessed
body and his blood, wene there were nothing but bare bread and wine, and call
it ydolatrye there to do him honor. But woo may such wreches be. For this we
may be sure, that who so dishonor god in one place with occasyon of a false
faith: standing that false bylyefe and infydelyte, all thonour that he does
him any where beside, is odyouse and dyspyghtfull and rejected of god, and
never shall save that faythlesse soul from the fire of hell. From whcche our
lord give them grace trewely to turn in time, so that we and they to gether
in one catholyque church, knytte unto god to gether in one catholyque faith,
faith I say, not faith alone as they do, but acompanyed with good hope, and
with her chyefe sister well workynge charytie, may so receive Christ's blessed
sacraments here, and specially that we may so receive him self, his very
blessed body, very flesh and blood, in the blessed sacrament our holy blessed
howsyll, that we may here be with him incorporate so by grace, that after the
short course of this transytorye life, with his tender pytye powered upon us
in purgatory, at the prayour of good people, and intercessyon of holy saints,
we may be with them in their holy felyshyppe, incorporate in Christ in his
eternal glory Amen.

Finis.
The fautes escaped in the prentynge of this book
In the preface (...) page (...). the fautes. ye amendme^tes.
xii. ii. i. his syxte the syxte xiii. i. xx. fashed falshed xv. ii. iiii.
fashed falshed In the book.
(...). i. xvii. for the fro the xvii. ii. xiiii. meat mete xix. i. ii. meat
mete xx. ii. xxii could could not xxi. i. xvii (...) (...) xxii. i. xiii onele
only xxvii. i. xix. byddyng bidding (...) xxxii. i. xxi furst the the xlviii.
i. xiiii wpych which xlviii. ii. iii. faith faith (...). ii. ix. some, (...)
such some such xlviii. ii. xvii. (...) it (...) xlviii. ii. xxii hyuynge
gyuynge lii i. xxi. (...) doctout lv. i. vii. quein quam lxx. ii. iii. how
saint saint lxxi ii. i. unto the un the lxxv. i. vi both he he, both
lxxxviii. ii. x. (...) (...) lxxxviii. il. xlii. (...) (...) (...). ii. xi.
(...) chose fo. page li. the fautes. yt amendeme^tes
cii. i. xi. preasely precysely cviii. i. vii. such should cix. ii. ix. so
vouchsaue (...) cix. ii. (...). by these by the cx. i. vii. (...) you cxi. ii.
xiii. thexposycyon his (...) cxiiii. i. xxi. gentle (...) cxxxiiii. ii. ix.
vii. chapyter vi. chapyter cxxxv. i. ix. ge (...) cxxxvi. ii. xii. ix. (...)
viii. chapyter cxli. ii. xii. (...). chapyter ix. chapyter cxliii. ii. i. and
not dwell and dwell cxlvii. i. x. xi. chapyter x. chapyter cxlix. i. (...).
xii. chapyter xi. chapyter cli. i. xviii. xiii. chapyter xii. chapyter clii. i.
xv. (...) tradidi quod et (...) clvi. ii. xiiii. be be he be clviii. i. xiii.
word world clxxix. i. xxii. the were they were clxxxii. ii. xx. in ded in
deed clxxxiii. ii. xiiii. word world clxxxiiii. i. vi. playnte plain
clxxxiiii. i. xiiii. hadelynge handelynge clxxxvii. ii. xi. gospel the gospel
clxxxvii. ii. xvii. (...) (...) clxxxviii. i. vi. xvii. xviii. Amnon Ammon
clxxxviii. i. xvi. xviii. Asolon Absolon cxcvi. ii. iiii. that parable that it
was but a parable cxcviii. ii. xxiii. (...) understands the^ all cciiii. ii.
vi. Lut But (...) i. vi. word not word of god (...) fo. page li. the fautes:
ye amendeme^tes
ccix. ii. xx. (...) (...) it ccx. i. i. (...) eat hye flesh ccxi. ii. iiii.
shode should ccxviii. i. ix. the were they were ccxviii. ii. iii. synynge
syenge ccxix. i. xiii. this body his body ccxxi. i. v. ta all in all ccxxi. ii.
vi. byleues byleuers ccxxiiii. i. xvii. face in face it ccxxiiii. ii. iiii.
scripturer scripture ccxxiiii. ii. xiiii. master that master ccxxvii. i. xi.
the be they be ccxxx. i. xiii. vows bows ccxxx. ii. xxi. the matters these
matters ccxxxi. ii. xii. dispute pylgryma. dispyse pilgrim. ccxli. i. iiii.
places as places in earth as ccxli. ii. xxi. and to and not to ccxlvii. i. xix.
lamb lame cclvi. i. xvii. And he And if he cclxiii. i. xix. places parts
cclxxiiii. ii. xxi. word world cclxxix. i. xvii. fauerouse fauerours

Sir Thomas More knight to the christen reader.
AFter these fautes of the prenter escaped in this book, I shall not let good
reders to give you like warning of one fault of mine own, escaped me in my
book last put forth of the debellacyon of Salem and Bt zance. In the. xiii.
lefe whereof, and in the first side, cancel and put out one of those
ouersyghtes that I lay to the pacyfyer, in those. ix. lines, of which the
first is the. ix. line of the same side, and the last is the. xviii.

For of troth not ye pacifyer but my self was ouersene in that place with a
little haste, in mysse remembrynge one word of his. For where as he says in
the person of Byzance, in the third lefe of Salem and byzance.

I (...) cause yt to be written into this dyaloge word for word as yt is come to
my hands: I forgate when I answered yt that he said, (...) if (...) come /
and took it as though he said as yt comes to mine hands.

And therefore albe yt that I have known many that have read yt, of which I
never found any yt found yt: yet sith yt happed me lately to look thereon and
find mine ouersyght my self. I would in no wise leave yt good reader
unreformed. Nor never purpose while I live, where so ever I may perceive,
either mine aduer sarye to say well, or my self to have said otherwise, to
let for us both indyfferently to declare and say the truth.

And surely if they would use the self same honest plain truth toward me: you
should sone se good readers all our contencyons ended. For than should you se,
that like as I have not let after mine apology, to declare that Tyndale had
somewhat amended and aswaged in one point, his formare evil assertions
concerning satysfactyon: so should he confess the troth that I had trewly
touched him / and that him self had sore erred, as well in the remanaunt
thereof as in all his other heresies. And tha^ also, like as I let not here for
the pa cyfyers part to declare my self over seen with haste in this one point:
so should he not let well and honestly to say ye troth on the the other side, and
confess him self very far ouersene with long leysoure, in all ye remanau^t
by side. I say not in all that he says, but in all that is debated between us.

I wot well the best horse were he which were so sure of foot that run he
never so fast would never in his life neither fall nor stu^ble. But sith we
can find none so sure: that horse is not much to be mysselyked, which that with
courage and pryckyng forth in haste, happynge for all his four fete sometime to
cache a fall, geteth up again lightly by him self, without touch of spur
or any check of the (...). No nor yet that horse to be cast away neither,
that gets up again apace with the cheke of them both. Now like as with the
best kind can I not compare: so of the third sort at the least wise will I
never fail to be, that is to wit rise and reform my self, wha^ any man show
me my faut. And as nere as I ca^ will I search the^ / and as soon as I spy
the^, before any man control them, arise, and as I now do mine own self re
form them. which kind is you wot well next unto ye best. But yet on the
the other side, of all mine aduer saryes could I never hitherto find any one, but
when he catches ones a fall, as each of them has caughte full many, there
lies he still tumbling and toltrynge in mire, and neither spur nor brydyll
can one ynche prevail / but as though they were not fallen in a puddle of
dyrt, but rubbed and laid in lytter under the manger at their ease, they
whyne and they (...), and they kycke, and they spurn at him that would help
them up. And yt is yet a fourth kind, the wurste ye wot well that can be.

Prented by w. Rastell in Metestreet in saint Brydys church yard. 1534. Cum
(...).


