THE Silkewormes, and their Flies: Lively described in verse, by T. M. a
Country Farmar, and an apprentice in Physic. For the great benefit and
enriching of England.



Printed at London by V. S. for Nicholas Ling, and are to be sold at his shop
at the West end of Paul's. 1599.

To the most renowned Patroness, and noble Nurse of Learning MARIE Countess
of Penbrooke.
GReat enuies Object, Worth and Wisedoms pride,
Natures delight, Arcadia's heir most fit,
Vouchsafe a while to lay thy task aside,
Let Petrarke sleep, give rest to Sacred Writ,
Or bow, or string will break, if ever tied,
Some little pawse aideth the quickest wit:
Nay, heavens themselves (though keeping still their way)
Retrogradate, and make a kind of stay.
I neither sing Achilles baneful ire,
Nor Man, nor Arms, nor Belly-brothers wars,
Nor Britain broiles, nor cities drowned in fire,
Nor Hectors wounds, nor Diomedes skarres,
Cease country Muse so highly to aspire:
Our Plain beholds but cannot hold such stars:
Ioue-loued wits may write of what they will,
But meaner Theams beseem a Farmers quill.
I sing of little Worms and tender Flies,
Creeping along, or basking on the ground,
Graced once with those thy heau'nly-humane eyes,
Which never yet on meanest scholar fround:
And able are this work to aeternise,
From East to West about this lower Round,
Deigne thou but breathe a spark or little flame
Of likeing, to enlife for aye the same.
Your H. ever most bounden. T. M.

The Table.
1 WHen garments were first used. Fol. 2 2 Whereof garments were first made. 3
3 Diverse opinions how and when silk was first invented and worn. 4 5 6 7 8 9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20. 4 Whether the Silke-worme or the Silk Fly
were first created. 21 22 23. 5 Whether the egg or the hen be first in
nature. 24 25 26 27. 6 Why the silk flies are only of a white color. 28. 7
What day of the week they were first created. 29 30 31. 8 The rare virtues and
chastity of Silk Flies. 27 28 33 38 9 That they are not to be scornd as being
little and therefore contemned creatures. 34 35 36 37. 10 Their wonderful
increase and propagation. 39 and 65 66. 11 Their manner of dying. 40 66. 12
That their eggs are more worth then the eggs of any Flier: yea then the
Philosophers egg, if there were any such. 41 42 43 44 45 46 47. 13 Their eggs
must be kept in a temperate place. 48. 14 They are not to be hatched til the
Mulbery tree buds. 50. 15 Why the Silke-wormes being crept out of the shel
feed only upon Mulbery leaves. 51 52 53. 16 How long they feed: When their
meat is to be gathered: In what quantity they are to be dieted. 55. 17 That
variety of meats is naught for them. 56. 18 Their table is to be kept clean.
ibid. How the sick are discerned. 59. 19 Of their sleep: ibid. 20 How they
must be distributed when they grow great. 57. 21 The causes of their sickness.
59. 22 Signs of their readiness to work, and how then they must be used. 60.
23 How long they work. 61. 24 When the worms are metamorphosed into Flies.
61. 25 When and how their silk is to be winded up. 61. 26 The sorts and use of
their silken threede. 63 64. 27 How their eggs are to be preserved. 67. 28
That the silk of Silke-wormes is the best of al other. 68. 29 What profit and
pleasure arises in keeping of them. 71 72 73 74. 30 Keeping of Silke-wormes
hinders neither Shepherds, Spinsters, Weauers, nor Clothiers. 75.
FINIS.
Faults escaped in Printing.
page line fault correction 5 11 for the read thy 7 3 ever never 7 14 courser
Coursers 9 19 private Privy 17 3 his this 17 13 lays lay 19 2 h harses
herses 27 4 through thorough 29 10 through thorough 48 2 Enicthean Erycthean 56
1 us as 59 1 I any If any 66 15 dropped drop

Of the Silk worms and their Flies.
SYdneian Muse: if so thou yet remain,
In brothers bowels, or in daughters breast,
Or art bequeathed the Lady of the pla^ne,
Because for her thou art the fittest guest:
Whose worth to show, no mortal can attain,
Which with like worth is not himself possessed:
Come help me sing these flocks as white as milk,
That make, and spinne, and die, and windle silk.
For sure I know thy knowledge does perceive,
What breath embreath'd these almost thingles things:
What Artist taught their feet to spinne and weaue:
What workman made their slime a robe for kings,
How flies breed worms, how worms do flies conceive:
From natures womb, how such a nature springs,
Whereof none can directly tell or reed,
Whether were first, the fly, the worm, or seed.
A time there was (sweet heavens restore that time,)
When bodies pure to spotless souls first knit,
Deuoyd of guilt, and ignorant of crime,
Upright in conscience, and of harmless wit,
Disdaind to wear a garment nere so fine,
As deeming coats and couers most unfit,
Where nothing eye could see, or finger touch,
Which God himself did not for good avouch. Genesis 1. verse 3^.

Yea, when all other creatures looked base,
As mindful only of their earthly food:
Or else as trembling to behold the place,
Where judge eternal sat, and Angels stood:
Then humane eyes beheld him face to face,
And cheeks unstained with fumes of guilty blood,
Desired no mask to hide their blushing balls,
But boldly gazed and pried on heavenly walls.
The breast which yet had hatched no badde conceat,
Nor harbor'd ought in heart that God displeaz'd,
Did it for silken wastcotes then entreat?
Sought it with Tyrian silks to be appeaz'd?
No, no, there was no need of such a feate,
Where all was sound, and members none diseaz'd:
Nay more, The basest parts and seats of shame,
Were seemly then, and had a comely name.
But when self-will and subtle creepers guile, Genesis 3.

Made man to lust, and taste what God forbad,
Then seemed we to our selves so foul and vile,
That straight we wished our bodies to be clad,
Seeing without, and in such great defile,
As reft our wits, and made us al so mad:
That we resembled melancholique hares,
Or startling stagges, whom every shadow scares.
Then Bedlam-like to woods we ran apace,
Praying each tree to lend us shade or leaves,
Wherewith to hide (if ought might hide) our face
From his al-seeing eyes, who al perceaues,
And with ful-brandisht sword pursues the chase,
Traitors of rest, of shade, and al bereaues:
Permitting men with nothing to be clad,
But shame, despair, guilt, fear, and horror sad.
These robes our parents first were decked withal,
Then fig tree fannes upon their shame they wore:
Next, skins of beasts, (to show their beastly fall)
Then, hairy clothes, and wool from Baa-lambs tore,
Last, Plin. lib. 12. ca. 10. and lib. 24. cap. 12.
Eastern wits, from mane of Camels tall,
Made water-waued stuff unseen before,
But til the flood had sinners swept away,
Nor Flax, nor Silk, did sinful man array.
For so it seemed just to Justice eyes,
Defiled men to wear polluted things:
And Rebels not to clothe in Flax or line,
Which from the sacred loins of Vesta spring,
Clean, knotlesse, straight, spotless, upright, and fine,
Whose flower is like five heau'nly-azurd wings,
Whose slime is salve, whose seed is holsom food,
whose rind is cloth, Plut. lib. de Isid^ and Osir.
whose stuble seru's for wood
Or if A most famous spinner in Lydia, of whom Ovid 6 metam.
Arachne erst made sisters thread,
Was it think you, for every man to wear?
Or only for the sacrificers weed,
Who of the immortal priest a type did bear?
Wearing not aught that sprang from brutish seed,
But what from out it self the earth did rear:
So that till holy priesthood first began, Exodus 28.

We never read that linen clothed man.
Yet some conceive when Orpheus a most famous Poet. Ovid 1 I^met.
Theban singer wanne,
VVood-wandring wights to good and civil life,
(Which erst with bears and wolves in deserts ran,
Knowing no name of God, law, house, or wife)
That then his brother Linus first began
The Flaxmans craft (a secret then vnrife)
Devising beetles, hackels, wheels, and frame,
Wherewith to bruise, touse, spin and weaue the same.
But Silk (whereon my loving Muze now stands)
Was it the offspring of our shallow brain?
Spunne with these fingers foul? these filthy hands,
Tainted with blood, revenge, and wrongful gain?
Ah no, who made and numbreth all the sands,
Will teach us soon that fancy to be vain:
Far be it from our thoughts, that sinful sense,
Should make a thing of so great excellence.
Ne need we yet with Hironimu^ vida^, Bishop of Alba. lib. 1. de Bombyc^
Tuscane Prelate fly,
To fictions strange, or wanton Venus eyes:
Who seeing Pallas taught from Saturn hie,
To clothe her self and hers with weaued line,
Yea all the Nimphs and Goddesses in sky,
To wear long stoles of Lawne and Cambrick fine:
Fretted to see her self and boy newborn,
Left both to heaven and earth an open scorn.
Revenge she cri'de unto the sire of Jove,
As she lay hid under th'Idalian tree:
Afford some raiment from the house above,
If but to hide the shame of mine and me.
So may thou learn from us The art of Love,
Whereby to win each Ladies heart to thee.
But grumbling Chuff rejected still her prayre,
Whereat lamented heavens and weeping air.
Then Cyprian Queen perceiving that no cries
Could pierce the leaden ears of sullen Sire,
Straight lodged her son in fair Oceanus his daughter, a most brave virgin.
Ovid 6 met.
Phillyraes eyes,
And caused him thence to darte up such a fire,
As had consumed the very stars and skies,
Yea melted Saturnes wheels with hot desire:
Unless that very hour he had come down,
And begged her aid, on whom he late did frown.
How often, as his love on Pelion hill
Stoopt down to gather herbs for wounds and sores,
Strewn he before her Tutsan, Balm, and Dill,
Long Plantaine, Hysope, Sage, and Comfrey moares?
Offering besides, the art and perfect skill,
Of healing bloody wounds and festred coares:
How often (I say) did he each day descend,
And bootelesse al his vows and wooings spend?
He loved* she loathed, he liked, she disdained:
He came, she turned, he pressed, she ran away,
Neither by words, nor gifts she could be gained,
(For only in her eyes the Archer lay)
Regarding naught but (wherein she was trained)
VVounds how to cure, and smartings to allay:
As for the wound of Love, she felt it none,
And therefore little heeded Saturns moan.
Thus thus perplexed the chief and grauest God,
(Or rather God supposd of highest place)
Touched now, nay thoroughly scourged with Cupids rod,
Sent from the eyes but of a mortal face,
Flewe down forthwith where Venus made abode,
And prostrate lying at her feet for grace:
Promised the richest clothing for her Art,
That now she did, or could desire in heart.
Who earelesse of revenge, and innely grieved,
(True beauty aye is full of rueful moan)
Was ever well til Saturn was releeu'd,
His inward griefs asswag'd, and sorrows gone.
And finding him, of hope, and help, bereeu'd,
(For still Phillira was more hard then stone)
Since that, quoth she, the virgin scorns thy love,
Try whether craft and force will make her move.
Transform thy self into a Courser brave,
(What cannot love transform it self into?)
Feed in her walks: and in a moment have
What thou have wooed to have with much adooe:
VVhereto, consent the ancient Suter gave,
In courser clothes, learning a maid to woo,
Filling each wood with neighs and wihyes shrill,
Whilst he possessed his love against her will.
For lesson which, his Mistress to requite,
Not with vain hopes in lieu of friendly deeds,
By Maiae's Mercury, postmaster to Jupiter.
son (before it grew to night)
He sent a Napkin full of little seeds,
Taken from the tree where Thisbes soul did light,
To make her self and boy far brauer weeds,
Than Pallas had, or any of the seven,
Yea, then proud Juno ware the Queen of heaven.
Withal, by him he sent the mystery
Of weauing silk, which he himself had found,
When chased from heaven by sons own treachery,
He was compelled to wander here on ground,
Where, in the depth of grief and poverty,
The height and depth of Arts he first did sound:
Yet would he this to none but her reveal,
By whose devise he did Phillyra steal.
What? shall we think, that silk was a reward.
Bestowed on crafty dame for aid unjust?
Would men, nay, ought they have such hie regard,
Of that which was the lone and hire of lust?
Not so, what ere The Italian Bishop dared
To feign for true, and give it out with trust:
Yet since silk robes the blessed High Priest wore,
They were not sure the first fruits of a whore.
Vespasians Plinius Secundus, lib. 11. cap. 2
Scribe affirms in Cean lle,
Latous Called Pamphia, a most princely Damsel.
daughter, quick of eye and wit,
Hunting abroad, times travail to beguile,
Chaunc'd at the length under a tree to fit,
Where many silken bottoms hanged in piles,
One by another placed in order fit.
She took one down, and with her faulcon eye,
Found out the end that did the rest untie.
Look how the hungry Lamb does friske and play,
With restless tail, and head, and every limb,
When it has met his mother gone astray,
Who absent blear'd and tear'd as much for him:
Or as Aurora leapes at break of day,
Seeing her lovely brother rise so trim,
No less that Princess triumph't (if not more)
Finding out that which was not found before.
Loves Schoolmaster Ovid lib. 4. Metam.
records a tale most sweet,
Of lovers two that dwelt at Babylon,
Equal of age, in worth and beauty meet,
Each of their sex the flower and paragon,
Next neighbors borne on side of selfsame street,
For twixt their parents houses dwelled none,
Him Pyramus, her Thisbe men did call,
Coupled in heart, though severed by a wall.
As neighbors children, often they talk and view,
That neighbourship was foremost step to love,
Love, which (like private plants) in short time grew,
Pales, walls, and eues, yea houses and all above,
Nay Hymeneus feasts were like to ensue,
And sacred hands give ring and wedding glove,
Had not unhappy parents that forbad,
Which to forbid, no cause but will, they had.
If lovers spoke, it was now all by looks,
None deigned or durst be trouchman to their mind,
Paper was barred, and pen, and ink, and books,
Not any help these parted prisoners find,
But of a rift along the wall that crookes,
(A wall of flint, yet more then parents, kind)
Which, were it old or new, none it espies,
But lovers quick, al-corner-searching eyes,
This rift they used, nor only as a glass,
Wherein to see daily each others face,
But eke through it their voices hourly pass,
In whispring murmurs with a stealing pace:
Sometimes when they no longer durst (alas)
Send whisprings through, when keepers were in place,
Yet would they shift to blow through it a breath,
Which fed and kept their hoping hearts from death.
Envious wall (said they) what wrong is this?
Why does not love or pity make thee fall?
Or (if that be for us too great a bliss)
Why is thy rift so narrow and so small,
As to deny kind love a kindly kiss?
For which we never prove unthankful shall,
Although in truth we owe enough to thee,
Giving our eyes and voice a way so free.
In vain thus having plaind in place distinct,
When night approacht, they each bad each adieu,
Kissing their wall apart where it was chinckt,
Whence lovely blasts and breathings mainely flew:
But kisses staide on eithers side fast linckt,
Sealed to the wall with lips and Lovers glue:
For though they were both thick and many eake,
Yet thicker was the wall that did them break.
Rose-fingred The morning, Homer. Iliad. 4.
Dame no sooner had put out
Nights twinkling fires and candles of the sky,
Nor Phoebus The Sun.
brought his trampling steeds about,
Whose breath dries up the tears of Vestaes The earth.
eye,
But swift and soft, without all noise or showt,
To wonted place they hasten secretly,
Where midst a many words muttred that day,
Next midnights watch, each vows to steal away.
And lest when having house and city past,
They yet might err in fields, and never meet,
At Ninus Which was without the gates of Balilon, toward the forest. Sabell.
Enneiad. 1. cap. 6.
tomb their Rendes-vous is placed,
Under the Mulb'ry white, and hony-sweete:
Growing hard by a spring that ran at waste,
With streams more swift then speedy The swift river of Donawe.
Isters feet.
There they agreed in spite of spite to stand,
When The Charles waine.
Monarchs ^eame had past The great star following Vrsa mayor.
Boots hand.
Consent they did, and day consented too,
Whose Coach ran down the seas in greater have,
Then ever it was wont before to do,
Loue-louing night approached eke so fast,
That darkness leapt, ere twilight seemed to go,
Whereat though some gods frowned, some were aghast,
Yet Lethes Sleep the brother of forgetfulness. Ci^. lib. de not. deorum.
brother did the lovers keep,
Chaining their guard with long and heavy sleep.
How feately then vnsparred she the door?
How silent turned it on the charmed cheeks?
And being escaped, how glad was she therefore?
How soon arrived where she her fellow seeks?
Love made her bold, love gave her swiftness more
Then usually is found in weaker sex,
But all in vain: nay rather to her ill,
For haste made waste, and speed did speeding kill.
The grisly wife of brutish monarch strong,
With new slain prey, full panched to the chinne,
Foming out blood, came ramping there along,
To silver spring, her thirst to drown therein,
Whereat the fearful maid in posting flung,
(For The Mooneshine.
Lucines eye bewrayde the Empress grimme)
Into a secret cave: and flying, lost
A scarf (for Pyrams sake) beloved most.
When savage Queen had well her thirst delayde,
In cooling streams, and quenched natures fire,
Returning to the place where late she prayde,
To eat the rest when hunger should require,
In pieces tore the scarf of hapless maid,
With bloody teeth, and fiery flaming ire,
Whilst she (poor soul) in cave played least in sight,
Fearing what should her love befall that night.
Who coming later then by vow he should,
Perceived a Lions footsteps in the sand,
Whereat with face most pale, and heart as cold,
With trembling fear tormented he does stand.
But when he saw her scarf (well known of old)
Embru'd with blood, and cast on either hand?
O what a sigh he fetched? how deep he gron'd?
And thus, if thus: yea, thus he inly mon'd.
Shall thou alone die matelesse, Thisbe mine?
Shall not one beast be butcher to us both?
What? is my Thisbe reft of life and shine?
And shall not Pyram life and shining loath?
Mine is the cursed soul, the blessed is thine,
Thou kep'st thy vow, I falsified mine oath,
I came too late, thou came (alas) too soon,
Too dangerous standing, by a doubtful moon.
O Lions fierce (or if ought fiercer be,
Amongst the herds of woody outlawes fell)
Rent, rent in twain this thrise-accursed me:
From out your paunch convey my soul to hell:
Whose murdring sloth, and not the sisters three,
Did Thisbe sweet, sweet Thisbe fowly quell:
But cowards only call and wish for death,
Whilst valiant hearts in silence banish breath.
Then stooping, straight he took her scarf from ground,
And bare it with him to th'appoynted place,
Kissing it often, watring each rent and wound,
With thousand tears, that trailing ran apace.
Salt tears they were, sent from his eyes unsound,
Yea salter then the sweat of Oceans face:
At last (having vnsheath'd his fatal blade)
Thus began he cry, as life began to fade.
Hold earth, receive a draught eke of my blood,
(And therewith leaned upon his sword amain)
Then falling backward from the crimsin flood,
Which spowted forth with such a noise and strain,
As water does, when pipes of lead or wood,
Are goog'd with punch, or cheesill slit in twain,
Whistling in the air, and breaking it with blows,
Whilst heavy moisture upward forced flows.
The Mulb'ry strait (whose fruit was erst as white
As whitest Lilly in the fruitfullst field)
Was then and ever since in purple dight,
Yea even the root no other stain does yield,
With blackish gore being watered all that night,
In morneful sort, which round about it wheeled,
Only her leaves retaind their former hue,
As nothing touched with death of lover true.
No sooner was he fallen, and falling, freed
Of perfect sense: but she scarce rid of fear,
Returns again to standing fore agreed,
Not dreaming that her love in kenning were,
Her feet, her eyes, her heart and tongue made speed,
To utter all things lately happened there,
And how she escaped the Lionesses claws,
By letting fall a scarf to make her pawse.
But when she vewd the newly-purpled face
Of Berries white: that changing changed her mind,
New signs persuade her, that is not the place,
By either part to meet in fore assigned.
Thus doubting whilst she stood a little space,
She heard a flittering carried with the wind,
And viewed somewhat shake in quiu'ring wise,
Which strait reuok't her feet, but more her eyes.
Her lips grew then more pale then palest Box,
Her cheeks resembled Ashwood newly feld,
Graynesse surpised her yellow amber locks,
Not any part their lively luster held:
Yea even her venurous heart but faintly knocks,
Now up, now down, now fallen, now vainly sweld,
Tossed like a ship when One of the Northwest winds.
Corus rages most,
That ankers has, and masts and master lost.
But when she knew her faithful fellow slain,
O how she shrikt and bruz'd her guiltless arm,
Tearing her hair, renting her cheeks in vain,
On outward parts, revenging inward harms,
Making of tears and blood a mingled rain,
Wherewith she Pyram drencht, and then thus charms:
Speak love, O speak, how happened this to thee?
Part, half, yea all of this my soul and me.
Sweet love, reply, it is thy Thisbe dear,
She cries, O hear, she speaks, O answer make:
Rowse up thy sprights: those heavy lookers cheer,
At which sweet name he seemed half awake,
And eyes with death oppressed, again to clear.
He eyes her once, and eying leave does take,
Even as fair Bellis The white Daisy.
winkes but once for all,
When winters Harvest.
usher hastneth summers fall.
When afterward she found her scarf al rent,
His iu'ory sheath void eke of rapier gilt:
And has his hand (quoth she) thy soul hence sent?
And was this blood by this thy rapier spilt?
Unhappy I: but I no more lament,
But follow thee even to the utmost hilt.
I was the cause of al thy hurt and cross,
Hold, take me eke a partner of thy loss.
Whom only death could from me take away,
Shall death him take from me against my will?
Not so, his power cannot Thisbe stay:
Who even in death will follow Pyram still,
His blade (yet warm) then to her breast she lays,
And fallen thereon thus cri'de with crying shrill:
Parents unjust which us denied one bed,
Envy us not one toomb when we be dead.
And al you heavenly hosts allot the same:
And thou O tree, which couerest now but one
(One too too hot, for Pyramus signifies as much as fiery.
so imports his name)
But cover shall two carcasses anon:
Wear signs of blood from both our hearts that came
In mourning weed our mischiefs ever moan.
She dead: Tree, Sires, and Gods gave what she praide,
Black grows the fruit, and they together laid.
Since which time eke some other Natal. Com. lib. vlt. Mytho.
Authors feign,
Their humming souls about these hapless trees,
To be transported from th'Elysian plain,
Into the snowy milke-white Butterflyes:
Whose seeds when life and moving they obtain,
How e're they spare the fruit of Mulberies,
Leave yet no leaves untorn that may be seen,
Because they only still continude green.
Yet that there might remain some Pyramid,
And everlasting shrine of Pyrams love,
When leaves are gone, and summer waining is,
The little creepers never cease to move,
But day and night (placing in toil their bliss)
Spinne silk this tree beneath and eke above:
Leaving their ouall (...) like
bottoms there behind,
To show the state of every Lovers mind.
For as in form they are not wholly round,
As is the perfect figure of the sky,
So perfect love in mortals is not found,
Some little warts or wants in all we spy,
Nay even as fine and course silk there abound,
The best beneath, the worst rold up more hie,
So sometimes lust o're-lieth honest love,
Happy the hand that keeps it from above.
Again, as these fine troops themselves devour,
Spinning but silken hharses for their death:
Which done, they dye therein, (by Natures power
Transformed to flies that scarce draw one months breath)
So lovers sweet is mingled still with sower,
Such hap above proceeds or underneath,
That still we make our love our winding sheet,
Whilst more we love, or hotter then is meet.
Others Plin. lib. 6. cap. 17.
report, there was and does remain
A neighbor Called Seres.
people to the Scythian tall,
Twixt Taurus mount and Tabis fruitful plain,
Most just of life, of fare and diet, small,
Lovers of peace, haters of strife and gain,
Graye eyed, read cheek't, and amber-headed all,
Resembling rather Gods then humane race,
Such grace appeard in words, in deeds, and face.
Whose righteous life and justice to requite,
(Whether with wind or rain, no man does know)
God sent unto them silke-wormes infinite,
In Aprils wane when buds the mulb'ry slow,
Which here and there in every corner light,
With six white feet and body like to snow:
Eating each leaf of that renowned tree,
The matter of these silken webbes we see.
These webbs for wares they on their coast exchange:
For alien none must come into the Land,
T'infect their people with religions strange,
And file their temples with polluted hand:
Neither do they to other nations range,
New fashions, rites or manners t'understand:
Better they have at home, where every slave
Wears silks as rich as here our Princes brave.
These be the tales that Poetizers sing,
Of Silken-worme, and of their seed and meat:
Sweet, I confess, and drawn from VVherof only the muses drank, as Poets
imagine.
Helique spring,
Full of delighting change, and learning great.
Yet, yet, my Muse dreams of another thing,
And lists not of fictions to entreat.
Say then (my Joy) say then, and shortly reed,
when silk was made, and how these silkworms breed.
Was it think thou found out by industry?
Inspired by vision or some Angels word,
When first the name of sacred Majesty,
Was given from heaven to Melchisede^.
Salems priest and Lord?
Did not before ten thousand Silkworms lie,
And hang on every tree their little cord?
Yes, but (like Hebrews harps on Babels plain)
Untouched and vse-lesse there it hanged in vain.
Before, most men lived, either naked quite,
Or coursly clad in some beasts skin or hide:
The best were but in linen garments dight,
Wherein themselves the greatest men did pride:
Yea afterward in time of greatest light, Mat. 13.

When chief Baptizer preached in desert wide,
Where said he, silken robes were to be sought,
But in kings courts? for whom they first were wrought.
Though whether worm or fly were formed first,
No man so right can tell as wrong presume:
Yet this I hold. Till all things were accursed,
Nothing was borne it self for to consume.
No Caterpillars then which venture durst,
To ravish leaves, or tender buddes to plume:
For only life and beauty lived in trees,
Til falling man caused them their leaves to leese.
The earthly herds and winged posts of sky,
And every thing that moved on Eden ground,
Fed first on herbs (as Duke of Moses.
Horeb hie,
Author of Natures story most profound,
Sets down to us for perfect verity,
(Gains aid of none but fools and wits unsound)
When for man's food trees eke allotted were, Genesis 2. verse 29

Which from themselves did fruit or berries bear.
Durst then the finest worm but touch the meat,
Or dish which for his sovereign was ordained?
Durst they figs, nuts, pears, plummes or mulb'ries eat
Before their lord with treason foul was stained?
No certs no, but when ambitious heat,
Reuok't the bliss which sinnelesse Sire had gained:
Then worms in common fed with us, and tore
Our trees, our fruits, yea even our selves therefore.
Say Romans heau'nly-humane Herod. Act. 12.
Orator,
Whose words dropped sweeter then Hymettus dew:
Say Antiochus Epiphanes.
Salems scourge and Iudaes tormentor,
Whose very name does pomp and glory show:
Say Plato, who died eaten of lice, as Diogenes Laertius writes.
thou whose writtes men as divine adore,
Inspired from heaven with knowledge given to few:
What are you now? what living were you then
But worms repast, though wise and mighty men?
Foule-footed bird, that never sleep well
Nor fully, but on highest perch do breathe:
Whose outward shreeks bewray an inward hell,
Whose glistring plumes are but a painted sheathe:
Whose tail, though it with pride so lofty swel,
Yet hides it not thy blackness underneath.
Tell me: what have thou got by climing thus,
But to thy self a shame, and loss to us?
To us alone? nay stowtest Oaks likewise,
Hard-harted willowes by the water side,
Sweet Cedar wood which some think never dies,
And The Bay.
Daphnes tree though green in winters tide,
Yea stone, and steel, and things of highest prize,
From natures womb that flow in greatest pride:
What are they al but meat for worms and rust?
Two due reuengers of ambitious lust.
Before thou wast, Called Cossi, which being fat, were counted a most dainty
dish in Rome. C^el. Sec. lib. 28. An. lect.
were Timber-worms in price,
And sold for equal weight of purest gold?
Fed Titmise.
creeping birds one barke-deuouring lice?
Were silkworms from The first and principal place whence they were brought
into Europe. Polyd. virg. lib. 11. de invent. etc.
S^rinda brought and sold?
Devoured they the leaves of tree most The Mulbery is called the wisest tree,
because it never buddeth till all danger of cold be gone.
wise,
With fury such as now we do behold?
Rather believe as yet they were not borne,
Or only fed on grass, on herbs, or corn.
For since their chiefest use is to arraye
This little breathing dust when time requires,
With gallant guards and broydred garments gaye,
With scarfs, vales, hoodes, and other soft attires:
Whose sense from sense is fled so far away?
Whose mind to bear so wrong a thought conspires,
As once to deem these Silken-mercers sent,
When nakedness was man's chief ornament?
But since they are, and therefore framed were,
Which first was framed? the egg? the worm? or fly?
No doubt the fly, as plainly shall appear,
To all that have but an indiff'rent eye,
Though two Euangelus in Macrobius lib. 4. sat. cap. 3. and Fir^us in
Plutarch. lib. 2. symp quest. 3.
great Clarks contrary thoughts did bear,
And sentence gave, without just reason why,
That eggs were made before the hardy Cock
Began to tread, or brooding hen to clock.
Pretend they did, that least and simplest things,
(Which none trained up in reasons school gainsay)
Of things compounded are the foremost springs,
Even as a lump of rude and shapelesse clay,
Into the mould a Moulder cunning brings,
And by degrees compels it to obey.
Forming by art what he in mind forethought,
Out of a mass that just resembled naught.
So eke though eggs seem things confused quite,
And far unlike what afterward they prove:
Yet foremost place they challenge by their right,
For who e're saw a cock or hen to move,
Till first they came from out the yolke and white,
And time, and heat, and place, and sitters love,
Had formed out a nature from the same,
Deserving well another natures name?
Springs not from eggs that huge The VVhale
Leuiathan,
The Tortesse eke, and bloody Crocodile?
Fish, Lyzards, Snakes, and Locusts or grasshoppers.
Skippers African,
Whose hurtful armies waste the coasts of Nile?
Nay if with one fit word the world we scanne,
May it obtain a fitter name or style,
Then that we should a common egg it call,
Which gives life and form and stuff to all?
Nay, did not once that cheerful brooding sp'rite,
Before the earth received form or place, Genesis 1. verse ^.

Sit closely like a hen both warm and light,
Upon the wauing nest of mingled mass,
Whilst yet nights torches had obtained no light
Nor Sun as yet in circled rounds did pass?
Yes, yes: the words are so apparent plain,
That to deny them, were but labor vain.
These some do use with other arguments,
To prove that seed and eggs were first in time.
Wrested from quires of sacred Testaments,
And those of heathen wits the chief and prime:
Which for authentic held by long descents,
If I gainesay, perhaps may seem a crime:
Yet rather would I carry crime and scorn,
Then falsely think, imperfect things first borne.
For reason says, and sense does almost swear,
Natures entire to be created furst:
Bodies to have been before the members were,
The sound before the sick, the whole, the burst,
That confidence had time when lacked fear,
That blessed state fore-went the state accursed:
Briefly, al bodies that begotten been,
Were not before created bodies seen.
Now what are seeds and eggs of worms or foul,
But recrements of preexisting things,
The bodies burden void of life and soul?
Yea, from themselves corruption only springs,
Unless by brooders heat (as from the whole)
They changed be to belly, feet, or wings:
Resembling them now metamorphosed,
In, by, and from whose essence they were bred.
Yea, Diphilus and Senecio, their arguments against Firmus and Euangelus, of
whom at large in Macrobius and Plutarke.
usual phrase such dreams confuteth quite,
For never man, this is an eggs hen said,
But this a hens egg is, showing aright,
That eggs are things by former natures laid,
Begotte of mingled seed by day or night,
Neither with skin, nor shell, nor form arrayd,
Till long they have abode in natures nest,
And wearied womb be with their weight oppressed
Again, to think that seed was made before,
The substance whence it is ingendered,
(Namely from out much nutrimental store,
Through excess of humors perfited)
Or else to guess it formed was of yore,
Ere pipes were laid through which it should be shed,
What is it but to dream of day or night,
E're darkness were, or any show of light?
Since eke all winged creatures by one day, Genesis 1. verse 20 and 24.

Are elder then the herds that crawle and creep,
Conclude with truth and confidence we may,
All flies were made ere worms began to peep,
Both they which all day long at base do play,
And night once come, do nothing else but sleep,
And these which only live to leave a seed,
From whence the neuer-idle spinsters breed.
Silke-flies I mean, which not one breast alone,
But all throughout, on head, wings, sides, and feet,
Besides pure white, else color carry none,
For creatures pure, a color thought most meet,
Martial'd the first of all in glorious throne,
Whereon shall sit the Lord and Savior sweet,
Who with ten thousand Angels all in white,
Shall one day judge the world with doom upright
No spotte on them, as else on every fly,
Because in them no follies ever grew,
No crimson read does for reuengement cry,
No wavering watchet, where al hearts be true:
No yellow, where there is no Jealousy:
No labor lost, and therefore void of blue:
No peachy mark to signify disdain,
No green to show a wanton mind and vain.
No orange color, where there wants despite,
No tawny sad, where none forsaken be:
No murry, where they covet naught but light,
No mourning black, where al rejoice with glee:
In brief, within, without, they are al white,
Wearing alone the badge of chastity:
Because they only keep themselves to one,
Who being dead, another choose they none.
True Turtles mine, begotten with the breath,
Not of a lewd lascivious mortal Jove:
Whose law was lust, whose life was worse then death,
Whose incests did defile both wood and grove,
But with the breath of him who underneath
Rules Stigian king, and heavenly hosts above,
Assist me if I err in setting forth
Your birth days story; and surpassing worth.
As Soon as light obtained a fixed seat,
(which equally was first spread over all,
Giving alike, both glistring, shine, and heat, Genesis 1.

To every place of this inferior ball)
Two master-lamps appeared in welkin great,
The One king of day, whom Poets Phoebus call,
And the other Phoebe, sovereign of the night,
Twins at one instant bred and borne of light.
Him heavenly Martial high, in Palace placed,
Built all of clear and through-shining gold,
With columns chrysolite most bravely graced,
And flaming rubies, glorious to behold,
Wearing about his yellow-amber wast,
A sloping belt, with studs twice six times told,
Wherein were grau'n most artificially,
Twelve stately The twelve signs in the zodiake.
Peers of curious imagery.
About him, as in royal Coach he sat,
Attended Hour, Day, Minute, Month, and year,
Spring, Summer, Harvest, Winter, Morning, Fate,
With Instancie, who then was driuer there,
Whipping his fiery steedes from For it was then full harvest and not
springtime, as the vulgar sort do hold.
Libraes gate,
Not suffering them to stand still any where,
Save once in Gibeon when five kings were slain,
By first-made Joshua cap. 10.
Champio^ with their faithles train.
His sisters court built al of silver tri'de,
And Iu'ory charret set with Diamons,
Embost with Orient pearls on either side,
Wheeld al with Saphires, shod with Onyx stones,
Declared in what great pomp she first did ride
Amongst the other twinkling Paragons,
Before her honor suffered an eclipse,
Through serpents guile, and woman's greedy lips.
Her handmaids then were perpetuity,
Constant proceeding, and continuance:
No show of change or mutability
Could justly then themselves in her advance:
Her face was full and fair continually
Not altering once her shape or countenance,
Till those lights changed for whom al lights were made,
And with whose fall the heavens began to fade.
Yet still on her wait Oceanus is the king, and his wife Thetis is counted the
Queen of the seas.
Ocean and his wife,
Nais The Lady of the rivers.
the fair, and all the watery crew,
Nights, Rivers, Floods, Springs, having else no strife,
Then who may foremost proffer service due:
Blood, choler, phlegm, (the roots and sap of life)
Are at her beck, waining or springing new,
According as from throne celestial,
She deignes to shine in measure great or small.
When they were crowned now in royal thrones,
And entered in their first and happiest race,
Amongst those glistring pointed Diamons,
Which cut out times proportion, lotte, and space:
Behold the earth with heavy burden groans,
And prays them both to eye and rue her case:
And with their friendly hands and meeding art,
To hasten that which ready was to part.
For even next morn the All-creating Sire
Had sent abroad, Genesis 1.
I know not I, what word:
Much like to this, Let Sea and earth conspire
All winged troops the world for to afford:
Wherewith the air: even to the desert fire, So called by Pyndarus, because
nothing lives in it.

Was so with great and little flyers stored.
That none but winged people saw the eyes,
Of any star or planet in the skies.
O how it joys my heart and soul to think
Upon the blessed state of that same day?
When at a word, a nodde, yea at a wink,
At once flew out these winged gallants gay,
Tide each to each in such a friendly link,
That even the least did with the greatest play:
The dove with hawks, the chickens with the kite.
Fearelesse of wrong, rage, cruelty, or spite.
Pert marlins then no grudge to larkes did bear,
Fierce goshawkes with the Phesants had no war,
Rau'ns did not then the Eagles talens fear,
Twixt Cuckoes and the Titlings was no jar,
But coasted one another every where
In friendly sort, as lovers woonted were:
For love alone ruled all in every kind,
As though all were of one and self same mind.
How safely then did these my Turtle-soules
Disport themselves in Phoebus cheerful shine?
How boldly flew they by the iayes and owls,
Dreadlesse of crooked beakes or fiery eyes?
Nay, who in all the flocks of winged fowls
Said once in heart, This pris'oner shall be mine?
When none as yet made other war or strife,
Then such as A Poetical God, and supposed instructor of brides and
bridegroomes.
Hymen makes twixt man and wife.
But since the fall of parents pufft with pride,
Not only men were stainde in viciousness,
But birds, and beasts, and worms, and flies beside,
Declining from their former perfitnesse,
Did by degrees to imperfections slide,
Tainted with pride, wrath, envy, and excess:
Yea, then the husband of one only hen,
Was afterward contented scarce with ten.
Hence, gowts in cocks, and swelling pains appear,
Hence, Partridge loins so feeble we do view,
Hence, sparrow treaders live out scarce a year,
Hence, leprosy the Cuckoes ouergrew:
Breefely, none did in true love persevere:
But these white Butterflies and Turtles true,
Who both in life and death do never forsake
Her, whom they once espoused for their make.
They choose not (like to other birds and beasts)
This year one wife, another wife the next,
Their choice is certain, and still certain rests,
With former loves their minds are not perplexed,
He yeeldes to her, she yields to his requests,
Neither with fear nor ielosie is vexed:
She clippeth him, he clippeth her again,
Equal their joy, and equal is their pain.
Remember this you fickle hearted Sires,
Whom lust transporteth from your peereles Dames,
To scorch your selves at foul and foreign fires,
Wasting your health and wealth in filthy games,
Learn hence (I say) to bridle badde desires,
Quenching in time your hot and furious flames,
Let little flies teach great men to be just,
And not to yield brave minds a prey to lust.
When thus they were created the first day,
Alike in bigness, feature, form and age,
Cladde both alike in soft and white array,
And set upon this universal stage,
Their several parts and feats thereon to play,
Amidst the rest of natures equipage:
Who then supposed (as since some fools have thought)
That little things were made and served for naught.
Diswitted dolts that huge things wonder at,
And to your cost coast daily i will from i will,
To see a Norway whale, or Libian cat,
A Carry-castle or a Crocodile,
If lean Ephesian Heraclitus, that ever wept.
or Democritus that ever laughed at the worlds folly.
th'Abderian fat
Lived now, and saw your madness but a while,
What streaming floods would gush out of their eyes,
To see great wittols little things despise?
When look, as costliest spice is in small bags,
And little springs do send forth cleerest floods,
And sweetest Called Onis in English.
Iris bears shortest flagges,
And weakest Ofiers bind up mighty woods,
And greatest hearts make ever smallest bragges,
And little caskets hold our richest goods:
So both in Art and Nature it is most clear,
That greatest worths in smallest things appear.
What wise man ever did so much admire
Neroes Made by Zenodorus: of which, and also of Theodorus image, more in Plin.
lib., 4. cap. 7. and 8.
Colossus five score cubits hie,
As Theodorus Image cast with fire,
Holding his file in right hand hansomly,
In left his pair of compasses and squire,
With horses, Coach, and footmen running by
So lively made, that one might see them all?
Yet was the whole work than a fly more small.
Nay, for to speak of things more late and rife,
Who will not more admire those famous Fleas,
Made so by art, that art imparted life,
Making them skippe, and on men's hands to seize,
And let out blood with taper-poynted knife,
Which from a secret sheat he ran out with ease:
The^ those great coches which themselves did drive, Made by Gawen Smith. Anno.
1586.

With bended scrues, like things that were alive?
Ingenious Ioannes Regi^montanus* of whom Ramus at large in Proem, lib 2. Math.
Germane, how did thou convey
Thy Springs, thy Scrues, thy rowells, and thy fly?
Thy cogs, thy wards, thy laths, how did thou lay?
How did thy hand each piece to other tie?
O that this age enjoyed thee but one day,
To show thy Fleas to faithless gazers eye*
That great admirers might both say and see,
In smallest things that greatest wonders be.
Great was that proud and feared Philistine,
Whose lances shaft was like a weauers beam,
Whose helmet, target, boots, and brigandine,
Wear weight For they weied 6000 Shekles of brass.
sufficient for a sturdy teame,
Whose frowning looks and hart-dismaying eyne,
Daunted the tallest king of Isreal's realm:
Yet little shepherd with a pibble stone,
Confounded soon that huge and mighty one.
Huge fiery Dragons, Lions fierce and strong
Did they such fear on cruel Pharaoh.
Tyrant bring,
With bloody teeth or tails and talens long,
With gaping Jaws or double forked sting,
As when the smallest creepers ganne to throng,
And seize on every quick and living thing?
No, no. The Egyptians never Yet for fear of them they honored their Gods in
the form of cats. Plaut. lib. de Is. and osi.
feared mice,
As then they feared little crawling lice.
Did ever A most famous trumpeter. Plin. lib. cap. 56.
Piseus sound his trumpet shrill
So long and clear, as does the summer Gnat,
Her little cornet which our ears does fill,
Awaking even the drowziest drone thereat?
Did ever thing do Cupid so much ill,
As once a Anacreon in one of his latter Odes.
Be which on his hand did squat?
Confess we then in small things virtue most,
Gayning in worth what they in greatness lost.
But holla, Muse, extol not so the vale,
That it contemn great hills, and greater sky,
Think that in goodness nothing can be small,
For smalnesse is but an infirmity,
Natures defect, and offspring of some fall,
The scorn of men, and badge of infamy?
For still had men continued tall and great,
If they in goodness still had kept their seat.
A little dismal fire whole towns has burnd,
A little wind does spread that dismal fire,
A little stone a carte has ouerturnde,
A little weed has learn'ed to aspire,
The little Ants (in scorn so often spurnd)
Have galls: and flies have seats of fixed ire.
Small Indian gnattes have sharp and cruel stings,
Which good to none, but hurt to many brings,
And truly for my part I list not praise
These silke-worme-parents for their little sise,
But for those lovely great resplendant rays,
Which from their woorks and worthy actions rise,
Each deed deserving well a Crown of bays,
Yea, to be graven in wood that never dies:
For let us now recount their actions all,
And truth will prove their virtues are not small.
First, though five Males be brought to Females ten,
Yet of them al they never choose but five,
Each takes and treads his first embraced hen,
With her he keeps, and never parts alive:
And when he is enclosed in Stygian pen,
Desires she one moment to survive?
No, no, but strait (like a most loving bride)
Flies, lies, and dies, hard by her husbands side.
In Tuscane towers what armies did I view
One harvest, Anno. Dom. 1579. when I was in Italy.
of these faithful husbands dead?
Bleed, O my heart, whilst I record anew,
How wives lay by them, beating, now their head,
Sometimes their feet, and wings, and breast most true,
Striving no less to be delivered,
Then Thisbe did from undesired life,
When she beheld her Pyram slain with knife.
But whilst they live, what is their chiefest work?
To spinne as spiders do a fruitless thread?
Or Adder-like in hollow caves to lurk,
Till they have got a crust and cankred seed?
(Whose young ones therefore, with dame Natures fork,
Justly gnaw out the wombs that did them breed:)
Or strive they Lion-like to seize and pray,
On neighbors herds or herds-men by the way?
Delight they with strange Of who^ Pliny writes, lib. 11. cap. 31.
Ants and Griphins strong,
To hoord up gold and every gaineful thing?
Live they not beasts, and birds, and men among,
Committing naught that may them damage bring?
O had I that fiue-thousand-versed song,
Which Thamyris, who wrote 5000. verses of the worlds creation Zetzes, 7. chil:
histor. 108
Poet proud did once with glory sing,
That whilst I write of these same creatures blessed,
In proper words their worth might be expressed.
What will you more? they feed on naught but air,
As does that famous bird of Paradise,
They live not long, lest goodness should empaire,
Or rather through that Atropo^.
Hagges envious eyes,
That sits, and sitting, cuts in fatal chair
That thread first off, which fairest does arise:
Affording crows and kites a longer line,
Then fliers full of gifts and grace divine.
When maker said to every bodied soul, Genesis 1.

Increase, increase, and multiply your kind:
What he or she of all the winged foul
So much fulfilled their soueraigne-Makers mind,
As these two flies? who coupled three days whole,
Left on the fourth more seeds or eggs behind
Then any bird: yea then the fruiteful wrenne,
Numbered by tale a Sometimes, more, seldom^ fewer.
hundred more then ten.
Which done, both die, and die with cheerful heart
Because they had done al they bidden were,
Might we from hence with conscience like depart,
How dear were death? how sweet and void of fear?
How little should we at his arrows start?
If we in hands a quittance such could bear
Before that judge, who looks for better deeds,
From men then flies, that spring of baser seeds.
Go worthy souls (so (...) is all one name in Greek for a soul and a
butterfly.
witty Greeks you name)
Possess for aye the fair Elisian green:
Sport there your selves each Lording with his Dame,
Enjoy the bliss by sinners never seen:
You lived in honor, and still live in fame,
More happy there, then here is many a Queen:
As for your seeds committed to my charge,
Take you no care: I Will sing their worth at large.
Weep not fair The Lady of the plain.
Mira for this funeral.
Weep not Miraes daughter.
Panclea, Miraes chief delight,
Weep not Gentlewomen attending upon Mira and her daughter.
Phileta, nor Gentlewomen attending upon Mira and her daughter.
Erato tall:
Weep not Gentlewomen attending upon Mira and her daughter.
Euphemia, nor Gentlewomen attending upon Mira and her daughter.
Felicia white:
Weep not sweet Gentlewomen attending upon Mira and her daughter.
Fausta. I assure you all,
Your cattels parents are not dead outright:
Keep warm their eggs, and you shall see anon,
From eithers loins a hundred rise for one.
FINIS.
The second book of the Silke-Wormes and their Flies.
O Thou whose sweet and heau'nly-tuned Psalms
The heavens themselves are scarce enough to praise!
Whose pen divine and consecrated palms,
From wronging verse did Royal Singer raise,
Vouchsafe from brothers ghost no niggards alms,
Now to enrich my high aspiring lays,
Striving to guess, or rather truly reed,
What shall become of all this little breed.
This little breed? nay even the least of all,
The least? nay greater then the greatest are:
For though in show their substance be but small,
Yet with their worth what great ones may compare*
What eggs as these, are so much sphericall
Of all that ever winged Natures bare? A comparison of the Silkeflies eggs
with other eggs.

As though they only had deserved to have,
The self same form which God to heavens gave.
From Lybian eggs a mighty The Ostrich.
bird does rise,
Scorning both horse and horsemen in the chase,
With Roe-bucks feet, throwing in furious wise,
Dust, gravel, sand and stones at hunters face,
Yet dwells there not beneath the vauted skies,
A greater fool of all the feathred race:
For if a little bush his head does hide,
He thinks his body cannot be espide.
From eggs of The Eagle.
her whose mate supporteth Jove,
And dares give combat unto draggons great,
With whom in vain huge stagges and Lions strove,
Whose only sight makes every bird to sweat,
Whom Romans fed in Capitole above,
And placed her Ensign in the highest seat,
What else springs out but bloody birds of pray,
Sleeping al night, and murdering all the day?
From eggs of famous Palamedian fowls,
And them that hallow Diomedes toomb,
In bodies strange retaining former souls,
Wise, wary, warlike, saging things to come,
Whose inborne skill our want of wit controules,
Whose timely foresight mates our heedlesse doom,
Comes ought but cranes of most unseemly shape,
And diuing Cootes which muddy channels scrape?
Yea Peacocks.
you whose eggs Hortentius sometimes sold,
At higher rate then now we prize your sire.
Proud though he be, and spotted al with gold,
Stretching abroad his spangled brave attire,
VVherby, as in a glass, you do behold,
His courting love, and longing to aspire:
What bring ye forth but spectacles of pride,
Whose pitchy feet marres all the rest beside?
Thrice blessed eggs of The Pelicane.
that renowned dame,
Who bleeds to death, her dead ones to revive,
Whom envious creepers poison overcame,
Whilst she fetched meat to keep them still alive,
How well befits her love that sacred Lamb,
That healed us all with bleeding issues five?
Yet has your fruit this blotte, to ouer-eate,
And glutton-like to vomit up their meat.
VVinters Robbin-red-brest.
Orpheus bloody breasted VVrenne.
Queen,
Summers sweet solace, nights Nightingale.
Amphion brave,
Linus Linnet.
delight, Canaries clad in green,
All Pies, parrat^, stares, etc.
linguists eke that beg what heart would crave,
Selling your tongues for every trifle seen,
As almonds, nuttes, or what you else would have:
Ofsprings of eggs, what are you but a voice?
Angring sometimes your friends with too much noise.
Victorious The house-cocke.
Monarch, scorning partners all,
Stowt lions terror, love of martial Sire,
True farmers clock, nights watchman, servants call,
Pressing still forward, hating to retire,
Constant in fight, impatient of thral,
Bearing in a little breast a mighty fire:
Oh that thou were as faithful to thy wife,
As thou art free of courage voice and life!
Chaste is the Turtle, but yet given to hate,
Storkes are officious, yet not void of guiles,
Hardy are Haggesses, but yet given to prate,
Faithful are Doves, yet angry otherwhiles,
The whitest swimmer nature e're begat,
Suspicion black and jealousy defiles:
Briefly, from eggs of every creature good,
Sprang naught distainted but this little brood.
As for that Called by Alchimists Ouum Philosophorum, the Philosophers egg.
egg conceived in idle brain,
Whence flows (forsooth) that endless seed of gold,
The womb of wealth, the A medicine famous in Homer to extinguish all kind of
griefs and pains.
Nepenthes of pain,
The horn of health, and what we dearest hold:
I count it but a tale and fable vain,
By some old wife, or cousning friar told:
Supposed true, though time and truth descries,
That all such works are but the works of lies.
For when the Sire of truth has truly said,
That none can make the covering of his head,
These slender hairs, so vile, so soon decaide,
Of so small worth though nere so finely spread
Shall any wit by humane art and aid,
Transform base metals to that essence read,
Which buies, not only pearls and precious stones,
But kingdo^s, states, and Monarchs from their thrones*
Ah! heavens forbid (nay heavens forbid it sure,)
That ever Art should more then Nature breed,
Curse we his work whose fingers most impure,
Durst but to dare the drawing of that seed,
Yet when they have done al they can procure,
And given their leaden God a golden weed:
Zeuxis his painted dog shall bark and whine,
When Jove they turn to Sol or Luna fine.
Sisyphian Sisyphus was one of king Aeolus sons, delighted in robbing and
cousening of his neighbors, wherefore this punishment was enjoined him, to
roll a stone continually to the top of a Pyramidall and most steep hill, til
it rested there, which was an impossible thing to perform, because he could
never pitch it. Ovid 3. met.
souls, bewitched multipliers,
Surcease to pitch this never pitched stone,
Vaunt not of Natures nest, nor Orcus fires,
Hoping to hatch your addle egg thereon:
Restrain in time such ouer-prowd desires,
Let cre'tures leave Creators works alone:
Melt not the golden Sulphur of your heart,
In following still this fond and fruitless art.
Record what once befell great Aeols Salmoneus, another son to Aeolus, who for
counterfetting thunder, was turned (as Seruius conceived) into a Salmon,
son,
For counterfetting only but the sound,
Of heavenly Canoniers dreadful gunne,
That shakes the beams and pillars of this round:
A fiery boult from wrathful hand did run,
Driving false forger under lowest ground:
Where still he lives still wishing to be dead,
Spotted without, within al staind with read.
Remember eke the Vulture gnawing still,
That euer-dying everliving Prometheus, son of Asia and Iaphet, who
enterprising (as Paracelsus does) to make man, was tied upon mount Caucasus in
chains, there to be eaten everlastingly by Vultures, and yet never to die.
Ovid 10. Metam.
wretch,
Who stealingly with an ambitious will,
From Phoebus wheels would vital fire reach,
Thinking to make by humane art and skill,
His man of clay a living breath to fetch:
Beware in time of like celestial rods,
And fear to touch the only work of gods.
But if you still with proud presumptuous legs,
Will needs clime up the fiery-spotted hill,
Pilfring from Jove his Nectar void of dregs,
And that immortal meat Called Ambro sia.
which none does fill,
If ye will needs imbesill those fair eggs,
Which in her child-bedde did their Leda, who being gotten with child by
Jupiter in the form of a swanne, brought forth two eggs, out of the one came
Castor and Clytemnestra, out of the other Pollux and Hel^na* Hesiodus.
mother kill,
Yet say not, that for gifts and virtues rare,
They do, or may, with these my eggs compare.
These, 4. Cic. 2. de diu.
these, are they, in dream which Roman spide
Closed in a slender shell of brittle mould,
Holding within, a white like silver tried,
Whose inward yolke resembles Whence Solomon fetched gold every three
years, which wisdom would never have permitted him to have done, if he had
known (as some imagine) how to make the Philosophers stone.
Ophirs gold,
From out whose center sprang the cheifest pride,
That e're Latinus, or his race did hold,
Exchanging in all countries for the same,
Meat, drink, cloth, coin, or what you else can name.
Here lies the Of which Calx, water, and oil, you may read more than enough
in Libauius: Epist. de o^o Philosophorum, and the troubling Turba
Philosophorum, and the reverent, D Dee, in Monad, Hierogl.
Calx of that renowned shel,
Here flotes that water permanent and clear,
Here does the oil of Philosophers dwell,
Styled from the golden Fleece that has no peer:
In midst of whose unseen and secret cell
Dame Nature sittes, and every part does steer,
Though neither opening shop to every eye,
Nor telling As one or two fools have done.
Caesar she can multiply.
Al-working mother, Foundresse of this All,
Ten-hundred thousand-thousand-breasted nurse,
Dedalian mouldresse both of great and small,
As large in wealth, as liberal of purse,
Still great with child, 3 A description of Nature.
still letting children fall,
Good to the good, nor ill unto the worse,
What made thee show thy multiplying pride,
More in these eggs, then all the eggs beside?
Was it, because thou take most delight,
To print the greatest worth in smallest things?
That they, the least of any seed in sight,
Might clothiers breed to clothe our mightiest kings?
O wit divine, O admirable spright!
VVorthie the songs of him that sweetest sings:
Let it suffice that I adore thy name,
Whose works I see, and know not yet the same.
But damsels, ah: who rustleth in the sky?
Methinks I hear Enithean Ladies Boreas, who by force ravished Orythyia King
Erictheus daughter. Ovid 6 Metam.
foe,
Blustering in fury from the mountains hie,
Look how he raises clouds from dust below,
Hark how for fear the trees do crack and cry,
Each bud recoyles, the seas turn too and fro:
O suffer not his breath-bereauing breath,
To slay your hopes with ouer-timely death.
Therefore as soon as them you gathered have,
Upon the whitest papers you can find,
In Boxes clean your eggs full closely save,
From chilling blast, of deadly nipping wind,
Let not that hoary Hyems or winter.
iry-manteld slave
So much prevail, to kill both stock and kind:
Far be it from a tender Damsels heart,
On tendrest seeds to show so hard a part.
Yet keep them not in rooms too hot and close, The seeds or eggs of
Silkeflies are to be kept neither too cold, nor any thing hot.

Lest heat by stealth encroch it self too soon,
And inward matter ripening so dispose,
That spinsters creep ere winters course be done,
Whilst woods stand bare, and naked each thing grows,
And Thisbes sap for aid be inward run:
For as with cold their brooding power is spilde,
So are they then for want of herbage kilde.
Th'Arch-mason of this round and glorious bal,
Of creatures created Man the last,
Not that he thought him therefore worst of all,
(For in his soul part of himself he cast)
But lest his wisdom might in question fall,
For having in his house a stranger placed,
Ere every thing was made to please and feast,
So great a Monarch and so brave a guest.
Under whose feet where e're he went abroad
Vesta The Earth.
spread forth a carpet void of art,
Softer then silk, greener then the Emerode,
Wrought al with flowers, and every herb apart,
Over him hanged where e're he made abode,
An azur'd cloth of state, which overthwart
Was biast (as it were) and richly purld,
With twelve brave signs and glistring stars inurld
Upon him then as vassals every day
Stowt Lions waited, tameles Panthers eke,
Fierce Eagles, and the wildest birds of pray,
Huge whales in Seas that mighty carricks wreake,
Serpents and toades: Yea each thing did obey,
Fearing his laws and statutes once to break:
Yet whereto served this pomp and honor great,
If man had wanted due and daily meat?
Trace you Gods steps, The seeds or eggs of Silkeflies are not to be hatched
till the Mulberie tree be budded.
and til you can attain
Wherewith to feed your guests when first they show,
Haste not their hatching, for t'wil prove a pain,
Filling your hearts with ruth, your eyes with dew,
As when th'vntimely lamb on Sarums plain,
Fallne too too soon from winter-starued ewe.
To pine you see for want of liquid food,
Which should restore his wants of vital blood.
Attend therefore, when farmers The Mullery
joy renues
Her lively face, and buddeth all in green,
For Hyems then, with all his frozen crues,
Is fully dead, or fled to earths unseen,
Corn, cattle, flowers, fear then no heavy news,
From Northern coasts, or Boreas region keen:
Birds sing, flies buzze, bees hum, yea al things skip
To see the very blush of Morus lip.
Let swallows come, let storkes be seen in sky,
Let The Nightingale.
Philomela sing, let The Wrenne.
Progne chide,
Let La^kes
T^ry-tiry-leerers upward fly,
Let constant Cuckoes cook on every side,
Let mountain mice abroad in ouert lie,
Let every tree thrust forth her budding pride,
Yet none can truly warrant winters flight,
Till she be seen with gemmes and jewels dight.
O peerless tree, whose wisdom is far more
Then any else that springs from natures womb:
For though Pomonaes All kind of round fruit.
daughters budde before,
And forward The Almonde tree.
Phillis foremost ever come,
And Persian Peaches: brought first out of Persia, as Columella, writes.
fruit yeeldes of her blossoms store,
And Aprils sign.
Taurus hot succeeds March his sign.
Aries room:
Yet all confess the Mulbery most wise,
That never breeds till winter wholly dies.
Such is her wit: but more her inward might,
For budded new when Phoebus first appears,
She is full leaued e're it grow to night:
With wondrous crackling filling both our ears,
As though one leaf did with another fight,
Striving who first shall see the heavenly spheres,
Even as a lively chickin breaks the shell,
Or blessed Souls do scudde and fly from hell.
Yet wit and strength her pity does exceed,
For none she hurts that near or under grow,
No not the brire, or any little weed,
That upward shootes, or groueling creepes below,
Nay more, from heavenly flames each tree is freed
That nigh her dwells, when fearful lightnings glow:
For virtue which, So writes Pliny, lib. 10, hist, not.
the Romans made a law,
To punish them that should her cut or saw.
I leave to tell how she does poison cure, Read Pliny. lib. citate.

From adders goare or gall of Lisards got,
What burning blaines she heales and sores impure,
In palate, jaws, and al enflamed throat,
What canckars hard, and wolfes be at her lure,
What Gangrenes stoop that make our toes to rotte:
Briefly, few griefs from Panders box out-flew,
But here they find a medcine, old or new.
Her blood retourn'd to sweet Thisbean wine,
Strengthens the lungs and stomach ouer-weake,
Her clustred grapes do prove a dish most fine,
Whose kernels soft do stones in sunder break:
Her leaves too that converted are in time,
Which kings themselves in highest prize do reake:
Thus gives she meat, and drink, medcine, and cloth,
To every one that is not drowned in sloth.
Brag now no more perle-breeding Taprobane,
Of Cocos thine, that So Monardes calls it. lib. de arb. Ind.
all-supplying food,
Vaunt not of Dates thou famous Leo Afer.
Africane,
Though sweet in taste, and swift in making blood,
Blush Syrian grapes, and plums Armenian,
Ebusian figs, and fruit of Phillis good:
Bad is your best compared with this tree,
That most delights my little flock and me.
But will you know, why this they only eat?
Why leaves they only choose, the fruit forsake?
Why they refuse al choice and sorts of meat,
And hungers heat with only one dish slake?
Then list a while, you wonder-seekers great,
Whilst I an answer plain and easy make:
Disdain you not to see the mighty ods,
Twixt virtuous worms and sinful humane gods.
I think that God and nature thought it meet, Why Silkewormes eat only
Mulberie leaves.

The noblest worms on noblest tree to feed:
And therefore they else never set their feet
On any tree that bears fruit or seed:
Others divine, that they themselves did weere
No other tree could yield their silken threede.
Judge learned wits: But sure a cause there is,
Why they else feed upon no tree but this.
Ne eat they all, as greedy Kafers do,
But leave the berries to their Sovereign:
Religiously forbearing once to bloe
Upon the fruit, that may their Lord maintain.
Nay, if these leaves (though nothing else does grow
In Eden rich their nature to sustain)
Had erst bin given for other creatures meat,
They would have chusde rather to starve then eat.
In that they only feed upon one tree, Why Silkewormes feed only upon one
meat.

How justly do they keep dame Natures lore?
Who teaches even the bleare-eyde man to see,
That change of meats causes diseases store:
The gods themselves (if any such there be)
Have but one Called Ambrosia.
meat, one drink, and never more,
Whereby they live in health and never die,
For how can one against it self reply. 2 Called Nectas

Dualitie of meats was sickness spring,
With whom addition meeting by the way,
Begat variety of every thing, 3 Read Plutark

Who like a whore in changeable array, 4. Sympos, quaest. 1

With painted cheeks (as did Philinus sing)
And coral lips, and breasts that naked lay,
Made us with unity to be at wars,
And to delight in discords, change, and iarres.
Wherefore as soon as they begin to creep,
Like sable-robed Ants, far smaller tho,
Black at the first, like pitch of Syrian deep,
Yet made in time as white as Atlas snow,
Send servants up to woods and mountains steep,
When Mulb'ry leaves their maiden lips do show:
Feed them therewith (no other soul they crave,
If morn and even fresh lefage they may have.)
The first three weeks the tenderest leaves are best,
The next, they crave them of a greater size,
The last, the hardest ones they can digest,
As strength with age increasing does arise:
After which time all meat they do detest, So that they eat not in all above
mine weeks.

Lifting up heads, and feet, and breast to skies,
Begging as it were of God and man some shrowde,
Wherein to work and hang their golden cloud.
But whilst they feed, When their meat is to be^ gathered.
leral their food be dry
And pulled when Phoebus face does brightly shine,
For rain, mist, dew, and spittings of the sky,
Have been full of the baine of cattle mine:
Stay therefore, stay, til dayes-vpholder fly,
Five stages full from Eastern Thetis line: That is to say, till the sun be
five hours high

Then leaves are free from any poysned seed,
Which may infect this white and tender breed.
Keep measure too, In what quantity they are to be dieted.
for though the best you get,
Give not too much nor little of the same,
Satiety their stomachs will vnwhet,
Famine again will make them lean and lame:
Lend Wit the knife to quarter out their meat,
As need requires and reason makes clame:
Lest belly break, or meagernesse ensewe,
By giving more or less then was their due.
Ne change their food (us some have thought it meet)
For Mulb'ries though they are of double kind, Variety of meatos is naught for
them.

The blacker ones are yet to them most sweet,
From out their leaves most pleasing sap they find,
But when they fail whilst Scythia^ krime Boreas, the Northwest wind
does fleet,
(Turn heavenly hosts, O turn that cruel wind)
White Mulb'ry leaves, yea tender Elming bud,
May for a shift be given in steed of food.
Sweep every morn ere they fresh vittailes see, Their table is to be kept
clean.

Their papred board, whereon they take repast,
With bundled Time, or slippes of Rosemary,
Leave naught thereon that from their bellies past,
No not th'alf-eaten leaves of Thisbes tree,
And when their seats perfumed thus thou have,
Remove them back again with care and heed,
To former place wherein they erst did feed.
Often shall thou see them careless of their meat, The sleep of Silkewormes,

Yea ouer-tane with deep and heavy sleep,
Like to that strange and Epidemian sweat,
When deadly slumbers did on Britons creep:
Yet fear thou not, it is but natures feate,
Who nethelesse has of peerless spinsters keep,
And makes them thus as dead to lie apart,
That they may wake and feed with better heart.
Thrice thus they sleep, and thrice they cast their skin,
The latter still far whiter then the rest, How often they change their skins.

For never are they quiet of mind within,
Til they be clean of blackness dispossessed,
Whether because they deem it shame and sin
To wear the mark of blackish fiend unblessed:
Or that their parents wearing only white,
They therefore in that only would be dight.
As they in body and in greatness grow, How they are to be distributed (...)
when they grow greater.

Divide them into tribes and colonies,
For though at first one table and no mo
(Small though it be) a thousand worms suffice,
Yet afterward (as proof will truly show)
When they proceed unto a greater size,
One takes the room of ten, and seems to crave
A greater scope and portion for to have.
The loft wherein their tables placed be, What manner of room their table
must stand in.

Must neither be too full, nor void of light,
Two windows are enough, superfluous three,
Placed in such sort that one regard the light
Of Phoebus steeds vprising as we see:
And from the other when it draws to night,
We may behold them tired as it were,
And limping down the western Hemisphere.
Glasde let them be, or linnen-couerd both,
To keep out fell and black Ants or Emets.
Monopolites,
The Myrmedonian crew, who void of sloth
Do wholly bend their forces, toil, and wits
To private gain, and therefore are full wroth
To see this nation any good besits:
Working themselves to death both night and day,
Not for themselves, but others to array.
The greedy imps of her that slew her son,
Pandions Wrennes and Robins.
daughter, bloody hearted Queen:
The winged Sparrowes.
steedes in Venus coach that run,
Inflamed with filthy lust and fires unseen,
Pnrsue this flock, and wish them al undone,
Because they come from parents chaste and clean:
O therefore keep the casements close and fast,
Lest quellers rage your harmless cattle wast.
If also carelessness have lest a rift,
Or chincke unstopped in thine aged wall:
Where-through a noisome mist, or rayny drift,
Or poysned wind may trouble spinsters small,
Mix lime and sand, devise some present shift
How to repel such cruel foe-men al:
Small is the charge compared with the gain,
That shall surmount thy greatest cost and pain.
I any seem to have an amber coat, How the sick are known from the whole,
and in what sort to be used.

And swell therewith as much as skin can hold,
Wholly to sloth and idleness deuote,
Tainting with loathsome gore the common fold,
Of deadly sickness it is a certain note,
Whose cure, since none have either writ or told,
Wisdoms commands to part the dead and sick,
Lest they infect the faultlesse and the quick.
Cold sometimes kills them, Outward causes of their sickness
sometimes ouer-heate,
Rain, oil, salt, old and wet, and musty food,
The smell of onyons, leekes, garlic, and new wheat,
Shrill sounds of trumpets, drums, or cleaving wood:
Yea some of them are of such weakness great,
That whisprings soft of men or falling flood,
Does so their hearts and senses ouer-wheele,
That often headlong from the board they reele.
Forbear likewise to touch them more then needs,
Skarre children from them given to wantonness,
Let not the fruit of these your precious seeds,
Die in their hands through too much carelessness:
Who toss and roll and tumble them like weeds
From leaf to leaf in busy idleness,
Now squatting them upon the floor or ground,
Now squashing out their bellies soft and round.
Thus being kept and fed nine weeks entire, Signs of their readiness to
work.

Surpised with age ere one would think them young,
With what an ardent zeal and hot desire
To recompense thy travels do they long?
They neither sleep, nor meat, nor drink require,
But press and strive, yea fiercely strive and throng,
Who first may find some happy bough or broom,
Whereon to spinne and leave their amber loome.
Then virgins then, They must scour themselves two days before you set them
to work.
with undefiled hand
Sever the greatest from the smaller crew,
For all alike in age like ready stand,
Now to begin their rich and oual clue,
(Having first paid as Nature does command,
To bellies-farmer that which was his due)
For nothing must remain in body pent,
Which may defile their sacred monument.
So being clensde from all that is impure,
Put each within a For that is the best and safest way to loose none of them.
paper-coffin fine,
Then shall you see what labor they endure,
How far they pass the weauers craft of line,
What cordage first they make and tackling sure,
To ty thereto their bottom most divine,
Rounding themselves ten thousand times and more,
Yet spinning still behind and eke before.
None cease to work: How they work not above nine days.
yea rather all contend
Both night and day who shall obtain the prize
Of working much, and with most speed to end,
Whilst rosy The sun.
Titan nine times does arise
From purple bed of his most loving Aurora. the morning.
friend,
And eke as often in The western sea.
Atlas valley dies)
Striving (a strife not easy here to find)
In working well, who may exceed their kind.
Yea some (O woeful sight) are often found
Striving, in work their fellows to excel,
Lifelesse in midway of their trauerst round,
Nay those that longest here do work and dwell,
Live but a while, to end their thread renownd,
For I have seen, and you may see it well,
After that once their bottoms are begun,
Not one suruiues to see the tenth days sun.
Go gallant youths, and die with gallant cheer,
For other bodies shortly must you have,
Of higher sort then you enjoyed here,
Of worthier state, How they are turned into flies when Dog days end, or
thereabouts.
and of a shape more brave,
Lie but three weeks within your silken beer,
Till Syrian dog be drowned in western wave,
And in a moment then among flying things,
Receive not feet alone, but also wings.
Wings whiter then the snow of An exceeding high hill in Asia
Taurus hie, A description of the Silkeflies.

Feet fairer then Venus Paramour, son to Cinara, king of Cyprus, by his own
daughter Myrrha.
Adonis ever had,
Heads, bodies, breasts, and necks of Iuory,
With perfect favor, and like beauty clad,
Which to commend with some variety,
And shadow as it were with color sad,
Two little duskie feathers shall arise
From forehead white, to grace your Eben eyes.
Then neither shall you see the bottom move,
Nor any noise perceive with quickest ear, VVhem the silk is to be winded
from the bottom

Death rules in all, beneath, in midst, above,
Wherefore make haste you damsels void of fear,
Shake off delay, as ere you profit love,
In boxes strait away your bottoms bear,
Freed from the coffin wherein late they wrought,
To gain the golden fleece you so much sought.
First pull away the loose and outmost down,
As huswiues do their ends of knottie towe, In what sort the silk is to be
winded.

That which lies vpmost is of least renown,
The finest thread is placed most below:
Thread fit for kings, unmeet for every clown,
On Natures quill so wound up row by row,
That if thine eye and hand the end can find,
In water warm thou may it all unwind.
Three sorts there are, How many sorts of silk there be.
distinct by colors three,
The purest like to Phactusa and Lampetia Ph^^tons sisters. Ovid 2 Metam.
their resplendant hair,
Who weeping brothers fall from coursers free,
Their tears were turned to yellow amber fair.
The second like Phillis, Demophoons spouse turned into an Almond tree.
her whom impatiencie
Made of a spouse a tree most solitary:
The last more white, made by the weaker sort,
Not of so great a price, nor like report.
From out al three, but chiefly from the best,
Are made, The use of all sorts of silk.
not only robes for priests and kings,
But also many cordial medcius blessed,
Curing the wounds that fullen Saturn brings,
Which being drunk, how quiet is our rest?
How leaps out heart? how inwardly it springs?
Speak you sad spirits that did lately feel,
The hart-breake crush of melancholies wheel.
Nay even the down which lies aloft confusde,
Makes Leuant stuff for country yonkers meet,
Though it of court and city be refusde,
And is not worn in any civil street,
But tell me yer, how can Diogenes that dog, who with his dirtie shoes trod
down Platoes silken Quilt (as Laertius writes) in greater pride then Plato
ever used it.
he be excusde,
Who trampled even the best with mired feet,
And in a moment marred all that with pride,
For making which, ten thousand spinsters did?
Now if of these your bottoms you require, The first made bottoms are best to
be reserved for seed.

Some to reserve for future race and seed,
Choose out the eldest, for their forward fire
Makes inward fly the sooner spring and breed:
Whereas the latter ones have least desire,
And lesser might to perfect Venus deed:
For why, their pride is dull, and spirits cold,
Borne in the quarter last of The waining Moon.
June old.
Wind none of them, which you for breed allot,
In watrie bath, nor else in wine, or lie,
Lest outward moisture innly being got,
Surrounding, drownes the little infant-flye,
And cause both strings and secundine to rotte,
So that before it lives it learnes to dye:
Or if you have them drenched so for gain,
At sun or fire to dry them take some pain.
Singled, then lay them on a table neat,
Covered al over with white That is to say, white paper, for the first writing
paper was the inner rind of a certain reed or cane, into which Phillira was
transformed. Com. Mat. in Mithol. Within 12 days after the bottoms finished,
the silkeflies are disclosed.
Philliraes skin,
Stay then again till Phoebus chariot great
In Oceans bath has twelve times washed bin,
And you shall see an admirable feate,
This formed and yet transformed brood within:
From which new shapes new bodies do arise,
And tails to heads, and worms are turned to flies.
Whereat to wonder each man may be bold,
When seely worms themselves new fliers made,
Whilst one another face they do behold:
Muse how, and when, and where, this form they had,
How new horns sprang from out their foreheads old,
Whence issued wings, Silk flies feed on nothing but air.
which do them ouer-lade:
For they recording what they were of late,
Dare not yet mount above their former state.
As studying thus they stand a day or more,
Offering to feed on naught but only air,
Lothing the meat so much desired before,
I mean the leaves of Thisbes tree most fair:
Disdaining eke to taste of Nais store, A day or a little more after
disclosing, they couple together.

To quench the heat that might their hearts impair:
At length they know themselves to be alive,
And fall to that for which our wantons strive.
Both long, How long they are coupled together.
and longing skud to Venus forts,
To stir up seed that ever may remain,
He runs to her, and she to him resorts,
Each mutually the other entertain,
Joined with fuch lincks and glue of natures sports.
That coupled still they rest a day or twain.
Yea oftentimes thrice turns the welkin round,
Ere they are seen unlocked and unbound.
So having left what e're he could impart, When they die after discoupling.

Of spirits, humors, seed, and recrement,
Willing yet further to have thrown his heart
Into her breast, to whom he all things meant,
He foremost dies and yields to fatal dart:
Ne lives she long, but strait with sorrow spent,
(Having first laid the eggs she did conceive)
Of love and life she shortly takes her leave.
Small eggs they be, in bigness, color, shape,
Like to the meat of Indian Parrachite, Their eggs in color and bigness,
are likest of all things to Millet seed, wherewith Parrachitos are fed.

Less far in view then seed of garden rape,
In number many, yet indefinite:
For when the females womb begins to gape,
And render what the male got over night,
Now more, now fewer seeds dropped from the same,
As they were short, or longer at their game.
Yet seldom are they than a hundred less, What number of eggs they lay.

Sometimes two hundred from their loins do fall,
Round, smooth, hard-shelld, and void of brittlenes,
Whited alike, and yellow yolked all,
Whose virtues great no man did yet express,
Much less can I whose knowledge is so small,
Though sure I am hence may we find a theme,
Able to drink up The wateror river whereon all the Muses drink.
Aganippes stream.
O keep them then with most attentive heed, Haw, the eggs are to be
preserved.

From Boreas blast and Aeols insolence,
From menstruous blasts and breathing keep the^ freed,
Avoid likewise the mil-dewes influence,
Pray heavenly Monarch fot to bless your seed,
Helping their weakness with his providence.
So may your milk-white spinsters work amain,
When Morus lips shall bud and blush again.
And An exhortation to all Farmers and Husbandmen to plant Mulberies.
thou whose trade is best and oldest too,
Steward of all that ever Nature gave,
Without whose help what can our rulers do,
Though gods on earth appareld wondrous brave?
Behold thy helping hand fair virgins woo,
Yea nature bids, and reason eake does crave
Thy cunning, now these little worms to nurse,
Which shall in time with gold fill full thy purse.
In steed of fruitles elms and sallowes gray,
Of brittle Ash, and poyson-breathing vgh,
Plant Mulb'ry trees nigh every path and way,
Shortly from whence more profit shall ensue,
Then from Made and planted by Aegle, Arethusa, and Hyperethusa, King Atlas
daughter.
th'Hesperian wood, or orchards gay,
On every tree where golden apples grew:
For what is silk but even a Quintessence,
Made without hands beyond al humane sense?
A quintessence? A commendation of this silk, with that which comes from the
Ossereans, as also with that which is made by the Indian worms.
nay well it may be called,
A deathlesse tincture, sent us from the skies,
Whose color stands, whose gloss is never appalld,
Whose Mulbr'y-sent and savor never dies,
Yea when to time all natures else be thralld,
And every thing Fate to corruption ties:
This only scorns within her lists to dwell,
Bettring with age, in color, gloss, and smell.
So does not yours (you Ofehese Osserians or Lords of the wood, read Bonfin.
lib. 1 Decad 1. Hung Hist.
Lordings of the wood)
Growing like webbs upon the long-haird grass,
Along the Aureleanus surnamed the Liberal, living 274. years after Christ,
in whose time a pound weight of silk was sold for the like weight in fine
gold. V^piscus.
Osserian bancks of Scithyan flood,
Which into Caspian womb does headlong pass.
No, no: Although that silk be strong and good
In outward show, and highly prized was,
When bounteous Caesar ruled cities prime,
Yet soon it fades, and yields to rotte in time.
If Pausanias books.
books be true, there is an Indian worm,
As big as The Dorbeetle.
he that robbs the Eagles nest,
Shaped like The Spider.
Arachne that does tinsels form,
And nets, and lawnes, and shadows of the best,
Fed with The Reed or cane.
her locks, who yielding stands in storm,
When The hie oaks.
woods-surueyours lie on earth oppressed)
From out whose belly, broke with surfeiting,
Whole clews of silk scarce half concocted, spring.
Yet that compared with this is naught so fine,
Ne ought so sweetly fumed with dainty sent,
Nor of like durance, nor like power divine:
Mirth to restore, when spirits all are spent,
If it be steept in sweet Pomanaes The goddess of apples.
wine,
Till color fade, and substance do relent:
Nay, nay, no silk must make that Called Confectio Alkermes a most singular
Electuarie against Melancholy, if it be rightly made.
Antidote,
Save only which from spinsters mine is got.
Whereof, if thou a pound in weight shall take
Unstained at all (as Amiens Io. Fernelius. lib. 7 qui est de compos. med.
flower does write)
And with the iuce of Rose and pippins make
A strong infusion of some day and night,
Adding some grains of musk and Ambres flake,
And seething all to hony-substance right:
O what a Balm is made to cheer the heart,
If pearl, and gold, and spices bear a part?
What need I count how many winders live,
How many twisters eke, and weauers thrive
Upon this trade? which food does daily give
To such as else with famine needs must strive:
What multitudes of poor does it relieve,
That otherwise could scarce be kept alive?
Say Spaniard proud* and tell Italian youth,
Whether I feign, or write the words of truth.
Not ever were your princes clad so brave,
Not ever were your wives decked as they be,
Much less was silk then worn of every slave,
And artists, sprung from base and low degree,
That Heliogabalus, for so writes Lampridius.
rioter whose belly diggd his grave,
Clothd all in silk, the Romans first did see:
Before whose time silk wou'n on linen thread, When the seed of silkewormes
was first brought into Europe.

Was thought brave stuff for any Princes weed.
But afterward, So Polidor virgil writes out of Procopius, saying that this
happened 555. years after Christ, lib. 3 cap. 6. de ret. invent.
when holy Palmers twain
From out A city of east India.
Serinda brought these worms of fame,
And plauted Mulb'ry plants on hill and plain,
Wherewith to fat and foster up the same:
How rich waxt Italy? how brave was Spain?
In Satin fine, how braggd each man of name?
Yea, every clown, that even as now, so then,
Habites did scarce discern the states of men.
Up Britain bloods, rise hearts of English race,
Why should your clothes be courser then the rest?
Whose feature tall, and high aspiring face,
Aim at great things, and challenge even the best.
Beg country men no more in sackcloth base,
Being by me of such a trade possessed:
That shall enrich your selves and children more,
Then ere it did Naples or Spain before.
No man so poor but he may Mulb'ries plant, How easy and chargelesse a thing
it is to keep silkworms.

No plant so small but will a silke-worme feed,
No worm so little (unless care do want)
But from it self will make a clew of threede,
Each clew weighs down, rather with more then scant,
A penny weight, What overplus there is in profit by keeping them.
from out whose hidden seed,
(After the winged worms conception)
A hundred spinsters issue forth of one.
Divine we hence, or rather reckon right,
What usury and proffit does arise,
By keeping well these little creatures white,
Worthy the care of every nation wise,
That in their own or public wealth delight.
And rashly will not things so rare despise:
Yea sure, in time they will such profit bring,
As shall enrich both people, priest, and king.
Concerning pleasure: How great pleasure there is in keeping them, both to the
eyes, ears, nose, and hands.
who does not admire,
And in admiring, smiles not in his heart.
To see an egg a worm, a worm a flier,
Having first showed her rare and peerless art,
In making that which princes does attire,
And is the base of every famous Mart?
And then to see the fly cast so much seed,
As does, or may, an hundred spinsters breed.
Again to view upon one birchen shredde,
Some hundred Clewes to hang like clustred pears,
Those green, these pale, and others somewhat red,
Some like the locks hanging down Phoebus ears:
And then, how Nature when each worm is dead,
To better state in ten days space it reares:
Who sees all this, and tickleth not in mind?
To mark the choice and pleasures in each kind.
Eye but their eggs, (as Grecians term them well)
And with a penne-knife keen divide them quite,
Behold their white, their yolke, their skin, and shel,
Distinct in color, substance, form, and sight:
And if thy bodies watchmen do not swell,
And cause thee both to leap and laugh outright,
Think God and nature has that eye denied,
By which thou should from brutish beasts be tried.
When they are worms, mark how they color change,
From black to brown, from brown to sorrel bay,
From bay to dunne, from dunne to duskie strange,
Then to an iron, then to a dapple gray,
And how each morn in habites new they range,
Till at the length they see that happy day,
When (like their Sires and heavenly angels blessed)
Of pure and milk-white stoles they are possessed.
Lay then thine ear and listen but a while,
Whilst each their food from leafage fresh receaues,
Try if thou can hold in an outward smile,
When both thine ear and fantasy conceaues,
Not worms to feed, but showrings to distill.
In whispring sort upon the tatling leaves:
For such a kind of muttring have I heard,
Whilst herbage green with unseen teeth they teard.
When afterward with needle pointed tongue,
The Flies have bored a passage through their clewes,
Observe their gate and steerage al along,
Their salutations, couplings, and Adieus:
Hear eke their hurring and their churring song,
When hot Priapus love and lust renewes,
And tell me if thou heardst, or e're did eye,
Like sport amongst all winged troops that fly.
It Is likewise sport to hear how man and maid,
Whilst winding, twisting, and in weauing, they
Now laugh, now chide, now scan what others said,
Now fing a Carrol, now a lovers lay,
Now make the trembling beams to cry for aid,
On clattring treddles whilst they roughly play:
Resembling in their rising and their falls,
A music strange of new found Claricalls.
The smell likewise of silken wool that is new,
To heart and head what comfort does it bring,
Whilst we it wind and tooze from oual clew?
Resembling much in prime of fragrant spring,
When wild-rose buds in green and pleasant hue,
Perfume the air, and upward sents do fling,
Well pleasing sents, neither too sour nor sweet,
But rightly mixed, and of a temper meet.
As for the hand, look how a lover wise
Delights more to touch Astarte slick
Then Hecuba, whose eyebrows hide her eyes,
Whose wrinckled lips in kissing seem to prick,
Upon whose palms such warts and hurtells rise,
As may in poulder grate a nutmegge thick:
So joy our hands in silk, and seem full loath
To handle ought but silk and silken cloth.
Such are the pleasures, and far more then these,
Which head, and heart, eyes, ears, and nose, and hands,
Take, or may take, in learning at their ease,
The dieting of these my spinning bands,
Whose silken threede shall more then counterpeise,
Pain, cost, and charge, what ever it us stands,
So that if gain or pleasure can persuade,
Go we, let us learn the silken-staplers trade.
But list, me thinks I hear Amyntas said,
That shepherds skill will soon be quite undone, Keeping of silkewormes
hinders not the keeping of sheep nor, Sheepheards.

Behold fair Phillis scuddeth from the plain,
Leaving her flocks at randon for to run,
Lo Lidian clothier breaks his loomes in twain,
And thousand spinsters burn their woollen spunne:
Ah! cease your rage, these spinsters hurt you naught
But will increase you more then ere you thought.
For card an ounce of silk with ten of wool,
How fine, how strong, how strange a yarne does rise?
Make trial once, and having seen at full,
Your new found stuff, chaffred at highest prize,
Then blame your idle heads and senses dull,
Trust not conceit, but credit most your eyes:
Laughing as much, or more, the^ ere you mourned,
When fear you see to joy and vantage turned.
Laugh now (fair Mira) with thy Virginswhite,
For why your eggs committed to my care,
Are grown so much in bigness, worth, and sight,
That Kings and Queens to keep them will not spare,
Yea Queen of Queens, for virtue, wit, and might,
Perhaps will hatch them twixt those hillocks rare,
Where all the Graces feed and Sisters nine,
Who ever love, and grace both thee and thine.
FINIS.

