IMMEDIATE ADDRESS UNTO GOD ALONE.

First delivered in a Sermon before his MAJESTY at Windsore.

Since reuised and enlarged to a just Treatise of INVOCATION of SAINTS.

Occasioned by a false imputation of M. ANTONIUS DE DOMINIS upon the Author,
RICHARD MOVNTAGV.

LONDON Printed by William Stansby, for Matthew Lownes and William Barret. 1624.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, AND RIGHT HONORABLE LORD, JOHN, Lord
Bishop of Lincoln, Lord Keeper of the great Seal, of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, Visitor of the Collegiate Churches of Windsore and
^^on.
Right Reverend in Christ, Right Honorable,
IT is now three years, and more, that preaching at Windsore, as my course
then fell, before his Majesty, I took my Text, Psalm. 50.15. which that Sunday
was verbum dici in die suo, Read in the public Service of the Church,
according to directions in the Book of Common prayer. In Pulpits, and in
popular Sermons, J nor like it in others, nor Practice it my self; to meddle
much or far with any Point of abstruse, or controuerted Divinity. For common
capacities, are made and fitted for matter of mean and ordinary apprehension.
Preaching is appointed to make men better in practique knowledge; and so was
ever used of the Ancients: not acute and subtle for discourse and speculation,
which is the ordinary piety of these times. But as then it fell out, such was
the Auditorie, so extraordinary The words, as they fell in process of
handling that Psalm, and of that importment, Call upon me in time of trouble;
So direct and plain for address unto God: unto Him alone: for Immediate
access without assistance or mediation, J could not well wave the Case of
Invocation, Aduocation, and Intercession of Saints and Angels, so much
persuaded, urged, practiced, and abused, in the common use and custom of the
present Church of Rome. (And yet not so, as to dwell upon it wholly, or to make
it (...), altogether.) Concluding it a point of plain folly, if no more, for
any man to implore the Help of others, to use Advocates and Assistants unto
God, in any exigence, time of need or necessity, who is so directed,
counseled, and invited by God himself, to immediate access without
mediation, in, Call upon me. Of folly and ridiculous absurdity, as it is by
them conceived, taught, and laid down: even by the most learned, judicious,
and advised amongst them; though J know, in point of practice and performance,
the simple vulgar people, not acquainted with, nor capable of Scholasticall
niceties, or difference in terms, of Invocation and Aduocation, Help
original, and derived; go to it down right with direct address indeed, unto
flat Impiety against God, and Jdolatrie in their ordinary devotion unto the
Creature. J was as Conclusiue against this custom, as I could be, as directly
opposite unto their Doctrine of Aduocation as Contradiction could make me; and
yet Right Honorable, I have been vouched, for an Abettor of their practice, at
least in part; I am sure, slandered in my Opinion and Preaching. There was
present at my Sermon, that infamous Ecebolius of these times, Religion is
desultor, Archbishop sometime of Spalata, then Deane of that Church, Marcus
Antonius de Dominis. This Man and Runaway from Religion (a man, if any other of
his Coat and Calling, apt enough to be circumcised and deny Christ Jesus, if
the Grand Signior would but make him chief Muftie, so much would Ambition and
Covetousness, his bosom infirmities, sway with Him) in his late impudent,
lewd, shameless Recantation, in which he professes and proclaymeth himself
unto the world a Knave in grain, a man of a cauterised Conscience, and
prostituted Honesty unto all, even Civil, conversation; as without all
modesty, he belyeth that Church in general, which my self have heard him
often publicly and privately commend and admire: As he spares not
Particulars, of most Eminent place: so also, amongst others, has he belyed me;
as if J concurred with himself now, in opinion; or auowed that ridiculous
Roman Doctrine and Practice of Praying unto Saints and Angels, in time of
need. For, He heard with great delight and content, as he says, one of his
then Canons of Windsore, preaching before the Kings Majesty, maintain, That
there was no cause why every man might not turn himself unto his Angel
keeper, and say, Holy Angel keeper, Pray for me. He names me not in this
passage, I grant, but wrappeth up a certain quendam in general and in
doubtful terms. And had J not my self professed, En adsum qui feci, J well
and quietly had rested blameless, ^y a namelesse aspersion, and left them to
guess at randon, or shoot at Rouers, who would happily have fastened it
otherwhere. But nothing was said, why I should shun the Charge, or divert the
Imputation upon any. And because the first notice that ever I had hereof, being
from (though at second hand) your Lordship, I could not possess my Soul in
patience, without giving your Lordship intimation, how untruly, an aspersion of
siding that way, had by him, so loose a Lozell, been cast on that society,
whereof himself sometimes had been, and my self am yet, through his
Majesty's Grace, a member: the rather, because we have all under his sacred
Majesty, especially in Cases of this condition, a Reference unto your Honor,
as our Visitor. May your Lordship then be pleased, to take notice of his
dealing, conformable to the rest of his leuder actions, in his turne-coating
from side to side. He styles me, One of his Canons of Windsore: as if, for
That, my dependence had been upon Him, or my self, and the rest of my
Brethren there had been his by appropriation. What the course is in the Court
of Rome, J know not, where Places of such quality are bought and sold. But
here J am sure, He was but one of us, The fundamental Statutes running thus,
De tredecim Canonicis, quorum vnus Custos, vel Decanus existat. The Deane, and
Prebends there, being no man's Canons, but his Majesty's: who by Right
Original, is, in his Royal Predecessors, Founder and Patron of that College.
Secondly, he does not bl^sh to write, that he heard me with great delight and
content. Whereof He nor was, nor could be capable. For in his own intent and
meaning to hear, is to understand and apprehend. This he did not: this he
could not do. For I preached in English, unto an English Auditorie, though
composed then of Royal and Noble presence. English, he might hear; but could
not understand, except carptim and sparsim, now and then, here and there a
word, or half a sentence. And yet I know he Read, for I was present: and
subscribed (he says since, against his conscience, the more Knave he) to enjoy
a good Benefice, for I was a witness thereto, the Articles of 1562. in
West-Ilsly Church in Barkshire. But Read I can that which J understand not:
Understanding and Reading are two things. And yet, this honest man, as if he
had understood my Sermon from point to point, shameth not to say, he heard me.
Which chiefly and thirdly is false for the main. The words, he puts on me,
I profess before God, I spoke not. I nor did, nor do hold the purport of
them, Certum and de fide. The most that himself, who must now say, what they
at Rome will have him, is this, and no more, Peradventure, or, it is Probable,
quod sic. But that which he did hear and understand is this, for these words
J spoke in Latin, not in English, Sed de Angelo custode, fortassis ampliandum.
No more, nor fewer words then so, this way. How these words, so spoken, should
affect him with such content, J cannot tell. I am sure, and can make good, they
are far enough removed from abetting or maintayning; that ordinary course
of Invocation or assistancy of Saints and Angels: even of Angels Guardians,
that continually attend us, as far as resolution is from doubting. But
howsoever, I resolved, even instantly upon first notice of this defamation, to
say somewhat in the Case. And thereupon, repayring unto my Papers, so soon as
I could find any leisure, out of my briefer Notes, for J wrote not my Sermon
verbatim, J drew into a form, the substance, J am sure, of all which was then
delivered: and enlarged it with much access, of more then I could well
deliver, or did speak within the compass of an hour, especially, or rather
wholly in that Eristical part and opposition which is inter parts litigantes,
about Mediation in Jnuocation. Which I thought it my duty to offer unto the
view and censure of your Lordship, in regard of that Reference, which, as a
Canon of Windsor, I have unto your Honor, our Visitor. But much rather in
respect of private obligation, in consideration of my own particular. For, let
the world take notice, if it may concern any, your Honor is He, unto whom,
next unto his most sacred Majesty, my most gracious Sovereign and Master, J
owe more, then to all the world beside, though I confess my self very much
obliged unto some of your Lordships Reverend rank. So that, I could not
answer it unto God and Man, if any act of mine, voluntary and direct, should
justly give your Lordship any distaste of my carriage or disposition in this
kind. And because your Lordship has been pleased to find so much leisure,
even in your manifold distractions diversely, and very great employments every
way, both in Church and State, as to read it over, and approve it in your most
able judgment, and give it your Honorable warrant to the Press; I could not
but make it your own in public, both out of duty and discretion; professing
unfeignedly, in the word of a Priest, Fecisti vt viuam and moriar, ingratus. Jn
which Profession, and Protestation J rest, recommending your Honors long health
and happiness, in my daily prayers, as J have good cause, unto God Almighty,
and my self unto your Honors service and devotion

Most obliged, RI. MOVNTAGV.

A TREATISE OF THE INVOCATION of SAINTS.
PSALM. 50.15. Call upon me in the time of trouble, so I will hear thee, and
deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me.


IT is read and remembered, Act. 2.37. that they who were pricked at the heart
with S. Peter's Sermon, As we use to do it.
being streighted, and not knowing what course to take, do instantly, as men
in perplexity use, fall in with (...); Men, say they, and Brethren, what shall
we do? Thus they make demurres, upon that present exigent, out of customary
practice, in course of kind. For so it is: The man that is in misery, will
make his moan. He that is distressed, will soon enough complain. Set he
never so good a face upon the matter, wittingly, perhaps, at least unawares we
may, take it up, dropping from his mouth, What course shall I take? What shall
I do?

In this Case, upon this Quaere, What shall I do? Every man will answer, each
man's heart and motion will suggest, and reply: What? but, Sit not still: cast
about: look abroad: seek out for some succor, and relief. At least go Call
and Cry for help, if that (peradventure) there be any nigh at hand, that will
Stay, Consider, Hear, and give Succor in Distress.

It is not ever usual, nor a common practice with God, So it is not without
good reason to call for help in time of trouble.
which was sometime affoorded extraordinarily by him, Open thy mouth wide, and
I will fill it. Or, Stand still, and expect Salvation of the Lord. But the God
who at first made us, without our own help or Concurrence, will not Save, nor
deliver us, without our own endeavors, and Cooperation.

Our Creation, and our Being we have from Him alone: who so wisely disposed of
us afterward, that in point of Preservation, we are not more passiues and
dependants. To Deliver, is his Act, in time of trouble: But to Call, and that
formerly, is upon our part to be performed first. And indeed, hither Nature
addresseth us, in Extremity; as being ever Sui Conserua^ri^s, desirous to
preserve our Being in State. And therefore, Live of our own welfare, affects
our Good, and well Subsisting. Skin for skin, and all that a man has, will he
give for his life, if it be in hazard, was spoken upon no other but this
ground. Therefore Sense is apprehensiue in extremity. Understanding is quick
and operative upon smart, hurt, loss, or danger. The Powers and Faculties of
Soul and Body, are as soon summoned so standing ready in pr^cinct^, to do
their Deuoyre, in whatsoever they may, for Ease, Relaxation, Help,
Deliverance; if it may be had. David's practice in this point was not
particular. He fell upon a common course of kind, When, He called and cried,
he looked round about, to see if any would comfort him. Psalm. 142.4. If any
man cared for his soul. So that, What shall I do, in Time of trouble, is a
Case soon resolved of on all hands. What but this, Look up: look about. But
the question is unto. For Men are not so ready to help, as to pity.
Seek out for succor: Call, and also, Cry for help. But unto Whom shall I
go and complain? unto whom with good Success, may I make my moan? or tender
my humble Supplication? The best relief to be gotten, or expected, was long
since resolved to have been this, Omnes miscerentur. Nemo succurrit. Alas my
Brother: God help the man, and the like are Alms, Seneca.
and Charity very ordinary, because they run at a low rate, and may largely
be conferred without much expense. But it is a matter of greater charge, and
cost, to power Wine, and Oil into wounds. It will stand us in much more then
so, to take care with the Samaritane for recuring, of the languishing wounded
man; if he lie upon our hands for his recovery.

We have heard of, no doubt, and sometime commiserated peradventure, his
complaint, who in the anguish of his agonized soul, and in the sore
extremities of his unknown pains, had cause enough to lament his own, not to
be expressed Case and Sorrows thus, Have you no regard, O all you that pass
by the way, Lament. 1.12. As being disrepected; not regarded, much less
comforted, of those, who saw with their eyes, which remorslesly, they slighted
over in their affections. David in the days of his indurance, though, he
Called and Cried too, as himself professes: though, he looked upon his right
hand, and upon his left; yet, if we believe his one relation, found no place to
fly unto: and no man cared for his Soul, Psalm. 142.4. We are commonly to
seek, and unresolved upon this Quere, Unto whom shall I make my supplication?
And tha^ in a (...) re^pect.


The Resolution herein is not easy: For two Respects. First, for Disabilitie,
of Power to perform. As not able. As not willing.


Disproportion, in the will unto ability: Few are so well disposed as to do
what they can. For there is, if not, a Lion in the way: yet a Reason of profit
to withstand. It will Cost more to Succor, then to Commiserate. Agar for
examples sake, would with all her Heart have relieved Ismael; being ready to
Dye for want of drink, Genesis 21.15. Motherly Compassion did whatsoever was to
be done for the Child: yet the poor woman wanted to relieve him. The Case
was otherwise with the Priest and Leuite, both of them might, it was in their
Power, have showed more Mercy unto the wounded man, had their good Inclination
been as well fitted, as their means and ability were consorted. Gallio
Deputy of Achaia, could have taught the Jews, with authority, better
manners; and freed Sosthenes from their outragiousnesse. But his affection was
not at all that way. Gallio cared not what they did, Acts 18.17. If Will or
Power, or both be wanting, we may long look and hope, and Call, and Cry, for
help, but all in vain, Non est, qui curet, None are nigh, to take notice of
our Case or indurance.

Now I would be loath in Deliquio, Therefore, specially in time of trouble, it
is good to find out some other upon whom to Call.
when my Life is fleeting: when Soul and Body, scarce can hold together, at
such a time, in such a pinch, (...) place of Bezoar water, Aqua-vitae, or some
such infusion to revive the spirits, have only cold water cast upon my face,
which may weat the surface, not relieve the trance. So upon an exigent of
extremity, Court holy water is but small comfort refreshing, the which, but
actiuated with Aurum potabile, works scarce somewhat, without that
ingredient, no great effect at all. I would be loath, being to leap a Ditch for
my Life, rely my self upon a broken Pole, a rotten Stay, a Reed of Egypt,
which not only fails, and lays me in the Ditch, but the dishiuered
splinters run into my hands, and wound me sore. I would be loath being naked,
cold, hungry, to meet with no better repast and refreshing, then, Depart in
peace; be warmed; be filled: and yet* nor meat, nor drink, nor clothing
given me. The Alms and Charity of the Hypocrite, James 2.16. Miserable
Comforters are all these: as good, no better, then Iohs friends. Therefore in
Extremity, when my life is at a lift, or my state set upon a desperate Cast, I
will hold him my very friend indeed, and acknowledge his Benefit with grateful
recognition of his Love and Kindship, who not only, does afford me, the
help he can Himself, and comes to the rescue with all his Power and
Possibility: But him also, that advises, or addresseth me, when I may be sure
not to fail of assistance in time of need: to meet with the man, That both
Can and Will relieve me. When, He that has Power, does not want Good will, his
Client, his Petitioner in distress, needs not at all despair, or be much
dismayed, for Non caret effectu quod voluere duo. He is sure to be heard, if
these two conspire, and to be delivered in the Day of trouble. But such a
Friend is not every where to be found like good Corn cast into bad ground,
Thick sown, but thin come up: Nor can every man tell who, or where is He.

I have seen a man sometime near drowning, and ready to sink under the
water, And better to use one sure means, then to try a great many uncertain.
catch at every Bul-rush that swimmeth by: lay hold on each Sedge or Reed that
grows in, or floateth on, the water willing to save by any means, if it
might be, his life, yet not knowing how or in what sort to assure it. In
Extremities and Exigences, so it falls out, men multiply devices many ways:
have many proiects in hand, and purposes in mind, and also peradventure sundry
assayes on foot? We have read in the Prophet of some that, Sacrifice unto their
Nets: of others that, Dig Pits as deep as Hell. Many make friends of the
wicked Mammon. And, By our own tongues, say diverse, we will prevail. Some
put their trust in Princes, the Sons of men: Run to Physicians for their
health. Thank Tobacco happily for their Life: the Prince in State, for their
Liuelihood and their means. Great men and such, as sway with authority, need
seek for no supportance otherwhere. For they like to a boisterous whirlewind,
bear all before them, and carry down whatsoever they undertake. As for that,
s^r^ defense indeed, The name of the Lord, unto the Righteous, it comes very
seldom within the Verge of their thoughts; much less to the Center of their
Actions themselves being a long from God in Life and Conversation: and
therefore running Circular, up and down, into many Imaginations and
speculations what to do.

But see the difference in event, (...). The Fox had many ways to escape, the
Cat but one way and no more. In effect it is that resolution in the Proverbs,
The riches of the Rich man are his confidence: But the name of the Lord is a
sure defense indeed, the Righteous runs thither and is safe. The Case was
once, as is imagined, That the Cat and Fox were in deep discourse, which way
best to make escape when the hunt was up. Reynard discoursed of this and that.
For he had devices his Budget full. The Cat had but one way, but it was a sure
one, and worth, in Conclusion, all his plots and policies, to climb a Tree, or
get up into an House, which stood her in good stead when Reynard failed. As
they stood thus discoursing, they heard the Cry, the Dogs came up hot upon
the scent: The Cat lightly leaped into a Tree and escaped: the Fox was caught
and torn in pieces, for all his policies: None of his devices stood him then
in stead.

This uncertainty in all humane things.
We read in the Prophets much to this purpose. Their turning of devices prosper
not, Are they not esteemed as the Potters clay? Into the Pits which they dig,
themselves are fallen. Their Nets are broken: the Birds escaped upon the wing:
Nay, oftentime it comes to pass, that the Fowler is caught in his own
snares. Their tongues taught to talk at randon against God, cleave, at most
need, unto the roof of their mouths. Riches and Princes fail both at a
pinch: and Friends run away in the time of trouble. All humane abets, are
well compared unto Summer Brooks and water courses in the Wilderness: dry
without water in time of drought and extremity, running over in Winter, when
water needs not. The Travelers to Tema, were deceived in their hopes: the
Carauans of Sheba in their expectations: finding no water there to drink, died
with thirst in the Land of Desolation. He said well, that had seen much in his
time, and was as Potent as any in his days: An Horse is but a vain thing to
save a man: and to deliver by his great strength. Who professed again to
purpose upon his own particular, I will not trust in my Bow, It is not any
Sword that shall help me. And semblably gave counsel, to the well advised,
Put not your trust in Princes, nor in any child of man: For why; there is no
help in them. Samson, we read was surprised when his great strength failed
him The Riches and Wisdom of King Solomon, could not secure the state of
Rehoboam, nor yet free his own times from some troubles. Achitophels
Headpiece, so working and practique, brought his neck unto the halter. Aman
that great Minion of the Persian Monarch, was disfauo^rited in a moment: and
yet lifted up to look higher then he did before. In the use and custom of
the World, Reason of state for common course of management, calls Reason of
Religion unto Counsel seldom: as if God were not interessed in the affairs
of men, but stood and beheld, what, and not wherefore, a far off. But yet
(...), at a pinch indeed, the profoundest Politician is often at a stand: In
God it is not.
the greatest States man is to seek, and at a loss: there is No help for him
but in his God. God must stand in procinctu: put himself into the breach, and
come on lustily to the rescue, or else (...), For two reasons.
What shall we do? for all is lost. Therefore, Call upon him, have address to
his assistance in time of Trouble.

For first he is of Power, to make good his party, Who has resisted the will
of the Lord? His power.
Who can stand with Him? or stand before Him? much less can any stand against
Him, or hinder his purposes to take effect. As he is Elshadai, The Almighty,
the Lord and commander of both Heaven and Earth. So is He Emanuel, God with us
also: Our God of old; the God of our Fathers, and of their Children. And from
Him Our God, Compassion does plentifully flow. (...)* where these two concur,
a man may set up his rest, and, ne quid vltra, for assurance rest contented.

Now of his Power there is no Question, but He Can. No Christian: no
reasonable humane Creature, does doubt of this, or make scruple of it, that the
God, and Lord of all things is Almighty. But assure me he will do it, and
then I His willingness.
Power and will both concurring in One, give full resolution to all doubts, and
satisfaction, which any way arise for point of performance. Let me have his
Promise that He will, and I rest secured for Performance. God is not a man
that He should lie, nor as the Son of man that He should alter the thing
that is gone out of his lips.

And we have his Promise, Who has promised to hear
That faithful God and true: I will hear and deliver thee. To Hear, is to
Regard, in Gods Dialect and phrase of speech both ascendendo, In whose Dialect
to hear i^ to regard.
from Earth to Heaven in due Obedience, when man is to do what God will have
him, as Hear my Law O my People: Psalm. 78.1. In effect, the same with that
which follows, Incline thine Ears unto the words of my mouth; As also
Descendendo, from Heaven to Earth, The Lord hear thee in the day of Trouble:
the same with that which follows by Interpretation. The name of the God of
Jacob defend thee. So at Present, in this passage it is instanced here, and per
omnia in effect the same. He makes no stop, at, I will hear: And who joins
hearing and delivering so close together.
but comes in instantly with, And deliver thee. Accept both thy Person and
Petition. In gracious Acceptance, Hear and Regard: In real Performance,
Deliver thee. First so: then thus: For Pity must go before Performance. It is
impossible for any to regard: that hears him not Call, or Cry, Sue, Petition,
or make his case known, whom He does regard: and Delivers, upon regard. Upon
regard had, assistance does ensue. For Pity runs soon in gentle heart. Can
God behold us, his, in Misery and heaviness, and not soon compassionate our
distress. This Text is to the contrary most pregnant, if we were once
resolved of the Parties therein, Me and Thee, which indeed, are Indefinite, no
way determined: and so we may ask the Eunuchs question, Of whom speaks the
Prophet in this place?

Ye^, before we call it is good to be resolved of both the parties, Me, and
Thee.
Ask we may; but if we will be soon resolved, of that doubt and scruple from
the Text. For though the Parties interessed, Me and Thee, are not expressed
directly in the passage, they are necessarily inferred from the premises, and
so concluded to be no other, then the Creator and Creature; God and Man whom
God has made; The Lord and his people whom he has redeemed. And that this
intercourse and Negotiation, for so it is, and seems to be, is betwixt these
two, Me, and Thee, appears by Collation of ver. 7. Which refer to the euenth
Verse.
Hear, O my people, and I will speak, I my self will testify against thee, O
Israel: for I am God, even thy God. There first begins this Commerce to be
set on foot, and here they hold on in the same terms. So that the Premises
considered, it cannot be questioned, but that To Call, in time of trouble: to
Hear and deliver out of Distress, are actions interchanged, betwixt God and
his Chosen, Me and Thee.

We believe an honest man upon his word; All these things being considered, we
may take it upon his word, that Hear and Deliver will follow one another.
such a man's Word, sooner then some man's Bond; and shall we make doubt of the
God of Truth? Him, so Righteous in all his ways: so holy in all his works?
Challenge him who can for breach of Promise, for forgetting his Covenant and
stipulation. He made a Covenant with Abraham, for Himself, his Seed. Ero Deus
tuus, and seminis tui. And did he not renew it unto Isaac for a Law: and
confirm it unto Jacob for an everlasting Testament? Because he said in his
Holiness, I will not fail David: Are we not often put in mind what things,
how great he did for David's sake? Is it not yet upon record, to stand for ever,
that they were The sure mercies of David. Whom he loves once, he loves
everlastingly on his part; his Gifts and Promises, are all (...) without
Repentance, as much as appertains unto Him. If man break not Covenant in,
Thou shall be my People; God will not fail on his part, I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed.

Men so interessed, are most what, It has been the confidence of all the
faithful so to take it.
many of them, well persuaded for the point. It was a strong Confidence and
strange resolution of some, Psalm. 46.2. We will not fear though the Earth be
moved, and the Hills be carried into the midst of the Sea. In effect, though
the Fabric of the World be out of frame; though Heaven and Earth, and all
those mother Elements of the World, be blended, shaken, and upon point of
dissipation; Why? Upon what ground are they so confident? The Lord of Hosts,
this is the reason, is with us, the God of Jacob, is our refuge. The Lord of
Hosts: Who can resist him? The God of Jacob; who need doubt of him. God
Almighty, can do what he will: God of Jacob, will do what he can.
Answerable to his promise of old, Ero Deus tuus, and seminis tui, Thy God I am,
and the God of thy seed after thee for ever. Our God now, this is their
resolution, As our Fathers God, in time of old. At hand to help us, in time of
trouble, as he has been Good and gracious unto all our Kin. He that is I
am: can not become, I have been, or I will be hereafter. Therefore Verse 7. as
in Propriety, I am God; so in Appropriation, I am thy God. Mine and Thine are
possessiue Relatiues, each has deep interest in other. So that, My God, thou
art Holy: my Soul, thou art happy, in having so good a God, as is our God, so
ready, so willing to do thee good.

To come home to the purpose; He that can divert or prevent a mischief, will
not sit still and look on in the ruin of his house, nor irrelentlesly see the
desolation of those, who are indeed, and are called, Psalm. 83.3. (...), the
hidden, secret, the received ones of God, nor the utter destruction of his
dearest friends. The Devil indeed will no doubt, antiquum obtinere, suggest in
extremity to dismay and drive us into despair, There is no help for him in
his God. But Loquitur e proprijs: who bad him say so, or put this word into his
mouth? God never did it: He speaks it only of himself: and himself, was a
Liar from the beginning. Absit enim vt credat aliquis, cuilibet minimo quicqua^
d^futurum in confessione nominis constituto. Believe not him therefore, who is
the Father of lies. Believe his word rather, who is truth it self; who keeps
his promise better then Princes do, and could never yet be challenged for non
performance of what he had said. Believe his Promise, I will hear and
deliver, who is and continues Truth it self for ever: and could not yet be
challenged for non performance.

Believe his Promise, and for farther assurance, And it may be further
persuaded by his extraordinary affection unto his.
take in by the way the dear affection he bears unto His own: the Party
interessed; more then ordinary, because themselves are more then of the common
sort, Diliguntur alieni, this is the ascent of Love, magis proximi: maxim
proprij. Which is Transcendent, because it is Gods. For Perfect are the works
of the mighty God, intimated to us, as we can conceive of them, at some
extent indeed, though not their own largeness, only thus Far, and to this
End, that we may perceive how they do excel; Deus su^^ Nobi^ nostra ^alutis
amorem significaturus, says Chrysostom, gallinarum charitatem, Patrum curam,
matris affectum, sponsi amore^^ praesefert; which are the greatest affections
named amongst men. Non quia tentum duntaxatam^t, but because we do not
usually apprehend or conceive, any greater instances of Love then these. Could
we imagine greater, yet would his surmount; as exceeding in proportion
whatsoever is, or is named great. For as the man is, such is his strength, as
is the agent such the action. The greatest and largest sized Love on Earth, is
the affection of a Mother to the Son of her Womb. Can a mother forget her
child, says God, and not have compassion upon tht Son of her womb? Natural
affection, in tenderness of compassion, and embowelled pity will say no. She
cannot* But were it possible; could she do so; yet would not I forget you,
says the Lord. The Reason is not only from his being Great, that he is
Paramount in all Perfections, by himself communicated to his Creatures; as
having and enjoying that without measure, which in measure proportioned he
has imparted unto us: But also and rather, quia Nos ^mamus necessario. If we
Love, it is because we cannot choose but do so; and often know no reason why
we do so, or should do so. Necessity causes us to do as we do* either
that of Nature, or Conueniencie. But de mera voluntate diligit Deus, There is
no other moouer of Him, then his Will. Mere gracious goodness in Himself,
without motive on our part makes him for to do as he does, being disposed to
do good. Motus a se misericordiam facit, a Nobis motus facit iustitiam. In no
case let it once be imagined of man, that God has now at last forgotten to be
gracious, or shut up his loving kindness in displeasure. Make no question, he
has not, but is the same he was ever. His Promise is past and upon record, I
will hear thee and deliver thee. And his words and meaning ever went together.
Had he not purposed and fully resolved, To hear and Deliver in Time of
Trouble: He would never have Invited us to Call: nor Directed us to Call on
me. For what, and to whom, we had been yet to seek: left to follow, and to
wander in our own ways: and take us to our own Imaginations: and then by all
likelihood and probability we had balked the right way, Otherwise our
address had rather been to some other.
not fallen upon Him, who is willing and able only to relieve us. Rather had
our address been unto Any other, then unto Him: and that principally in two
regards; for Disproportion, And that in two regards.
then for Disaffection betwixt Me and Thee, God and Man, to which two, add
Ignorance to know and to understand what is for our good, and avail in the day
of trouble. Which like the three destroying bands of the Philistines, 1. Sam.
13.17. consume all good endeavors in the Land.

I may well say, Invited, nor directed: for so it is; But contrariwise it is
only unto him. By way of direction.
Call upon me, as addressed from God, as it stands in this passage considered
here, is indeed by way of Direction and Inuitation. Consider Me, in respect of
Thee alone, and go no farther then Inuoca me, Call upon me, that is, reflect
upon the Sovereign command God has over man: the necessa^^^ dependence, man
has upon God, in Esse simply to have his Being: and in Been esse also, all
Good things from him, so Call upon me is a strict iniunction, ab Imperio: no
gentle Inuitation, a Consilio. Nay by way of command indispensible at all (...).
A precept tendered under that high commanding form, Do this and live, the
style of the statutes of the Lord of Hosts, in which all those eternal moral
Duties are tendered, which bind us semper habitually, albeit not ad semper
Actually. Specially, if by Calling upon God, we understand the worship of God.
So conceived, and so understood, Call upon me, is Honor me, Worship me, Fear
my name* Love, serve, and obey me. So, How shall they call on him whom they
have not known, is, how shall they serve and worship Him as they ought? And
this is a Duty indispensable, at all times, not that of trouble alone: An
Honorable respect incommunicable not to be imparted unto any Creature: not to
be suspended at our pleasure. Thus, in all places, at all times, upon all
Occasions, Call upon me, by way of eternal Obligation. And in this sense and
meaning, upon None but Me. Such Honor is due unto God alone.

It is confessed upon all hands, by the parties divided in point of Piety,
that This Honor is Gods peculiar due. Latria, is for none but only God. That
as Author original of Deliverance* that as Donor of every good gift indeed,
God is alone to be called on, he will not part stakes with any other. But
here the passa^^ (...), and so rather a kind Inuitation.
Had he stayed here at, Call upon Me, and gone no farther, I would have
resolved it a strict Iniunction of a moral and eternally binding Duty: But
because the Passage is of larger extent, and takes in withal, The time of
trouble, I suppose it a tendry of kindness rather, a Gentle Inuitation, to
come and Call: with a needful Direction, upon Me.

The time of trouble is not every Day. For it takes in withal the time of
trouble, which is not every day.
A day of Compunction, Psalm. 69.18. and therefore also, of Anguish, and
Coarctation, Esaias 37.3. A day of darkness and of blackness, Joel 2.2. Fire,
sword, storm, tempest: waters, many, raging, deep and roaring. Threatened,
imminent, pressing oppressing, ouerwhelming and sweeping desolations. When ab
intra from within, as great or greater, do add unto the bitterness of that
Day, and agrandise the heavy weight of trouble. When friends are far off:
Consolation not near: Counsel is to seek: Invention at a stand. (...)* Thy
self and Thine at point to perish, to be utterly undone and cast away for
ever, Then, at that time, in This day of trouble call upon me, and I will
hear. As much as kindest kindness can offer.

So we are directed to inform us first, And this direction may well amend our
ignorance.
and amend us in our Ignorance and want of Direction, that are much to seek,
and naturally instantly have address unto quo me vertam, What shall I do?
which is (...), the voice of amazed admiration: but properly (...), the word of
one at gaze and at a stand; not knowing what to do, how to resolve, which way
to take, or turn himself in those streights. Ignorance of good, of right, of
behoof, is the Natural disease of the soul of man: even since that great
Light of supernatural Grace, from the Sun of Righteousness, then vertical
in man the little World, was utterly extinct in the fall of Adam. Ignorance
since then, is the Cause of those Curses which we endure or incur, in the
course of our Life any way. Had not Samson lost his Eyes, he had not left his
Life so, with the price of his own blood upon the Philistines: no Man so
dearly paid the pawnage of folly in his separation from the God of his life,
the Death of his soul, and loss of indowments of Grace. Remove this
Ignorance in the understanding, and eftsoons the forms of things appear as
they are, crooked, straight, misshapen, entire. Upon sight of Errors,
Confession is Instant, Non putaram, I was not aware: I did it of Ignorance: I
wist not what I did: agnizing the Original of our miscariage. Hence our
Designs and Consultations consequent are, Quo me vertam, how may I mend that
which is amiss? Thus being dazeled, we are to seek groping, as the men of
Sodom, at Lots door: or as Elymas, to find a guide, wandering else as men do
in a Maze. Our tongues teach our hearts, what they think or should; God help
the man thus wrapped in Errors; and lost in the Labyrinth of devices. And God
does help him: by Direction, For it le^des us to call upon him.
Call upon me. Which leaves no plea for farther Ignorance: but us
inexcusable, if we go wrong, and Call upon any else but Me. It is formerly
observed, what is the Course of kind, men multiply devices many ways: The
reason is evident, they know not the way; nor had ever hit upon it but by
Direction* of this or some such as this, Call upon me; from God.

And yet (...), we must have somewhat more It assures us of a hearing.
In a Case of wrong and Injustice done by some great Grantorto, I know my
Recourse for Redress must be unto Him, that can set all right, The Prince in
State, Gods Lieftenant for that purpose, To help them to right that suffer
wrong: to which end and purpose he bears the Sword. Yet unless I find that
favor to be Heard in my Request and humble Petition, I were as good, nay
better, possess my soul in Patience, sit still and endure whatsoever
indignities rather after that ancient rule in Tacitus, Iniurias far and
gratias agere, Say I thank you Sir to Him that does me wrong, least stirring
and storming to no purpose, if I cannot have due redress in time, I exasperate
his oppressing humor the more, and so draw upon my self needlessely greater
grieuances, indignities, and vexations. So in Case of address unto, and
Intercession with God, when we stand in need of his help and assistance, to
be heard and delivered in time of trouble, that our Suites be not quashed;
our selves not disheartened, our Prayers may come into his presence, we must be
advised two ways. First that we stand in no terms of disgrace, nor out of
favor with Him. Secondly, that we It takes away the two ordinary impeachments
of help and assistance.
Which is in respect of Disaffection to our Persons: In respect of
Disproportion to our state. Two ordinary empeachments of Help, assistance,
Both which hinder us in the Court^ of men.
and redress, in Course of Civil common cariages amongst men.

For Disproportion first in point of State, in regard of awful Majesty in the
person and Condition of Princes advanced (...), high upon the steps and stairs
of Honor, the Petitioner does and is to keep Distance, in his Carriage and
Decorum: not to press or presume into his Princes presence, nor hand over head
near unto his Person, without good warrant and incitement. For God, it may
seem semblably of like Condition, that we should not presume to come so near
him, And this disproportion should make us also stand at distan^e with the
Almighty.
nor thrust our selves forward to importune him, or indeed at all to
petitionate Him, who is the God of glory, in state of Majesty: who dwells
in Light, that is in Excellency vnapproachable: attended about his Throne in
his Palace Royal, by Angels and Archangels, Thrones, and Dominations, those
Mighty Executioners of his will, and most glorious Ministers in his
managements abroad, who being, as they are, so transcendent unto men, are
admitted no farther into his designs and purposes reserved unto Himself then
only (...), to have a certain glimmering of his glory, to behold him, as it
were, behind a trauerse, as light at a crany of a windore, or ^hink of a door.
But now, What is man? who is The Son of man? to come so near unto his Maker,
or presume to approach his Presence Royal. Take him in his Naturals, Dust and
ashes. Take him in his best state, no better then (...), in all his Royalty,
though on equal terms with Salomons, but a Clod of Clay gilded over, as well
said Epictetus in Arrhianus. In point of good manners and civility, such an
One may and must Fall off, stand at distance, and not dare come near to
petition God, in Person at the least, but only if need be, by Seconds and
Mediators. Suppose it he may, to be spoken unto him, which indeed is in an
other case, and unto persons of other Condition, Esaias 65.5. Stand aloof: by
thy self: Touch me not: come not near me, for I am Holier then Thou.

Nay more, so He must, stand off and at distance with the Almighty, And that
by Gods own direction insinuated here in the kind of Inuitation, Call.
by very direction of God Himself insinuated here. His very warrant of
address in this his kind Inuitation, tells him tacitly so much, and
assigns him his station for his state, in letting him know his Condition, by
the carriage and conduct of his Petition. Had he not been invited to do So,
first, what is He that durst presume, and Call upon this Me, The God of
Israel, the glorious God which rules in Sion? Being invited out of Grace and
Goodness, he is yet further limited and stinted to his Carriage, and quousque,
which puts Him in remembrance, who and what is He; where, and upon what
terms is his station. For to Call is not peculiar unto Every man: nor
indistinctly spoken To, or Of any man. We know it is the proper Act of those,
that are a long, far off, and at distance when they Call. We use not to Call
unto Him that is nigh, at hand, fast by us, in the same room. We only speak
to him, and most what also summissa voce, To come and help us, to lend us the
hand, to relieve our Necessities, and do for us in our wants that surcharge us
sore. Infer then we may from Gods intent in this direction, out of the
nature and manner of his Inuitation: that God and Man stand at distance, are
not in proximo or propinquo, but parted and disseuered asunder far.

Which may be aggrauated from the degree of disproportion here.
In regard of Disproportion of State, Nature and Condition: this has been
touched upon already: No such distance inter duos, betwixt any two other, as
God and his Creatures. The first and last of Things that are and have reference
each to other. For what Disproportion is elsewhere, is inter subalternos, only
betwixt them, that have some equality and combination, of Nature, Essence,
Condition of kind, which hold no Concurrence or Correspondence here. Upon this
Remoouall so far in Nature, insueth a second, in site and place; For locus
and locatum in Natura rei, hold terms of Proportion necessarily. Now as far
as Heaven is from the Earth so far apart is His Majesty from us. We dwell
beneath on Earth, in houses of Clay, and have our Habitation in the Dust: His
aboade is on high, far above our reach, we cannot ascend thither if we
would; though it were granted that we knew the way. Locally we cannot, by
approximation, as Bathsheba came to Solomon having a suite unto Him, or as
Hester unto Ahashuerosh. Which shall hereafter be qualified.
One day we shall have that Honor and advantage also: yet thank him for it,
or we never should: when this Corruptible has put on Incorruption: and this
Mortal has put on Immortality. But that One day, is not Any day: is not
every day, is not this day, that is Man's day, while yet we have need and cause
to Call upon Me, in time of trouble. Then, in that day, no Trouble is, shall,
or can be nigh, to make us Call for relief, and redress, when Peace and
security have met together: height of joy and gladness kiss each other,
embracing Perpetuity for Companion for ever, in full fruition of Eternal
bliss foreuermore. Interim, we are not so cast off, so shut out, or kept off
at distance, as having no Access to the Royal Majesty of Heaven, nor means
to come near his Person, or into his Presence at all.

Much we have and many, And is here in some mea^ure, specially by the ascent of
Prayer; implied in these words, Call upon Me.
very effectual and sufficient: all (...) in one word here, Call upon me. That
is in other terms, Pray unto me, Prayer is (...), An Ascent, as they define
it, and going up unto God, of those that are at distance, and removed in suo
vbi, of Natural posture Locally: of Hereditarie encumbrances affectedly, of
which also in loco, and anon. An ascent: but what manner? in what fashion? How?
yet we are as far to seek as before, How shall I come before the Lord, or
approach unto my God? This is chiefly the ascent of the mind.
They add, (...), unto the forme^ Description, an Ascent, not of Body, but of
the mind to God: The Soul is interessed in this Action, that noble and active
part of man. The Soul, a Subsistence of a large capacity, not any Thing on
Earth can fully give satisfaction to it: No not all things, but God in Heaven
and Earth; so is it a Substance of very strange agilitie. Ou^nis spiritus ales
est: It is a Spirit, as Angels, euiternall to the Image of God, that Eternal
Spirit: and Spirits all of them, are of a quick dispatch. An ancient Adage it
is, (...), so swift as thought does employ; the dexterity of this noble part
of man, and strange agilitie, with which, in a moment of Time, in imperceiued
time, it passes with speed from East to West, Walks the rounds of North and
South. Nor height nor depht, no lenght or extent, no force of opposition, or
resistance, can bound it in, or exclude it out. Anima est vbi amat, non vbi
animat, nor only where it likes there it lives, but where it works, there
it walks, giving Life and motion to the Body: is not yet bounded within the
Body. The Soul of man living upon Earth, ascends far above all Heavens
and heights: approaches with quick and easy speech and pace, unto that
Throne of Majesty, and yet of Grace in Heaven, and there tendreth Petitions by
Calling upon Me, our God that has promised to hear when we call, and to
deliver us in time of trouble. To him (...), by Deprecation of evil to come,
and feared: (...), in Desire of whatsoever we would have, making our wishes
and desires known unto Him affectionatly: (...), in Intercession for our
friends, that would be remembered by us in our Prayer. Or lastly, (...), giving
him thanks, that has wrought and sent Redemption unto his people, that has
not denied us the requests of our lips, but Heard and delivered us in our
trouble. It is not the bodies Act by local motion: it is peculiar to the
soul, by mental exaltation, to approach, and come near, to Call upon God, as
being only serviceable for that employment.

And yet it must be granted, it can not be denied, but that (...) is Incident
to the whole man. More then Incident: very convenient: yet farther, requisite:
and so, in some sort at least, of necessity urgents. Prayer is an Ascent of
the mind: But so that the ascent of the voice may seem also to be implied.
so is ^oo^ the voice, or else why here, Call upon me, says God, in time of
trouble, seeing Call is an act of the outward man, performed by those organs of
speech and motion?

The dutious respects we owe unto God: those Human^ performances we do for
God: our service of Piety performed unto Him: our Actions any way interessed
in him: all passages of Negotiation and Commerce interchanged with Him, are all
of Condignitie or Co^gruitie. Such as cannot but be done by us: or such, as
being done, it is the better for us. Such, as must needs be done in this sort:
such as being thus done, are the better done by us every way: or would not
otherwise be so well done as so. With this difference, that the heart is
required of absolute necessity.
The Heart is required, of Absolute necessity. God has challenged it for his
own part and portion: My Son give me thy Heart. No Pagan but thought it ever
due unto God. Therefore, Optimus animus pulcherrimus cultus, was assigned in
the state of mere Nature without Grace, as most well pleasing unto and
accepted of God. If that be wanting in our devotions, our best performings are
but the sacrifices of fools: we offer, but the calves of hypocritical lips.
The voice of conuenience.
The voice is not necessary absolutely. We find them sometime singled, and
that cum effectu: Moses at the red Sea, cried amayne unto God: yet Moses was
not heard to speak one word. Hannah prayed fervently, with a troubled spirit;
yet her tongue went not at all: her lips scarcely moved; yet both of them
Called, and Cried too: both of them were heard, and that to purpose. But D^uid
Called, and Cried, and Rored too: he lift up his voice unto an high streyne,
and was heard and delivered often times. Not then Call upon me, with thy
voice, as if the heart were not sufficient: but because the voice is very
convenient, As in the time of trouble: but specially in time of public Divine
Service. As it helps.
especially in the Time of trouble. Convenient then: and expedient elsewhere,
in public Service and communion of the Church, met together for that purpose.

1. To make up 2 part.
Man is considered two manner ways; his Occasions to call, are so many ways
diuersified: as he is Himself, consisting alone: as he is, a member of, and
makes up a part in a society. Time of trouble accrueth, and is incident unto
Him either way. When many call together, Call with the voice is of absolute
Necessity, in the usual and set Service of the Church. No man of sense or
reason will question this, that the prayers of the Church must be vocal: as
David sang lustily, and with a Courage, when he praised God in the great
congregation. Not of absolute necessity for him that is alone, whose private
wants and vrgences set him on work: but yet of Conueniencie for him also, if I
be not mistaken, many ways.

The voice, 2. To raise up the affections.
set to call upon a pitch and a loud streyne, serves as a bellows, naturally
to kindle and inflame the feruor and elevation of the heart to raise it up the
easier, and send up the affections thereof sooner unto Heaven. Mark this who
so pleases; the voice in such heavenly occupations as this, gives life and
motion unto desires: vigor and actiuenesse unto affections, Attention and
intention more bent and reserved, and enforced unto our words and purposed
supplications. Their wits go not a wool-gathering, nor yet their thoughts on
wandering, that be thus thoroughly bent and busied in and upon Call on me. The
voice, not alone, or by itself: for the Heart must help and carry it up. Nor
yet the Heart so actiuely set on seruent devotion, as when the voice does
enlarge it otherwise contracted, and most what shrunk up. Aaron and Moses were
employed unto Pharaoh: fratres animo, as well as vtero: to impart Gods will and
directions unto him. Heart and Voice, are our Interpreters and Intercessors
unto God, to implore his help, and impart our necessities unto him. The Voice
in Call, is as Aaron unto Moses, spokes-man to Pharaoh: interpreter to God. The
Heart to the Voice, as Moses unto Aaron, to direct, advise, and put the words
to be spoken into the mouth. Both united in Combination, as Elias and his fiery
Chariot, in which he ascended into Heaven. Nixus Cordis, that we call. Partus
Oris, what we call. He that singleth either upon singularity, whether
impairing in point of congruitie: or else parting points of condignitie,
doubleth with God in Devotion and Piety, and depriueth himself of success
and succor in Necessity. For he calls not as he should, and therefore
distasteth in his call: and can he look for acceptance, with distaste? That
which God has joined, let not man presume to put asunder. God made both, and
appointed both, Heart and Voice, unto one purpose. And (call) being here read
indeterminatly, makes both (that of the heart, and the other of the voice)
liable to performance.
Call is not here, that we can read or find, confined and limited unto
either, Heart or Voice: we have it indefinitely: we read it indeterminatly,
call upon me, without adiection at all. So, or thus, a sign that both are
liable to performance upon occasion: and He that is directed and invited to
Call, left unto his Liberty, or Necessity, as his public exigences, or
private necessities shall employ him. It is an infallible sign, I suppose,
when no one nor other, heart or voice is excluded, that Call upon me is a
joint Act of either, but left upon indifferency, to Place and Person, Need and
occasion, as Discretion and employment shall think behoouefull: yet Call,
verbum oris, a word that imports an external Act, the performance of the
tongue, not of the heart is used, I suppose, to insinuate, that for this time
of Life, the service of God in our best endeauours, must be conformed unto
what we can do, as mortal men, not what we should do, as perfect men, or
shall perform hereafter, at Home in Heaven; as Angels rather then mortal Men.

The voice is not necessary in some misconstructions; because, forsooth, Yet
some would be too spiritual, in excluding the voice.
Gods service is spiritual: and we must merely become intellectual. So
sighs, and groans, as many as you will; and eyes gloyted upward, God knows
why, or whether; but Call with the voice, is too Carnal, an Angelical
conformity would better fit us. Nay, will, perhaps, hereafter; will not now,
or yet: we must do as we may, and Call as we can; which wanting not devotion
appertaining, will not want effect or acceptance that is expected. There never
was but one amongst the sons of men, whose Actions are and ever were absolute
rules of imitation; He that says in the Gospel, Learn of me. It was a Call
to purpose, a loud one indeed, in which he commonly did commence his suits
unto his Father. We are sure it was then, when as the Apostle tells us,
(...) he was heard to purpose by the God of his Life, and delivered from the
danger of that he feared. He cried and called as loud as might be, with a
great voice, we read it in the story of his passion, (...) strong Cries, in
Saint Paul's relation of all that ever were, He least needed so to lift up his
voice: a more summisse tone would have served his turn: yet this was his
carriage in commencing his petitions: None ever Called so loud as He. I read
not any mental Prayers of his related, though he, if ever any, prayed
continually. He did this for Precedent unto us, not so much for Practice in
Himself* who was not tied to so, or so; but freely might follow his own
ways, and counsels at pleasure.

But peradventure it may seem (...) disparagement, They might better urge a
disadvantage in the use of it, being easily tired, if it be continued.
at least some disadvantage to Call with the voice, though David used it often:
because, as it is truly observed in Natural courses and Occurrences, Nihil
violentum est diuturnum* Nothing violent can long be permanent: Those that in
Calling upon Me, God at some distance in time of trouble, do raise their Call
unto so high a pitch, in strong cries unto God, and supplications, cannot long
continue in the self same tone, nor yet go through in their Devotions,
unless that sometimes they break off, and fetch breath; and rally themselves
now and then upon a Pawse, to be heard the sooner, to be heard the better, to
enforce the more effectually their Calling upon God; reenforced a new by a
Fresh supply, as it were, of forces; that, as Tertullian speaks, Do lay
siege unto Heaven. And what of that, if they so make some stops and breaks in
their Meditations? Much more, I suppose, But that will rather prove an
advantage, if they often break it off by shorter ejaculations.
it will be for their advantage every way. A line Drawn out in length, both in
Art and Nature, is the weakest of all Dimensions or Figures whatsoever. The
longer Drawn out, so much more the weaker, where each part sustaineth the
peise alone, has no help nor supportation from another part. A line redoubled
is the stronger; the more redoubled and ioynted, so much more the stronger. We
see it veryfied in an Arch, and rounded building, where each stone buckleth
into another. As in Art and in Nature, so likewise in Grace. Our hearts are
like unto Moses hands; heavy of themselves: their affections extended, as a
line Drawn out; weak and feeble in extension; the longer extent, the more
feeble, especially upward, against Course and kind. For Ascent is not Natural
unto heavy Substances: Violent motion must so enforce them, which cannot long
hold out in statu quo. Affections in this Case are all in all, and they thus
considered are as a Bow, which standing long bent proves but a slug, strikes
the mark very seldom: rather indeed sends not the Arrow home. So far from
drawing blood, or making a deep wound, that hardly stringit, it does raze the
skin. Interchanged res^ with motion, is so Natural and Necessary, that
nothing can subsist without it long. Perpetual Action and Motion does empaire
the state of that, which is continually moved, and in moving wears, though
sens^ms^nt se^s^, not so soon perceived by the sense.

For so ou^ prayers are truly made Cal^, as they are in my text.
In this regard I cannot but much commend those Prayers which are indeed, and
truly Calls. Vbi multi dantur ad Deum reditus. Many breaks, and returns unto
God are usual; letting down and stretching up the strings of our affections,
from and unto their fit and just proportion and measure. And that was (such
Cassian) the meaning of the Monkish devotion in Egypt. Ins^i^ut. L^b. 2. c. 10.
Antiquity named these, Iaculatorias Orationes, Prayers shot forth with some
bent of Affection; the use and profit of them is thus expressed by Cassian,
speaking of the Monks in Egypt in his time, who much and often used them in
their rigid and most exact Devotions. Vt frequentius Dominum deprecantes
jugiter eidem coharere possimus: and vt insidiantis Diab^lijacula, quae
in^ligere nobis tum praecipue insistit, cum oramus, succincta vitemus
breuitate. No small profit, to prevail against the Devils assaults, to put by
his temptations, and suggestions that incumber our affections in their
performings. No better means to put them by, then by such jaculatory Prayers
as these, which prevent him in his attempts, and are sooner dispatched then he
would think them begun. Say Cauilling Catharists what they can to the
Contrary, it is a Manifest, that the Prayers of the Church, in our Common
Liturgies, authorized and in use, are very well thewed and composed for the
nonce, to fit the dispositions and affections of men. Short and effectual,
(...), none so potent or likely to prevail with God. Collect^, they are
called; And it is the meaning both of the name, and use of our Church-Collects.
Epist^l^ 1^1.
and such they are; Collected and shut up into a narrow room and scantling:
and so Constipatae, are more effectual and forceable, As vis vnita fortior,
such are they combined. Saint Augustine seconding that relation of Cassian,
gives the same reason of that Devout Practice. Ne illa vigilanter erecta qua
oranti plarimum necessaria est, per productiores mor^s euanescat atque
hebetetur intentio. For long continual beating in, and plodding on the same,
Dulleth the edge and Liveliness of the Agent. Therefore Mother Rebekah, out of
her Discretion and experience, knew how to Dress a Dish for Father Isaac, that
so a blessing may Descend upon the head of Jacob her son.

There are that glory much in very long Prayers; That loose themselves often,
and their Desires in their Devotions; and may very well go blow the seek for
them; that Can not tell why they came to talk with God. Say they know not in
Discourse with God; and having long babbled, and battalogised with God,
immannerly enough, and to no purpose at all, after all this much ado, and his
so long Patience to hear them talk idly, may well be questioned with, what
would the good man say? Absit ab Oratione multa locutio, sed no^ absit multa
precatio. Mistake not my meaning, as if I meant to condemn or prejudice long
and fervent Devotion. Yet do I not c^nd^mne (...) praying, but much (...) nor
many prayers but many words.
In Prayer, Pray much and fervently, a Gods name; but take heed of talking and
ta^ling much, Sic si feruens perseueret intentio. The longer men continue in
familiar Discourse with God, the more Honor, so redoundeth Doubtless to the
Discourser. The more and more many ways they make their Cases known; the more
instant and urgent men are with God, the better at all times welcome to Him,
and more likely to prevail. As Intention is no way to be blunted, if so be
the edge be both sharp and Durable; and will not be broken nor taken off: So
if it be keen, and yet soon blunted, give new quickness, by whetting it
once, and often. Many Words, but no many Prayers, are frequent and usual in
our Ordinary Talkers of Devotion. To speak and talk much, is with words
superfluous and more then needs, to prise the obtaining of that which is not
very behoouefull, whereas were men well and rightly Disposed, some sighs and
salt tears, might dispatch all. Plus gemitibus, indeed, quam sermonibus
agitur: plus fletu quam affatu. Multum precamur, in how few words soever, cum
ad Eum quem precamur pia cordis excitatione pulsamus. To excite and stir up,
to hold on, and hold out the well settled and resolved Devotion of the Heart,
nothing more potent nor prevailing, then voce clamare, to Lift up the voice,
and Call upon God: Call and spare not, For ( Call) (...) an extent, being a
word of degrees. Chrysostom.
as long as may be; as loud as can be. Call has an extent; it is a word of
Degrees: (...) written not with many Letters, yet of great employment in
Preuayling Devotions every way.

With this Condition, if yet farther we Call and Cease not: but Call and Call;
Call and Cry aloud so long, Donec misereatur nostri: at last let him not go
without a blessing. Call is but once, I grant it, in the Text. But yet Call and
no more is not sufficient. Nor is it intended we should Call but once. But
Call and Call, again and again, until he attend unto our Prayer. I enforce
not the Direction, beyond purpose, I suppose, and intent. The words themselves
give it. If not Call; which is single: yet Call upon; which employeth (...),
Once and again: Call, and Call: often, instantly, now, Neither is it Call in a
single word, but Call upon, which implies it to be instant.
then anon: that is, Call upon God; give him no rest; as Himself says unto
Moses in an importune suit, Let him not alone: nor Let him go. God loves and
approoueth importune Suitors: Such as will not soon, nor be easily put off;
such as will take no Denial. With men in Civility it is held good manners, Si
ter pulsanti nemo respondet, abit^. Knock thrice, if none answer, then be
gone. In Course of Life and Friendship it is good Favor, to Do a good turn
once and have Done for ever. And therefore such wise men as well understand the
world, are careful to husband up, and not to spend favor. But with God it is
otherwise: No good inducing argument with him, I come not often: I am not like
to trouble thee again in haste. Nay, nothing more ha^sh or Distasting unto
Him, then, I never did till now trouble thee with suit, nor am I likely to do
it again in haste. But Call upon me, toties quoties, when, and as often as
thou will: And at all times instant.
The more often the better welcome. Be instant, urgent, give not over. Pray
continually, at any time. Offer up Pure hands, and an honest Heart in any
place: Upon any Occasion: For any thing. The Day of trouble, in the Text,
Specially in the day of trouble.
is not Exclusive, So, as if not at all but then. Not Definitive, So, as if
only then. It is indeed the fittest, but not the only time. And not the
fittest neither for it Self; or in regard of any Disposition in God: but only
in regard of Men's Dispositions, In regard of our better dispositions then.
then rather fit, then at other times. Otherwise any time is alike unto God;
for Men's Private Prayers and Devotions. In the Day of trouble, Men are of all
other times most Sensible, most apprehensiue of want of Comfort, of Relief and
Deliverance; and so most willing and well disposed to Call upon me; whom
otherwise, at other times, they are well enough contented to let alone, as if
God were Disquieted, with Petitioners and Suits. It is a Course observed in
Israel of old, In their affliction they did seek the Lord: whom still in
Prosperity they forsook when they were full. Seldom Do we say, God help
me; or, What shall I do; but when we are pinched with some Extremity. God
knows our humor and Disposition, that the best and fittest time to deal with
us, is, The day of trouble.

Therefore he leaves Goades in the Israelites sides: therefore (...): a stub
in the Flesh, with Saint Paul: therefore coarctat, he narroweth and
streighteth us at home. (...), says Saint Basil, not delighting to trample on
us. It is Childrens play, to build houses of Reeds and Bulrushes, and straight
to Demolish them again. God will no such pastime as this. But, as I have
seen, a Nurse Suffer her Foster child to take a knock, with a Fall, that he
may become more wary, and not wander at random as otherwise he would, but be
the more fond of her, for want of whose ready assistance he fell: So I know,
that God, to have our Company the oftener; to enjoy it the longer; to secure us
unto himself the better; suffers the Day of trouble to overtake us, for our
good: that so drawing near him, we may be safe without Scruple of
Disproportion otherwise: which may happily put us off far enough from Him.
Besides thee, which we have said of disproportion: there is a second
impeachment in regard of disaffection.


In respect of Disaffection yet farther removed from Him. For who can look
for Help at his Enemies hands? For good Respect there, and for gracious
acceptance, where he has been ever at odds, and ad oppositum? For
advancement or Reward from his Prince; who in Justice might take his head for a
Traitor? It is most Certain, God and Man, in effect Prince and People,
Subjects and Sovereign have Anciently been at odds upon many great
Differences Diversely; upon high terms of Disunion sundry ways. And therefore
no Cause for Him, to look to be heard at his Call in time of trouble. Adam,
at first, instantly upon the breach betwixt God and Himself, did Discover this
affection upon guilt of Conscience, in Himself, Which may well fright us from
coming to call upon God: it frighted Adam from coming to Gods call.
and His; Genesis 3.10. I heard thy voice in the Garden, Calling Adam, where art
thou, and was afraid. Afraid to Come at Gods call: much more afraid to come and
to Call on God; in time of trouble and affliction.

True indeed, and good Reason for it. Therefore Every one that Calls is not
heard. Nor is Call on me, directed indifferently: but upon supposall of status
alteratus, But, indeed we have had a better call since Adams: and so we may
also the better call to him, and hop^ to be heard.
Men becoming new men; by Submissiue Reconciliation. The Person is first
accepted, then the Petition granted: as the gift elsewhere is grateful for the
Giuers sake: God had respect to Abel and to his gift. God heard Abraham, for
he was his friend: delivered Jacob, who was his Servant. Here, not singuli
generum, are directed to Call; every man, every where, at any time; nor genera
singulorum, at all adventures: but only such as be remembered, Verse. 15. That
hear the Lord first, Israel Verse. 7. The people whom he chose. For there are
some concerning whom he has resolved and set down, They shall call upon me,
the very carriage of these, and terms here used; But with a double
distinction.
but I will not hear: they shall seek me early, but shall not find me,
Prou. 1.28. So then Distingue perso^^^, put difference to the Persons, and
Scripture seeming contrary, will be well accorded. This Intercourse is not
left at large: the Negotiation is not betwixt Any and any, this man or Call,
and I will Hear, passes betwixt two, Of the persons employed in the words,
Thee and Me.
Me and Thee, God and Gods chosen. The Redeemer of Israel, and the People whom
he has bought: his Beloved Ones, because his Faithful Servants. Faithful,
trusting in him, assured of Him: and Faithful also to Him, that deceive Him
not Fides is dictorum factorumque, they say, and truly, constantia atque
veritas, and these keep touch with God, and stipulation per painte, and
punctually, I may say Covenant. For in all and every Gods promises of Grace,
there is an Indenture drawn betwixt God and man, for performing of Covenants
on either part. The Conditions are reduced to these parts, For there are
Conditions drawn between them both.
Walk thou before me and be upright: So, I will be thy God, and thou shall be
my people. These ever expressed or supposed, must be supposed Performed before
we come to Call upon Him, that is able to Deliver us in time of trouble. We
have the same instanced in this present passage. For the Promise and Direction,
is upon Condition: the Illatiue, And, in this present pas^sage; the promise
runs upon a condition.
And call, is in effect thus, And so: or, then call, and not before. So there
lies a^ Encumbrance upon this Promise of Assistance and Inuitation. I will
hear, there is a Condition to keep touch with God, which must be formerly and
first performed: Th^^ Verse being ^^ferred upon the former Verse.
Pay thy vows, in the Verse preceding this, then come and Call in the day of
trouble. Pay first the old Debt, then go on with a new score. No reason to
Hear him when he Calls upon God, that is, challenges Performance of Gods
Promise for assistance, that has not Himself kept touch with God first. Not
without good reason.
For can Promise-breakers expect Performance? or He challenge an other that is
false himself? Joshua had a Promise at his first entrance into State, As I was
with Moses, so will I be with Thee. A Charter sealed from the Almighty, No man
shall stand before thee all the days of thy life. And yet not many months
after the ensealing, Israel fell before the men of Ai. Sensit hic peritus Dux,
that all was not as it should be, expostulating with God, he found the Cause
was breach of Promise on Isreal's part, The People had not paid their vows to
the most High. Upon Inquisition had it appeared by Confession, and Euidentia
facti, that A^han had committed Sacrilege, in Interuerting the Consecrated
thing, and Profaning that which was Religious. Therefore Israel fell before
their Enemies, as being guilty of a roaring Sin, Theft and Roberie against
God.

Rar^ antecedentem scelestam, deseruit pede poena claudo. Mark who list, and
then make this observation, If Sin march before, then will assured Vengeance
be in the Rere. If Judgment ensue, it is most certain, Iniquity has been
found in Jacob. Had Zimri peace that slew his Master? Achan escaped not with
his Sacrilege. The Sin of Achan is a Ranger in the World. Many Hunters have
Taken and divide the spoils of the Sanctuary, never determined for such
Profane hands, nor appointed for such ungodly uses, as they are converted and
serve unto: The true Cause alone, if well advised on, why so many mighty
Nimrods in the World miscarie, they and their Posterity, at least in the third
Generation, mark it who list, being swept away and gone-out of Gods houses by
them devoured: out of his Inheritance, which they and theirs had dismantled and
laid wast. Go therefore, Solue vota, pay what thou owe, discharge thy
Promise, make peace with a good Conscience, be at one with God, this
Inuitation is warrant enough, to Call, and be heard in time of trouble. Call
then and Challenge Him if he do not Hear. It is made a Book Case, and
fitteth well the purpose, Malach. 3.10. Prove me now if I open not the
windores of Heaven, and power you out a blessing without measure. As great an
Obligation as can be entered into, I will power you out a blessing without
measure. See the Condition, on their parts to be performed: without which no
such blessing at Gods hand. Bring all my Tithes into my Storehouse, that there
may be meat in my house, says God there unto them. Israel, having robbed
him, in his own reserved portion, were justly plagued for this their
Sacrilege, and not heard, nor delivered, upon their Call, in time of trouble;
upon amendment, certainly assured, that A blessing without measure, should be
given them: that God would set open the windores of Heaven unto them.

And this is ever God his manner of dealing with us. Upon condu^^^, but very
easy.
God deals as it were upon trucke and exchange. He sells indeed his Favors,
as in bargain and sale; though he sell them at an easy rate. Not for Money,
nor yet money-worth, that is disclaymed by Proclamation, Esaias 55.1. Come buy
without Money, or money-worth. Not at such rate that men be thereby undone: as
if a man should s^ll his Patrimony, to buy a Bishopric, or Office, and dye
soon after: or some other Preferment at Steeple-faire. Or take up Sin from
the Devil upon Bond, the Interest whereof will at length eat them out; God
means no such Vow or Promise as this. No such Peace Offering that may undo
the Son of thy Body, for the Sin of thy Soul. It is easy enough Payment,
by thy Self conditioned, and therefore justly by Him exacted, Walk before me,
and be upright. Then Call and Spare not: Call and Doubt not, but veniens
veniet: he that shall come will come and not tarry long, if in Calling thou
Double not: that is, Single Him that which alone will not Content Him, Call
with the mouth, not with the heart. Give him voice enough: but sparingly or
nothing of the Inward man. Inuocare, is, intus vocare. The Mouth is but Midwife
to the Heart; our Inward parts then should be employed, that so we may be
(...), attend that only which we do: not, as the Proverb was sometime, Castra
in Hispanijs aedificantes. Divine actions, require the whole man. God will not
be served by halfes; nor will he part stakes with any other in that which is
his peculium and peculiar.

Here then as Personas, so distingue tempora. As Every man is not alike with
God, Of the times.
nor in the in ^jsdem, distingue tempora. The same men are not ever considered
in the same state, nor yet accompanied with the same attendants, and therefore
have not ever the same success. For we must not ever expect the like success,
though we be interessed in the promise.
There are different affections, and varying Dispositions in the the same men,
to Call, at sundry times. Nor do they come alike prepared ever. So now, as
anon: or as they did at other times. Nor yet so qualified as they should be.
The best are not always and evermore heard, and delivered when they call. No
not, when they Call out and Cry, with the whole heart: nor though they Cry
aloud, and lift up their voice, and Roar for disquietnesse of their souls, as
David has observed in himself. And it is most certain, it cannot be denied,
Practice and Experience in common course of Life, does auerre and make it good,
that even in the best; those that Pay their vows, and keep touch with God:
that are of Israel according to Adoption and Grace; the Secret, the Hidden, the
Reserved ones of God: that Call and Cry aloud; that double not with God: that
Pray with the Heart and Understanding also: Are not ever heard, when they Call.
I add, because we must be instant in Calling, and, in Calling upon, continue
calling; that is, be Fervent and instant in Prayer, those that Call and Cease
not, Expect and doubt not, yet are not ever answered in their earnest desires,
nor have a fiat vt petitur, assigned to them: They Call, and Call, and yet are
not heard. Paul avouches his own Case and Example to this purpose. Thrice he
besought the Lord, and was not heard, the Angel of Satan continued buffeting
of him, the Stub in the flesh was not removed from Him. Of Esaus Calling and
Crying, calling often and with tears, the Case is plain and avouched by Saint
Paul unto the Hebrews, and many more instances might be given. But for Esau
and his Compeeres the Case is plain, the answer expedite, He was not of the
Tribe of Populus meus. A Stranger from God, and the Word of his Grace. He had
then no part nor portion in that Promise, I will hear: He was not intended in
that Inuitation, Call upon me. Paul was a man of an other making indeed, cast
in the mould that God would have him. And yet 2. Cor. 12.9. for all that, he
Called thrice and was not heard: where then is the Truth of his Promise in
Performance, Call upon me and I will hear, seeing Paul the party interessed,
was, if ever any, of the stock and kindred of Populus meus, interessed in the
Promise for Performance, I will hear and deliver: and also called, if ever any
did, with due observation of Conditions?

Now that God may be cleared, when he is questioned for performance of his
Promise: Since God may hear us two ways.
and our hopes secured, when they rest affianced on his Word, I will hear and
deliver: thus it is; A man is heard at Gods hand, two manner ways. First, ad
voluntatem, In his very desire according to his will: which is not ever ad
salutem, 1. Ad voluntatem.
for and to his good. Or, he is heard ad salutem, 2. Ad salutem.
for his good and his avail, as he should and would intend, if he understood
himself aright: though not ad voluntatem which was irregular, enormious and
damageable. Saint Paul was heard, as he desired. Not indeed according to the
error of his opinion, And our opinion may often misdeeme that to be good,
which is not.
by which he misdeemed it good for him, to be free from that buffeting of the
Devil: but heard as he should be, and as he would desire, according unto
his better judgment, in that which was more available and for his greater
good. I put the Case: a man of Service in Church or Commonwealth is a Suitor
to his Prince of whom he well deserves, having spent in his Service much time
and means, for some Pension of one hundred Crowns per annum: and upon some
Reason of Profit, or ground of State, is denied his Suite in that Particular:
but so, that in lieu thereof he has an Office of Honor, of a thousand pound a
year passed over to him instantly. Or say that a Petitioner for a poor
Parsonage, missing that, as formerly disposed of, were rewarded with a Deanerie
of good Corpse and value: no man will or can say otherwise, but, that both they
sped well, and were heard to purpose, according to desire, though denied in
their prime intended Suite, according to the letter. For by their Petition,
intention prima, their purpose and project was this, to do themselves good,
by procuring means and maintenance: to which end, upon a second intention,
they pitched and resolved on this or that particular; which in their Opinion,
liable to misconceit and error, was a Suite of Consequence to do them good;
though in Issue and Conclusion they missed of it: and if they had obtained it,
as they desired, their Case and state had been much worse then it fell out to
be otherwise. Paul was not heard ad voluntatem, as he would and wished:
because he wished what was not then so expedient for Him. But yet ad salutem,
he was heard abundantly, My Grace, said God unto him, is sufficient for thee;
this Grace was imparted to him plentifully. The Devil himself on the other
side, was heard ad voluntatem, when he sued to become Jobs Tormentor. To go
into and destroy the heard of Hogs. When they are permitted to possess,
afflict, seduce men unto Sin, they have then their desire at their own wills.
But better it were for them not to be heard so at all. It makes for their
greater condemnation, to aggrauate the weight of their eternal punishment, and
fill up the measure of their Impiety. They are not, nor shall they ever be
heard ad salutem. (...).
For God has sworn unto them in his wrath, they shall never more return unto
his rest. Their Judgment is sealed, whatsoever some Merciful ones do dream
and doat, their Damnation sure: The sentence passed against them is
Irreuersable, not to be trauersed by Writ of Error: So that all things work
together unto their Confusion: even the grant of their desires, by God.

For Gods Children and Beloved, At the least it is not so good as we apprehend
it.
it is a ruled Case in Nature, and holds true in Grace, No man ever did, no
man ever can or will, desire his own proper hurt and damage intentionally.
That which He knows and is assured to be evil, that no man ever did or can
desire as evil.

For, malum sub ratione mali, nor is, nor can be die peculiar Object
adaequatum of our Wills and Desires, but malum only, sub ratione boni. The Evil
which we would not, that indeed we do, that we desire and procure also to
our selves: we Call, and Cry, and sue, and seek, an^ Labor often earnestly
with God, to procure it to our selves: but out of Opinion and Misconceit, that
it will be for our good and great advantage: Bonum vtile or delectabile; In
point of pleasure or of Profit. Now the Case stands thus betwixt God and his
Children, He loves them dearly with tender Compassion, and with Mercy
everlasting he does embrace them; and therefore of Himself, and from
Himself, he wishes, wills, works, and procures, that which is Good, and
ever Good, and only Good for them. Man is much and often his own Foe, in
Willing and Procuring his own hurt and loss, which he does not directly as
intending so, but out of Ignorance and unwittingly, as taking things to be
what they are not: mistaking much the Forms and Fashions, Events, and
Consequents, the Causes and Occasions of things Contingent, yet in their
Causes, not in Act, and so, Unseen, Unknown, and Undiscerned what they will
be. The Will is Chief Monarch of the Soul, The Will being not rightly
informed by the understanding.
ordering and disposing authentickly. The Understanding is Chief Counselor
of State, (...), The Kings Eye. Much is done amiss, because commanded ill; yet
the King is blameless, being ill advised: Inform him aright, all shall be
well: for he disposes, as He is informed, by him that most what mistaketh
the mark, calling Bad good, and good bad: suggesting, as convenient, which is
no way competent. Now God far otherwise does dispose: Actually, intuitiuely,
simul, semel, he beholds and discerns all things as they are. For past or
to come there is nothing with Him, who sees from everlasting to everlasting:
knowing what will be before it is. To purpose, when we Call, he knows and
is assured, that were our desires granted us, as we wish, it would sort unto
our hurt and utter undoing. And thereupon his Wisdom out of his Love denies
us the request of our lips, the earnest and affected desires of our hearts:
though with strong Cries and Supplications, with fervent affection, yea with
tears: as knowing it better to be denied, then by having them granted to be
undone. Not any man, I suppose, that has had to do with God, but either has
or might have made this real observation unto Himself in his own experience.
I appeal in this particular to their own Priuitie, And therefore God may be
aid (...) to hear us, when he seem^s to deny us.
who or can or will remember it, whether God in not granting them many their
desires, has not in that very particular done them good: and made manifest his
Care and Love enlarged unto them? For they find, or may so find it upon
after-experience, that had they obtained it, they had been undone: being
denied it, they were made men. So that we may be Heard very well unto a
purpose, when we are not heard, nor delivered as we would be. And God is
just of his Promise, true of his word, when he does not hear us at Call, in
time of trouble: but puts us off, puts us by, or plainly denies us our
request.

This gives a further rule to our Call. When we call, not to prescribe the time
or means, or subject of our desires
Therefore Call but prescribe not, So or So: Now or then, as the men of Bethulia
did, by such a day if he save us not, we will render up the City unto the
Enemy. Leave God unto his Liberty, for When, How, and What to do. The Time,
the Means, the Subject of our desires, which shall rest in his best
disposition for our advantage, Which is often crossed for many Reasons.
many ways: whether prorogued, precipitated, or denied. In Particular, there
are Reasons to move and persuade us yet farther in the point.

for Humiliation of our Hearts; For our Humiliation.
apt enough to swell up big with self-conceit of our own worth, upon
opinion of some, the least Grace and Favor with God: expressed in Saint Paul's
case 2. Cor. 12.7. Least he might be puffed up, he was beaten by that Angel of
Satan.

Secondly, For trial of their Faith, and fidelity For trial of our Faith.
that it may appear the Devil was a Liar, when he affirmed, Job served not
God for naught, that he did it (...), he had need of him; and to leave him,
he could not tell where to be better. It was a sign of Fidelity indeed,
Though thou kill me, yet will I love thee.

Thirdly, For Augmentation of their Love, For Augmentation of our love.
I will love thee dearly, said he in the Psalm, because he had been his,
Refuge in time of his trouble.

Fourthly, For Declaration of his worth: For declaration of our worth.
so is manifested by tribulation; and the more tribulation, the greater
manifest thereof. Ille latebat and fallebat. Job was not discovered, till he
was put unto it. He was reputed as other men, till he was tried and found
Faithful.

Fifthly, For Exaltation of their reward; (...): For exaltation of our reward.
The more we endure for Gods sake in Earth, the greater shall be our reward in
Heaven. Call then and murmur not, Call, despair not, Call and expostulate not
with God, for being not heard instantly, or not at all, when thou Call for
Deliverance, according unto Expectation; A greater suit is granted, when a
smaller is denied, which also would turn unto apparent loss; and so what
breach of Promise, I will hear and deliver, in these Cases?

So that it is no prejudice, to be de^erred, or denied.
These must be remembered, least that, as it happens very often, We being not
heard, nor yet Delivered upon request and Call, according to Expectation: but
differred a while, adiourned, put off unto a farther day, be soon
discouraged, disheartened, and finally put by that assured assistance, which we
looked for, and otherwise might have from our God. Men soon grow weary of
well-doing: more soon in actions of Piety; most, when they fail though never
so little of Expectation: which as it is not regular, nor yet well directed; so
it holds not stanch any long time; a little disaster will quite dismay it; a
small Cross or rub in the way quash it. In truth, For, God ever has his
reasons of love why he does it.
Deus vt iterum venias pau^a dat: vt frequenter adeas difficulter dat. God does
not lavish out his Graces, though abundantly he could do it all at once, but
gives indeed sparingly, and with a straightened hand. It is not for niggardise
that he does so: It is to have thee come the oftener. He hears, gives,
delivers not upon the first motion, at present suit; it is not for any
sinister intent; it is to have thee Come and Call the oftener. The oftener, the
better welcome. Unto Himself without Mediation: thou by thy self without
Deputation. (...) it is a Personal Intercourse, Call, I will hear, betwixt
Me, and Thee. So we cannot pretend disproportion. It is not to be thought
there is disaffection.

Had we not been invited to Call first: Therefore, whether we consider the
manner of his hearing, or of his inuiting us to call, we may put off all
thought of disaffection.
upon Conscience of Desert, we peradventure might have Cast in some scruple of
Disaffection. It is more then Manifest, he has put up all, passed by all,
pardoned all, that so kindly inuiteth to Call upon me. We find not any Suit
in the Premises commenced; no Petition exhibited for access or Favor. The
first thing we hear of independantly, is Call upon me. Thus Grace preuenteth
with the blessing of Goodness, those that in Necessity had need of God. Had
we not been prevented by Inuitation, (...) in his own Person; we might have
put in excuse for our selves thus, By what warrant is this Inuitation? We must
not presume; we dare not come at him upon so great terms of disproportion.
But being invited so, By Himself, though there be no proportion betwixt Him
and us; the Majesty of Heaven, and Mortal men on Earth: But, we must not put
off our duty of calling,
it is no manners to refuse the offer and gift of a Superior. No pretense of
Disproportion can be available, if that God do condescend to such terms of
Proportion. If God do condescend to talk with Abraham, Abraham may be bold,
though Dust and ashes, to discourse with God, and importune him for the
Sodomites, as we know he did. The more immediate Mandate, The rather; being
his own immediate mandate, that we should call.
the greater respect due unto it from the Subject. The more immediate Promise,
ever the surer hope from him that has ever bin his words master. The word of a
Prince, is a Royal engagement, and graund assurance. Noblemen were wont not to
break their words having spoken upon their Honors. Which, as it challenges a
greater respect
And in Verbo Sacerdotis has been held a surer tie, then a Corporal oath is
for a Priest: And shall we admit any quarrel against God, as if he meant not
truly, that we should have access unto him, and assistance from Him? A
Princes Inuitation by Himself in Person, gives greater assurance then by
message. This Call upon me, is as immediate as may be: Nothing possibly can
be more. God with his own mouth, in his own person speaks and inuiteth,
not by delegation, by another man's. And we are invited to Come as he calls,
not by delegation, but our selves: immediate Inuitation, for immediate access.
No one steppeth in betwixt Me and Thee in this negotiation. No Interloper in
this Intercourse and Commerce. No Intercessor, to be heard and delivered in
time of trouble. Either of Himself, without warrant, coming in motu proprio,
unrequested: nor: by appointment in Subordination from God, by entreaty or
atonement from our Selves, or others.

Thus effectually to deliver, So, it cannot but produce a surer hope, and
greater confidence.
and that at a pinch, and but upon Call, in Exigence of trouble, should advance
our endeavors, even extremum potentiae, by all means possible to be
thankful. Si totum me debeo pro me facto, quantum rependam pro me redempto? A
maine part of thankful Duty unto God, and recognition of his Love, is to
believe his Promise, and build upon his word; to Follow his Directions, Come at
his Inuitation; not to stand, as in doubtful suspense what to do, or what
Course to run in time of Trouble: Seeing he that is Able, does declare
himself willing to Hear and Deliver, at our Call, by Immediate warrant from
himself, without help or mediation, or Suit of others.

And yet the Church of Rome, The practice of the Church of Rome* far
otherwise.
having lost her first Love, and long since made forfeiture of her Honor, has
prostituted her Devotions, even (...): As a common strumpet, gives
entertainment to any Commoner promiscuously; So has she also divided her
Call, in her Devotions, to every one that passes by: Each Saint has a part,
as it happens, as men are disposed, or occasions are presented. (...); as the
Fox in the Fable, She has many addresses unto many Mediators, For Access
and Audience: For Dispatch and Riddance at Gods hands, to be heard and
delivered in time of Trouble, few or none immediate To, or By himself.

Many Mediators of Intercession only: For I say not, For though she be wise
enough in confessing God the donor, and principal author.
I cannot, I must not say that the Church of Rome denies Call upon me, to
hold in good Obedience, or in Divinity. For Certainly She addresseth Te ad
me, Man unto God, unto none but unto God, to be heard and delivered by him
alone, out of tribulation in the Day of trouble: as Author and Original of all
help and Grace, deduced and derived merely, wholly, and totally from Him.
Freely professing, willingly acknowledging, as truly believing as any do or
can do whatsoever, that, Every good gift and perfect giving is, (...), the
work of God, and (...) sent of God. It is true, and must not be denied, The
Roman Church in her Doctrine (for, and concerning Practice; it is otherwise)
does not impair, or impeach the Sure, firm, and fastest Meditation, the
Peculiar work of Christ Jesus, or appoint Propitiators in his place, who
alone, as all sufficient in himself paid the price of our Redemption, and
made up without assistants or Concurrents, the alone, absolute atonement, by
his Real and perfect Satisfaction, betwixt God and Man. Willingly they
acknowledge and profess together with us, that, None but Christ: none but
Christ. In Earth they have none beside Him, and in Heaven not any to be
compared to him: who only through the Dignity of his Person: and
alsufficiencie of his Desert, meritoriously obtains what we can desire, or
what we Call for at Gods hands. It is false which is imputed, if yet it be
imputed, and laid unto, their Charge, That they have many Gods, or many Lords.
That they Call upon Saints, as upon God to help them: That they mention not
Christ, but Saints in their Devotions. They do not deny Call upon me. In
their Doctrine and Opinion, Invocation is peculiar unto God alone, as a part of
that Eternal Moral duty, which man ever does owe unto God, his Maker and
Protector in all his ways, Invocation I mean, in a proper Sense: it is
Aduocation and Intercession only which they give unto Saints; which Act is
sometime called Invocation in a large extent, as it passes and is directed
from man to them. Their help, with David, only stands in the Name of the
Lord, who has made both Heaven and Earth. For Gratiam and gloriam, say they,
dabit Dominus, It is the Lord alone that Gives, because it is in his power to
give, both Grace and Glory. Therefore the great Dictator of that side lays
down this Proposition, as resolved upon on all hands by his Party, It is not
lawful to desire or request of the Saints, that as Actors of Divine good
things and Benefits, they grant unto us, glory, or grace, or any other means
unto eternal happiness. For why: Our help stands in the Name of the Lord,
that has made Heaven and Earth. And he adds, That the Saints are no
immediate Intercessors for us with God, but whatsoever they obtain for us at
Gods hands, that they do obtain by and through Christ. And it is for ought I
know, the voice of every Romanist, Non ipsi Sancti, sed eorum Deus, Dominus
nobis est. So it must not be imputed, which is not deserved, were they worse
then they are. It is a Sin, they say, to belie the Devil: a Shame to charge
men with what they are not guilty of, to make the breach bigger, Being in
this, as she is in other opinions, somewhat (...) us.
already too wide. Concerning Saints departed, thus they teach. First, that
according unto Scripture and Faith of the Church, They live and subsist in
their better part. That, their Life is hidden in Christ with God; whose
Presence they now enjoy in Glory in Heaven. That there, they rest from their
Labors, and magnify his Mercies incessantly, who has sent such Redemption
unto their souls; That there they forget not their brethren upon Earth, but
remember the Church Militant unto God. And sure, if there be a Communion of
Saints, and a Fellowship betwixt those two maine parts of the Tolu^, the Church
of the Redeemed by the blood of Jesus, Triumphant in the Heavens, and yet
Militant here in Earth: Orant pro Nobis saltem in genere; those that enjoy the
Fruit of their Labors now with God, are not Forgetful of their brethren
behind, and not consummate in the Flesh. I insist not on this, it is not now
questioned by the Opposites.

But farther, they teach that the Saints in Heaven, make also Particular
Intercession for us: that is, Some of them, for some of us here, which is, in
my Opinion, though no point of Faith for which I would burn, yet true and
certain in all Credibilitie. But how it is limited or to be enlarged: how
and in what sort and sense it is true, may appear more particularly upon the
Process, Thirdly, that Saints and Holy Angels in Heaven, may be jointly or
severally prayed unto: Many by many, by one, or some: One, by any one, or by
many, which accordingly their People put in frequent practice, Chaunting it
every where, Ora pro me. The Council of Trent, that Oracle of the Roman Faith
and Religion, resolves thus. Sanctos Orationes suas pro hominibus De^ offerre.
Bonum esse atque vtile, suppliciter eos Inuocare. Ad eorum Orationes, opem,
auxiliumque confugere. In some Generalities, as their manner is, leaving way
and liberty for disputes abroad.

And in this point not better to be answered, then; by taking away the
ambiguitie of the word Invocation.
For better Evidence in this point, the Question controuersed, inter parts, may
be limited, or rather explained thus. Invocation, as was touched, is a word of
ambiguous signification; as most words are, because there are more things then
words, Subsistances, then names to Call them by, It is taken specially for to
Call upon me, as him upon whom we absolutely rely: at least vltimate in that
kind. It is also used for to Call unto, as to Helps, Assistants, or Advocates
in suite, when in Time of Trouble and Necessity, we have Cause to come and
Call on God, directing our Prayers ever, prima intention unto him. When
therefore we talk of Invocation of Saints, and dispute concerning praying
unto Saints, we must understand Invocation so, as directed unto them only, as
Assistants, and Mediators only of Intercession; and therefore not to be
Inuocated, or Called upon in the same sense and terms as God Almighty is, the
Author and Donor of every good giving: nor to be implored as Christ Jesus is,
the only Mediator of Redemption, and Meritorious Advocate of Intercession.
Therefore, having occasion and Cause, to Call upon me in time of trouble, they
employ not Te ad Me, Man unto God immediately, but do it secundarie, and by
Mediators. This is not unlawful in it self. It is no exclusive, Call in thy
own Person. For warrant and practice is for the Contrary. Orate pro Inuicem:
is a Precept. The Church prayed for Peter, there is practice. But such
Mediators they use in this Case, as are supposed not to be, apti nati: not
accommodated to the purpose; not fitted or disposed to be employed in, and
therefore incapable of that office of Intercession. Who if they were such as
they take them to be, and it could appear plainly that such indeed they
were, might very well be employed as Intercessors, none sooner, none better,
or with more advantage then they every way: and happy such as could entreat
their aduocation, in regard of that great Grace and Favor they stand in with
God: as also that affection they bear unto their brethren, and apprehension
they have more then holy Angels have, or can have, through their own
experience, of Tribulation.

The Church of Rome is thus persuaded of them; therefore they use in all
exegincies, and times of trouble, in all their addresses unto God for help and
succor, to use the assistance of holy Saints and Angels: to have recourse into
them, the blessed Virgin, Saint Peter, Saint Paul, that so they may find
favor and acceptance at Gods hands, to be heard and delivered the sooner in
time of trouble. Herein they are persuaded that they do well and wisely, and
with great advantage to obtain their desires. I am not yet so persuaded of
this their use and practice: I see no reason yet to subscribe unto their
doctrine; I may hereafter peradventure be of their mind, to say Sancta Maria
ora pro me, though it be unlikely, and I do not think I shall, If any Roman
Catholic, or all the Roman Catholics living, can euict by any one conuincing
demonstration: or bring but one irresistible argument, from Reason, Nature, or
from Grace, Can prove it by Scripture so expounded by the Church, for five
hundred years after Christ, So dogmatically concluded, by cases so ruled, by
rules so given in general Counsels: or in Provincial or National confirmed by
General; By general consent and practice, so expressed and at full, in the use
and evidence of that ancient Church to the determination and end of the
Council at Chalcedon, about five hundred and fifty years after Christ:
Finally, to give a little more advantage, by any one Father of credit amongst
themselves, that dogmatically resolves it, vt certum and d^ fide, and I will
subscribe, and say together with them, Orate pro me. He or they that dare and
can, undertake this task, perform it, and I subscribe. Till then, my
Resolution is and must be, (...), as I have received so will I hold: Yet she is
more ca^telous, then Wise, to go about for Assistants, when she may go a
nearer way without them.
It is not to be taught as a point of Faith, nor to be urged upon any with
observation: nor to be tendered with Anathema to the gainsayer, nor to be
practiced necessarily. That it is builded up out of mere conjectures, and
uncertainties; what they can do, and how far prevail: and therefore it is
folly for me or any man ordinarily to have recourse unto the Angels of God: or
unto Saints at rest with God, ordinarily and in point of Piety and Devotion:
to use them as Advocates and Mediators in my suites, to Call unto them to Call
upon God: when my Self that am then interessed principally, may commence my
own Suites, commend my own Case, follow my own business, and effect my own
purposes personally, being graciously invited to do it my self, and
immediately directed unto God by himself, in Call upon me in time of trouble.

I say it is Folly, and so it is, in extremity; Her opinion in this and many
other points is not so far from Atheism as her practice is near unto folly.
to Call unto them in such sort as is accustomed, in common sense of Reasonable
men. For less ado by much would serve, then is made, in imploring this Saint
and that: a surer and a more warranted course might be taken, then to go
about, when we may go the nearer way. We are not certain at the best, what
they do or can do for us in these cases, that are so employed and implored by
us. I will not, I dare not be so harsh and rigorous, as to condemn them of
Impiety for Calling unto them. For though more be done unto them, then is,
fit or convenient: and more bestowed on them, at least by Consequence, then can
consort with the Condition of their Creation: yet nothing is detracted there
from the Creator, in giving them that they are not capeable of.

It is no general rule of necessary Consequence, They take from God, who
ouerlauishly give any thing unto men. Thus it stands in Case betwixt us and
them, if we take them in the lump, at whole sale in their Doctrine, as it
were. I cannot say it does so, for their Practice, as if that also were so
gently to be handled. In this, as in many other; if not in all points of
Practique Piety, Practice and Precept, their Doctrine in Schools, and
Discipline abroad, Coelo and Solo disparantur, are so much at odds in so many
particulars, as if the one had not to do with the other: or they that did the
one, were not the men interessed in the other. In their Doctrine of defrauding
the People of the Cup in the holy Sacrament of the Altar, they plead it, and
conclude it in Schools and Councels, that the Cup must not be given unto the
Laity: the People are to receive but in one kind. And yet their Practice is
now, of what standing I know not, to give them also of the Wine, as I have
been assured by some Roman Catholics I can name, my Neighbors, and it has
been auerred by their Priests.

Mary mark their iuggling, and observe them convicted of foul Forgerie: the
Laity drink not of the Chalice, though they drink of the Wine of
Consecration, powered out of the Chalice into a Glass, which peradventure
alters, in their opinion, the Property of the blood of Christ, and
euacuateth the power, and efficacy of the words of Consecration. Whether this
be so or not, I cannot swear, I have nothing but hearesay: that I have, and
can name my Authors.

In their Doctrine of Images they disclayme Idolatry indeed: and take the
imputation with great offense, and as the most part of them do teach in their
Books the use of Images, I see no cause to style them Idolaters. But sure the
Peoples practice is (...) next door unto it: very like it, if not the same. A
man, one of their own for his Profession, Catholic Moderator.
a man of good account for his Experience, confesses, that the vulgar, the
greater part of men who understand no Greek, nor can tell what Latria or Dulia
means, comprehend not any other Mediocritie, then to Adore right down, or
else not at all go to it bona fide; and with as much devotion adore our
blessed Lady and other Saints now with God, as they do God Himself But be
this, as it is, in their common Custom, it is grand Impiety, so confessed on
both hands, to invoke any, beside Me. For it is a part of that Divine Honor,
whereof God has said, No man shall have it, because it is not Communicable to
any Creature with or beside God. It is as good Blasphemy as can be committed
in point of Practice, to Call upon, still I say upon, not unto, any other at
all beside Me. For to Call upon any, emplyeth them to be the Authors
Original, and Donors Principal (so much is intended by that Phrase) of the
good implored at their hands. But to Call unto, that is to use in their Suits,
unto God, in their Necessities and Exigences, beside God, Assistants,
Advocates, and Mediators, Proctors unto God, Procurers from God of good things
unto themselves; though it be not (...) flat impiety, yet is it (...) plain
down right Folly. To beat the Bush while they may catch the Bird; To go
about, when they may walk the near way home, to use much ado, when little
help will serve, to imply Mediators when they need none: to pray and entreat
the Porter for entrance, when they may go freely unto the Closet of the great
King: to bribe a Servant to deliver a Petition, when the Lord does Call for it
out of their own hands. A plain Case, he may well be begged, that will run
such an idle and wandering course.

They suggest to persuade it from use and Congruitie thus. In the Fashion and
Practice of the World say they, Poor men that are Petitioners to Prince, or
Potentate, to Judge or Justice, must be feign, and are enforced, that they may
procure Favor and have good success, to make means, and so commonly to make
Friends, and by their mediation come to speed, that otherwise might long enough
attend, and it may be, returned without effect.

They urge, that Kings have their Masters of Requests: their Cabinet
Counselors, Minions and Favorites in State, who prefer at their pleasure
whom they please, and keep back whomsoever they do not affect; that they use
to bestow Graces, and Offices by Recommendation. Great men most commonly attend
not Dispatches in Person themselves, but turn Suitors over unto others: bid
them come again to morrow, I have no leisure to day, go to my Man, give him
your Petition, and at convenient leisure I shall peruse it. Answers immediate
are not ordinary* with Persons that keep state, and stand upon terms of
Distance and Disproportion. And what so great Distance or Disproportion say
they, any where as here, in Case of intercourse betwixt God and Man; where is
no common medium to make a mutual Commerce betwixt them? Thus they do plead
plausibly, and make simple people believe much. As if it were and needs must
be so with God as Man.

And, it seems, they are willing to be fool themselves, i^ us they cannot
But in this Fair show and carriage of comparison, our great Masters aut fallunt
aut falluntur; wittingly and willingly they would deceive: or ignorantly they
err not remembering the Nature and Practice of God: not considering his
intimations of his will and good pleasure to us revealed. First, the Practice
they produce, upon which they insist to persuade, is not (...) so generally
true, For, how weak is that, which they falsely urge as a perpetual practice
with earthly Princes?
such a received ruled Case, as has not suffered at all, contradiction. There
are and have been always such as use it not. And no marvel, it is no Natural
course of kind, that so it should pass for an universal Practice. It came in
by abuse from the State and Pride of the Persian Monarchs, from the loose
licentiousness and Socordia of those Eastern Nations very Imperious in their
Grandees, and men of authority, most servile and abject in their Peasants;
With the Romans, an ingenious and Free People: with the Grecians, a civil and
well disposed Nation, it was long ere this Servile Course came into pactice.
Augustus Caesar, upon occasion was requested of an old Soldier of his to
afford him his Presence at hearing of a Cause he had; the Prince replied, he
would depute one for him: which the Soldier, not used to such terms of
putting off, or if you will, of Distance, answered him stoutly, But I sent no
Substitute, O Emperor, to fight in thy quarrel at Philippi: I went my Self,
and adventured my life in Person, and am I put over to a Proxy? which Augustus
acknowledging, with some blood in his face, went himself as he requested, and
did not assign a Substitute to do it. In the Grecian Story it was as
stoutly replied by one to Philip of Macedon, if I remember aright, who making
this answer to a Petition, I have no leisure, received as free a return from
the Petitioner, Noli ergo regnare, What do thou with the Kingdom, or with a
Crown, if thou have no leisure to dispatch and hear suites? And not to go
beyond the surroundry of four Seas, we have a Precedent amongst our own
Kings, that Princes give not all: nor yet dispatch every thing by mediation. He
amongst our Kings, Qui coniunxit Rosas, that both knew and practiced rights and
points of State, as well as ever did any since his time, gave his Offices of
Church and Commonwealth so freely and absolutely of himself, that He only
took and deserved thanks if he gave them: Himself had the Benefit and
Profit if he sold them. Mediators were not much in request in his time, not
much employed, nor many things done by them as it seems. So this practice is
not so certain.

But to admit it an Eternal truth and universal Rule, Which if it were
granted perpetual with them, would be no Argument to prove it so with God.
That intercession must be made, by Abettors unto great men and Mediators,
that Princes never give dispatch but by deputation, as is pretended in the
Persuasion: yet might they not hereupon infer by any good sequel or
consequence, that thereupon, it has been and must be so with God. For what
are we unto Him, to inuert the Argument? What is our Model unto his Making?
The^e is and has been ever, as Himself has auowed it, a main disproportion
and dissimilitude betwixt vias meas, and vias vestras: the ways of God, and
the by-walkes of man. My ways, says the Prophet, are of an other fashion. If
then by so good warrant there be avouched such dissimilitude, There being so
great disproportion betwixt them.
and disproportion betwixt God in his courses of communication, and man in his
carriage to his Neighbor: we had need of as good a warrant to conclude this
particular, Men do so, therefore it is Gods course: or else, Tu quis es, What
art thou O man, and where is thy Commission, that thus upon bare Presumption
and no more, do amussitare, square and rule out, the perfect and absolute
proceedings of God in Grace, by the Leaden and Lesbian Rule of humane use and
practice? let him that can, show me forth his Warrant to do so: if none can,
as I know none can, I dare not so slight nor under value this Direction and
Inuitation of his own, Therefore it is better to follow Gods direction upon
good ground in the Verse: then theirs upon none at all.
Call upon me. It is true, to disable Me, the Party invited, is but Dust and
Ashes: No more was He that was called Gods friend, and admitted to familiar
conversation with Him. I confess with Gedeon, My Father is a poor man in
Manasses, and I the least in my Fathers house. But what of that, if God do^ not
disregard me? if he be pleased to have it, as is premised? Awful regard
presumes not boldly, nor hand ouer-head into the presence of a Prince, near
unto the person of Him that is Verenda maiestate conspicuus: But if a Prince
be pleased to condescend so far, it is scarce good manners then to keep
aloof. Unless Adam did well to hide himself, when God called for him, Adam,
where art thou? Sure it had been no wisdom nor discretion in Hester, to say
no more, when Ahashuerus held out the Scepter to inuit her approach, to have
kept off, fallen back, or interceded with Aman to speak for her unto the
King. If this be not folly, tell me what is? For I know not.

It is said, men may, and I know that oftentimes many do, For, as there may be
reasons given, why it should be so with men: so this Verse may furnish us with
as good reasons, why it should not be so with God.
wait long and attend for dispatches in Courts of Honor and Justice, that
have not good Means and Mediators for access, and diligent Sollicitours for
dispatch. For State, for Conueniencie, for Necessity, for Multiplicitie of
business, immediate access, immediate audience, immediate and quick dispatch
is not ordinary with men. But God, as he is the Author of our good: So is
he the Promotor thereof Himself. Call upon me, without mediation: I will
hear thee my self, without Delegation. The Action is personal: the
Inuitation proper. No Substitute, Advocate, or Attorney. No Suite commenced
from hand to hand, which often miscarieth in the carriage. I am sure no
Petitioner will apply himself to means, who can have immediate dispatch: will
address himself to Servants though of chiefest rank, as those of the
Bedchamber to the King: or to the chief Favorite in the State, that toties
quoties, may have free and personal access, without any Sir Oliver to impeach
him: Who can have cheerful countenance at approach, without any Secondary to
assist him: Gracious audience in petitioning, willing acceptance upon audience,
and without long tarrying or much ado, good, expected, and quick dispatch.
He that may do so, will not; if he understand himself aright, or his own
strength, rely upon promise or performance of another, (...), unless he have
a Privilege to wear a Fools Coat, but in person prosecute his own Cause.

There is much in this Inuitation Call upon me, to give satisfaction unto this
Objection, It contaynes enough to satisfy all our desires, and all their
objections in this case
the most in use, and most frequent in the mouths of the multitude. We do
not observe any pause in the passage betwixt this Call, and I will hear. As if
time would be required to answer Petition, as in course of Law upon Bill of
Complaint; and a space, of Necessity or of Course, pass on betwixt
Performance and Supplication; as if it could not be answered the same day. No
Verse interlopeth twixt Hear, and Deliver, as if The King would advise first
what to do: Whether Hear when we Call: or give no Audience, or Hear, give
Audience, but not Deliver, deny dispatch. In exigent need, when we are at a
pinch, at a stand, to advise and deliberate what to do, is a kind of denial.
Bis dat, qui cito dat, in extremities. God keep me from Skeptic in my
necessity. Now in Gods inuitation and Direction in the point, there is only
Actus continuatus as it were, Call, hear, deliver, with a breath. And no
marvel. Such is his course, his custom such. Nescit tarda molimina Spiritus
sancti gratia. When he comes to deliver in time of trouble, he comes on
lustily, not gradu testitudineo. Can a man wish better success, or quicker
success then Abraham's Servant had, who went immediately to the God of his
Master Abraham? Go seek, enquire, return and come, it will appear true upon
Search made, that never was he ashamed, because never deceived that took this
course. He need not incumber himself with Atturneyes: Be at great cost and
charges to fee Pleaders at Bar: or entertayne Sollicitors with expense: but
Himself in Person may become his own spokesman that deals with God, his
own Mediator and Intercessor for Christ's sake. What soever is pretended in the
course, use, and practice of the World: It is folly and madness in some degree
at least, to entertain as they use, Necessity with Delays, or dally out
Extremities, when we may be heard by God without more ado instantly, by our
selves.

Secondly, they would persuade to say Sancta Maria ora pro me, and invocation
to be used unto Holy Saints with God, because Angels have been prayed to as
Mediators, and that without tax, rather with approbation. So that the
persuasion supposes as true, and takes it as given, that whatsoever accrueth
unto the Angels, is competible also with the Spirits and Souls of the blessed
Dead; of the Living with God: of the Righteous. And then proves it factum by
evidence of Text, that Angels have been called to in Devotions. And first
concerning that supposition, the equal indowments of men and Angels.

In this Question of Invocation, it is to be observed, that our great Masters
in Israel, In this Question of Inuo^ation, one main Fall^^re is, that they
join Saints and Angels indifferently together.
of the Church of Rome, suggest unto us and put in the plea, Saints and holy
Angels, indifferently, in distinguishedly, as if they were two words of one
signification: as if there were no difference in the choice, to address our
selves unto one or other indeterminately; at any time, in any place, upon any
exigent or occasion, both whom, and when, and as we please, as particular
devotion, or some more private respects and affection shall lead us.

So we find it ruled with negligence enough by the Master of Controversies to
our hands. Sancti sieve Angeli, pie and vtiliter inuocantur: the very decision
of the Oracle of Trent. So they dispute without any scruple: as if there were
no difference for the employment, nor any distinction of condition for the
engagement: Not observing how much they differ both in employment, and
condition.
when as Saints and Angels differ many ways: and Angels are set up (...)* in
regard of men. For the Excellency of their nature, Nobility of kind, Extent
of their ^^dowments. Use of their Employments, and worth of their
Atchieuements, many ways, above and beyond the Sons of men. They are called
Angels, from their Employments: and are Agentes in rebus, upon Earth unto God,
upon course in kind ordinarily, and extraordinarily. Angels Liegiers, Angels
Keepers, of men and Countries; Angels Messengers upon occasions. Saints in
Paradise are nor so nor so, sent, employed at any hand. They have their
Habitacula, their (...) Mansions: not Free among the dead, to go and walk at
liberty as they will: to perform Service in attendance upon Gods Employments,
except peradventure upon peculiar Dispensation, some one or other, at some one
time or other, Unless upon peculiar dispensation of employment.
has been dispensed with for egresse e receptaculis, and for some
extraordinary Dispensation: as Moses and Elias, at the Interuiew with Christ
upon Mount Tabor. One in a Million, in long tract of Time happily has had such
unusual Employment: whereas Angels are messengers ordinarily, by prime
institution in their kind. So that the Case being different betwixt these two
people: Holy Saints and Angels, not in one allotment; were it commanded, were
it lawful or expedient to Call unto Holy Angels in time of trouble; yet can it
not ex aequo be inferred, we may therefore Call unto Holy Saints as well, and
in semblable sort.

To prove the supposition of Equality betwixt them every way, Which spoils
that conclusion out of Matthew. 22.
it is alleged out of Matthew. 22.30. that by evidence of our Savior Himself,
the Saints are (...), equal with Angels every way: go hand in hand with those
blessed Spirits, so many ways Transcendent in Nature and Employment.

Thus it is alleged by the Master of Controversies as well as by others to
this purpose and intent, Or rather the collusion out of that Text.
but falsely and with much Collusion. For the Text is no way to the purpose of
any such equality of Saints and Angels.

First, there is a mere disagreement in time. quaere, is only de praesenti.
What, In regard of the disagreement in time.
and in what state the Saints are at present, not yet reunited unto their
Bodies: It is not questioned, it is not to purpose, what they shall be
hereafter in Time to come. It is questioned what Power they are of for
Intercession now, when we do, or may stand in need of Assistance, to be
heard and delivered in time of Trouble. What is it to our purpose what they
shall be hereafter, when we stand in no need of their Assistance any more,
nor of Recommendation unto the Majesty of Heaven? We with them, and they with
us alike interessed in God, and both alike partakers of that blessed state,
which shall never be changed, not so much as accosted, with any time of
trouble. The Power they are of; the Profit to be had by them, is for time of
this Life, and Gods dispensation with us in this present world, wherein our
necessities are often very great and urgent, and sore extreamities are upon us
many ways. It must needs be then an idle discourse in them: an halting and a
lame Conclusion, nothing to purpose, not able to persuade, that disputes and
proceeds from what Shall be hereafter in Time to come, after Judgment, to
that which is now in use, and being in the old World. Many things are now,
which shall not be then, when as all things shall become new; and what is now
shall not be then, when we, and all shall be changed. So that, First the place
of Scripture is not to purpose in regard of Time.

In respect o^ Subject our Savior himself (...) that (...) to the present
(...).
which there particularly is insisted on. Our Savior in that passage does
precisely and punctually direct his speech unto the Sadduces, those Jewish
Atheists and Epicures, that denied the Resurrection of the dead; and to prove
their impious assertion, Put a Case, as they imagined, of absurd Inference, if
there were granted a Resurrection: A woman there was that had seven husbands in
her life: to whom shall she appertain at the Resurrection? It is answered, To
none of them as wife. For in that other world, is no more man or wife,
marrying, or giving in marriage, but Men are like Angels. Then like Angels. At
the Resurrection, the Saints of God become (...), then, and not before, equal
to the Angels. So precisely he speaks of the Time to come: these perswaders
allege it for the present. Secondly, not then alike, per omnia, point per
point, no not in the Kingdom of God in glory. Our Savior nor said, nor yet
meant so. Amongst men shall continue Male and Female, in distinction of Sex as
now; Angels nor are nor shall be Male and Female. Men shall never become
Spirits, as Angels are: nor Angels have flesh, and bones, and be clothed with
their skin, as men shall be. For then there is no Resurrection of the dead, if
Bodies raised up out of their dusts to Life, be not the same again which
sometime they were. Different Natures, Men and Angels, must necessarily have
distinct Natural Proprieties. Accidents do follow the condition of those
Substances in which they are. In qualities and Indowments of kind, as well as
in formal being and Subsisting; Men and Angels shall differ, and be
distinguished after the Resurrection. Therefore not (...) like Angels in every
point; and if not so, how in this of Indowment, unless peculiar warrant can
be showed? To conclude, our Savior limited that (...), Equality of Holy
Saints, after the Resurrection unto Angels, unto one thing only, and no more;
one particular alone and no more: that whereof the present quaere then was,
marrying after the Resurrection, or remaining man and wife. Even in this
particular not being married, not giving, or being given in marriage; Saints
shall be then, but are not as yet equal unto the holy Angels. So, the issue
is: So that the equalit^^ is many ways nothing to the purpose.
They are like in one thing only, not in all: that One thing is not, has
nothing to do with, this thing. Nor are they yet alike in that one thing they
shall be hereafter, are not now. And we must be answered for now, not then:
for the Present, not the Future, or to come. So the Evidence is (...) and
speaks not to purpose, neither for Particular, nor for Time.

Thou (...) was of (...) purpose falsified by the Controuersor.
Faulty, and falsified also voluntarily. The Controuersor for reads the Text
thus, Sunt aequales Angelis, are equal at present unto the Angels: whereas the
Gospel has it, as our Savior spoke and meant it, de futuro, of the Time to
come: Erunt aequales Angelis, are the words of the Text, Shall be equal unto
the Angels. That he meant to corrupt it, appears by his Gloss, A^ appears
b^ his gloss there.
a notorious lie, Imprimis nihil deest eorum quae Angeli habent, quantum ad hoc
munus. They want not now any thing at all, wherewith Angels be endowed, as much
as appertains to this employment. An assertion most false in it self, and
directly crossed, by a contrary assertion of Himself, and his Accomplices in
this very point of Invocation. For in point of Information, whereby Saints
departed come to understand our Needs and Necessities, our Cases, and States,
when we implore their help and assistance unto God, this is one, that the
Angels, Agentes in rebus, in the Church on earth with men, as ordinary Agents,
or employed occasionally, do inform and give knowledge thereof unto Saints.
Which himself elsewhere contradicts.
Which supposall of such Information from them, be it true or false, vain and
imaginary, or real and indeed, I dispute, I question, I care not, does of
necessity enforce a disproportion and, (...) of the Saints unto the Angels;
against the resolution, of our great Master here, (As his fashion is.)
whose custom is to serve himself for the present purpose, to put by the
thing that presses him, he cares not how: and so that he may serve his turn
then, and rid his fingers of present trouble, respects not what he has said
elsewhere, or what will ensue upon his assertions, then and there. In common
sense and Reason he that informs another ignorance, and gives him to
understand what he understood not, is superior, at least in point of
Information; and so, Granting the Angels superior, in point of information.
Aliquid eis deest eorum quae Angeli habent, quantum ad hoc munus, precisely:
the flat Contradictory to his Position. Saints and Angels are not equal, no
not in this: and therefore also the Question is ill stated by Him and his,
touching Invocation of Saints or Angels; as if there were no terms of
inequality or disproportion betwixt them at all.

We may easily (...) why it (...) wi^h him, both to contradict himself,
I wonder not at this Contradiction: For mendaces are seldom memores: Forgers
and Faulsers cannot carry things so cleanly, but at sometime or other they will
discover and betray themselves. For as in Truth, one part is Comportable and
Compliable with another, so falsehood ever does dash against it self, hewing
hoof against hoof. They agree not long with and amongst themselves, that
conspire together against God and Truth. But let them be lumped or consorted as
they would have it, as they please, let holy Saints and Angels, even now at
present, before the Resurrection, go hand in hand together, passibus aequis,
in all points: or if yet they will let Saints in some sort be Superior unto
Angels, to further the Case of Invocation: That is, both being apt and
disposed, and fitted to pity and compassionate, to help and relieve our
necessity and needs: let Saints have this Prerogative, to commiserate sooner,
and assist readier, and help effectualler, as they plead for them, because
they are more near unto, and conjoined with us then Angels are, as being
members together with us of Christ, flesh of his flesh, and bone of our bone.
As having felt themselves, being yet in the Flesh, those miseries of Mankind,
whereof Angels had never experimental knowledge or trial: let it be granted
that thereupon in these regards, they are more likely to put to for our
assistance, extremum potentiae, the utmost extent of their best endeavors,
according to that well known and approved saying in the Poet, Non ignara mali
miseris succurrere disco. Let it be added, that what they entreat for, they
shall obtain it at Gods hands; God will not deny them, whom he hears always
when they Pray unto Him: yet are all these but fair Pretexts and pretenses,
and Circumductions; nothing material to the point in Question: And to ^oaue
from the Question.
only brought in to make a show, to dazzle the gazer with imaginations: and so
to lead men off from that which indeed is to be proved, As appears in this
particular.
to pitch upon things that are not questioned, as will appear in particular
more precisely. The Question is, Whether Saints may be called unto, to Call
upon God for us in distress. The reason is; It is doubted whether they can
hear when we call. The maine to be proved will be this, They can, and that
ordinarily, at any time, in any place, any men or man. Hic Rhodus, hic saltus:
these are to be made good, and then we yield. Prove them, and I will say as
well as any Romanist, Sancta Maria, ora pro me. But because they do wander
whom we must follow; Therefore, since we can (...) follow them the right way
into the Question: let us hu^t them out of their by paths. And first for the
practice of praying to Saints.

In Jacobs practice they can nei^h^r find Invocation,


have after them in their bypath whatsoever: and first unto Praying to
Angels, in Practice, and upon Record, as is supposed in holy Writ, for practice
long ago, before the Law.

Jacob lying on his deathbed prayed to an Angel, Genesis 48.16. Angelus qui
eruit me de cunctis malis, benedicat pueris istis. Hic aperte S. Jacob Angelum
inuocauit: says Bellarmine in the point; The Angel that delivered me out of
all evil and adversity, bless these children. Here it is apparent that holy
Jacob inuocateth the Angel. Not so apparent, I wis Sir, as is supposed, either
for Inuocating in general, or for Inuocating an Angel by holy Jacob. Not for
Invocation, we find no Ora pro istis, here by way of address, or directed
Supplication: not (...), so much as any terms of Compellation, Thou Angel
which have kept me Preserve them; or assist them with thy help, furtherance,
and prayers: which should have been if it were to purpose: For says the
Master of Controversies himself, Non debere peti a Sanctis, nisi vt orent pro
Nobis, All we can, or must ask of Saints is, That they would pray for us. And
therefore it is professed and protested by the Perswaders themselves, that they
never go beyond degree of Compellation thus, Sancta Maria, ora pro Nobis: and
herein they say right; they should not go farther, most what they do not: at
least their meaning is no more but so. Secondly, this passage of Jacob is not
to the Angel, it is concerning him: Nor Invocation of an Angel.
(...) merely by way of wish and desire, not (...) by way of Supplication.
Jacob relates what the Angel had done for him all his life time: and wishes
he would do as much for them his graund children, Ephraim, and Manasses, the
sons of Joseph. A wish or desire, that such, or such a good thing, and happy
success may be, is no Prayer unto the thing that it would be so. Unless we
imagine, and as well we may, that Balaam prayed unto his own Soul, when in
the Self same form that Jacob wishes here, he desired, Moriatur anima mea
morte justorum. Let my Soul die the death of the righteous, and let my latter
end be like unto his. Or David prayed unto the Angel, when he says, Let the
Angel of the Lord persecute them. He prayed that it might be: not to him to
do it. No more does Jacob in this place.

Thirdly, had it been an express and direct prayer, Let it be read, Unless
of such an Angel, which only may be prayed unto.
Thou Angel which have delivered me, bless them. Yet our Perswaders are never
the nearer, but out of the way. For this Angel might be prayed unto, and yet
not every Angel so: nor yet Saints inuocated accordingly. For howsoever Saints
are unto other Angels, this Angel is paramount to them, infinitis parasangis:
and transcendent unto all Angels beside. He is Angelus foederis, that Angel of
the Covenant in the Prophet. Not Angelus Domini, an Angel of the Lord: but
Angelus Dominus, The Lord that Angel, Christ Jesus himself; no Created Angel,
that Jacob meant and intended here; who indeed had preserved him in all his
ways, and kept him safe in his going out, and returning home, from Esau his
Brother; Laban his Uncle; in his own Country, and in a foreign Land. That
found him in Bethel, and spoke with him there: Ose 12.4. That Angel mentioned
formerly, Chap. 31. Verse. 11. and explained, Verse. 13. I am the God of Bethel,
where thou anointedst the pillar, and where thou vowedst a vow unto me. Thus
the Fathers of old understood that Scripture, As the Fathers also of old
understood it.
from the first Infancy of the Church: not of any Created Angel, Custos; but
of Christ, God, Creator of Men and Angels. (...). He, Page 71.
an Angel, God and Lord, says Iustine the Martyr, disputing with Trypho the
Jew, appeared unto Abraham in humane shape; was seen of Jacob in the Form and
Figure of man. Wrestling with him, as is recorded, in his return from
Mesopotamia, at such time as he met with his brother Esau, and at his going up
to Bethel. And more precisely comprehending all other apparitions, (...), it
was he, the same, and no other, who was seen of, and appeared unto the
Patriarchs of old. God, and also Lord of all, howsoever called Angel there.
Thus that holy Writer, Vir Apostolicorum temporum, who pricked fast on upon the
Apostles time, if he did not know some of them in the Flesh. Athanasius has a
discourse unto the purpose, and therein is peremptory, that He was Christ.
(...) etc. Orat. 4. (...). 260.
If so be that the Patriarch Jacob, in blessing his Nephews, Ephraim, and
Manasses, said thus, The Angel that delivered me out of all adversity, and
nourished me from my youth up, until this day, bless these children: yet he
does not there couple or compose any one Created and Natural Angel with God,
Him that was Creator of all Angels. Nor does he forget and by pass him, of
whom he had been nourished from his youth up until then, that is God, and
desire a blessing for his Nephews from an Angel. But in phrasing it thus, That
has delivered me out of all adversity, he plainly shows, that he did not
intend any Created Angel, but insisted upon the ground of the Word of God, whom
he coupleth with the Father in praying unto Him, By whom God delivers whom
he will deliver, knowing that he was, as sometime he called, The Angel of the
great Counsel of the Father. Jacob professes it was He, and no other beside
Him, that had delivered Him out of all adversity, and had hitherto delivered
Him, and blessed Him also. Nor was it his meaning, by Prayer to obtain a
blessing for Himself at Gods hand, and to put over his Nephews to be blessed
by Angels. But he prays unto him to bless his Nephews, unto whom Himself
had sometime said, I will not let thee go except thou bless me, and without
all question this was God, as himself professes and affirms plainly, I have
seen God face to face. It may seem this Champion of Christ undertook his
Masters cause in this, as he did in the maine, against some Angel adorer in
those days: so fully he discourses upon the point, at this day denied by
Victorellus and others, Beu-pleaders for Invocation and worship of Saints and
Angels so frequent with them: For after other discourses he concludes thus,
(...). It was therefore none other, but the Lord God himself that appeared and
said unto him; Lo I am with thee, I do keep thee, and preserve thee in thy
way wherein thou walk continually. I could father enlarge upon the point out
of others, but I write not Commentaries, nor Common-places. In opinion of
Antiquity and sense of the Church, Christ Jesus was that Angel that Jacob
meant: and it is aperte false, and a forgery, which Bellarmine avouches, Hic
aperte Sanctus Jacob, inuocauit Angelum. In opinion of Antiquity, as in
Evidence of truth, this Angel was no Created Spirit, but God Himself. Lastly,
at least if He were an Angel, He was not any other but his guardian Angel: For
the words in the Text do employ the office of his Angel guardian; The Angel
that has kept me from my childhood; unto whom now, being to go the way of
all flesh, he might intend to put over his two young Nephews, the Sons of
Joseph. Mistake me not, I say not he, meant his Angel guardian; For I am fully
resolved with the old Fathers, He means Christ: but to suppose and grant He
was an Angel, he could then be no other but his Guardian Angel, which will not
pleasure the Perswaders in their plea at all. For in this present question
touching Invocation, the Case of Angels Guardians is peradventure different,
much and many ways, from the condition, and employments of them at large. The
conclusion is then, Jacob did not emplore the help or patronage of any Angel
here, Jacob then cannot help the ^ purpose.
nor have we any Precedent in Jacobs practice for our address in necessity or
other ways, in point of asistance by Invocation unto Saint or holy Angels
whomsoever. Nor is this Text of Scripture to the purpose.

I (...) they will (...).
They proceed and produce the fifth of Job, Verse 1. for an Instance, or Precept
for Invocation. Call now if there be any to hear, and unto which of the holy
Saints and Angels will thou turn thee? Thus they enlarge upon the Text, adding
for explication, and Angels, which is not there. For by Saints they tell us,
Saint Augustine there understands Angels. A needless allegation of Saint
Augustine howsoever: for if Saints were only men and not Angels, ye if the
allegation be as they would persuade, the Text is to purpose, I deny not. The
resolution being laid down once for all, that in this question Angels and
Saints go passibus aequis for Invocation. But so and not so it mattereth not:
Nor Saints are able, nor yet Angels to relieve Him, or to understand Him when
he calls in time of Trouble. Siquis est qui respondeat, For, it rather make
(...) against them, and (...).
is as much in effect, as Nemo est qui respondeat. There is no help for thee
in any one of them: therefore if thou call, it is to no purpose: as good an
inducement as may, for Call upon Me, Turn thee unto them. Call upon them,
though never so loud, so often, so effectually, it is in vain, They can
neither help nor hear. The man that does this, may take up that saying to
himself, Job 19.14 My familiar friends have forgotten me, and well take up
that saying. For if that speech of Job 19.21. Miseremini mei amici mei, Have
compassion upon me my friends, because it runs out in terms of Invocation,
must be understood of the Angels of God, as our great Masters do pretend;
then Angels, those very Friends by Jobs own verdict, are to no purpose called
upon. For Verse 19. he complains again, All mine inward friends have
abhorred me. Such unfortunate Undertakers are these great Masters in Israel,
that contrary to Rules in their own Schools, do for want of better evidence
in a desperate Case, make speeches metaphorical argumentatiue, and derive
demonstrations from Similitudes, which may indeed illustrate and explicate, but
prove (...)

But to grant which is not proved, Nay, suppose those words of Job understood
as they would have them: yet was it, if any at all, but a dispensatorie action.
were Sancti Angeli in this passage, did God actually counsel and advise Job,
or permit him only to make some Angel his Mediator; yet what of that? It was
by way of dispensation. A passage not usual, but permitted unto him
extraordinarily. And courses of that kind, extraordinary, and dispensatorie
actions are not for us. Therefore nothing is proved by any of them. Upon that
supposition it might be (I say not it was so, I am persuaded otherwise) that
some Angel in particular might repair unto Him, converse with Him, unto whom
Job then might, why not, use such words of Invocation or Intercession, as to
his Friend, desire his help and assistance thus or thus, which aduanceth the
use and approbation of Invocation, then Moses and Elias apparition in Glory
upon Mount Tabor, the lewd and loud Lies that are coined daily in the Church of
Rome of apparitions by the blessed Virgin at Lauretto, Sichem, to Ignatius
Loyola, or such like; or the Miracles of Eliseus do justify, the supposed
Forgeries, Miracles I should say, of that grand Impostor the Pampelonian
Soldier Loyola, enrolled of late in the Calendar of Saints, more likely by
far, to be a firebrand in Hell.

And as they prove nothing from the practice of Jacob and Job: neither can they
from any other.
I conclude, Show me it written in the Scriptures of the house of Israel, Old
or New, that I should, I may address my self by Prayer or Intercession unto
any Angel: point me out any practice, though practice be (...) very ticklish
in point of Piety to go further, so used or so supposed to be used, by any
one Writer for the time prefixed, viz. to the Council of Chalcedon, and herbam
porrigam, I will yield and say, Sancte Angele ora pro me. If not, if none be,
or can be alleged Positive to the point in question, (...). Adieu Angels
intercessors to be inuocated, it is but sopperie which is pretended. I would
not willingly transgress the Ancient bounds, nor violate the precincts and
limits Antiquity has set. I know not any that practiced this part of Piety
to make holy Angels their Mediators, and said in their Devotions with
allowance, Sancte Angele ora pro me.

But yet De Angelo custode fortassis ampliandum. But whatsoever we deny for
other Angels, perhaps they would plead more pro Angelo custode.
Where a little to enlarge and express my self in this, being charged
publicly and in print, for I confess, I am the party intended though not
named, by that infamous Ecebolius of these times, and impious Renegado, I
speak what I know, the unworthy Archbishop of Spalato, in a public Audience,
and that before his Majesty at Windsore, to have affirmed expressly in a
Sermon, And hope to euince it out of my own mouth.
That there was no cause why every faithful man should not turn himself unto
his Angel Keeper, and say, O holy Angel Keeper pray for me. I do avouch in
verbo Sacerdotis, that those words never passed the hedge of my lips, I never
spoke them as I know, and have been assured, his most sacred Majesty can well
remember. And who is this uncircumcised Philistine to be believed before the
Lords Anointed? The truth is this, Preaching at Windsore upon this present
passage, Call upon me, being then my course in that Church, and the words,
Sermo diei in die suo, read in the Church at Prayer that day, which is and
shall be my custom most what to preach upon, as the Ancients used, to take
some Text of the day, and somewhat enlarging by occasion upon this practique
part of that Roman Faith, and Tridentine prescription for Invocation (...) to
show the folly thereof, In process, falling on Angelical intimation and
assistance in the point, I used these very words, nor more nor fewer, Which was
never opened to that purpose.
De Angelo Custode fortassis Ampliandum. Which so spoken the man might
understand well enough, For I spoke them in Latin, and he was present,
whatsoever else was spoken was in English, which, I am sure, he understood not
at all, unless his Angel Keeper, or Devil attendant, did expound them to him.

Nor could it make any thing to their maine purpos^ if it were spoken,
Had I then so concluded touching Angelum custodem: yet Quid hoc ad Iphicli
boues? The Angel Keeper is not to be remembered upon equal terms with
Angels of Commission extraordinary. Nor turning unto Him with Pray for me,
unto imploration of their aid, who have no such commission ordinary as he
has, but are all upon employments extraordinary. Nor any more affinity with
the business in question, then Alexander the Coppersmith that wrought Saint
Paul much vexation, had with Alexander of Macedon who so much troubled the
whole World. It is an opinion received, and has been long that if not every
man, each son of Adam, yet sure ^ach Christian man regenerate by water and
the holy Ghost, at least from the day of his Regeneration and new birth unto
God, if not from the time of his coming into the World, has by Gods
appointment and assignation, an Angel Guardian to attend upon him at all
assayes, in all his ways, at his going forth, at his coming home. Who though
he go inuisibly, and assist insensibly, as his Nature is, yet is supposed to
attend upon us, to be present with us continually: Parum est fecisse Angelos
tuos, fecisti and Custodes paruulorum, who Continually behold the face of their
Father in Heaven. This being supposed to be so: So that it were also rightly
understood.
It being resolved that he does not leave us at all, the time of our life: it
being believed, that he is evermore present at hand, and near unto us: under
correction, to say now, which I said not then, I see no absurdity in Nature,
no incongruitie unto Analogy of Faith, no repugnancie at all unto sacred
Scripture: much less impiety for any man to say, Sancte Angele custos ora pro
me. This in private discourse I might say unto him, talking upon this, as we
did upon many other particulars, disputed of betwixt the sides of Protestant
and Roman Catholics. It is no impiety, it can be no foolerie thus to
resolve, only upon the former supposition. For as to my Brother, or to my
Friend at hand, near unto me, I may say, Good Friend, or good Brother, let me
have your good Prayers unto God for me: so good Angel Keeper pray for me,
supposing him present, and always at hand, as, if he be Guardian perpetual he
must be. And therefore Calvin observes against this Roman tenet of
Invocation, Nor if we granted Invocation for all Angels, as well as this,
would that (...) the Invocation of Saints.
that the case is not the same betwixt Angels and Saints, because Angels are
appointed, which Saints are not, and deputed to protect us, though in
particular he grant no Angel Custos. It is true, that Invocation of Saints is
a point of Foolery, it being, at least uncertain, whether they are, and in
what manner they can be, acquainted with our wants, seeing their condition is
not to attend us, and they are removed far above our reach and Call, Though
for them we grant not: for the Angel Guardian we might better grant it.
though we call unto them never so often or so loud: but the case of Angel
Guardians is far different, being ever in procinctu, nigh at hand unto us,
continually, and never abandoning us all our days. If my self, at London
should say unto a friend at Constantinople or in the Indies, Sir help me, I
might be laughed at deservedly for my folly. This case comes home to their
practice of Invocation. But if I speak unto him that is present with me,
stands by me, to help and assist me, I commit no absurdity in Reason, nor
in Piety. And this upon supposall of Angel Keepers, which I urge not as a
point of belief or Piety, We do not urge (...) certain truth.
the case it self of Angel Keepers is not so resolved: but only mention, as of
congruitie, because it is most probable there are such Keepers. If thus my
self resolved, do infer, Holy Angel Keeper, pray for me, I see no reason
to be taxed with point of Popery or Superstition, much less of absurdity or
impiety. But be this as may be: Salus Reipublicae non vertitur in istis: a
man may go to Heaven that uses it, and he that denies it may go thither
also, as likewise they may, hoc non obstante, go either of them the contrary
way, to the contrary place; through breach or observation of things of an
higher nature, and greater allay tendered unto us under that strict form,
Believe this and live.

But to return to our Perswaders for Prayer unto Saints, But, whatsoever we
grant or deny, they are eloquent Orators, for the Invocation of Saints too.
they use to tell us many long and plausible Discourses, of the happy and
blessed estate of the Saints in Heaven: of the fruition and enjoying of his
presence in Glory, with whom is the fullness of joy, at whose right hand is
pleasure for evermore. They discourse of their Charity and good affection unto
us their Brethren militant in the Church upon earth, the great desire they have
to do us good: their readiness to help and to assist us at need: The grace
and favor they are in with God, and the possibility they have to be heard in
their desires, and to have whatsoever they ask granted to them. As if it were
questioned at all by us, whether quoad statum they did see God or not: or were
as yet, quoad locum, in Heaven with God or no. Some have doubted of both in the
Church of Rome I grant, especially for statum more material of the two: as
John 22. and that Renegado, a man of no Religion, as appears by his own
Profession, nor Conscience, who publicly taught little less then this, not by
way of Problem, but Position, as I am more particularly assured of it, who
dissuaded him from doing so, but he would not hear me. We make question of
neither Place or State, but in Faith and full assurance hold them partakers and
possessed already of that state of happiness and glory with Christ Jesus,
Urging what we do not deny de ^oco, and s^atu,
who in the highest Heavens, sits at the right hand of God in Glory, which
wins infallibly, leads indeclinably, holds inseparably unto and with
God. Foelix anima, as Saint Augus;tine meditateth upon this state and condition
of the Righteous: Quae terreno corpore resoluta, libera Coelum petit, secura
est, and tranquilla: Non timet hostem neque mortem. Habet enim praesentem,
cernitque indesinenter Dominum Deum pulcherrimum, sui seruiuit, quem dilexit,
and ad quem tandem laeta and gloriosa peruenit. But what is this to purpose,
But to no purpose.
their being with God, enjoying God, preuayling with God, loving us? to the
purpose of ordinary power to assist us: and practice of Intercession to mediate
for us? What is i^ to me what another is in himself, if it be not otherwise
ad me, that I receive some benefit or advantage? Not any of these, nor all
these indowments and atchieuements come home to the point of power and
possibility, ordinarily to hear the Petitions of any, at any time, in any
place, necessarily required, and to be assured before I can say; Ora pro me.

Nor is it to purpose or for advantage, that they come in upon the Seconds with
a fair Discourse unto Nouices and their Proselytes, of that love and dear
affection which they bear unto their Brethren. And therefore doubt not, And,
with as little success, discoursing of their dear affection to us.
say they, as if this were questioned, or to the purpose, but they wish, and
will, and what they can most readily procure, quantum in ipsis, as much as they
can, and they can do much, whatsoever in God may stead them or do them good.
They love us indeed, no question of that: and so consequently, according unto
the nature of love in the effects thereof, will, and wish, and seek the good
of those whom they love. Their love is now greater being in Heaven, unto man,
then ever it was or could be when and while they lived upon Earth. For
Charity is transcendent in those celestial Citizens. And therefore no
question they pray for men upon earth. But how? and for whom? All Christians in
general: their Brethren as yet in great tribulation: the Church militant upon
the face of the Earth. This they know: the state of these, and their
necessities are known to them in Heaven: and upon knowledge they do
commiserate them: and Commiseration procures Intercession, else were there no
Communion of Saints: no bond betwixt the militant and triumphant Church. In
specie, for those Churches whereof themselves were parts, noble and lively
members yet being in the flesh: as more interessed there then otherwhere. For
if charity be ordinate here upon earth: diliguntur alieni, magis proxi^^i,
maxim proprij; It cannot be imagined to be disordinate, it is not sure
irregular in Heaven: where order is most of all especially regarded, as the
Place and Persons, where and by whom Gods will is performed so absolutely, as
that by the Doctor of Israel in his perfect pattern of Prayer, we are thither
addressed for imitation, thus, Thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.
But so for those ordinarily and of common course, as that which they pray for
is the general good of all, not the particular interest of any one. Thus
Gregory Nazianzene was persuaded himself, but did not press others to
believe it, that his deceased Father then with God did specially intercede for
his particular flock. Orat. 19. page 288.
(...) (...). I am verily persuaded and believe that my Father now with God,
and the rather because he is with God, does by mediating and interceding with
God for you, do you more good, and stand you in greater stead by his prayers,
then he did while he lived amongst you by his Doctrine. This is the common
voice with general concurrence, without contradiction of reverend and learned
Antiquity, for ought I ever could read or understand, and I see no cause or
reason to dissent from them touching Intercession, in this kind.

I add in particular yet somewhat farther. (To which we had rather add then
detract from it.)
Those with God, may and do recommend unto God in their celestial Prayers,
their kindred, friends, and acquaintance upon Earth, whom they knew, in whose
love and familiarity they had interest yet being in the flesh, and with whom
they had conuersed more reseruedly. But no other sort and manner for them then
only for such instant and exigent necessities. But, in reference to what they
were here acquainted withal.
For such causes, occasions, and employments, as being yet in viuis, and
conversant with them, they knew of, understood, and were acquainted withal or
interessed in, and have not forgotten being Resiants in those heavenly
habitations, and all tears wiped away from their own eyes. For the Soul of
man separated from the Body by Death, and subsisting alone in all freedom,
Which they cannot but retain in memory.
happiness, and content with God, cannot be thought to empaire or suffer
loss in any indowment natural or acquisite, which tend to perfection of state
and being: and I speak and intend this of those indowments formerly had in
time of life. For, as concerning those newly acquired, accruing in, and to the
state they then enjoy with God, speak they that can tell, if yet they can tell
what they speak. Nor is it so strange. For if that those who are restored
again by Christ, and raised up from the dust of the earth, to live with him in
glory, in the day of restoration of all by Christ and retribution of the
Righteous, shall perfectly know, and take notice of, those whom they never knew
nor saw, perchance nor heard of in the flesh, as being post-nati unto them so
many hundreds or thousands of years: If they shall know Adam, Seth, Enoch,
Noah, Abraham, all the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles: how can they forget the
names and notions of them, with whom they conuersed so many years? From whose
society and company they so lately departed? unto whom they imparted of their
own secrets, and with whose counsels they were acquainted? with whom so long
they lived together serving one God together as friends? Dives in Hell, where
the Soul, if any where, Since even the souls in hell can do it.
loses her indowments, knew Abraham whom he had never seen in Earth, and
acknowledges him to be the Author of his stock and people the Jews. Dives in
Hell, had not forgot the number and condition of his Brethren on earth, and was
also careful and mindful of them, least they should come into that place of
torment. Whether it be an History, as Tertullian and many other suppose, or
else a Parable, as others rather think: yet even so it will come home to
purpose. For parables are not Chimaraes, or speculations merely: but deduced
from condition of things that be. He saw him as he could, with his
understanding; he took notice of him, with his understanding: He lost not the
memory of the things he had; who acquired the knowledge of what he had not.
Had he lost what he had, it had been in vain for Abraham to have said, Son
remember, Ex hac parabola discimu^, well resolves Euthymius, quod in futuro
saeculo non solum peccatores vident bon^s, and boni peccatores, sed ^g^^scunt
etiam igrotos. Nam Dives ab Abraham c^g^osc^tur, and Lazarus a reprobo epulons,
says Gregory. Nor will, nor effects of will are extinguished in them: either
Natural, in good things, as the rich man desired his Brethrens good, or
Deliberatiue in bad, as being immutable unto good. And doubtless if in
Carcare, it be retained, much more it is eminent in palatio. The Saints in
glory have a greater portion, Glory being the Perfection of Grace, and Grace
the aduancer of Nature, then the Reprobate in Hell can enjoy, of the acts and
perfections of the Soul.

Upon this ground and persuasion of the Souls indowments, Celerinus in
Cyprian, writes unto Lucianus, a man ready to be offered up in persecution,
thus: Rogo itaque Domine and peto per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, vt
caeteris Collegis tuis fratribus mejs and Dominis referas and abijs petas, vt
quicunque prior vestrum coronatus fuerit, istis Sororibus nostris Numeriae and
Candidae tale peccatum remittant. I entreat and beseech you sir, by our Lord
Jesus Christ, that you speak unto the rest of your Colleagues, and Fellow
Confessors, my Brethren and Masters in Christ, and entreat them that whosoever
shall first obtain the Crown of Martyrdom, ask and procure forgiuennesse of
this Sin, unto our Sisters Candida and Numeria. This indeed Cyprian has by
way of Relation, remembering the practice of another man: but He himself in
another place out of his own judgment, makes this request for himself;
Mementote tunc mej, cum in vobis virginitas honoratur. And he makes this
agreement and compact with Cornelius, Bishop of Rome, and holy Martyr* That
whether of them twain should depart this life first, should remember his
companion left behind, and recommend his estate unto God in Heaven. In his 57.
Epistle thus. Concordes atque vnanimes vtrobique pro nobis semper oremus:
pressuras and angustias mutua charitate releuemus. Et siquis isthine nostrum
prior diuinae dignationis celeritate praecesserit, perseueret apud Dominum
nostra dilectio pro fratribus ac sororibus apud misericordiam Patris non cesset
Oration. And answerable to this, out of the same persuasion is that of Hierome,
where he puts Heliodorus in mind, what he would have him do for him after
death. Tunc and parentibus eiusdem ciuitatis scispetes, and pro me rogabis qui
te vt vinceres induxi. He prays not to him being dead, but advises him what
to do when he is dead; Remember his Friend upon Earth left behind, and
Recommend his Cause unto the Almighty: which is nothing to the Roman
Invocation of Saints (if yet Saints) altogether unknown and unacquainted with
any of us in their Life time.

Thus far we may go peradventure safely, in Negotiation betwixt the Saints
dead and alive, and that through every species and kind of Prayer and
Supplication. Intercession for good to be obtained. Neither do we only grant
this memory: but, if they will a more peculiar care, and charge of their friends
here.
Deprecation of evil to be avoided; giving God thanks for good obtained and
received. I add yet further, peradventure some Saint or Saints departed, may
have more special care of, interest in, charge over, some men or man, Country,
or Countries, then is used ordinarily, or others commonly have by usual
disposition; out of some special dispensation, peculiar deputation, out of
ardent affection, religious devotion, or some like other regard best known and
approved unto God, in his secret counsel and purpose, in some extraordinary
course. Leo had this opinion of Saint Peter, as appears in his Epistles in
sundry places; as specially superuising and patronising the Church of Rome. Nos
experti sumus, says he, and nostri probauere majores, Sermon 1. de S. Petro and
Paulo.
credimus and confidimus inter omnes labores istius vitae, ad obtinendam
misericordiam Dei semper nos specialium Patronorum orationibus adjunandos. And
it may be admitted, that, as opinion has been, some certain Saints have more
special Care, and a peculiar Patronage, Custody, and protecting Power, as
Angels also have, over certain Persons and Countries by especial deputation.
Not for employment, to be sent e tabernaculis beatorum, the Office of Angels
in their Ministry, but for advancement of their good, in general intercession
for the Body, not in special mediation for any part or member occasionally:
Examples hereof are frequent and many. Saint George is accounted the Patron of
England: And this also, as we did the other, de Angelo Custode, we do but
grant, we do not urge, de fide.
Saint Andrew of Scotland: Saint James for Spain; others for other People and
Countries anciently chosen and deputed. It needs not be tendered or held as de
fide; it is no point of necessity to Salvation; it may be true, there is no
Impiety in believing so or so: nor does this opinion of a general Protection,
infer any special Intercession. This I am sure, the Ancients supposed it,
and were of opinion, yet never said to any such Patron Saint, Ora pro Nobis, or
Pro me. Leo had that opinion for Saint Peter over Rome. Nor do we thence
infer Intercession.
Basil imagined the like for those forty Martyrs of Caesarea. Nazianzene
relates a story done, whereby the most blessed Mother of God, may seem to
have special Care of holy Virgins: De Cura pro mort. Cap. 16.
And S. Augustine supposes not much differently. Deus suorum merita Martyrum
vbi vult, quando vult, quomodo vult, maxim per eorum memorias, quoniam hoc
nouit nobis expedire ad aedificandam fidem Christi, pro cujus illi confessione
passi sunt bonitate mirabili and ineffabill commendat. So Saint Augustine
opined, and I see nothing to the contrary, but so may we. For no support is
hence, no direction, no color at all for Call unto them ordinarily. Incident
occasions newly arising every day, have no dependencie upon, nor
correspondencie with these Precedents. Though Cyprian and Cornelius might so
agree in time of Life, while ordinarily they could speak or intimate their
Necessities one unto another: though he that dyed first of them two (
Cornelius was the man, first martyred) might, and doubtless did recommend
Saint Cyprian, left behind him, unto God in his prayers, and so strengthen his
Faith, confirm his Love, advance his desires and deserts in suffering, and
that, according unto compact, and promise betwixt them two in Earth; yet was
this no warrant for Saint Cyprian, remaining behind some years after him, to
direct his addresses unto Saint Cornelius, for after occasions not known unto
him before his death. Nor did he ever after put him in mind of his promise,
or commend his Case unto him, with Sancte Corneli, ora pro me. For how could
he give him notice thereof, which is in this Case, all in all? And though it
may be, for we are not ascertained, nor can so be, nor ever were any so
resolved, that the Martyrs had some interest in some occasions, in some places,
toward some persons extraordinarily, that some Saints have peculiar
dispensations: yet I say with Saint Augustine in the place before remembered,
Ista diuinitus exhibentur: long aliter quam se habet vsitatus ordo singulis
Creaturarum generibus attributus: as even the opposites must confess. Because
we are to be ruled by ordinary course; not by extraordinary dispensation.
And we are to be regulated and directed by that Ordo in rebus vsitatus, not to
address our selves for Practice, unto unusual courses of extraordinary
dispensation. Non omni quia in vinum aqua cum voluit Dominus repent conuersa
est, ideo non debemus quid aqua valeat, in Element^rum ordine proprio ab istius
diuini operis raritate, vel potius singularitate, discernere. Nec, quoniam
Lazarus resurrexit, iccirco mortuus omnis quando vult resurget: aut eo modo
exanimis a viuente, quomodo Dormiens a vigilante excitatur. Alia sunt, rerum
humanarum limits, alia diuinarum signa virtutum: alia sunt quae naturaliter,
alia quae mirabiliter fiunt. In effect these passages are not to purpose for
our Devotion, who are left unto ordinary courses of kind, and not directed to
incertaine, extraordinary, dependant dispensations.

Therefore we put in Ordinarily, and it must not in any case be left out. For
Ordinary, and Revealed things are for us, Secret, and reserved, for God. Reason
in Nature, Illumination in Grace, from Revealed Intimation, must be the
pole-starre of our passage in practice: either Lex scripta, or ^onnata: What
we have read, or are assured of. It may be peradventure by some special
dispensation and indulgence, upon some Reason best known and reserved unto the
Majesty of Heaven, And we are not to conclude a general out of some
particulars*
that Some one holy Saint, or also many holy Saints, may in some certain
cases, take special notice of some men, be especially informed in some
particulars, and give thereupon particular help and assistance, at some time,
unto some persons, in some places, as Saint Augustine relates of the Relics
of Saint Stephen: and Ambrose, of Protasius and Geruasius. Yet this particular,
these many particulars, cannot make a General in true Art and Reason: and
therefore the rule tendered as General thereupon must needs be faulty. God
is not tied unto Course in kind; nor necessitated by the Law, which Himself
has proposed and appointed in Nature. And therefore, though according unto
Order, and Course established, the Souls of the Righteous in the hands of God,
have no commerce at all any more, As, on the other side, we must not confine
God, or limit his Saints from particular dispensations.
or Conversation with men, so far, as to be acquainted with their ordinary
affairs and proceedings, or to take notice of their Courses, which is the true
meaning of Calvin in that place; Lib. Instit. 3. Cap. 20. Sect. 24. belyed by
Bellarmine, so far as if the man denied an Article of the Creed, the
Communion of Saints: yet extraordinary dispensations are not thereupon denied,
or thereby taken away at all. For Moses and Elias, came forth of Paradise
actually, and were seen upon Mount Tabor, talking with Christ Jesus in Glory.
For Potamiaena remembered her promise after her death made unto Basilides in her
life, and in a Vision set a Crown of Gold, in assurance of Martyrdom, upon
his head: related by Eusebius, in his sixth Book, and fifth Chapter. And so
Christ Jesus might meet Saint Peter at Rome Gates, though Heaven must contain
him till the End of all: and Mercurius wound Julian the Apostata to death by
special dispensation. So ordinarily, though when the Soul is departed out of
the Body, and the body returned into dust, not to be restored again to life
till the Day of Doom and Consummation of all: yet contrary to this course of
kind, some have been raised again to life by Divine Power, extraordinarily,
as we are assured: and some peradventure unto eternal Life, not to return
again unto their dust, as those that rose at our Saviors Resurrection, and
were really discerned and seen of many, the first fruits with the first
begotten of the dead, Illos non tumulos certum est repetisse silentes,
Amplius, aut terra retineri viscere clausos.
as Tertullian is peremptory and the most of our Writers old, new. But Olle
quid ad te! these Dispensatorie Singularities of Gods will and power unto some
particulars, are no Rules for our Actions, or Expectations. Revealed things,
and ordinary only are for us, Though we must not regulate our actions by them.
and to be our directions in practice of Piety and Devotion. We are not to
rely upon what God can do, nor what he sometime has done: but only upon that
ordinary course, which unless he shall think fit otherwise to dispose of, he
has appointed to be always kept and done. Whatsoever he will do, I know he
can do. If once it be (...) gone out of his mouth, it is not impossible: it
shall come to pass. Unless we have very good warrant indeed, and where it may
be had speak those that can tell, such special Acts of peculiar
Dispensations build not up our Faith toward saving of our Souls, no^ yet
square out our practice any way. Can we find it assured us by good warrant
unquestionable, that Angels and Saints, both or either, attend us in our
courses at all assayes? If we can, say and spare not, Holy Angel, holy such,
or such a Saint pray for us: If no such assurance, then I see no warrant so to
say: Their will is good, no doubt, We conclude then, that there is no
question, whether they are affected to us, but how they are informed, of our
wants.
for what they can do. No man will doubt of their good affections, unto their
Brethren, who knows their Charity is enlarged. Their Power is great, no
question, to do much which they will do. Much indeed, but not yet all they
would do. Whatsoever they ask at Gods hands for Christ's sake, they obtain
it, without controversy. God denies them nothing. Nor any on Earth so soon
as Saints in Heaven, (...), have God so ad placitum, and command in a sort that
I may so speak, as they: being powerful with Him to prevail for all their
desires. But yet as Ignoti nulla cupido, No man affects that whereof he
never heard: So no man does commiserate, the party and case he never knew.
The Heart, we say, rueth not, what the Eye sees not. Can they then entreat
for me, or for any, without Information wherein or for what? How shall I
inform them for my estate, or be sure I am heard when I supplicate thus,
Sancta Maria ora pro me? She is in Heaven: I upon Earth, (...), a great Gulf
is betwixt these two places. She is there by Definition, or Circumscription, as
the Soul separate can be determined and confined. She never knew me or mine
in the flesh: had no correspondencie with any of my Kin, being gathered to
her Fathers in joy with her son, long before my self was borne into the
World, or had any thing to do, amongst the sons of men. I know the saying is
that, Kings have long ears, their (...), Agentes, in rebus and many Informers
give them notice of passages every where. And yet not so long, but that many
great Rumors of great sound and noise never came within the compass of their
Ears. But whether Saints in Heaven have such long Ears or not, Bellarmine
cannot resolve Calvin, I am sure, though he traduce him for using the Phrase,
as if he would embase the glory of Gods Saints, who meant only to show the
folly of these Perswaders in this particular.

Page 156. de al^era vita.
It is childish and ridiculous that Pinello the Jesuit has, Abraham was heard
praying for Abimelech, when he lived upon Earth: He will therefore be much
sooner heard of God, being now in Heaven, for those that he commends unto
Him. Ridiculous: For this is not the Question, whether he shall now be sooner
heard or no: but, whether he can as well recommend any now unto God, as he
did the Case of Abimelech, being with Him. Can he as well hear and
understand those men that desire him now to recommend their cause unto Christ,
as he could Abimelech when he requested him to pray for Him? If he can so
well, and easily understand their Case, I grant he shall as soon, nay sooner
be heard. See how toyishly these great Masters play with their own fancies,
making much ado, with that which need not trouble their enquiries, but balking
the maine of which most men do doubt, and yet this is that Achilles for the
Catholic Cause, that unanswerable Argument, forsooth, which the Master of
Controversies boasts of could never be answered nor assailed. We read, says
He, in both Testaments Viuentes, a viuentibus inuocatos: his meaning is, that
men yet living have desired the Prayers of their Brethren yet living also, as
for instance, Romans 15. the Apostle entreats thus, I beseech you Brethren
assist me with your Prayers unto our Lord, therefore, Licebit etiam nunc
eosdem Sanctos cum Christo regnantes inuocare. Every Child can give a non
sequitur to this foolish Reason, Therefore it is lawful to invoke the same
Saints now with Christ. Lawful for Saint Paul I suppose, means he not so?
Sure the Argument concludes for Him, if for any, as though Saint Paul now
stood in need of the Romans Prayers. If lawful for us to do now that which
Saint Paul did then: and this be his meaning as it is, but that I know him a
man of extraordinary Learning, I would suppose him scarce a Smatterer in common
sense and reason; so that needs, Roscius noluit agere, aut crudior fuit: the
man was not himself in this childish dispute, their state being different,
their conditions diverse, much and many alterations interuening every way. Were
there but some circumstances not the same, it were sufficient to alter the
state of the Question. But says He, the great Controuerser, thus. And
therefore that they plead in vain for Invocation,
If we may not much more and rather inuoke them now, then Saint Paul might
then speak unto them, it is either because they will not intermediate for us,
and this is false: Or because they cannot: and that is false: Or because it is
not sitting they should as being an injury done to Christ, unto whom alone all
our Address should be. The first he proves, because their Love is
enlarged, and upon the improouement of their Charity, their desires much
greater to do us good. The second, because their Power is much larger now then
it was then. The third he says, cannot be supposed, for then Christ was also
wronged in his Office, if living men on Earth desire their Brethren, in private
or public to pray for them. Indeed I grant Christ is not wronged in his
Mediation, It is no impiety to say as they do, Sancta Maria, ora pro me:
Sancte Petre, ora pro me. and so no wrong unto Christ Jesus, to use mediation
of Intercession unto Him. As it is taught, I add in their Schools: by their
Doctors: resolved by that Oracle of Trent. But not as is practiced in their use
and custom, where simple men inuoke Saints as they do God: go to their
Devotions unto the blessed Virgin, not only far more frequently then to Christ
Jesus: but without any difference at all go to it down right, as to the
Authors and Originals of the things they desire, having them in their power to
bestow or not. They have power much more then they had on Earth. Not to give,
but to entreat, to prevail with God, now sooner, in the state of bliss and
immutabilitie, then in the state of Subjection unto Sin and Misery. But
admit it not Impiety, as I think it is not, It is flat and egregious foolerie
at the best.

Peter might say to Paul at Antioch, Unless, they could prove them acquainted
with our affairs,
when they lived together; and Vice versa, Paul unto Peter, Pray for me,
without scruple, or doubt, or question at all. But what need for one to say so
now to either, when neither needs Intercession of other? I cannot say now to
either one or other without incongruitie, or touch of Foolerie, Pray for me.
Were I with Them: could I come at them: or certainly inform them of my estate,
without any question or more ado, I would readily and willingly say, Holy
Peter, blessed Paul, Pray for me: Recommend my case unto Christ Jesus our Lord.
Were they with me: by me: in my kenning, I would run with open arms, and
(...), fall upon my knees, and with affection desire them to pray for me. But
seeing it is nor so, nor so: at least I cannot be resolved so, nor all
Saint-inuocators in the World can prove it so: I would gladly see and know, by
what warrant I on Earth so uncouth and therefore vnkist, so unknown unto them
altogether, for ought can be proved, so far removed from all ordinary
means of intimation to make my case known, can say unto them, Holy Peter,
blessed Paul, pray for me. Let their great Grace and Favor with God alone: of
which I make no question. Their love and entire affection unto their Brethren
alone, of which I am as well persuaded as all the Roman Catholics in the
World are. And in both these respects, their more then probability to prevail
in whatsoever they shall petitionate God for me. All this is nothing, to no
purpose, if they cannot tell who nor what I am: what I would have or desire
them to solicit for, or whether I speak unto them, implore their assistance,
or recommend my suite unto them or not. For I must needs in common reason,
make him acquainted with what I would have, whom I mean to employ in that I
would have. Knowledge is the first moouer in all humane actions whatsoever.
Vltimus actus intellectus practici, est primus voluntatis: The Will wills
not, but that which is suggested by Understanding. Knowledge is (...) all in
all in this present question and dispute of Invocation of Saints, which
ordinarily they seem not to have of themselves, nor yet possibility to be
informed thereof. Or show how they should be acquainted with them.
Prove me this, that they have or may have notice thereof, and prove all. I
will no more contend against their Intercession, if any Papist living, or all
the Papists living can prove that I may make my necessities known unto them
ordinarily; but instantly subscribe without more ado. I grant they know much,
and that ordinarily of themselves, their own indowments, or else by infused,
or revealed knowledge. Know all they do not, no not what is necessary and
required in this case; and what they know, or how much, none but themselves, or
God can relate: which was never yet discovered, that I could find. To make them
omniscious we know, is to give them that of God, which is Incommunicable to a
Creature. Bellarmine rightly detesteth this, and complains that Melanthon
does injuriously cast this aspersion upon their Church. We are told, and have
heard much talk, of their morning and evening knowledge, of their Natural
power and free disposition; of Divine supernatural dispensation; of Angelical
information; of Almighty revelation. But all these and other, bring forth no
better or stronger issue, then some things, at some times, some of them, we
know not who: by some means or other we cannot tell what; may attain unto,
God knows how much: and so leave us uncertain we know not where, to rely
upon some help, we know not from whom, what, or how far. The great Canuaser
of Controversies, for all his confidence, was feign to fall off with a flat
Ignoramus, touching their knowledge resolved on by himself for a stay: and
cast us off at adventures, with this resolution irresolute every way; Vnde
sciant Angeli conuersionem peccatorum, pro qua tantopere gaudent in coelis, vt
dicitur, Luc. 14. Inde sciunt Sancti nostri, nostras preces. The question was
asked by one in good earnest, How the Saints in Heaven may come to take notice
of our prayers: his answer is, In that very sort as the Angels come to know
the conversion of a Sinner, for which they so much, and so greatly rejoice.
But, good Sir Confuter of Calvin, resolve us of fellowship, vnde is it that
Angels know that? and then peradventure we may be still as far to seek for
answer, as he is said to be, unto this indissoluble argument of Intercession
of Saints departed; because men living are employed as Mediators unto God by
Prayer, therefore the Saints may be so employed.

Whether by Intuitiue knowledge, or communication.
But to come to the point: Whatsoever thing or Substance has, or can have a
knowledge of the state and condition of another, must have it originally, or by
Means and Communication. Original knowledge, is Plenary and Intuitiue,
peculiarly proper unto God alone, who is intimi^r unto every thing, then the
thing is or can be to it self: And understands more and more perfectly, then
that Thing does by, or of it self. For he only has knowledge comprehensiue.
The knowledge that Saints and Angels have, (For in this Question as is
specified, they are not divided by the Perswaders to their Intercession) is
Communicated, not original; they being not Creators, but Creatures.
Communicated from God two ways, as is avouched. In Himself: without Himself.
That Supernaturally to Saints and Angels: by which they that behold his Face
in glory, do withal, in him, as in a glass, behold infinite Forms of things
and beings. The other naturally proceeding from the Power of that indowment,
wherewith Saints and holy Angels are endowed, quatenus tales, in that their
blessed estate. Antiquity, taking up the phrase from a passage in Saint
Augustine, has named these two different degrees and kinds of knowledge in
Men and Angels, Matutinam and Vespertinam cognitionem: Their Morning and
Evening knowledge. That which they know in beholding of God, most perfect and
pure, by way of Resultation from his alsufficiencie. That which resideth in
themselves, and proceeds from themselves, not so eminent, excellent, nor so
far extended as the other. Whether by effluxe and emanation out of themselves,
by species congenitas, which is not probable: or else, which is most likely,
though themselves are not persuaded, nor yet resolved of it, by sp^cies
abstractas, from the Creatures. Concerning their Morning knowledge more anon,
when we come to take a view of their glass of the Deity.

But as touching their Evening, or Natural knowledge, For, their knowledge may
be strict enough.
seeing it is uncertain whence, and what it is, or how far it extends; who
can determine? or of what Capacity and Efficacy it is. For either we must
determine of it from the Effects; or conclude of it by the Cause. The Cause is
uncertain; because unknown. The Effects uncertain; because vnapprehended.
Who can say how far it extends? Who can measure or bound it out, that never
yet spoke with any Saint or Angel to be informed, and take thence resolution?
And for any experimental knowledge thereof, it is absolutely without the verge
of man's walk. How little, how much soever it be, it is put down by
themselves as a ruled Case: Their Natural disposition, or understanding, does
not reach home to such a Power or ability, as necessarily must concur, and
is required absolutely unto Invocation, but is of an assise, by much shorter
and more curtayled then will serve: as thus. The Prayers, Petitions, and
Desires of Men, upon any occasion, at any time, are either Conceptus animi,
merely Mental, and not expressed by voice: or withal Vocal, thereby made
known unto such as are within distance. Mental Prayers merely they apprehend
not, nor understand at all. For how can any Understand the Spirit of man, the
thoughts of the heart of man, but the man whose thoughts they are, who is
privy to his own mind? Only God, who made and fashioned the Heart: Who
understands all things long before they come to pass: Who sees from
everlasting to everlasting, intuitiuely, knows the secrets, discovers the
boughts and turnings of the heart, because he is intimior, nearer unto man,
then man is or can be to Himself. Vocal prayers they cannot, being out of
distance, not present with, or near unto them that call. Now in case of
Petition and Invocation, it often stands thus: Men in diverse, and those
remote and distanced places, far asunder, may, and often do, at one and the
same time and instant, Call, and Cry out for help and assistance in their
exigent necessities. How shall they help, who cannot hear? How can they
hear, that are not present, or near, either actually, or virtually, by
Contiguitie, or Continuitie, unto and with those that Call? As Saints in
Heaven, and men upon Earth, nor are, nor can be so present each with other
ordinarily: except perhaps, and but also perhaps, by some particular
dispensation. I grant, that the Soul is a Substance of exceeding quick
dispatch, and of wondrous agilitie every way: especially sole, it self
entire, separate from the encumbrances of the Body. And yet, vltra posse non
est esse. The actiuenesse of it is not indetermined, or uncircumcised. The
Soul is a Substance confined To, where it is, and works determinately. If
here, not there: if in one place, at instant not in another, and though
mooueable, yet how, in what fashion, with what disposition who can say, or
determinately resolve?

It is an Idle, as are many more in him, speculation, that I say not Profane,
which Pinell^s the Jesuit has, Lib. 1. ca. 17.. de altera vita. How far
soever the Jesuit seems to extend it,
that the Souls of the Righteous, now in Heaven with God: of all the
Righteous, and every one of them: even the lowest and least in the Kingdom of
Heaven, do behold in verbo, or in Essentia diuina, the forms and fashions,
the several natures and kinds of all things whatsoever, that were done,
procured, or brought forth in the world. The frogs and lice of Egypt. The gourd
of Jonas: the hair that Absolon shaued and weighed in the scales: him weighing
it in the balance having been poled. And why so? Ratio est, and it is worth
the marking, quia omnes beat^ natural quoddam habent desiderium ejusmodi res
cognoscendi; The Souls of the Righteous have a Natural propense inclination
and desire to see and know all such things as these: all the things that are in
God, and, an Actual desire, nor is, nor can be frustrate for ever. In effect
this is, to see and know as much as God himself sees or knows; not only
what may or can be imparted unto them from God. Which desire, if any such has
been, or is, is too very much extrauagant and exorbitant. Lucifer did no more.
His desire was to be equal with God; and in knowledge, at least, Beyond all
reason.
like unto the most High. But whatsoever the man childishly imagines of them,
their desire is limited, and must be ordinate. It is at all times conformable
unto Gods will, and evermore submitted, subjected unto his good pleasure. More
then he will discover they must not know: they cannot; they do not desire to
understand. And that this in question was of that kind, he should have
proved, and not have brought in, what no man denies, He fulfilleth all their
desire. Prove that this is a part of their Desire. It is no part or portion of;
it belongs not to, the Essence of their happiness or Perfection: though it
belong unto Perfection, and is a principal part thereof. But Perfection of
God, and not of man. Of Divine perfection whereto it is consequent: Not of
humane, to which it is not appendant, nor has any relation thereto at all. Now
it is not the Divine, but humane Perfection, that is their inheritance.
Farther, their indowments are not extended, Neither does the denial of that
knowledge, argue (...) imperfection in them.
Perfectum est, cui nihil deest, secundum modum perfectionis ejus. Not simply
and absolutely, Cui nihil deest: Such is the Perfection of God alone; who
absolutely is alsufficient to Himself, and w^nteth or stands in need of
nothing: But such Perfection, as whereof the thing is capable, according unto
kind, and in degree of possibility which it has to receive such endowments
ordinarily. Now it is the resolution of their own Schools: Non est de ratione
beatitudinis essentialis, vt nostras orationes, aut alia facta nostra matutina
cognitione in verbo videant. It does no way appertain to the Essence, and
condition of the felicity of Gods chosen in the land of the living, that they
know our Desires, or understand our Prayers, by beholding of them in God. So
Gabriel Lect. 31. in Canon: Missae. And it is not certain, says the same
Gabriel, whether it be incident to their felicity accidental. The one
Certain, quod non: it is not at all any part of Essential happiness: The
other Uncertain, An sic, whether it concur to Accidental happiness or no.
Then what Certainty is there for the Inference, they do know; Or for the
Preface, they Desire to know; when all their Desire, as it is ordinate, so does
it make for their happiness one way or other, Essential, or Accidental.
Therefore for the main, Gabriel concludes, That the Saints with God, do not
by any power of their own: by any Natural or Evening Knowledge whatsoever,
understand our Prayers Mental or Vocal, Nullas Orationes nostras,
peremptorily, neque mentales, neque vocales cognoscunt. They are not then
Idonei auditores of us, when we Call, though we Call, and Cry, and Roar;
though (...) with strong Cries and Supplications we lift up the voice.

For his Reason is to purpose, unanswerable, undeniable, They are too far
removed out of distance. They and we are disparted so far asunder, it is
not possible there should be Relation at all. And yet in point of Invocation it
will appear, and he confesses as much, that their Natural or Evening
knowledge only is that which we must trust unto: as being alonely in their
power to use and to dispose: and of ordinary dispensation. Therefore Gregory
says himself, as Bellarmine confesses, that Job is peremptory against
Natural knowledge where he says, Unto which of the Saints will thou turn
thee? And so he there puts over all unto the glass of the Deitie^ which
alone in conclusion must bear all. But because it is the last hope and refuge
they have, we adiourne it unto the last place, and take in some other
uncertainties by the way.

But the Patrons of this cause, confirm their knowledge further by Angelical
Revelation.
As in point of Irresolution men fleet up and down, catch sometime at this,
sometime at that: so they retire, being beaten off from Natural knowledge of
Saints, unto Angelical Revelation. So by Intimation and Ministry of the
Angels, Men's Actions, Petitions, States, and Necessities, say they, are
imparted and made known unto the Saints in Heaven, who, as they are charitable
abundantly, do instantly address themselves to entreat the Almighty for
relief. To make this good, Saint Augustine is produced; Who indeed in his
Book, De Cura pro Mortuis Cap. 15. amongst other peraduentures and
uncertainties, as himself professes them to be, falls upon this of
Angelical Intimation. Possunt and ab Angelis, qui rebus quae aguntur hic
praesto sunt audire aliquid mortuj, quod vnum quemque illorum audire debere
iudicais, cui cuncta subiecta sunt. In which passage not to purpose, it is
plain and evident, that Saint Augustine does not rely upon it: insisteth not
on it at all, as certain. Possunt audire, It may be they do hear, is all he
will stand unto, and that neither is but aliquid, which he so propounds, and
that aliquid, yet limited with a iudicat. So in conclusion, Saints may
peradventure, and peradventure not, Hear and know something from Angelical
Relation, if he will and permit, and no otherwise: and as he permits and
wills both, whose Absolute Will is the Rule of all: who dispenses even this
also as he pleases. Is not this good assurance for Invocation? But admit it
more certain then as yet we can find it; The Proposers of this May be this so
uncertain Proposition, do first of all in the Assertion cross, and fall
foul with their own Position; that Saints in this dispute, and to this
purpose are every way equal unto the Angels. Which mainly opposes the
foresaid equality of Saints and Angels.
For equality supposes the same terms vbique. And Saints have it no
otherwise then upon retayle, at second hand. For the Angels make it known unto
them, who else had been Ignorant, and that inuincibly, of the particulars.
Secondly, if they urge Angelical Revelation, At the least, if that Angelical
Revelation may be granted.
then that unanswerable Argument of the Controuerser is but as a Shaw foul, in
a Corn field, Vnde sciunt Angeli conuersionem peccat^rum, inde sciunt Sancti
nostras prec^s. False, and falsely alleged of him, out of his own mouth, by
the verdict of his Associates. For Saints know them no otherwise then by
Information from Angels. Angels know and understand the Repentance of Sinners
and their Conversion, by Natural or acquired knowledge, as being then present
some of them, when Peter, for instance wept bitterly: or Nineueh repented in
Sackcloth and ashes. Angels are all of them, Saints are none of them,
ordinarily, without any exception or privilege, of Hierarchicall Order,
Ministering Spirits, as their very name imports, Gods Agents employed in the
Church, in Defensive sort, to protect his Friends, in Offensive actions to
oppugn his Foes, generally used and employed for their good, who shall be
heirs of the Promise. Now as is their Employment in Destination: such their
Execution, in putting it to practice, as they should: to visit, take notice of,
assist, ensue, protect, provide for: and that either Ordinarily, as Leiger
Angels do; for their particular and peculiar charge being Custodes paruulorum,
by special assignement: or extraordinarily, as do Angels at large, where and
when God sends them upon special service.

Or, being granted if it make a complete information.
The men that Moses sent, to search out and to view the Land of Canaan, made
report at their Return of their Observations there. In like sort, be it
granted that Angels at their Return home into Heaven from their Agencie on
Earth, impart what they find, and have observed in their Agencie abroad, either
one to another, Saints and Angels, as it were of course and in full Assemblies:
or occasionally in particular as it happens. Neither is certain, neither
assured. Beside, as much to seek are we, Whether all they know, have met with
and observed in lump, or what may concern each ones particular to whom they
do impart it: as to Saint Peter that which touches the Roman State and
Papacy, to Saint George of England, Saint James of Spain, Saint Denis of
France, what is for them to know, in and touching those Countries over which
they are designed or reputed Patrons. Whether so or otherwise, speak those
that can tell: if yet they can tell what it is they speak. Luke 15.17. There
is joy in Heaven amongst Angels for the Conversion of a Sinner. And it is, I
grant it, a Necessary inference, Therefore they knew it first: or else they
had not rejoiced for it. They did know it without all question: nor do I, nor
need I, dispute the question, or enquire the manner how they came to know it.
Angels, and Saints also without question know and understand much done upon
Earth, For a complete and general knowledge can not be proved by one
particular.
which yet does nothing further Invocation. One Swallow makes not Summer, no
more then one Woodcocke does Winter. The Granting of one Act, though
ordinarily, necessarily (and yet it cannot be said here, So, or so) does not
in any good Logic infer a Generality. Because they know the Conversion of
a Sinner, Mary Magdalen, suppose it, or Zacheus, a thing notorious in it self,
and done in the view of Men and Angels; does it ensue, that therefore
necessarily they know all the desires, thoughts, wishes, and Prayers, nay I
will say public Actions of the one or other? much less do they so understand
all things of all men in all places whatsoever. The Conversion of a Sinner is a
particular: and no particular does conclude a General. Else, because Eliseus
knew the Secrets of the King of Aram, and the packing of Gehezi with Naaman;
there was done in Israel nothing but he knew it, which we know to be otherwise
by his own confession, in the Shunamites Case, She is troubled, and the Lord
has not revealed it unto me.

Secondly, that particular is of a main consequence, Specially from that
particular: of the conversion of a Sinner.
The bringing home again of the lost Sheep. An Action of such Nature and
employment, as touches the Communion of Saints. And so the sooner, and rather,
imparted unto those, that are interessed as members are all, more or less, in
the Collateral main Actions of another member. Therefore we read that a
Feast was made, and public joy frequented, at the Prodigals return home unto
his Father: not usual in matters of another Nature. And it must not be
ouer-passed here, that our Savior does not say, The Conversion of a Sinner is
known in Heaven, by which might be employed an ordinary course, for the
Conversion of every Sinner: but thus, At the Conversion of a Sinner there is
joy in Heaven. As if it had been said, Then when it is made known unto them:
as if it were not ordinary or Natural for them to know it, but upon
Information. Howsoever, we are yet but upon, Uncertainties. Peraduentures, are
our greatest, and utmost Resolutions. We are directed for common course of
Life against common sense and reason, unto extraordinary passages, and
addresses. To rely upon some stay: we cannot tell what. Bid go call upon
some Angel, to the purpose, that He may impart our petition unto some Saint:
which Saint does communicate it to the blessed Virgin: and she obtain it by
entreaty, though once it was by command of her Son. A long Circumduction with
much ado: before all can be dispatched, I may be undone. I may perish, before
my case come to knowledge or scanning, whereas, Call upon me* is a shorter way,
I am sure: a surer course, I dare auow, where instantly I may be heard and
delivered at my Call, if not ad voluntatem as I would: yet ad salutem, for the
best, in time of trouble, and my most and surest advantage.

From hence they go on, Therefore, since this will not serve, from Angelical
they fly to divine Revelation.
to have more strings unto their bow, unto divine Revelation, that God imparteth
unto the Saints in Heaven, the necessities and extremities, the Prayers and
Desires of men upon Earth, at that very instant, in which men make them in any
vrgency any way. No otherwise then the Prophets understood things to come: or
knew the thoughts of men, and secret actions, otherwise indiscernable because
performed in private, and upon the absence of the parties made acquainted with
them. This is not apertissima sententia Augustini, as Bellarmine fableth. For
then he should resolve for it and pitch upon it, which he does not, Lib. de
Cura pro mortuis, cap. 15. but only recites it, one amongst other probable and
coniectural means, whereby Saints departed may be supposed to come to understand
some of the actions of the living. Poscunt etiam spiritus mortuorum, A thing
both uncertain,
aliqua eorum quae hic aguntur, quae necessarium est cos nosse, and quae
necessarium non est eos non nosse, non solum praeterita vel praesentia,
verumetiam futura, spiritu Deireuelante cognoscere. The souls of the dead
(...) also understand somewhat that is done amongst us on Earth, which it is
necessary they should know, and not be ignorant of, not only things that are
past or present, but also what is to come. He says no more but possunt, They
may peradventure, and Aliqua somethings, we know not what, which is nothing to
our Prayers certainly, where, or whenever we do make them unto Him. Such
things as Predictions Prophetical, and other such like extraordinary
Donations, are to some only: at some times: in some cases: to some ends, to men
and Angels: to men by Angels; as Saint Augustine does affirm, and that aperte
in this passage. Non omnes homines, sed Prophetae, dum hic viuebant,
cognoscebant. Nec ipsi omnia, And weak*
sed quae illis esse reuelanda, Dei prouidentia iudicabat. A very weak support
to bear so great a weight as does follow Invocation. Unless in this case it
be particularly avouched, that God must discover all things in heaven and in
earth, unto men departed, and to Angels ordinarily at all times in all places
without privilege or exception. So that, as Pinellus avouched for the forms
of all things, they have knowledge omniscious with this alone difference; And
absurd.
Saints and Angels are omniscious, but by communication: God is originally, and
not from others. A thing absurd in Dispensation, if it were true otherwise, God
communicates perfections, his perfections unto his Creatures: but it is only
de suis: a part and portion befitting the condition and proportion of the
Donee, not answering the ability and sufficiency of the Donor. It is not sua:
All that he has: All Power, all Wisdom, Knowledge, and Understanding of all
things to all purposes. For nothing does or can communicate to other, Extremum
potentiae, all it has. But were it fit, convenient, or possible for the Donor
so to indow; yet it is not possible for the Donee so to receive. For it is a
ruled case in Nature and in Grace both, Quicquid recipitur, ad modum
recipientis recipitur, as the Donee, can receive it: not as the Donor could
confer it. They follow the Lamb whithersoeuer be goes. So they may be of
his Court, not of his Counsel. Amici sunt agni: They are indeed and must be
esteemed the Lambs friends. But never was any Friend so entire: Never yet
Favorite had that Interest, as to reuerse that Dictate of Reason, Wisdom and
State, Secreta mea mihi, Reserved Secrets are for my self. Many Secrets were
hid even from the Angels: and not made manifest, but by the event, in and by
the Church even unto them: And are they not yet in statu quo? for ordinary
knowledge howsoever: for extraordinary is not to purpose, will not serve the
turn. Or if it were, and would; yet then all things must be the object of
this extrauagant understanding: or how come these into Interlope alone, Our
Prayers and Petitions unto the Saints!

It is not, it cannot be resolved how by any Revelation from God ordinarily
this is or can be a settled truth. And yet if it cannot ordinarily be done:
they fly fur^her to the glass of the Deity.
Nor how by any Natural Power or ability in themselves, they may be raised
up unto so high a pitch: therefore lastly as Ad anchoram sacram in tempestate,
they have recourse unto their Morning knowledge in verbo, in the Essence of
God, in the Glass of the Deity which must bear all. The Glass of the Deity
a quaint and very plausible conceit. Qua cognoscitur verbum, and relucentia in
verbo, the very Destina of this Doctrine according to the practice in the
Church of Rome: Qui videt videntem omnia, is videt omnia, is the Position: in
which God is made and supposed a glass, by way of resemblance, as representing
unto the beholders view, somewhat no doubt: but what, or how much we cannot
say; nor they assure us. But to the point: In things of God, For so they (...)
our knowledge in Heaven*
being of an higher streine then the Capacity of man, we must not talk at
random, according to our own Fancy, nor measure the Almighty in himself,
as we please, or in his Actions, according to the poor scantling of humane
passages, or ability. Therefore Quo Warranto, do they talk thus of God, or
represent unto us the glass of the Deity? Who taught him to speak so* that
spoke so first; Gregory, or who ever was the author of it? In the language of
Ashdod, they may babble so: but they talk not in this manner in the tongue of
Canaan. The Glass must be in this World, if any be at all. Men living look
into the Glass, if any do. For here we behold as in a glass: There, and
Beholding is reuealedly, When men on Earth do rather behold as in a glass.
and Face to face; unless a glass be no glass: or Saint Paul's opposition of
Terms and Times be false, or not to purpose.

Secondly, the condition of a Glass is, we Neither can it agree with the
condition of a glass: which represents all before it.
to express and represent unto the beholder, All, whatsoever is before the
Glass. But Gods Perfection is such, that in Him are comprehended (...), What
Is, Was, or Shall be hereafter. So that Videns videntem omnia videt omnia. It
cannot be otherwise, but that He who sees God, sees whatsoever is in God.
Say you so? And that Essentially, and comprehensiuely? Then man is made like
unto the most high: God sees from everlasting to everlasting, and so by this
rule must all his Saints see. In which regard, Since something in that (...) is
(...) all the Angels,
I wonder Saint Paul durst auow, That the mysteries of our most holy Faith,
were not known unto Angels from the beginning, but by revelation from the
Church. And yet those mysteries were ever in that Glass, as being resolved on
in the purpose and counsel of God, not secret, from the beginning. And the
Angels, from the first instant of their Creation, especially confirmed in
Grace, did ever indeclineably, Behold the face of God in glory. And how can
this Conclusion of Christ Jesus stand firm, But of that day and hour, the day
of Doom, knows no man, no not the Angels in Heaven: it being to be received
as an Eternal truth, That he who sees him, that sees all things, does also
in and with, and by Him see all things? For, is the Day resolved on in his No^
can it without absurdi^i^ and (...) be granted, that all things are (...).
Why then Saints and Angels are therewith acquainted, that read and behold in
Him, as in a glass, whatsoever is Reconditum, in his most secret thoughts.

I add, it is absolute absurdity, nay flat impiety, to tie God Almighty, and
therefore most free, unto a fatal concatenation of Causes. Thus they do in
this case, or else, nor do they, nor say they any thing to purpose. There is a
twofold glass, if yet they needs will insist upon, and prattle of a Glass: at
least all things are, which in effect is the same, to the same purpose, in a
twofold difference and disposition. Natural, and so necessitated: or
voluntary, and so free Agents are they all. Natural Agents work, and cannot
choose but work always, at all times, in the same sort, being not diversely
applied unto Patients. The Sun being risen, gives light, and cannot choose but
give light unto the world. The Fire burns always, and cannot choose but burn
combustible matter put unto it. For, if they make it a voluntary glasses
nothing is revealed but at his pleasure.
But voluntary Agents not so. They Can and Cannot work at pleasure. They
suspend their Actions, if they will: and dispense and dispose them according
unto Time, Place, Occasion. It was a profane Paganicall conceit, (...),
Calaber.
that God was also subject unto fatal necessity and decrees, and hissed out,
with indignation by the wisest of them. For we know, and are assured, not only
Christians, but even men endued with common sense and reason, that God of all
Agents, is most free: As being absolute of himself alone, (...), no way
depending upon any; no way beholding to another. He can then suspend his
Actions as he will, in revealing and concealing what he pleases: To, and from
whom he will and pleases. What he does conceal: how much he does discover of
Himself unto others, they must first assure, that from the Morning knowledge
of Saints and holy Angels, in the glass of the Deity, go about to persuade
unto Invocation, and to establish Intercession of Saints. Unless, and until
they can do this, it is idle to talk of the glass of the Deity, in which all
Gods Counsels and Actions are beheld: or the Saints looking and prying into
that glass, in which they may view and surueigh all his counsels. Est enim
verbum speculum voluntarium, says Biel most truly, ostendens, videnti se,
quantum voluerit, non autem quantum relucet. And Thomas farther, 1. par. qu.
12. artic. 8. Cum nullus intellectus creatus illu^ comprehendat, non potest in
ipso videre, omnia quae facit vel facere potest. Sed vel plura vel pauciora,
secundam quod perfectius vel imperfectius eum videt. Enough to break in pieces
this fancy of a glass.

And, if they make it a natural glass: ye^, who shall give the beholder, as
sufficient capacity, (...) glass is of continen^^.
And yet farther, to condescend to that which must not be granted, because it is
absurd, false, and impious, that God is not a Voluntary, but a Natural glass:
yet even then, and so, are they never a whit the nearer by looking into, or
staring upon that glass, to understand whatsoever may concern this case,
unless that Obiectum be adaequatum, the Beholder be of as great capacity, as
the Glass is of continency, which He beholds. Suppose a glass as wide,
large, and spacious as all Europe, which naturally may and does represent all
that part of the world; yet what is that to me for my information, for
business of Spain, Norway, or Constantinople, unless my sight, not able to
reach in plano, unto all parts of Europe, nay not of England, a point of
Europe, could take a perfect, and thorough view of each part and corner of the
glass, so much more large and spacious, then that one not very big Country is;
Each finite Subsistence, has a quousque, for magnitude, durance, and
perfection; thither it may come, but go no jot farther. In the Glass of the
Deity, if there be imagined such a glass, there are Actus, and ordines
Hierarchici, and of Subordination, according to capacity, capabilitie, merit,
disposition: or else the blessed Virgin has but an equal portion with
ordinary people: S. Paul no more advancement in Glory, then he whose Acts
burn, and is himself scarce saved by fire. And yet we know there are vix
saluati: there are Porters at the house of God; and such as are admitted, ad
mensam, ad dextras, ad sinistras. But those that have most, and deepest
insight, greatest shares, all come short of that large and immensurable
dimensum, to be made partakers of all the secrets of God, nay to know the
thoughts or prayers of men, which they must understand, and that ordinarily
too, or how can a man say to them, Pray for me? Nay, unless I do know their
nice dimensum, how can I, or any one say, Pray for me? It may be that Saints
part and portion whom I implore, unto whom I make Petition, is not so large, of
such capabilitie nor extent, as is requisite, as another is. (...). The Angels
behold what they can behold and see, and Archangels as much as they are capable
of, each according unto his own measure and scantling; For the Angels may see
much: al^hey cannot.
but every one, and all short of this degree and measure, to know and
understand all things ordinarily. Bellarmine in this point, has brought an
argument, that, nor Himself, nor any for Him, have or will ever be able to
answer. If the Saints need at any time any new Revelation, and have not the
Ability and Sufficiency at once from God, and that at the instant of their
admittance into Glory, the Church were too bold, so hand ouerhead, to implore
them all, or say unto any one of them, Ora pro me. but first in Reason and
Congruitie should Call upon God, to reveal and make known our Prayers unto
them. Upon which we infer, They are too ^old. For the Church is unjustly
made accessory thereto: For their Ability is not absolute at the first, but
receives an access ever day by day, until the Consummation of all by Christ.

If for instance, the glory of Saint Paul does increase daily in heaven, as by
means of his works remaining to posterity, the glory of God, the effects of
his grace, the bounds of the Church are increased daily. The reward of Saint
Paul must be answerable to it, and receive an addition, as their own Schools
do determine every day. Nor had he his dimensum, or portion at first. So
then, (...). Adieu fine fiction of the Glass of the Deity, it is but a pretty
toy to play withal. Adieu no less invocation of Saints, especially built up
from that fiction, a foregery invented to delude men withal, to teach them to
rely upon a reed of Egypt, and lose fair and sure possibilities, nay
certainties sure otherwhere. A fiction cast off, if I well remember, for at
this instant I have not the book by me, by Hugo a Victore, long ago.

Can that be sure or well built for others to rely upon, and fly unto, where
the Master builders of Babel, not to say Bezaleels, are confounded, and in
distraction among themselves? the Schoolmen I mean, one with another.
Cognitio is all. Saints Intercessors must first know, and be acquainted with
our necessities, before they can give us help or assistance. And before they
can know it, we must acquaint them with what they must know. Now, de modo quo
cognoscant* How and in what sort, these holy Saints and Angels, albeit they
behold, and that indeclinably Gods face in glory, do see also and know other
things beside God, Non conuenit inter omnes, says Pinello. And yet it must
conuenire, and inter omnes too, or we must go seek for Patrons in adversity,
And if we doubt whether they can see our wants: we may well doubt whether they
can help them.
having no scriptum est for our warrant, and what is tradition not accorded? In
Gods Precepts and Tendries of belief, I will subject, and captiuate my
enquiring into plain belief, and be content though I can but know (...) that
so it is: because he has said it: though he has not discovered (...) what it
is, nor I can reach unto (...), wherefore it is. But in that which is not
tendered under so high commanding form, as Believe th^s and true, it is good
wisdom to play the Sceptick a while, and to enquire, An, and cursit, before
Assent, consent, and full approbation be yielded thereunto. Pinellus relates
it, upon his word I take it, that Occam, Gab^el and John Mayor, do positiuely
affirm that Saints departed and with God, And how many be there that doubt of
that (...).
behold no creature at all in verbo per visionem beatisicam: Much less in all
probability, the needs and necessities, the votes and petitions, the cries and
complaints and several desires of men upon earth, to be manifested and made
known unto them, but by other, I know not what, notions, means, and
revelations. Catetan, Soto, and Durand he says, Fly for sati^faction, unto
particular revelations. The glass of the Deity they utterly deny, affirming it
assuredly, and tantum non de side, that Saints behold nothing at all in the
divine Essence. Bellarmine casts off these their revelations as incredible
and improbable. Scotus and Occam will not be beholding unto that imagined
glass we speak of: because, as Gabriel Biel relates it of them, they are
naturally endowed, Distinct and intuitiue cognoscere cogitationes aliorum:
That is, they are set down in the throne of God himself, Almighty and
Omniscious, who was wont to challenge it as his own peculiar, Ego Dominus
scrutans renes: and had it given him without all contradiction, 2 Paralip. v^.
Tu solus nosti corda filiorum hominum. And again, he sees from everlasting
to everlasting, and understands our thoughts long before. The gloss upon
Esaias 63. resolves it, that Mortui etiam sancti, nesciunt quid agunt viui:
etiam ipsorum silij: The dead, though Saints in heaven, and living there with
God, understand not at all, what men that live upon earth do. No, not, though
they be their own children, of whom they have, in all probability, a more
special care. Thus he: expounding that sentence of the Prophet, verse. xvj.
Doubtless thou art our Father, though Abraham know us not: and Israel take no
notice of us. Which exposition, there the Author of that Gloss, Biell tells
us, did borrow, as indeed he did from Saint Augustine. And lastly, let them
consider what consequence will ensue upon this resolution of Saint Thomas: in 1
par. quest. 12. ar. S. in respons ad 4. Inuocatio est de rebus singularibus.
Sed talia non faciunt ad perfectionem intellectus Angelici vel beati. Non ergo
illum ^ntellectum habent. This is no objection but his own resolution. Where
such diversity and inconstancy is, what assurance can men have to rely upon
the intercession of Saints, not yet determined how, or whether it may be had
and obtained or not?

Saint Augustine in his fourth Tome. Lib. de Cura pro mortuis cap. 13.
discourses upon this point at large. Si rebus viuentium interessent animae
mortuorum. If the souls of the departed were present with, or interessed in
the affairs of the living: and if they did really and indeed discourse with
us, then when we behold them in our sleep: my most dear and loving mother
would in no case leave me now, who in her life time followed me up and down,
by Land and Sea, to the intent she might live with me continually. For God
defend, that she now in bliss, should be more auerse or cruel then when she
lived. Believe me, were I grieved at any time, or perplexed: it cannot enter
into my thoughts otherwise, but that she would visit and comfort her
distressed son; whom sometime she loved with such tender affection, as she
could not endure to behold him heavy. But questionless it is true which the
holy Psalmist says, when my father and my mother forsook me, the Lord took
me up. If so be then our Parents forsake us in death, how can they be present
or interessed in our cares or affairs, any way? And if our Parents have then
no such interest in us, who are the dead beside that can tell what we do?
how, or wherewithal we are distressed? The Prophet Esaias says, For thou art
our Father, though Abraham know us not: and though Israel take no notice of us.
If so great and famous Patriarchs, as Abraham and Jacob, did not understand,
how the world went with their posterity, the people that came from their
loins, how can it be that men deceased should at all take any notice of the
state, or intermeddle with assisting men alive on earth? Thus that learned and
most judicious Augustine discourses to the point. Who yet farther enforces
the truth of this position from the promise made by God unto that good King
Josias, viz. That he should be gathered unto his fathers in peace, and not see
the destruction of Jerusalem, nor the plagues that were to come upon that
people. Which promise had been to no purpose at all, as he well infers, Si
post mortem sentiant, quaecum que in vita humana calamitates contingunt.
Bellarmine he answers nothing to purpose: nor does himself, I suppose, know
what, viz. That the meaning of S. Augustine is; The Saints departed, do not
converse with men here naturally, that is, as he expounds himself, sicut
faciebant, cum hic vinerent. That such an addle and senseless answer should
drop from the mouth of such a Master in Israel! or that he should bear us in
hand Saint Augustine would so play the child in earnest, as to argue the case,
That dead men are not alive when they are dead, That is, do not converse with
men then, as sometime they did, while yet they lived, naturally? Though
Bellarmine be disposed thus to toy and t^flle, S. Augustine meant seriously,
that the souls departed are not interessed at all, do know nothing at all of
the passages and affairs in the world: as his whole discourse: the instance of
his mother, the example of Josiah well declares. If by naturally, he meant
ordinarily, as it seems he would have done, if he durst have touched it,
because he straight opposes supernatural interest thereunto: it is most true,
that Saint Augustine does resolve, that ordinarily they meddle not at all, know
nothing at all of our affairs, and no other intercourse betwixt them and us,
Unless by some extraordinary dispensation.
will hold up Invocation then this natural, and ordinary. He grants, and I
subscribe to his opinion, that some Saints may extraordinarily, at sometimes,
by special dispensation take notice of some things, and be assistants in some
cases, unto some particular persons, Bellarmine himself brings that out of
S. Augustine which implies that thus he should have said, enough to discover
his own folly. Non ideo putandum est, vivorum rebus quoslibet interesse posse
desuntos, quoniam quibusdam sanandis vel adiu vandis Martyrs adsunt. Sed ideo
potius est intelligendum, quod per diuinam potentiam, Martyrs vivorum rebus
intersint quon^a^ defuncti per natural propria^, viuorum rebus interesse non
possunt. This case is put by special dispensation. Put for Martyes only; and
not for all holy Saints departed. Put as a special act of Gods omnipotency:
therefore ill and falsely applied unto ordinary practice for all Saints
departed: and that special dispensation made a common course of ordinary
practice. Thus like S^s^phus, he alters and changes the forms, the stampes,
and marks of things, and that all to no purpose, unless special acts of
Divine Omnipotency be made common rules of action in course of Piety, and
intercourse betwixt God and Man.

^ut ordinarily (...).
Yet well fare Hugo de sancto Victore, who concludes this question thus, as
B^el sets it down. Many make question whether Saints departed do hear the
prayers made unto them, yea or no. Whether it be possible that Petitioners
suites should come unto their notice and understanding. Certainly, it is no
very easy matter to set down a conclusion resolute in questions of this
nature. For how can we be ascertained and resolved in our knowledge concerning
them, we being not able to conceive nor find out, what knowledge they have of
us and our affairs, and by what means they attain unto it? This is most sure
and certain, that the souls of the Righteous residing with God, in the secret
place of Divine contemplation, where they both do see God, and have so far
forth information of things done abroad, as may only extend to advance and
augment their own joy, and enlarge their assistance tendered unto us. He means
in general, not in particular to this man o^ that. Hitherto little advantage
is for Invocation: and no matter: For mark what follows: We desire
Intercessors with God, in our need. And what will thou more? Do thou
peradventure fear, that happily they will not pray for thee, whose practice is
to pray perpetually? How can it then be that they should not pray for thee; if
thou prayest for thy self, who yet cease not praying when thou do desist?
But thou will reply: If they hear me not, I do but wast words in vain, in
making Intercession unto them, that do neither hear nor yet understand. Be it
so: Saints hear not the words of those that call unto them. Well: nor is it
pertinent unto their blessed estate, to be made acquainted with what is done on
earth. Admit that they do not hear at all. Neither, whether they do, o^ do
not (...).
Does not God therefore hear? If he hear thee, why art thou solicitous then
what they hear, and how much they hear, seeing it is most certain that God
hears unto whom thou prayest? he sees thy humility, and will reward thy
Piety and Devotion. In effect, as if it were concluded by him. It is no
material thing or of necessity to pray unto Saints.

Not the ten^t any point of faith:
Be it then unto us as indeed it is not, No point of Faith, but merely brought
in out of some private affect^ons, without any warrant any way more, then
incertainties and peraduentures, that Saints departed, But in (...).
are to be called unto for Advocates and Assistants in time of trouble, or
howsoever. Be it at most a point of Indifferency, to be believed in opinion, or
else rejected; but in practice ordinary, a point of flat foolery to call upon
them, In (...), a point of fooly.
who are peradventure Saints, peradventure not. It may be at some time, it may
be not, enabled or disposed, we cannot tell, how or how far; to understand
our Petitions and our Prayers; to accept, and accommodate our desires. I
suppose the man that understands himself, being in need, and in necessity,
will in his exigent necessity, (where ever bis dat qui cito dat,) not go so
far about the bush: and that on peraduentures will adventure Life and State
upon uncertainties. ^
Iamblychus a Pagan will stout him for it, whose judgment was (...). Men make
themselves fools, and deserve to be laughed at, that ask good things
otherwhere then at Gods hands, who is able and willing to come at call: to
hear and deliver in time of trouble. Who beside his goodness in preventing
grace, that he wills us to call, before he was entreated, has given
direction in most loving inuitation: For immediate access call upon me: thou
thy self call upon me, without any advocate at all, or mediator, or any
assistant for intercession: As if Invocation of Saints were but idle.

Last of all they go to practice and imitation, Yet is it mainly urged from
the practice of ancient times.
thither they appeal: and tell us of use in being long ago: produce us
Precedents in ancient times, and tradition without the memory of man. The
Fathers did so in the Primitive times: Et vir^s magno, sequi est pene sapere.
Since that, God himself has ratified the custom, and confirmed it by
miracles from heaven; and therefore we may safely do, why not, as they have
done before, and as God would have us to do, by special warrant.

This persuasion is a potent one I confess indeed with ordinary men in course
of life: But that practice not squared by a perfect rule.
because we live by practice and not by precept: are directed by that which men
do, rather then by that which men should do. But first we might answer by S.
Augustines rule in point of Precedence and example: where the practices of
Superiors in common course do become rules of action unto Inferiors: and that
which has sometime been done so or so, is tendered to be done so perpetually:
viz. A sanctis accipe perfectis exemplum. If needs you will go to it by
practice, set down for a rule, for to follow that which is of perfection
indeed: as being squared by a perfect rule. Go take in Precedents derived from
perfect men. Now that is to do as Moses was commanded: To follow the pattern
showed him in the mount. That is to do after the rule directed and showed unto
him from heaven. The which rule is, Call upon me: and the practice according
unto that rule, ^or the rule is here contrary to their practice.
of those men that in the mount have talked with God, and followed the pattern
showed them there. Thus he that was the Father of all the faithful. Thus the
eldest of the promised seed: thus he that prevailed with God Almighty: thus
the man that spoke with Him in the bush, And we have practice ancient (...),
and (...) to that rule.
and saw the face of his Creator. So all descending downwards, righteous men
and Prophets, famous and honorable in their time, who called upon Me, the Lord
alone, and never upon any but on Me. This ancient universal practice in
Israel, their successors in time and place, the Apostles of the Lamb, have
commended unto the Church by word and example evermore. Who never in her best
parts and purest times presumed to transpose the ancient fixed bounds. If that
(...), the men that came after these in time, and therefore in honor and
account come far short of them, have altered the language once spoken in the
land, and babled in an unknown tongue, We have no such custom, nor the Church
of God. The best of their Compeeres, the principal and flower of the sons of
Seth, I mean those servants of Abraham, armed at all points, against the
enemies of Christ, the three hundred and thirty in the Council of Nice, have
put a word in our mouths, which may serve as an answer to all objections
whatsoever, (...). Let things continue as they were long ago in the eldest
times: In use and practice from the beginning. Innouations grow in, most-what
upon the by, and in process of time it comes to pass, that Exempla fiunt
quae esse facinora desierunt.

But I will not now use this advantage here, And, after them the practice and
doctrine of the Fathers, if rightly understood, is not much against it.
especially against men of such rank and reckning, (...), the men deserve
far better words and usage then so; having been all famous in their
generations and such as have left a name behind them. And therefore with awful
respect unto the persons and place, I answer, first in general, that their
words are not to be taken aduantageously, nor cited for assertions resolved,
which were never meant nor intended for so peremptory conclusions, as are in
these cases deduced from them. We should weigh and consider, what and how we
read in the writings of the Fathers touching points in Controversy at this
day. Non eadem, de ijsdem, ab eodem dicuntur, upon experience we find it, That
the same man of the same thing, speaks differently, in diverse places: With
some imputation perhaps of uncertainty and contradiction, yet not deserved: if
we consider diverse and different circumstances. In heat of Opposition, by way
of contention, some For many things beyond their judgment may fall from them
in heat of disputation.
which will not hold weight at the beam of the Sanctuary, and the men that
take advantage at them in one point, will soon fall off from them in another.
S. Hierome is much in this kind, according to the vehement choleric nature
and disposition of the man. Secondly, Or popular discourse.
and gain action in point of practique Piety, they lavish by way of
exaggeration, in large hyperbolies and amplifications. So the Grecian
Homelists, and Chrysostom especially above them all: Or related ex opinione
(...).
of which they are reporters, and no more: they relate unto us the opinions of
other and not their own: They tell us what was done, but do not entermeddle
by way of censure or opinion for their parts. All these when they speak
positive divinity indeed, and conclude things de side dogmatically, their
Positions then run in another tone, which gives, though unjustly, occasion of
suspicion of contradiction, if men do not consider their sayings perpensedly,
or be disposed to take advantage covertly. A case to be exemplified, as shall
appear in the present question afterward.

Again, it is a point considerable, how many of And in many things they are
mistaken, or belyed of those that produce them.
that either are, or else may be produced by the Opposites for Patrons and
Abettors, of Intercession and Mediation by Saints, could in no case condescend
unto this conceit, their Positive grounds and resolutions being direct for the
clean contrary and flat opposite opinion to be true: viz. That they had no
interest at all in GOD; nor yet means or possibility to commence any such
suite unto him for themselves, much less for others. It is confessed by the
grand Dictator of Controversies, that the Patriarchs and Prophets were not
inuocated of old, under and before the Law, as the Apostles, Martyrs, and holy
Saints were after the Law: in regard that Christ was not then come in the
flesh, nor yet they in statu, quo anon. For until he came, and in Death
descended, and delivered them thence, they were conclusi in carcere, shut up in
Limbo, a region of Hell, and did not enjoy the presence of God in glory, nor
come near to put up any suites unto him: Again* it is by him supposed a
chief cause, why many deny Invocation of Saints, Heretics, as he calls
them, old and new, because that they, both are and have been in that error,
that as yet they are in atrijs, attending in the Porch or base Court abroad,
not admitted to the presence of the Alm^ghty. If things stand thus, as he
would have them, then upon supposition of the premises, many ancient Fathers in
the Primitive Church, called to be witnesses for practice of Intercession of
Saints, do in their intention say nothing to purpose; cannot indeed be
produced for witnesses in the point, but are made to speak what they never
thought, what they could not think, being men known and confessed to have
held this opinion, that the Souls of the Righteous departed hence, are not yet
with God, enjoying his Presence, and beholding his face in Glory; but are in
Atrijs and in vestibulo domus Dei, and in those Repositorijs, seated God
knows where, expecting the full accomplishment of their consummation in
Christ; in the day of the retribution of the Righteous. This being supposed,
needs (...), that hope of great help and assistance from them, by so free
access, and representation of our Prayers unto God, as these men talk of;
from those, who could not even in their own opinions, intimate their own
suites unto God, in presence representatiuely, being not admitted thither where
he had his residence, not coming to look into the Glass of the Deity: For
they were, it is taught, in Limbo, a verge of Hell, far enough remote from
God and Heaven. Thus it is determined by him that can tell, Haec quaestio
fundamentum est omnium aliarum, (namely, concerning the honor due and done
unto them: Canonization of them, Assistance from and by them,) an Sanctorum
animae Deum videant, and vere beatae s^nt ante diem iudi^ij. So that Irenaeus,
the Author of the Questions under Iustine Martyrs name: Tertullian, Origin,
Hillary, Chrysostom, Theodoret, and others, must be spunged out from the list
and Catalogue of Assertors of this point, The Saints departed, may profitably
be inuoked.

And lastly, in many thin^^ they are m^^rly Rhetorical.
pretended for this particular: those Rethoricall Figures, Prosopopeyes, (...),
and Compellations of holy Saints and Martyrs, to be found in the Panegyricall
Orations of the Greek Fathers, especially, are directed, not at large to any
Saint or blessed soul, as to parties unknown, Specially speaking to Saints,
supposed to have more particular int^lli^ence, and care of them.
without our acquaintance, but only to such as had, or be supposed to have
had, some more special and reserved reason of entireness, presence,
assistance, or intelligence with them, then others had, as interessed in the
State, Calling, Profession, Place, Life, and manner of Conversation of the
Petitioners, or directed unto such as were their familiars and acquainted in
this life: and so more private and peculiarly addicted unto them in Heaven. Who
peradventure might, as has been said, through peculiar disp^nsa^ion, be very
careful of their good, intend their necessities and behoof: and through that
peculiar dispensation, attend the occasions sometime of their acquaintance,
according to that practice and opinion in use, specified in that compact
betwixt Cyprian and Cornelius Bishop of Rome. These general Observations,
These f^^e observations may help us in the allegation of the texts of Father.
may be exemplified in the particular allegations of texts of Fathers; either
representatiuely for the body of the Church in Councels: or else particularly
in their private writings and allegations; which are not demonstrations of the
Church Doctrine in those times, but only private opinions of some men,
delivered obiter, and upon the by, without any contestation at all; or violence
for the maintayning of them. Which severally persuade not, but being laid
together, if they speak one thing, and run all one way, may not be lightly
rejected or cast off: Nam quae non prosunt singula, multa invant. Therefore to
join issue, let us try their force, and see of what efficacy they are of to
persuade to a general opinion and belief.

Dionysius Areopagita leads the Ring (as he is cited by the great Master of
Controversies) in his 7. Chapter of the Church-Hierarchy, See it first in Dien.
Ar.
Idem sit, acsi sole suos radios sanis elargiente, oculis, sibi quis oculos
eruens, solaris luminis particeps fieri postulat. Sic impossibilium superflua
spe ille suspensus est, qui sanctorum flagitat preces, and Naturae ipsorum
consentaneus, sacras operationes abigit. I will take no exception to the person
of this witness; Whose Testimony, if it be good,
let him pass for an honest legal man, though he be generally, anciently,
and probably also suspected for a counterfeit, and held insufficient to give
any witness in upon evidence of Record. To the witness and testimony which he
gives, I answer. Here is no mention of the practice: nor yet Justification
for the rule of Invocation of Saints. Nay, rather that practice, in general or
particular, is disallowed, as unprofitable, because used in a Subject that is
impossible. Flagitare preces Sanctorum, is superfluous, because the hope of
help from them is impossible. It is, says he, as if a man that has no eyes,
should expect or desire to be enlightened from the beams of the Sun, which
shines indeed forth unto them that are api nati, fitted to receive it, and
capable of it. Nor can the allegation be aduantaged any way, because Sani, are
comforted and refreshed by the light of the Sun, which indeed shines unto
those that are capable of it: For it is confessed, to hold proportion there
with, that the Saints departed, do in general pray for the Estate of the
Church militant upon Earth: May well be applied against them.
for the state and necessity of particular Churches, or private men their
friends, with which they were acquainted in time of life. That is, That the
Sun indeed sheddeth, and casts beams abroad. But the question is of
particular Intercession for any man: that is, of applications of those beams
of the Sun, to the eyes of the blind in vain, and without profit, which are
pleasant and profitable to him that has his sight. Thus this Testimony, as it
lies in the body of those Controversies, is pregnant against the Pleaders of
it. But farther, in the Deposition subscribed And, it cannot make for them, if
Sancti be so understood, as he meant it.
Areopagita speaks a far off, and to another purpose. Sancti in Dionysius
Language, are not Defuncti, or Regnantes with Christ, as the Controuerser
supposes: but the word is to be taken according to the phrase of those most
ancient times. So Saints, in Saint Paul, are not Saint Stephen, Saint James,
and such as they, Then dead: The phrase is not once, I suppose in him that way:
but men then alive in the bosom of the Church; parts and members of the Church
militant. The Saints in Dionysius answerably were such holy men as served at
the Altar; as the last words in the Testimony, as it is laid down there, might
very well have informed him: Et Naturae ipsorum consentaneas sacras operationes
abigit. In effect, Will not regard, or partake And the latter words restored to
their true construction.
or of the Sacraments which they minister unto him. (...). In neglect and
disregard of the gifts of God; and in breach of his Commandments. Again, I
add, that Bellarmines eyes were not in his head, when he took a view of the
Testimony of Dionysius; or else he took up the witness from some Knight of
the post, who was ready to say any thing for his own advantage. For the whole
discourse of Dionysius in that Section is concerning Prayer for the And the
occasion considered, whereupon Dion. spoke them.
not for their actual assistance and relief. Reader do but go view the
Evidence, and tell me if the alleager be not either much to seek, or much more
too blame: a very silly man, or a sly Sophist, and very Colluder in the point
in question.

Another and a better Evidence is of those times, as ancient, See (...) again^
(...).
and more authenticke witness, then Dionysius; a legal man, and without
exception any way. (...). ^
I salute that beloved and much affected name, whom, Oh might I see, placed in
my seat, then when I am with Christ, enjoying Heaven. He means Hero, a
Deacon of the Church of Antioch, and Successor to himself in that See. Which
speech had not passed doubtless from that holy man, had he not been
persuaded that the dead with Christ, had notice of, and were interessed in the
affairs of the living in this World. I grant this was his judgment or
opinion: But yet for all that, this is nothing to purpose. For Ignatius does
not will Hero, Who in that which they allege, desires only to know his
Successor, and that by special dispensation.
or his people of Antioch, to call unto him after death: no, nor yet assure
Hero he would pray for him. The most that we can resolve of, is this, that he
should know him to be his Successor, and take notice of him in his Spirit. And
that this also by special dispensation. For says he, (...): I would to God I
might see him, that is, be permitted to see him, as if it were not ordinary:
For then he needed not have so wished, if he could not choose but see, and so
take notice of him. It is granted that Saints by special dispensation, may
take notice and care, and patronage in some special Actions, of some special
men or Societies, in whom they are more nearly interessed, as was Ignatius in
the Antiochians. What if I should say, by some natural, though unknown
approximation? this will never produce so large an inference, as, therefore,
any man may call upon any Saint, in any place, at any time, for any exigence,
or occasion. And it is only his desire, which proves nothing to their purpose.
He that knows the Inualidity of a particular, to infer or conclude a
general, will not much be moved with such allegations. Lastly, I add,
Ignatius does but wish it; and a man may wish mere impossibilities.

Irenaeus, as in age, Another Evidence is out of Jrenaeus.
so also succeeds in allegation. In which the man meant to make us merry, or
marvel, in sending Eve the wife of Adam, and Grandmother of all, dead, A
merry one.
and being gathered unto her place and people, so many thousand years before
the Virgin Mary was borne, to invocate for Intercession that blessed Virgin: Et
sicut Eua seducta est, (are the words of Irenaeus,) vt effugeret Deum: (read
it aufugeret.) Sic Maria suasa est, obedire Deo: vt Virginis Euae, virgo Maria
fieret aduocata. A mere impossibility in Nature, and in Reason, that the
Virgin Mary should be Eues Intercessor, yet closed up with this Epipho^ema,
Quid clarius? because there is the word Aduocata in the Text. Or else a mad one.
I may say, Quid clarius, that the man is beside himself? Yet so beside him,
and out of him supposed, that railing Franciscan, answerable to his name,
Feuardentius, took up the same allegation, and as he dreamed it to be
Eu^dentissimum, so he scored it also in his margin with this goodly gloss,
Beata virgo Maria (...) and caeterorum pec^antium aduocata est. I wonder he did
not add this excellent blasphemy thereunto. Euam and peccantes a morte
redemit: For so it ensues in Irenaeus. Et quemadmodum astrictum est morti
genus humanum per virginem, soluatur per virginem. Aequalance disposita
virginalis inobedientia per virginalem obedientiam. Much more plain for
Redemption, then that former part is for Intercession: yet I hope the man will
not fasten such blasphemy unto so great a worthy in Christ's Church, as was
Irenaeus. His meaning is this, and no more: That as by Eua sin came into the
World, Valesse the Father be soberly exp^unded.
and by sin death: So by the Virgins means, life, and salvation
instrumentally: In that she was that chosen vessel of the holy Ghost, to
bear him in her womb, who by taking flesh of her, redeemed us from the curse
of death. So she in a sort was cause of Life: and in that sort Mediatrix; that
is, Aduocata here: not Intercessor for Eve, who was so long in time before her*
First then the man plays fast and loose: the Colluder, As by them he is not
in a threefold regarded.
in the ambiguity of the word Aduocata. Secondly, he infers an
impossibility, and therefore an absurdity, that the blessed Virgin Mary did
pray for Eve: which must either be in Heaven, and then she needed it not: or in
Limbo, and that was but for a time, till Christ in his death descended into
Limbo, and led both her, and all other the Fathers thence with himself into
Heaven. Thirdly, according to the opinon fastened unto Irenaeus, She is
Aduocata to none but to Virgins; and therefore not promiscuously to be called
one of Any: and by those of whom she is Inuocated, to be so called on, only
for a time. For so is the comparison there instituted, betwixt Eua and Maria
Virgins.

To him succeeds Eusebius in the Controversy, whose testimony speaks thus,
A fourth they have out of Eusebius.
as there it stands reported, out of 13 book, 7 Chapter of his Evangelical
preparation. Haec nos quotidie factitamus, qui verae pietatis milites vt Dei
amicos honorantes, monumenta quoque illorum accedimus, votaque ipsis facimus,
tanquam viris sanctis, quorum intercessione ad Deum non parum juvari
profitemur. I answer, first, Eusebius does not Where he speaks only of the
general mediation of the Saints for us.
of particular Invocation for part^cular Intercession. But of general
Mediation of the Saints in Heaven, who without all question, nor does any man
doubt of it, do pray for Saints on earth in general, according to the nature
of Communion of Saints, without any Intercession Specialy, that of the Martyrs.
Secondly, Eusebius does not enlarge his speech to all the Saints departed, of
any state or condition whatsoever, but, whatsoever it be that he says, he
confineth, it unto Martyrs only, whom he calls according as the alleager
has it, Verae pietatis milites. Now the case of Martyrs and other Saints is
not equal or parallel. For in the opinion of the Ancients, that of Martyrs
was paramount to all other departed with God: as enjoying more privileges from
God, with Christ in glory, by some specially enlarged dispensation, then they
the other holy Saints did: as Saint Augustine teaches in De cura pro mortius,
If the place will not rather prove to be corrupted.
Bellarmine wilfully corrupts, or ignorantly cites, or negligently takes up
this Text upon credit, by retaile: For Eusebius has no such thing as is
pretended. His words in his own language are these: (...)* 8^.
(...). In that Section parallelling the opinion and doctrine of the Pagans,
the Doctrine of the Church, and revealed knowledge of God, from which at first
they derived whatsoever they opened in these points, though with much
deprauation every way, he relates the heathenish opinion touching the souls
of these men, who had spent their lives for their countries cause, and dyed
manfully in defense thereof. Their happy estate: Their eternal felicity: and
from thence descends unto Martyrs in the Church of God in these words. Atque
ista quident non incongrue vsurpari poterunt, de morte vtrorum Deo imprimis
dilectorum, Quos si verae pietatis milites appellare volueris, non aberrabis.
Vnde apud nos in more positum est, illorum adire reconditoria, and ibidem
Orationes fundere, animas ipsorum foelices honorare, quae a nobis fiunt summa
cum ratione. Here is no mention of assistance from their intercession: No word
of intercession or mediation at all. No praying unto them to pray for us: but
only praying unto God. Their God: their God and ours: at their Tombs and
Monuments only, with devotion: an usual practice of those times

The next allegation out of Athanasius, The next is out of Athanasius.
may very well come under the censure of the Statute of Rogues: if yet we would
learn the place of Nativity, or could tell whether to return it to be kept.
He Canteth indeed to purpose, and speaks home. Inclina Maria aurem tuam, and
ne obliuiscaris populitui. In so much as that, hear Bellarmine with much
greater good reason, might have put to his quid clarius, then to that testimony
of Irenaeus. But we know this language was not spoken in Irenaeus's time: nor
yet in Athanasius days. The inuenter thereof, and Pater fabulae was of much
later date. In plain terms: he is a counterfeit that says it, But so that
it wa^ n^uer in him (...)
not Athanasius whose name he bears. I do not feign this answer of my
self: I do not take it up from the Centuries of Meydenburg. I borrow it not
at all from some forlorn Heretics, or mis-begotten Innouators: it is the
direct Censure of those two (...) of Roman Catholic Religion Baronius and
Bellarmine: which you may marvel at, but so it is: Of Baronius as Bellarmine
relates: and he says true; for so we find it, Anno Christi 49. Sect. 19. Of
Bellarmine when he was of better judgment: and not tied to point of propugning
Invocation: In his Catalogue of Ecclesiastical Writers. Let him therefore
pass, this Athanasius, I mean, as a branded rogue, seeing he that produces
him, and needs his testimony has discarded and discredited him sufficiently
to be a counterfeit.

Saint Basil has furnished them with a double testimony.
Saint Basil is the next in this Jury of twelve: For so many are empanelled of
the Greek Church; who Orat. in 40 Martyrs, directs us to call unto them in
the time of trouble. Qui aliqua premitur angustia ad hos confugiat. Qui rursum
laetatur, hos oret. Ille, vt a malis liberetur: Hic, vt duret in rebus laetis.
This is the first testimony out of him: In the former
for there is another. First, I answer: Basils words are depraved by the
Cardinals Controversy: he is not (...) as he speaks.
for he recites them as if Basil had given his counsel with approbation, and
exhorted men to have recourse to them in time of need. Ad hos confugiat. So he
cites the place: Let him fly unto them. Hos Oret. Let him Pray unto them. But
S. Basil in his own language has no such thing: It is only a narration of
practice: without counsel, advice, or approbation. (...), does fl^e unto them.
(...), has recourse unto them. There is a difference, I ween, betwixt these
two passages, howsoever altered, let him see to that that did it. Secondly, he
speaks not dogmatically, by way of any Positive resolution, but as Basil was
one of those, He speaks like an Orator, not dogmaticlly, as they cite him.
wel-nigh the first of those, that excelled in that popular kind of Homilizing,
wherein to move affections, and to stir devotions, those Christian Orators
took up the course and the practice of great Masters in that Faculty, not
plainly to teach, and positiuely to demonstrate, but to improve their Doctrine
and teaching by Art, to settle the better what they would deliver in points of
Piety; and for course of life. It was e re Christiana in those times, much
every way, that the holy and most blessed Martyrs of Jesus, should be had in
great respect and awful regard of men, who if need so required, must tread
after them the same steps, must maintain the same cause; and howsoever, stand
continually in procinctu, at all assayes. That themselves might expect at
Pagans hands, the selfsame measure, meeted unto those Heroes. Now nothing
could be more potent for persuasion in that point, then to settle an assurance
of their interest in GOD. There honor at his hands received. To be not only
highly rewarded themselves, but to have that grace and favor to recommend
others: As with men on Earth, which is plain in Cyprian: so with God in Heaven
to prevail, recommend to him, and obtain for others what they desire. This
point the Fathers press much and often in their Anniuersary solemnities upon
Martyrs memorials. Now, what is spoken Panegyrically; raised up to height with
Hyperbolies, and bo^sterings of Art, is not to be pressed dogmatically: For
they use to come down to a lower strain, when they speak to the point, yea,
or no: More reseruedly and suspensly in far much streighter terms. Again,
Basil speaks only of that time and place, the day of their festiuity in
annual observation: And he speaks only of the place, and time of their
annual festiuity.
The place their sacred Oratory, dedicated to Gods holy service in them: At
which time, in which place, more specially they might be present, and were so
imagined to be, rather then at other times, in another place. (...). The Church
of these holy Martyrs is a And yet then, And then, and there auerreth no
invocation of them* but intercession by them.
and there, not invocation of them, but intercession by them, is auerred by S.
Basil. (...), Join your Prayers unto and with the Intercession of those
Angels; with them, not to them, unto God: for (...) he resolves God was
present there: W^llin^ them to join in prayer with those Martyrs.
And therefore thirdly we must remember that (...), he would have them join
in prayer with the Martryes, because that these were more interessed where
Saint Basil uttered that Oration, then Saints at large are, or can be, unto any
of us. They were all Cappadocians, of that Country: and they not long before
Martyred, at least not so long before, but that they then living, might
remember them well enough; and they remember the state of that their Country,
whereof peradventure, they were deputed to take special care and charge. And
so lastly it was a particular case, and relied upon some dispensation only,
which does not warrant a general practice, of all, unto any, at any time
indeterminately.

A second testimony is recited out of the same Basil in his Comment: The other
testimony is of a higher strain.
upon the 33. Psalm. these words of the Psalm, The eyes of the Lord are upon
the Righteous: and his ears are open unto their prayers. Where Saint Basil
thus: Sanctae spirituales virtutes aliquae, oculi dicuntur, quod curam
susceperint nos intervisendi: Nonnullae aures, vt quae nostras suscipiunt
preces. But not high enough to take hold upon Invocation of Saints.
This passage is indeed of another strain, as putting to decision
dogmatically: not related, or amplified Panegyrically. But even this does not
reach home, it is too short to take hold upon Invocation. For Being meant only
of Angels.
and their case is different: their condition not the same. Secondly, not of
all Angels in general, but only of some, and so appointed to that Act by
special dispensation: Appointed by special dispensation.
peculiar Protection, as they are Custodes parvulorum. In the text there is a
plain diuersification of their Act: Some are eyes: others ears: some employed
in messages to us: As peculiar Protectors.
Others receiving our prayers: but of whom? From them it is probable, that were
sent to visit us: either as Guardians, or Extraordinarily: either way no
warrant, for Invocation of Angels, or Saints at large. Lastly, he means The
prayers al^o being understood not of particular men, but of the whole Church.
the prayers of the Church, and not of every particular man.

Not to divide them in Opinion who in affection were so combined together.
Greg. Naz. comes in with a thraue of testimonies: not all indeed brought in by
the Master of Controversies, but yet of that Nature and Condition as that they
may all speak as well as some: Naz^^^zen seem^ (...), as they will have it, that
we must take him in parts.
I will produce them as they happened to come to my hands. And first in the
nineteenth Oration, as the Copies go, page 288. touching his own father
deceased, before Saint Sasil then present at the Sermon, In the first, he says
in deed, what we deny not.
thus he: Nec dubito quin hoc nunc quoque tanto magis deprecatione sua, quam
prius doctrina, praestet, quanto nunc magis Deo appropi^ quat. Nazianzene in
this place may well be taken to resolve this position dogmatically. That the
prayers of the Righteous in heaven, regnant That the prayers of the Saints in
heaven are more effectual.
then the prayers of men militant in the Church upon earth. This is not
questioned when they do intercede. Secondly, Nazianzen That his deceased
Father would not forget his late Episcopal ^harge.
and happiness, did (...), fight for his flock; Do the Office of a Pastor in
praying for them. No more do I doubt then Nazianzene did thereof. They whom he
meant were sometime his fathers Episcopal charge. He loved them, instructed
them, cared for them* defended them in his life: nor could he forget them
being dead. For the soul does not drink of Lethe lake, to forget the things
and passages of this world, wherewith formerly she was acquainted. But I make
a question indeed, But neither he says, nor can they prove that he, o^ any of
his Church prayed to his Father.
whether Nazianzen did pray unto his father: or any of his Church recommended
their private necessities, and afterward, occasions unto his mediation or
aduocation. I read not that he or any else did so. I am sure he prayed not
unto him there: Not so much as speaks unto him by way of Apostrophe or
compellation. That which he supposes his father did for his flock, is also
supposed to be done motu proprio, and not upon solicitation. And what is this
to the case of Invocation unto peculiar Saints?

Farther he proceeds with Saint Basil his friend in his Funeral Oration
thus: The next is the supposed Invocation of his friend Basil.
Tu vero Sacrum and diuinum caput, de coelo nos quaso respice, carnisque
stimulum a Deo nobis ad disciplinam datum aut precibus tuis siste, aut certe vt
forti animo perferamus persuade, atque omnem nostram vitam ad id, quod maxim
conducibile est, airige. Nosque postea quam ex hac vita migrauerimus illis
quoque tabernaculis tuis suscipe. As direct an Invocation supposed as may be.
Nay rather a desire and a wish, that Saint Basil might be permitted to do so,
and so, then a prayer unto him, upon this resolution that he could and would
do so. At Ora pro Nobis; of strangers every way unto one unknown. But to one
that he knew.
But indeed as Nazianzen spoke it in his own language, when he spoke it, it was
(...) a wish and desire at Gods hands: as Billius, a Papist, has translated
it, it is (...), a prayer. Respice nos (so he has it) is an higher strain, to
an higher note, then (...), o si, or vtinam, And that the Translator has
wronged Nazianzens meaning, Abused by the Translator.
whereby the Controuersor was willing enough to take advantage, appears by
his own words a little before, whereas the ground of his prayer is but
opinion. (...). And now he is in Heaven, and there, as I verily suppose,
offers up sacrifice for us, making Intercession for the people. For howsoever
he is gone from us, yet verily has he not utterly forsaken, nor yet
abandoned us. All that he avouches, as I am persuaded, But howsoever
unresolved, and grounded upon opinion.
as I take it, and therefore uncertain: and in him unresolved. Nor does he so
much as say, Do this; but, oh that thou would do this for Secondly, it is
but a point of his rhetorique, and no more: And merely Rhetorical.
and so is all that conclusion directed unto him as present there, an ordinary
strain of wit and invention in such passages, Nazianzen was not of opinion, I
suppose, that Saint Basil really and actiuely did (...), that is, in the phrase
of the Church, at that time, offer the holy Eucharist or consecrate it in
Heaven: No more was he resolved that those other parts and particulars here
specified by him, were then at that time really and actually performed. Lastly,
it is And at the best, it is but a particular case of a friend to a friend.
of a friend to a friend, then lately dead: and also concerning that which he
might very well remember: and concerning which it had peradventure passed by
contract betwixt them, as was betwixt Cyprian and Cornelius, touching (...) a
stabbe in the flesh, some certain tentation or other, for removing of which
Saint Basil is put in mind to entreat God: Very likely according unto promise
and stipulation. So in effect, it is a particular case, And so proves no
general practice.
of one friend to another; which can be no precedent for general practice and
example. It is grounded merely upon peraduentures, not resolved positiuely: It
concerns remembrance of things formerly passed; and not intimation of things
newly done.

Upon the selfsame terms runs that which is said to be directed unto
Athanasius by the same Nazianzene: The next, directed to Athanasius by Nazian*
is better interpreted.
only the Interpreter is there the honester man, and makes him speak in the
Optatiue* as out of opinion, not in the Imperative, as out of Judgment, thus:
Nos autem vtinam ipse benignus desuper, and placidus aspicias, atque hunc
populum gubernes: meque siquidem res pacatae futurae sint, in vita adbuc
teneas* gregemque vna mecum pascas: sin autem Ecclesia, sit bellis flagratura,
reducas, aut assumas tecumque and cum tui similibus colloces tametsi magnum sit
quod postulo. Which if we take it literally, and dogmatically, Athanasius is
made therein much more then a Mediator of Intercession. He could have said no
more unto Christ Jesus himself. And if it be as well understood.
But Gregory was too well grounded in Divinity, and had not his name Theologus,
for naught, thus to err; and too religious, thus to fall soul upon Gods own
prerogatives. Athanasius then in rest, It is either directed unto God.
might do for him thus, and thus: as a special friend, as interessed in that
common cause of the Church, wherein no man had his part so deep as he, having
been in his life, the principal defender of Christian verity, and opposer of
heretical impiety. Athanasius against all the World, and all the World against
Athanasius. Or if to Athanasius alone addressed, no more but a rhetorical
flourish with a figure. Or, if directed to Athanasius, to be taken as a
Rhetorical flourish.
I need not seek far, for warrant to this exposition: In the same passage
we have, (...): Do thou break off my present Oration here. His meaning is,
not that Athanasius should either really come down from Heaven, or actually,
by some extraordinary course and means from Heaven, make him to desist and
break off his Oration, and stop his mouth: But in effect thus, and no more:
Let me here conclude, and make an end. Such proofs has Nazianzene for this
Invocation, that Rhetorical Figures, Apostrophees, Prosopoiees, and such like,
must go for demonstrations.

That Oration of his upon Saint Cyprian comes last, to pay for all. And so
may we take that also in this Oration upon Saint Cyprian.
The first allegation wherout is (...), the same, and may receive the
selfsame answer, which that did out of the other upon Athanasius: whereto an
ancient Scholiast, and Commentor, whom I have seen and used, in written hand
does accord: (...). The Conclusion, according unto Rules of Art, is cast into
the form of a wish: Therefore to be discussed in Hermogenes School, and not
pressed in disputes of Dogmaticall and Positive Divinity. Nazianzene concludes
his Oration upon Saint Cyprian thus. At tu nos e caelo benignus aspicias:
sermonesque nostros and vitam gubernes: sacrumque hunc gregem pascentem
adjuues: cum in caeteris rebus quoad eius fieri potuerit, Eum ad optima quaeque
dirigens: tum graves lupos syllabarum and verborum captatores amoliens. This
passage will not reach home to Ora pro nobis, with confidence, in persuasion,
He speaks to one that la^ely knew the persons and passages of the Church.
to parties unknown, and not interessed particularly. He desires it might be
so, that Cyprian might do it: he does not desire Cyprian to do it: For he was
not resolved Cyprian could do it. He believed that the Saints departed
understood, Yet he desires him not to do, what he knew whether he could do,
or no.
and took notice of things done here. But by credibility, not by Faith. (...),
is the phrase he puts on it: and though in two places he seems to go
farther, unto (...), or (...): yet it is but in some only cases that he so
speaks; nor is that with ordinary resolution. In some Cases, as to those that
were but lately departed, acquainted with the persons, and the practice and
passages of things in the Church, or of private men: the memory whereof may
cause in them a fellow feeling, and procure a careful respect to them in
Heaven, and so recommendation unto the Almighty. Thus in his 24 Oration
touching Athanasius then with God, he pronounces. (...). I know right well,
and am persuaded, says he, that now at this present Athanasius being in
Heaven, does from thence behold us, and helps those that suffer for
Righteousness sake. He means, by interceding unto God for them, being a man
that in his life had suffered much for Piety and Christ's cause, and drunk as
deep of tribulation as ever did any. Out of this compassion from a
fellow-feeling upon experience, Athanasius he thought, and so do I,
recommended the cause of the Church unto God. But Nazianzene thought not, no
more do I, that Athanasius did, or could understand every private man's
passages, or needs in the Church. And therefore, neither does he himself pray
unto him, nor advises us, or any for to do it. As for (...), I know right
well, it does often infer no more then (...), Opinion uncertain, A^ appears
by the like doubtful speech.
not Resolution. And what Nazianzene indeed did think of this particular, is
plain, and apparent out of his own writings resolved and dogmaticall. In his
Funeral Oration upon his Sister Gorgonia, In his Funeral Oration upon his
Sister. page, 190.
he comes off directly with this conclusion. (...) (...). Now if thou have
any regard or apprehension of our Actions here, and if GOD does permit and give
that power to the Holy Souls in Heaven, to have any understanding of such
passages as these: Receive at my hands this Oration of mine, in leiue of, and
before many Funerals. The Interpreter does somewhat draw off his meaning unto a
shorter scantling: as if in Gregory Nazianzens opinion, those blessed Saints,
did happily take notice of honor done unto them, and happily not: Whereas his
meaning is, and so his speech runs generally, concerning all things, and any
thing whatsoever. Bellarmine used a better Translation: Si tibi aliqua nostri
sermonis est ratio; but answers poorly and falsely that Si there, is not
Dubitantis, sed affirmantis, And though Bellarmine strive to help it forward
with a criticisme.
as in the Epistle unto Philemon; Si habes me Socium, suscipe illum: In effect
Quoniam habes me socium. Indeed as true the one as the other: For Saint Paul
not doubting of Philemons willing Obedience, proposes this as a Condition:
Spoiled in the illustration, that should have confirmed it.
(...), If you respect me as a Friend; If you desire to hold friendship and
fellowship with me: then receive him. Not receive him, because thou art my
companion: A foolish Exposition in common sense and reason. But be the folly of
that gloss what it will be; Yet, to end all, Nazianzen does elsewhere better
interpret himself*
Nazianzen elsewhere declares what his opinion was plainly, (...). And hear,
Page 30.
oh thou soul, of great Constantius, if yet thou have any sense or
apprehension hereof: and likewise, ye the souls of all Christian Emperors
before him, (...). If there be any sense is not I suppose Affirmative, that
they have understanding, but merely dubitatiue, whether they have any
apprehension or not. He was not resolved, himself confesses, (and what may
we think then of all other passages alleged) whether the souls of the
Righteous, at rest with God in Heaven (and in that number he rancked
Constantius, whom Athanasius sends to another place) had any ordinary notice
of things done here: indeed any notice at all. Rather it appears, he thought
no: and then, what advantage from him for Invocation of Saints or Angels in the
Church of Rome?

Another passage yet they have out of the same Oration upon S. Cyprian, by them
not sufficiently explained of Justin...
But at length we have it home in a second passage selected out of the same
Oration upon Saint Cyprian, where Iustina a Christian Virgin, Virginem Mariam
rogauit, vt peri^litanti virgini opem ferret. Thus the Master of Controversies
without any more ado, or farther enlarging upon the passage. The Story is
thus. The Greek Church had gotten up a strange Story of Saint Cyprian Bishop
of Carthage and Martyr, never heard of, nor dreampt of in the Western or
African Church, in which he lived and dyed, not remembered by Pontius his
Deacon, who lived with him and wrote his life. And yet it is certain and
cannot be denied, the Grecian Tradition can be referred unto no other Cyprian
but this. That Tradition is this, That Cyprian formerly was a Pagan, and a
Conjurer. That durante his Paganism he fell in love with Iustina a Christian
Virgin of Antioch, whom when as by woing and ordinary means, he could not
win unto his will, he went about to entice and prevail with by Magical
spells and Coniurations. Which the Damsel perceiving, fell to work against
him, with the ordinary arms of Christians in those times, Prayer, and Fasting,
and the sign of the Cross. Puella, simul at que persentit, desperatis alijs
rebus, Who, after prayer, and fasting, without any Mediator, commenceth her
own suite.
ad Deum confugit. Sponsum suum Christum defensorem assumit: recounteth up, and
puts God in mind, of his works of old, the wonders he had wrought in
times long ago. Hac atque his plura commemorans, Virginemque Mariam supplex
obsecrans, vt periclitanti Virgini suppetias ferret jeiunij and chameuniae
pharmaco sese communiret. This is the state of that story in Nazianzene. In
relating of it, they first commit crimen falsi. For in the Controversies it is
so reported, as if Iustina, in her exigency had had recourse only unto the
Virgin Mary, who nor principally nor primarily had recourse unto her. That
indeed had been home to the practice in the present Church of Rome, that take
up that course indeed: Run first unto her: solely unto her: not so much as
taking in Christ Jesus by the way, in mumbling their Martins, and devotions.
But this Virgin Iustina had been better brought up, and taught better things
then so. First, she prepares her self by fasting and Scleragogie, to dispose
his prayers and her devotions aright. Then she addresseth her self unto GOD
immediately according to direction, Addresseth her self first, and immediately
unto God, and Christ her Patron.
Call upon me: (...). As if there were no help for her but in GOD. Secondly,
She takes Christ her Patron that was her Spouse: for it is more then probable
she was a Votary. Thirdly, she takes in, tanquam ex abundanti, And then ^akes
in the blessed Virgin, ex abundanti, as a second or third.
the blessed Virgin by the way, as if resolving thus, what she can do I know
not, if any thing she can do, a virgin to Christ a virgin, her help and
assistance also I implore: So it is to small purpose for that Invocation* which
addresseth Saints to God, as Mediators where men forsooth, dare not commence
their own suites themselves, the contrary being instanced in this particular.
And whereas she takes in the blessed Virgin upon the by as a second, or a
third, it leads to opinion, Which only shows the opinion of those times,
that Saints departed could peradventure understand them.
and but opinion of those times, that the blessed Virgin or other Saints
departed could peradventure understand some passages here, and therefore if
they could they might assist if they would, if nor so, nor so, there was no
hurt done. Again, not opinion of the Church, peradventure, but only of some
few in the Church: and if those some in extremity, And the practice of men in
extremity, that lay hold upon any thing to save their lives.
when, and where, as those that are sincking and now to be swallowed in the
stream, do catch at any thing to save their lives: so parties distressed use
any means, though it help them not, having no time, in exigence to dispute or
resolve, quam been, quam male, with what hope of success they fall upon it.
And the rather so, And this is the only example of such practice in
antiquity, and as weak to help them as she was then to help her self.
because this is the only example of such practice in Antiquity: a good
inducement to suppose the Custom was not far grown in, nor the opinion much
prevailing. So that here is but a single practice, of one only Maid, in
fearful extremity: upon some uncertain persuasion, that the virgin Mary
happily might by extraordinary dispensation, have some special Patronage by
assignment over Virgins. Which is no absurdity much less impiety, was
grounded on a more general persuasion of the Church, that the Saints, though
in heaven, had interest some way in the state of their friends allies and
companions: especially for Professions of life, Societies of men, Countries,
and Churches whereof themselves were. A persuasion then but of opinion, not
Religion: no man compelled to believe or to practice it. Nor it self, nor the
consequents thereof points of faith commanded: Grant us this liberty, and we
contend not. If they in all assayes, practice it themselves, and would teach
their Nouices and Proselites so to do, as this Virgin does, Have recourse, to
God, and Christ: to God in Christ: and then ex abundanti, upon the By, help or
help not, take in Saint Mary, Saint Peter, Saint Paul, so, (...), as Nazianzen
phrased it, if they can hear, understand, or help, there is no more but this,
If they assist, good and well, if not, no hurt or harm done, God can and will,
to whom principally, primarily and before all, we have recourse in Christ
Jesus, with full hope and confidence of assured deliverance, ad voluntatem, or
salutem. But (...): In the Church of Rome it is otherwise: Our Lady has all
Prayer and Devotion addressed unto her. All Saints there attend upon her. Our
Lord has but reuersion, at second hand: Our God has few suppliants, or none
at all: every man running to our Ladies shrine, or Saint Curlos.

And an example only related by Nazianzen, and no more.
And yet farther I add: Nazianzen is but Narrator of this story, and no more,
that which he has is diegematicall, not by way of conclusion, or of
approbation. He passes no censure to it, any way: nor lets us understand
what his own opinion was in the point. And yet by the Master of Controversies,
it is alleged as dogmaticall, a proof from Nazianzen, and for his judgment
in the case: For so was his proposal for the conclusion, that Sancti are
Inuocandi, Probatur quarto testimonijs Graecorum and Latinorum Patrum. So that
we find a manifest collusion in our great Master here. Beside, the Narration
was but an hearsay. Nazianzen was no ear witness thereof, nor does report
it of his certain knowledge. So that peradventure it was, nor so, nor so. And
the learned know that this narration of Saint Cyprian, howsoever taken up in
the Eastern Church, and believed has nor view nor appearance of Fact in the
West. Nor can be clearly resolved by all the Annalists in the World. Their
great Dictator Baronius is plainly buzzarded in the point, and wisely
concealing that which he could not reconcile, passes it over as in a dream.
So that the whole story for ought we know or can conceive, is but Apocryphal,
I know not whether merely Apocryphal.
and this particular narration must needs come under the same verge and rank.
Or if not: But, if authentical, not of authority enough to confirm their
tenet.
but we admit it for authentical, yet singularia have no warrant, to be rules
of actions unto others. No more this, then that other of Gorgonia, related
also, and with better credit, because ex certa scientia, by the same Nazianzen,
she being his own sister. So it was, that she being desperately sick, when
all Physic and hope of help from man failed, as Iustina in extremity, Ad
mortalium omnium medicum confugit. But how? in a peculiar and strange manner.
Having some remission of her sickness from the violence thereof, on a night at
midnight, she gets up, and out of her chamber into the Church she goes;
falls on her knees down before the Altar: entreats him that was worshipped
upon the Altar, of all loves, mercies, and works of wonder, to restore her unto
her health: at last, having prayed long, wept much, and watched a good space,
she lays her head down upon the Alter, and threatens God, so Nazianzen
phraseth it, she will never rise up from that place, until he send her health
and strength again. (...). Wonder as it was, See, instantly, she felt her
self perfectly whole and sound. This might be done: and doubtless was so: For
we believe the public protestation upon knowledge of such a Reporter as was
Gregory Nazianzen: But this is no precedent for imitation; No more then that
fact of Iustina, was exemplary, though we yield him the Evidence to be true.
Private humors; Singular actions, upon sudden motions of some special
instinct, must end where they began; though excusable, tolerable, or auailable
in particular, dangerous they may be for directions unto others, that have no
such special warrant as they might peradventure have upon occasion.

Their equal in time, dear friend and near alliance in blood, Gregory Nyssen
is yet more plainly Panegyricall, in that which they cite.
Gregory Nyssene comes to speak next. Who performs more apparently the part
of a Panegyrist, in that Encomium of Theodorus, remembered by the Controuersor.
Intercede as deprecare pro patria apud communem Regem ac Dominum. Timemus
afflictiones, expectamus pericula, non long absunt scelesti Scythae. A plain
Rhetorical (...), in the very carriage of his Oration: no dogmaticall
resolution of his faith: yet one such testimony, could our Masters afford us
one, or find us one out, is worth an hundred of these that insinuate but prove
not, because they do not understand. Nyssen spoke it as an Orator, not as a
Divine. In a popular Sermon of Commemoration, As appears by his following
exaggeration.
Quod si majori quoque opus fuerit aduocatione ac deprecatione, fratruratuoru^
Martyrum roga chorum, and cum omnibus vna deprecare. Multorum justorum preces,
multitudinum and populorum peccata luant. Admone Petrum, excita Paulum, vt pro
ecclesijs quas constituerunt, soliciti sint, pro quibus catenas gestauerunt,
pro quibus pericula ac mortes tulerunt. They will not, I imagine, press us to
believe, that when any Saint inuocated cannot prevail alone and by himself
(for their own assertion is, God hears them always) he goes unto others and
desires their assistance: yet such a case is put by Nyssen here, as if
Theodorus, not being in such grace with God, to obtain, he must be forced to
take to himself seconds and thirds, Peter, Paul, and the rest of that glorious
company his fellow Martyrs. It is idle to allege such Rhetorical passages,
and Panegyricall strains, to prove points of difference and Controversy
dogmatically. Again, it is to purpose, and must be remembered, that Gregory
spoke it on the ninth of November, And the solemnity of the time, in which some
greater honor perhaps might accre^ to the Saint of the day.
the day of his Excess and Consummation under Maximianus, and then kept
holyday in that Church. It may be probable, and that is all: For certain it is
not, there being no constat of it in infallible truth, only coniecturall in
opinion) that upon that day, upon that occasion, God, who as he is glorious in
his Saints, so is he also glorified by his Saints, does discover unto that his
glorious Saint and Servant, whose memory for his noble Acts, is famous in the
Church that day, for the honor that is done unto himself in him, either by
Angelical intimation, or Divine extraordinary dispensation, for his more
accidentally at least accrewing glorification, some passages, in that place,
where he was interessed, that so he may honor him the more, in granting his
desires and petitions; for the good of them that in him, and by him, do honor
and glorify God. If the Church had such an opinion of old, as peradventure
they had, it was but opinion and probable pious meditation; to excite others to
go after those Worthies examples, by recommendation of the so excellent
reward. It was no point of faith, nor preached to believe, not believed to
practice generally, but left at men's liberty to believe or not. So let the
Church of Rome believe it if they will: So they press not all others to
believe it with them, nor condemn them of Heresy that do not practice it,
nor will believe it. Thirdly, it was a Being (...) touching the whole Church,
and the likelie^ to be known of Saints in heaven.
and touched notoriously the whole Church: that which Nyssen intended in that
place, no private occasion, or peculiar interest of some man. It was (...). For
the state of his Country then in hazard: The Scythians, the Goths, and such
other enemies, were then up in arms. Public actions, Universal occasions,
long in suspense, much depending, a good while before notorious unto Heaven and
Earth, are the subject of that Intercession there intended, which immane
quantum di^^ert from such cases as commonly come under their Invocation.
Theodorus in Nyssens opinion could not be* was not ignorant of these passages,
and upon such persuasion has address unto him. (...). Although thou art
passed the course of this life, yet thou well enough wortest, the sufferings
and necessities of man what they be. Beg peace therefore of God for us, that
so this Festival solemnity of thine may not cease. (...). The state of
mankind in general not particular: and that also by remembrance of things
past, not information of things present: or if so, yet of general report and
common fame, not of special notice or intimation. And lastly, what certainty
he had hereof, Theodorus Presence, Assistance, And all the while spoken by one
full of uncertainties. page 1017.
and possibility to relieve, appears, by his own words somewhat before,
(...). Wheresoever thou now wonnest, come hither in person, and be a spectator
of this solemnity. For we call unto thee again, that have called us to
participate thereof. And whether thou conuersest in heaven with God on high, or
wonnest in some heavenly habitation above, or Copartner and Companion with the
Quie^s of Angels, art assistant in the presence of theirs and thy Lord: Or else
with Powers and Principalities, as a most faithful servant do honor and
worship him: For a little while omit those employments there, and come in
friendly, though in invisible sort unto them, who do honor unto thee. These
words do not run in such a strain, as sounds for resolution and
dogmaticall proofs, scarce for opinion or conceit. And yet if it did, as it
does not, we answer it is an extraordinary case, and therefore, not (...), to
the purpose; (...), nor (...), much, often, and frequent come not home to the
point. Invocation warranted, must insist upon perpetual deputation thereto:
(...) and (...), always, and every where must come in. It must be a rule of
general practice or we cannot subscribe it: let it be done and taught
dogmatically.

Ephraim the Syrian, harpeth upon the same, no other string: Their next
testimony (...) upon the same string of Rhetoric.
Precamur beatissimi, qui pro Domino saluatore, proque illius charitate, sponte
and impigre tormenta sensistis, atque ideo familiarius Domino coniuncti estis,
vt pro nobis miseris, etc. Dominum interp^llare dignemini, vt superueniat in
nos gratia Christi. Nay he strikes not so full a stroke. For it is but an
Apostrophe in general: which infers But touches a more general assembly of
Saints.
but to the entire and whole Assembly of those happy ones in general. And that
not in a peculiar case of need, or private interest of any one man, but in an
universal case of mediation: In an universal case of mediation.
For it is in Confess^, that all the Saints departed, each several Saint
departed, and with God, do and does incessantly inuoke the high Majesty of
Heaven, pro Nobis miseris peccatoribus, and de Negligentiae squalore
sordentibus: Which Brother-like affection, and Saint-like performance, is an
especial part of the Communion of Saints.

Cyril of Jerusalem, Cyril of Jerusalem strikes not so strong a stroke.
if yet he be the Author of those Mystagogical Catechismes under his name,
which in some ancient Copies are ascribed to John of Jerusalem, who, or what
he was, I know not, is recited thus by the Controuersor, in more places then
one. Cum hoc Sacrificium offerimus, facimus mentionem etiam eorum qui ante nos
obdormierunt; primum Patriarcharum, Prophetarum* Apostolorum, Martyrum: vt Deus
orationibus illorum suscipiat preces nostras. In which saying, he comes not
so far as Ephraim. He remembers the practice in the Church in those days: a
most ancient and very laudable custom, tending to piety and example of good
life, to commemorate the memory of the dead at the Altar* Speaking only of the
Commemorations of the dead* after an ancient and laudable custom.
Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs, and Confessors; and withal, to
beseech the Majesty of Heaven, that he would graciously accept, regard, and
grant their prayers for his Church upon Earth: and mercifully give ear unto
their own Supplications then poured out unto him. This Testimony, in my
understanding, speaks to another purpose, not for Intercession by Invocation.
The Prayer here intended, is made, not to Saint, nor Soul, nor Angel, but to
God: He supposes, so do all; that those Holy ones with God, And of prayers
made only to God.
do continually pray unto God for the Church; which prayers he desires God
would mercifully hear, and grant unto them, for the good of his chosen upon
Earth: Both parts in this passage, militant, triumphant, employed in Prayer:
The prayer of either directed unto God. This only difference, The one as in
necessity; praying for themselves, the other in security; themselves
interceding for others. Neither Inuocating other for to do it: but de motu
proprio, and correspondent to their state.

Theodoret spoke of the like prayers.
Theodoret intends no more but so, in that testimony taken into the
Controversies: Ego autem huic narrationi sinem imponens, rogo and quaeso, vt
per horum intercessionem diuinum consequar auxilium: Rogo and quaeso, nor this,
nor that Saint, but God alone; to this end and purpose, that by their
Intercession and Prayers, I may find assistance: which might be done, although
he never said; Sancte, Tu, aut Tu, ora pro me: as being a member of that holy
Society, for which they intercede continually. And yet if they did intercede
for him particularly, it was upon occasion extraordinary, his pains, and
desert of them and the Church, in that History which he wrote, out of which
this Testimony is recited, De vitis Patrum. But special Actions and particular
Dispensations, as has been often said, are no rules for general directions
of Piety, in point of devotion, and of Gods service necessarily incumbent. But
whereas the Controuersor tells us, that Theodoret in Historia Sanctorum
Patrum singulas vitas ita concludit: If he mean in those precise words; it is
most false: And, for that which they urge out of his History, is merely belied.
scarce does he conclude any so. If he understand it to that sense, it is
likewise false: For the 1. the 13.16.17. lines have no such thing at all; the
rest that have the thing, yet differ, in substance sometime; often in
circumstance, very seldom therein agreeing. The eight in number, falls in
with that practice of the Ancients, of friends unto friends, to remember them
unto God. Ego autem, cuius, dum adhuc esset superstes, percepi benedictionem,
ed vt nunc quoque fruar precatus finem imponam: And in the 18. to the same
purpose: Ego autem rogo, vt illam consequar intercessionem, quam huc vsque
percepi, dum esset adhuc superstes. Not by special Invocation of him, to
remember him: but by prayer unto God, that he may remember him: or if unto him,
as vita; id. Rogans Sanctos, yet not with such confidence, as if he were
certain to be assuredly heard: Vita vj. Ego autem nunc oro, vt quam dare
potest cius consequar intercessionem: He was not resolved what manner it was,
but whatsoever it was, desires to obtain it. So, or we have no certainty in
the point, or that which we have, is not to purpose: not to interpose an
exception against the party, as incompetent, because suspected or
misunderstood, because of that number, who held that Saints departed do not
yet see God. Damascene and Theophylact, are not Homines legales, to be
empanelled upon this Jury of twelve, out of the Greek Church; being both
Postnati unto Primitive antiquity, and out of the verge of the Churches purity:
Damascene living in the year 730. and Theophylact suruiuing William Conqueror.

Their testimony out of Chrysostom, of the Emperor his interceding.
To conclude with Chrysostom, thus he speaks to the purpose, in the
Controversies: Homil. 66. ad populum Antiochenum circa finem. Nam and ipse qui
purpuram indutus est; He means the Emperor, the Prince then in state, Accedit
illa co^plexurus sepulchra and fastu deposito stat sanctis supplicaturus, vt
pro se intercedant apud Deum: Et scenarum fabrum and Piscatores orat, qui
diademate incedit redimitus. He means Saint Peter, Saint Andrew, James,
John, and Paul; though Bellarmines Interpretor, whosoever he was, has
ignorantly, and falsely, and impiously too, translated (...) scenarum fabrum: as
if Saint Paul had been a Stage-maker, who was a Tent-maker, as (...), or
rather (...) signifies, and not a stage-maker, a course of life I dare say he
did detest: But let that pass, as not If it be true.
it is not worth three blew beans, in a blew bladder: For Chrysostom. never made
half so many Orations, under that title of Ad populum Antiochenum. Bellarmine
himself else where is my Author: (...) de Scriptori (...) 3^8.
Ex homilijs ad populum Antiochenum viginti and vna tantum reperiri dicuntur
manuscriptae in antiquis Secondly, this is only a narration what was done: Yet
it is (...) narration, without any approbation of the thing done.
it is no approbation of the thing done, or doing of it. The testimonies
recited out of the 5. and 8. Homil. upon Saint Matthew: and 1. upon the 1
Thessal. do speak of Saints living and not departed, and so are not to
purpose, The other testimonies speak of Saints living.
or ad rem. (...). It is good to enjoy or participate the prayers of Saints:
and he instanceth the profit by Saint Peter delivered out of prison, at the
prayers of the Church; which I know, and I think our Masters do believe, was
of the Church militant, and not triumphant. So Hom. 44. in Genesis (...). Which we
understanding beloved, let us have recourse unto the Intercession of Saints,
and entreat them to recommend us to God. But as I said, he means living, not
departed Saints: as interpreting that of Ier. 3.15. And my self could furnish
them with a better.
But I will help them to a Text indeed, that comes home, et rem acu:
carrying with it approbation, nor so alone, but also inuitation to perform it.
Tom. 5. page 481. (...). Not only upon this day, their holy day, and solemn
festival, but other days likewise, let us persist and attend upon them at
their Memories, (he means, Bernice, Prosdocia, and Domnia) let us make means
unto them, entreat them to vouchsafe and undertake the Patronage and protection
of us: They can do much with God, now dead, as they could alive; much more and
rather dead then alive: For now they bear about them the marks of Christ
Jesus; and can obtain any thing of our Lord and King, if they but show these
marks unto him. And yet this does not prove precisely and home, And yet will
not that prove the point in Controversy.
the point in Controversy, no, not though he adds: If then they have this
great power with God, let us by them endeavor to make God our friend, to
derive down Gods mercies unto our selves, by continual attendance at their,
Memorials, by our frequent repayring thither, having made our selves in effect
their meniall servants. As not concluding any faith, or practice, or persuasion
of his.
or practiced, or persuaded Invocation of Saints: but only pleaded it out of
some opinion, to help devotion, and stir up the multitude in his popular
Sermons, to a reverend opinion, an And spoken rather out of his Rhetoric, then
out of his Divinity.
Thus he lauisheth often as a good Pleader, when he carries not himself in
Cases of belief, as a positive Divine. So speaking of the holy Eucharist, he
calls it fire: He says, the blood runs about our teeth, and appealeth to
the Auditory, As his manner i^ elsewhere.
if they have not observed it. At the time of communicating, he says, we are
in Heaven, conuersing there with Cherubins, and with Ser^phins: And yet he
meant not these transcendant speeches literally, I suppose, no, not in your
opinions you Transubstantiators. Nor are all passages in this very testimony so
to be taken, And as he cannot but be conceived, in this very testimony.
as at first sight they seem to carry sense, and emply. For good Sirs, what
(...), marks of Christ Jesus, could those three souls in heaven and
happiness carry about with them? How could they represent them unto God or
Christ, before the resurrection of the body? But if yet you dare avouch that,
this speech of his, I hope yet you will not justify (...). To the utmost of
our power, let us imitate her. He means Saint Pelagies, who yet slew her
self. Consider in the Fathers, and all Writers indeed, How, what, wherefore,
and when, is said, and of whom, by Panegyricks and popular Preachers in their
Sermons. Otherwise many Impertinencies, Incongruities, flat absurdities, false
impieties will ensue and be taught as positive truths.

Secondly, I answer, it cannot be determined how Chrysostom could be of this
opinion, The rather, because it is his opinion that the Saints do, yet expect
(...).
at least 1 Cor. 15. Hom. 39. and Hom. 28. upon the Epistle to the Hebrews,
and in other places, he seems to be through for that opinion, that the
Saints departed, not yet in Palatio, behold not the face of God in glory, but
expect in (...), the Porch, as he phraseth it, the accomplishment of the reward
to the Righteous, and final Consummation of all in Christ. Which opinion
cannot stand with our Invocation, where of necessity they must have access,
that are to be employed as Mediators, unless Absalon could daily have address
unto David his Father, and commend all Suitors unto him then, when for three
year together he saw not his face.

Chrysostom said, And howsoever, that (...) do not much need their mediation.
To. 5. page 416.
he would never had dyed in that defense of this opinion, nor maintained the
practice of it against opposers. For he tells us plainly, (...). Thou have
no need of Mediators unto God Almighty, nor yet to run up and down from one
to another to speak for thee. But be thou alone forsaken, abandoned of all
men, no man taking care or tuition of thee: yet come thy self unto God:
intercede with him in thy own person, and without all question thou shall have
thy desire. He uses not to grant our desires so soon: nor so willingly our
requests when others become Mediators for us, as when we speak for our selves,
although we be otherwise laden with sin. And the same word; almost in
another place he has. To. 1. Ho. 4.^. in Genesin. (...). For And, that we are
sooner heard at our own suite, then at theirs.
upon mediation, as he does at our own suite. And farther affirms it an
experimental^ truth thus, (...). Which instantly he proves by examples. And
yet to purpose more inforcedly: To. 5. page 546. When we have cause to imply
the help of man, we are feign to be at cost and charges: to sue, pray, entreat
in most submisse and servile sort. Much ado we need: great business we have
to effect it. We cannot directly have access, to give thancks, or to petition
in our own persons; But we must make friends, by their Tutors, and Stewards,
and servants first, by fair words, by bribes, all the means we can, if yet by
mediation we attain our suits. Now no such ado when we deal with God
himself: He requires no intercession for those that sue unto him, nor does he
so readily grant us our suite by mediation of others, as he does when we
entreat him for our selves; without any mediation or assistance at all. And so
in many other places beside, the repeateth (...). We have no need at all of
Mediators: Unless they will have Chrysostom various and contradictory to
himself.
Shall we think that Chrysostom forgot himself: or spoke as his present
occasions led him, without respect unto the truth, saying, unsaying the same
thing? Believe it who list. But Positiuely he addresseth Te unto Me, God unto
Man, without any Mediator Ex abundanti peradventure, Who, though he might
perhaps take them in ex abundanti: yet neither was that his ordinary course.
he thought Saints departed might sometimes in some place upon some occasion
give good assistance unto our Prayers. Ordinarily the course is, Call upon me:
Extra ordinem, it may be, use their assistance. Generally they may pray in the
consent of the Church: particularly they do, or do not as happens. Happen
it may occasionally, as Martyes upon their festiuals: which some Ancients
thought. Then especially: but otherwhiles also. A case not resolved on in those
days. And therefore as if it were no general belief, he adds that their
Suffrages at other times, may do good, but most probably, in all likelihood
upon their Natiuities, unto such as make their prayers at their memorials: not
so much inuocating their special and private assistance, as upon this
occasion, that God will that day extraordinarily extend his loving kindness
for his servants sake. That day, and in that place alone. For that day they did
imagine them to be present: and as present so spoke unto them. But only upon
d^yes of peculiar respect. To. 5. pa, 505.
Thus Chrysostom elsewhere of Saint Ignatius. (...). In consideration and
regard hereof, let us prefer our abiding here before all other content and
pleasure whatsoever. That so being aduantaged with much content, we may,
through the means of their intercession, become Inmates with them our fellow
servants. And this was rather in the opinion of Him or Them that came thither,
And rather fitting himself to the opinion of others, then expressing his own.
to visit their shrine, by working upon his or their affection, then in any
actual or real performance of the Saint toward them, as the same Father
expresses it in his second Oration upon the Martyr Babylas. (...). The very
sight of the Coffin presented by view to the understanding, amaseth it
straight, and so affects it in that very sort, as if the party there interred
were present really, to be seen with the eye, and together in prayer unto God
joined with us. A plain proof of Chrysostomes resolution in the point, who
seems to be ^o very much for Saints mediation. A strong imagination, and no
more; an impression, no reality upon the understanding. And he adds yet a
case parallel of those men, that having lost some one dear friend or other,
and going to visit the place of his burial, imagine that they behold him
personally there, which we know is an ordinary impossibility: (...), address
their speech unto him or them, as present, as hearing, instantly. Imagination
is strong, they say, and does much: sure it does, which produces such effects
in Invocation: for which, Neither will they have any better success either
with the Greek or Latin Fathers.
if Chrysostom may interpret his own meaning, there is no great warrant in
his works. Thus the Jury of Greek Fathers, ten of them at least, have said,
what they knew, or could speak in the Case upon their knowledge. (...), Not at
all to purpose, nor answering the question propounded to them. The Latins
succeed, if not more full to purpose, yet more frequent to the point. For to
supply defaulters if any were, there are returned well-nigh a December non tales,
as being postnati, and so partial, that speak indeed to the practice since it
was in being, out of the verge of our limited time, Gregory the Great, he of
Tours, and some other. And yet against the foreman is more exception: For they
are honest men at least, of good reputation in the Country amongst their
neighbors although their witness, as interessed, be not receiueable: but
Cornelius, is a Counterfeit, no legal man, a flat Knight of the post. Ex
Latinis, says Bellarmine, St. Cornelius Papa, in Epistola 1a. quae est de
translatione corporum Apostolorum, is the first and foremost that is brought to
speak: much to the prejudice of this cause: more to the just reproof of the
Defendant, that brings that party to speak for him, whom himself,
elsewhere, will not acknowledge otherwise then for a Rogue. For there he
resolves that only four Epistles of Cornelius are extant, and this alleged
is none of them. De scriptor: Ecclesiae.
But he set forth his book of Ecclesiastique Writers since, and therefore more
advised upon better search, and second thoughts, he has not authorized the
Epistle as authenticke. But admit Cornelius were the Writer thereof, and not
some boy of the Scullery, or of the Stable, yet the fellow whosoever speaks
not to purpose: Orantes Deum, and Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum, vt
intercedentibus Sanctis suis Apostolis, maculas vestrorum purget peccatorum.
The prayer that is made, is to Jesus Christ, and to no Saint. There is mention
of Intercession, but without Invocation. Nor needed that. For he means only
such and no other Intercession but such, which the Apostles of the Lamb, and
Church of the redeemed in heaven, did make unto God, for their Brethren yet in
Earth. And even that Intercession is not enlarged unto all, but confined unto
the Apostles alone, Saint Peter, and Paul, because the present occasion touched
the^ alone. The most that can be made of it, is this, that God would be
pleased, to apply the general Intercession of those Apostles, in, and with the
Church triumphant, unto this part of the Church Militant, that at present did
this honor unto those Apostles: this is all.

Saint Hillary is the next man, Saint Hillaries testimony is more true, then
material.
and his witness is true, upon Psalm ^29. but not to purpose, He speaks
only of Angelical Intercession, Intercessione Angelorum non naetura Dei
indiget, sed infirmit As speaking only of Angels.
Not a word touching Invocation or Intercession of Saints. Now Saints and
Angels as it has been declared, are ill and ignorantly combined per omnia, in
this case, which are most*what (...) and (...), Incompatible companions in the
point. Secondly, he speaks of And of particular Intercession.
unto whom they have been employed, or unto whom they are assigned: The first
is a singular extraordinary case, and so holds not for general practice
every where. The second is ordinary, as is supposed; which if it be indeed as
is supposed, then it is to purpose, but not to the question; and therefore this
witness might have been spared, as that is in part out of 124. Psalm, where
if any intercession be intended, it is that in general for the whole Church.
Sed neque desunt stare volentibus Sanctorum custodiae: neque munitiones
Angelorum. And anon, to explain the praesidium he means: Ac ne leave
praesidium in Apostolis vel Patriarchis ac Prophetis vel potius in Angelis qus
Ecclesiam quadam custodia circumsip^runt, crederemus, adiectum est. Et Dominus
in circuitu populi sui. This is their Praesidium, a sure one indeed, the other
is accessory and for all, out of that Communion and Society of Saints in the
both Triumphant and Militant Church.

Saint Ambrose is produced to speak next, but he speaks not home as they
would have him: Saint Ambrose speaks not out of full resolution.
nor to purpose as they allege him: Obsecrandi sunt Angeli, qui nobis ad
praesidium dati sunt. Martyrs obsecrandi, quorum videmur nobis corporis But
only out of some opinion of their patronage.
qui proprio sanguine, etiamsi quae habuerant peccata lauerunt. Isti enim sunt
Dei Martyrs, nostri praesules, speculatores vita actuumque nosirorum. Non
erubescamus cos intercessores nostrae in^irmitatis adhibere, quia ipsi
infirmitatem corpori^, etiam cum vincerent, cognouerunt. The very carriage of
this passage tells us thus much: that Saint Ambrose spoke it not as out of
resolution* or conclusion Theological. It was but opinion that they were our
Patroni. His speech bewrays his meaning; Videmur, And that opinion: (...) as
patrocinium quoddam is from full patronage.
it was restrained even in that his opinion, and not left at randon or full
liberty: Patrocinium quodda^ is all he can stretch unto, he could not well
resolve, what, where, or when it was afforded. It is not an impossible thing
for the^ to pray for us. And he that says so, and no more but so, might as
well be produced to say it was no certain thing. Beside, Saint Ambrose there
speaks of there Intercession in Genere; for the Church, not in particular And
not more uncertain then too general Intercession at large.
and of Invocation at large, that which is elsewhere more clearly explained:
that God would be pleased to accept and to grant the prayers and Petitions that
they make for us, the Church yet militant upon Earth: being certainly inserted
into the Covenant of grace, Baptismo sanguinis, and by shedding of their own
blood, so seeing and enjoying God, that like unto Angels Guardians they become
unto us, Praesules, vitae speculatores, actuumque nostrorum: unto whom res
nostrae, did belong and appertain, as the joint Actions of a Community do in
common to any of that Society. The manner how they were so: The terms how
far they were so: The means whereby they did so, he resolves not, he could
not tell, and therefore contenteth himself in general terms with that only
Intercession, which without all doubt they make for the Church: which may cause
them desire to know what they can, though what they might know, he, nor no
other, could certainly tell, and therefore could not warrant, as indeed he does
not, any ordinary Invocation of any one Saint, for any particular occasion
whatsoever. What his opinion was therein, no man can better tell then himself:
or speak to more purpose then he has done. In Comment: ad cap. 1. Epistol. ad
Romans where he concludes, Ad Deum, quem vtique nihil latet, promerendum,
suffragatore non est opus, sed mente denota. It was not then of necessity in
Saint Ambrose opinion, to use Intercession of Saint or Angel. He might go
himself by personal address, and every pious devout man might so go in
person, needed not use Intercession of any: if any did interced for him good:
if none did, yet lost he nothing thereby.

Lastly, whatsoever Saint Ambrose has, or de sanctis, with God in general,
And not mean^ de sanctis (...) in general, but of Martyrs (...) particular.
but only of Martyrs in Particular. Now their case was singular, their
privileges surmounting in the opinion of antiquity. And therefore what by some
is applied unto Martyrs is not to be transferred unto all in general. It was
an use in the Primitive Church to pray for the dead: how and wherefore I
dispute not now. But he that should do so for any Martyr, in Saint Augustines
judgment much wronged the Martyr.

Hierome concluding his Funeral Oration upon Paula, Gregory Nazianzen has
taught Saint Hierome, also how to Rhetorize.
desires her in heaven, to assist him with her prayers thus. Vale Paula, and
cultoris tui vltimam senectutem Orationibus j^ua. This he learned of his
Master Gregory Nazianzene: and both of them as Panegyrists, in Rhetoru^
scamnis. For it is no more but a Rhetorical conversion unto her, not of force
to conclude a Divinity problem.

a wish: and not (...), And it appears as it is, only a wish.
a direct prayer unto her.

Thirdly, it was addressed to one, his most familiar, inti^e, and ancient
friend: and therefore Addressed to a late familiar friend.
ex opere operato: and it may be he spoke it out of assurance of, or with
reference unto, some promise or compact betwixt them made, as in the case of
Cyprian, and Cornelius.

Lastly, Hierome was persuaded she did remember Upon ground of her kind
remembrance.
and so it was no prayer by direction: For so elsewhere we find it concerning
Blesilla, Loquitur illa, and alia multa quae taceo, and pro te Dominum rogat:
mihique, vt de eius mente securus sum veniam impetrat Peccatorum. Max^imus of
Turin by the like address concludes his Panegyricall Sermon upon Saint Agnes.
The like address Maximus of T. had unto S Agnes.
Itaque O splendida Christo, pulchra Dei filio, and omnibus Angelis et
Archangelis grata, vt nostri meminisse digneris, quibus possumus precilus
exoramus. He made that Sermon upon her Anniuersary mind day: and as then forte
present, at that special occasion, by peculiar dispensation: so he directs
his speech unto her: and that not with confidence of being heard: Without any
great confidence of being heard.
Quibus possumus precibus, is as much as nothing: In effect, as I can, so I
direct this my address unto thee: hear and help me accordingly as thou
can, and may: So the man, in the point, was not (...); He was not so fully
persuaded of that, or any Saints assistance, as that he went farther then
opinion. In another place, to that purpose, he speaks so reseruedly, Ideo
veneremur eos in saeculo, quos defensores habere possumus in futuro. Possumus,
peradventure, and no more: uncertain he was whether I, or no: And yet farther,
Possumus, save only those as we were sometime interessed in here. And
thirdly, Defensores, upon general cases of the Church: not in particular
assayes of our own.

The Emperor Theodosius in Ruffinus History, Lib. 2. cap. 33. does not invoke
any Saint, And we cannot think much otherwise of Theodesius.
or Saints at all: only upon that exigent of the Rebellion of Eugenius and his
Accomplices, he went in Procession with Clergy and Laity that were firm unto
him, in great devotion, to the Oratories, Churches, Chapels, Sepulchers, and
Shrines of the Apostles, of Martyrs, and other holy Saints: there he made his
prayers unto God in Christ, not unto them, though he were so persuaded they
could and would take notice of him, and assist him with their prayers unto God
Almighty; as well they might then, and he be so persuaded at that time
concerning them, in such a public action as that was, in which not only the
Imperial Majesty and State, Though his was also in a (...) action, ^^^thing
both the Imperial State, and the State of Religion.
but Christ an Religion also lay at stake, upon the hazard and trial of that
days adventure. If then any some, or all the Saints of Paradise did assuredly
take notice, and were informed in particular, and this were also to be proved,
yet is it no warrant for their ordinary knowledge in other passages, nor yet
for extraordinary when we will have it: no more then that we expect in all
actions of Annes, against: Rebels, Traitors, Tyrants, or Infidels, God declare
himself so as then he did. For so it is, God showed himself then the Lord of
Hosts indeed; and the Mighty God of battle, if ever else in the sequel of
this action against Eugenius. For this is that memorable action, concerning
which Claudian wrote thus.

Te propter gelidis Aquilo de monte procellis
Obruit aduersas acies, Panegy ad Honor: in 3. eius Consulatis.
reuolutaque tela
Vertit in authors, and turbine reppulit hastas
O nimium dilecte Deo, cui fundit abantris
Aeolus armatas hyemes, cui militat ether
Et coniurati veniunt ad classica venti.
What friends Theodosius made in this exigence, upon whom he called, unto whom
he had address, Ruffinus relates in the same place, Tum vero vt conuersas
suorum acies vidit Theodosius, stans in edita rupe vnde and conspicere, and
conspici ab vtroque exercitu posset, proiectis armis ad solita se vertit
auxilia, and prostratus in Conspectu Dei, Tu inquit, omnipotens Deus nosti,
quia in nomine Christi filij tui, vltionis iusta praelia ista suscepi: si
secus, in me vindica, si vero cum caussa probata, and in te confisus huc veni,
porrige dextram tuam, ne dicant forte Gentiles. (For they were Pagans, or
addicted unto Paganism in the action) vbi est little Deus? In which exigence
he prevailed by his own immediate Invocation of God himself.
Thus the Emperor then prevailed not by intercession of any Saint, but at his
own immediate invocation unto God himself, as Socrates, Theodoret, Sozomenus
relate it: and it is expressed by Ruffinus, that this was, and had been his
use of old, often approved with success: ad solita se vertit auxilia. So
nothing is gotten by this allegation: To advance the proof farther for their
advantage, beyond the observation of the Controuersor, Lib. 7. ca. 24.
Sozomenus reports that the Emperor setting forth upon his voyage, made his
recourse unto God in a Church, which he himself had builded in honor and
memory of Saint John Baptist, For whatsoever is related of his Inuocating John
the Baptist.
seven miles distant from Constantinople, (...), earnestly entreated the
Baptist to assist him: nor only so, but he did this with success. Fertur
enim, says the Story, quod eo tempore quo pugna haec committebatur, ex eo
templo Dei, quod ad septimum lapidem situm erat, in quo preces fuderat
Imperator egressus demon quidam, abreptus in sublime, Iohanni Baptista
conuitiatus sit, and capitis obtruncationem obiecerit, magnaque voce clamarit,
Tunc me But the credit first of this Story may be questioned: It has little
credit.
for Socrates, and Theodoret, elder then Sozomenus, have it not; and Sozomenus
himself has no greater warrant for it then hearsay: (...), the report is:
but who the Author was, what credit it was of, is not related. Theodoret
reports, that not John Baptist, but John Evangelist, and Philip the Apostle
were (...), and assistants unto the Emperors Forces. But be the Story
authentical, and of incontrolable credit, it is a singular fact, joined with
miraculous operation of him, who is ever glorious and admirable in his Saints:
but then especially, when as his own glory, and the state of the Catholic
Church does lie at stake, as it did upon the hazard of that days success.
Such singular passages, are not to be called into precedent, unless also we
expect the like extraordinary and miraculous deliverances in our addresses.
Lastly, the Emperor had repair unto God alone, At the least, it is but a
prayer, that God would appoint the Baptist for aid.
without Baptist for to aid him. But to put it home for the most advantage,
admit that (...), he calls upon the Baptist indeed, and without more ado; it
is not to assist him in his prayers unto God: but having gone himself in
person, with confidence first unto the Throne of Grace, And being in a Church
dedicated to him, he might the better take him in by the way for assistance.
John Baptist, by the way.

The two next are Paulinus and Prudentius, To the testimony of Paulinus and
Prudentius, it is enough to say, they are Poets.
Christian Poets, who use the liberty of Poets, Quidlibet agendi: They may
pass on: and if he need testimonies of this kind, I can afford him 500. as
fit, as pat, as pregnant as these, and build him up strange positions in
Divinity; if I may be permitted to take and allege literally, and sensu primo,
the enforced passages of Poets, Christians as well as profane.

And of Victor, that he is an Historian.
Victor Bishop of Vtica, is an Historian: and such are Narratores, of other
men's Acts, not expositores of their own opinions. Narrations have no more
weight or worth, then have those Authors from whence they proceed. But Victor
in this place laying aside the person of an Historian, takes up the carriage
of a Panegyrist merely: That takes up also the carriage of a Panegyric.
To deplore the calamity of the Church in those times, by the barbarous
Vandals, etc. he conuenteth, as it were, the Catholic Church by parts, and
addresseth his Rhetorique in this wise, Adestote Angeli Dei: D^precamini
Patriarchae: Orate Sancti Prophetae: Estote Apostoli saffragatores: Praecipue
tu Petre beat, quare siles pro ouibus and agnis, a communi Domino magna tibi
cautela et solicitudine commendatis? Thus he expostulateth with Saint Peter,
and chideth him, you will not suppose, really and indeed, but only
Rhetorically and figuratively, no more then to express Art, rather then Piety
therein: and why not in like sort for Invocation, in which sort and fashion he
goes on, Tu Sancte Paul, gentium magister, cognosce quid Vandali faciunt:
which a man might as well produce, to prove that Saint Peter and Saint Paul,
were ignorant of, not interessed in the calamities of those times: and so far
of to be inuocated, or their help implored by the Church, as having no notice
thereof at all.

The next testimony.
Fulgentius was a man of worth in his time, but the testimony produced is none
of his: It is suppositions, and a counterfeit. The whole Homily is in Saint
Augustines works, Tom. 10. as one Sermo 15. de Tempore. Nor deserves any.
The Louanists, found it ascribed unto Seucrianus in some Copies, which argues
it a stragler, a masterlesse piece, a rogue: And more then that, a blasphemous
varlet in this very place recited by the Cardinal Controuersor. Omnes cursus
naturae virgo Maria in Domino nostro Jesus Christo suscepit, vt omnibus ad se
confugientibus foeminis subueniret, and sic restauraret (so it follows, where
the Cardinal left of) omnegenus foeminarum ad se venieutium, noua Eua seruando
virginitatem: sicut omnegenus viuorum Adam nouus recuperat Dominus Jesus. Is
not this a varlet in grain: a fit Patron for Invocation, that in the very
grand-work of Redemption parts stakes betwixt Christ Jesus and the Virgin
Mary, that entitleth her nouam E^am, as Christ is called nouus Adam. That
professes she restored all Womankind, as Christ did all Mankind. I suppose
William Postel coined this work to give credit and countenance unto his old
Beldame. Howsoever the Cardinal wanted witnesses it seems, that took in
such a Rascal to make up a number, for want of better evidences, and to
purpose.

As for Saint Leo, The other of Leo, if they were doubled could not help their
cause.
he might afford him many more testimonies of like nature, concerning Saint
Peter's Intercession, as Sermon. 3. in die Anniuersario, Sermon. 1. de jeiunio. 10.
mensis. Sermon. 5.6.8. in Natali Apostolorum. All which extend no farther then
this, that some special Church and people, as Saint Peter had over the Roman
Church, Being all of particulars.
and yet Leo goes no farther then this, By his merits and Prayers, we hope to
find assistance: Intercession, without any Invocation. These testimonies look
toward Intercession: that produced in the Controversies is for neither: Unless
this may be remembered for to establish Invocation, Make you friends of the
unrighteous Mammon, that is, make Intercession, and call upon Mammon. For the
text of Saint Leo looks that way, Per bonam aemulationem, ipsorum exambi^e
suffragia.

Saint Augustines authority would have prevailed much, if he had favored the
cause.
I have reserved Saint Augustine for the last, as being the man upon whose
shoulders for dogmaticall points disputed and resolved, the Church of God has
as much relied, as upon any since the Apostles times. For scarcely is
intercession found in him, unless it be of Martyrs, who in the Augustine, But
he resolves it, only as an act of special dispensation for Martyrs.
had an especial privilege above other Saints. And therefore he that yields
Martyrs as were interessed, rebus viuentium, denies it precisely of other
Saints. Non ideo putandum est vivorum rebus quoslibet enteresse possed
defunctos, quoniam quibusdam sanandis vel adiuvandis Martyrs adsunt. Sed ideo
potius intelligendum est, quod per diuinam Potentiam Martyrs viuorum rebus
intersint, quoniam defuncti per naturam propria^ viuoru^ rebus interesse non
possunt. So that by Saint Augustines resolution it is an Act of special
dispensation, no natural ability or sufficiency in any Saint, to take notice
of any thing done upon earth. And secondly so an act of special divine
dispensation, that it belongs unto some only, and is not communicated unto
all generally: Martyrs alone have that privilege. Which instance of Saint
Augustine, out of the opinion of the Church, answers well-nigh all
allegations, of any practice this way for Invocation or Intercession in
antiquity. And lastly, Martyrs with Ad memorias eorum, And for them too, with
some limitation.
and not elsewhere. These Memoriae being now no where extant, Invocation in
his opinion is ceased. Or else in Natali eorum die upon the day of their
consummation: which being but once in the year: and in so long a tract of
time, uncertain also, Invocation can be but seldom, and then too uncertain:
and they being only to be then Inuoked, do make Intercession only then.
Sicut dicit Apostolus non omnes sancti habent dona curationum: ita nec in
omnibus memorijs sanctorum ista fieri voluit ille, qui diuidit propria
vnicuique, sicut vult. August. Epistola. 137. And the testimonies recited in
the Controversies out of Augustine are all for Martyrs, not Saints of any
other rank or reckoning, betwixt whom and Martyrs he puts this
difference, that Cum pro caeteris defunctis oretur, Martyrs pro nobis rather
intercedant.

Thus they spoke and wrote that for five hundred years or thereabout after
Christ, And so it was resolved by the first, and best in the Primitive Church.
were the chief and principal amongst the Worthies of David. Whereof not any
one speaks positiuely to the point, as in full resolution of the truth of
that conclusion. Holy Saints and Angels are to be Inuocated. And therefore the
latter Writers.
Those that remain upon record, filed up in the Controversies, Gregory the
first, Gregory of Turon, Bid, Anselme, Bernard, are later, postnati, to the
practice grown into use, and therefore not authentical in the question. Nor
did Philip Melanthon at all enlarge Quiante Gregorium ignotam fuisse scripsit
sanctorum Inuocationem. Namely, for use and approbation of the Church. And
Decrees of Councels are the less to be listened unto.
As for decrees of Councels in determinations of Faith: Our Masters of
Controversies are not much troubled with any great store of them. In the
appendex unto the Council of Chalcedon, the Bishops of Europe write thus unto
the Emperor Leo. Sanctissimum Proterium in choro, and ordine sanctorum
Martyrum ponimus, and ejus intercssione misericordem and propitium Deum habere
postulamus. But first of all it is no Council decree: indeed it specifieth a
practice of the Church, and so also a belief. They used to pray unto God that
he would be pleased to accept the Intercession of Martyrs: which is nothing to
the point in question. For here is invocation directed unto God, not Saints.
Intercession of Saints is remembered, but not of all: only Martyrs. Then
Intercession is not Invocation. It is, and may be where Invocation is not,
etiam in particular, but this is also in general. For, if not the whole Church
represented, yet for the Church representing in a special action, a peculiar
time, singular occasion so remarkable and notorious, it could not be hid, they
desire God, that Proterius might remember them, and commend them unto the
Majesty of Heaven. The second allegation is of less operation, Flauianus post
morte^ viuit: Martyr pro nobis orat: It is only an asseueration what he did,
not Invocation, that so he might, and that which he did, was a special case,
of Intercession for them whom he knew in the flesh: of deprecation for the
state of the Church whereof he had special notice in his life, being therein
interessed particularly: But, quid hoc ad Bacchum? for ordinary practice
commonly? Show me any positive assertion of Father: any Decree of Council
within the time prefixed of 550. years, and I subscribe.

As for miracles, And the miracles which they report, least of all to be
believed.
I believe them when I see them. Sure I am, there is much cosinage and
collusion in them. The Donatists were wont to brag much of them: Quae figmenta
mendacium hominum, vel portenta fuerunt fallacium Daemonum, in the opinion of
Saint Augustine. For even the Devils those Gods of the Gentiles wrought
miracles, and true ones substantially, for the confirmation of Paganism and
Idolatry. Orata. in Iuda^ 1.
(...). For even the Devil, says Chrysostom, has by his Art and cunning
cured many diseases, and restored men unto their health again. What then?
Shall we therefore subscribe unto, and partake of their impiety? God forbid.
And who knows not Heretics have ever run this course to confirm their
impieties from such delusions. Adijcient multa de authoritate cujuque doctoris
^aeretici: illos maxim dostrinae suae sidem confirmasse: mortues suscitasse,
debiles reformasse, futura significasse; v^i merito Apostoli crederentur. Quasi
nec hoc s^riptum sit venturos multos, qui etiam virtutes maximae^ ederent, ad
fallatiam munie^dam corruptae praedicationis. (...). 44.
So that in opinion of Tertullian, it is no safe proceeding by this
Mirabiliatian courses, to justify Invocation of Saints or Angels. So that no
reason but to embrace Chrysostomes resolution, For either they confirm nothing*
(...). Credit is to be given to the Scripture, rather then unto Miracles
whatsoever. But to grant them true, truly done, by the only finger of God,
yet being, as they are, extraordinary works of wonder, whenever they
confirm that for which they are alleged, we may do well to remember, that
what they so confirm, are also extraordinary dispensations, Or nothing but
extraordinary dispensations.
not to be drawn into practice ordinarily, and so nor they, nor their effects
any thing to purpose.

And so they must every way fail in the (...) of Intercession
Show me, to conclude, any positive practice in antiquity, not one or two
examples of some private parties. A received resolution for the verity thereof,
concluded dogmatically. Demonstrate unto me infallibly, by reason, Scripture,
authentic tradition, that Saints departed are call of them, or any of them
interessed ordinarily, rebus viuentium. That by either Evening or Morning
knowledge. Natural indowments, or acquired accruments. By divine revelation.
Angelical relation, Till they have found us better assurance, that they know,
and are interessed in our affairs.
or other means they do or can know and understand my necessities, exigences,
prayers, or practico in any time or place when I call upon them, or unto them,
and I will unfeignedly join hands of fellowship, and say, Saint Peter, Saint
Paul, pray for me. Until that, (...); and so I think will any, desire to be
excused for Invocation: For to be persuaded as some have told me they are,
that in their opinion Saints nor do, nor can be privy unto my necessities, nor
hear my prayers, and yet to pray unto them, is to my understanding so poor a
part of Piety, that it is without warrant of common sense. It is peradventure
possible, says Saint Augustine, that the dead know something done here amongst
us, by relation of Angels, Qui rebus quae aguntur hic praesto sunt, and
beholding the actions and occasions of mortal men with whom they converse,
peradventure make report of them in Heaven. Such things and no more, and no
other then those are, which he to whom all things are aperta, and in
subjection, thinks fit and convenient for them to know. Somewhat God may be
pleased to reveal and let them know immediately from himself. (Unless as we
by particular Revelation, may know of theirs.)
Some men may have at some certain times particular revelation, or
peradventure apparitions from the dead: as Saint Paul yet living (...), was
rapt up, but how, into the third Heaven. Verum ista diuinitus exhibentur, long
aliter quam se habet vsitatus rerum ordo, singulis creaturarum generibus
attributus, says Augustine. All these being extraordinary dispensations, no
ordinary rules of practice are not to be made ordinary Precedents, especially
in cases of Religon and Piety, or of such humane exigences as require quick
dispatch, and certain assurance for deliverance: Specially since we have a
surer, and speedie^ way of dispatch, with (...) them.
Can I expect through the Means, Mediation, or Intercession of any Saint, or
all the Saints of Paradise, any spedier admittance then I can have from God
himself; any readier dispatch then he immediately affords? Call upon me, and
I will hear. Inuitation out of Mercy; promise of Grace are not so far a
sunder in the text of David: and as instantly consequent in Gods performance.
The word is no sooner out of thy mouth. Hear me, O Lord: but it is in the
Ears of the Lord of Hosts, and instantly finds grace and acceptance; For
straight he comes in with. I will hear and deliver thee. Abraham's servant, a
good servant of such a Master, in that great employment, To take a Wife for
Isack, Genesis 24. Has recourse unto the God of his Master Abraham. Immediate
address, without aid or assistance* and what success? such as none could
expect or desire better. For verse. 15. Before he had left speaking, behold
Rebekah came out. The party provided for him: So God instantly heard his
prayer, and granted his request. No man, I suppose, would desire better
Audience. (...). If thou have any suite to, To. ^. page 195.
or business with man, thou first inquire if he be at leisure? to be spoken
with? He that attends on him, answers my Master is a sleep, he cannot be
spoken with. But no such matter if thou address thee unto God. Go to him and
Call, he instantly answers and gives ear: No business hinders: No
Mediator needs: No servant or attendant to keep thee out. But say, Lord have
mercy upon me, and eft-soones behold, God is at hand. While yet the Word is in
thy mouth, he returns answer, Lo here am I. Thy Petition is dispatched
before thy suite be fully ended. No long suite: No great charge: not much
trouble or attendance in Call, and I will hear. It is not man, thou have
recourse unto, that so thou should follow him far, or repair unto the
place of his abode. God is always near, ever at hand. Thus to purpose. And
again, in the case of the woman of Tire. (...). Page 190.
She does not address her self to Peter: she supplicateth not unto John:
she does not entreat James to help her: but passes through the midst of
them to Christ. I need no Mediator quoth she: but with true repentance my
companion, I come personally unto the spring head. He came down from Heaven:
he took flesh for this cause, that even I, might come and speak unto him.
Therefore in conclusion, to their persuasions, that direct, and inuit me
otherwise then to call upon Me. Without more ado I answer with Nazianzene in
another case, (...): Let us stand as we do: all things considered, we have no
reason to change for the worse. Hold that fast which we have received from our
Elders, the ancient Christians of the purest times: the eldest Tradition of the
Church: who never were acquainted with such diuersions from the right and
direct way. And their contrary Doctrine is both a nouelty, and foolery.
It is a nouelty I auerre, and will auow to use such Intercession. Not heard of
for practice ordinary in the Church for above five hundred years after Christ.
It is foolery to go so about the bush, when without much ado, the bird may be
had. It cannot be proved by any Roman Catholic nor all the Roman Catholics
living, that Saints departed, of what Rank, Condition, Quality, Mansion or
Degree soever, can understand ordinarily our Needs, Necessities, Votes,
Desires, or Petitions, and therefore, as unfit for this employment, are not
ordinarily to be Called upon, for Help, Assistance, or Relief. Origens
conclusion will hold and shall be defended and made good against all Opponents.
Vtrum sancti qui cum Christo sunt, aguni aliquid and laborant pro nobis, in
particular, upon particulars, est inter mysteria occulta Dej: And therefore not
so rashly to be resolved affirmatively. Without any ground.
It is no point of Faith fundamental, or secundary: never so resolved for many
ages in the eldest times of the Church: no practice of the faithful ancient,
imposed, or universal: no tradition for it, much less Scripture: no ground in
reason, or in Divinity. It is but folly in time of necessity to rely upon their
mediation: The best course is, The used course has been ever: the surest way
is ever without their mediation, to have immediate address unto God in Christ.
If any Papist living, or all the Papists living, can justify the practice of
their Church herein, against the Doctrine and practice of the Church of
England, I will subscribe unto all Popery.

And yet we are wronged, And yet we deny no honor to the blessed Saints.
and deeply calumniated by foul mouthed detractors, as injurious unto God in
the dishonor of his Saints, because we give them not the honor which is not
due unto them, whereof they are not any way capable. Those blessed ones with
God, that have fought a good fight; kept the Faith, finished their course: as
they are now regnant in glory, with their Redeemer; so are they honorable
amongst the Righteous upon Earth for ever. They have left a name behind them:
so that their praise shall be remembered for evermore. The Lord has gotten
great glory by them, and therefore with renown he will reward them. No
Christian will deny, or envy them their due: And for my self, I say with
Nazianzene, or Basil I am sure. (...). It does me good at heart to see them
honored, I admire, reverence, adore them in their kind; their Triumphs and
Trophies over Death and Hell my Tongue and Pen shall most willingly set out to
life, with all the poor skill and faculty I have. Thrice happy Reapers of that
mighty Booz, that did so worthily in Ephrata, and were so famous in Bethleem:
that sowed in tears, when you went out weeping, but reap now the fruit of
your labors in joy, you have left some gleanings for Ruth to gather after you,
to the comfort and cherishing of her poor widow mother. Thrice happy guests of
that royal Ahashuerosh, admitted to eat at his Table in his Palace, that
Non-such of God, to drink the sweet wine of felicity in the cups of
immortality, clad in the wedding garments of immutability: Blessed Souls and
immaculate, it has been your turns already, being purged with the Oil of
Purification, and perfumed with the Odors of the Lambs innocence, to go into
the Chamber of that great King, and to be married unto him by immortality.
Spies of that Land of promise, which indeed flows with milk and honey, to
whom that Captain of the Armies of the Lord of Hosts, the Joshua in truth, and
not in type, has given rest from all enemies round about. Fair Flocks of
that great Shepherd of Israel, that feed upon the Mountains of Eternity, and
repose your selves in Pastures, by the waters of life, we know you afford us
your best wishes and desires: refresh us with the crummes of your delicacies
there, compassionate our yet Pilgrim estate, that lie among Lions, feed with
the Wolf, and go to water with the Dragons. We cannot forget, we must not be
unmindful of your worth, John, Peter, Paul, James, Stephen, Luke, Andrew
Tecla, those (...), Sacrifices for Christ, Page 76.
as Nazianzene calls them, such as with them, after them, and before them,
Pro veritate periculis se obiecerunt: cum igni, ferro, belluis, tyrannis, malis
praesentibus et denunciatis, alacri animo, velut in alienis corporibus non
suis, imo, vt expertes corporum, dimicarunt. (...). These you honor not, but
disgrace what you may: so he expostulateth with, and charge Julian that
Renegado: but he never intended so to honor them, as Honorificentiam regis
defer Comiti, But that which is only due unto their Maker.
to give them the honor due unto their Maker. This I must not, I cannot, I
dare not presume to do: For how can I answer it unto my Master, who has
denounced, My honor shall no man have, nor will I part stakes with any other?
Nay, how unto those Grandies themselves, the Saints? so jealous of their
Redeemers honor, that before all they first would plead against me, and cast
me upon enditement of high Treason: so far are they from admitting, or
patronizing mine excess. (...), I confess with Origin; they deserve to be
honored, Contra Cells. 1.
but not (...), or (...), not to be worshipped or adored:(...), is (...). The
honor they expect, the most and greatest we can do unto them, says
Chrysostom, To. 5. pa. 625.
is to go after them in their worth, and to be followers of their good
deseruings. Nazianzene enlarges himself much upon this point, and concludes:
Hoc honorum genere magis oblectatur Cyprianus, O^at. 18.
quam cunctis alijs in vnum congestis. Haec et cum apud Homines versaretur,
vita moribusque praesiabat: et absens per nostram vocem omnibus in mandatis
dat, quam obsecro ne contemnatis, si tamen aut illius in dolorum acerbitatibus
tolerantiae, ac certaminum pro virtutis defensione susceptorum, aut etiam mei,
qui hac legatione fungor apud vos vlla habetur ratio. Nazianzene did not in
this, nor do we with him, and all antiquity, vnder-valew their worth, or
esteem lightly of their atchieuements. (...). Men, says Chrysostom, that
fear GOD, ^o. 5. pa. 721.
when they refuse to adore the Creature, do not vilify or despise the
Creature, but rather give honor to the Creator. The godly man hates not the
Sun, because with Pagan Infidels he adoreth not the light thereof, but gives
that respect thereto which is due. Thus we answer in this point of
Invocation, and make our Apology against detraction, for dishonouring or
disparaging Gods holy Saints. That GOD, glorious in them now and ever, grant us
of his grace, through their Intercession for his Church in Christ, that we may
so pass through things temporal, that finally we loose not things eternal:
but together with all the Saints departed, may rise again to immortal Life.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 2. lin. 29. mere, p. 3. l. 3. love, l. 17. miserentur, p. 8. l. 1.
alonge, p. 14- l 2 reserved, p. 20 l. 7. nor man, p. 26.14. which does, l. 27,
cas^e dis. patch, p. 35.27, know not what, p. 37.19. (...): p. 107. l. 11, ius
petes, p. 110. l. pen. Non enim, p. 136. l. 14, possunt, p. 145. l. 8. (...), p
146. l. 5. unto, p. 178, l. 8 (...), l. 23. for us to, p. 182. l. 13, to a
Christian Virgin ber, l. 28. and of, p. 189. l. 15. (...), l. 18. (...), p.
210. l. 19. Exercitui.

END

