A COVNTER-BVFF TO Lysimachus Nicanor: Calling himself a Jesuit.

By PHILOPATRIS.

Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos Ducit, and immemores non sinit esse
sui.

Printed Anno Domini, 1640.

A COVNTER-BVFF TO Lysimachus Nicanor. A pretended Jesuit.
I Cannot now but give my grief a tongue,
Since innocence, and virtue suffer wrong;
Since calumny, and fals-hood strive to wound
Our Mothers breast, and purpose to confound
That Covenant, the Popish hyrelings foil,
Heavens herald sent to bless North-Britains soil:
A band of truth and power, the Prelates baine,
Which with our dearest blood we will maintain,
As sworn, Gods purer worship to defend,
Our King to serve, our straying faults to mend.
Illustrius Trajan, though a pagane prince,
After much blood of Christians, did dispense
With the remainder of that Heaven-blest band.
Who through a Red sea fraungh'd their longed-for land.
Whiles by proconsull Pliny he was informed,
That Christians in their lives were more reformed, Plinius secundus.

Nor then was vented forth, by false report,
And that in sober way they did resort
To private meetings, whereunto their God
They sweetly sang, some divine hymn or ode,
Committing nothing worthy Caesar's wrath.
Whence all inditements, sentences of death
Were straight repealed, and Christians were set free,
Dispensed to brook peace, truth, and liberty.
The like our hope and trust assures us, shall
Unto our native homebred Caesar fall:
Whiles by some worthy Plin', it shall be told him,
That in the arms of love we still infold him,
That the pure incense of our sacred prayers,
Maugre the spite and pride of all gainsayers,
Is daily for his safety powered forth,
And since no earthly thing is of more worth,
Nor life and fortunes, we shall both employ,
For thryce-blest Charles, the center of our joy:
So that we brook in full integrity,
With peace and truth, our ancient liberty.
Then false Lysimachus, thou runnigate,
That seems to pry into the soul of state,
That personates a subtle Jesuit,
And yet art known a homebred parasite,
That has belcht forth a rapsodie of lies,
And against thy Country false coined calumnies*
Thou by our Statutes have deserved to die
An ignominious death, for such a lie,
As may breed discord 'twixt the King and State,
Is death: here many laws I may repeat,
And practicks too, M. Thomas Rosse.
but these are all so clear,
As need no glossing: Only I will here
Touch one for all: A Scot of ancient race,
A scholar too, as thou art, lived a space
In Englands Court, and for some private hate,
A pasquill did against his Country wreat,
As thou have done in fouler sort, more full
Of vil'd aspersions, from thy phrantick skull.
Well then King James of lasting memory,
Who could not brook that any calumny
Should be asperst upon his native land,
After some trial there, he gave command,
The Lybeller should home go, and sustain,
Of doom unpartiall laws the unpitied pain.
And here being tried, judged and adjudg'd, they fand,
That he should loss his head, and faulty hand,
Which straight was done in public view; and so
I think the matter with thy self will go.
For we do sure expect our Sovereign
Will send thee home, that here thou may sustain,
Due punishment: But since that thy offense
Is worse nor his, the judges may dispense
With headings blow; and make thee climb the top
Of some cursed tree, come down into a rope,
Nor shall this one jest more in silence rote.
Which careless I, had now almost forgot,
Of a Polonian Swain, more curious
Nor wise or learned, called Stercovius.
Hither he came clade all in antique sort,
Where seen in streets, the subject of a sport,
He soon became to childish gazers, who
With skriechs and clamours hiss him to and fro,
Till forced he was with shame and speed to pack him,
And to his feet and loathsome cabin take him:
Where in a furious and chollerick mood,
He nothing breathed but fire, revenge and blood,
And fondly swore, our nations overthrow,
He should adventure, with a sudden blow
Of his both pregnant and pernicious pen,
Like to a fierce and fearful powder train.
Thus fraught with fury, home to Pole he goes,
To wreak his splen on his imagined foes:
And there his pen he loosed, and with more spite,
Nor hell had taught him thoughts, he did indite
A legend of reproaches, stuf't with lies,
Was bold to print, and vent those calumnies,
Against the Scots, their manners and their fame,
Of purpose to obscure their splendide name,
In all that Esterne clyme, and tract of ground,
Where squadrons of our Nation did abound,
Whence some choice men of ours, did take in hand,
To supplicat the Princes of that land,
Their wrong for to redress: so with great pain,
Great search, and length of time their point they gain,
For all vaste Teutons states, the Spruch, the Dan,
Dispatch, and arm with power some trusty man,
Stercovius to pursue in any ground,
Take and arraigne him where he may be found,
Which is with great turmoile and travel done,
Yet things well acted are performed soon:
For this sly fox, hunted from hole to hole,
At length is caught, and unresolved did thole
His head, divorce, which from his body fell
Low to the ground, his soul I cannot tell
Which way it went, for most unworthie I,
That should into the Eternals secrets pry.
Now since by law of Nations, foreign Princes,
Have granted patents throughout their Provinces,
A slanderer thus to take and apprehend,
Who did a stranger Nation vilipend,
What shall our Sovereign do? when it be's known,
How falsely thou have lied against thine own.
But now thy piece I must anatomize,
And try with Linxes sight what therein lies;
First for the bulk though spacious to the eye,
It Is pesterd with a full hydropisie,
And from a liver rotten, drencht, and spent,
Poison for blood throughout the veins are sent:
The frontespiece unmaskes an hypocrite,
While thou strives to play the Jesuit,
Whence in egregious sort, thou lies, and fails
In every point of thy false paralels:
Daring compare our true reformed land,
Unto the bloud-hound, hell-inspired band
Of those, who still are hatching dreadful things,
And hunt the precious lives of sacred Kings.
Next with what impudent and flintie face!
Thou makes the bloody league, a leading case
To our blessed Covenant the powerful mean,
God and our Kings true service to maintain.
For of that league was not a monster made,
A French-like body, with a Spanish head;
Which broached that traitorous blot by hels devise,
To shake, and sack the glorious flower de Lice.
They traitors were, times stories sure relate,
To God and man to Prince, and to the state:
We paternes here of love, of truth, of zeal,
Opposed right in a contrare parallel,
Have vowed, and sworn our lives and goods to spend,
Gods truth, our Prince, and country to defend:
So are thy words like flowers but sap or root,
Which only to repeat, is to confute.
Again thou say, we sympathize with thee,
And strive t'ecclypse the rays of Majesty,
Pressing what is proper unto God alone,
A Monarchs sacred person to dethrone,
Of independent power him to deprive,
And call in doubt his high prerogative.
To this our talion statute, we oppose,
Which does as treason hatchers judge all those, I. 6. p. 11. c. 49.

Who dare accuse, and cannot prove a treason:
Thus guilty thou's be found by law and reason.
For since an hundred and eight Kings have sent,
To royal Charles a pierlesse monument,
A Crown untoucht, since famous Fergus hand,
First heald the helm of our sea-bordering land;
And that 'twixt us, and England rival hate,
Like time spent Almanacks, worn out of date,
Is turned to peace, hatched in Eliza's reign,
And consummate by our blessed Sovereign,
Thrice sacred James, that heaven-predestin'd one,
Who should rule Britain, long dis-joyn'd alone:
And that by Charles late reign, that love knot ty'de,
Should while as time does last, unloos'd abide:
We here before The Almighty now protest,
And by Him swear, that in our loyal breast
So damned a devilish thought did never enter,
But full resolved, shall life and all adventure,
TO uphold the pillars of that Monarchy,
Which destined was by Heaven, great Charles for Thee,
Brook't by so many Kings, thy brave forbears,
Now thirty less then twice a thousand years:
Nor that against our neighbors was intend,
Any invasive power or force to send,
But In defense, our royal emblam'd word;
A Lion crowned, a Scepter, and a Sword,
Adorn our arms unstained, since Alexander
Began to kythe the Eastern worlds commander:
A Thistle here is seen, and seems this way,
None can unpunisht me provoke to say,
Of all these Motto's here unfold the sense,
We take no arms but in our just defense:
If England will invade, untwist that band,
Which long has keept the one and other land
In peace and love, and on our bounds encroach,
By sea or land, we must bide their reproach,
And then our courage taught by wit and skill,
And skill by courage armed, resolve we will
The hazard of a war to under go,
And set our face against our invading foe,
The worlds great Judge no doubt, in whom we trust,
Will be our safeguard, as our cause is just,
By him confirmed, unmovable we stand,
And shall preserve our never conquered land.
A multitude fit and composed in arms,
TO invade, or to repel by force, all harms,
Under a certain law, Eips. de militia Romans dial. 2.
an armies called,
We on this part defensive, unapal'd,
Resisting force, are forced to take in hand
This war, to brook the freedom of our land,
As our ancestors old, of farre-spread name,
Who traced in true record of endless fame,
Have left that Jewel unstained liberty,
To be enjoyed by their posterity.
And should not now their fair example tie us,
Though all the furies were let loose to try us,
The same to do, and to our offspring leave,
What from our fathers old we did receave;
Lest they should curse these dismale days, and say,
We did Religion and our State betray.
But O His colors shine into the field,
To whom we should our lives and fortunes yield,
And not resist our answers short and plain,
Which as the law of nature all maintain,
To be eternal sure and immutable,
An universal law, just, firm, and stable:
Whence flows that source of laws, which binds all,
Of Nations, civil, and municipall,
What men intend, (to keep this sweet soft breath
Unharm'd by fierce assaults of threatening death)
Is done by law, L. 3. F. de Just. and jure. L. Scientiae 49. 4. F. ad L. Aquil.
and may in their defense,
Armed force repel, by force and violence:
And so defend we should* being forced thereto,
And in this case all is lawful that we do.
All fair means are assayed, our Prince to please,
We bend our thoughts the Lions wrath to appease,
And in a most obsequious Sympathy,
We supplicat for peace, we call, we cry,
Which if it please him flately to refuse,
By this necessity, we cannot choose
But rise in lawful arms, and not neglect
Religion, Laws, and Country to protect.
A wise man should, Terent.
the Comic sooths it so,
Try every way before to arms he go,
For by one tempest of a civil broyle,
Which rises in a late calm settled soil,
The Prince is more prejudged, nor granting to them
Much liberty; yea, though he should undo them,
He Is sharesman of the harm, can but obtain,
In end with certain loss, Bacon Es. say 29.
uncertain gain.
A foreign war was well compared of late*
To heat of exercise into a state,
But bad distempers of intestine war,
Like to those bloud-corrupting fevers are;
Then if whole Britain in cumbustion be,
It follows sure, the head cannot be free:
For in each symptom of a sharp disease,
The head does with the body sympathize.
O had I here the power, the place, the skill,
To vent my well-set thoughts, as I have will,
By truth emboldned then, I should explain
Our countries case to my dread Sovereign,
Show him the pathway, for his joys increase,
To solace in the multitude of peace,
To keep that band untwist, his peoples love,
Which is the surest tie a prince can prove,
Let pure Religion strength and vigor take,
By reason of a state-confirmed act:
Give way to justice, and our laws restore
Unto the sense and force they were before:
Banish foul gamesters flatly from the play,
And chase ear-pleasing sycophants away:
Unmask their face, and to a trial bring,
The source from whence these poisoned waters spring:
And namely this, and such false lybellers,
Seditious sowers of mischief and jarres:
Then our enlightened King with favors eye,
Through clear, not gommie spectacles shall see
Of loyal Subjects, here a heaven-blest brood,
In faith, Religion, and alleadgeance good:
Then shall Jehova shoure on him his grace,
And breath to all his Kingdoms truth and peace:
And whiles the sun, light to the world shall bring,
A race of Kings from forth his loins shall spring.
Those mang-merd priests, Rabelais calls them so.
drunk with the dregs of sin,
When they a novice to confess begin,
They make him first bread-band his guiltiness,
And all his sinful thoughts, words, deeds, express:
This done, they tax and charge him with such crimes,
As never practiced were in former times;
Thus to that youngling sins are taught and shown,
Which heretofore were neither heard nor known.
So by that other parallel of thine,
Thou calls in question if by power divine,
Or peoples suffrage, Monarchs are enthroned,
By whom, and why uncrown'd, and how repon'd,
But whiles thou seems t'unmask a verity,
Thou over-shades the royal Majesty,
And in quottations has so far deborded,
That people will believe what is recorded,
They Will tender all thou say, and not purloyne,
But take these vented pieces for good coin,
Their faith is stung, they will surely trust these men,
So Naive-lie represented by thy pen:
And if these errors be, thou do unfold them,
For men cannot believe what is never told them.
Those tender points thus pressed, and other things,
Shall make thee sure, a darling unto Kings:
But when thy stuff be's tryde by Lynxes eye,
Thou shall as thou deserves exalted be,
As Haman was great in Assuerus Court:
But as thou scoffs a Prince, thou makes a sport
Of sacred Scripture, and a nose of wax,
Causing her rays on dunghills to reflex:
Thus God, the King, Nobles, and people be
Scorned, wronged, detract'd, and railed upon by thee,
What this deserves, let justice to it look,
There needs no ditty, but cast up thy book.
Yet since thou did divinity profess,
As by those ragged rapsodies I guess.
From David's mouth thine errors I proclaim,
Unto the world, ar symbols of thy shame:
First in a scorners chair thou sits, Psalm. 1. 1.
and thus
Thou art denyde these blessings poured on us,
Did ever scorn flow from so foul a mouth,
As his, who flouts and scoffs Gods sacred truth.
And next, thou shall not in Gods tents abide,
Nor in his all o're-topping hill reside,
Since thou have loosed the arrows of thy tongue. Psalm. 15. 3.

And done thy Country and thy neighbor wrong.
King David hates a two tongued hypocrite, Ps. 26. 4.

And these that in malicious lies delight:
Thou styles thy self a Jesuit, and so
For a diguised liar thou must go.
That Kingly prophet truly has foretold, Pl. 31. 18.

That thy sharp'd tongue, which is, and has been bold
The righteous to traduce, shall silenced be,
Has not this judgment justly ceased on thee.
And of those curses thou shall have a share, Ps. 35. 11.

Which against false witnesses pronounced are,
Thou art a witness false, and strives to move,
Our Prince to quite his ancient Kingdoms love.
Thou art prohibit with thy lips profane, Ps. 50. 16.

Gods sacred will and precepts to explain,
Since thou have datted flames of infamy,
Against their fame, Ps. 50. 20.
who brethren were to thee.
But here I pause, and leaves the rest to those,
Who more exact can pay thee home in prose,
Who shall uncace thy waires, let all men know,
That they be not upright though seeming so:
I Will only point at some unwarrant'd places,
Which amongst thy Paralels thou interlaces.
In down right terms, in speeches plain and free,
Thou dares defend that thrice damned Liturgy,
Which had almost intoxicate our State,
But is abolished and suppressed of late,
Which is in sound, in sense, in words express,
The smooth framed model of an English mass.
Yet thou forsooth, must by thy pen defend it,
Though King and Church, has simply it suspendit:
Thus sure thou would, if urged thereto, maintain
The Jewish talmude, Turkish alcorane.
In these foregoing theams, Paral. 2.
thou proves that we
Preasse to supplant a sure-fixt Monarchy,
But in the following head, thou speaks beguesse, Paral. 3.

And leaves the great point, brands us with the less,
Forgetful that a base and lying slave,
A good and ready memory should have.
In this our heinous crime thou qualifies,
And looses some small shots of calumnies,
Where greatest should be last) shows our intent,
To loose the raynes of Church government,
That Church affairs should not be rull'd by Kings,
With many more absurd, and futill things:
So that thou seems to quite, Epanorthosis.
what is first and past,
And by correcting takes thee to the last.
But to that speech we answer all in one,
Our King's chief ruler of the Church alone,
And has such power in that government, J. 6. p. 18. c. 1. and p. 20. c. 6.

As is explained by acts of Parliament,
From which true Subjects never can debord,
So of both states he is the Sovereign Lord.
Then with a daring boldness, thou reviles
That sacred name, and with base skurrill styles,
(Though in a roguish comic jesting sort)
Thou makes of it a scene, a skuff, a sport,
And calls him only executioner
Of laws, Page 11.
and worse, a servile officer,
Or H. and least that this for thine should go,
Thou scoffing tells that men will say it is so:
Thus traced thou have by thy pernicious pen,
What never yet was said or thought by men.
A fellow here was pinioned on hie, This was Ard. Cornuall a town officer.

Convict for high contempt of Majesty,
Whiles his Prince portrature exposed to seal,
He on a gibbet hung, fixed with a nail:
And though the poor soul harbored no intent
His King to wrong: yet his dire punishment
(So precious is the shadow of a King)
Was sealed, that he on that cursed tree should hing,
And that the long-fixt tree should be over thrown,
Burnt, and its ashes in the air be blown;
How can our Prince then brook that round-spun speech,
Whiles thou makes men compare him to an H?
Till the like doom pass on thy book and thee,
As on that pannell and his fatal tree.
Then thou at random runs in full carriers,
Darting thy spite against our noble Peirs,
Against our Pastors, and the common sort,
Extracts the Chimick substance of a sport:
And like that houling hel-hound Cerberus,
Thou barks not simply at our cause, and us,
But dares disgorge thy hell envenomed splen,
Against the splendour of heroic men.
Shall famous Lesly now become the scope
Of thy envy, or thinks thou to unprope
His sure fixed worth, whose truly noble spirit,
Whose wit-mixt valor, whose transcending merit,
Has imp't his virtue in the wings of fame,
And reared eternal trophies to his name,
Is tryde to be, and so styled in all parts,
A never conquered, conqueror of hearts,
Is wooed by kings, who would their states assure
From all disasters, so they could procure
His stay with them, (by his directive aid)
In all exploits to be their martial head.
Then here thy tainted conscience is appealed,
If thou esteem him truly paralel'd,
With damned Loyola, author of that sect,
Who did such hyreling as thy self infect
With bloud-imbrued maxims of Estate,
For that red front, thy war presaging hate,
The programe of thy book, declares a will,
So thou had power thy mothers blood to spill:
Since each draught of Loyola limn'd by thee,
And thus compared, proves an arrant lie,
As who would parallel this raying light,
With that dark shadow of the sable night,
Or purer white with black, or good with evil,
Man with a beast, an angel with a devil.
It Is known our General is of noble birth,
Of famous parents sprung, in place and worth,
Excelling whiles they lived: but in their son,
Thryce happy two, that left us such a one;
To whom the heavens their treasures did impart,
A Cupids body, and a Marses heart;
Of mixed heroic gifts a sympathy,
Courage with grace, valor with modesty.
Then like a swinish base pedantick slave, Rachel Arnot.

Thou makes thy snout dig in a Matrons grave,
Snuff at her asses, though now never there be,
Since she did change her mansion lusters three.
Blind mole taine in thy work, harsh screaching oule,
Thou bankrupt chyding beast, thou envy's soul,
That strives to byte heavens guest, a glorious ghost,
Who in Celestial boures amid the host,
Of glory raying angels, does receave
Such joys as God can give or man can crave.
Cursed be thy pen, Levit. 19. 14.
cursed thy immortal hate,
For envy should prove stinglesse after fate,
So all thou writes are hellish calumnies,
Which take their influence from the prince of lies:
Curse not the deaf, (this sacred text I find,
Nor cast a stumbling block before the blind,
The Lord forbids thee this, (the precept's plain)
I Will not obey, thou answers him again,
But will offend and curse, (thy words are clear)
The blind and deaf, that neither see nor hear.
And thus far I: the rest I leave to those
Whose divine thoughts and pen can well disclose.
Thy devilish caball, hell-inspired Art,
And snares to trap thy mother, pierce her heart.
Who thus complains of her unnatural son, personating a Jesuit, and who has
dispersed (under that guise) false calumnies against the whole Estates of
Scotland, and so deserves that punishment set down in Scripture, Exodus 21. 17.
That pasquiller that would me thus disgrace,
And with such spyte, spit in his mothers face.
Gods curse attends him, threatened by his word,
O then I crave, that Justice scales, and sword
May weigh and punish: may my native Prince
Try and revenge his guilt, and his offense.
And now thou King of kings, enthroned above,
By whom Kings reign, by whom they live and move,
Inspire in my Prince breast, a sprite of peace,
And shoure on him thy favors and thy grace,
Command, Lord, thy Vicegerent, tell him plain,
He should thy truth, and calm of peace maintain.
He cannot force belief, let him secure
Thy divine worship here, as true and pure.
Appease his wrath, let not my Lion roar,
Nor dart his thunder on his native shore,
So we shall praise Thee, who for ever reigns,
And whose transcending power all powers restraines.
FINS.

