A right excellent treatise of Astronomy, made in the Thuscane or Italian
tongue, by master Antonius De Montulmo, called in latin Facies coeli, the face
of the Heue^s wherein a man may see tofore hand the mutations of the air that
shall happen for this present year of our lord 1554, and 1555, next following,
declaryng also what diseases, wars, pestilence, dearth of victuals shall
happen to them that dwell in the eight climate under the elevation of the pole
Artike 52. degrees as the inhabitants of the most part of England do dwell.
Translated into English by Frederike van Brunswike.

Imprinted at London, by Thomas Marshe, dwelling in Fletestrete, at the sign
of the princes arms.

FOr as much, as God which is the beginning of all Creatures, (good gentle
reader) has made man to his own similitude and likeness, whereby he is almost
co^parable to the holy Angels of God, who is it then that will deny that man
may by the disposicion of the stars prognosticate things to come, as
Berosus Chaldeus writes, that holy Noe did unto the Armenians and Scithians
after the universal deluge or floude, wherefore they called him the partaker of
the mind of God. Moreover, S. Hierome writes, that what so ever can be
comprehended with humane understanding is ruled by the wheles of the sun.
Wherefore in as much as both the divine and the prince of Philosophers
Aristotle in his book de generatione and corruptione confesses that propter
accessum and recessum solis in curculo obliquo fiu^t generationes and
corruptiones i^ mu^do sublunari: It follows that knowing the disposicion of
the celestial bodies, by the which all elementate bodies be ruled, that we
men may by the science of Astronomy (which science Petrus Caneracensis
calls worthyly natural theology (prognosticatyng as is aforsayd things to
come, as mutations of the air, pestilences, and al other infirmities, war
penury, peace, or plenty of virtuals, which depend of the heavens as
second causes of God, to such effects, appointed wherefore (good gentill
reader) the premises being well pensed, I desire the not to take all things
that shall be prognosticated in this years prognostication and the next years
prognostication as contigentes of fatal necessity, but that it shall chance,
if god do not forbid, thus I bydde thee well to fare.

The first Chapter.
Considering first the enteryng of the Sun into the first minute of the head
of Aries, in ye ninth sphere which is the first beginning of our year
Astronomical, I find the twenty and four of Libra ascendent, theightene of
Scorpio, the beginning of the second house, the twenty and one of Sagitari
the beginning of the third house, the second of Aquarius the beginning of the
fowerth house, the eight of Pisces the beginning of the.v. house, the third of
Aries, the beginning of the sixth house, the twenty and four of Aries the
beginning of the seventh house, the eightene of Taurus, the beginning of the
eight house, the twenty and one of Gemini, the beginning of the nineth house,
the second of Leo the beginning of the tenth house, the eight of Virgo, the
beginning of the eleue^th house, the third of Libra the beginning of the
twelueth house, Sull in the first of Aries, Luna in the eightene degree of
Gemini, Saturnus in the twenty and two degree of Pisces, Jupiter.xxix. of Virgo
retrograde. Mars the.xxvi. of Pisces, Venus in the xiii. of Pisces, Mercurius
in the eighte of Pisces, I take upon this figure, Mercurius to be the lord of
the first quarter of the year, until the Sun enter unto the first of Cancer,
which shall be the.xii. of June this year, and I make Venus partaker with him.
Wherefore as for the disposicion of the air, it shall be rainy and stormy,
specially the most part of all Marthe next, and great winds, and in April
next hail, specially about the nineth of April many days before and many
days after the day aforesaied. And in May rainie and windy, spcially the
first week before Whitsondaie. Thus I have generally touched the disposicio^
of the first quarter of this year.

The second Chapter, of the disposicion of the next quarter Astronomicall,
beginning the.xiii. of June twenty and two minute after.vii. of the clock in
the Morning.
THE figure of the whole heaven, shall be thus, the degree ascendent, the fiueth
of Leo, the twenty and four of Leo, the seconde-house, the fowerteneth of
Virgo, the beginning of the third house, the thirtene of Libra, the beginning
of the fowerth house, the twenty and six of Scorpio, the beginning of the
fiueth house, the nineth of Capricorn, the beginnyg of the sixte house, the
fiueth of Aquarie, the beginning of the seventh house, the twenty and four of
Aquarie, the beginning of theight house, the fowertenth of Pisces, the
beginning of the nineth house, the thirtene of Aries, the beginning of the.x.
house, the.xxvi. of Taurus, the beginning of the eleventh house, the.ix. of
Cancer, the beginning of the twelueth house, Sol in the first minute of
Cancer, Luna in theightene of Scorpio, Saturnus in the first minute of Aries,
Jupiter in the.xxv. of Virgo, Mars the fowerth of Gemini, Venus theight of
Cancer, Mercurius in the fiftene of Gemini. And the lady of the hour shall be
Venus. Upon this figure I perceive that Sol is the chiefest dominatour of the
second quarter before mentioned, who commits his disposicion by a quarter
aspert of Saturn, being lord of the eight house, the house of death, by the
which it is signified, that there that be this year great death, and
specially this quarter, which shall be very hot and dry.

The.iii. Chapter of the third quarter of the year aforesaid, that is to say,
thentrie of the Sun into the first minute of Libra, the thirtene of
September, eighte hours, fiuetene minutes, forty secondes after Noone.
THE site or figure shall be this of the heavens at the time and hour
aforesaied, the sixth of Gemini the ascendente, the third of Cancer, the
beginning of the second house, the third, the eightene of Cancer, the third of
Leo, the fowerth house, the twenty and five, of Leo the fifth house, the sixte
house the eleventh of Libra the sixte of Sagitari the seventh house, the third
of Capricorn theight house, the.xviii. of Capricorn the nineth house,
the.iii. of Aquarius the tenth house, the.xxv. of Aquarius the.xi. house
the.xi. of Aries the.xii. house, the sun in the first minute of Libra, the
moon in the.i. degree of Taurus, Saturnus in the 27. of Pisces retrogade, in
the xi. of Libra,, in the.v. of Leo, Venus in the ii. of Scorpio, in the.xix.
of Libra retrograde, upon this figure I see Venus to be lady of this quarter
and I find Sol to be Lord of the hour, and that Luna from Taurus with an
apposite aspecte commits her disposicion to Venus, and Venus over Mars by
aquarte aspecte by the which it is signified that in that quarter about the
beginning shall be great thonder, and about the end rainie weather.

The fourth chapter of the.iiii. quarter of the year of our lord aforesaied,
that is to say, the enter of the su^ne in to the first minute of
Capricorn.xii. hours xlvii. minutes.xxxii. seco^des after none in the xi. of
December the year aforesaied.
THe figure of the heavens thalbee thus as follows, the degree ascendente, the
nineth of Libra, the third of Scorpio the second house, the third house, the
fowerth of Sagitarie the xi. of Capricorn the beginning of the fourth house,
the 17. of Aquarie the fifth house, the.xv. of Pisces the.vi. house, the ix. of
Aries the seventh house the.iii. of Taurus the. viii, house, the fourth of
Gemini the ninth house, the eleventh of Cancer the tenth house. 17. of Leo the
eleventh house, the sixtene of Virgo the twelve house, the Sun in the first
Minute of Capricorn, the Moon in the third of Leo, Saturnus in the twenty
and four of Pisces, Jupiter in the twenty and nine of Libra, Mars in
theightene of Virgo, Venus in the seuentene of Aquarius, Mercurius in the
thirtene of Capricorn, upon this figure I perceive Venus to be lady and
Mercuri her parteiner, wherefore it shall be much inclined to Rain and wind
most part of this quarter.



The fyft Chapter declaryng the figure of the heavens at the eclipse of the
sun, which shall be the year above said, xxix. of June vii. hours.xxxi.
minu. after noone.
The first house which is called the asce^dent the.iii. of Capricorn, the.ii.
house, the xiiii. of Aquarie, the third house, the viii. of Aries, the eight
of Taurus, the fourth house, the xxvi. of Taurus the.v. house, the eleventh of
Gemini, the vi. house, the third of Cancer the seventh house, the xiiii. of Leo
the eight house, the viii. of Libra the ninth house the tenth house, theight of
Scorpio, the xxvi. of Scorpio the eleventh house the xi of Sagittarius the xii.
house, the son in the xvii. of Cancer, ye moon also in the xvii. of Cancer.
Saturn in the first degree of Aries, Jupiter in ye xxvii. of Virgo, Mars in ye
xvi of Gemini, Venus in ye xxix. of Cancer, Mercurius in ye xxviii. of Gemini I
take upon this figure celestial Jupiter to be lord, who is in the eight
house, and in the dominion of Mercurius, which signifies great death shall
happen through hot fevers subuertyng the memory of men, making them to rave
and to rage as mad men without any reason, and this shall happen most among
noble men and amongst boys not passing.xiiij. years, and amongst young
women.



The figure of the heavens at the time of the Eclipse of the moon, which shall be
theight of December xiiii. hours.xx. minutes after noone the year of our
Lord abouesayd, 1554.
The degree ascende^t the 23. of Libra, the xvi. of Scorpio the second house:
the third house the.xix. of Sagittarie, the fourth house the first of Aquarius
the fifth house the vi. of Pisces, the second of Aries the vi. house, the
seventh house the xxiii. of Aries theight house, the xvi. of Taurus, the.xix. of
Gemini the ninth house, the tenth house the first of Leo, the eleventh the vi.
of Virgo, the xii. house the second of Libra, the sun in the.xxvii. of
Sagittary, the moon in the xxvii. of Gemini eclipsed in the ninth house of the
heavens Saturnus in the 24 of Pisces in the fiueth house, Jupiter in
the.xxviii. of Libra in the first house of the heavens, Mars in the xvii. of
Virgo in the xi. house of Venus in ye xiiii. of Aquari in ye fourth house,
Mercurius in ye nynth of Capricorn in the third house, I take upon this
figure celestial Mercurius to be Lord, and the moon to be the particular
lady of the house of henour and kingdoms, who being totally obscured and
darkened in the nynth house signifies that there shall be an occasion of
universal mournyng.



The particular declaracion of the wether for this present year. Anno. Domini.
1554.
January.
THE first day somewhat inclined to be cold and moiest, but the trinalle
aspect of Jupiter and Mars excityng and stirryng up a Northeast wind will make
Snow: the second day more windy and cold then before. The third day fair
and whitishe ruddie clouds sparkelyng about the sky, and a strong North east
wind. The fowerth day very fair, the wind eastern. The.v. at morning very
windy, but at a.xi. of the clock, or else at midnight, it will thawe the snow
that fell before. The six, cloudie and moist The seven day it shall be thawe.
The viii. somewhat fair in the morning, a small east wind, but about.xii. of
the clock, it will be fairer wether then before, and all the.ix. day windy.
The.x. day somewhat inclined to moisture, but that is to be thought that the
trinall aspect of Sol and Jupiter, being Oriental, will stir a North East
wind, that the effect of this moisture shall not appear. The eleventh in the
morning fair, but afterward cold, and cloudy wether. The twelve day in the
Morning, somewhat windy. The thirtene day more windy then before, and
whitishe clouds sparkeled about the heaven, and all the day fair. The
fowertene day fair weather. The.xv. day windy, more then before: The
sixtene somewhat cold, and moiest. The seuentene, cold and moiest: The.xviii.
somewhat windy and fair weather. The nineteneth day faier and more windy:
the twenty day in the morning somewhat windy, and somewhat toward night
inclined to coldness and moisture: the like weather the.xxi. day, the.xxii.
day temperate wether: the. xxiii day somewhat windy weather: The xxiiii.
fair in the Morning, but a little before noone and after, cold and rain, but
it will break up, and be fair about four aclocke in the after noone, again
the five and twenty day windy: the.xxvi. day cold and cloudie till night,
but then it will break up: The.xxvii. fair weather, and windy all that day.
The xxviii. day cloudie, and cold, but about one of the clock after
Midnighte, this weather will change, and it will be fair the.xxix. day, and
in the after noone wax windy: the thirty day somewhat inclined to cold and
moiesture, but I think the applicacio^ corporal betwixt Mars and Mercury,
will cause winds, taking away thesaied enclinacion of moiesture: the.xxxi.
day fair, and windy.

February.
THE first day of February very windy: the second a fair day: the iii. a
cold cloudie day: the.iiii. a cold, and somewhat a moiest day: the v.
windy: the.vi. fair: the.vii. somewhat cold and moist, and that shall
continue all the eight day: the.ix. day fair and somewhat windy, but
about.ix. of the clock at night, this fair wether will change to a cold, and
moist wether: the.x. somewhat windy, and cloudie withal: the xi. day
somewhat windy, and a fair day the.xii. day cold, and cloudie: the.xiii.
somewhat inclined to rain: The.xiiii. somewhat windy: the xv. more windy
then before, with showers the same day and some Hail withal, because of the
Coniunccion corporal of Venus and Mercurius, and Sol, and Mars, with an
applicacio^ of Mars unto Saturn, which will cause the wether abouesated. The
sixtene day somewhat temperatly cold. The seuentene day fair wether, and
sunnie. The eightene day cloudie, and somewhat moiest. The. xix day fair
wether. The.xx. day wind, specially in the forenone, but in the after Noone,
somewhat inclined to drislyng rain. The.xxi. shall be inclined to moiesture.
The.xxii. fair wether. The xxiii. somewhat inclined to moiesture. The.xxiiii.
somewhat inclined to windiness and fair wether. The.xxv. shall be cloudie, and
somewhat inclined to moiesture with Hail. The.xxvi. fair weather, and
somewhat windy. The xxvii. rain and Hail, and a cold day. The.xxviii. day
rain, and Hail, with great coldness.

March.
THE first day of March somewhat windy, and at night a cold driflyng Rain,
and therefore a man might say very little, or none. The third day rain and
hail, and the same shall continue almost till eighte of the clock in the
night, then it will break up. The.v. day altogether cold wether, rain, and
Hail. The sixth day in the after Noone somewhat windy. The seventh, Rain,
cold weather, and Hail. The same wether the eight day but toward night
somewhat fair, and disposed to wind, and small drislyng rain. The nineth day
great blastes of winds, keeping rain away, rain with some lightenyng and
thunder the tenth day. The eleventh day a little wind with rain. The twelueth
cloudy The. xiii, rain, and some Lightenyng before, and about Sun risyng
that day, and in the after noone fair weather. The fowertenth day, because
of the opposicion of Mars and Jupiter, there shall be rain, and lightenyng, or
thunder. The fiuetenth day somewhat inclined to moiesture. The sixteneth
somewhat Cloudie, cold, and windy with some showers the seue^teneth day The
eighteneth day, because of the co^iunccion of Saturnus, and Venus, very cold,
and great rain. The ninete^th day because of the coniunccion of Saturnus and
Marcurius Rainie, and somewhat windy withal, the twenty and.xxi. day rain:
the.xxii. day fair weather, and very great wind with dark clouds: the
xxiii. fair weather. the xxiiii. cloudye and cold: the.xxv. day fair, and
somewhat wyndye: the xxvi. day all the morning till after noone, somewhat
cold, cloudy and wyndye: The xxvii. day fair, and a strong wind, because
of the conjunction of Mars and Mercurius, in a fyry sign, that is to say, in
Aries. the xxviii. fair: the xxix. a fair day. the.xxx. wyndy, and cloudye:
the xxxi. fair weather.

Apryll.
THe first of Apryl the year above said a very fair hot day: the second a
temperate day: the.iii. a fair day somewhat hot: the fourth day a fair
day: the.v. day a fair day: the.vi. day a fair day: the.vii. viii.ix. days
of April, showers shall happen with joined, or myxed with hayle, and temperate
wynd: the.x. day fair: the.xi. day somewhat disposed to be fair with reddyshe
clouds bryngyng* with them sometime an April shoure. A fair day shall the
xii. be: the xiii. day windy. the xiiii. day colder then it was before, and
cloudy: the xv. day a fair day: the xvi. a fair day with white and read
Clouds, sparkeled about the sky: the xvii. day a fair day, and somewhat a
wyndye day: the.xviii. day more wynd, and that all the night following till
five a clock in the morning, in the xix. of April then colder then before and
cloudy: the. xx day wyndye: the.xxi. day more wyndy then before: the.xxii. day
cold drislyng rain, with a little wind: the xxiii. somewhat cloudy, but after
one hour after noone wyndye: the xxiiii. fair weather: the xxv. somewhat
wyndye and fair, and hot at night: the xxvi. day sweet shoures, but after
toward night fair weather: the xxvii. wyndye, in the beginning, and cloudye
toward night: the xxviii. in the morning, and most part of the day, wyndy
and temperate weather: the xxix. temperate weather and the xxx. also, because
of the trinall aspect betwixt Sol, and Jupiter in terrestrial signs, which
causes temperate drought.

May.
THe first day fair wether with a temperate wind. The second day somewhat
Cloudie in the morning, but most part of the day, after fair, and hot.
The third day faie, and windy in the after none. The fowerth day cloudie,
and windy. The fiurth day, fair and hot. The sixth day fair wether. The
seventh day temperate wether. The eight day somewhat windy. The nineth day
rain, windy withal and hail. The tenth day fair and somewhat windy. The
eleventh windy, cold, and rain with hail. The twelueth day in the fore
Noone fair wether. The thirteneth day somewhat windy. The fowerteneth day a
fair day. The fifteneth sweet showers of Rain, with read and somewhat
whitishe clouds sparkeled about the heaven. The sixtene day cloudy, and
somewhat colder then before. The.xvii. day fair in the morning about Sun
risyng, but within an hour or two, somewhat disposed to showers of mild Rain.
The eighteneth till it be noone and paste, windy and fair, but somewhat
cloudier then before, in the afternoon. The nineteneth fair weather. The
twenty day fair, but after none cloudie. The.xxi. fair, and a breakyng up
of thesaied Clouds. The.xxii. fair and somewhat temperatly windy. The xxiii.
day fair, but about midnighte somewhat inclined to moiesture. The xxiiii.
fair and somewhat windy all that day and night also, but the.xxv. about the
Sun risyng cloudie. The xxvi. fair and clear wether, in the morning, and in
the after noone somewhat to wind inclined. The.xxvii. and. xxviii day inclined
to fair wether and dry, with lightnyng also. The.xxix. the wether shall be
fair and windy, but therewith cloudie. The.xxx. day very windy the.xxxi.
day windy with clouds like to bring showers, but it shall hold up.

June.
THE first of this monethe shall be fair and temperate wether. The second
windy and temperate. The third in the morning fair, but after noone cloudie.
The fowerth a te^perate weather with some wind. The fiueth cloudie, as though
it would rain but the quarte aspect betwixt Sol and Jupiter will take it away:
the sixte day great wyndes with rain and hayle: the seven th day wyndye:
the eight day in the morning fair, but about after noone rain and hayle: the
nynthe day dry and somewhat wyndy. the tenthe fair, and somewhat hotter then
before: the eleventh shall be a cold and moist day. And you shall have about
the xii. of June aforesaid rain and hayle: the xiii. of June aforesaid in the
morning cloudye, in the afternoon fair, but somewhat to hot, the xiiii. of
June aforesaid sommewhat wyndy in the morning, and the same wind is like to
continue all the same day, the xv. of June aforesaid cloudy in the forenoone,
but after noon fair and somewhat hot wether: The.xvi. of June aforesaid in the
morning there shall be a little sweet dew of rain, y xvii. of June in the morning
somewhat windye, but fair wether with white clouds, but at ten a clock
cloudye and close, and at after noon: and specially that night somewhat hotter
then it was before, the xviii. day about the after noone wyndye somewhat
hotter then before: The.xix. fair and at night very hot, the.xx. about.ii.
of the clock at after noone some sweet dew of rain shall fall, but very
little to speak of: all the rest of the day it shall be wyndye and all the
night also: The xxi. altogether cloudye. The xxii. fair and hot, but about
mydnyght a little sweet shower of rain. The xxiii. day fair weather and
sommewhat hoate. The xxiiii. a fair day. The xxv. day fair weather, but some
clouds, bringing with them some dew of rayn. But the xxvi. day in the
morning cloudy, and all the night following very hoate: The xxvii. day in the
after noone wyndye, with whityshe clouds sparkeled about the heaven: The
xxviii. day windy and cloudy: The xxix. fairer weather, and sommewhat hotter
then before: The xxx. day wyndy wether, and temperate and fair.

July.
THe first of July shall be a cloudy and moist day, the second day fair and
very hoate. The third temperate. The fowerthe very hoate. The fiueth day
te^perate, and at night cloudie and close wether. The sixth day cold and rain.
The seventh day hot wether and fair. Theight to rain somewhat disposed, and
the same weather shall be the nineth day as the eight day The tenth fair and
temperatly hot, but in the after noone Cloudie. The eleventh day cold and
moist, but about six of the clock, the twelueth day before noone it will
break up, and be a fair and temperate hot day, till after three of the
Clock in the after Noone, then will be cloudie wether, the thirteneth day
somewhat inclined to moiesture, but it is to be feared least thesaied
enclinacion be annichilate through the applicacio^ of Mercury to Jupiter,
being in a temperat mansion, the fowerteneth windy, and fair temperate
wether, but about the Sun setting cloudie, and so all that night, the
fiftene day somewhat disposed to moiesture, the sixteneth, the weather fair
and a hot after noone, the seuenteneth day windy and temperate, the
eighteneth faier wether, and more windy then before, the nineteneth temperate,
somewhat colder weather then before, the twenty day a temperate day,
the.xxi. day windy and read, and whitishe clouds, sparkeled about the
heavens, and at night lightenyng, the.xxii. inclined to moiest the.xxiii.
somewhat cloudie, the.xxiiii. a fair hot day, because of the corporal
coniunccion of Sol and Mercurius in the fire sign of Leo, the xxv. day
cloudie, and about nine of the clock at night, very hot, the.xxvi. day
fair, the.xxvii. day cloudie, the.xxviii. day temperatly fair, the.xxix.
windy, the thirty, a temperate day, the same wether the.xxxi. day.

August.
THE first day cloudie, the second a fair temperate day, and after Noone and
at night very hot, the third a fair hot day, the fowerth day a
temperate day, the.v. day fair and hot in the fore Noone, but afterward
somewhat inclined to moisture the sixth day in the morning fair, and at after
noone cloudie, the seventh fair and temperate in the after Noone, and at
night somewhat inclined to moiesture, the eighte day a fair morning, and all
day. The nineth very windy. And the tenthe somewhat inclined to cold and
moiesture: the eleventh day, fair wether and temperate: the twelueth some
rain, or else the thirteneth day: the fowerteneth day fair and somewhat
windy: The fifteneth day cloudie and windy in the after noone: The sixtene
day fair: the seue^tene day cloudie and look as though it would Rain, and
it shall not: theightene fair wether, and somewhat windy: the nineteneth
cloudie, and after midnight fair and windy: the twenty day temperate dry
wether: The one and twenty, windy and cloudie: The two and twenty in the
morning, fair and pleasant: the three and twenty day hot and fair
weather: the four and twenty fair weather, and a pleasant still wind. The
five and twenty, six and twenty, seven and twenty, fair weather, and
great winds: The eighte and twenty, more hot then before, and also more
windy the nine and twenty day fair wether, the same the thirty day also:
the thirty and one, a faier and a hot day.

September.
THE first day a fair day: the second day fair in the morning, but in the
after Noone cold and rain with some hail withal: the same weather with some
wind, and temperately cloudie, also the third day: the fowerth somewhat
inclined to moisture in the after noone, but in the morning it shall be
temperatly windy: The fiueth a cold cloudie before Noone, but in the after
noone temperatly windy, and fair temperate wether. The six day somewhat
windy, but toward night, cloudie, and inclined to moiesture. The seventh
day, cloudie in the morning, and somewhat colder then before, but in the after
noone, it will not be so cold as before: the eight windy, the nineth a
temperate cloudie day. The tenth day cold and cloudie. The eleventh cloudie
and temperate, and toward night, clerer wether and fairer wether then before.
The twelueth day somewhat windy. The thirtene inclined to coldness and
moiesture, but about ten of the clock before midnighte it will break up, and
be fair and dry the next day The fiftene cloudy and cold, somewhat more then
before, but toward night, the clouds will break up, and it will be al
night fair, and sixtene windy, and the seuentene in the morning more windy,
but at after Noone cold and cloudie The eightene day fair weather. The
nineteneth day windy. The twenty cloudie in the fore Noone, but toward
night fair. The one and twenty, fair weather and dry in the morning, but
after Noone cold and moiest, and about the hour of five at after Noone
somewhat temperately windy, and so all night long. The two and twenty,
temperate wether. The three and twenty fair weather. The xxiiii. Cloudie. The
five and twenty, very windy The xxvi. fair and windy. The.xxvii. great
winds and fair weather. The eighte and twenty fair weather. The nine and
twenty, somewhat inclined to rain. The.xxx. cloudie, and somewhat windy

October.
THe first day faier wether, and somewhat windy. The second day Rain in the
fore Noone, but I think the sixtile aspecte of Mars and Jupiter, will make the
after noones wether fair. The third in the after noone wyndy. The fourth in
the after noone cloudye, and toward night inclined to drislynge rain. The
fifth in the after noon wyndy. The sixth fair in the forenoon, and at night
cloudye, and as though it would rain: the seventh day cold and moist, the
eight day cold and cloudy: the.ix. about.vii. a clock at night: and after
all the night wyndy and temperate weather, the.x. fair wether, the xi. fair,
and the xii. also: but about.x. a clock at night cloudy. The xiii. like to
rayn, but it will hold up, the.xiiii. day wyndy: The xv. toward night fair:
The.xvi. toward night wyndy: but after mydnyght more windy then before: the
xvii. cloudy: the xviii. fair clear wether: the xix. very wyndy and fair
weather, the xx. fair wether, the.xxi. somewhat inclined to moisture: the xxii.
cloudy and cold, the xxiii. fair and te^perate wether, the xxiiii. ye same
wether, the xxv. fair wether, the xxvi. in thafter noon, and toward night,
and the night time very rayny: the xxvii. about after noon very fair. The
xxviii. fair metely, the xxix. al day cloudy, and the night rain: the xxx.
fair, the xxxi somewhat fair and cloudy in the after none with inclination to
moisture.

Nouembre.
THe first day somewhat fair, and read clouds with blackenesse in them,
bryngyng with them an inclination to moisture, but not withstandyng it is
lykely to hold up as is aforesaid. The.ii. day rain. The third day fair and
dry, and a froste in the morning, and about noone somewhat disposed to rayn.
The fourth somewhat disposed to moisture, and cloudy withal, with some rain,
and hail, or else as they call it slete. The fifth day the same wether: The vi.
toward night fair: The vii. day fair till night, and about xii. of the
clock at night clouds like to bring us some rain: The.viii. somewhat rayny:
The ix. a fair and dry day, at night a frost: The x. day the same wether: The
xi. cloudy, and somewhat wyndy: The xii somewhat fair wether, but I fear that
there shall be rain because of the trinall aspecte of Mercurius and Saturnus in
Scorpio and Pisces being watrye signs: The xiii. cloudye and wyndye: The
xiiii. sum what fair. The xv. day dry: The xvi. at after noone wyndye: The
xvii. fair weather: The xviii. day at one of the clock in the after noone
somewhat disposed to rain: The xix. somewhat fair: The xx about v. of the
clock in the morning cold and rain: But three hours before noone it will
break up and be a fair day: The xxi. a fair day: The xxii. day a very fair
day: The xxiii. about after noone inclined to coldenes and moisture: The
xxiiii. in the after noone fair: The xxv. cloudy: The xxvi. fair wether: The
xxvii. toward night cloudy: the xxviii. day about after noon a little dryslynge
rain: The xxix. day rain: The xxx. day rain.

Decembre.
THe first, day fair and wyndy: The.ii. day cloudy and wyndye: The iii. day
cold and cloudye: The fourth in the after noone after ii. of the clock wyndy:
The fifth day cold and rain with sleete or snow myngled withal: The syxte day
cold and moist: The vii. clouds, and like to rain: but about v. of the
clock in the morning somewhat fair wether. The viii. at afternoon cloudy, but
after and about ii. a clock after mydnyght fair wether. The ix. at after noon
somewhat wyndy. The x. m^tely fair and dry temperate wether, but after.v. a
clock at night cloudye. The.xi. day temperate and fair. The xii. day
toward night great rain. The xiii. day fair weather and dry above head: a
fair day the the xiiii. The xv. a fair day, and a great frost. The xvi.
about viii. of the clock at night fair wether. The xvii. cloudy: The xviii.
cloudy, cold, and rain: The xix after noone fair wether: The xx. fair: The
xxi. and xxii. wyndy: but the xxii. at night a great froste: The xxiii. cold
and moist. The xxiiii. day mylde shoures of rain. The xxv. all the forenoone
cloudy, but after mydnyght very wyndy. The xxvi. a fair day. The xxvii. about
after midnyght, rayn: The xxviii. fair, cold; and dry wether: The xxix. about
sun risyng fair: but after xi. a clock before noon cloudy. The xxx. day in
the morning somewhat fair, and wyndy The xxxi. cloudye, and somewhat wyndy.

The.vii. Chapter of the infirmities that shall be in the aforesaied year of
our Lord. M.D.liiii. and in every quarter thereof.
SHE standing of Soll in the first of Aries, and in the sixte house of the
heavens, signifies that the infirmities, which shall happen in the first
quarter of the year aforesaied, shall be in the heddes of men, as madness, and
other hot infirmities about the brain, because that he is Lord of the sixth
house, which house signifies of his own nature, diseases, and infirmities.
More over Mars the sanguinolent planet, being in the sixte house, at the time
of the Eclipse of the Sun, signifies that there shall be many hot and dry
agues, as Tercians, which come of corrupt blood, and color superaboundante,
in the second quarter of the year abouesaid, and many diseases, which shall
happen in me^nes Necks also in thesaied quarter, which shall rise of corrupt
blood and choler superabundaunte in the second quarter of the year abouesaid,
and many diseases, which shall happen in me^nes necks also in thesaied
Quarter, which shall arise of corrupt bloudde, and puscules, and antraces,
and peines in men's ears also. And in the third Quarter of the year
abouesaied, there shall be many diseases reigning in the raines, and in the
secret places, because of Venus, being impedite in the reuolucion figure in the
sixte house, and that in the sign of Scorpio. Finally in the fowerth quarter
of the year abouesaied there shall be many diseases in the yies, and in the
belies of men, and women and in their necks, shoulders, and arms, many
infirmities.

The.viii. Chapter of wars, and contencions.
FIrst Soll in the sixth house, and in his exaltacion, signifies that the
Servile and ignoble people will hate their nobility, and will look to exalte
them selves against them, and that in the first Quarter of the year
abouesaied, and Saturnus in the sign of Pisces, ye princely planete Jupiters
house, mingled with the beams of the Sanguinolent signifies that there shall be
bloodshed among noble men, and great contencions, which shall at last be
pacified by noble men of religion in the next quarter of the year. Mars in
Gemini a mannely sign, signifies manslaughter, and in the third quarter,
Mars in Leo, and in the fowerth house, signifies contencions, and that many
shall in that reuolucion come to their end by the sweard. Finally Mars in the
fowerth and last quarter, signifies bloodshed, and wars, because he is in
which is a Sign of human form, and in the twelve house, the house of
enemies and contencions.

The.ix. Chapter of Cattall, and all other things, which serve for
Victualles, as wheat, barley, Beans, and such like.
FIrst in the first quarter, Mars being Lord of Aries, combust in Pisces, and
impedite with thenuious beams of Saturn signifies death of sheep in that
revolution aforesaid, and Mars in the face of Taurus, in ^ight Sphere Impedite,
signifies death of Rine in the second quarter of the year above said. Venus
also in the revolution of the third quarter of the year aforesaid, in the sixth
house vayng Lady of Taurus, signifies that Rine shall have many infirmities.

Moreover, in the fowerth quarter Venus the Lady of the sign of Taurus, being
in the fiueth house, which is her joy, signifies that Calves, Rine, and
oxen, shall prospere well that last quarter, wheat in the first quarter shall be
but of metely low price, but in the end of the first quarter, about
Whitsontide, it shall arise up to a more higher price. Barleie shall be of a
vile price, to speak of, in the beginning of the first quarter, that is to
say, in March, but in April it shall arise in price more. Beans shall be of a
metely reasonable price in the first quarter aforesaied. Wines shall be of a
mean price, and honey shall be of a lower price, then it has wont to be. Many
apples this year shall be, specially of Sweetynges, and fuche like. Moreover in
the second quarter wheat shall be of mean price, and very little of it thesaied
quarter. Barleye in the secande quarter shall be of a great price, and this
Harvest thereof no great plenty. Beans shall be of a great price, this
second Quarter, and little store of them this Harvest. Much honey shall be this
Somer, and more good cheap then it has been. Also there shall be nostore of
grapes this year, and there shall be very few Nuttes this year.

The figure of the first quarter Astronomicall, of the year of our Lord, a.
M.CCCCC.LV. beginning the tenth of March fowertene hours, four minutes after
Noone.
THE degree ascendente the xxvi. of Sagittarius, the second house the third of
Aquarius, the.xxvii. Pisces the third house, the first of Taurus five, the
fowerth house, the ninetene of Taurus the fiueth house, the fifth of Gemini: the
sixte house, the xxvi. of Gemini, the seventh house the third^ of Leo, the
eight house, the twenty and seven of Virgo, the nineth house, the tenth house,
the first of Scorpio, the.xix. of Scorpio the eleventh house, the.xii. house,
the fifth of Sagitarius, the sun in the first minute of the sign of Aries,
and in the third house of the heavens, Luna in the thirty of Libra, and in
the tenth house of the heaven, Saturnus in the third of Aries, in the third
house of the heaven, Jupiter in the second of Scorpio in the tenth house
retrograde, Mars in the tenth of Virgo, in theight house of the heavens. Venus
in the.xxiii. of Pisces, combust in the third house of the heavens, Mercurius
in the twenty of Pisces in the second house of the heavens combuste, I take
upon this figure, Luna to be Lady, and Mercurius partaker, who commits her
disposicion to Jupiter, and thereby makes him Lord of the year, which
signifies that the wether shall be temperate, and the wind North and temperate,
notwithstanding sometime moisture withal.

The site, or figure of the heaven at the time of the Eclipse of the Moon, the
fowerth of June in the year of our Lord God, a M.D.l.v. and.xiiii. hours, and
xxxii. minutes at after noone.
The degree ascendent the second of Gemini, the degree of the second house,
the first of Cancer the third house, the fiftene of Ca^cer. The fiueth of
Leo, the fowerth house. The.xxi. of Leo the fiueth house, the fiueth of Libra
the sixth house, the seventh house, the second of Sagitarie, the eight house,
the first of Capricornus, the nineth house the fiftene of Capricornus, the
tenth, the first of Aquarius, the xi. the.xxi. of Aquarie, the twelve house the
fifth degree of Aries The Sun in the twenty and three of Gemini in the first
house, the Moon in the twenty and three of Sagittari, in the seventh house,
the Planete Saturnus in the thirten of Aries, in the twelf house, Jupiter the
twenty and four of Libra in the twenty and four of Libra in the sixth house:
Mars in the twenty and two of Virgo in the fifte house Venus in the nineth of
Taurus in the twelve house of the heavens. Mercurius in the first of Gemini in
the first house, and oriental, whom I perceive to be lord of this forsayde
Eclipse of the Moon, who goes to the Sextile aspecte of Saturn, Lord of the
house of honor, who being impedite, and in the Sign of Aries his fall,
because it is apposite to Libra his exaltation signifies a marvelous
depression and fall of a great man of honor.

And as for diseases and inf^rmities there is none almost by this Eclipse
signified, but cold reumes and such like moisture in men's heads, which
diseases Jupiter in the syxt house will with his corporal presence much
mitigate.

The site of the heavens at the second quarter Astronomicall of the year
above written beginning at the entryng of the son into the first minute of
Cancer the xi. of June. M.D.Lv.
THe first degree ascendent, the viii. of Libra, the first of Scorpio the.ii.
house, the first of Sagit. the third house, the.x. of Capri. iiii. house, the
xviii. of Aquarius, the v. house, the xvi. of Pisces, the vi. house, the viii.
of Aries the vii. house, the first of Taurus the eight house, the first of the
ix. house, the x. of Cancer, the tenth house, the eleventh house the xviii. of
Leo, the xvi. of Virgo the xii. house, the son in the first minute of
Cancer, the Moon in the seventh degree of Aries, and in the vii. house of the
heaven. Saturnus in the xiii. degree of Aries in the vii. house also, Jupiter in
ye xxiiii. of Libra in the first house, Mars in the xxvi. of Virgo in the xii.
house. Venus in the xviii. of Taurus in theight house Mercur. in the xi. of in
the ix. house, whom I take to be Lord of this quarter: who commits his
disposition to Saturn by a sextile aspect: Wherefore I take that the air this
quarter shall be very cloudy, wyndye, and raynye, more then to such a hot time
of the year is convenient, because that Saturn is impedite, and his
declination meridian more then two degrees from the Ecliptike line. And because
there chances this Quarter a dreadful Conjunction of Jupiter and Mars, in
Libra I will the next Chapter show the site, and figure of the heavens, and
the hour and minute of the said conjunction.

The site or figure of the heavens the.vi. of August at the Conjunction of
Jupiter and Mars in the sign of Libra in the* xxvii. degree.xlvi. min. at vii.
a clock at after noone, and.iiii. minutes past.
THe degree ascendente the xii. of Aquarius the second house, the xv. of
Aries, the.xx. of Taurus third house, the fourth house, the ix. of Gemini,
the xxiii. of Gemini, the v. house, the ix. of Cancer the vi. house, the
seventh house the xii. of Leo, theight house the xv. of Libra, the xx. of
Scorpio the ix. house, the ninth house of Sagittarie the x. house, the xxiii.
of Sagittarie the xi. house, the ix. of Capricorn the twelfth house, the sun
in the xxiii. of Leo in the seventh house, the xvi. of Aries the moon, and in
the second house, Saturn in the fourtenthe of Aries retrogradus, Jupiter and
Mars in the xxvii. of Libra, and xlvi. minut. coniuncte in the.viii. house of
the heavens, Venus in the.xxi. of Cancer in the sixte house of the heavens,
Mercurius in the.xvi. of Virgo in the seventh house, of this conjunction,
Saturnus in the xiiii. of Aries retrograde, and in the second house is Lord
and chief Dominatoure, who signifies to men that great loss shall happen to
them by death of their sheep. Moreover Jupiter lord of the house of honor,
and Mars lord of the nynthe house, which house signifies religion and the
ministers thereof being co^iunct in a humain sign in the ^yghte house, the
house of death sygnifieth that mortality shall fall upon Men: That is to
say, by sodeyne death and fever tertians, and impostumes rysyng of corrupt
blood, and by other like hot and choleryke diseases. Finally after this
conjunction shall follow much wynde^, terrible lyghtnynge and fyres in the
air, and great drithe and a greatte pestilence upon men also.



The site or figure of the heavens at the beginning of the third quarter
Astronomical, which shall be the.xiii. day of September fowertene hours
xxviii. minutes after noone, M.D.lv.
THe degree ascendent, the xxi. of Leo, the.x. of Virgo the second house: the
third of Libra the third house: the.vi. of Scorpio, the fourth house, the xix.
of Sagittarie the fifte house, the xxvi. of Capricorn the sixth house, the xxi.
of Aquari^ the seventh house, the tenth of Pisces theight house, the third of
Aries the ninth house the sixth of Taurus, the tenth house, the xix. of Gemini
the xi. house, the xii. house the xxvi. of Ca^cer, the sun in the first minute
of Libra in the third house, the moon in the xii. of Virgo in the second
house, the planette Saturn in the xi. of Aries retrograde in the nynthe house,
Jupiter in the v. of Scorpio direct in ye fourth house of Mars in the.xxiiii.
of Scorpio in the.iiii. house, Venus in the seventh of Virgo in the first house,
Mercurius in the.xxv. of Virgo in the second retrograde. I take upon this
figure celestial Sol to be chiefest dominatour and Venus his partner, because
she is Lady of the revolution hour, and so is with an opposite aspectiunct to
Saturn with a receptio^ one of an other, for Sol is in the exaltation of
Saturn, and Saturn in the exaltation of Sol, but Saturn being retrograde in
the ix. house signifies that men shall be irreligions and no pity or mercy
almost emongst men, and that there shall be no reverence to the ministers of
religion. More over the wether shall be cold and cloudy, and the air with
blackenes almost always covered.

The life or figure of the heavens at the fourth quarter Astronomicall of the
year of our Lord M.D.Lv. beginning the.xi. of Decembre xviii. hours.xl.
minutes after Noone.
THe degree ascendent, the xi. of Sagittarie, the xi. of Capricorn the second
house, the first of Pisces the third house, the tenth of Aries, the fourth
house, the fourth of Taurus the fifth house, the xxi. of Taurus the sixte
house, the xi. of Gemini the seventh house, the xi. of Cancer the eight house,
the first of Virgo the ninth house, the tenthe of Libra the tenthe house: the
fourth of Scorpio, the xi, house, the twelve house the twenty and one of
Scorpio, the Sun in the first house, in the first minute of Capricorn the
Moon also the first house in the.x. degree of Sagitarie, the Planete Saturn
direct, but notwithstanding slow of course in the seventh of Aries in the
fowerth house, Jupiter in the twenty and four of Scorpio, in the twelueth
house, Mars in the second of Aquarius in the second house, Venus in the
twenty and eight degree of Sagitarie in the first house, Mercurius in the.xix.
of Capricorn in the second house, I take of this reuolucion, Luna to be the
chiefest lady, who commits her disposicion to Venus, Lady of the sertile,
being in the ascendent, with a coniunccion corporal, which signifies that m^
shall have many infirmities in their thies and arms in this reuolucio^, and
the wether shall be te^perate, with sometime mild driselyng rain.

The particular declaracion of the wether for this present year. Anno. Domini.
1555.
January.
SHe first day in the after noone rain and windy, the second day rain all
the after noone, and at night also, the third day ruddy clouds, with
blackness mingled with all and rain, the fowerth day in the after Noone, and
after great Rain, and almost all the night long, Rain also, the fiueth day
toward Night fair weather, but the day aforesaied shall be Rainie, because
of the Sextile aspecte of Soll to Saturn, they both being in most mansions,
the sixte day somewhat inclined to rain, the seventh day somewhat ruddie
clouds, and blackness mingled with the^, bringyng some rain. The eight day
fair wether, and toward night windy, and rain. The ix. day rainie. The tenth
day in the after Noone fair, and somewhat windy. The eleventh day at after
noone rain. The twelueth in the morning fair wether. The thirtenth at after
noone rain The fowerteneth a temperate day, the fifteneth a fair day in the
after noone but about the fore noone, and the night before rain, and windy
wether shall be, the sixtene somewhat inclined to rain, the.xvii. in the morning
somewhat fair but red clouds coueryng the heavens, shall bring some rain after
noone. The xviii. day, because of the quart aspect of Jupiter and Mercurius,
shall be very windy. The.xix. day somewhat drisselyng and rainie, the.xx.
day white and read clouds, bringyng with them showers of rain, the.xxi. the
same weather: The.xxii. day windy and fair, in the fore noone the.xxiii.
day cold and moist the.xxiiii. day black clouds, rain and winds also, the.
xxv day cold and rainie, because of the corporal coniunccion of Saturnus and
Venus, in the sign of Pisces, the twenty and six day cold and moiest, the
twenty and seven day toward night rain, and some windiness in the air,
the twenty and eighte day windy and fair weather, the. xxix day fair
wether. The thirty day rain and black clouds, with cold weather.

February.
THE first day cold and moiest. The second day somewhat inclined to
moisture, the third day in the after noone somewhat fair, but at night, and
specially after midnighte windy, and somewhat inclined to rain, the fowerth
before noone, somewhat inclined to moisture, but after none fair wether, the
fiueth day rain, specially about noone, and at one of the clock, because of a
Sextile aspecte betwixt Saturn, and Mercurius, the sixth day, because of the
apposicion of Sol and Luna in Aquarius, and Leo, which be rainy signs rain,
the seventh day somewhat inclined to moiesture, the eighte day a fair day,
because of the co^iunccion Corporal, of Luna and Mars, in Virgo a dry sign,
the nineth day rain with wind, the tenth day very windy because of the
quarte aspect of Mercurius to Jupiter retrograde, the eleue^th rain with wind,
the twelueth windy and fair whitishe Clouds about the heavens, because of
the trinall aspecte of Soll and Jupiter retrograde. The thirtene day in the
morning fair wether. The fowerteneth at noone somewhat inclined to moiesture,
and after noone more inclined to rain then before The fiftene day a fair day,
and readdishe clouds sparkled about the heavens, the sixtene day about after
none, rain, the seuentene day at after noone fair weather. The eightene at
after noone rainy. The ninetene windy and rain alitle, the twenty toward
night windy, the twenty and one, about eleven of the clock before noone rain,
but toward night fair weather, the.xxii. toward night, cloudie and rain,
the xxiii. because of the apposicion of Soll, and Mars, fair wether, and red
clouds, bringyng with the^ some rain some times, the.xxiiii. because of the
coniunccion of Saturn and Venus, in the moist mansion cold wether, and rain,
the.xxv. day fair weather, the.xxvi. day rain and windy the after noone.
The.xxvii. day somewhat fair at the after noone and toward night,
ye.xxviii. day rain.

March.
THE first day windy with a little driselyng Rain, the.ii. day somewhat rainy
wether, the third day rainie wether, the fowerth and.v. rainy because of the
coniunccion corporal of Venus and Sol, in the watrie sign of Pisces, ye.vi.
day toward night fair red clouds, and wind with alitle rain the.vii. in
the after noone somewhat re^perate wether, the.viii. cloudie and moiest wether,
the.ix. temperate wether, the.x. day white clouds about the heavens
sparkled, the.xi. because of the coniunccion of Venus and Mercury in the
waterie sign of Pisces, rainie and windy the xii. also the same wether,
the.xiii. cloudie, cold wether, rain and hail, because of the corporal
coniunccion of Sol, and Saturnus that day, the.xiiii. toward night, and at
night rain.xv. somewhat inclined to rain, the.xvi. in the morning somewhat
fair wether, the.xvii. and. xviii rainie wether, because of the coniunccion of
Saturn and Mercuri, the.xix. day, somewhat fair wether, the.xx. day fair
wether, the.xxi. in the morning rain, because of the coniunccion of Luna, and
venus in Pisces a watery sign, the. xxii at morning cloudie, but it will break
up at after noone, the.xxiii. day windy, specially at night, the.xxiiii.
somewhat ruddy clouds, bringing with the^ some rain, the.xxv. in the morning
some drislyng rain, the.xxvi. about noone, cold and cloudy, the. 27. fair
before noone, but in thafter noone itis like to rain somewhat but alitle,
the.xxviii. day about noone windy, but toward night therewith cloudy,
the.xxix. after noone alitle rain, the.xxx. day about after none very windy,
the.xxxi. day great winds, because of thopposicion of Jupiter and Mercuri.

April.
THe first day fair, the second day windy, and at after noone hot, the
third a fair day, but toward night somewhat inclined to rain, the fowerth
day fair, and temperate wether, because of the coniunccion corporal of
Jupiter and Luna, in Libra, an airie sign, the.v. in the morning cloudy
the.vi. a fair day, specially in the after noone, the.vii. day a fair after
none* and somewhat hotter then before, the eight day, and specially in the
morning, windy, and after somewhat inclined to coldness, and moiesture in the
after noone, and the same night also, the nineth day somewhat a fair day and
very windy with white Clouds sparkeled about the heavens, because of
thopposicion of Soll, and Jupiter in a fiery and airie signs, the tenth in
the morning cloudie the eleventh somewhat inclined to rain, the: xii. day, a
fair morning, but afternoon cold and cloudie, the.xiii. day about after
noone windy, the.xiiii. about the rising of the sun fair, and temperate,
the.xv. fair and hotter then before because of the trinall aspect of Sol and
Mars in yearthly signs, the.xvi. in the morning windy, and after noone fair
and somewhat hotter then before, the xvii. somewhat driselyng rain, because of
the co^iunccion of Venus and Luna, in Pisces, the.xviii. day cold, and cloudie
the most part of all the day and night also, the.xix. day fair, and
temperate wether, the.xx. also fair, and somewhat inclined to sweet rain.
The.xxii. the same weather, the.xxiii. dry temperate wether, ye.xxiiii. day a
metely fair day The.xxv. in the morning a fair day, but after colder and
cloudy: The xxvi. windy and fair wether the xxvii. cloudy and temperate
weather: the xxviii. fair wether, but somewhat wyndy and cloudy, because of the
sextile aspecte of Saturnus, and Mercu. the xxix. a fair and hot weather all
the night long, because of the conjunction of Mars and Luna in Virgo: The xxx.
day in the morning somewhat wyndye, and afternoon sommetyme sweet shoures,
but most part fair weather.

May.
THe first day a fair te^perate day the second day cloudy and somewhat
inclined to moisture, but it is like to hold up, not withstanding because the
significators of this rain be in temperate mansyons, and the moon also. The
third day fair wether and wyndy, because of the conjunction of Jupiter and
Luna in Libra an ayry sign. The.iiii. somewhat ruddy and sometime rain. The.v.
day cold, because of the conjunction of Saturnus and Venus in the sign of
Aries: The vi. windy and raynye weather, because of the quart aspect of Mars
and Mercurius and the firtile aspecte of Venus and Mercurius the said vi. day,
The vii. windy and cloudie til night, but in the night about.viii. of ye
clock somewhat fair wether, and about x. of the clock somewhat inclined to
moisture. The viii. day somewhat fair wether. the.ix. day cloudie wether, and
the tenth day in the morning somewhat inclined to moisture, but at after noone
specially toward night fair wether and somewhat windy. The xi. day sweet
showers of rain. The xii. day in the after none fair wether. The.xiii. fair
and windy The xiiii. day red white clouds, sometime some moisture. The.xv.
day wyndy with sometimes rain a little in a quantity, The xvi. day cold and
cloudy with clouds troubling the heaven like to bring some rain, but it will
hold up as it is before said. The xvii. a fair day the xviii. somewhat fair
wether. The xix. some wind and rain. The.xx. day fair wether, but toward
night cloudie. the xxi. day because of the opposition of Jupiter and Venus in
Aries and libra a fair temperate day with white clouds sparkeled about the
heavens. The day cloudie. The xxiii. day cold and cloudie also, because of
the sextile aspect Saturn and Sol. The xxiiii. day cloudie and somewhat in
clined to moisture The.xxv. day cloudie, but about three of the clock at after
noone it will somewhat break up. The xxvi. in the afternoon wyndie and metely
fair wether the xxvii a fair day, and the xxviii day also the xxix. cloudi.
The xxx. day a metely fair day. The.xxxi. day fair wether and wyndie.

June.
THE first day a fair hoote day because of the quarte aspecte of Mars, and
Sol. The second also the same wether, the third day wyndie and cloudie.
The.iiii. day a fair day, the v. day a fair day and windy, the sixth dai
inclined to moisture, the seventh day inclined to wind. ye viii day somewhat
inclined to rain, the nynth fair wether and somewhat wyndie. the tenth day in
the fore noone wyndie, the xi. in the after noone fair temperate wether The
xii. wyndie and cloudie. ye xiii. day fair wether and wind, the xiiii day
cloudie: The xv. day sweet showers of small rain: but toward night and al
night long it will be fair and break up: The xvi day cloudy, the xvii. windy
because of the conjunction of Luna and Mercurius in Gemini: the xviii. a fair
temperate day: The.xix. a colder day then before, and cloudy also: the xx. in
the morning fair wether and also windy: The xxi. day cloudye: the xxii.
toward night windy: but all the most part of the day metely fair: the
xxiii. day somewhat cloudy wether: the xxiiii. inclined to moisture, the xxv.
day white and red clouds sparkled about the sky with wind, bringyng with them
some rain: The xxvi. cloudy and colder then before: The xxvii. a fair windy
day, and the xxviii. also: The xxix. somewhat cloudy: The xxx. fair wether.

July.
THe first day cloudy, the second day cloudy, and that because of the quarte
aspect of Saturnus and Mercurius, the third day a fair day all the fore
noone, but in the after noon cloudye. The fourth in the after noone somewhat
rainy, and toward night fair wether, the v. a fair day, but because of the
sextile aspecte of Saturnus and Venus the heaven shall be over cast with clouds
like to bring some rayn, but notwithstanding it will be as is aforesaied a
fair days. The sixth a metely fair wether. The seueth a metely temperate
wether, the eight day a fair day with great wind and white clouds covering
almost the heavens, and this because of the quarte aspecte of Sol and IVPITER,
and MARCVRIVS quarte aspecte to Jupiter also. The ix. a fair day and a hot
but that temperately, because of the application of Luna to Saturn. The tenth
day a metely fair day in the afternoon. the xi somewhat inclined to moisture
and the xii. day also, the xiii. some rain is like to happen, but the most of
the wether shall be temperately cloudie the xiiii in the afternoon cloudie,
the xv temperate wether and clouds in the sky like unto the skales of iron,
the xvi day fair temperate wether, The. xvii somewhat fair wether, the xviii.
day cloudie, the.xix. day a fair day and somewhat wyndye, the.xx. day
somewhat moiste weather, the.xxi. day temperate wether the xxiii. day
temperate wether, the xxiiii. a fair hot day, specially in the after noone:
the xxv. in the morning wyndy, the xxvi. fair wether: the.xxvii. a fair day,
the xxviii. somewhat cloudy but dry wether: the xxix. fair wether: the xxx.
windy: The xxxi. somewhat inclined to drislynge sweet rain.

August.
THe first day fair wether because of the application of Mars to Jupiter in
the sign of Libra, the second day cloudy all the most part of the day, but
at night fair clear wether, the nynth day fair in the morning specially, and
almost all day, the fowerth in the after noone inclined to some rain, the
fiueth somewhat inclined to moiesture: the sixte a fair day, and whitish read
clouds sparkeled about the heavens, and sometimes notwithstanding cloudy, and
that because of a quart aspect betwixt Luna and Mars, and of a corporal
conjunction of Saturnus and Luna, the seventh day fair wether, and wyndy, the
viii. day sommewhat fair wether: the nynth at after noone fair and hot: the
tenth cloudy: the xi. a metely fair day: the xii. a fair temperate wyndy day,
because of the sextile aspect of Sol and Jupiter: the xiii. a temperate day:
the xiiii. in the morning about vii. a clock fair: but about ix. a clock
somewhat inclined to rain, and afternoon fair wether: the xv. somewhat
inclined to cloudines: the xvi. a temperate wether: the xvii. fair and hot
wether: the xviii. fair temperate wether: the xix. wyndy: the xx. cloudy: the
xxi. day fair and temperate weather: the xxii. a fair day: the xxiii. a fair
day, because the sextile aspect of Sol and Mars: the xxiiii. cloudy: and like
to rayn: the xxv. somewhat inclined to moisture: the xxvi. widy, the xxvii.
cloudy, but toward night, fair wether: the xxviii. somewhat inclined to
wind: the xxix. somewhat more cloudy then before: the xxx. metely fair: the
xxxi. fair and hot.

September.
THe first day somewhat windy: the second day cloudy, and cold wether: the
third day a temperate day sommewhat cloudy like to rain, but it will hold
up as before said the.iiii. fair wether, but sometime red clouds bringing
with them some rain the v. day metely fair wether, and temperat and dry, the
vi. cloudy, the. vii fair, and temperate, the viii. metelye fair, the. ix
fair, and that in a temperate mansion also the x. the same wether the xi.
cloudy, the xii. fair because of the quarte aspecte of Mars to Luna, and the
sertile of Venus to Jupiter, the xiii. a fair temperate day, the xiiii. fair
and windy, and that because of a sextile betwixt Mars, and Mercurius. The xv.
fair, the xvi. cold and cloudie. the.xvii. so^what e^clined to moisture, ye
xviii. fair temperat wether, because of the conjunction of Luna, and Jupiter
in Scorpio ye house Mars, the xix. windy, ye xx. a fair dai because of the
corporal conjunction of Luna and Mars in Scorpio, with sometimes read clouds
bringyng with the some rain, the xxi. Cloudie, ye xxii. somewhat windy. ye
xxiii. til it be past iii. clock in the after none windy but afterward because
of the Suns opposition with Saturnus cold, and cloudie: ye xxiiii. day
somewhat inclined to moiesture, ye xxv. fair wether, ye xxvi. cold, and cloudy
the twenty and seven metely fair. The twenty and eight, te^perate wether,
the xxix. temperate and windy, the.xxx. fair

October.
THe first day metely fair wether the ii. day inclined to moiesture, The
iii. a temperate day, the.iiii. te^perate, but somewhat cloudie, because of the
trinall aspecte of Saturnus and Mars in fiery signs, the v a te^perate day,
the sixte metely fair weather, the seventh day a temperate weather, the eight
day some what temperate, and toward night windy, the* nineth day a
temperate day, and black clouds like to bring some rain, but it shall hold
up, because of Saturn and Venus, the.ii. significatours of this moiesture, be
both in the temperate Mansions, the tenthe metely temperate, the eleventh day
fair wether; the twelueth because of the sextile aspecte of Mercurius and
Mars, one in an airie sign, an other being in a fiery sign, the thirtene day
cold and cloudie, the fowertenth temperate, with an inclinacion to moisture
the fiftenth fair in the after noone, the sixtene inclined to moisture.
The.xvii. somewhat inclined to droughte about head, theightene toward euenyng,
fair white and red clouds, with wether also, the ninetene a fair day, the
twenty day metely fair wether. The.xxi. day temperate wether, the.xxii.
temperatly windy. The.xxiii. fair, and somewhat windy, the.xxiiii. in the
morning fair, and in the euenyng clouds like to rain but it will hold up,
because Venus the significatrix of this rain, is a good te^perate mansion,
the.xxv. fair and windy the. xxvi fair wether, till two a clock in the
after noone, but afterward very cold and cloudie, the.xxvii. a fair temperate
day, the.xxviii. great winds and white clouds about the heavens, the xxix.
day toward night windy, the. xxx great winds, because of the coniunccio^ of
Mercuri and Jupiter, the.xxxi. cloudie.

Nouembre.
THe first day fair wether, the.ii. cloudie about noone, till three a
clock, and then metely fair wether, the.iii. day, because of the coniunccion
of Mercurius and Sol in a moist sign, and a moiest mansion also, signifies
rain with some wind, the.iiii. cloudie, the.v. and.vi. fair weather, the.vii.
fair and temperate, theight temperat, and in deed neither fair nor foul,
the nineth mild Rain, because of the coniunccion of Jupiter, and Venus in
Scorpio, a moiest sign, and a moist mansio^ also, the.x. day rain and hail,
or else some snow withal, because of the quarte of Saturnus and Mars in most
mansio^s, ye same wether most part of the next day, the.xii. day somewhat
inclined to gentle and small rain The.xiii. day the same wether, the xiiii.
cloudie. The.xv. inclined to moiesture. The.xvi. cloudie in the after noone.
The.xvii. fair weather and froste. The.xviii. a fair dry day from rain.
The.xix. cloudie, because of the trinall aspect of Saturnus and Sol. The xx. in
the after Noone like to rain, but it will hold up. The.xxi. somewhat cloudie.
The.xxii. fair in the for noone but in thafter noone windy, the.xxiii.
cloudie, the.xxiiii. fair wether, the.xxv. cloudie, and as though it would
rain, but it will hold up, because Saturn and Venus (whose trine aspect
causes the wether aforesaid) be in fiery signs, and temperate mansio^s,
the.xxvi. fair, the. xxvii cloudie, the.xxviii. metely fair, the.xxix.
somewhat cloudie, the.xxx. metely fair

Decembre.
THe first day cold and rain withal, because of the quart aspect of Saturnus
and Mercurius in a moiest mansion. The second day somewhat inclined to
moiesture, the thirds fair wether and white clouds spackled about the
heavens, the fowerth fair and temperate wether with some* wind the fiueth
somewhat inclined to moiesture, the sixth in the morning fair, and all the
most part of the day Cloudie and very cold, the seventh windy, the eight
in thafter noone metely fair, the nineth somewhat windy, the tenth more
windy, in especially at afternoon, the eleue^th a metely fair day about
noone but afterward cloudie, the twelueth day somewhat inclined to moiesture,
the thirtenth day metely fair wether, but somewhat to much inclined to
moisture, the fowertenth day cloudie. The fiuetenth windy in the after noone,
the xvi. a fair dry day, but toward night cold and cloudie, the xvii. day
somewhat fair wether, the.xviii. cold, cloudie and rain with some Snow,
because of the quart aspecte of Sol to Saturnus, and a sextile of Mars to
Saturnus, and a quart of Saturnus to Venus. The. xix day metely fair
temperate weather, with wind, about ten of the clock, the xx. day cold and
cloudie, the.xxi. somewhat windy, and some Rain, the.xxii. day fair
temperate wether. The.xxiii. somewhat windy, the.xxiiii. in the morning fair
and windy, but afterward cloudie weather, the.xxv. a fair cold day, the.
xxvi, day cloudie, the xxvii. day fair and temperate, the.xxviii. day metely
fair, with often times sweet showers, and alitle wind. The.xxix. day
windy, but after noone cloudie, the. xxx a fair day. The.xxxi. day inclined
to coldness and moiesture.

Of thinfirmities that shall be this present year.
FIrst Mercuri lord of the house of diseases, in ye first beginning of the
first quarter, being in the sign of Pisces his fall, and in the second
cadent from the ascendente, signifies that men shall have infirmities in their
shinne bones, secret places and Belies, and these diseases shall happen most
upon boys, and old women about the age of.lx. and upon the learned sort of
men also. Jupiter lord of the house of infirmities direct, and in the
ascendent of the second quarter of the year, signifies that there shall be no
infirmities in that quarter, but peines in the yies of men, and about their
knees also, which diseases shall happen most upon noble men, and upon young
noble maidens also. Moreover Saturnus, being Lord of the house of infirmities
in the third quarter, and impedite in Aries, and in the nineth house
signifies, there shall be quarterne agues, which shall be great, and reumes
stillyng out of men's heddes into their Lights, and tremblyng of Sinews, and
peines in their knees and yies, through corrupt blood, because Mars in the
sign of. Finally, Venus in the fowerth quarter, is figured Lady of the sixth
house, being in Sagitarius in the ascendent also, signifies that men shall
have no infirmities, but such as happen through surfettes of drinkyng, and
immoderate venerious acts.

Of wars, and contencions.
MArs in a humain sign in theight house, signifies that mortal war shall
happen amongst men, and the more because of his retrogradacion this evil
effect and disposicion shall be more vehement, and this shall appear more in
the Southe parts, and in the East parts, then in any other places. Mars also
in the second quarter of the year aforesaid, and in the.xxvii. of Virgo in
the.xii. house, the house of enemies signifies war and bloodshed Mars in the
sign of Scorp. and in the.iiii. house of the heavens, signifies that many
shall be slain with the sweard, and that in the iii. quarter of the year
aforesaid. Finally Mars in the. iiii quarter, and in the reuolucion thereof in
the second house, the house of substance, signifies that there shall be great
spoil of the ignoble people by soldiers, and men of war, because he is in
Aquari, which sign is the fall of the Sun, and the house of cloudie
Saturn, which planete signifies diggers, and deluers of the earth and such
ignoble people and persons.

Of Cattall, and all other things, which serve for victualles, as wheat,
barley, beans, and such like.
FIrst Mars being Lord of the eight house impedite, signifies that in the
first quarter of the year aforesaied, Sheep shall die much, and in the
second quarter also. More over in the third quarter. Mars in Scorpio,
signifies that Sheep shall not die in the Reuolucion of the said Quarter, and
in the fowerth and last Quarter, Mars in the second house, signifies that
Sheep shall not die, but very few. Venus in the first quarters Reuolucion, in
the second house Retrograde, signifies that Wolle shall be but of a metely
low price in that quarter, and Venus in the second quarter, and in the eight
of Taurus, and in the eight house of enemies, signifies that Wolle shall be
higher of price much more then before it was in ye first quarter. And Venus in
the seventh of Virgo, and the first house of the heavens, at the reuolucion of
the second quarter signifies that wool shall be very dear, and higher of price
then before. Moreover in the iiii. quarter of the revolution of the year
aforesaid. Venus peregrine in the ascendent, signifies that there shall be
great plenty of woulle emo^gst men, and it shall not be dear. Venus Lady of
Taurus retrograde, signifies that Rine, or calfes shall not prosper in the
first quarter but metely so, but in the next quarter, Ryne and calves shall be
of a good, and high price, and so also in the third quarter of the year
aforesaid, but in the.iiii. quarter Venus in thasce^dent and impedite out of
all her dignities, signifies that the price of Oxen, Ryne, and Calves, shall
fall in the said quarter. Whete in the first Quarter low of price, and in the
second quarter within the which harvest falls no great abundaunce of
Wheat, and in that quarter it shall be but of a low price Moreover in the.iii.
quarter, specially ii. wekes before Michelmas, wheat shall be good cheap, and in
the fourth quarter low of price will wheat be. Barley shall be of a metelye
low price in the firsie quarter of the year. Barley also in the second
quarter of the year of a metely low price: but in this second quarter in the
which harueste falls, there shall thereof be good ple^tie Barley in the third
quarter shall be good cheap.ii. weeks before Mighelmasse, but about fouretene
days before Hallontyde dear again: but that dear the shall not long continue.

Barley in the fowerth quarter of the year meetely good cheap, and little of
it amongst men. Beans in the first quarter of the year aforsaid good
cheap, and of low price. Beans in the second quarter of metely reasonable
price, and that somewhat of the highest, and of them great plenty in this
second quarter. Beans of a meetely good price in the third quarter. Beans
in the fourth quarter good cheap. And generally for most things necessary,
this year will be plentyfulle enoughe, specially all the Somer, for all the
chief fruits of the earth.

Finis.

