CONTEMPLATIO MORTIS, ET IMMORTALITATIS.

LONDON, Printed by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent
MAJESTY: and by the Assigns of John Bill. Anno Dom. 1631.

CONTEMPLATIO MORTIS ET IMMORTALITATIS.
PHilosophers, Statesmen, and Divines do all hold, that in this world there are
but tria genera vitae: Vna est actiua: Altera Contemplatiua: Tertia voluptuaria.

Which of these is best. Quaeritur:

Actio Contemplationis expers, is but vita impolita; Contemplation, if it take
up all a man's time makes vitam sterilem.

Voluptuaria vita, though it be not otiosa, because it is in actu: yet is but
desidiosa occupatio. Amongst these, who so tryes all as I have done, shall
find; that Action profits most, but Contemplation pleases best: specially that
which indebts a man to action. For man was not made for Contemplation only. It
is true, retiredness is is more safe then business, yet as he is not happy
that is always busy: so a public man should not always be shut up in
thoughts pleasing his life in the sweetness of thinking.

The sweetness of thoughts, and virtue of Contemplation, lies in the right
choice of the subject: every knowing man being so inquisitiue by nature, and of
so busy a fancy, as it is happy for him in this way to fall upon a fit
subject.

Some ancient Fathers, and some late Writers have fixed upon the love of God,
some upon the Passion of Christ, some upon the joys of Heaven, some upon
contempt of the World. So several others upon several other subjects. All
opining, that some one is to be chosen. For who so will viuere sibi, must
vacare Deo.

Ego in meo solito recessu in quo a negotijs publicis vacans, mihi ipsi
vacaueram (which was but seldom) found it fruitful, useful, and delightful,
cogitare de Nouissimo.

Quatuor sunt Nouissima, say the Fathers; Death, Judgment, Heaven and Hell,
subjects large enough.

But considering I had passed so much employment, so many offices in several
professions, I was some while musing whether any of these fitted me to
contemplate. In the revolution of many things, I found, that when Meditation
had produced Devotion, then it applied it self to Contemplation. And that true
Contemplation required a settlement upon some divine object. Hereupon I made
choice of Death and Immortality for the subject of my Contemplation.

But first my thoughts did beat to find a difference betwixt Meditation and
Contemplation.

Meditation or recogitation, I saw was but a reiterated thought, proper to
production either of good or evil. Day and night have I meditated on thy Law,
says David in one Psalm: in an other, Why have they meditated vain things?
But Divines do now dedicate Contemplation to divine mysteries. Which affecting
our souls, and exciting our wills, produces some holy resolution. We meditate,
says one, to know God; we contemplate to love God. Meditation is the mother,
Contemplation the daughter. Yet as Joseph was the crown of his father, and
brought him increase of honor and contentment: the like does Contemplation to
her mother Meditation. When God himself had seen the things created in
several pieces, he said, they were good. But when he considered the Universe
(as it were in Contemplation) then he said, Lo, they were exceeding good.

For Meditation considers her objects piece by piece; but Contemplation sums
them up all together, and sees as in a gross, all the several beauties of
meditations objects. Meditation is with a man as he that smells the Violet, the
Rose, the Iessamy, and the Oringe flowers, one after the other, distinctly. But
Contemplation is a sweet water compounded of them all, wherein you shall smell
all these odours together, extracted from the several sents, which before you
smelt diuidually. Which extract is far more fragrant, then were any of the
simples, though every one was sweet alone. This is more elegantly denoted in
the Canticles; where the Spouse pleates up her hair, trussing it up in one
knot, to show that we should not diffuse our thoughts into variety of
considerations, but recollect them by contemplation.

The end of all is, after many changes of meditations and discourses, to reduce
all cogitations to one conclusion. Which is, contemplation of things divine.
Here with a man's soul being once affected, he shall hardly obtain leave of
his thoughts to return again to employment.

Now to return ad meum Nouissimum. What man lives (says David) and shall not
see death? And if after death Iustus vix salnabitur, as the Gospel says; Then
we may well be fearful, and had need be careful, that we be not taken
unprepared.

When I was a young man (says Seneca) my care was to live well. I practiced
Artem been viuendi: when age came upon me, I studied Artem been moriendi, how
to die well.

It is true, Iter vitae occupatis non apparet, nisi in fine: yet when I was
occupatissimus, hoc me dulci oblectabam solatio, aliquando me victurum mihi.
And this at last I am come to, disponendo, non mutando me.

The covenant of the grave is showed to no man, says the Wiseman: But the
watchword is given to all men: Sint lumbi praecincti, Lucernae ardentes,
semper vigilantes. Lord let me be found in this posture, when I shall be to
dye.

Nunquam ego fortunae credidi, etiamsi videretur pacem agere. I have had my
portion as another man, of the worlds favors: yet did they never so delight
me, or abuse me, as to make me neglect, or to defer this work of
preparation. I considered this, Guttatim per horas and dies fluit vita. And
although the hour be not past till all the glass be run, and nemo multum
ex stillicidio potest perdere: yet the glass then runs most faintly, when it
draws nearest to effluxion. Careful Martha was full busy about many things,
but was well admonished, there was only vnum necessarium.

Physicians exclaim, Vita breuis, Ars longa est. But Divines teach, Ars optima
est, vsuendo discere artem been moriendi. If this Science be to learn, when
prae foribus Mors est; Thy sin-sicke Soul will say, Infelix ego homo, quis me
liberabit a corpore mortis huius? But if thou have learnt it betime, then it
will rejoice to say, Mihi viuere Christus est, and mori, lucrum. Welcome death,
more blessed then my birth.

In the whole course of my life I have always thought the right way to die,
was to live well; and the way to live well in the world, was to dye betimes to
the world.

Mihi Mundus Crucifixus, and ego Mundo: yet I found it rem difficilem; In mundo
viuere, and mundi bona contemnere. Therefore for assistants, I took three
coadiutors; Faith, Hope, Charity. Charitatemex cord puro, spemex conscientia
bona, fidem non fictam. And for my souls health often used this preparatiue;
Examen conscientiae meae. Nam quicunque cordihabet salutem suam, let him every
day, mane and vespere, examine his heart. Quid nocte vel die praecedente, has
he thought, has he said, has he done? Et in quo peccati labem inuenerit? Let
him mend it, cum proposito efficaci, simili non peccare. This if it be done
daily, I dare boldly say, Vix fieri poterit, vt quis moriendo peccet, aut
peccando moriatur.

Inter these thoughts, I had these things in Contemplation.
1. First, what Death was, and the kinds of death. 2. Secondly, what fears or
joys death brought. 3. Thirdly, when death was to be prepared for, and how. 4.
Fourthly, death approaching, what our last thoughts should then be.
Of these I thus resolved.
THat Death was a fall, What death is.
which came by a fall. Our first framed father Adam falling, in him we all
fell. Cecidimus omnes (says S. Bernard) super acerbum lapidem in luto, vnde
inquinati and vulneratisumus. Therefore we needed water in Baptism to wash
us, Blood in the Eucharist to heal us.

This falling sickness infected not only the person, but the nature (such is
the infection of evil always worse the^ the Act) making man that was
immortal, subject to Death, as are Birds and Beasts: whereas before we were
differenced from them in this condition, though made of the same matter, Dust.
Yet as we now stand, the fault is ours, if that fall be not our rise: the
advantage we have by Christ, being more then the damage we had by Adam, ideo
qui stat, videat ne cadat. For relapse may turn us again to be as Birds and
Beasts, that have no joy, but being; no sorrow, but dying.

Consider Death originally or in his own nature, and it is but a departed
breath from dead earth inliuened at first by breath cast upon it. Take the
dimension of it, and it is but a point of Time, interiected between two
extremes. A Parenthesis which interposed breaks no sense, when the words meet
again. When Seneca was asked, Quid est Mors? he answered, Aut finis est, aut
transitus. Rogatus Secundus Philosophus said to the Emperor Adrian, Mors est
aeternus somnus, Diuitum Pauor, pauperum desiderium, incerta peregrinatio,
ineuitabilis euentus, latro hominis, fuga vitae, resolutio omnium. Plato said
it was Lex Naturae, Tributum mortalium. Scaliger defines it to be, but the
cessation of the souls functions. All men grant the cause of Death was just,
yet few can tell, who was the Author, or what is the name or nature of it.
Estimemus singula fama remota quaeramus quid sint, non quid vocentur.

In Nature it can be nothing for it has no cause efficient, The nature of Death
but deficient. Post mortem nihil est, ipsaque Mors nihil. It has no Essence,
though Existence. It is no substance, but privation; no creature, but
creaturarum sepultura. Therefore curiously to search the efficient of it, were
to labor the eye to see darkness. God made it not, says the book of
Wisdom, nor is it mentioned as any of his works. God that made all things,
saw that all things which he had made, were good. Omne ens bonum, and omne
bonum estens. Therefore good Saint Augustine said finely, Lord, thou have not
made Death, wherefore, I beseech thee, suffer not that which thou have not
made, to reign over that which thou have made. It is no error to say that man
made death. For curiosity (the itch of man's Soul) affecting to know that
which God never made, which was the evil of death, thinking it had been good,
to know evil, by desiring to know it, made it. He that knew all other things,
knew not this one thing: that he knew enough. So divine a thing is knowledge,
that we see, innocence it self was ambitious of it. Life did not content,
that was thought but the act of knowledge: knowledge was the life the soul
looked at. That yet begets a studious scrutinie to discover things we can
never know. So we see, that although Nature be moderate in her desires, yet
conceit is insatiable. But since God has revealed more then we can know,
enough to make us happy; let us learn sober knowledge, and contented ignorance.

Who then was the Author of Death? The Autho^ of Death.
The book of Wisdom says, that through envy of the devil, death came into
the world, and they that hold on his side, find it. But if the Devil was the
father, Sin was the mother. For says Saint James, sin being finished,
trauaileth in childbirth like a mother to bring forth death. Adam falling,
sin followed him: Man being tempted, Death attempts him, and by sin death
entered. Death had no interest in man, till sin had dispossessed him of the
freehold he had in God. There was no trust in Gods servants, says Eliphaz,
but even Angels were charged with folly. And to do the Devil right, he did
but persuade, not compel. It was in man's choice to stand or fall. Adam
acceperat posse, quod vellet: non velle, quod posset: nos accepimus and posse,
quod volumus; and velle, quod possumus: ille posse non mori, nos non posse mori
sic Augustinus. Power of standing, man had from God, but possibility of
falling from himself. Therefore though we may thank our first parents for
our birth-sinne; Yet we may thank our selves for improouing of it; wherefore
said the old Letanie, Ame, salaa me, Domine.

All man's native virtues were given him but in trust, and under a condition.
He abused the trust, and brake the condition, so incurred the penalty. For
that is man's nature, ever subject to extremities, either dull in want, or
wanton in fruition. Ne moriemini was a fair warning, but he cared not for it:
when Satan tempted, he consented. Had the mind governed the eye, the Apple
could not have beguiled, though it was fair to see to. The proud aspiring
thought was hatched in man. The Devil was but the deviser, sin was the
Author, and we being partners in the sin, shared likewise in the punishment.
Facinus quos iniquinat, aequat. Since then Death stole in at the ear, by our
hearkening to ill counsel; let us now cast it out by the ears, through
hearkening to Gods Word: the word of life, the life of Death.

For the name of Death: The name of Death.
Saint John calls it a sleep, Amicus noster Lazarus dormit. Of Saint Steven it
was said, and when he had thus spoken, he slept. The Patriarchs and Kings of
Judah slept with their Fathers. Transitum ad vitam, aliqui appellant mortem,
says Saint Bernard. Sed ideo Scriptura dormientes appellat, vt euigilaturos
minime desperemus. He is not dead (says David) but sleeps, whose flesh does
rest in hope. The night savors of mortality, and sleep is but the shadow of
death, and where the shadow is, the body cannot be far off. But let it be
Mors a morsu, which our first Parents tasted; or Mors a mora, which yet tarries
for us all. Let her be styled Lady, mistress of the world, that will not be
courted, nor yet cast off. Yet is she but vox tantum, a thing next to nothing.
Solo timenda sono. Better is it called a transfiguration, or transmigration
from life by death to life again, Exitus non transitus. Transitus quem ire non
intelleximus, transissesentimus. The grave is but a withdrawingroome to retire
in for a while, a going to bed to take rest, sweeter then sleep. And when it
is time to rise, cum expergiscar, then I shall be satisfied, says the Prophet
David.

In the mean time it is common to all, Death common to all.
Mors etiam saxis nominibusque venit. Yet this favor nature has done. Quod
grauissimum fecit, fecit commune, vt crudelitatem fati consolaretur aqualitas.
Who lives and shall not see death? Quisquis ad vitam nascitur ad mortem
destinatur, it respects none. Equat omnes cinis. It is as natural to die as to
be borne. Licet impares nascimur, pares morimur. No sooner borne, but hastening
to die: Orimur, morimur. We come into the world with a sheet about us, as no
sonner borne, but going to be buried. For all this, man is even with Death.
Nunquam enim magnis ingenijs cara in corpore mora est: nay, the good Soul
aegre fert has angustias. Therefore what great thing does death in hastening
days? This shows infirmity, rather then power. Age does more, nil enim non
longa demolitur vetustas: Death only shortens time, not life; for life's time
shortens by lengthening: Morimur, quod mortibus viuimus; morieris, non quia
aegrotas, sed quia viuis. This all men are to know, that mortis meritum, is
peccati debitum. Both imposed on man for sin.

Since then, Life but a dying death.
it is a Statute made in heaven, omnibus semel mori, and that life is so
momentanie, and death so certain; splendemus licet, Heu quam cito frangimur
corpora vitrea! Since life it self is no true living, but a dying being; and
such a being, as every day pants for breath, which nature fawnes upon it for a
while. Mors and fugacempersequitur virum. And since death is no death, but a
going unto heaven, and heavens coming unto us; How can a man but think it a
well spent life always to be meditating upon death?

But says Zenophon, Cur vitam contemnendamputas, and habes? I will not inquire
nor require more of death, but death. Err as enim, qui in terrogas, Quid sit
mors? Et propter quod mortempetam? Quaeris enim aliquid supra summum.

But if a man dye shall he live again? says Job. Yes, Life after Death.
says Saint Paul, we that are in this Tabernacle sigh, and are burdened,
because we would not be unclothed, but clothed upon, that Immortality might
be swallowed up of life.

Phoenix sponte crematur
Vt redeat, proprioq solet pubescere letho:
Ste tu corpus coactum
Discere mutata melior proceed figura.
The bright days die into dark nights, but rise again a mornings Though the
body sleep awhile in the dust, yet shall it arise after thy likeness. The
Soul which departed for a season, shall, as Saint Paul said of Onesimus, come
again and be received for ever. That body which was sown a natural body,
shall rise a spiritual body: Sow in tears, reap in joy; who so go forth
weeping and carry precious seed, shall return with joy, and bring their
sheaues with them.

Yet caro ista Pulueries, this clod of earth must lie a while in Dust. Sed
resurget tandem as the Queens daughter all glorious within. For if in this
life holiness makes the face of a man to shine by an Irradiation from the
heart; what shall be the beauty of the body glorified? Surely though it be not
deifyed: yet shall it be purified, perfected, and immortalized. Our vile bodies
shall be changed, says Saint Paul, and fashioned like unto his glorious body.
Such glory have all his Saints.

If the exchange be such, who would not be willing, yea, glad to die? Nilminus
est hominis occupati, quam viuere. Quos autem felicitas grauat, exclamant illi,
Mihi viuere non licet. It is a good mind to be content to dye, and willing to
live. But to be willing to dye, and content to live, is the mind of a strong
Christian. Diligimus mortem pariter, pariterque timemus. Ipse metus te noster
amat. When the Senator Cato was asked a question concerning Death; Si Deus
(inquit) ille mihi largiatur, vt repuerascam, valde recusem. Nec tum me vixisse
poenitet, quia been vixi; nec timeo, mori, quod ex hospitio, non domo, discedam.

Wherefore though death be not to be sought in the error of youth, as the
Preacher says. respects it may be desired. Death desirable for three
respects.
Portus est aliquando petendus, nunquam recusandus.

As first, that sow may betimes leave off to sin; since sin lives in us, and
leaves us not till Death. Dixit Socrates, Appropinquante morte multo es
diuinior.

Secondly, the Soul that soon departs, facilius ad superos iter facit, quia
minus facis ponderisque traxit.

In this passage between life and death, what is the distance? So little, as
with the Ancients the Emblem of life was oculus apertus: Mortis clausus, but
not extinctus: nec plus interesse putauerunt inter mortem and vitam, quam ictum
oculi. Man is only a wink of life, his life and death joined as near as joy
and grief; where tears express both.

Thirdly, that we might the sooner come to live indeed. Vita aeterna est illa
vita vitalis, ista est tantum mortalis. For this cause says Bernard,
praecipitat quisque vitam suam, fuiuri desiderio laborat, praesentium taedio.
Men commonly say. There is nullum tempus praeter Nune. But this present is not
that which contents the Soul. Nimis angustat gaudia, qui praesentibus
acquiescit. They are only creatures of inferior nature, that are pleased with
the present.

Man is a future creature, his soul looks at what is beyond this life.
Scrutatur quod vltra mundum, futura and praeterita illum delectant; Haec
expectatione, illa recordatione.

It would make a man heavenly proud, but to think of how Divine a nature and
quality his Soul is. The Heathens could say it was Diuinae particula Aurae.
Epicurus makes it a Spirit mixed of fire and air: Others define it to be a
selfe-mouing number. Seneca said, Quid aliud est anima, quam Deus in corpore
humano hospitans? Never could any give it such a definition, that either an
other, or himself could conceive it.

And no wonder that a man cannot conceive what his Soul is: Because it
suffered a composure before it self was. Therefore Admiration rather then
Search becomes a man in such a secret.

Tully said, Mihi quidem nunquam persuaderi potuit, animos dum in corporibus
essent mortalibus, viuere; cum exijssent ex ijs, emori. Let me ever worship
the great God of this little god, my Soul. Et ne plus vltra.

Only this I know, That to no creature else God has given a living soul, nor
is there hope in any creature else, but man; and this hope is given for
sustentation of his soul.

He that contemplates these things, will bear himself too loftily, and think
himself too good to look so low, as upon the sublunarie things of this life.
Angustus, est animus quem terrena delectant.

How then can this Beauty be pleased to inhabit long contubernio isto? All it
needs to care, is but Sepulture to that body which once had the Honor to be
the Temple of such a ghest: But because many times the houses of the dead and
the vrned bones do meet with foul hands, for this also Nature has provided,
vt diserte ait Maecenas. Nec tumulum quaero, sepelit Natura relictos.

It is one of the daily petitions of every good Soul, Adueniat Regnum tuum,
Thy Kingdom come, O Lord Yet says Ambrose, Hoc nitimur and reluctamur. For,
Quis sine querela moritur? Quis non gemens, quis non recusans exit? Quis cum
accesserit, non tergiuersatur, timet, plorat?

In all things else, Man's cross Nature.
observe how contrarily we carry our selves. The labourer from his work hasts
to his bed. The Mariner rows hard to gain the Port. The Traveler is glad
when he is within kenning of his Inn: yet we, when Death comes to put us into
our Port, shun it as a rock. We fear what we should wish, and wish what we
should fear.

O fortunatiorem Marcellum eo tempore, quo exitum suum Bruto approbauit, Man's
better choice.
quam quo populo Romano consulatum! Hear, O Christian, what the Pagan says,
Quid ni non timeat, qui mori sperat? It is harder to make a true Philosopher
patient of life, then of Death. Hic spe mortis patienter dolet, and taedio
doloris libenter moritur. Hunc fert, illam expectat, sed expectata Mors, tarde
venit.

I am in a straight betwixt two said Saint Paul, whether to live in the flesh
were profitable for me, and which to choose I wot not. Yet at last resolved,
live or die Christ was to him advantage. Therefore to be loosed and to be
with Christ was best of all. Till then God grant that I may have vitam in
patientia, mortem vero in desiderio.

So shall I fulfill my course with joy, life not dear, nor death grievous.

In elder times both wise men, great men, Life and death compared.
and vain men, had Death in such estimation, and so undervalued life, as they
fondly said, Had man been worthy to know what life was before, he received it,
he would have been loath to accept it. Nemo vitam acciperet, si daretur
scientibus. Life would have kept us in slavery, but that Death freed us. They
counted death but the retreite of life, and optimum Naturae inuentum: for by it
every man might make himself happy, no man be longer miserable then he will.
Placet no vita? viue. Non placet? licet co reuerti, vnde venisti. They thought
no state miserable, but that which Death could not remedy. Wherefore (say they)
a wise man lives but so long as he should, not so long as he can. If Death
were not in our power, we should desire it more then now we fear it.
Magistra rerum ratio taught them, that common safety lay in Death, and, inuitum
qui seruat, idem facit occidenti. Life was subject to many fortunes, sed in eo
qui scit mori, nil posse fortunam. This made them cherish these desperate
conceits: Nil refer; faciatne finem, an accipiat. For though life be not, yet
Death is at a man's command. Mori nihil aliud est, quam velle; in which respect
no man could complain of life. Quia neminem tenet. If any man did complain,
this was their wish, Mors vtinam pauidos vitae subducere nollet; sed virtus
hanc sola daret. In scorn some said, Egone expectem vel morbi crudelitatem vel
hominis, cum possim medio exire tormento, and aduersa discutere? But their
brauest conceit was worst, that it was genus mortis generosum, for a man to be
author of his own death, say they, if permitted to desire death, why ill to
give it to themselves?

-- Sed furor est, ne moriare, mori. They seemed thus to maintain their
assertion, by reason as wellas courage. Death is natural, therefore we come.
Viuere noluit, qui mori non vult, he is sorry that he was a man, that is not
glad to dye. It is inevitable, therefore we must be resolute, feras non culpes,
quod vitari non potest. Fools fly it, old men attend it, wise men wish it.
Nay, some so prided themselves in this way, that for Care, Fear or Grief they
would not dye. Non inferam mihi manus propter dolorem, nor yet for fear,
stultum est, timore Mortis mori. Nor yet the threats of torments. Sic mori,
vinciest. Sed si coeperat suspecta esse Fortuna, si multa occurrebant molesta
tranquillitatem turbantia, then it was Fortitude to dispatch themselves. How,
or with what, it mattered not. Scalpello aperitur ad illam magnam libertatem
via, and puncto securitas constat, said Seneca when he bled to death. Cato will
die because the Commonwealth declined; Nerua, because the laws were not kept;
Siluianus, because he would not live at the mercy of his enemy; Lucretia, to
cover a dishonor.

But Plato and his Socrates were of another mind: Death was to be expected
till Nature called for it, or Justice took it. For Religions sake men may
ponere animas, but suas, not for ostentation, nor in discontent. Inde facult as
fuit non ponendi animam, sed pendendi. Bona res est mori sua morte. Life was
given to manage to the utmost, and to make the best of it. Every one was here
set sentinel, not to depart the place till his Captain calls him off. Non est
optima, quae placet, sed quaedecet: That Death was best which was well
recollected, quietly suffering what it could not possibly prevent. Fortiter
ille facit, qui miser esse potest. It is not enough to die with a Roman
courage, nor that the cause of Death be just; but it must be also necessary,
unsought, inevitable.

But let go this discourse, my Contemplation lies another way. The kinds of
Death as of life, are two: The one bodily, The kind of death.
the other spiritual. As bodily life is the conjunction of body and soul: So
bodily Death is the separation of soul and body. And as a godly man has three
degrees of life:

The first in this life, when Christ lives in him; for the soul of a good man's
soul is the Spirit of God within.

The second when his body returns to the earth, and his soul to God that gave
it.

The third at the end of the world, when body and soul reunited shall enjoy
heaven: So likewise a wicked man has three distinct deaths. Dead in sin
while he lives, dead in soul when he dies, dead in body and soul when both
are adjudged to eternal condemnation. Malis fit mors sine morte, fin^ fine
fine, defectus sine defectu. Quia mors viuit, fints semper incipit, and
desicere defectus nescit. To labor not to lie is labor in vain, it is to
defer, not to avoid. To forget to dye, and hope to live is dangerous
security. This let a wise man do, quod ne cesse est, ne timeat; quod incertum
est, semper expectet. Seek not consolation against death, but let Death be
thy consolation; for there is no comfort against death, but in death. Supremum
necoptes, nec metuas diem. Mortem optare, malum, timere, peius.

Now to make Death easy: Think of the glory that follows it. Who will not
endure a few pangs for infinite pleasures? The bitter pill promising health is
swallowed willingly. Mors non anfert vitam, sed in melius transfert.

That the aspect of Death may not trouble thee, look not upon Death in death,
but look beyond it. Think not so much of it, as of the happiness that comes
by it. Erit somnus dilectis, initium refrigerij, scala montis, haereditas
secura, Ianua vitae, ingressus in tabernaculum. Therefore says Job, From six
troubles it delivers thee, and in septima, that is, at point of death, non
tanget te malum. Fit your self for it, and you will never fear it, do by it
as you do in other things, when you would go sleep, you put off your
clothes, you draw the curtains, and go to bed. Thus as it were acting
sleep, before you go to sleep. So address your self to death before hand.
Bring your self acquainted with it, that when it comes you may entertain it,
non vt hostis, sed vt hospes, not as a foe, but as a friend: not as a stranger,
but as a guest that you had long looked for; and bid welcome Death, more
blessed then thy Birth. What a grief is it to see some great men build stately
houses, as if they should always live, and yet they to live as if they had but
mortal souls!

It is good counsel; Effice mortem tibi familiarem, vt possis, cum sors
tulerit, illi laetus and alacriter obuiam exire.

Those Philosophers were more mortified, who had their graves always open
before their gates, that going out or coming in, they might always think of
Death. Good Joseph of Arimathea built his Sepulcher in the midst of his
garden. So do thou, amid all thy pleasures and delights, think of death, and
that will cool and temper all thy vain desires. It will so qualify thee to
the world, and the world to thee, as thou will not much care for it.

In this world we are all Benonies, the sons of Sorrow. The way to Heaven is
by weeping cross.

Hi motus animorum atq haec certamina tanta
Pulueris exigut tactu co^pressa quiescunt.
It is observed, that most of other creatures live long, but dying, perish all
to nothing. Man that is short-liu'd, he dying, lives eternally. Think but of
this, and you will think as S. Bernard did, that life was little better then
hell, were it not for the hope of Heaven.

Surely Christ would not have dyed, but that we might die with safety. He by
death in death, did deliver us from death. And did Christ dye for me, that I
might live with him? I will not therefore desire to live long from him. It is a
token of little love to God, to be loath to go to God. All men go willingly to
see him whom they love. Our brother Joseph lives, therefore though with Jacob
I cannot say, I will go see him before I dye. Yet Lord let me dye that I may
see him whom my soul loves. Living I cannot, but dying I shall.

Let no difficulties hinder, for since Adams fall none passes unto Paradise,
but by burning Seraphims. The way to Canaan is cumbersome, but knowing that our
journey leads to the land of promise, we pass it pleasantly. Yet before we
come at Jerusalem, we take in our way the valley of tears. The swift River of
Jordan must be crossed, before we come to the sweet Waters of Siloam.

Let no delights tempt you; prosperous fortunes may hinder a cheerful dying:
but if pleasures of life allure not, fears of death will never trouble.
Neminem aduersa conuincunt, nisi quem secunda decipiunt. Adam was set upon in
Paradise, Job on the dunghill: yet Job fortior in stercore, quam Adam in
Paradiso. The very place of pleasure is dangerous. In Paradise Adam could not
be innocent, but out of Paradise he was a good man. For any thing in life, lose
not the cause of life, nor judge not of things by the face of things. For life
and death have deceivable vizards: under the fair face of life lurkes grief:
under the foul feature of death (which is but fancy) lies felicity. Take off
the mask and you shall change your mind; loath that you loved, and love that
you loathed.

Vita habitu casto, cum non sit casta, videtur,
Mors, praeter cultum, nil meretricis habet.
Now for the freedoms that come by Death. Freedo by deat


First it frees from all worldly injuries: Mors multorum malorum finis, nullius
boni. Here good men do but live, and suffer been agere, and male pati. It is
their portion and it is good for me (says David) that I have been afflicted.
Non sentire mala, non est hominis; sed non far, non esset viri. Sufferings
are greater trials then actions.

Secondly, it ends all miseries. Man in misery (says Job) longs for death, and
digs for it more then treasure. Mors finis est, non poena.

Nay says one, Nec finis, nec paena bonis lex est, non paena, perire. Death
ends sins, not life: it reformes, but does not destroy Nature. Vitiorum est
Sepultura, virtutum Resurrectio.

Thirdly, Mors omnium dolorum solutio. Life it self is a disease, and we dye
by corruption of humors, whether they be of body or manners: who think to
heal all infirmities with an easier plaster then Death, Delineamenta potius
quam remedia podagraesuae ponunt.

Fourthly, Blessed are they that die in the Lord, they rest from their labors.
Adeo iuuat occupatum mori.

Fifthly, Refrigeries est animae. Refection to the Soul. Were we but in a
throng, we think that man at ease who gets out first. Noah, when he had
been tossed but a year upon the waters, Mount Ararat was to him a gladsome
place; for there the Arc rested. So likewise miscrable man after many
wearisome years, tossed up and down the world as in a troubled sea, will be
glad of Death as of Mount Ararat, a resting place for his tired Soul. As an
Apprentise patiently undergoes seven years labor to be made a Freeman, or
as a bondsman waits for the year of Iubile: So does the Soul for her
deliverance.

Lastly, Delicatas enim mentes eneruat felicitas. In vain mirth, there is no
true joy, nor gladness in laughter. Nam res est seuera verum gaudium. Delight
in pleasures, and you shall find your greatest pleasures become your bitterest
pains in their loss. A man whose soul is conversant with God, finds more
pleasure in the desert, and in death, then in the Palace of a Prince.

The benefits that come by death.
FVlnesse of grace, The benefits by death.
which here we have but in part. Viuere velinthomines, Here we have but
arrham Spiritus, there we shall have pretium.

Secondly, Erimus participes, non spectatores gloriae. Enjoy with these eyes,
visionem illam beatificam, joy unspeakable. And (says S. John) your joy shall
no man take from you.

Thirdly, They follow the Lamb whithersoeuer he goes. There we shall be
married to him, here we are but contracted. Desponsabo te mihi, says the
Prophet. Those favors and louetokens I have here received, do but inflame,
not satisfy desires, and I am willing to part with them, lest they should make
me loath to depart to him that gave them: Meretricius est amor plus amicum,
quam sponsum diligere.

Lastly, Elysium of the Poets, Catones, Scipiones, and Scaeuolas, but Abraham,
Isaac, and Iaeob: The Patriarks my Fathers, the Saints my Brothers, the Angels
my Friends, my wife, children, kindred and servants that are gone before me,
and do there attend me, looking and longing for my ariuing there. Therefore
with David I will say, Lord, when shall I come and appear before thee? Like as
the Heart pants for the water brooks, so pants my soul for thee, O God. I
had rather be a doorekeeper keeper in thy house, then dwell here though in
chambers of pleasure.

Touching the second general Division. II.
The fears or joys that death brings.
NAturally men fear Death, The fears of death.
because it ends being, which Nature would preserve: Rachel mourned for her
children and would not be comforted, because they were not. When Moses Rod was
turned into a Serpent, it was fearful. But when God bids, Fear not to take
it up, it may well be handled. Timeat mortem qui Deum non timet, sed si sperare
desideras, desine timere. It is well said, Pompa Mortis magis terret quam mors
ipsa. Groans, convulsions, and a discouloured face show death terrible. But
that Philosopher is not to be followed, who to prepare himself the better for
death, set forth death most fearfully: nor yet that Emperor to be praised,
who so little esteemed of death, that he dyed in a complement.

Fear of death kills us often, where death it self can do it but once. The
Philosophers thought, that if death (as bad as men count it) were not mingled
with bitterness, men would run to it with desire and indiscretion. Ergo
mortem concupiscentes, and timentes, aeque obiurgat Epicurus. It is true, life
would not willingly be troubled with too much care, nor death with too much
fear. Fears betray, cares trouble those succors that reason would yield to
both. Multi ad fatum venere suum, dum fata timent.

Fears multiply evils, Faith diminishes them: yet most men wish, vt mors
potius semel incidat, quam semper impendeat, because nothing is so painful as
to dwell long under the expectation of some great evil.

Conscience of dying, gives the right sense of death, and the true science of
living. For by death absoluitur anima, resoluitur corpus, gaudet quod
absoluitur, quod resoluitur, non sentit. Therefore said the Heathen man, Non
nego poenas esse quibusdam post mortem, sed quid ad mortem, quod post mortem
est? If there be any fears in death, says a wise man; Quare iuuenes non
timent fieri senes? But it is the nature of fear to make dangers greater,
helps, less then they are.

When Anaxagoras had word brought him that his dear and only son was dead:
Scio, said he, me genuisse mortalem. The sons condition, satisfied the
fathers passion without more words. He can never be at ease, nor live
contentedly, that lives continually in fear of death. Nil in morte metuamus,
si nihil timendum vita nostra commisit. There is no such gentle remoouall of
all life's discontents, as a quiet death.

He that knows not how to end his time, has lost all his time. Nescire mori
miserrimum. Socrates de morte disputabat vsque ad ipsam. When Otho and Cato had
prepared all things for their death they settled themselves to sleep: when they
awaked, and found themselves upon the stroke of execution, all they said, was,
Vita supplicio data est, mors remedio. Cruel tyrants have been told to their
faces, that their threats of death, were promises of life. Their swords were
favors to the sufferer. Mortal wounds made them immortal. Viuere non potest,
qui mori non audet. Though it be true, that it is in vain to fear what we
cannot shun, and fear of death, as a tribute due to Nature, is a weakness:
yet fears be not always ill symptoms before death, nor in death: at that
instant nature will reluct for love sake to keep still her being. But grace
thus distinguishes of being. To the wicked the best thing of all were not to
have been. Non nasci optimum. His next best were to live long. It was ill with
him that he was borne, worse, that he must dye: for he not being sure of a
better, would feign be sure of this. Conscious to himself that this dying
life, will bring him to a living death. His hope is no longer then his breath.
His word is Dum spiro, spero; he flutters inter mortis metum, and vitae
tormentum: viuere nolit, and merinescit. With good men it is otherwise, to them
the best thing of this life is to have been, for this leads the way ad
beatitudinem patriae, to the fruition of their faith. Quid huius viuere est,
says he, sed dijs mori. His word is Cum expiro, spero: his hopes faint not,
when his breath fails him. Patienter viuit and delectabiliter moritur. To this
man, mori qua^primum is his rather: for that ends misery, and begins felicity.
There is no man so valiant as the believer. Therefore he says unto his soul,
Why art thou cast down, O my soul? Why art thou so disquieted within me?
Wait on God.

Soul and Soul are differenced in dying, as well as living. The difference of
souls as well in dying as living.
The Atheist dares not die for fear of non esse. The ill liver dares not die,
for fear of male esse. The doubtful conscience dares not die, nesciendo;
whether he shall be, not be, or be damned.

Only the good man dares and desires to die, he is assured of his hope, his
hope is full of immortality. I am thy salvation, says his Savior: to the
other theend of these present miserable miseries, is the beginning of worse,
and such as death it self cannot terminate: for that would be happiness
enough; if they had but hope, there would be an end at last: the greatest
pleasure they would desire, is, the act of death, so that might end their
sorrows: but their conscience will not let them lie, or flatteringly persuade
them: Adueniet tandem quae non sperabitur hora.

This they know, and grieve to think, that Tophet is prepared for the bad, and
Paradise for the good. As the tree falls, so it lies: and as death leaves
thee, so judgment shall find thee: he that lives ill, seldom dies well.
Live well, and you cannot but die well: practice well doing, and you shall have
the comfort of well dying.

Sed quam amarum erit hoc tempore corporis and animae separatio? Body and soul
parting.
We see old acquaintance cannot part without tears. Quid facient intime
familiares, quales sunt corpus and anima, quae ab ipso vtere ita iucundissime
vixerint? If the Ox loweth when his fellow is taken from him that drew the
plough with him, qualem mugitum shall we give when soul and body part?
Siccine separas amara Mors: Siccine separas, says the Book of Kings? The
Spirit at this time may be willing, but the flesh will be loath. Egre amittitur,
quod valde amatur. Faith will assure, God is thy father; but nature will tell
thee, She is thy mother, and thou may not yet leave her. In this conflict
take heed the mothers side prevail not. She will play Naomi's part, persuade
thee earnestly to stay and enjoy the delights of Moab yet a while longer. But
resolve thou with Ruth, to see what entertainment is for thee in Bethleem, for
there thou shall find a Boaz.

In ista hora, every man will make Balaams suite, (for no man would be
miserable, if it were enough to desire to be happy) but such a wish only will
not serve. He must pie viuere, that will secure mori. We all desire to shut up
our last Scene of life, with In manus tuas, Domine, commendo spiritum meum. But
it is not the last words a man vtters that do qualify his Soul. Remember how
in thy life thou have entertained Gods Spirit: for as we used his in this
life, so he will use ours after death. Qualem quisque se fecerit in hac vita,
talem se inueniet exiens ab hac vita.

At this hour what would a man give for the redemption of his soul? but poor
indigent man, never was any so rich that could pay the ransom of his own
soul. A displeased mercy, asks greater satisfaction then thou can give.
Laesa patientia fit furor. Now thou go to give account of thy Stewardship:
that is, temporis amissi, mali commissi, boni omissi. And thy Soul already
knows, in conscientia tua, whither it goes, quando egreditur e corpore tuo.
And although thou can carry nothing else with thee, yet this thou can not
leave behind thee; Which is liber conscientiae tuae, that will tell thee
whither thou go, and what thou shall look for. Tunc quasi loquentia tua
opera dicent; Tu nos egisti. Tua opera sumus, non te deseramus: sed tecum
semper erimus, tecum pergemus ad Iudicium. Man is a great flatterer of
himself, but conscience is always just, and will never chide thee wrongfully.
It always takes part with God, against a man's self. It is Magistratus
domesticus, that will tell what you do at home, and, says the book of
Wisdom, wickedness condemned of her own witness, is ever timorous, and
being pressed with conscience, forecasteth grievous things. Nemo seueriorem
seipso habet iudicem.

If a man will take his aim by the best men that ever dyed. That of David,
Ezechias, yea and of Christ himself (as a man) is able to amaze any man. When
as our Savior Christ at the point of death, said, Father, if it be thy will,
let this Cup pass from me. When David said, Save Lord, for thy mercy sake; for
in death there is no remembrance of thee. And Ezechias wept sore, when he was
bid, Put thy house in order, for thou must die. Si Prophetae, si Apostoli, si
Martyrs, si Christus ipse, was thus troubled at the hour of death: wretched
man that I am, what shall I do? Even as Christ bids me. Be of good cheer,
for I have overcome death. Mors morte redempta est. Now there is advantage in
death: that death which was the wages of sin, is made the reward of
righteousness: and in these forenamed persons it was not death, but the curse
of the Law that went with death, which Christ in our persons, and these other
persons in themselves, feared.

When Christ was to leave the world, and his Disciples to the world, he left
them this word for their learning and their comfort: If you loved me you would
rejoice, because I said, I go to the Father. In my Fathers house are many
dwellings. I go to prepare a place for you, that where I am you may be also.

Now that death has overcome death, and Faith has secured fear: nec me
taedeat viuere, nec timeo mori. What can he fear in Death, whose death is his
hope? Right precious in the sight of God, is the death of his Saints.

See then what makes men willing, or loath to die. Obsecro te Lucili, said
Seneca, cur timeat laborem vir, mortem homo? It is the present condition of men
in this world, that makes them willing, or loath to die. Nor life, nor death,
are alike to all men: some can as willingly leave the world, nay dye, as others
can forbear the Court. And as men differ in their condition, so do they in
their acceptance of Death: some pleasant their lives, as if the world should
always laugh upon them. Et post mortem nulla voluptas. These would do any
thing rather then die. Others live as if they came into the world but to act a
sad man's part and dye, these wish a change, hoping it will be a benefit.
Therefore well said the son of Syrach, O death, how acceptable is thy
remembrance unto him whose strength fails, that is now in his last age, and
vexed with all things: and to him that despaireth and has lost patience! But
contrariwise, O death, how bitter is the remembrance of thee to a man that
lies at rest in his possessions! unto the man that has nothing to vex him,
and that prospers in all things: yea, to him that is yet able to receive
meat! Certainly to this man that thus lives at ease in delicacie with
affluence of all things; (for even to use happiness is as difficult as to
forbear it) to him it is a sad and bitter meditation, to think that death
must take him from all these joys, wherein his heart took pleasure.

O quam amara mors mundum amantibus! Every poor contentment glues his
affections to that he likes. When as the best of this worlds contentments are
but contemptible. If thy heart be set on Heaven, thy soul will have no
pleasure in these low things, look upward. Os homini sublime dedit, coelumque
tueri. The mind contemplating Heaven, walks beyond eye sight, and at so far
a distance discernes God, as if he were at hand, there is his true solace, to
converse with God. Who ever they be that dwell in Contemplation of heavenly
things, go off rich in thoughts, satisfied in their expectation.

For an antidote against Death, hate sin, and the pleasures thereof, then
will death be delightful, nor life doleful: nay, death it self looking thee
in the face, knowing thy heart, will change countenance, look upon thee facie
non horrenda, sed blanda, non terribili, sed amabili. This very day of death.
Dies iste, quem tanquam extremum aliqui reformidant, tibi aterni natalis erit.

The good man's hope is even in death: the world-louer ends both hope and
happiness when he dies.

Plato discoursing unto one, de contemptu mortis, and speaking strangely upon
it, was answered, Fortius loqueris, quam viuis. At ille dicebat non quemadmodum
viueret, sed quemadmodum viuendum esset.

How ever the Contemplation of death pleases, yet the sufferance of death
pinches. A man satisfied that death is nothing but a bridge, to pass him over
to an other shore where life stands, and looks for his landing: yet while he
is upon the Bridge, (which is but a short step betwixt two lives) his
vertiginous brain will grow giddie, and he will before troubled in the passage.

Did not the word Ibis ad Patres, sweeten the contemplation, as did that wood
cast by Moses into the the waters of Marah, turning bitterness into
sweetness: the thought of death (though it be but a gathering to our Fathers)
would be an unpleasing contemplation.

But fears being past, which are but shadows, set off joys the better.
Therefore now to see What joys death brings.
OVt of the bitter came sweet, The joys brought by death.
said Sampson. When we think upon the separation of body and soul, then it
is a sweet contemplation, to consider the conjunction of our bodies and souls
with Christ: which being once made by the bond of the Spirit in this life,
shall never afterward be cancelled. For let death, wild beasts, or birds,
devour and tear the body from the soul, yet neither body nor soul are
thereby severed from Christ. Non curo (says Ignatius) si ferarum dentes me
moluerint modo pura fiam farina Christo. And yet the body thus consumed, lives
not in the grave or belly of the beast, nor yet receives life or sense from the
soul while it is in this seat, until the great Assizes, that general Venite
comes. But then, look what the condition of Christ was in his death, the like
shall be of his members. The body and soul of Christ were severed, as far as
Heaven and the Grave were distant: and yet neither of them were severed from
the godhead, but both existed in his person: so likewise our bodies and souls,
though rent and pulled in sunder millions of miles distant, yet neither of them
is severed or disioyned from Christ our head. Qui praedixit, reuixit, this
serves to work it.

Humane wisdom cannot comprehend this. Weak faith looks for means, and is
put to shifts when she sees means fail. But omnipotency works by
improbabilities and tells us. There is no faith, where there is either means or
hopes. Difficulties and improbabilities are the objects of Faith. Through the
Spirit (says S. Paul) we wait for the hope of righteousness in faith.

Yet in nature we see that in winter season, trees which seem as dead, revive
again in the Spring, because the body, grains and arms of the trees, are
joined to the root, where the sap lies all the Winter, and by means of
conjunction, it conueyes vegitation to all parts of the tree; even so men's
bodies have their winter, when they are turned into dust. Homo arbor inuersa,
cuius Radix in caelis, rami in terra. Their life is hid in Christ with God. Yet
in the day of resurrection, by reason of this mystical conjunction, divine and
quickening virtue shall stream from Christ to his Elect, and cause them to
resurge from the grave, to life eternal. For the head will not be without the
members: where he is, there they shall be also.

It is noted how in that transfiguration, the body of Moses which was hid in
the valley of Moab, appeared in the hill of Tabor, which assures that this body
of ours, lodge it where you will, is not lost, but laid up to be raised in
glory, as it was laid down in corruption. The incineration and dissipation of
this dust, shall have a recollection in that day of resurrection.

In the valley of dead bones, did not the Spirit say to Ezekiel, Prophecy upon
these bones, and say, O ye dry bones, I will cause breathto enter into you; I
will lay sinews upon you, and will bring up flesh, and you shall live?

If any think, The difference betwixt the resurrection of the ungodly and the
just
this Resurge again, which is so wonderful, is not peculiar, but common unto
all, both good and bad, (as good men love not to be happy alone) its truth,
yet, it is not by the same cause, nor to the same end. For the wicked rise by
the power of Christ, to be judged and condemned. But the godly rise by the
virtue of Christ's resurrection, to receive eternal life. Vita mortem
assumpsit, vt mors vitam assumeret.

Therefore they collect truly, who say, that the rotting of our bones is no
death, but a being asleep; and that sleep must needs be sweet, which has
peace with rest, and rests in safety.

Awake then thou that sleep, arise, come and live: he whom thou love,
sleeps, but thou will come to awake him: till when his couch of ease, is his
coffin, the grave his bed, wherein he lies never troubled with dreams or
fancies, what shall become of his body, till it rise again.

I am the resurrection and the life; (says Christ) He that believes, though
he were dead, yet shall he live: the arrest of Death shall not always keep
him. Well said S. Austine, The bodies of Saints shall be raised, tanta
falicitate, quanta felicitate, with as much ease as happiness. Nam mors tantum
intermittit vitam, non eripit; death does not disanul, but discontinue life. By
our rising, we are remitted to our better right, a life which never dies, a
morning which has no Eve nor ending. Me thinks I hear death say of life, as
John the Baptist said of Christ: He that comes after me, is before me. Which
is life.

O sweet word Life. The best Monasyllable in the world. Gods own Attribute.
Deus viuit. And my soul (says Job) shall live, for my Redeemer lives. And is
this life, but the child of this word Death? then blessed also be the word
Death, the mother of life. I will no more call thee Marah, but Naomi; for thou
art not bitter, but sweet; more pleasant, though swifter in thy gate then the
Row or Hind. The Stoike could say, Mors est quae efficit, vt nasci non sit
supplicium. But what says S. John? I heard a voice from heaven, saying, Write,
Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, whose works follow them, they die
no more, death has no more power over them, all tears are wiped from their
eyes.

Compare together the benefits of life and death, and you shall clearly see,
how that death which seems to dispossess us of all, puts us in possession of
more the^ that al.

Per varios casus, per tot discrimina reru^
Tendimus in Latium, seeds vbi fata quietas
Ostendunt. --
It is but being which we have by Nature, or by Birth; our better being is by
Grace; but our best being is in glory: there we cannot be, till death have
conveyed us thither. Esse naturae est, been esse gratiae, optimum esse gloriae.
Better therefore is our last being by death, then was our first being by birth.
Dicique beatus ante obitum nemo. Birth brought me into the world, but that was
misery, allowing no vacation to sorrows. Ne natalem quidem excipit. For crying
was the first note of my being. Calamitatis futurae propheta. Death carries me
from a world of miseries, to a world of felicities. Dies mortalis est fatalis
Natiuitas. Here I dwell in a house of clay, whose foundation is dust: Death
brings to an habitation made without hands, everlasting in the heavens. Ad
excelsa sublatus, inter felices currit animus, excipitque illum coetus sacer.
Birth brought me to converse, and have commerce with men, death brings me to
have communion with Saints, and fellowship with Angels; yea, to enjoy visionem
illam beatificam. The immediate fruition of God and Christ.

Old father Jacob, when he was told of his son Joseph's power in Egypt, was
not satisfied to hear of his honors, but enquires of his life: intimating
that life to come, is better then all the honors that are in Egypt, or
fortunes that are on earth: nor yet did Joseph's life content him, without being
present with him, and therefore said, I will go down and see him: counting it
better to behold with the eye (and yetmost sins begin and creep in at the
eyes) then to walk in desires. Implying, that the best things that are,
pleasure us not in their being, but in our enjoying them.

What then shall be the joy, The joy soul and die at the meeting.
when soul and body separated for a season, shall meet again in joy, and
mutually enjoy one the other? The sense of this delight and contentment did
well appear in that meeting betwixt Jacob and Joseph, whom mutual loss and
separation for a while, did more endeare each to other.

Intermission of comfort has this advantage, that it sweetens our delight more
in the return, then was abated in the forbearance.

And was Jacob glad to leave his country, the land of Promise, to see his
younger son Joseph, though in Egypt. What then shall be the souls joy to end
a pilgrimage in a strange land, and go to see his elder brother Christ in
heaven, an inheritance more pleasant then that land of Goshen, freed from all
the encombrances of this Egypt? Therefore said S. Paul, I desire to be
dissolved, that I may be with Christ. For this tedious mortality, pleasant it
how man can, will be intolerable, if death do not disburthen it; because long
living so loads us with sin, as the burden thereof tyres every man at last.
It is such an inmate, as will roost in us as long as life affords it
houseroome: nor will it lodge alone, but still one sin will call in another:
but through death, the very body of death, and burden of sin, are both cast
out together.

Since then the life I now enjoy, is beset with death, tends to death, and ends
in death, I will no longer mistake terms, calling that death, which is life;
and that life which is death. Hanc esse mortem, quam nos vitam putamus: Illam
vitam, quam nos pro morte timemus, said Lactantius.

More divinely said S. Austine, Per vitam ad mortem transitus est, per mortem
ad vitam reditus est. Therefore the Pagans did not ill, to celebrate the day of
their death with mirth; and the day of their birth with mourning. For although
the soul be then infused, when man is made; Death the regeneration of the
soul.
yet it is newborn, when man dies. His body being the womb, and death the
midwife, which delivers that to sorrow, this to glory.

The Prophet Jeremy so little ioyed in his birth, that he said, Let not the
day wherein my mother bare me, be blessed.

Quis pauet? quis flet? quis eget? quis errat? Solus (heusortes!) homo sperat,
optat alget, voluit, explorat, queritur. Malorum omnia plena, said a divine
Poer.

But to assure there are joys in death. What says the Scripture unto well
dying men? Rejoice, and lift up your heads, for now your Redemption draws
near.

The third general division. III.
When Death is to be prepared for: and how.
IT was the saying of the divine Philosopher Plato. There is nulla salutar is
Philosophia, The time when.
but perpetua mortis meditatio: and sine ista meditatione tranquillo esse animo
nemo potest. Scipio was wont to say, Mortis meditatio, Is vita sapientis: and
that it was the most honorable Philosophy to study a man's mortality.
Politiques say, Totavita discendum est viuere. But says Seneca; Hoc magis
miraberis, Tota vita discendum est mori. Fools would feign do in the end,
that which wise men do in the beginning, Prepare for their end: but careless
men think, that the signiory and government of times is at their commands, to
do what they list, when they list. We have little power over the present, much
less over the future. Therefore King David cried betimes; Lord, let me know
mine end, and the measure of my days, what it is, and how long I have to live.
All the days of mine appointed time, says Job, I will watch, till my changing
shall come.

Change, the great Master of the world, that has Time for his Agent, abuses
many men with the hope of time. It is true, Time is a servant equal to all
men: it holds pace, and flies as fast in idleness, as in business; so as time
well spent, diminishes our time: yet when it is employed in timely preparation,
it lays up time as treasure for a future time, and so is rather a husbanding,
then consuming of time.

He lives in safety that watches his time. Diem perdidimus, said Vespatian. But
in reckoning of time, most men miscast-time, counting that first which is last,
and that last which is first; beginning our account from the day of our Birth,
whereas our deaths day is our first day. For in the account of life, our last
day of life, is the first day to life. We then ceasing to dye, when we leave
to live.

Solebat dicere Fabianus, In tria tempora vita diuiditur, quod est, quod fuit,
quod futurum est, ex his, quod agimus breue est, quod acturisumus, dubium, quod
egimus, certum. Reckon first with time past, and you may make time to come
certain: make your salvation certain, says Saint Paul.

The Scepticks put a fortasse up on all things in the world. But said S.
Austine, there is no one thing in the world to be named, where this word
fortasse had not place, except you speak of death. Hic solum fortasse locum
habere non potest. Death, as it is said of the kingdom of heaven, comes not by
observation. He lives not, that knows where, when, or how he shall dye: yet
noneliues but knows he must dye. Mors omnibus finis, multis reme dium,
quibusdam votum, de nullis melius merita, quam quibus accidit antequam
vocaretur. Therefore said one, dementiae est, it is more then folly not to be
prepared for death. Sed si mors veniens praemeditatur, tunc superatur. The
preparation for death, is the fruition of life. Nemo propter Canos and Rugas
diu vixit: yet never man preserved himself from dying, by forgetting death.
The very Heathens, by natures instinct, provided themselves for death by
sacrifices to their gods.

Frange toros, pete vina, rosas cape, fundere nardo;
-- Ipse iubet mortis te meminisse Deus.
Solomon saying, A fair way of dying well
the day of death was better then the day of birth, inferred that there was a
fair way of dying well: whereunto two things were most requisite.

First, a timely preparation before death. Nam facile sustinet, qui expectat
mortem. Seneca said, Saepe debemus mori, nec volumus; morsmur, nec volumus. We
ought often to prepare for death, and we will not: at last we dye indeed, and
we would not. In hoc errore omnes versamur, quod non putamus, nisi senes ad
mortem vergere, citamur nec sensu, nec aetate. Mors quo facilius obrepat, sub
ipsovitae nomine latet.

If you intend preparation for death, you must avoid all procrastination,
Nescis enim quid serus vesper vehat. This vox Coruina, that always cries,
Cras, cras, couzens many a man, making him perdere hodiernum, trusting upon to
morrow, says Tibullus. I am mala finissem letho, sed credula vitam spes alit,
and melius cras fore semper ait, but trust not to that: Ille sapit quisquis,
Posthume, vixit Heri. Solomon says, Ne glorieris in crastinum, nescis enim
quid superventur a pariet dies.

By deferring, we presume upon that we have not, and neglect that we have. Quod
in manu fortunae positum est, disponimus; quod in tua est, dimittis. Which made
the Heathen Poet, diuino furore instinctus, utter hoc salutare carmen, Optima
quaeque dies miseris mortalibus aui, prima fugit.

Therefore, noli tardare, delay not thy prepare for death, til thou feel the
approaches of Death. Recordare nouissimum, and non peribis in aeternum. Do the
work of of the day in die suo. No man can promise himself a morrow.

Fleres, si scires vnum tua te^pora mensem:
-- Rides cum non fit, forsitan, vna dies.
Every man has his day. Est and dies hominis, and dies Domini. When man's day
is past, then Gods day comes.

The case therefore of those men is mostvnhappy, who after forty or fifty
years of days, in their misspent time (for it was not vita, but tempus) and
now ready to die, are even then to learn how to dye, when they are in the Act
of dying. Quae tam stulta mortalitatis obliuio, inde velle vitam incoare, quo
pauci perduxerimus?

It was a sweet speech, and might well have become an elder body, which a young
innocent child used lying in extremity of sickness: Mother, what shall I do,
I shall dye, before I know what death is, I pray you tell me what is death,
and how I should dye? Certainly, multum interest, peccare aliquis nolit, an
nesciat. But there is nil miserius morienti, quam nescire mori; nay says one,
Tolerabilior est non esse, quam nescire mori.

Since then it is a thing as well natural, as necessary for a man to dye,
Quisquis ad summum peruenit, ad extremum properat. It is no thanks to a man to
pay that willingly, which he must do of necessity. But in paying of this
debt, wisdom counsels thee two things:

First, to consider the time when.

Secondly, the means or manner how.

For the time, seek not death in the error of thy life. Remember thy Creator
in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come not, nor the years
approach wherein thou shall say, I have no pleasure in you. Before the silver
cord be loosed, or the golden ewer broken. Before the Almond tree flourish,
and the Grasshopper be a burden. Before the keepers of the house shall tremble,
the strong men bow, the grinders cease. They wax dark that look out by the
windows, and the daughters of music be brought low.

Old Barzillai, being in this case, refused all the pleasures of a Kings house,
though he was gently entreated by King David.

Age, or sickness, will make a man unapt either to compose, or dispose
himself to death. Tunc tibitarda sluunt ingrataque tempora. It is no good time
then to prepare to die, when it is a burden to live.

Thy best health affoords but time good enough for this business. Therefore
dedicate not all thy time to business, for that as well as sloth, may rob thee
of thy time.

Do you desire some signs of death, Three signs of approaching death.
before you take this course? Tres sunt mortis nuntij, casus, infirmitas,
senectus. Casus dubia infirmitas grauia, senectus certa denunciat. Casus
nuntiat mortem latentem, infirmitas apparentem, senectus praesentem.

When man begins to be sick, his senses are wholly busied about the pains of
the disease.

I am vigor and quasso languent in corpore vires. The Physician is then
conferring with thee of the state of thy body. The Lawyer is consulted with,
about thy worldly state. The Minister touching thy souls health. Thy friends
are then unwelcome, strangers trouble thee, visites, offend thee: thy own
servants cannot please thee, other men's discourses tire thee, to speak thy
self spends thee, and to be silent grieves thee, not to be told how thou
do, vexes thee, to be told how ill thou art, discomforts thee; but it most
of all afflicts thee, to see thy wife, children and kindred, weeping and
lamenting by thee.

Thus miserably we poor men at this time are distressed and distracted, made
unfit for any thing, when, as God knows, a due preparation to death, requires
all the faculties and strength, of a sound, perfect, and whole man.

Every man naturally, when he comes near the goal of death, even for some
intrinsicall cause, though unknown to himself, is then weary of himself,
entertaines life with a tedious dislike. Tunc iniucunda est rei poenitendae
recordatio, distasting every thing, neglecting the very thought of all humane
affairs.

Nec iuueni lusus qui placuere, iuuant. But then thinks, O how am I straightened
till it be accomplished!

This should have been done when strength of understanding served. Nam serum
est tunc viuere incipere, cum desinendum est.

The little Be, so soon as flowers spring, goes abroad, viewes the gay
diapry, and the diversity of the flowerie fields, suckes the choicest of them,
fraights her thighs, carries to her hiue, makes a cuurious comb, and so by
times hoards up honey in Summer against the Winter. Why is the winter harder to
the Grasshopper, then to the Ant? only prudencie and imprudency differs them.

Think not thou the winter of thine age, a time fit enough for this work.
Mauna must be gathered in the morning; it is too late to prepare when time is
past before you begin.

Repentance also begun in the time of sickness, Repentance when to be
practiced.
is commonly as sick as the party, yielding then, when it cannot resist, and
then preparing and repenting, when all other helps and hopes fail.

Sound repentance and fit preparation must both be timely, not then forsaking
sin, when sin forsakes us; and wishing time, when time is past. Omnis motus
naturalis velocior est in fine, the end of time, affoords little time.

Holy Job tells us, If thy bones be full of the sins of thy youth, they will
lie down with thee in the dust. Sed mortantur ante mortem vitia, and ad
iudicium non sequantur. When death has folded up thy days, all opportunity
is past. The Cock crowed, but that Gallicinium, so soft a voice could not
awake thee. Therefore Signicinium, louder music, must end the Scene.

It is a great mass of sins that we have wound up, in the days of a long
misled life; it will ask long time to untwist this bottom; nay, to rauell it
out in many ends, will ask great labor. Great labor, and little time, suite
not: Therefore work while it is day, The night comes, when no man can work.
Use not time, as ill husbands do their Farms, let their Lease run out,
before they be e're the better by their Farms.

Few and evil are the days of the longest lived man, and yet to every man
there is a Triduum lent, the space of three days at least: but sleep not
vsque Quatriduum, lest it be said, He has lain four days in the grave: Iam
foetet.

Flatter not thy self by the thieves example, who repented, but in illa hora.
That is not set for imitation, but to keep from desperation.

It is a strange thing to see, that old men will not see death, though it be
before their faces; nor young men, though it stand at their backs. The old
gray headed man to seem young, had colored his hair black; but the devil
told him he would not be so cozened.

No^ omnes fall is, scit te Proserpina canum. The common fashion is to put men
in mind of their death, when we doubt they cannot live. Till the Physician
finds some ill symptoms, the patient may not be dis heartened with the name
of death. But he is the good Physician of my soul, that tells me of death,
when he sees me live in sin.

There is not any man so wicked, who with his good will would die in his sins;
yet most so live, as if they believed permission were the Article of their
faith all their life long: and the Article of remission of sins, were
reserved till the point of death.

But terrible will death be, when the dying man with grief for opportunity
lost, will repent that ever he lived, and count it happiness enough, if then
he might die and be no more. But that will not be, quia Mors est sine morte.
Semper viuit, semper occidit, sed nunquampraeoccidit.

That which ends all, is without all end; Remember the parable of the five
foolish virgins, and the fair warning Christ gives: Be ye ready, for the
Son of Man comes at an hour when ye look not. Ecce venio sicut fur; that
is, when you sleep best, and think least of him.

Now as it is wisdom to be prepared for death; Settlement in Religion, the
best preparatiue for Death.
so if you will die with peace of conscience, be well resolved in point of
Religion before you die, never any man was a looser by believing; for faith is
ever recompensed with glory; while thou live it is not amiss to make doubts:
but thou shall find it a fearful thing, to die in doubt; and the happiest
thing under heaven, to be well assured, and clearly resolved in the truth of
thy faith before thou die. This done, then be of good cheer, for thou shall
hear Christ say unto thy sick soul, as he said unto the sinful woman, Go
in peace, thy faith has saved thee. And let all conceited humanists remember
what their master Aristotle said when he died: Anxius vixi, dubious morior. O
Ens entium, miserere mei.

Now of the way to die well.

Non est res magna viuere: Hoc omnes faciunt: sed pauci been moriuntur. Et illi
Mors grauis iucumbit, qui notus omnibus, ignotus moritur sibi. Man is ready to
die before he lives, and therefore lived in the world, that he might die to
the world, his years come to an end, as a tale that is told: his days deceive
him, for they pass as a shadow by Mooneshine, then appearing longest, when
they draw nearest to an end. We that now live, live by death; for had not
Christ dyed, we had not lived. Therefore says S. Paul, My life is not dear
unto me, so as I may finish my course with joy.

Do you desire to live a long time: the son of Sirach says, A man that is
made perfect in a short time, fulfils a long time. Et vita ipsa, si scias vti,
longa est. Vir bonus bis viuit, says the Spaniard. Am^liat at at is spatium
sibi vir bonus, hoc est viuere bis, vita posse priore frui He lives twice, that
leads his first life well. Alexander had a good account of his age, reckoning
by victories, not by days. So should Christians count their days by every
sin they conquer in that day. Numbering of days, says Saint Austine, is not
numerus dierum quis sit, but, qui sit.

Tres sunt dies hominis, says Saint Hierom, Dies Conditionis, dies
Conuersionis, dies Resurrectionis. One day certifieth another, says David.
Time lent us, flies away in the time that is lent, every moment coming, being
the death of that is past: But weigh well every moment, for it is of so great
moment, as that upon it depends eternity of time to come.

Unto dying well, there are three things most requisite. Three things requisite
to dying well.


First, to be often meditating upon death.

Secondly, to be dying daily.

Thirdly, to dye by little and little.

Often meditation of Death, The first step to dying well.
brings you to die in ease, alleuiates pains, expels fears, eases cares,
cures sins, corrects death it self. Quo modo non morimur, cum viuitur
mortuis? we live with so many deaths about us, that we cannot but often
think of dying. Every humor in us engenders a disease enough to kill us, so
that our bodies are but living graves, and we die, not because we are sick,
but because we live, and when we recover sickness, we escape not death, but
the disease.

Do then as the Preacher counsels; what you have to do, that do quickly;
For in the grave, whither thou go, there is neither work, nor discourse,
nor travail, nor wisdom, nor conversation, nor fruition of any thing; all is
entombed in silence, darkness ouershadowing it.

Measure not life, spatio, sed actu, because life is ordained for Action, not
for fruition. If thou have any good to do for the Church, the Commonwealth, or
thy Friends, do it quickly. Have thou much goods laid up in store? make thee
friends with thy Mammon, but sing not a requiem to thy soul; say not vainly,
Viuamus dum viuimus, sors fortuna vt volet, ordinet: vita iam in tuto est.
Remember Hac nocte: know, that after the day of vanity, comes the night of
Judgment: then both light and delight go out together. Sadly and suddenly
shall thou find all worldly pleasures turned into waking dreams: Et quae
parasti, cuius erunt? All the towers in the air that thou have built, Vno ictu
prosternentur.

On the other side, do thou eat the bread of carfulness, and drink the
water of wearisome affliction? Here is Manna, bread from heaven, and water
after which non sities.

There is no such cordial to comfort cares, or temper sorrows, as often and
seriously to think of death, and to be acquainted with it betimes; Priuacie
with death, a sovereign cordial against death.
for through acquaintance, death will leese his horror: like unto an ill face,
though it be as formidable as a Monster; yet often viewing will make it
familiar, and free it from distaste.

It is said that Philostrates lived seven years in his tomb, that he might
be acquainted with it against his bones came to lie in it. Some Philosophers
have been so rapt in this Contemplation of Death and Immortality, that they
discourse so familiarly and pleasingly of it, as if a fair death were to be
preferred, before a pleasant life.

This is well for Natures part, Where the power of death lies.
and Moralists think it enough for their part, but Christians must go
further, and search deeper. They must search where the power of death lies:
They shall find that the power of every particular man's death, lies in his
own sins, that death never hurts a man, but with his own weapon: it always
turns upon us some sin it finds in us.

The sting of death is sin. Pluck out the sting, death cannot hurt. Quid
huius viuere est, diu mori? Dye often, and you shall be sure to dye well.

The second step to dying well, The second step.
is to dye daily. Morior, ne moriar, I dye daily, says S. Paul. Singulos dies,
singulas vitas putae; qui enim ^mnes dies tanquam vitam ordinat, crastinum nec
optat, nec timet. The old saying is as good, Do that every day, which thou
would do the same day that thou dyest. Bonum est consumere vitam ante
mortem: Make that voluntary, which is necessary, and yield that quickly as a
gift, which you must pay as a debt at last. Did men know that death were only
an end of life, and no more: every man for his own ends would be a disturber
of the worlds peace while he lived, and seek to make his own but when he
dyed. He that dies daily, seldom dies deiectedly: so he that will live when
he dies, must dye while he lives. The widow that lives in pleasure (said Saint
Paul) is dead while she lives. Live holily and you shall die happily. Studeto
talem esse in vita qualem velis reperiri in morte.

A living man is subject to a double death: Two sorts of death, where to every
man living is subject.
The one natural, the other spiritual. Natural death does but separate the
body from the soul: But the spiritual death separates the soul from God. Of
all other, it is the most desperate state of life to live naturally, and to be
dead spiritually: Thou have a name to live, but thou art dead, said Saint John.
but of the Prodigal child returned from his evil ways, it is said, This my
son was dead, but is now alive.

We count it a fearful thing for a man to be author of his own death. A
sinful life slayes the soul, and so while we live, we kill or lose our better
life. The commandment that says, Thou shall dee no murder, specially forbids
the murdering of our own souls: but certainly that which depriues us of our
better life, makes of all other the worst death.

It is therefore a holy wisdom for a man to let his sins go before him.
Moriantur ante te vitia. They to die actually, thou here virtually: and so to
live, that when thou art to die, thou have nothing to do but die. Atchieuement
of riches, pleasures, honors, have been painful; yet if these things leave
not us by accident, we leave them by death, and at our death we shall plainly
tell them, as Job said, Miserable comforters are you all.

If life delight, then use it, yet so, as a Traveler does his Inn, for a
night and away, and in thy journey follow not the common tracke. Nam ad Deum
faciens iter, per trita si itur, longius abitur. But do as the doubtful
passenger, ask questions of every one you meet, that can set you in your
right way. Herein be as great a questionist as were those religious Ladies of
Rome, who never let Saint Hierome rest for questions, which was the readiest
way to heaven. If a man would but compare the Forenoone of his age with the
Afternoon, how long the one is and how short the other is, every man would be
dying daily. Palmarios posuisti dies. The longest liver has but a handful of
days. Life it self is but a circle, always beginning where it ends.

Erat, quando non erat; sed erit. Time was, when man was not. But how late a
beginning soever man had, yet after death he shall be sure never to see end.
With the Ancient of days there are no days: And the time shall be, when time
shall be no more.

There be two common errors which deceive most men: Two common errors.
First, that a man enters not into eternal life, till he dies: when as his
calling here begins his life eternal. To Zacheus (Christ said) This day is
salvation come unto thy house.

Faith preuents time, and makes things future, present. The godly man that has
his present life hid with Christ in God, so lives here, as if his conversation
were in heaven, carrying himself not only honestly, ciuilly and humanely; but
beyond natural condition, his life seems super-humane, divine and spiritual.

The second error is that howeuer a man lives, yet if at last he seem to die
well, then, all is well, and his soul is sure to be saved: this is a bold and
a dangerous conceit; for though Misery be the object of Mercy, and Hope the
miserable man's god; yet humane life has not a greater friend, nor many times a
greater foe, then Hope.

Many would dye, did not hope sustain them: more have dyed, flattered with
vain hope. Whosoever hopes too much, cozens himself at last. Be not deceived, God
is not mocked: not every one that says, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven. In this mortal life enter into the first degree of life
eternal or thou may die eternally, with Lord have mercy upon us in thy
mouth. But have thy part here in the first Resurrection, which is from sin
to Grace: and then thou shall enjoy the second Resurrection, which is from dust
to Glory.

The third step to well dying, To die by little and little, the third step.
is to die by little and little Tota die mortificamur. Naturally we are every
day dying by degrees. The faculties of our mind, the strength of our bodies,
our common senses every day decaying paulatim.

He that uses this course, every day to dye by little and little, to him let
death come when it will, it cannot be either terrible or sudden. If we keep
a Courser to run a Race, we lead him every day over the place to acquaint
him by degrees with all things by the way; that when he comes upon his speed,
he do not start or turn aside for any thing he sees: So let us enure our
souls and then we shall run with boldness the race that is set before us.

To die by little and little, is first to mortify our lesser sins, and not
to say with Lot, Is it not a little one? We may not wash our hands from crying
and from bloody sins, and yet hug in our bosom some beloved and Herodian
sin. Certainly great sins will never be conquered, if little sins be
cherished. Saint Cyprian writing consolatory Epistles, to the Martyrs of his
time, told them that he that once has overcome death in his own person, does
daily overcome him in his members: if you mortify the members of your flesh by
little and little, you will not fear the cruelty of any exquisite death the
Tyrant can devise.

There be a sort of little deaths, as sickness of body, troubles of mind,
loss of friends, and the like: use these rightly in their kind, and you may
make them kindly helps to dying well.

The right way to bring any thing to a good end, is to proceed by degrees. God
himself made nothing absolute at first. This great God loves to have degrees
kept degreeingly: to grow to greatness is the course of the world, so by
little and little to go out of the world, per gradus, not per saltum, is the
way to Heaven. Let a man go out of the world, as he came into the world, which
was, first by a life of Vegetation, then of Sense, afterward of Reason. David
prescribes us this order when he says, Doce me and duce me, Domine. He will
not runnetill he be taught to go. Teach me to do thy will, and lead me
into the land: What land is that? There is terra quam terimus: land on earth,
which yields us all pleasures, that is not it. There is terra quam gerimus,
refined earth, beautified bodies which we bear about us, nor is this it. There
is, terra quam quaerimus: the glorious land of promise, that is the land we
seek. Into this land, duce me, Domine.

For the manner of dying.
AMongst men it is a matter of chief mark, the manner of a man's death. All
men, as men, die naturally; as Christians, they should die religiously. The
good man equally can die, or live, for he knows if he live: God will protect
him, if he dies, God will receive him. The Prophet David in a Contemplation of
Death, ingeminates the word, saying. Domine Domine; exitus Mortis. The issues
of Death belong to thee.

A good man by his good will would die praying and do as the pilgrim does, go
on his way singing, and so adds the pain of singing, to that of going. Yet by
this Surplus of pain, vnwearies himself of pain. But some wretches think
God rather curious, then they faulty, if a few sighs, with a Lord have mercy
upon us, be not enough at the last gasp.

There is no spectacle in the world so profitable, or more terrible, then to
behold a dying man: to stand by, and see a man dismanned. Curiously did
thou make man in the lowest part of the earth (says David:) but to see those
elements which compounded made the body, to see these divided, and the man to
be dissolved is rufull. So dependant is the life of man, that it cannot want
one element. Fire and Air, these fly upward. Water and Earth, they sink
downward. So living man, becomes a dead carkase.

Seneca thought a man might choose his own death, which was some ease to him.
Quemadmodum nauim elegam nauigaturus, and domum habitaturus: Ita mortem vtique
qua sum exiturus e vita. But better says another, Stulte haec cogitantur:
vitam alijs approbare quisquam debet, mortem vero sibi.

But since it is so great a matter to die, so necessary to die well, so
dangerous to die ill: Let your life be an acting of death.

Certainly Death has great dependancie on the course of a man's life. There
be many that choose rather to die quickly, then to live long sickely. Some
that will inuit Death to do them the kindness to take them soon out of the
world, counting a short death, the happiest hour of a man's life. And for this
(says Tully) a man is most beholding to Nature. Quod vnum introitum ad vitam
dedit, exitus vero multos. Sed non sic itur ad astra. Christians know better
ways, as how to live in grace, that they may die in peace. And to whom this
grace is given, for him glory is reserved, says Saint Paul. Many a good man is
sore troubled to see men of the best lives, to have distempered and perplexed
ends. Some rauing, some despairing, some dying suddenly, and seldom have any
so bitter draughts, as those whom God loves best.

It is fit therefore to take notice of the causes that be natural. Despair in
dying, may arise as well from weakness of nature, as from trouble of mind: but
in neither case can this prejudice him that has lived well. Mark the
righteous, and behold the perfect man, for the end of that man is peace.

Rauings, and other strange passions, are many times rather the effect of the
disease, then moving from the mind. For upon deaths approaches, choler fuming
to the brain, will cause distempers in the most patient soul. In these cases
the fairest and truest judgment that can be made, is, that sins of
sickness, occasioned by violence of the disease in a patient man, are but
sins of infirmity, and not to be taken as ill signs or presages: I will not
despair in respect of that man's impatient dying, whom the worm of conscience
had not troubled, or devoured living.

David in this case, the better to make his way, prayed, and cried, Lord, spare
me a little, O spare me, that I may recover strength, before I go hence and
be no more.

Indeed to Ezekias some years of days were lent, but we are not worthy of
that favor, we must time it as we may, and be content to live and die at
uncertainties.

As a sick man hearkens to the clock, so let us watch Death. For sudden
coming of death, finding a weak soul unprepared, makes it desperate, leaves
it miserable.

Sudden death of it self is not therefore evil, What death is to be counted
sudden.
because it is sudden: but because it may take us away suddenly, our souls
unprepared. The good man never dies unprepared, because his perseverance in
goodness, is a providence against sudden death.

If a man be always prepared, and have set all even betwixt heaven and his
conscience; sudden death is but a quicker passage to heaven, and is not to be
accounted a sudden death, but a sudden departure, because it came not unlooked
for.

Though the righteous be prevented by Death (says the Book of Wisdom) yet
shall he be at rest, because he has made his peace beforehand. His
departure is no misery, for his hope is full of eternity. Ezekiel the Prophet
(so often styled Son of man) to him God says, I take away from thee the
delight of thine eyes, (which was his wife) with a stroke suddenly, and yet
thou shall not weep. Let not the present pleasures of this life allure thee,
nor the cares thereof possess thee, and sudden death cannot surprise thee.
Improuisa nulls Mors, cui prouida Vita. But if a man do not prepare to die, he
may live seven years in a consumption, and yet die a sudden death. For any
time is sudden to him that is unprepared.

They take their mark amiss, who judge a man by his outward behavior in his
death. If you know the goodness of a man's life, judge him not by the
strangeness of his death. When a man comes to be judged, his life, and not
the manner of his death, shall give the evidence with him, or against him. Many
that live wickedly, would seem to die holily, more for fear to be damned,
then for any love to goodness. To these men there is malum triplex, quod manet
in septima. Which is Horror in exitu. Dolor in transitu. Pudor in conspectu
Dei. If my life please God, I am sure my death shall please me: for he that
lives well, is sure to die well: but he that lives ill, is not sure to d^e
well. Vitae praesentis finem, talem esse oportet, quale futurae est principium.

It is a great happiness to die in ease. Quis tam facile, quando vult, dormit,
as he that lays down his life in peace. Yet a good man does not always die
in the exercise of his goodness. But as a wise man when he sleeps, leeses
not his knowledge; no more does a good man his graces, though he die in
distemper. For habitudes of goodness do not then leave him, though they
cannot then do their office for him.

But the vulgar opinion, if a man die quietly, and go away like a lamb (which
in Consumptions and dull diseases, all men do) then sure he goes to Heaven.
But if he die distempered, and of frantic behavior (which happens to many
through extreme inflammations) then sure he goes to hell, is a judgment from
nature, not of Religion; and in this case trust not Natures judgment, for it
is arted with subtilties of physic.

Serenitie, joy and peace in a dying man, is a hopeful behavior: yet we see
the clear stars that are so delightful to behold, bring forth their Rays
by sparkelings, and dartings, as though they were delivered of their light by
travel and hard assayes. So good men in their death, have great variety of
accidents, many languors, many agonies, many iterated endeauours, travailing of
Death, as in a Childbirth. But when the passages of the soul lie open to God
without opposition of worldly cares; then it peaceably makes egresse with a
sweetness, and without disturbance.

Natural causes have their operations; but it is the God of nature that
commands them. It is Gods property sometimes to work supernaturally by nature.

But trust to this, believe aright and live as you believe, and you shall be
sure to die in safety: and the way to end life quietly, is to render it
willingly.

Let no contentment of the world so fix you to the world; as to make you
desire longer life. Saepe in hoc esse, Been, non diu. Shortness of life is no
unhappiness. Citius mori vel tardius, adrem non pertinet; been mori aut male,
adrem spectat.

The Book of Wisdom says, He was suddenly taken away, least ill should
alter his understanding, or deceit beguile his soul.

Had present death been evil, or long life good, Cain had been slain, and
Abel had suruiued. But Death commonly begins first, where God loves best. His
soul, says the son of Sirach, pleased God; therefore hasted he to take him
away.

We see the best men live not longest. And indeed it were injurious to wish
that goodness should hinder any man from happiness. He that lends good men
to the world, owes them a better turn then to let them live long in the world.

One man seems to die casually, another violently, both by destiny, all men
by Decree.

Que^ dederat cursum natura, peregi, said the Poet. But the Divine tells us,
though Moses dyed upon one Hill, Aaron upon another Hill: yet both where they
might see the land of Promise.

How familiarly did Moses hear of Death, when there was no more betwixt God
and him, But, Moses go up and dye?

With such a sociable compellation are good men invited to Death, as to a Feast.

Nec mihi Mors grauis est
posituro morte labores.
-- Mors mihi merces erit.
The assurance of life after Death.
ALthough my flesh be eaten with worms, Assurance of life after death.
these worms turned to dust, this dust blown through the earth, yet after
thou have turned all to destruction: Again thou say, Come again you
children of men. Redemptor meus, is the word of assurance, My Father, and your
Father, says the Gospel. Meum and tuum, are words of Assurance to men's souls,
though in men's states they make all Controversies. I know that my Redeemer
lives. How do I know it? not by Opinion, but by Faith. Fides non creditur,
sed cernitur. Things are not so, because we are persuaded they are so: but
because they be so, therefore we are so persuaded. The woman with child,
knows she is with child, when she feels it stir lively: So the Spirit of
God assures our spirit, when we feel his Spirit in us.

Holy Job says, Though after the skin worms destroy the body yet in my
flesh I shall see God for my self, and mine own eyes shall behold him, and
not an others.

Which numerall Identity gives certainty, that this soul of mine,
impersonated anew, and so inanimating my body again, shall give a new being,
and a better being unto both.

That soul, the lost pearl, which to find a man would have given all that he
had, shall there be found engraven in gold, where as here it was found set but
in clay.

The fourth general division. IIII.
What our last thoughts should be.
AS in greatest extremities, good Physicians leave drugges, and minister only
Cordials: so deal by thy soul when death approaches, cast away all worldly
cares, entertain only thoughts that will animate thy weak body, and refresh
thy thirsty soul, as did that dew of Hermon, falling upon the Hill of Sion:
nor will I fear how this body of mine shall appear an other day. For I am
promised by him that will perform, it shall not be found naked: But this
covering of flesh being cast off, I shall take this body again clothed with
glory, as with an other garment.

This does Saint Paul most elegantly and divinely express, saying: We know,
that if our earthly house of this Tabernacle be destroyed, we have a building
given of God, that is, a house not made with hands, but eternal in the
heaueus. For therefore we sigh, and desire to be clothed with our house,
which is from heaven: Because, that if we be clothed, we shall not be found
naked. For indeed, we that are in this Tabernacle, figh and are burdened,
because we would not be unclothed, but clothed upon, that immortality might
be swallowed up of life. And he that has created us for this thing, is God,
who also has given us the earnest of his Spirit. Therefore we are always
bold, though we know that whilst we are at home in the body, we are absent
from the Lord. For we walk by faith, and not by sight. Nevertheless, we are
bold and love rather to remove out of the body, and to dwell with the Lord. 2.
Cor. 5.

This is so promising and so sweet, as it seems, to transport a man alive from
earth to Heaven. Hic in via es, sed illic eris in Patria. Therefore bait not
too long upon pleasures by the way. All the while I lived, said a good man, I
was going on my journey toward my country: but now that I am dying, I find
my self near home, I am now come to Mount Sion the City of the living God,
the heavenly Jerusalem.

I will not therefore sit down on this side Iordane, but hasten to the City;
whither when I come, I shall there see my God face to face: Hear my Savior
say, Euge, bone serve. It is my Fathers will to give thee a kingdom.

Is it not enough, that my God is gone up to prepare a place for me, but will
he give me a kingdom also? And shall not I be glad, when God shall come and
fetch me to inthrone me in this kingdom? Absit.

Now me thinks I hear my soul say, Cur non accedis, Domine? Quid moraris? I
have too long dwelt in this sepulcher of earth. And woe is me, that I still
remain in Mesech, and dwell in these tents of Kedar. It is enough, Lord, as
Elias said in the wilderness, Take now away my life, for I am no better then
my Fathers were.

Nay, my soul is now grown so high minded, that she says, Mayor sum, and ad
maiora genitus, quam vt mancipium sim huius corporis. Thus rich in thoughts,
and great in expectation, does divine Contemplation make us.

God has not given a soul to any creature else but Man: Therefore it is but
duty in Man to know the dignity of his Soul, which is so heavenly ambitious,
as it will not let heaven alone, till it may see, as it is seen.

Grauata est anima mea, my body is a burden to my soul. It has had honor
enough to have been so long companion with my Soul: wherefore now as Saint
Hierome said, Egredere, anima, egredere.

The Hermit sitting on his turft, said to his soul, Sexaginta annos
seruiuisti Deo, and nunc mori times? Go out of this Arc of flesh, O my soul,
for I smell the savor of rest. Celeritas nunc in desiderio, mora est.

Though my soul, as a bird, for necessity sake, has been feign to stay
awhile here upon earth; yet willingly would she be soring in the skies. But I
find that ista vita est mihi impedimento ad id, propter quod viuitur.
Specially when I hear my Savior say, Father, I will that those whom thou have
given me, be with me also where I am: That they may behold my glory. To him
that is faithful until death, I will give a Crown of life. Therefore,
desiderio desideraui ergastuli huius egressum, that I may see facie ad faciem,
him whom my soul loves, and to be (Lord) where thou enioyest thy self, and
glorified spirits enjoy thee.

Entertain thy last hours with such like thoughts. Et hatibi dabunt ad
aeternitatem Iter, and in itinere subleuabunt. They will Angelize thy body, and
imparadise thy soul, before thou come into Heaven; yield a sweetness,
far beyond the bitterness of Death.

Certainly, a good soul, thus employing it self, in ista hora, will not
leave the felicity it shall have in such a transmigration from death to life,
for all the joys that life past did ever render her.

Good Saint Austine, in a high speculation, endeavoring to express this
heavenly joy, was asked by a grave old man: Father Austine, quid agis? A man
may as well draw in all the air in the world with one breath, as express to
the life that which thou art now about. Though this ineffable joy cannot be
expressed: yet it is res generosa conari alta, and mente maiora concipere, quam
quae effici possunt.

Therefore this we may do, some way sample that which we can no way express.

Look as a Bird that has been long encaged, then chants it most merrily, when
she gets loose into the open air.

-- Nititur in syluas quaque rediresuas: Or as a sick man, that has wearily
tossed and turned himself in his bed all night, is them comforted when he
sees the day break, and the sun beams guild the morning:

Or as a prisoner that feels his chains heavy upon him, longs for releasement.

-- Liberaque a ferris crura futura velit: So it will be with thy Soul, when
thou shall hear thy Savior say, I am thy salvation. Come unto me thou that
art weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh thee. Poenitentibus and
petentibus pertinet Regnum Coelorum To them that are weary of this durance, and
sue for deliverance, belongs the kingdom of heaven.

Wherefore as a wearied traveler that has passed a long journey (though
perhaps met with some delights by the way) is then gladdest, when he comes
within kenning of his country.

Natale solum dulcedine cunctos ducit. Even so thy soul, after many years
pilgrimage in the wilderness of the world, being come with Moses to Mount
Nebo, and beholding the pleasant land of Canaan from the top of Pisgah, will
then laugh for joy, as does the Horizon, to see the Sun coming as a
Bridegroom out of his chamber. Dilectus meus descendit ad hortum suum, ad
areolam aromatum.

Of this joy, thy dazzled eyes might have some glimpses, when thou wast in
health: but then it was as the blind man's vision in the Gospel, to whose first
sight men seemed to walk like trees. But in this thy new state, thou shall see
clearly men and Angels stand before the Lambs Throne, and hear thy self
invited to the Lambs Supper, where thou shall be brought into the wine seller,
and love will be the banner over thee.

Come then, O Shunammite, stay me with flagons, and comfort me with Apples, for
I am sick of love: Kiss me with the kisses of thy mouth, for thy love is
better then wine; Show me, O thou whom my soul loves, where thou feedest,
where thou lie at noone.

Thus with Solomon in a Canticle, and with David in a Psalm, let be the
Raptures of thy Soul, which, as in trance, shall be caught up to Heaven, as
was Philip by the Spirit, or Abdias by the Angel.

And with an Heroical alacrity, tempered with a gracious humility, give up
thy soul to God, and bid farewell to the world.

It was S. Bernards, I shall never truly joy till I hear this word. Come you
blessed; Nor cease to sorrow till this be past; Go ye cursed.

Dying Saint Stephen, before his eyes were closed, had a faciall fight of his
Savior, looked steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God, and Jesus
standing at the right hand of God. And old Simeon, after he had seen his
Savior, then rejoiced to say, Lord now let thou thy servant depart in
peace, for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation.

Hoc videa^, and moriar. Morior, vt videam. THE RAPTVRE OF THE SOVLE.
RApitur anima, cum coelestia Contemplatur, and contemplando iucundatur. And
because sight increases delight; Therefore Rapture would feign ascend to
vision. But that is a privilege for Saint Paul; It so divinely rauishes, as it
raises in man towering thoughts, irradiates his soul with high apprehensions;
yea, so it eleuates man's soul to God, as it takes him out of himself, to live
above himself. The Soul being thus powerfully attracted by the fair
inducements of so divine delight, She on her party corresponds, and with a
willing assent glides after these attracts: And as a vapor exhaled by the Sun,
she goes out of her self, would willingly draw the body with her, but that
substance is too sad: wherefore she quitts it, as not agil, and spritefull
enough to soar so high.

It is an admirable thing to consider, that the eye of a man, so weak a
creature, should look up every day to heaven, so wonderful in height, and yet
never be tired by the way. But by this I see, that heavenly Contemplation, if
it be strong enough, and not ouer-clogged with earthy thoughts, is able to
carry us with case to heavenly ecstasy: but then there must be application of
the will and understanding, from things sublunarie, to things heavenly. For the
will takes pleasure to perceive the understanding taken into Rapture; and when
as the faculties both of will and understanding, do intercommunicate their
rauishments, then are we sweetly brought into divine ecstasy.

Of this sacred ecstasy, the Seraphical Divines make diuerssorts: One of
Understanding a second of Affection, a third of Action.

Action is well added, for a man is not to be above himself in Contemplation,
and under himself in Conversation.

The first of the three is in Splendore. The second in Feruore. The third in
Labor. The one caused by Admiration, the other by Devotion, the last by
Operation.

In these Raptures, the Fathers who were styled Saints had such a complacency,
as they strove to act this as the way of a new life, sometime before their
Death, insomuch as the Votaries would say: Never was Saint but had Ecstasy and
rauishment of life before his death. They labored by a liquefaction of their
souls into God, to Insoule themselves in God: to put their fowls out of the
natural comportment of the body, and so to live in divine ecstasy, without
living in the body.

Some so lived, as it was doubted whether they were liuing-men dead, or
dead-men living: nay some, with feruency of spirit, were transported into such
Ecstasy, that their souls being wholly conversant in divine Contemplation,
they cared not to afford common assistance to Nature, and so have dyed through
exinanition and want of strength.

Thus did love perform the office of Death. Love is as strong as Death, says
Solomon; nay with them it wrought more then death could do. For death only
performs by effect, that which love operated by affection.

Death did but separate their bodies from their souls. But love separated
their souls from their bodies. In such a trance they report Saint Austine to
say, O God thou only art all mine, when shall I be wholly thine?

S. Bernard to say, What is there in heaven, or what desire I on earth, but
thee, O Lord? Thou art the God of my heart, and my eternal portion, my Soul
is satisfied with nothing, but to be with thee.

S. Ambrose to say, The soul of Jonathan was knit to David; but my soul is
glued unto thee, O Lord.

S. Hierome to say; O my Sauicur, did thou die of love for me? A love more
delorous then death: but to me, a death more lovely, then love it self. I
cannot live, love thee, and be longer from thee.

S. Basil to say, That Jacob, when he had fast hold on God, let him go for a
blessing: but the Shunamite, My soul will not let thee go so. For she now
seeks no more Benedictions of God, but to enjoy the God of Benedictions.

When Sauernius the Indian Saint, was recovering from dying, it is reported he
was heard to say, O my God, do not for pity so ouerioy me, if I must live
still, and have such consolations, take me to heaven. For he that has once
tasted this and thy sweetness, must necessarily live in bitterness.

This is the state of loves life in God, which gives a super-humane Being unto
man, man being yet on earth. So that this ardent love, never satiated here,
having ingrafted me into God by her uniting virtue, makes me now say Viuo ego,
sed non ego: viuit vero in me Christus. My life is hid in Christ with God. And
though my Savior be hidden from my corporal eyes in God, as God was hidden in
him, while he lived here on earth; yet now me thinks I see him face to face.
Visione beatifica, and iugiter reuelata facie, Sponsi gloriam speculando,
transformatur anima de claritate in claritatem: Audet and ipsa loqui, Tota
pulchraes amica mea.

MORTIS EPILOGVS.
QVoniam mors me quotidie expectat, ego mortem quotidie expectabo. But before
thou go, consider well these four things.

1 Vndevenis. 2 Quo vadis. 3 Quides. 4 Quid eris.
Upon enquiry vnde venio, I am told, Peccatores peccatorem me in peccato
genuerunt. Miseri miserum me in hanc lucis miseriam induxerunt. Conceptus
culpa. Nasci miseria. Viuere paena. Mors Angustia. Et quanto est vita mea
longior, tanto est culpa mea numerosier.


This makes me to think, Quorsum commodata est mihi vita humana?

For this only, Ad comparandum vitam coelestem:
Et hoc vult diuina clementia,
Quod vita mea sit breuior,
Vt labor meus sit leuior.


For my, Quo vado.
IT is life's Posy, Vadere, to fade and decay.
Vado tells me I am in transitu,
But it reioyces me to think,
Eo ad Patres.
And this promise comforts,
Sepelieris in aetate bona.
Therefore nec me taedet viuere, nec
timeo mori:
Mihienim Mors seruit in solatium vitae.
Vitam habeo in Patientia,
Mortem vero in desiderio.
Plangam ergo Paulatim dolorem meum,
Et tunc
Oblitus exilij Ibo ad Patriam: nam
Mortua morte reuertitur mihi Christus.
To express, Quid sum.
QVis fando explicare queat?
Puluis and Aer, this I know;
Et in puluerom reuerteris. This is sure.
That homo is Morbidum, putre, cassum;
This every man finds.
Homo de humore liquido; This is our metal,
And the mould is no better, In vtere impuro,
Damnatus antequam natus, that is our Condition.
Semen Abrahae; that's our best Stock.
Dicens putredini; Thou art my Mother,
And to the Worms, You are my Brethren.
So here is our great kindred.
Our dwelling is, Inter pulices and culices, amongst Flies and Fleas. Our
quality is vile and base, lighter then vanity, there is our weight. A thing of
nothing, that is our worth. Et in non hominem vertitur omnis homo. There is our
end.
What then is our being? Somnium and dolor est tota vita hominis, cum crescit
vita, decrescit. Vita ipsa non est vita, sed vmbra mortis and figura vitae.
Flentes nascimur; In labor viuimus; In dolor morimur.


Then certainly Si natus sum plorans,
Si morior plangens,
Nolo egoviuere ridens.
Hoc tantum volo.
Animam meam ornare quae Deo and Angelis
mox praesentenda est in coelis.


Now for, Quid eris. This also I know.
QVodsum, and me nonesse, scio. Sedid esse and nosse desidero.
Number videre Deum, viuere cum Deo,
Esse in Deo, and habere Deum:
Haec est aeterna securitas and secura aeternitas.
This may be admired, but cannot be througly understood:
Yet better understood, then can be expressed.
Therefore to my soul I say not, O Animula, blandula vagula: but,
O Anima Dei insignita imagine,
Decorata similitudine,
Desponsata Fide,
Redempta Sanguine,
Dotata Spiritu,
Deputata cum Angelis,
Quidtibi cum Carne?


But to contemplate Quanta claritas, quanta suauitas, quanta iucunditas maneat
te in illa visione, cum facie ad faciem videbis Christum?

FINIS.
Erratae.
PAge 2. line 2 is redundat. page 18. line 23. fawnes pro fannes. p. 19. l. 2^.
Diseere, pro Desere. p 29. l. 12. the threats, pro for threats. p. 30. l. 6.
animas, but suas, pro animas suas, but p. 30. li. 7. Inde, pro Iudae p. 36. l.
^3. conu ncun^, pro comminuunt. p 38. l. 23. we chinke, pro we would think.
p. 51. l. 23. amaze, pro amuse p. 41. l. 8 amicum, pro annulum p. 74 l. vltima.
Tolerabili^r, pro Tolerabilius. p. 80 l. 4 Signicinium, pro Cygnicinium. p. 92.
l. 7. Palmarios, pro Palmares.


