THE SHEPHEARD'S PARADISE. A COMEDY.

Privately Acted before the Late King Charles by the Queen's Majesty, and Ladies
of Honor.

Written by W. Mountague Esquire.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring at the George in Fleetstreet nere St.
Dunstans Church. 1629.

Gentlemen,
AFter I had seriously considered how to prepare the Reader to receive this
piece, with apprehensions becoming It Is merit; I discerned my self incapable
to contrive an Ornament beyond the noble name of the admired Author: When I
have once entitled it to Mr Walter Mountague, and assured it genuine, I
conceive the Expression imports an Elogie, above the design and reach of the
most alluring Commendation. It Is known, these Papers have long slept, and are
now raised to put on that immortality, which nothing has ^itherto depri^'d them
of, but their concealment. They address themselves to the inspired and more
refined part of men! Such as are capable to be ravished when they find a fancy
bright and high, as the Phoebus that gave it: Such as have experienced those
ecstasies and Raptures, which are the very Genius of Poetry; P^etry its self
being nothing else but a brave and measured Enthusiasm: Such as know, what it
is to have the Soul upon the wing (suspending its commerce with clay) reaching
a room almost as losty as the proper Scene of Spirits, till warmed with divine
flames, it melts it self into numbers as charming as the Harmony of those
Spheres it left beneath it: Such as are thus qualified, may here read upon the
square; Others will find themselves unconcerned.

Happy Pen! that have blessed us with such conceptions as render it equally
impossible to celebrate, and to imitate: Happy Pen! that have given the
little-God a garment, as soft as the down of his Mothers doves.

This is all, my thoughts commissioned me to say; Except it be, that I am

Your humble Servant, T.D.

To his Friend the Stationer, Upon the SHEPHEARD'S PARADISE.
IF names can credit Books or make them sell,
Believe (Friend Stationer) your cause goes well.
The greatest part of Readers will engage,
Upon perusal of your Title Page;
And those that come not in toth' Author's name,
Will from the beauteous Actors (sure) take flame.
I am inspired your gain to Prophecy,
Methinks from utmost Inns of Court I see
Young Amorists smitten with Bellesa's look
Caught by the Gills, and fastened to your Book.
But still there does remain a stiff-neck^d Tribe
Whom no Repute nor Author's name can bribe;
Through specious Titles who as easily see
As through a Commonwealths man's Liberty:
Doubt such the least; the learned and the wise
Must needs he took with deep Philosophies
And dark discourse: at least, good manners says,
They first should understand it, e'r^ dispraise.
The Shepheard's Paradise. A PASTORAL.
Saphira The Queen. Bellesa The Queen. Basilino My Lady Marquess. Moramente My
Lady Marquess. Agenor Mrs. Cecilia Crofts. Genorio Mrs. Cecilia Crofts. Palante
Mrs. Cecilia Crofts. Fidamira Mrs. Sophia Carew. Gemella Mrs. Sophia Carew.
Miranda Mrs. Sophia Carew. The King. Mrs. Arden. Pantamora. Mrs. Villers.
Camena. Mrs. Kirk. Melidoro. Mrs. Howard. Martyro. Mrs. Victoria Carew.
Bonorio. Mrs. Beaumont. Osorio. Mrs. Seamer. Timante. My Lady Ann Feilding.
Votorio. The Mother of the Maids. Romero. Mrs. Seamer.
THE SHEPHERDS PARADISE.
The First Act.
Osorio, Timante. Osorio. WHat whisper's this Timante, that wakes our Prince
out of his amorous slumber, and blows him thus abroad to seek for rest in
agitation?


Timante. This noise, Osorio, has past-by my ears; but judge you how unfit to
be let into our beleefs. When it must be a woman's virtue that is of proof
against such power, youth and honor, as our matchless Prince attempts with;
whose repulse must counsel this retreat, and that cannot be, Osorio. Constancy
would too much cheapen herself, should she impart such a proportion of virtue
unto a woman, when the rarity of it in that sex, is that which has raised
Constancy to such a Virtue.


Osorio. There Is a degree in virtue women may attain to in their defense, that
they retain even after they are taken: against Prince's assaults there is naught
to be required but a neglect of speedy composition; for taken as it were by
assault, they remain with as much honor as women were born to. F^d^mira has
already made such a resistance, that it almost brings the possibility of Women's
defending themselves against Princes, in question: therefore now even her
surrender is a Trophie to her, and the gods owe the virtuous Princess of
Navarr that satisfaction, the dishonor of Fidamira; who, they say, quit her
father's Court in a just disdain, to marry one who loved another. I am sorry
the Prince is guilty of an injury to so excellent a creature.


Timante. They say, Osorio, it is Agenor that intercepts Fidamira's love to the
Prince; it is surely fixed on him.


Osorio. If it be so, he is but justly punished, for having set him so, as all
things must pass through him to Himself, if his own joys be intercepted by
the way; it is a strange fortune of a man, Timante, redeemed from death by such
a chance, as none can know who gave him life; one, whom but-forgetting, must
have killed, ^ preserved amongst the fury of a commanded extirpation of
mortality; trusted to the rage of common Soldiers, who had paid so much of
their own blood for this commission, as it was doubted whether they had enough
left to execute it. In this deluge, to see one ^ingle infant saved, was such a
miracle to me, as I have not wondered at his succeeding fortune.


Timante. It may be, the Prince being a child then did beg his life: believe
it, he was more to him then hi^ father, as reviving is above begetting; and so
loves him with such a supernatural tenderness, above the fondness of a
father.


Osor^o. But look, Timante, where the Prince and Fimadira come: their looks
methinks, imply so little peace, that even their sorrows seem to c^ntend for
Mastery.


Timante. Come, Osorio, let us retire; we shall know what kind of storm these
clouds contain.


The Prince and Fidamira. Basilino. Gentle Fidamira, forgive these looks and
words that come in a morning to demand Albricias of you for the news; the use I
mean to make of this my heaviness, is, but to sink me down unto a level
eeven with you, that from thence you may receive your Equal not your Prince. I
owe your virtue my conversion, for in persute of that which fled before me up
to heaven for safety, my thoughts were raised thither, and detained; and were
thus blessed for following you, and their intent forgiven. So now I may justlier
resume ^he name of Prince thus given by you; and yet preserve disparity between
us for my becoming thus a Prince proves you an Angel, and that prompts me to a
demand which I dare ask, because it is the greatest blessing mortality can
taste, and consequently you only can impart; and sure I was not destined to owe
you less then all the good that you can give.


Fidamira. If I were sad before for one attempted innocence, I might be much
more now, for this so general injury to all our sex, in which Sr. you seem to
exalt but a resistance of unruly wishes to that height of virtue our sex can
rise to. Nothing can be called temptation Sr. to innocence, to make it self a
way all is lost in the possessing; but such a virtue as should dare resist a
Prince's fair and honorable love, when the yielding is a victory, such a
bravery of virtue were a subject worthy of your praise. To what a hight of
contemplation would such a subject raise your soul, the which the preservation
but of innocence has carried even already into heaven?


Basilino. Sure Fidamira's virtue is not ne^re such an extreme; Virtue is
always gentle and pliant to the strength of reason. It weakens it self when
it hardens into obstinancy. What reason can virtue bring with it, to justify
it is temper in the neglect of so fit an exercise of it self, as in a Prince
his fair and virtuous love?


Fidamira. It must produce that which is above all Reason, faith either to the
gods or men: virtue preserves her temper in the tenderness of either of these
vows; nor can a Prince bring any reason that this virtuous tenderness may not
or'eflow, and not resist.


Basilino. Faith to the gods, Fidamira! It Is scarce a a good excuse for a
despair: how can it then protect a froward contempt of all the joys and
blessings the gods ordain for t^ose they represent themselves by? And Faith to
men cannot be so religious as not to be subject to so high a dispensation.
Might it not thus remit it self, even constancy might seem to be a sin. No
Fidamira, the gods have not left such a temptation for Princes to repine, as
the permision of such a frowardness to defeat their just desires.


E^damira. I wonder not to see a Prince so much mistaken in this virtue,
Constancy, that is so free as tyranny enlarges it. Princes should do well to
prove it to be no virtue, since it may warrant disobedience to them, nor have
You that call your selves the Images of gods, reason to repine, if, in your
large commision, they have reserved the Soverainty of o^r wills unto
themselves. You then, young Prince, you that have inthroned your self among
the gods, by the confinement of your wishes to be just; know there are none so,
that would distress, or much less break, a promised faith.


Basilino. By these turning stepps I shall wind my self into an admiration,
so as I shall not wonder at her refusal; it is time to go directly to my wish.
I am so humble after my repentance, I do not bring my person, or my birth to
claim a joyful acceptance: but allege your virtue and your beauty, to which
you owe even some constraint to place them in such a light where they may be
most conspicuous; which I can plead to be preferred by your making me happier
then any other.


Fidamira. O how blessed am I, that have the means to make so brave a Prince
happier then he can wish!


Basilino. No more my Fidam^ra. I will not exact a word more then is necessary
for a consent.


Fidamira. If, Sir, I must expound this happiness unto you, you will not
understand it at the first. Else know Sir, I love you so, I joy to think you
may leave so new, and an unmatch't example of your virtues, as my condition
does afford you. Know Sir, I have deposited my faith, and have received a
mutual pawn upon it, and it must be your anger sooner than your love, that
must release it. And, were it not a blemish to your innocence, even death would
be an ease to mine: but pardon royal Prince even this little digression into a
doubt of you. The gods that will not have your virtues called in question by a
fear, assure me already you will, by a forgiveness of me, possess your self
of a diviner happiness then can be due by any acquisition.


Basilino. O do not mock me thus i^ a submisse deluge of the sentence of the
justest Heavens, in which you have an Angell's part to be the bearer of it. It
is not fit, I should so soon be trusted with that innocence, I am so lately
reconciled to; and Heaven will be so just to make the guilty fire of my lust,
but-the-refiner of your virtue for another use. But I find Heaven merciful in
this, that it would vouchsafe me a miracle for consolation as well as
punishment, that an accession of my love to Fidamira, should bring a patience
with it to consent to this perpetual distance you have pronounced; all merit
to Fidamira. In this separation from my self to this exalted patience, I
disclaim, and own my bad humanity in my affliction for my curse; but I will
promise you the rest of my sad life to study this hard happiness, which is not
at the first so easily understood. But I am afraid the thoughts of you which
must be always mixed with my study, must keep it long obscure.


Fidamira. O that I were, young Prince, what you have called me but in my
excuse, an Angel, that I might fly through all the quarters of the World, and
with an Angell's voice proclaim the yet-unheard-of virtues of the matchless
Basilino. The grossest part of the earth, (where Love's so overgrown with
flesh, it is not to be known,) would shake it self a pieces at my voice; and
Love abstracted, grown it self, would so remain in emulation of your praise,
Princes should owe you more then to their nature.

Which by the easiness it gives them to outdo,
Makes the harder their out-suffering too*
But your example would be a decision for them even in this. And for your part
of happiness, you seem not yet to see it. You must know, Sir, this is none of
those light-colored joys which fade and sully in the handling; this is one
which wearing sets a gloss and luster on. Which cannot decay but by your
leaving of it off. And still the more you think on me, even those sad thoughts
will be true shaddows to set off your joys.


Basilino. I must no longer, Fidamira, trust my infant-virtue against the
growing strength of thy beauty which improves in this thy interdiction of them.
I Will leave you, Fidamira, and without asking any thing, not so much as, who is
that Subject, so much richer than his Prince by the consignement of your faith;
And I doubt not but the heavens think me so fully punished as they will never
consent* to the breach of this my vow, of ever being guilty even of the
directest ^olicitation of your love. And some auspicious deity antedeates this
ease unto me, the belief that no other man shall ever enjoy the matchless
Fidamira.


Fidamira. Go worthy Prince, and may you leave me all your sorrows. May your
triumphant youth be crowned with such successes in all your future wishes, as
that the pleasing multitude may persuade you, you had never faild in any. And
may you never remember me, till your glorious life, glutted with praises of
out-doing all your sex, may look back on me for a more transcenden^honour by
this Mark, of how much you have outdone yourselfe, and so present you with an
unhop'd for joy, which is the only retribution I can hope to make you. Till
then, let me, and sin, be at a distance from your thoughts.


Basilino. Farewell, fair maid, you shall soon hear of resolutions shall some
way deserve those good wishes you have now advanced.


Fid^mira. May all the blessings which I would wish you, which are
unexpressible, fall down as wonders on you.


Agenor, sol^s. The Prince stayed long with Fidamira, and is now going hastily
to the King his father. His looks me-thinke imply some strange resolve. He
purposed now to make his last attempt, and to venture even his crown to take my
Fi^amira, whose virtue's such, as I believe her beauty was bestowed upon her,
to prove a trial of it worthy of her glorying in. And the earth has not a
fitter then the just offers of this worthy Prince.


O here he comes. Basilino, hastily Basilino. O Agenor, had I now leisure
equal to my sense of Fidamira's goodness, I should not defer a minute from
the making thee admire her. She has made me happier then I did hope. I am
resolved, Agenor, and I have already so disposed my father* as I believe the
second time will carry his consent: come Agenor, let us not lose a minute.


Agenor. Stay I beseech you Sir a while, that I may be acquainted with your
will, and so know how to argue for you.


Basilino. Come away Agenor, I Will tell you as I go, The King may intend to
employ your credit with me to dissuade me, but I Will convince you by the way. I
shall but reel along, between my shaking fear and shaking trust of Fidamira.

The King, Osorio, Timante. Leave us all! How much allay have all Princes
treasures in them? even those that they are ordained to coin themselves for
blessings, their children, even these rich Images do sometimes prove burdens,
not treasures to them: I am in this distress. The name of King which does
exalt the blessings of a Father is only that which does forbid me the
indulgence of a common parent. Were he entirely mine I could let my judgment
fall into a complacency of this his wish: but as I am but as it were his
guardian to account to all my Kingdom for him, I must not consent to expose
this State to such a hazard as his absence, when I stand as it were propt up by
him. I am resolved to offer him rather to quit the thought of the Princess of
Navar^e, and to give him my consent to marry Fidamira, whom they say he loves
with a pa^sion able to control his reason, much more his follies.


Basilin^, Agenor. King. I have, my Basilino, been so affected with thy wishes,
as when by the enquiring of my collected thoughts I could find no reason to
approve of thy intended separation from us, I did addict them all to search for
an excuse of the indulgency of my consent. And thou art so unhappy in thy birth
as I have multitudes to satisfy, on whom wisdom it self can seldom have its
operation; much less a natural ^^^dernesse can move against it. In what a
strange distress am I, whom reason does appoint to displease him in this world
I love the best, for others satisfaction, for my own interests, which are such
as I cannot repeal, without reproaching Basilino of unnaturallnesse, in
preferring of his fancies so before them, I will by silence give him leave to
pass by, and remit them all into his power as a Suitor, not a Judge, and for
my part do make him King of this his wish by my consent.


Basilino. Oh Sir.


King. Hold Basilino, I made you thus a King, that you might have somewhat to
give worthy a Father's asking, and that the deposition of this your wish might
be by your gift to me, not my refusal of it. And now I do conjure you,
Basilino, by the power of a King, that has deposed himself, rather to pray
than to command, to change this your desire of leaving us, into any other you
can think of, and stay here; and by the gods we wish may move you; with us, the
agreement to it shall be esteemed a blessing to us.


Basil. O that the angry gods would pity me so much, that I might now obey you
in a fatal silence. It is not a feathered fancy that carries me to fly above
my will, but a weighty misfortune that bears me down before you, to demand ease
for my oppression, which I must have some time and distance to discharge my
self of. Nor has my curse been so defective in any circumstance, as to
distract me quite, and so free me from the sense of all your interests; but it
seems to admit an unsensiblenesse of all my own, to keep me wholly from the
survey of you, whose contradiction of my ease is the refinedst torment. But I
could provide, by engagement to you, Sir, against any important prejudice my
absence may but threaten; if I might hope as well to l^ighten that weight, I
should else think too heavy to strive under. I could acquaint your Majesty with
my arrival, and my residence in every several place, and by my promise to
return upon any summons, should import but even your fears, secure you from any
prejudice of my distance, which I would condition should not be out of the
limits of France or Spain. Now, Sir, have pity of one whom you have robbed of
praise, by making him a King against his will; and this submission of my self
unto your will, think a sacrifice worthy of a father and a King to value. And
for your large offer, Sir, I am so reduced, I had but this one to ask of you,
the which to ease you, I am content to deny my self.


Exit the Prince, sadly. Agenor stays. King. O Agenor, Is not Basilino unjust
to add unto my sorrows, by his sharing with me in them? Into what a parallel
of misery are we both come, by thus our meeting one another?


Again. In this agreement, Sir, where your misfortunes meet and not your wishes,
a subject may interpose himself and break off the accord. I do not see Sir, how
the hazard of the Princes desires equall's that of yours; you endanger Sir, the
los^e of your own wish in the possessing it, for you shall rather keep a
Prisoner then a Son; and by his Liberty* on those conditions he has proposed,
you shall be more secured than by his Residence: your people by the fame of Him
from all neighboring nations shall think he is a Prince of them too, and
therefore fear you more. My opinion is you consent to his first choice, upon
those terms he desires to take it.


King. There is, Agenor, such a darkness spread over Basilino as ore-casts my
reason, and cleares up his to me; Methinks I see this his obedience set too
heavy on him, as it oppresses me, for whom he offers to sink under it. No,
Basilino, thou shall not thus acquit thy self of all those obligations, I can
challenge as a Father and a King, by this out-suffering all the benefits that
ever those names can ^'re confer.


Enter Basilino. King. Throw off, my Basilino, the suppos^tion of those clouds
which hang upon Thee, thou art deceived if thou believe thy looks are dark,
or over-cast. The bright obedience of thy soul, shines through them, and has
dissolved those clouds that shaddowed me into these drops; which fall but now
like Sunshine showers in sign of fair weather: therefore now upon this
condition of thy so full obedience, I may venture, Basilino, to command thee
any thing, and I will keep thee in the exercise of this thy virtue; therefore I
command thee now to enjoy thy first choice, thy intended travel upon what
conditions thy own discretion shall make when thou art gone, and not before; It
were a sin not to reward thy duty with full Liberty, rather then engage it,
and in all that is left to me to express a trust of thee I shall, which is in
this, not to enquire the cause of this thy resolution; but believe it is fitter
for thee to act, then me to ask. I have only this to demand of thee, that
thou would not make me so impoverish't by this grant, that I have nothing
else to give to Basilino. Accept of my first offer added to thy choice, and
leave me some request even as a benefit to engage thee by my performance of it
to thee like observance of my latest will, which I shall wish no other
prosecution of, by Basilino, than that the world shall find me of his imparted
wishes in his absence.


Basilino. I must again in this removed extreme wish for silence to comprise
an answer which no words can carry. You have been, Sir, so exact in this your
blessing, as you have put it into a name that does improve it* my obedience.
You are, Sir, now so inrich't in this your libe^ality, as I can ask you now a
blessing almost equal to your first, the protection of the heavenly Fidamira.
In which I dare boast some retribution of your benefits, having in her given
you a subject for the exercise of all the worth and virtue that even you are
King of. Then, Sir, your leave to part immediately with Agenor only, that this
your gracious gift may be extraordinary in every point. That the grant and the
receipt may be together: and I the sooner may begin to praise the divinity of
this your goodesse,


King. Stay and take these blessings with thee. If it be fame has pressed thee
by giving thee in hand already a share of public honor, may thy succesfull
daring carry thee so soon to such a height of true renown, as thou may
quickly be so much above the praise of personal activeness, as even honor it
self may soon restrain thee to command: And may that send thee home to this I
keep but for thee. If it be Love's attractiveness that drives thee from us,
may thou obtain unknown, without the help of any title showen which may
thou give her in reward, not condition. What e're it be that parts us Basilino,
let it be thine own success, and not my distress, that may bring us soon to
meet. For Fidam^ria; you shall not be able to go so far, nor so concealed, but
my strange care of her shall be told you as the wonder of the time.


Basilino. The consciousnesse of my self of being your son is an advantage ^am
scrupulous of in my undertaking, and I shall not so distrust my self, as to
seek more by my professing it. It is a title Sir I will leave here, and you
shall not hear you have a son abroad but by my obedience to any of your
Summons, upon which I kiss your royal hands.


King. I must look off this parting. With all my blood Fare well. Agenor, I
look to hear from you of Basilino, what is unfit from him.


Agenor. Best of Kings and fathers, remain in peace, till the loud glories of
your son, repay you these in tears of joy.


Exeunt Prince and Agenor. King. Do any of you know where Fidamira lives?


Timante. I do, Sir.


King. Go then presently, and take some of the guard with you, and bring her
hither with all honor, and no show of violence.


Timante. I shall, Sir. Exeunt.


Enter Fidamira. Fidamira. It Is strange this sudden resolution of the Prince!
Sure this is that he told me I should hear of, when he went away.


Enter Agenor. Agenor. The life of man protracted to a miracle were yet too
short to tell the wonder of thy faith, much more that instant is but left me
now for admiration of it. The Prince is instantly resolved to leave his fathers
Kingdom, and has obtained his leave. And has chosen me the only partner of
his thoughts, and his companion in his mean disguise. So as heaven finding thy
virtue such as it might easily draw into a miracle, resolved to raise it more
eminence by this farther trial. And I for this their end am punished with
love, and trust of Basilino.

The time we had resolved for consummation of our wishes we must now differr
till our return. Sure Fidamira thou have refined thy self so near Divinity,
thou art above the being enjoyed by sense. And it were insolence in me to hope
for such a temptation in this absence, as you have met with, but even the love
of Queens is not so impossible as my embracing it. The Prince's parting does
depend on nothing now but my return. Which he is almost as impatient of, as I
of staying here; which is a blessing I repine so much to leave, as I have need
often.


Fidamira. It is a strange resolve, Agenor: there is a ^ranscendency in that
young man above the fate of Princes, and could any action endear Agenor to me,
it should be Basilino's trust. For the differring of our wishes, the occasion
is so strange, it does import the will of heaven. And for the trial of my
faith it is too easy, and assured a thing for heaven to intend, if heaven
means a miracle in mine, it must by it is entireness after the breach of
yours which to me would seem such a miracle, I should not wonder though my own
should be preserved for my affliction.

But this sad Digression has no reason for it, but the distracted sense of
your departure. Go then, Agenor, and serve that glorious Prince with such
succesfull faith, as he may think, at your return, not knowing of our loves by
the opinion of thy faith, that nature meant our faith's only to match one
another, and for improvement of our joys, he may have his share in the
bestowing them; stay not for any thing but for a confirmation of my wish.


Agenor. How opportune a blessing is this last command of Fidamira's? by which
she does appropriate my faith so solely to her self as she applies my duty to
the Prince as meritorious unto her, I can now serve the Prince with such a rare
uninterested faith, it shall not wish for recompense, having already more
reward then he can give the will of Fidamira. Which the Gods keep for a reward
of all his glorious deeds at his return, in giving him but even as much to
give to Fidamira as his consent unto her will. Which as the consummation of his
glories, and our joys, I must expect. And now by loosing of your hands, let
fall this partition which they yet hold up. And in this darkness pray our
hearts may not lie long under the whole weight of love they now must bear, but
that our joys may be restored to ease them.


Fidamira. Mine shall turn inward all their light upon my thoughts, which shall
be polished as they shall still answer one another with the reflex of my
Agenor's Image.


Agenor. Move Fidamira now, and let us with equal steps fall thus from one
another, while this earth we tread by interposing of it is self between thy
light and me, shall sh^ddow out this dark Eclipse.


Enter Basilino in his ^isguise Basilino. It is no injury to Fidamira to leave
her where I have put off my self. I find a yielding in my genius to the
curiosity of passing by the Shepheard's Paradise, to which peaceful harbor I
have heard of such a strange repair o wrack't and hop-lesse for^unes, as the
distress has proved a blessing.


Enter Agenor. Basilino. Here comes Agenor not yet fitted for our journey. Have
you taken your leave of my Sister, Agenor? did she not cry? she is fond of you.


Agenor. She is pleased with me Sir as the object of your goodness.


Basilino. I Will advise with him. You eome, Agenor, opportunly to vote in a
cause concerns you too. Whether we may take fitly this opportunity to see the
Shepheard's Paradise as we pass forwards to Navarr. I can have admission by a
blank of my fathers with a warrant for it* and the time of the election of the
Queen, which is every year the first of May, is now within three days. What
says Agenor?


Agenor. I do believe it, Sir, a curiosity worthy of an entire purpose.
Therefore not to be omitted, lying in the way of our design, which cannot be
better begun than by the information of your self in such a variety, as all
foreign nations do admire, as it were a heavenly Institution that extends it
self to all strangers, whose births are such, as may be worthy fortunes
prosecution, and the distress seem so desperate as it may bring honor to the
remedy. And this may prove, Sir, your nearest way unto your journeyes end, the
forgetting Fidamira. For, sure Sir, beauty is soonest worn out of our memories
by the imposition of new weight upon it, and so the last presses away the
former. And fame tellssuch wonders of this place, as sure it is rather a
religious fear than your fathers guard, secures their solitude from the
invasion of nations on the pretense of adoration. And it may be Sir, the gods
will not indebt you for so much as the composition of your broken mind, to any
nation but your own.


Basilino. It must be Atheism in love, not change of my Religion; it must be
that belief which I resolve that Beauty is but an Idea, not to be enjoyed but
by imagination; and by this Atheism must I be saved, Agenor.


Agenor. There Is nothing, sure Sir, so impossible to be enjoyed as your enjoying
this opinion long, unless you could refine your self into an Idea abstracted
from your flesh. You must not only lose your memory, but all your senses, to
retain this new opinion. Can you think, Sir, beauty was never enjoyed?


Basilino. Never, Agenor. There is no Lover's soveraign-fancy that will not
confess that Beauty is so set up, as it is even above his highest thoughts and
to endeare his thoughts alleges an impossibility of thinking height enough.
Can our sense then, Agenor, get up such a pitch, where even our fancy flatts
into an excuse?


Agenor. These are but Love's raptures, that sometimes carry beauty above sense.
In any kind it were injustice to require of our senses the carrying of us above
ground, when they were not ordained to fly. Their motion is toward
fixt-materiall-objects, which they can reach, and are not bound to comprehend
Lover's descriptions, that enlarge beauty into a spaciousness, where it loses
it self, because it cannot be compassed. Take this rule Sir, Sense is not
bound to follow any thing out of sight, and within those bounds it can enjoy
all it meets.


Basilino. Well Agenor, we shall have leisure to discourse of this, as we go:
let us set forward then toward the Shepherds Paradise. We must change our
names. I Will call my self Moramante.


Agenor. And I Will change my name into Ge^orio: we must make haste Sir, the
journeys equal the days we have left for them.


King, Osorio, Timante? King. Are the lodgings prepared as I commanded!


Timante. They are Sir, you are obeyed in all things.


King. When Fidami^a comes, bring her in; forbear till then. I must do her
some honor may be so sudden, so strange, as may over take Basil^no before he
can get out of our kingdom.


F^damira all in black, led by Osorio and Timante* the King looks am^z^dly on
her at the first. King. I thought I might be tempted to own some power to
oblige such a creat^re, on whom nature seems to glory to have bestowed all
her^. Yet I will not be so unjust to the departed Bas^l^n^, as to appropriate
any thing I am to deliver to you. For in his Will he has left you all that I
can give you. Neither could I have believed, it could have been so difficult
the being Executor to a Prince. For I find more due to you than he could
bequ^ath, or I dispose unto you. Therefore be ple^sed, fair M^ide, to ease me
so much, as to name your wishes; since you have reduced a King to the belief
of having nothing worthy of you, and therefore dares not choose for you.


Fidamira. If the departed Prince Sir, have in his Will bequeathed any thing to
pious uses, to purchase prayers for his success, and fair return, your
Majesty will prove an improvident disp^n^er of them in the choice of me, whose
devotion is already kindled in so pure a flame as interest would dimm it, and
not nourish. And even my wishes, Sir, are all so clear from any stain, of
self advantage, as they are such as your Majesty cannot possess me of.


King. ^ll (...) Fidamira, my impotency as a King in the disposing any thing so
worthy; and yet beg the knowledge of thy will in a more powerful name, a
servant unto Fidamira. And^ by the virtue of that name believe my self
enforced to a captivity of any thing that ^he ^^all wish.


Fidamira. You have already Sir furnished me with an unlook't for wish, the
expiation of the guilt your proclamation of your self has cast upon me.

I had another Sir so innocent, as it was fit for you to join, though you
could not grant, the Prince his soon return, so crowned with his desires, as
he may think he brings more joy with him, then even your crown can promise him.
And this is Sir, my only wish. And it is so propitious to me, as it makes your
Majesty all the return I can e're hope, for those your offered benefits, the
wishing of you all increase of joys and glories.


King. Do not wonder Fidamira at the title I took on me. I spoke to you in
Basilino's name, and it was not unproper, in the performance of his will to use
his name. And I am afraid, I shall too truly take upon me. The wish which you
have chosen, has so indebted me unto you, as I must speak something now in my
own name, and retract the promise I had made to Basilino, to possess my self
of all my power, which I think yet too little to tempt thy modesty to the
choice of any thing it does contain. But do not Fidamira in duty to your King,
reduce him to repine at his condition, in having nothing to present you with,
but wishes back again.


Fidamira. In all humility and reverence to your power Sir, I thus fall down to
beg of you, and that which only as a King you can bestow, Lib^rty. Which I have
chosen as the greatest blessing Kings are trusted with, to satisfy your
Majesty in the obligation you desire to mark me with. And I trust so much to
your goodness, as I think I need not bring the gods to plead for my
dismission, whose cause has furnished me with this ^ute unto your Majesty; the
per^ormance of some vows, which will require privacy to perfect: and thus your
Majesty shall set me at Liberty, that am yet in bonds unto my vows.


King. You have made so st^ange a choice* ^^damira, as the unwilling giving it
endeares the gift, and that which does persuade me most unto this grant, is,
that you shall take from me that, which is dearer to me than all you leave me,
your company; and while you do avoid the merit of my actions, you cannot
disappoint my sufferings of some desert unto you.

Therefore you shall choose what place agree^ best with your intent. If you will
accept this Palace, I Will leave it to you, and your privacy shall be secured to
you by a guard, that shall not come so n^^re you, as to let you know you have a
house. Choose what Temple you like best, and the entrance shall be denied to any
other, that no impure breath may mix with yours. But Fidamira, these your
devotions perfected, I shall expect you do accept our Court for Sanctuary to
that Saint-like innocence shines about you. It were impiety to let you live in
the crowd of common persons and your own piety will enjoyne you to allow my
daughter your companion, as a pattern for virtuo^s youth.


Fidamira. It would be to me Sir, a retreat out of my self, to be any where
but in my father's house. Whither I beseech you Sir, I may have leave to
return, and remain some few days; after which, I shall obey your Majesty,
with that devotion which is due to those, whose Image you are; believing Sir,
you will command nothing, but what shall be meritorious to obey you in.


King. You shall be Fidamira reconducted to your fathers house, and there
remain undisturbed, till your own pleasure gives me admission to you.

Who waits without?

Enter Osorio, Timante. Carry back again Fidimira to her father's house.


Timante. How has this face displeased the King, tha^ was resolved, before he
saw her, to lodge her in the Palace with such prepared honor, as raised all
the Court in to a wonder of the cause? Methinks, I find now more then e^re I
^ould have guess't. Exeunt.


Exeunt all but the King. King. O what a mock was this, to ask me liberty
while she was captivating me? I had not so much power left, as to keep her
here, when she would go. She is so much already Mistress of my will, as she
disposes of it even against it self. Whither shall I repair for Liberty,
that am besieged by my own guard these trai^erous eyes? I must condemn them
to perpetual darkness, or they will betray me to such a light, as will darken
all my other senses, even by the inflammation of them. Will Love be content
with no less Trophy, than the inversion even of Nature, ^^^ning the branches
down into the ground, and ^ake the roots to bud and blossom in the air? Must
Love needs have a garland of such prodigious flowers? Now Basilino I find, thou
have left me somewhat to do f^r thee, worthy of a King to brag of, the
wrestling with these passions for thy sake, which else I shall im^^^ce, and let
into my heart, as an enlargement of it, and my life.

But I will so allay this heat,
By taking Thee into its seat.
As it still shall be withstood,
As if I lived but by thy blood.

Act the Second.
Pantamora, Camena, Melido^o, Martiro, Vo^orio, Genorio, Bel^eza, and all the
Shepheardesses. Belleza chosen Queen. Pantamora delivering the Crown to
Votorio. Panta. ANd I into your hands resign, The Sphere wherein our Majesty
does s^ine. Which moved and governed by a heavenly force, Thus every year does
terminate its course.


Votor. The gods, Bellese, by the voices of your sisters have chose you Queen,
and you must now tak^ your Throne, with this Oath I am to give you, for the
fair observance of all those conditions you are trusted with this Crown upon.
Which are the faithful executions of the Laws, we live under and reign over.


Read the Oath. Bell. Give me leave, fair Sisters, while I am yet my self,
before I do become your Creature, and so more obliged to wonder at your
goodness, to renounce all merit to this honor; unless the being surprised by
it may pass for any, which if my person do not prove enough, my foreign
birth will certify much more. Which as it will advance me toward your
particular civilites, must needs remove me from the pretension of this eminence
amongst you.

Therefore your former favors can only give a r^ason for this excuse, that to
recover the desperate debt I owe you all, you have resolved to lend me more, so
to (...) me to make a retribution may comprise them all, and for this end I may
avow a joy in this your choice: which I shall study so to justify your
judgments in, by the complying both with the obligations of your debtor, and
your Queen, as when I shall resign that, I shall have purchas't one I shall
esteem as much, a creditour to you all.


Came. We too Bellesa are deputed in the name of all, to assist the ceremony of
your Oath, and the publication of the Laws.


Vot. Proceed Bellesa to the reading of the Oath.


Bell. By beauty, Innocence, and all that is fair,
I Bellesa as a Queen do swear,
To keep the honor, and the regal due,
Without exacting any thing that is new.
And to assume no more to me than must
Give me the means, and power to be just.
And but for charity and mercies cause,
Reserve no power to suspend the Laws.
This I do vow, even as I hope to rise,
From this, into another Paradise.

Vot. When your Highness has possessed your Throne, I must begin to read the
Laws.


Bellesa ascend's the Throne, and Votorio reads. That the Queen is to be
elected the first of May, every year, by the plurality of the Sisters voices;
from which election the Brothers are excluded.

That the Queen must be aged under thirty, and beauty to be most regarded in
the election.

That both the Brothers and Sisters must vow chastity and single life, while
they remain of the Order; and the breach of this Law is to be punished with
death.

That every year at the election of this Queen, what Brothers or Sisters shall
desire to retire out of the ^rder upon design of Marriage; shall then upon
their demand be licensed, and at no other time.

That the Queen shall admit of none into the Order but one every year by
grace, the rest upon publication of their pretense; which must be, either a vow
of chastity, which is not ever to be dispensed with; or the verification of
some misfortune, worthy the charity of this honorable Sanctuary, which all the
Sisters and Brothers are to be Judges of.

That there is no propriety of any thing among the Society, but a community of
all which the world calls riches and possessions.

That detraction from the honor of a Sister, without proof, is to be punished
with the penalty inacted for that fault.

That no brother or sister shall ever go out of the limits of the Kingdom, but
by a final dismission.

That no such shall ever be received again upon any pretense.

That strangers shall be admitted only by the grace of the Queen, or by
particular warrant from the King. And upon no condition stay above three days.

Vot. These be the laws your Majesty is sworn to protect. And now, I in the
name of all the blessed Society bow in obedience to you.


Came. We in the name of all the Sisters, salute you Queen, and beg to leave the
seal of all our duties in your Royal hands.


They kiss her hands. Vot. Now Madam, after an hour's r^st, the Order requires
your Majesty to repair to the Temple, there to perfect all the Ceremony.


Bell. I can have no such rest, Votorio, as on my knees before the Gods; for I
have yet a greater blessing to implore of them then this they have bestowed;
their propitiousnesse toward my discharge of what they have imposed upon me.

Princes Votori^ have no less,
To pay the Gods, than to possess.
What are those strangers?


Vot. They are admitted Madam, by special warrant from the King.


Exeunt, All but Moramente (...) Genorio, Moramente p^lle Votori^ back. Mor. If
you have leisure to allow us so welcome a civility, as to satisfy a Stranger's
curiosity, you may oblige us in acquainting us, what the Queen said of us.


Vot. My profession, and your habit Sir, enjoynes me both to this: and after I
have satisfied you in this demand, to offer you my service, in easing you of
any curiosity, this place has put upon you.

The Queen desired to know only who you were, and how admitted, which I gave
her an account of, as far as my knowledge led me.

Which was no farther then your admission by the Kings Letters.


Mo^. The limitation Sir, which is upon the stay of strangers here, where
curiosity is fed so much fuller then it can swallow, much less digest, might
excuse an importunate detention of any one but you Sir whose habit renders you
so necessary to the resid^n^s, as it were a sacrilege to rob them of your time.


Vot. At it is a pious work, the distribution of hospitable civility* I am the
pr^p^rest you could have met Sir, to pay the ingen^ousnesse of your curiosity
with the knowledge of any thing you can ask here.


Morame^te. Since this civility may be meritorious to you sir, I shall the
willing p^t ^ou to the exercise of it And first I would gladly ^no^ the
an^iquity of the instituted regality, with the occasion of it, and the rest of
the particulars of this place which my Ignorance cannot furnish me with
questions for.


Votorio. The ingenuousness of this institution is such, as we may joy we owe
it not unto antiquity. It derives it self no higher then this King's
grandfathers time, who had a daughter called Sabina, a Lady of that strange
beauty and perfections, as this, was but one of the miracles she left us to
admire her by. The virtue of her resolution takes off much from the wonder of
her wit. Which seems to have remained imperious and not flexible to her
distress. She was sought by two Princes, The Dolphin of France, and the Prince
of Navarr: whose passions seemed so equal, as the most powerful could not
bear ^ denial, and the weaker found himself so armed by his passion as he
despised the anger, which the power of France had vowed against him, if he were
preferred. Sabina's inclination to Navarr drew down the power of mighty France,
upon this Prince of Vallance. But the hope of fair Sabina which he seemed to
think himself a gainer by, after the loss of most of his country. Then
Sabina, whom it seems the love of virtue only had made partial to Navarr,
found the way to exalt her virtue more, then by persisting against difficulties
which seemed to take off from the glory of it, by the abatement it procured
where it intended an advantage. And so fearing left his sufferings might raise
his virtues to such an estimation, as he might be thought to have^d served her,
and so the matching of herself might lessen her, resolved to take the glory
wholly with the sufferings to her self. And so sent to the victorious Dolphin
(that had already made himself Prince of Navarr, and bragged that with that
title he would woe S^b^^a) her promise that upon condition of his restoring
Navarr unto the Prince, and swearing future, peace, she would never marry the
Prince of Navarr. The Dolphin whose success had nourished his love with hope
even in Sabina's direct denialls, swallowed this as an assurance of his wish,
without examining the words, believing his own flattering omen more security
then even Sabina's promise. He accepted the conditions, and presently restored
all his conquests though the Prince refused the treaty, and the future peace.
Yet he instantly performed all that Sabina asked, who now resolved to publish
the performance of her vow. 'Twas sure the gods that did infuse these thoughts,
for a reward of so supreme goodness, and made the monument of her admiration a
Sanctuary for distressed virtue, so to convey to future times a blessing with
the memory of her. She begged of her father leave to make a vow of chastity and
desired a propriety of this place as her dowre; which nature seems to have
made of such unmatch't delightfullnesse, as if she had meant to brag, that she
made a stage onearth worthy of Sabina's acting on this her divinest part.

Hither then by the consent of her indulgent father, Sabina came, attended by
many Nobles of both sexes, whom love to Sabina, or admiration of the action
brought with her. Of which she made this Order. And authorized by her father,
erected this regal government, and enacted all the laws you have heard read;
which have been so inviolably kept, as a punishment here would seem a wonder.
She enjoyed the regality during her life, and then left the propriety of all
unto the Queen. Who is eligible as you have heard. The peace and setlednesse of
this place is secured by natures enclosure of it on all sides by
impregnablenesse, as if it were only for chastity to make a plantation here. At
one passage only, the rocks seem to open a way of themselves, so as to let in
the Kings care in a Garrison. Which he maintains for safety of the place, which
delivers all strangers to us as suitors, not invadors. Thus Sir I have informed
you of the institution of the order of the Shepheard's, which is called by the
Foundresse, The Shepherds Paradise As being a (...) receptacle of distressed
minds, and a Sanctuary against fortun's severest executions. Now Sir, I must
needs tell you the generous end of the Prince of Navarr* that you may see,
there was nothing accessory to this heavenly Institution that had not such a
transcendent newness of bravery as they seem made for such a divine novelty.
The Prince as it seems hating the earth, whose safety had occasioned the loss
of Sabina, In scorn of it forsook it, and came hither in a disguise.

And was admitted into the Order, where he lived concealed, and dying without
making himself known unto Sabina; but at his death, left such a notorious
memory as all ages shall study to display, and put it to the royallest
ornaments can be due to Princes. The Queen ordained a particular ceremony to be
performed every year at his Tomb, which is justly observed.


Moramente. This is so heavenly a tradition, as it becomes best our delivery.
This order seems a match between love, and honor, and chastity, which you are
happy sir in being the Priest to. But give me leave to wonder, why the brothers
are excluded out of the election, which is to be guided most by beauty, of
which sure they be the best Judges.


Votorio. The reason Sir, that I have heard was then given by the Foundresse,
That it had been to have made them Judges in their own causes. Since there is
none but has a particular interest that does prepossesse his choice. Whereas
all women are rather Inquisitors, then admirers of one another. And being void
of passion, no freindship can incline them to yield priority in beauty. And so
'twas thought most probable, that where most of them agreed to yield, the
advantage must be unquestionable.


Moramente. The wisdom, Sir, of the Foundresse was such, as it carries away our
admirations, even with this our prejudice. I have one more satisfaction to
desire of you, which the omission of, I do believe, in your opinion might
render me unworthy of these I do already owe, the knowledge of your new
Queens condition, and the time of her admission, with her pretense.


Votorio It Is not above a year since she was received so, that, had she not
had such a transcendent beauty, as might have endured the abatement of the
envy, which so sudden an election might have taken from her, and even after
that deduction have remained incomparable, sure she had not been chosen Queen.
It was thought Pantamora the precedent Queen* would have been relected. She is
by birth a stranger, of some part of France. And brought with her marks of
noble birth. Her pretention was an intention of her father to dispose of her to
a person of great wealth and quality, who then loved another so passionatly, as
the contestation with his father about his consent was so loud, as the voice of
it came to the lady's ears. Who moved, as she said then, with the true honor
of her sex, resolved rather out of due to her perfections then pride of them,
not to expose them to such an undervaluation, as the dispute of being enjoyed.
Therefore left she her fathers house and repaired to this Sanctuary for
protection of her beauty, which was in danger of profanation. This was received
of all as an acceptable plea for her admission, as a trium^h that beauty had
got by flying. She has lived here ever since with so winning a modesty, as it
has so reconciled the plurality of the sisters to the strangeness of her birth
and beauty as her chocie may be ascribed to an inspiration from above, rather
then her aspiring thither.


Moramente. You may well ascribe it to the gods sir, the merit seems to be so
well proportioned to the reward and the sex is happy to have such an
acquittance for the debt they owe to the Lady, as a Crown. We never met a
greater tentation to uncivil detention, then the pleasingness of your
conversation. Therefore wonder (...) we cannot retire from you; we have two
days yet to st^^ and we shall wait upon you before our retreates from hence.


Votorio. There Is nothing Sir, but my public duty could call me away from my
attendance on you. It is a part of my duty the entertainment of strangers, so
to secure the privacy of the society.


Moramente. I perceive the Institution has so provided for the Societie's
self possessing, it has not left so much as an omission to employ them in the
redressing of. We shall not fail to address ours^lves to you to receive as
much comfort at our departure, as the sorrow will admit of, which will be,
Your blessing.


Votorio. Sir, I must leave that now with you.


Exit Votorio. Moramente. What say you Genorio, are you not indebted to this
digression of my curiosity?


Genor. Take not upon you the digression sir, It was some infusion from above.
But does your curiosity carry you farther yet? does not this place promise you
the diversion you seek, from thinking on Fidamira? Here you may have choice,
either the remedy I prescribed; or that which you intended, the admission of
new beauty to displace that, or you may harden your self by the neglect of this
into such a habit of insensiblenesse, as you may be of proof against all
temptation.


Moramente. Had not my vow Genorio a much nobler aim then my own, I might
consent to let it fall here, and break even to humor thee, so little I esteem
my self. But I have pointed it at the expiation of a guilt, that does so darken
me, as the neglect of beauty might now seem a curse of blindness on me. But
when I have cleared my self of that, then Genorio I will return, even thither
if thou will, with opened eyes, to let thee see my quarrel to my self is
greater then love can reconcile, in living so unmoved with beauty, as
Fidamira's suit to me shall not unsettle me.


Genesis I can imagine no quarrel you can have to your self but one, which this
your resolution of unsensibleness of beauty must compose, the misfortune of the
Princess of Navarre, whose repair you cannot render so much void of sense of
beauty.


Mor. It Is that, Genorio, which must value this my penance, the prostitution to
her only for pardon, not reward. I will seek her to add one glory more to
her, the forgiving me, and when I have but seen her, leave there my guilt, and
take in place of it, the punishment of never seeing of her more. Methinks,
Genorio, had I but once paid my devotion to her hands, I should then rest
absolved in peace.


Genesis Look Sir, how we are blessed; the Queen comes this way, and the Priest
leading Her. Let Us stand by.


Enter the Queen and Shepherdess going toward the Temple. Vot. Madam, these
strangers curiosity assure me, they would be displeased to leave any privilege
uninjoyed. If your Majesty shall please to give the honor of your hand to
their welcome.


Queen. What Country men are they?


Vot. Castilians, Madam.


Moramente and Genorio, kiss the Queens hand. Queen. This place is civil
only in making all strangers, of what ever Nation that are not residents; and
for that, that there are none that are not so to virtue and to honor.


Exeunt, Queen and Shepherdesses. Genesis I am not yet so fast but I can fly,
And only to preserve my Faith and liberty.
While I intended to keep the Prince here, as nearer Fidam^ra, I find my self
removed from her; come Sir i will jest no more, we have seen all: shall we go on
in persute of our design.


Mor. O what inchantment's this? Methinks I find my self fixed here, and yet
the virtue of this touch ^uickens, and moves my senses so; as it implies
divinity ^ather then Magic. Methinks I find the hand that holds ^e, as it
presses, print Characters upon me, such as my ^aste reads, and satisfies for
this detention.


Genesis In what contemplation are you Sir? will you ^et forward Sir, toward your
lodgings, to prepare you ^or your journey?


Mor. I was thinking how ridiculous a thing Genorio, your proposition of
staying here was, since if we would the Order admits it not.


Genesis It were some loss of time in your design, but not impossible to do.


Mor. How might we conceal, or disguise our selves, if we meant it?


Genesis The means were not so unfit as the resolution, for the way must be
noble; by a direct profession of some misfortune, and so be received into the
Order, which the disguising of your self at any time would dispense with you;
but Sir, let us go, it grows late.


Mor. We cannot go before we be dismissed by the Priest, who is now assisting at
the public service; we must stay till the Queene's return from the Temple,
and so take our leaves.


Genesis That hand with one touch more, would plant me here, I do not like this
backwardness; Sir, sure the Princess of Navarre is not here. I am glad to
find the burden of your guilt so light, as you do choose rather to stand still
under it, then move toward your discharge of it.


Mor. I am so willing to be punished for her sake, Genorio, as I take kindly
this reproach; and as you are her soliciter, to be my guide toward her: tell
me where you think the likeliest place to find her, for in Navarre we may
believe she is not so long concealed from her Father.


As they are going out, they meet the Queen's company coming from the Temple.
Genesis You must now needs stay while the Queen be past.


Queen. I understand you are Castilians, gentlemen: Come you lately from the
Court?


Mor. We came directly from thence Madam, and made such have to be here at the
ceremony of the Election, as it is not three days since we left the King.


Queen. How does the King and Prince? have any of you had such access to the
Prince, as to be able to inform us of his Person and Humor?


Genesis The honor I have Madam of being his Domestic allows me to think my
self a fitter reporter of Him, than this Gentleman. For his person Madam,
Nature has thrown away so many perfections on it, so that his birth needs not
to make him Lovely. For the composition of his mind; it seems to have injured
him by his birth, that exposes him to so much probability of flattery; the
truth of his virtues being such as Parasites deceive themselves in the
exaltation of them.

In my opinion Madam, he has all that youth can brag off, with all that age
can reproach youth with the want of.


Queen. I have heard the Prince much valued by all relations, and of so strange
a passion of hi^, for a Lady of his Court; as though all other advantages being
ascribed to him, he intended this only, the loving her more then all the world.


Genesis It Is true Madam, He has long loved a Lady, called Fidamira, who is such
a subject for a noble passion, as it seems no wonder; even the Prince's
constancy in insensiblenesse, and the only strangeness is, that she is not
moved toward him by his virtues, not that he moves not from Her by neglects.


Queen. You give her beauty a great power, that can dispense with there
discretion, and the obligation to her Prince. Did you ever see her, sir? I see
your friend is partial to her.


Moramente. I have Madam, and may allow her all the beauty in the world left
out of this society.


Queen. We are not subject sir, so easily to envy, as you should have needed
so soon to have qualified your friends praises of her: but pray sir, does the
Prince persist in this so meritorious constancy?


Genorio. There was a rumor Madam when we came from Court, that the Prince to
crown her virtue, and his wishes, had offered her marriage, which she had
excused the acceptance of, by a pre-ingagement of her faith. And that the
generous Prince resolving to vie with her for the braver fame, took this
excuse with the humility of a private servant. And resolved to leave his
father's Court; that at some distance from her, he might settle his resolution
of leaving her liberty, and taking his again.


Moramente. This we have heard Madam, but dare not affirm as true,


Queen. Fame of it self charged with the weightiest things, is leight enough
to be suspected; But carrying love's quarrels it grows incredible for thoughts
to reconcile them, and so the truth which Fame set out with, may be changed,
before it can arive. If this were true, though it were hard to decide an
advantageous glory in this case to either of them, yet I should incline to
recompense his sufferings with some ods of honor, since he is to enjoy her
wish, and he nothing but the virtue of performing ^ers. What say you, ladies!


Pantamora. As it is a strange virtue Madam must preserve faith so entire, when
it may be set in a crown, as the loss of a corner would never be perceived: I
confess I wonder more at her, that might have had so large an ^asion for her
faith as a Kingdom; than at him, whose kingdom being not enough to purchase
such a faith, was then content with patient admiration of her.


Camena. I believe Madam, the Princes virtue has resisted by far the greater
temptation: for her insensiblenesse might have justified his change, but even
his constancy could not authorize hers. Faith must be set without a foil, so
every blemish will be visible. Should a Prince scratch, or deface a Jewel,
while he kept it in his own hands, he might set what price he would upon it,
but in the common estimation that would deprise it. So Fidamira must have lost
of her true value though the Prince had rated her as high as ever. So that she
seems to have preserved her value, and the Prince to have for her sake
undervalued himself. Wherefore I should repair him by allowing him the
greater share of glory.


Queen. Whenever you see the Prince again, you may let him know, how his
honor has been noted here* And has prevailed against the competition of our
Sex.


Geno^io. Give us leave Madam, to receive our dismission by your royal hands,
and to wish the Prince had but once seen your Majesty. The desperateness of
the ill, and the eminency of the afflicted, both concur to make the cur^ worthy
of you.


Q^^en. I could wish Sir, he did enjoy the best part of me, which is the peace,
and quiet of my mind.


Exe^^t all but Moramente and Genorio G^^^^^^. M^ fear was quicker-sighted
then my sense that did propose to me at first the readiest safety that tha^
passi^^ knows, of flying from danger. Which I obeyed so fast, as nothing could
have overtaken it, therefore m^ curse was forced to meet me, so to bring me
back, and now methinks, I am so fixed, I can but move against my fear, for
having been so bold as to precede m^ love. Oh how I curse my fear for having
disputed (...) against the Prince's staying here. But since my soul is changed,
I must disguise my self also to the Prince. Will you be pleased to go, Sir?


Moramente. How out of tune are these words Genorio?


Genorio. Have my eyes so soon infected my voice with treachery, that it
betrays me to the Prince? Is It not the (...), and not the sound, is out of
tune;


Moramente. No Genorio, but me-thoughts thy words were dragged along with such a
sound as if they had gone to suffer for a fault.


Genorio. Alas Sir, what accent can fall low enough to reach the depth of your
dejection no tune, no words sad enough. The pity that I owe you sir, that are
not only going out of Paradise, but into such a Labyrinth, as it is uncertain
whether every step carry you backwar'd, or forward toward your journies end;
since we know no more where to find her we seek, then she knows we seek her.


Moramente. It Is true Geno^io. But how might we unwind this maze of Pilgrimage;
and make the way director to my vow?


Genorio. Alas Sir, it is a case of conscience, wherein I may better be a
client, then a counsell^r. I am now in suite for mine. Sure Sir, the heavens
that have infused this tender scruple of your guilt, affect your innocence so
much, as to inspire your heart with the directest means of expiation. For did
they not intend you an unblemished purity, they would never have moved you with
so precise a tenderness, as even to me seems superstition.


Moramente. It Is so just a zeal that carries me Genorio as the perplexity of
the way to it does not distract my purpose. But heaven is so merciful to my
willingness as it presents me with some means of ease, and offers me a line to
guide my straying motions, by which benefit I count received, because I do
avoid it, for Genorio's sake.


Genorio. Were it a discharge for you Sir, to have me become as miserable, as
this reservation of your self from me would make me, I should with silence
accept the curse. But I believe, it must be an assumption of more guilt unto
you Sir, than yet you have, the suspicion of my forwardness, nay of my ability
in easing you, in any way you can design me to, where your opinion oynes with
my endeavor. For nothing can seem so hard to me to act, as it is now to suffer
this tenderness of yours against your self, therefore Sir let me beg it as a
grace, your disposing of me, as your opinion shall direct you for your ease.


Moramente. You may well beg this Genorio, for it is a suit will make you so much
richer then I, that I can never discharge my self from an Indebtment to you.
Therefore now Geno^io be not so ambitious to pursue your suit.


Genorio. What an amazing goodness is this of yours Sir? that knowing all the
obedience the prostitution of this life could render you, is so much your due,
as it could scarce chaleng praise, would honor an easing you, which to omit
were impious, with the reward of obligation from you. You have set me so near
your self, you have forgot what I was. You know Sir, you have made me so
happy, I must trust to others to believe I was ever miserable, Then give me
leave to accuse you of forgetting me, when you would seem to bribe my blood to
your obedience, with so immense a treasure as obliging you, that would be paid
with your acceptance of its effusion of your ease. Therefore Sir, unless you
mean this a torment to me, you must impart your thoughts.


Moram^nte. How exactly kind art thou Genorio? that wilt convince me by my love
to thee, not to my self, interesting thy ease in this my opening of my
thoughts; I was thinking of the difficulty of the way toward the directest end
of this my journey, my devotion to the Princess of Navarr, and how thy
information of thy self of her retiring, and the most probable place of (...)
concealment might take off from me the laborious part of search, affording me
the ease of staying here, till thou come back to guide me. This was my
thought Genorio and would not such a debt pawn me beyond redemption to thee?


Genorio. I confess Sir you have found a pain disputes the joy of easing you,
which nothing, but the sense of leaving you, durst have attempted. And this
beginning is hard, all that will follow will seem don, this difficulty past


Moramente. Did not the perplexnesse of the enquity leave the success
uncertain, and assure the pains; I might persuade away thy first objection,
since I must share the half of the first pain, of leaving me.


Genorio. Could I leave you Sir, after that I could do any thing. Were she so
strayed from mortals, as destiny knew not where to find her, my Genius would
direct me to bring news of her.


Moramente. Alas Genorio, the fright of this our parting has almost
distracted thee. I will venture no farther on thy temper. Since we are both
engaged in this wild labyrinth, we will keep together; that so, though we find
nothing, we may not lose one another.


Genorio. Stay Sir, heaven is so careful of your ease, as it vouchsafes,
methinks, even me an inspiration, that whispers to me, that your staying here,
will be auspicious to you.

So that the Gods are pleased to recompense my loss with a provision of your
happiness. And now my leaving you, is become their direction, and the presage
of it, is made a joy. Therefore now I do expect nothing but your instructions
for my parting.


Moramente. The gods had need join with me Genorio, to recompense thy merits.
I was resolved to stay here and profess my self of the Society, till you had
found the way to this strayed Saint, then upon your return my profession of my
self would dispense with the engagement and I might, guided by you, the
easlier perform my vow.


Genorio. I will go Sir, without expecting any merit from my diligence, besides
this of my obedience: for my mind gives me that your resting here, not your
remove, must settle your peace.


Moramente. Come Genorio, we will go together to the Priest, you for
dismission, I for entertainment.


Gen^rio. I Will leave you Sir with this presage, that I shall find your Atheism
converted into Idolatry at my return.


Moramente. Methinks I find my self nearer a change of torment then of ease.
Eexunt.


Enter Fi^amira. Fidami^a. O where does innocence reside! Is she always in
her journey here on earth? and ^udgeth but in Court sometimes, and that which
honor, glory, and ambition makes their journye's end the Palaces of Princes
she takes but in her way* and passes on. Is she so froward as not to love good
company; Sure it is not that. But that she wants that pliable complacency that is
required in the S^ciety of Courts. She cannot consent to give herself away in
complement. Sure if she be fixed any where on earth, it is in the shade of
solitude, where the clear soul by the reflex of speculation sh^wes fair
Innocence her self. Where she inamored of her own beauty lives, and makes
Self-love so meritorious, as'twere a sin to be delivered from it. Thither must
I carry mine, while it is yet unstaind the breath of the Court would must it
over at the least should I consent to this intention of the king's, of placing
me a^ Court, though it were with a pretense of a compa^i^^ to his daughter, who
they say is my companion all (...) in what she knows not of* why should he
come hi^^^^^^ to retract his promise of my privacy, before the time he had
allotted it, was expired; And he spoke with such a degradation of himself, as
if he meant to ask some what, which would not sure with the divine Image, and
therefore did depose himself from being King to make himself all man for his
pretention: such preposterous humility to me could imply no less, though yet
his words have had no other guilt then his submission. And I am bound in sense
of all his gracious care, to provide against the perversion of all this into
his sin. And to secure his innocence even by my hazard. Therefore I must
suddenly fly from hence, and heaven to encourage this intent, presents me with
such a retreat, as may make the extremity a blessing, the Shepherd's Paradise.
Thither will I fly. Fortune in all her oppressions has enricht me with a full
pretense for my admission. The Prince his return cannot ask less then a
year; then I shall be free again for my Ageno, whom since this face has twice
endangered in the loss of me. I Will change it till I may deliver it him.
Therefore it shall put on mourning for its faults, and his absence. The order
admits equally of all nations, and as a Moore I will fly thither.

Love, let not this averse-disguise
Those of thy order scandalize
Thy honor's not advanced by beauty
So much as by a true love's duty.

Ente^ Bellesa and Martiro. Martiro. Did not I so much admire Madam you
transc^ndent virtues, I should wonder at the triumph the gods have raised them
to. How well are the Prince his corrections and your glories fitted. He by his
faith to you is suspended from his principality in the top of all his promised
joys. And you for your discontents, are advanced the sooner to a Crown.


Bellesa. It Is true Martiro* but the peace of my mind was never yet since I
came here so busy, as to think on any reparation due to me. And what I owe the
most to heaven for, is, the indifferent sense of this crown, which as it is but
temporary, fits so easily on me I shall not feel it when it is taken off. I shall
make up the diminution of my power of doing good, with the addition to my time.


Martiro. Give me leave Madam, to whom time is a burden, to ask how an
addition to it may prove an ease. You cannot better improve this time, than in
such a charity.


Bell. You must measure time Martiro. with your soul, not your sense; you must
not antedate your desires so as time may seem too slow to bring you them. The
computation of your time must be like that of clocks, which weigh and measure
time at once. Andnothing leightens time so much as weighing it. If you must
needs Maritiro any thing without your self, le it be somewhat you may hope for.
Nothing takes away more from time then that.


Martiro. Alas Madam, I am so free from this variety of wishes, as I have but
one; and that so heavy a one, as as it cloggs times motion, and so lengthens
my days unto me for a tedious course. And you have named a remedy to refine my
torment by, the impossibility of attaineing it, Hope: for I am so desperate, I
would not change my wishes for any thing that I could hope.


Bellesa. It Is then Martiro a vanity in your sufferings, not a desire of ease;
and pity were a prejudice to you, as it would lessen the merit of your
patience.


Martiro. It were a cheapning of your pity Madam, to have it fall so low as my
condition. P^inces can expect no more from you.


Bellesa The descent of pity is the exalltation of it. love indeed should have
an object level to its self.


Martiro. You could love then Madam, if you had met with such an object, as you
might not seem so much to incline to it, but to receive it as a parallel.


Bellesa. I would not have the reservation of my self Martiro, be a defect,
but an election. I could love but upon such terms* as should reproach mankind
a scarcity of merit if I did not, and not tax me with a natural repugnancy to
love.


Martiro. Upon these terms Madam* you are equally just to all our sex, in this
general exclusion, by the condition of deserving you. For to that great
disparity, all worth may seem but equally distant; as all Numbers are equally
disproportionable to Infinity. Therefore Madam persist in this right unto your
self, and you shall be a universal wonder, not a private joy.


Bellesa. Fear not Martiro, As I do^ not think my self worthy of a miracle
made for me of purpose, which such a man must be as I could love; so I do not
think the gods will so decline my thoughts, as to make me love less, than what
I have proposed them, and so choose to afflict me with the greater miracle.


Martiro. These thoughts are worthy of you Madam, love them still; so that your
virtue may contend with your person, whether nature, or you, have made the
greater miracle.


Enter Votorio. Votorio. The occasion Madam, will crave pardon for this
presumption on your Majesty's privacies. One of the gentlmen that your majesty
lately dismissed, demands admission into this Society. And that your Majesty
would appoint the time of his allegation of his pretense; the other is departed.


Bellesa. I will not differr his wish a day, this afternoon give order for a
convocation, and I will go and prepare my self for the ceremony.


Exit Bellesa. Martiro, I will ask pardon of my love for all my past
complaints, and bring my joys in suffering to plead for a forgiveness. He
that will have the glory of a love, that out of choice affects impossibilities,
must needs delight in suffering. I will preserve my vow, and this darkness may
keepmy passion from becoming madness.


Enter Melidor^, and Camena. Melidoro. Are you behind Martiro? the Queen is
past, they say, to the Convocation, and we by you shall be stronger in our
excuse.


Martiro. It is a fair excuse for you too Melidoro; you being together, it
will not seem strange, the time past you unawares. My being with you may
discredit that pretense, and may imply, you could not be so well pleased, as to
forget how the time passed.


Camena. No Martiro, you must go with us, the ex^rcise of charity may better
excuse a fault then an idle pleasingnesse. We may be thought to have borrowed
the time, to lend your sorrow some comfort in* better then to have forgot it in
our own security.


Martiro. I am not so miserable, as to be rel^evable by so cheap a comfort as
common charity. There Is but one in the world happy enough to pity me, and I
can pity all the world, whose joys though they be clear, and make some noise
as they go on, yet are so shallow as the bottome's to be seen.


Melidoro. Come Martiro, this cloud of yours may break one day. Then we shall
see what it contains.


Exeunt Enter Bellesa, Pantamora, Camena, Melidoro, Martiro, Votorio, and
Moramente. Votorio. When your Majesty is placed, the pretend^r by your leave
may begin his plea.


Moramente. With all respect to the presiding Majesty, and honor to the blessed
society, thus I lay down my misfortunes at your feet, which I find I put off,
even as I now take on me here. And I begin to grow doubtful of the justness
of my pre^ence by a surprise of happiness, which enters so fast my eyes, as I
must fly back unto my memory in haste to bring out my sorrows. For I have such
a new unluckinesse made of purpose for me, as I ought to fear that this joy
breaks in upon me, but to carry away my memory, and with it, my pretense to
this divine relief, and so to make this instant lightning a perpetual storm.
Now I must first address my self unto my own sex for judgment, in what you
Ladies cannot be deciders for want of experience in it. Loving against scorn, I
was so humble, as I had no scruple left in all my sufferings, but that of
disappointing her I loved so well.

I could have wished that even her scorn had been preferred before my wishes.
So that I must excuse my conconstancy by Fate, since it occasioned such a fault
in her, as this injustice you shall hear. In this continuation of my passion,
which was so unhappy, I may now call it so, as to afford me many services done
to her, which I will not expect so much reward for as their repetition. At
last, fortune made one day my own life, which was so contemptible to me the
deliverer of hers, and the presenter of what punishment she should appoint the
barbarous attempter. Whose threats had almost saved the active spilling of her
blood, by that cold exanimation fear had drawn over her. Which notwithstanding
did her that service, as to send forth some faint cries that guided me to the
rescue, in a wood where despair had carried me, to envy the life of plants,
and to despise mine own. There I found her on her knees, prepared to be a
Sacrifice to that blow was moving toward her.

I, when I came to intercept it, (guilt is so weak, as it is no vanity to say,) I
easily became as much master of his life, as he was of hers: and offered her to
purge the ground, that had borne such a monster, with his blood. She then, I
may say properly coming to her self, seemed to beg of me more earnestly his
life, than she had don her own of him; as if her soul had been already
carried up to heaven, and owght him this fright as a bl^ssing. I disarming him
only, obeyed her. And gave him not only his life, but more then my own. When he
was gone she told me she forgave him, since he had freed her from an injustice.
Her life was only welcome to her, to retract her neglect of me. Which she would
recant as far as faith and honor would warrant her. I was impatient to know
how far these limitations did extend Whether my wishes were shut out by them.
She told me, the execution I had stayed was upon a condemnation, where I had
witnessed aagainst her, which somewhat qualifi^d the obligation, that this
person, I saw ready to b^ the executioner, was one she loved so well, she had
begged this as a blessing of him, the dying first, so to end with a perfect
innocence, since his jealousy had resolved him to the death of both. And that
he had so much disputed this request a^ had given me time to b^ the suspend^r
of this judgment. Therefore that I should not wond^r if she was tender of his
life, that had so lately give^ her more then his own. For that she could not
have lived after him, and must have died with the guilt of her own hands* the
innocence of whose heart would be sufficiently proved to me, by the knowledge
that it was of me only she was accused* Therefore bid me weigh the merit of my
action, with my unhappiness in the occasion I wondered to see my self
indebted, even after such a present, as two such lives unto her. Therefore
acknowledging my misfortune, ascribing this releese to her chance, begged of
her some command, whose performance might absolve me from the fault of my
contribution to this distress of his, with promise to undergo whatsoever she
should promise a full forgiveness on. Th^n she with as much security as rigor,
condemned me to more then I had freed her from. And told me that this mistake
of her intended executioner did not so much a^at her passion to him and could
much less dispense with the engagement of her faith. Therefore commanded me
never to see her more, and so rest contented all my life with this joy of
having made her happy. After this hard command, to soften it, she steept it in
such tears, as I grew rather ashamed, then resolved. Then she began to praise,
and magnify the bravery of this my action. So as I was afraid to hear her
long, lest vanity should seem to share with love, in the persuasion to this
obedience. I gave her instantly my promise of complying with her will, and to
add somewhat even to her own wish, I said I would conduct her to her servant,
and never more but once again accuse her of cruelty. And joy, that my
accusation of her might now prove meritorious to her. And this settled in
peace, and confidence with him, I should make him witness of my vow, so to
secure her future joys. This I did the same day, and so left her there, where
she began to be sensible of my company. And resolved to repair to this
Sanctuary with so much devotion to forgetfullnesse, as nothing but the hope of
my admission here, could have persuaded to the repetition of this story. Which
if it do procure me, I may triumph over fortune. Whose depression of me has
but sunk me to the center of rest and peace.


Bellesa. Collect the voices upon the hearing of the pretention.


^otorio goes along, and receives all their votes softly: and says, All the
vo^es agree for this reception Bell. And mine Votorio shall confirm all.
Methinks both s^xes are interested in gratitude in his pretention. Women, for
the demonstration of their power; and Men, for the exaltation of their love.


M^ra My admission here is such a blessing, as it shames all my former wishes,
and removes me from the probability of e're remembering the frustration of them,
but as a benefit, which frees me now from wishing any thing.


Bell. Let the oath be given him, and the habit, and this convocation dismissed.


He kisses the Queen's hand and is resaluted by the rest of the Ladies, and so
goes out. The third Act
Enter Genorio. Ge. SInce the exclusion of that light that lightened me out of
my self, I find my self settling again into my own temper, and the dispute
reduc^d now only to my memory. Fidamira does prevail, having the deeper seat;
my eyes had drawn a superficial darkness over it, which had but shaddowed not
displaced my Fidamira. And I find those shadows vanished now removed out of
those beams that made them. Therefore I will now first go and take out the
stains of these new colors which my eyes had received in such haste, and
guild my thoughts over anew with Fidamira's rays, on which no other beams
shall ever shine, but to make them glitter more. Oh that the Prince his stay
might settle his passion, as much as my departure h^th unsettl^d mine. So that
this journey may doubly secure my F^dam^^a. I will first visit her, and from
thence dispatch trusty enquiries into several parts to discover the abode of
this wild Princess of Navarr. Upon my discovery I will repair unto the
Prince, who I doubt not but before his return from thence may well be at his
journeys end.


Ent^r ^i^amira disgu^sed like a Moor. Fid^. The King's impatient search has
followed me so fast, as it has been my habit not my legs has saved me from
reprisall. Here is one, but his Easy pace does not imply he follow^s any body.
The gods guide you, Sir, toward your desires.


Ge^. As much good fortune wait on all your wishes Lady.


Fid^. It may be Sir, you may much contribute to mine in the direction of my
way, which my haste would be much advantaged by a certain knowledge. The way
to the Sepheards Paradise.


Genesis You are in your right way, Lady, my own immediate coming from thence may
assure you of it. And one day's journey, if your person furnish strength for
your haste will render you there.


Fida. Your coming from thence Sir may inform somewhat may more advance me
then the present prosecution of my journey, if your own haste permit you.


Genesis Though I move not upon my own occasions, yet they are so addressed to the
service of your sex, as I dare allow you any time you shall demand.


Fida. Sure Sir, you are much indebted to our sex, that think you owe so much
civility to me, that seem to be one of those that nature has appointed for a
punishment, thus to mourn for beautie's martyrs. My curiosity shall not presume
too much, since it is seconded with such a face. I would only know, whether you
were there at the last election of the Queen. And how the form is of receiving
those into the Society that desire admission.


G^^. I owe the sex so much, Lady, I am confident I shall not add one to the
number of those you call mourners: bu^ m^thinks your bl^ck becomes you so well,
as if beauty it self, weary of white and r^dd, had retired a while to black
for a vari^ty. I can resolve you Lady of the election of the Queen, who is
called Bel^esa. And having heard the laws readd at the coronation, can
instruct you in the form of rec^iving pretenders into the Society, which is
the manif^station of some cause wherein virtue, pressed by f^rtune to an
extremity, flies thither for a sanctuary, and brings her self entire.


Fida. I doubt not then of my being received, unless my birth prove such a
misfortune, as may make me unfit for that beauteous society* which I hear are
all such, they need not so much as a foil to set them out. Otherwise my
misfort^n^s are such, as it may seem a shame to virtue to be the subject of so
many.


Genesis Virtue, Lady, is always in hostility with diverse enemies, and even her
scarrs do not impair her but make her still entire. Therefore she suffers
nothing by her liablenesse to distress, and she is so beautiful, as she gives
your color a loveliness, that perswads me it is the brightness of your soul
shines through the darkness of your face, and brings me a pleasednesse that
seems rather inspired then attracted from your looks.


Fida. You have professed your self so happy Sir, you must needs have store of
pity to throw away upon misfortune; So I may please you in the exercise of
your own virtue, as necessity is delightful to an ingenuous liberality. Is the
Queen, Sir, that is to be chosen most by her beauty, unquestionably the
handsomest of all the society?


Genesis She is such a one, Lady, as will so much oblige you as to make you equal
to the rest of the society compared with her; there is in my mind so much
disparity, as all comparisons reach her alike. She put me that was armed with
love; I thought, of proof against all the world, to flight to save my self.


Fida. You have forgot nothing Sir, there that may serve you in recompense of
this civility?


Genesis Yes Lady I have forgot that there, which I never hope to remember more,
but as a danger, from which I owe the gods thanks for my delivery. You will
find Lady a Shepherd called Moramente lately received, he was a friend of
mine, to him you may be pleased to present the wishes of his friend that left
him lately.


Fida. I think Sir, our haste may now part us upon equal terms, they both
seem to require the prosecution of our way.


Genesis The gentlnesse of your conversation, Lady, and the harshnesses of your
condition both deserve, and seem to need a wish, I will leave with you,

May all your joys have leisure, sorrows haste,
Your wishes only by success displac't.

Enter Pantamora Pan. How unsure are the calmest harbors, mortality can ancor
in? Fortune has raised a storm for me, that drives me out even of this
security, and makes the exposure of my self to the wide Ocean of the world
again, a wished-for safety. My sinking here now is inevitable, and this safe
descent is more unsufferable to me then striking on a rock, and so to perish
with pre-eminence* The sad misfortune which admitted me into this sanctuary is
so outweighed by this that falls on me now, as even this place that did releeve
me then becomes my persecution. Here I found ease for all the pains, that
spiteful death, by his cursed seizure on my love, inflicted on me: but here is
none for the ^xtinction of my power, whose separation from a noble heart if it
be consolable, becomes the greater curse. In the remission of its self it must
consent in yielding unto comfort. Love is not such an irremediable passion as
ambition. Love when it goes least annihilates it self, and so becomes its own
remedy: ambition yields not to repulse, but scales up again as often as it is
thrown down, and so is less relievable All the comfort I can admit of, is,
that my vexation does so new a thing, as to defeat the peaceful virtue of
this place; though that will be much abated by the necessity of dissembling my
discontents. Here comes Melidoro and Camena. They are so pleased they will
easily be deceived.


Enter Melidoro, and Camena Came. We may give you, Pantamora, as much joy in the
resignation of your power, as Bellesa in the possession; since she can enjoy
but what you have done, and she can not till she resignt tha joy as you have
done.


Pant. I dot no repine Camena, at my resignation, but it is to avoid a sin not
as I am void of sense of soverainity, so as to prefer a private condition
before so public an eminence: and I believe the possession of ones self
enlarged much by the extent of power. Active thoughts are not to be weari^d out
by ease. They that prefer retreates and privacies for the enjoying of
themselves, cosen themselves of what they might improve in company; and so, it
may be, lose more in that they might acquire than that they make use of in the
easiness of their contentedness. Sure, for the prospect of my thoughts, I
would choose an eminence to set them in.


Meli. Sure Pantamora, if our thoughts take their horizon at a convenient
distance, the emission of them so far i^ a recreation to them. But if they look
so far as to mee^ no termination but the air, they lose themselves i^ their
extents. Privacy may send out thoughts so far as a conspicuous exaltation;
therefore sure they that in calm^ solitude can keep their wishes within their
reach, and their thoughts not much farther then their wishes, enjoy a much
happiness as they can think of, and none desire more.


Came. But it seems Pa^^^mor^, it is not the peace bu^ the priority that you
affect amongst us. And that thi^ place had only the virtue to ease you, as it
was capable (...) soverainity, not devoted unto solitude.


Pan. Mistake me not Cam^n^, I do not think it che^pens private joys, to
raise the value thus of hers that eve^ the gods intend advantage to. But I
forgive you, that b^ the estimation of your own happiness, cannot cons^^^ to
allow soverainity prec^d^ncy. You will bette^ unde^stand one another, therefore
I Will leave you where you will not be so easily mistaken.


Came. It Is a hard thing P^ntam^ra, not to be so in yo^ that change so often.


Exit Pantamora. Mel. How much do I owe you Camena, that have settled me above
Pantamoras wishes. I would desire soverainity for nothing but to lessen the
disparity which is between my passion, and power of serving you. And give me
leave Camena, with an humble patience, to show some sense of your disagreement*
to our demanding a dismission at this late Election.


C^mena. If Love, Me^idoro, raise it self to such a sovereignty as to possess
all power, and fortune in it self, and to neglect all other; then my
differring our remove from hence continues you in this your throne; for, they
say, Possession, and much more propriety, retrenches Love's prerogative.


Melid^ro. As love, Camena, seiseth all our senses, it keeps all their
faculties so busied, as they have not leisure to taste, much less to enjoy any
thing, and when our senses have preferred it up into our thoughts, there it is
inthroned higher, than any mortal joy can reach up to depose it. Love may rise
to this transcendent height, that it may seem to look down on all things, and
despise even enjoying: but, likely, our thoughts in this elevation stay not
long, but growing dizy fall. Therefore when our imaginations settle at such a
pitch, as our senses are within distance of them; then possession is a
foundation to maintain Love at that height: and such love, Camena, remains
unmoved, and sees the ruin of many aspiring passions that fall down by it.
Therefore possession what it takes off from loves summer-prospect in the
height, does recompense it with strength, and security against the change of
seasons.


Came. Then Melidoro, the impropriations of our selves proves us both more
habitable, and less delightful, and the security of your loves cools to a
tepid warmth, which is not only void of brightness, but of light. Love is
darkened, Melidoro, when the flame's p^tt out.


Meli. Hymen's torches do imply, Camena, loves flame is nourished, not put out:
and may not love blaze as well in them, as Cupid's wild fires?


Came. They say indeed, Melidoro, they are the emblems of the nuptial flames,
which go out with them.


Mel. All flames Camen^, as they be lightsome, so are they wavering too: we see
their light and their uncertain motions both at once. Therefore suppose this
flame of love put out by nuptial rites, it settles then into a temperate
heat; whose equal ardor purifies it more. For love like gold, Camena, must be
brought into a fluentnesse, and by receiving of impression so becomes most
useful.


Came. In this usefullnesse you speak of Melidoro, the gold is made lighter
still, and is made current by ^llay^ So women, like gold, lose of their value
for the good they do. I cannot yet resolve to abate so much from what I love
so well, my self, as to submit to a propriety.


Meli. Nuptial bonds Camena do not convey you over to the propriety of him
they are delivered to; they rather do enlarge the owning of your self. For
they make the same as your self, what you vouchsafe to join unto it. So you
are still owned, but by your self enlarged. D^ not fright me then Camena, with
that word [submission, when all I wish is but this Identity, To become mo^^
subject to you, because we do dispose of nothing so freely as our selves.


Came. That which in our freedom Melidoro, is an a^surance against these bonds,
after our engagement do^ expose us most to the penalty of them. This Identity
(...) man and wife, this aggravates our faults, as it imply^ the husbands
sufferings for them. This interesteth that whose tenderness hardens our lives
unto us, a husband^ honor, which is so delicate, as breath, nay imagination
wounds it; and our afflictions are presently ministered for remedies, and all
our suffering made legal by this Identity. Therefore Melidoro, I will not
hazard the blessing o^ my love to you by making you My-selfe, who have a title
dearer to me far.


Meli. It Is an affected cruelty Camena, to punish me for possibility of sinning,
and not to leave me so much as your love to joy in, by this ascription of my
punishment to that. No Camena, this is a deceit full of apparition of your
love, which like the Sun now it is setting seems to draw near us, when it is
remotest: therefore now I must expect a following darkness.


Came. Mark Melidoro, how you that would decline men's easines to jealousy, are
already insensibly crept into it.


Enter Votorio. Voto. Melidoro and Camena, I come to warn you both to the
Convocation. The Queen has appointed to day for the hearing of a new
Pretender, the hour is near at hand.


Came. We will both go along.


Exeunt. Enter Fidamira called Gemella. Gem. My innocence has strengthened
even the weakest part of me so, as to defeat the kings persute. And now
secured from those fears, lest I should once enjoy a thoughtlesse ease, I find
a care rise up before me, how I should disguise my story. Fortune has provided
such an excess for me, as I might spare the half, lest my distress may seem
so irremediable, as to exclude me from this ease. The strangeness of my curse
is such, as it excludes all belief, otherwise then that my complaint is vain.
And it is no discretion to allege the love of Princes, for a misfortune. I must
therefore degrade them of that quality, and relate them but as father and son,
this will interest both sexes in my pity, who am fled hither, choosing so to
make peace for others, to come and beg my own,


Enter Queen and the Society Queen. The pretender is already here, lets take
our places and give her audience.


Gem. The very introduction to my story, Ladies, may be a pretense enough unto
your pitties, that I am reduced to beg belief of you in that* which above all
things derogates from your selves, That your contrariety could be beloved. And
that which will avert you Gentlemen from the credit of it, is, that it may seem
a scandal to have this love imputed unto men; unto whose colors this of mine
may seem a stain, and not an ornament. Thus I am so miserable as before I
plead my cause, to make my judges justly parties against me; but, this wonder
past, and pardoned, then the consequence may easily be believed because it is
successively natural, A Father and a Son being the subjects of this wonder.
The passion of the son was first. The father followed it unknown to the son; of
which the father meant to apply the first discovery, only to benum and dead
what was left of life. This was that only pretense which the fury ^ealousy, did
allow the son* which had persuaded as it seems the father, that the blackness
of his thoughts would match the color Nature had meant to suit with mine. And
the gods know, I was so equally averse to both, as they had made our colors
The fathers purpose seemed to him past defeat; and finding me one day so
constantly unmoved with all those storms lover's complaints do raise, at last
this swelling sadness broke into a rage, and v^wed rev^nge. The which the
strangn^sse of, might be discr^dit^d in my belief, had not the wonder of his
love presaged unnatural events. He said, he would reduce himself to a
condition should defeat even my pity, and in revenge of my crosse-will would
frustrate even my power of helping him. And there he seemed to prove, this
purpose was designed above, since nature had cursed him unto the making of his
curs^, his son. Whose making was not thought enough, but his end too was
destined to him, and even for such a cause, as was a greater torment then the
act. Therefore he said, his thoughts condemned his son of more then parricide,
his intercepting of my love to him, and he should be sacrificed to this
suspicion. So little did the love of twice himself prevail, set by his love
to me. And this he said, he did acquaint me with, that my virtue which had been
his tormentor, might have the pain of being the cause, and knowing this
detestable effect without the means of a prevention, which his instant
execution should make impossible. And thus he seemed to fly from me, as if the
pleasure of this act already had displaced that of his being with me. Then I,
counseled by virtue in this strange surprise, which seeing as her self she had
not power to divert this rage, did prompt me to disguise her into a shape might
please his fancy for a while, and so delude this fury by its own resemblance.
Then I persuing him with haste stayed him, seeming to embrace his rage, not
wrestle with it. Then I told him that I did allow this brave resolve, as a
temptation high enough to justify my yielding to. And I could never have
thought to have met a humor worthy the matching mine unto. I told him, mine
was none of those warm tender hearts that sighs could blow into a flame. It
had an adamantine temper, which only blood can soften; and that he had done
like to that Painter, that had the figure of a lion running mad, and wanting
nothing but the foame to represent, grew so distracted with despair of hitting
it, as in a rage he threw his pencil at it, and by this chance did rarely
perfect his abandoned work: and so his fury had, throwing it self into so
high despair, made up that figure, which only could have taken me.

I told him, that his fears were true, and that his son was guilty of
interposing between him and me. But his offense was only natural, not active
against him, whose having of a son, had resolved me, not to submit the
pleasures of my bed to a minority in any thing. Therefore he that could intend
to kill his son to impossibilitate his joys, will easily do it to assure them.
Which if he would promise, on the belief of his brave mind, that had advanced
me to such proofs of it, I would advance his possession of me, even this
night, before the ceremonial rites. He agreed to this with so much joy, he
seemed to have made and not destroyed a son. That night, I having taken up the
time on such a pawn as this, made presently the best of it, and laid it out
so, as I thought the use of it should pay the principal. Therefore I sent
instantly to the son; and, by tokens, that I had taken from the father as
pledges of his word, assured him his death was purposed by his father, and that
night. That there did remain no time for any thing but flight. This he
believing did fly instantly. Which I assured of, my next part was now, to
unmask my virtue, whose vizard grew offensive. Therefore thus winged with
innocence, I did resolve to fly over these seas, which part our neighboring
lands, leaving a Letter which might clear my virtue, from that black engagement
I had made. And coming hither, the kind gods presented me with the self
equal report of so divine a body, as it offers it to the releife of all
nations and sexes, and my arrival here I cannot ascribe to less then a divine
direction.

Thus have you heard a Story, whose strangeness needs so much of your pity,
it must first ask your credit as a charity; which if you do vouchsafe, I
cannot doubt a fair commiseration. And the newness of this my pretense brings
somewhat with it, as a recompense for my admission, an enlargement of the
powerful virtue of this place which by receiving me into this happiness^,
shall show, it cannot only disappoint Fortune's malignity, but Nature's too.


Queen. Votorio, collect the voyees.


Votorio. No vote opposes the admission.


Gemella Nature, Madam, has by my humility lightened so the dark misfortune of
my birth, as ambition, whose color is my contrary, seems so unlovely to me,
as I shall wish nothing but rest and solitude, whose shades best fit with me.


Bellesa. Let the oath and habit be given her.


Exeunt. Enter Bonorio. Bono. How much does heaven approve of this compassion?
It has already paid me with all the blessings earth affords, and has made
the King the recompencer of my happy disobedience. He has since Fidamira's
flight heaped so much fortune and honor on me as if he meant that amazement
should take up all my senses, and leave me none to lament her love with, which
sorrow seems to him his prerogative, she would admit no partner in it.

But I have a pain deeper then any guess can reach to allay. Such a one as the
name of father forbids the cure of.

The king is gone this way, his afflictions make my curse inevitable; for even
their releife, the finding Fidamira, must prove her loss to me.


Exit Enter King. King. O Fidamira, thy fears have blemished even thy
innocence, in this unjust affliction of thy Prince, that had no thought but how
to show that Princes are happy in the means of setting virtue in its truest
light. If this purposed remove of thee out of thy Fathers house did shake thee
into needless fears, 'twas thy humility, that did not know, that thy
transcendent merit was so much, that a King could not spare the smallest
circumstance in all his power to honor it enough. So, what I was forced to do
even to avoid omission, thou did avoid for an excess. Was it not pain
enough for me to part with Basilino, without the addition of this strange heavy
curse, That his return should prove a torment to me? For so it must by this
distress of Fidamira, whose happiness I only was to account for, upon his
request O that he were come back, that I might free the name of King from such
misfortunes! and resigning to his g^iltlesse youth break off this thread by
ruder motions, and not stay till it wear out with age* I would my self
undergo a boundless pilgrimage, which, though it had no end but expiation of
my guilt to Basilino by the expiration of my self, I Would undergo it so. Most
of those I sent in search of her already are returned, and with their silent
sadness, bring mourning only for their answers. Into how wild a divination
have my straying sorrows led me here alone? and they have brought me to a way
whose shady melancholy seems to invite me to begin my Pilgrimage* Here comes
one too whose looks forespeak his news. What, have you found her?


Genesis Who should I have found?


King. Can thou look so and ask, Who? Is there so much sorrow left in all
the rest of the world as thou pretendest to, and not employed in F^damira? What
art thou, that seem so boldly sad to vye with me?


Genesis This is the king I must dissemble* I am one that may allow you any
subject you can choose about your self, and then dispute afflictions with you.
I am a voted Pilg^ime, whose wandering motions seek their aim hopeles of so
much rest as even the knowledge of the end they are directed to.


King. Alas, thou art so short of me, as even thy misery is my wish. Were it in
my choice to be a Pilgrim or a King, I Would choose thy curse for ease. If you have
nothing else to vye with me, you may add this unto your greifs, if you did
mean they should* exceed all others; they being now outsorrowed by me, whose
condition if you knew, would shame all your complaints.


Genesis My sorrows Sir, do ly so heavy on me, I cannot raise them up so high as
a relation; yours must be leighter, needs, that you can lift them so high as
your mouth.


King. This dumb dejection of your self under the pressure of affliction may
as well imply your weakness as the sorrows weight. And silence so may equal
all pretensions unto misery. Therefore raise your complaints so high to put
them in a balance against mine, to try the which out-weighs.


Genesis I am content to leighten yours to weigh with you. I have loved, and have
been so near enjoying, as the disappoyntment did double the pain, by the
reflex of that which lightt on her I loved, by this differring of our joys
which I am now more distanced from, than I was ever near.


King. I did resist and overcome a passion, whose opposition had but left me
one pain in all the world greater than it, and that fell on me, the
disappointment of hi^ love, for whose success I only could have yielded, and I
remain^ guilty in the opinion of them both, a^ the defeater of their joys.

The one I shall never see again, to undeceive. The other I must see so
guiltily deceived, as he unjustly must cond^mne his father.


Genesis This is the only misery (I do confess) I could allow a pity to. This is
a lending of your senses to others torments, whose joys only they cannot taste.
Your own wishes in my mind could not releeve you, since they tend only to
others ends.

I do allow you so much advantage Sir, as I confess your present misery is
above my fears. But give me leave to ask* as a stranger to your country and
your story, Whether this Fidamira that you named be yet a live. Methinks her
death might ease you much.


King. Kind pilgrim, In the absence of my son, jealous of, so much comfort as
my care, my cursed fate guided her the only way unto my guilt, her flight. I do
not think her dead, no more then a disguise may be a preparation to it. As
death may have a better pretense to seize her then as not her self, than in
the lively illustration of her self, to whom all lives are due. And to let
thee see, kind Pilgrim, how due to me this thy ingenuous yielding was, I will
direct thee to an ease of all thy miseries, while mine are unreleevable. I Will
terminate thy aimelesse course, and point thee out to such an end, whose sa^e
attainder shall center thy sorrows up in rest. You have heard sure of the
Shepherds Paradise, whose peaceable bounds have that strange virtue from the
gods, as to include all those within a peaceful acquiescence, that are
admitted there. Thither repair, for though you have not grief enough to weigh
with mine; yet your misfortune's full enough for a pretense to be received even
there. And when you find the smiles of that smooth place laugh at your
wrinkled sorrows past, then for my sake dispute your joys with those
contented souls. For you may sooner there outvie all their delights* than my
distresses, should you run on in this sad maze till you did measure all the
world and end your days.


Genesis I will submit my self to your directions Sir, but to an end differing so
far from what you do prescribe as mine shall be in a defiance unto peace. I
will even there raise up new sorrows which my dist^acted soul shall there
erect for trophies, got from the cont^sting virtue of that place; which my sad
life shall so defeat, as all those joys that shall incompasse me, shall by
the deadness of my sense, serve but to prove my miseries the more complete.


King. Follow my counsel friend; it may be the virtue of this place may be so
strong, it shall incline your own willingness toward your relief. I must
leave you, and I am sure not far out of your way toward my advice.


Genesis The gods be with you Sir, and may you live to be a wonder in the contrary
extreme of what you now are. Alas, good King, how patient have I been to allow
your sorrows victory, striving with mine, which these were too that you
brought forth. For Fidamira's flight belongs simply to me, and has no comfort
but the admiration of her virtues, which this happy meeting with the King has
so exalted as the wonder mingles with the sense of my disappointment, and so
tempers it into a hopeful patience. The kings counsel is so good, it will
serve for more then he intends it, and I hope for as much joy to him, as he
meant ease to me. I will go back directly to the Prince, and now assure him
that the Princess of Navarr is dead, to stop his fathers course. And as I
find his thoughts are fixed or moved from Fidamira, so contrive his return;
the which will quickly unconceal my Fidamira, who must needs be hid in some
neighboring privacy secure from her virtuous fears.

This penance of not seeing her, I take as due unto these faulty eyes that have
been pleased with another object. Which now redeemed shall make me watch their
straying motions with a stricter care.

Beauty shall slide from them as it falls
Like smooth things lighting upon crystal balls,
Whose touch does part and not together fix
Their own agreeing makes them cannot mix.
So beauty in mine eye shall meet with such
I cannot fix, but pass as it does touch.

Exit. Enter Bellesa, Moramente, Martiro. Bell. That which you reported of the
Prince, Moramente, is now fully confirmed by this Moor that we admitted last.
She past that way she said, and so describes his person and his parts, it
seems a miracle that faith or honor could have virtue to r^sist his will.


Mora. I know the Prince, Madam, so well, I wonder more at the unfitness of
his wishes, than at the gods refusal. Which was a gentle punishment of his
forgetting self. And I believe wherever he is gone, heaven will direct him to
a choice, between which, and his own, there shall be as much odds, as between
his choosing and the gods.


Bell You believe then Moramente, he will love again, and by a high success
shall know he was reserved by heaven, for more then he could wish at first, you
think heaven does allow of love's twice.


Mora. As it does intend, Madam, all good should rise to its perfection, our
minds are but love's pupills at the first. Which fit themselves but to proceed
and take degrees, and so our second love is a degree wherein our souls attain
to experience that imploys it self in loves refinement. So not by the first
step, but by this gradation, Love ascends unto its highest.


Bell. I will allow you Moramente, Love is no irradiation of a light into our
souls whose first instant brightness is in its perfection. But may not the
first spark be kept alive and raised unto as high a light, as can the second,
which is kindled still by putting out the first?


Mora. It Is not an extinction of the flame, it is but a change of the material
that fomented it: so second loves have this advantage, they being the first
instant in that height the first was long agrowing to, and have the first
comparison to raise themselves by, which must prove it higher by having got
above it.


Bell. These degrees of elevation M^ramente, you require in Love, infer this
consequence that love should be a continual motion, by change aspiring to
transcendency. For it comparison does raise it so, he is to blame that takes
but one. For by your inference the number must exalt no^last unto the greatest
height. Your inconstancy does not concern us so, as you should strive to prove
it a virtue to us.


Mora. In this degree Madam, which I have named Love comes to touch a point,
after which all motion is a declination. I do not allow loves leightnesse, or
variety contributors unto its height. I do agree the glory of it, is in a
consistency in this elevation the second love attaines to; because the first
cannot know how high it is. Had I thought inconstancy a virtue, Madam, I never
had been blessed with this so great a joy as seeing you.


Bell. What Moramente says, Martiro seems to justify the Prince his second
love, and so to make his cause a president to plead his own by, since their
fortunes do reresemble much in the miscarrying of their loves.


Mar. So he has reason, Madam; for the Prince's case would warrant any private
^ans dismission of such thoughts whose entertainment did so much defame loves
power by his Tyranny; and they ill subjects are, whose constant sufferings do
better the world from his subjection which can be taken only by their will.


Bell. I do confess the Prince for many reasons might not only be allowed but
wished a second, and succesfull love; that he may know our Sex have joys that
may outprise his sufferings; be may else grow vain in this his sorrow, and
believe love owes his more then it can pay in all our Sex.


Mora. What Madam then is my condition? whose sufferings I should think injured
compared with his, did I not find the Prince exalted by you to so high a pity,
as I am glad mine were now likened to them, might not I pre^end to have my
second choice, wisdom, not inconstancy?


^el. I believe you might; and I should pity you the more, were you not here
in this deligh^^ull ^^^ce, and he abroad in search of that you have attained,
Forgetfulln^sse.


Mora. You speak Madam, as though you wished him here; where would he were
even in my place, and I any where but with your pity.


Bell. You wish Moramente much against him, and more against your self: for you
had my pity in your admittance, you had it at first sight; and, since, you
have my interest in all your joys as part of the Society.


Mora. If I wish him Madam in my place it is that I dare wish more in his brave
name then in my own, in whom so insolent a wish as your esteem could find but
such a pity as distraction does.


Bell. I do esteem you so much Moramente, as I dare never resolve to pity you
so much. I trust the virtuous peace of your composed, and settled thoughts.


M^r. M^^amente is so civil, Madam, he would make the virtue of this place
defective, to endear your power by the applying of his wishes unto you. And
your civility to us Madam is such, you borrow now this time from your devotions.


Be^* It Is true, Ma^tiro, time is not so civil as to stay for any body.


Mora. I have yet devotion enough Madam to forgive M^rtiro his excess. I Will
stay behind a little to dispose my self to that. Exeunt Bellesa, M^rtiro.

I see there is no vizarding of love to make it pass abroad unknown; the eye
or mouth are even enough to show what it is. Nay did young Love himself wish a
disguise he could not ever be fitted. For who can take a measure of a growing
love? where every instant adds as much as even your thought can comprehend. And
now Love seems to promise more advantage by this self discovery. It prompts
me to Martiro's friendship, whose trust will both afford my love more room for
recreation of it self, and help to carry it nearer Bellesa by an insensible
approach, which it may make by him. I will profess ^y passion freely to
Martiro. I am sure to be believed, that's a joy which I defy my own misfortune
to oppose me in. But I must not provoke it with unthankfullnesse* I must
acknowledge to my misfortune the debt of this experience.

All love's a light* which as it does eject
Shadows, by them it does it self detect.
So he that thinks love can be shaddowed quite
Knows not, there is no shadow without light.
I will contribute now to B^llesa's knowledge, and will leave these verses
here, which she must find at her return. Exit.


Enter Gemella. Gem. Is this strange discovery part of my curse, my finding out
of the Prince, only that I might miss Agenor? The peace this place affords had
been too much for me without this disquiet of Agenors parting with the Prince.
I can guess no reason, unless he should, finding him settled here, have asked
leave to go back again unto the King with the design of seeing me. Which I am
aptest to suspect. I^ does so well agree with my misfortunes such a
disappointment. And yet I findsome bold devining-thoughts, that thank my fears
that brought me hi^her. And promise me I shall redeem the Prince his favor,
by so strange a service. He may think I ow the virtue of my faith unto his
fate, that did compel me to inconstancy. Which was ordained that his despair
might welcome this destined blessing so much more; and I shall have a double
merit by my contribution of despair and hope. I do confess his passions, and
already have professed his praises, and he is himself our Prince. And now I
must apply my self to the success of his disguise. I shall so studiously
pursue his end, as his consent unto Agenor's choice and mine shall be a joy of
his, and no reward. Here lies a paper. This is his hand, I cannot mistake, mine
eyes are not disguised. These are verses full of passion. I Will keep them so, as
she he meant them to, shall see them more recommended, then this chance can do.


Enter Pantamora. Pan. I thank my thoughts for this reproach they send me. Now
the wish of my contribution to the successes of my love, which now again has
mastred my ambition; and all the quarrel I have now unto Bellesa, is, the
having envied her, that so low a passion should be in me, for which I will
accept no less satisfaction from my self then the dis-lustering of her in
Moramen^'s eyes. I am confident she is already settled there with all the
advantage love can choose. And sure, she cannot choose but see her self there
by the reflex of his addresses, which are so clear as her conivance implies she
finds her self no way disfigured there. Yet all this is no more advantage
then I may allow her. I would not meet with lesser difficultyes to expiate my
envy, which my heart has let it self descend to. And now my thoughts shall
take their rise no lower then the admiration of her beauty and her virtues, and
from thence carry my loves success above them all. I will not strike on the
flat of envy or destraction, but in fair conspicuous flights will make above
her. Exit.


Enter Moramente Mora. To what a rashness has my Love transported me? as if I
might expect my passion had given me an equal power over others to that it had
assumed over me. I did deliver up my wishes to Martiro, with such a confidence,
as if I had granted his contribution to them as a suit. He answered me with
such cold civility as did imply surprise. He said, he wondered that so noble a
passion could be so defective in so essential a point as secrecy. But that he
would impute this opening of my self to him a desire of making him a friend by
this advance of such a trust, as must express my confidence in him by the
exposure of my happiness to his discretion. In return of which, he said he
would promise me so strict a secrecy, as my love should be locked up with the
profoundest secret^ of this world, his hidden thoughts; which should never have
more air then would afford them breath only to live, but not to speak. How
dull was I, not to believe before that all that had seen her, were in love with
her? I Will give security now for my believing it, a general distrust of all the
world. All women needs must envy her, and all men me for the out-loving them. I
will punish this my looseness so, I will endure the guilt of breach of
friendship for it, and lock it up even from Genorio at his return.


Enter Genorio led by two Soldiers. Soul. We may discharge ourselves of this
charge now, having met you Sir, who are of the society. He demands Votorio, to
whom, you can direct him better then we.


Mora. This stranger, friends, is addressed to me, where you may leave him, and
take your discharge.


Soul. We obey Sir, and leave you.


Exeunt Soldiers. Mora. Do thou bring news Genorio, that thou had rather
thy clothes should tell than thou? What black traver^e have thou brought, to
draw between me and my joys were flying to embrace thee.


Geno. I am happy Sir, to come to be embraced by you in this infectious Color
which must fully and black you too.


Mora. Throw then Genorio those blacks over me, for nothing can appear so ugly
unto me as this party-colored doubt.


Genesis If the blacks be not so polished Sir, as you may see your self in them,
then let your thoughts sink down as low as possibility can fall, and they must
needs find your misfortune there. You have not many to confound your choice.


Mora. It must be that, Genorio, that which sinkes beyond the center of
misfortune, so as it ascends upward unto heaven in a rebellion for Saphira's
elevation thither. My distraction tells me it must be that, and justifiys this
seizure on me. I am so mad already, I do not wish it should be less. And I am
not so happy as to be naturally mad, for I have so much sense left yet Genorio,
as to thank thee for the exempting of thy self from so soul a thing as
telling it me.


Genesis Give me leave to tell you Sir, you have not guessed so much misfortune,
as your distraction is going now to make. Suppose heavenly Saphira at her home.
Will not the part of lamentation that you ow her, ask an entire soul to pay it
her? why then do you tear that apeices, which even whole will be too little to
offer up unto her memory? do you think that less then a man can be enough to
mourn for her? Then Sir, collect your senses, and by this union strengthen them
for the imposure of this weight, that they may be the bearers of this sacred
hearse. This leight-distraction shows they would fly from it as a burden*
Therefore Sir, consider what shame it will be for you to mourn for the divine
Saphira as you are not your self.


Mora. As I am my self Genorio, I must needs be the unfittest to mourn for
her; for so I owe her most, and am unworthy even of an ability to acquitt my
self. Should I speak to save those senses that were guilty of her death? No
Genorio, no less then running mad, and biting even the virtue of the place, so
as by my inf^ction it may distracted dye, and turn this Paradise into a
mourning wilderness, where nothing but wild sorrow shall abide. There is
nothing but the virtue of this place so inverted, can be a monument of grief
fit for the divine Saphira.


He offers to go out. But stay, before I go Genor^o, tell me the manner of her
leaving of this world, that I may be higher swollen with this black raging
poison I must spread, that I may overcome all Antidotes this place is
strengthened with.

Genesis The knowledge of this circumstance will be so useful to you Sir, as you
must give me leave now to condition for the imparting of it; Since not your
self, I need ^ot own my duty, therefore promise Sir to reassume so much sense
as to comply with your own duty, and your dear fathers wishes. Whose sorrows
for your absence joining with his age, will quickly rob you of some part of
those distracted griefs requiring a great share for him. Therefore your duty to
Saphira should advise you to avoyde so sad a mixture as his death must be,
which must part griefs with her. And were it but to raise your mourning as a
private man up to the height of a great Prince, you were obliged for that to
re-inthrone your self, that by this low dejection of yourselfe, it might so
become the greater fall, and so you advanced in your design of honoring
Saphira.


Mora. Does my father summon me Geno^io to the performance of my word, in my
return? I will begin at this great height of strayning nature, in my
disobedience to him, I must benight the luster of this place. Courts of
themselves are sad enough Genorio, each one has there his own particular
affliction that benum's him of the sense of others. No Genorio it must be here,
among these joys, where greife's a miracle, that I must celebrate the
funerals of the divine Saphira, and so give blacks to all this society. If you
will leave to me to guess the manner of her death, I Will show I am so stark
mad, as I Will believe she dyed for love of me.


Genesis I Will contribute so much to the madness of the belief Sir, as to let you
know she dyed married to the King of Albion, whom her beauty which was only
undisguised in her retreat into his country, which she chose for solitude,
raised her to the public eminence of Queen, without the help of any other
quality; all which until her death she kept concealed, unwilling to owe any
thing but to her beauty.


Mora. This may allay my grief into a sober melancholy which I must now impose
upon my self, the only means of expiation left. This methinks has brought me
to my self again, her having been another's. And now Genorio I will promise
thee to stay but to use the virtue of this place for the recovery of this sad
disease was growing on me. Therefore do you pretend to be admitted h^re, and I
will promise within few days to declare my self, and so return. I Will go and
send Votorio to you.


Exit Moramente Genesis I will obey you Sir, and with no less merit by the pain
of staying now, than in the leaving you before. Sure fortune is not blind, it
could not lead us up and down, thus, as it were in such intricate and many
changes, at it does. She has brought me back hither, and persuades me now she
will conveigh me to my end by staying here. Sure this pretense of staying here
to mourn was but found out as the best disguise Love can put on, because the
blackest sorrow. And nothing will conceal love longer then an approved
pretense to sadness. I must apply my observation, and my curiosity as a
stranger, to discover whether his thoughts be not more fixed on Bellesa's life
then Saphira's death.


Enter Votorio. Voto. The Gods protect you, Sir; Moramente told me you demanded
me.


Genesis He has obliged me Sir, in so speedy procuring of this favor, I am come
to entreat your help in an audience, for the delivery of my pretense to be
admitted into the Society. Fortune, since I went from hence, has so intended
my persecution, as if my having been but here had been a declaration of my
self against her. Therefore now I am come back hither for Sanctuary, with this
to recommend my sad pretense the having suffered for my b^ing here.


Exit Votorio. Enter G mella. Gem. It is you Sir, have brought this darkness
with you, that has ore-cast Moramente thus.


Genesis I assured only his enquiry in somewhat he desired to know abroad, which
if it has afflicted him, it will add somewhat to my pretense. The misfortune
of having been so cursed as to bring sorrows hither, it will be in your power
Madam, now to over-pay that which you were so lately pleased to call civility,
my direction of you hither. Your happy admittance here must needs indebt you to
any body that did but contribute so much as showing you the way.


Gem. That which helped you to retain me in your memory may excuse me for your
being fallen almost out of mine. This black made me notorious to you and has
disguised you to me. It seems you are owner as well as bearer of part of
Morament's greife^.


Genesis Among all misfortunes Madam, I have not this of nature, the being
insensible of what friendship should affect me with, and so only this
particular touches me, my own dysasters challenging this habit.


Gem. Your own misfortunes are now to be releeved by our knowledge of them: but
you may ease us by the acquaintance of this grief which you have brought to
Moramente.


Genesis I wonder Madam, it falls so heavy on him to cause this dejection, since
it falls on him but from another whom it fell on first. It Is the death Madam of
the Princess of Navarr, whom the Prince his Highness was so in love with, as
he left his fathers Court even to ask nothing but her pardon. The story is too
long to satisfy you by, of the Prince his reasons. But this is enough to
possess you of the reason of Moraments sorrows, his love and duty to the
Prince.


Enter Votorio. Voto. The Queen Sir, is going to the audience-seat, and it is
time for you to move that way.


Genesis I follow you Sir. In hope of time enough hereafter, to ask your pardon,
Lady.


Gem. I shall meet you presently Sir, and I hope embrace you, as one the gods
seem to favor, and to have forgiven by their direction of you into this
Society.


Exeunt Vo^orio, Genorio. Gemella. The gods should too much enlarge me to
furnish me with more ad^iration of the virtue of this place. Sure they chose to
make me thus happy, as the subject whereon the virtue of this place might get
the greatest honor by the despair of my condition, that I should live to miss
Genori^, to endeare the finding him here. This is he, my joys tell it me
better then my eyes. The Prince is here, and left the sense of the Princess
Saphiras death might qualify these joys, the Prince being in love with the
divine Bel^esa is fallen out to make her death as it were a sacrifice to all
our lives. This free's the Prince from any scruple in his love, and so prepares
the wished success unto Agenor and my self. I will conceal my self still unto
Agenor. It is not jealousy, but to do him right by this allowance of so much
merit, as his constancy must be, in this place, imparadised in the strength of
temptations of our Sex: and I love him so I Would have him outmerit me in what
only I can alleadg it, constancy, which in a defense against this place's
beauty will be done. I do not despair of Belles^s taking too, my approaches
have been succes^ull yet.

Love's well advanced, entrenched within our ears,
It works securely covered from our fears.
If e're it come to parley under ground
But with our thoughts, we likely do compound.

Enter the Queen, and all the Society. Voto. Moramente by me begs your
Majesty's pardon for his absence which his indisposition has occasioned.


Bell. I am sorry for the justness of his excuse. Let the ^^tender begin.


(...) Behold deaths Herald, sent to proclaim a Victory (...) he lately had
over love, by which both sexes are defeated so, as men may fear the being
loved, and women may justly leave from loving, since nothing but dying can show
that they can love enough. Behold and pity me whom death keeps thus alive by my
despair. In living to proclaim his Triumph, not only in my love, but in my
life, I am that wretched he, that shame unto my sex, that was beloved by such a
one, as had not sin enough to die, but death was feign her virtue to employ.

This treachery did death use me with, whilst I was as I may say even in his
company, as much as darkness and absence represent him. In this separation
then, death I may say betrayed love too: for 'twas the deadly sin of lust,
armed with the power of a Prince that did assault the virtue of this matchless
She. To save whose life she gave her own to death delivering it with her own
hands. Which being not strong enough to defend her innocence, were innocent in
the defeat of her own life when it stood against her innocence. After this, do
not believe that I pretend admission here for comfort, but bound to seek
through all the world the place which is the truest enemy to lust, and death,
which all consent is this; for that virtue which defyes the first, defeates the
last of his power. Therefore I must implore your aid in this, that in revenge
of this injurious life which nature is not so kind as to allow me hope of a
justifiable freeing of my self of, I may live here where only life is such, as
it despises death.


Bell. Votorio, collect the votes


Voto. They agree for his admission.


Bell. And I confirm it too. But methinks death has not been so injurious as
your sense would make it in this cause for it seems to have come in upon the
rescue, not the arrest; and we are interessed in your life as a record of the
virtue of our sex.


Genesis Did I not justly prefer the estimation of this place before the rest of
the world, I should have been a moving monument, and should have dispersed her
Epitaph as far as life would have have served to carry me. But since in this
one cent^ meets all the extended lines of virtue that touch this worlds
circumference, here I have chosen to fix my self; that in a firm consistency
the dimension of this virtue might be trulier taken here.


Bell. Votorio, let him be sworn.


Vot. You shall be obeyed, Madam.


The fourth Act.
Enter Moramente reading of a paper. Mor. MY whole life Saphira should have
been thy Epitaph, had not thy end dispensed with my beginning. This is an
obligation which my fancy brings unto thy memory, which I will offer to it now.


Enter Gemella. Gem. The Queen, Moramente, hearing of your indisposition, is
come to visit you.


Mor. The Queen, Gemella? Let her not be so cruel as so soon to interupt my
senses in a sorrow that they are paying. But the seeing her will set me so
behind by such an interposing joy, as will so lighten all I can pay after, as
there will nothing pass for weight.


Enter Bellesa. Mora. Madam you have set all my sorrows, that I ought my
friend, upon my own account for my unworthiness of so sovereign a remedy as
your presence.


Bell. What distemper is it Moramente, that detained you thus long from the
Society?


Mora. If e're your sight did cure any Madam, call it that; for that is the only
mark that I shall e're remember it by.


Bell. They say you have a freindship so ieneere to you, and so refined, as you
are wounded through it. What paper's that you seem to be suprised with in your
hand?


Mora. The tenderness of friendship Madam, is the best constitution of it, and
misfortunes that fall first on friends have not their weight broken by the way,
but fall heavier as they bring them down upon us. This paper, Madam, is a part
that I have acted personating the unhappy Prince, whose sorrows I took so
cruelly on me, as they do excuse the insolence of taking his person too, in
this meditation on Saphira's death.


Bell. Pray let me see it, Moramente. G^mella showed me verses of yours the
other day, which I liked well, they were discreetly passionate.


Mora. These, Madam, I dare commend more, as they concern me not so much. I Will
read them to you, Madam, in the person of the Prince upon the death of the
Princess of Navarr.

Having allowed my sorrows choice of pain,
They have chose this, the searching still in vain
The cause of this strange death, and though on earth
I find more reason for it, then for her birth,
As curses are much more then blessings due;
Yet that does not seem strange enough for new.
Methinks heaven's wisdom needed not disburse
Such treasure, to resume it for a curse.
But as the benefactor's use, or want,
Does justify resuming of his grant:
So the recalling her does but imply
Her want brought heaven unto necessity,
So heaven did re-impropriate this wealth
Not to impoverish us but store it self.
This then me thought, did me some reason show.
Because, it did transcend all reason so:
Then carried by this rapture up above,
I found that all the gods had been in love
With her, so as their immortality
Would have been tedious to them, if to dye
Had been the way to her* so, to be even
With all their loves, she died and went to heaven.

Bellesa. The cause of your pain Moramente ought to cease, if it depend on the
finding of a cause strange enough for this lamented death. Did you ever see the
Princess of Navarr?


Mor. I must confess, I am eased of all the pain that I have ever heard of;
and that which does remain does not detract from your virtue Madam, since I
ought to think your knowledge of it, would but improve it. In not having seen
the Princess, I attribute rightly unto the Prince, who as I conceive could not
possibly arrive in Albion before her death.


Bellesa. Sure Moramente, her Marriage was her death unto the Prince; that
breath which did bequeath her to another, was her expiration to him.


M^r. I believe Madam, the having made her self away must needs lessen much his
devotion to her ^^rtues; nor do I believe that e're he meant to love her; but
moved with a religious sense of those hazards of hers he was accountable for,
did vow this search for expiation, not expectance of her love.


Bell. Sure, love is very injorious, or it is injured much by men's complaints;
for, since my coming hither I have heard no pretense to a misfortune, but Love
has had the imputation of it. Sure you know what Love truly is; therefore
instruct me what in it self it is, that never heard of it but c^iminated with
sad effects.


Moramente. I shall retract all my complaints if I be so happy as to be the
first, that informs you Madam what love is, and shall do so great a service
unto Love it self, as it has but one recompense great enough for my reward.

True Love, Madam, is a Spirit extracted out of the whole mass of virtue; and
two hearts, so equal in it as they are measured by one another, are the
vessels where it is refined, heated naturally by each others eyes, and joined
by pipes as subtle as our thoughts, by which it runs so fast from one into
another, as the exchange and the return are but one instant. And to confirm
this doctrine, you Madam by this receipt may make it when you please.


Bellesa. The reason then that I have heard Love called a poison, is, when this
Spirit is intended to too high a degree of heat.


Mor. If it be drawn from good ingredients, it cannot rise to an excess. Pure
Love is a virtue Madam that has no extreme; and wild desires take but Love's
name, as rash blasphemers do repeat the gods by an habitual sin, by which
they only do profane themselves. It is desire, Madam, you have so often heard
called poison. It Is true, that is a mineral which if it be not well tempered and
prepared, is very dangerous; but, so disposed, it quickens the virtue of all it
mixeth with.


B^l. Me thinks Moramente you conclude, There must be a conformity of two
hearts for Love's composure, and so a single one that gets not another to join
with it cannot attain to Love's perfections.


Mo^. Loves perfection Madam, is such a blessing as the gods have, not left in
the power of any one to consummate* but, to indear it by the difficulty, have
ordained it should depend on the consent of two. This rarity in nature else,
would prove too cheap if every single heart could be possessed of it. Therefore I
conclude that loves perfection must be such a compacted union of two hearts so
close, as there is not so much as even a wish left out between them.


Bell. But how can this be done? For I have heard most women say, that when our
hearts are softened so as they are impr^ssive, then men think themselves their
sovereigns, having set their Image on them; and so our hearts are rather
wrought into subjection, then that equal union you describe.


Mor. I confess, Madam, there may be men as vain as women's fears: but, vanity
though it take many marks upon it self, yet leaves but seldom any. It is so
light, Love never feels it as it passes over it; therefore Madam, Vanity does
but polish Love in its own conceit, and so sees it self in it, and pleases it
self with the reflex without the impression left. But a man's heart possessed with
true love as soon as it perceives but the least gentleness, where it is
applied to move, then with humble insinuations it works it self under that
heart, it means to raise in this injection of it self into it; so that the
woman's heart is not subjected but exalted by this union.


Bellesa. You conclude then Moramente, that all love is a desire refined into
the parity in union; and I have heard Martiro say, Love's soul was made of the
impossibility of union: How can these two be reconciled?


Mor. I have heard of men so long immured up in darkness, they began to make a
sight out of the habit of privation of it: and so despair at last may thus
suppose it self a light, and custom may delude it, and such dark visions
Madam are better wondered at then intended to disprove.


Bell. I confess Moramente, I incline more to your opinion, as the more clear
by far. Martiroes lessons are yet too hard for so young a beginner as I, I
shall acknowledge my self your pupil as the first I ever understood Love by. I
hope you will come abroad now. Pray give me this paper, left it make you fall
into a relapse.


Mor. You are a greater Mistrisse in love Madam then you know of: for I have
not told you half of that I have heard of you, the repetition of which would
ease me more then the repetition of all other griefs. I have so desperate a
disease, Madam, I cannot hope for a relapse.


Exit Bellesa. Mora. Can chance be trusted with more treasure then even love
can glory in, kindness from the divine Bellesa? [I shall acknowledge you the
first that ere I understood love by.] How well has she expressed her ignorance
in love by speaking thus plainly of it? Thus much understood by her that said
it, were theme enough to change my story, and make it more succesfull then ever
i^ was cross. But this was said by chance, to let me see fortune is so
confident in my oppression, as she dare show me joys in her hand to scorn me
by.


Enter Pantamora. Pan. I wonder Moramente, how so much sorrow did remain for
you, since your affliction has been parted amongst all of us. And none has
taken a larger share of it then I.


Mora. I need not Pantamora excuse this sense occasioned by me; since all your
sex is interested more in this your loss then any one of ours, as you might
glory that she was your own.


Pan. Sure Moramente the desire of that glory must have been the rack on which
your soul has been extended to raise your sorrows thus. Freindship gets not
so far within us as to shake us so.


Mora. As freindship appropriates all joy, so Pantamora I have wished it as the
greatest blessing I could wish the Prince, if he desired it, to appropriate his
sorrows also.


Pan. This is vanity Moramente, that lightens through those clouds incompasse
it; as if you would seem to present the Prince with all you have, your love,
and sorrows too. I will help you forward Morament by my belief that there
goes not only your passion, but her sense of it to justify your griefs: And I
confess it is not unlikely you should move wheresoever you should apply.


Mora. I was never so near any happiness as even this mistake of yours. For
this, Princess, I confess; I was not in so much certainty of despair, as in
all other good fortunes I have been, because I never saw her, nor she me.


Pan. ^ confess I guessed by that neernesse to the Prince your sadness did
avow you, you might have been employed by him in his passion to Fidamira, which
we have heard of, either to divert, or delay the match, and from thence derive
your interest to so much sorrow. But will you so far affirm this truth as to
profess you love another now? for I cannot allow any thing else but Love such
a passion of a noble heart, as this your thoughtfullnesse implies.


Mora. If I did love Pantamora, would you infer from thence the justness of my
greifes, and so conclude me unhapy even by Fate?


Pan. No Moramente, It may be I believe so of your omen as I would share
something in the direction of your love toward the success of it. For I
should impute your misfortune sooner to your own fault in choosing, than to your
ordaining Fate.


Mora. Suppose then Pantamora I were to love, How would you direct my choice
toward an apparency of success?


Pan. You have a person and a virtue Moramente to discredit counsel by
mastering improbabilityes. You may succeed in what friendship might be bound to
a disswasion in.


Mora. It Is true, I cannot think my self repaired by less then all that love
can give, since I have suffered all it can inflict. And if I would expose my
self again unto the hazard of a wish it should be such, as but the
possibility of it should shame the more apparency of failing in it.


Pan. The attemptingnesse of your spirit is not to be reproved, but you must
know that it is not difficulty, should most indeare our undertakings if we may
rise by easiy unresisted stepps unto an equal height. It Is not the scrambling
up a precipice that is to be preferred where there is equality in all but
easiness, there difficulty impaires and not improves the value.


Mora. I suppose Pantamora, all love's success is equally removed from me,
therefore would I make a choice, whose eminent desperateness might some way
flatter me in the disappointment of my wishes.


Pantamora. There may be such a virtue Moramente, as it may make too strict an
opposition to it, a fault as an extreme too distant from it; and so, difficulty
de^priseth what it would set off.


Moramente. Such a virtue as yours Pantamora might challenge a complacencie in
all its wishes, that insolency in me were more misfortune then loves power
reaches to shame me with.


Pantamora. If you could learn to wish as I do Moramente, youl'd find much ease
in the avoiding of a harsh resistance.


Moramente. As you do Pantamora? that is with nothing. You are in a condition
never to wish, but out of charity to others.


Pantamora. If so, they are all now employed on you, that your nearest wishes
may end with the same success as mine.


Moramente. And in return of this civility, I shall wish no more success then
I believe is due to yours.


Exit Pantamora. Moramente. Can this too, be by chance? Sure it is, that each
one here is an Oracle of Love. So that all that is said's ambiguous, but even
this in the fair^t sense could not divert me from Bellesa's riddle.


Enter Genorio. Moramente. I congratulate, Genorio, your admission here: what
think you of this place? were I not better stay here a while, then venture back
so soon into that dangerous air where Fidamira breathes?


Genorio. I believe Moramente (for so I now must call you) this place already
has furnished you with such an antidote as you might venture to seek out
Fidamira, and defy the power of her love. You may much less then, apprehend
the danger of the place, from which she has now removed all virtue, your
father's Court.


Moramente. Why? is she gone from thence Genorio? did thou call her Saphira
mistrusting my obligation of a sorrow great enough for her? or have thou
plagues in store for me, and do produce them thus successively, left
overcharged, I should break all in pieces?


Genorio. No Moramente, Fidamira is not dead. She is only frighted from your
fathers Court by the fears of too conspicuous a life, to avoid the guilt of
others sins, rumor, and calumny; and guided by her virtue, that was shie even
to a degree of wildness is fled, and whither known only to the gods: your
fathers search has proved that she is hid from all mortality, his care has
been so exquisite.


Moramente. No, I am confident she is not dead by this Genorio, I could not
have been so long suspended from the sense of such a curse. She Is not so much
as strayed, for the gods must needs guide her in a journey they have sent her.


Genorio. Me thinks, you should not name the gods without remembrance of the
bonds of nature, and of piety you stand engaged to them in, to relieve your
father; whose tenderness of all your prayers sinks under the pressure of a
fresher grief than your unhappy absence, the flight of Fidamira. His goodness
is such he fears more your imputation of it to the forfeit of his promise,
then he fears all his present sorrows.


Moramente. I will presently Genorio ease him of all those fears by writing to
him as from France, to thank him for such honors meant to Fidamira as did
make good his promise. Her fears better than her assurance proves it. I will
acq^aint him too, with the remove of all those sad occasions drew me from him.
And I will promise him a speedy and a joyful meeting, which I will perform
too; for at the next election which approaches now, I will declare my self,
and so return.


Genorio. This is the least you owe your father Sir, but all I think you can
yet spare him, engaged as you are here.


Moramente. Well Genorio, this I resolve; and believe, you had rather stay here
too then be the messenger. I must now go wait upon the Queen for my
acknowledgements for the honor of her visit.


Genorio. I believe Moramente, that (Visit) may begin your Letter to your
father, but hardly end it with the promise of your Resolve. Exit Moramente.


Genorio. O that I could shut up those false lights that dazel thus my faith to
Fidamira.


Enter Gemella unperceived. Gemella. I have found A^enor, but with a look so
heavy as it weighs down his eyes, so as he has not seen me yet, it is my
darkness that has so benighted him. I will stay yet unseen, and in the
deadest time of his complaints, this cloud shall break and give him all the
light, whose want obscures him so.


Geno^io. Have not my eyes attracted poison strong enough to stop my breath
before I do break out into t^is foul profession of my tainted faith? or may I
thus recover, if I can breathe it out through these opening pores, before it
seiseth on the nobler parts? I will take F^damiras name, and try if that can
yet expel it before it fix, there is force enough in this Receipt. For this
great Cordial, Love, unlike to others, does improve its virtue by the habit,
not remit it; and, to enforce what I have taken inward her name and memory [he
pulls out a picture] I will send this after the infection the same way it did
get in, to try if this can overtake it, and so bring it back. I will not go
without this shield before me. It Is no indearment blessed Image unto thee, to
say, Thou want^ but speech: for I confess, I hear thee, and thou speak as
loud as thunder to me, in so just reproaches, as they welcome the amazement
that they bring. Thus armed, I will go on and challenge even Bellesa to
satisfy my injured Love, and to repair his honor. In this strife between
these two, I Will give the odds of life.


Exit Genorio. Gemella. I did not think to have found Agenor thus over cast, he
has out done me in a disguise, he has blackt over his soul. Have I lived to
be obliged to a concealment of my self unto Agenor upon my discovery of him? O
that I had enlightened him, before I had been thus enlightened by him! Thoughts
that fly by us like instant lightnings never so little ill are not emptied
sins. I might have found him dazelled, and might have freed him from the
danger of this darkness he is now contesting with, and this my blind belief
might well move me to that: but my misfortune's so exact, as it has overturned
the intention of the heightning of his joy down to the lowest curse between us
both. I will yet find him out before he meets Bellesa with that odds which he
has offered her. I am so far from that vanity as I would not contest with her,
unless advantage given me more then even Agenor for the Judge.


Exit Gemella. Enter Martiro. Mar. The Queen told me she visited Moramente, and
had a great discourse with him of Love, and that she is well satisfied with
Moraments reasons. Thus much is more in her then a declared fondness in
another. It is not fear, struck to such a degree of cold, as makes it
poisonous jealousy, that makes me thus tender of Bellesa's loving; nor my
despair that's sunck so low as malice; but the supreamest admiration that ever
soul attained to, that sets her so near the celestial bodies, as it can allow
her for low mortality but such a love as there is, which is but titular, and
propitiatory, far above all propriety, which undeifies all we adore. I would
not have her bow nearer the world then all the worth of it can set it self to
her, which is so far from rising to equality, as it can scarce get height
enough for comprehension of her. Therefore I cannot consent that any thing but
souls should e're approach her, and they so purified as when they rise to
heaven. I do not doubt but her high thoughts are even as undeclineable, as my
wishes are. And in the belief of her being the impossibility she has
commanded me to justify in Love, I will go write my obedience to her.


Exit Martiro. Enter the Queen. B^llesa. What gentle fear is this that murmurs
so within my thoughts, like breath of air that seems to hold discourse between
the leaves? I never knew any thing yet so near Love as the fear of it. But I
must still these noyses in my thoughts. For innocence so gentle is, we need not
take the pains to blow it off, we may even think it away: therefore I must not
give my thoughts the liberty to play with Love, as it is an infant; in belief
that they can rule it.


Enter Moramente. Moramente. Your Majesty will be pleased to pardon this breach
of your privacies, 'twas to perfect the cure you began, by this acknowledgement
of my health to your Majesty.


Bell. I receive gladly these acknowledgements as they declare your health, not
as they bring me any belief of contribution to it.


Mor. To assure you Madam of the virtue of your favor I must acquaint you with
news, by which I have been set up since I saw you, that might have pulled me
down as low, as did Saphiras death, as I believe it will afflict the Prince as
much, Fi^amiras flight; whi^^er ^nknown to all the search the King can make.

But now I am so changed into your ^reature, that I have sense for nothing but
what comes to me through yours.


Bell. Why, Do you think the Prince will be so much moved at this? Is there any
Love can give neglect the help of a long absence to join against it, and yet
master both?


Mo^. I do believe Mad^m, they are strong enemies joined; but against either of
them single, Love will have the better.


B^l^es^. You see Moramente, I persevere your pupil still. Therefore tell me
whether you would choose against you, To be neglected in continual fight, or
loved, enjoined to a perpetual absence.


Moramente. You have almost posed your tutor Madam; I must confess, that I
would choose the object not the speculation; neglect does but exclude from that
which we never had, but banishment does interdict us that which is our own, and
so becomes the greater curse.


Bellesa. You prefer then Moramente, the limited pleasure of one sense before
the large extent of all Imaginations. It seems that you have changed that
worthy passion brought you to this place, for some you have found here.


Mora. You were once pleased to tell me my cause resembled much the Prince, in
whose name I dare dispute it, not my own. Do you think Madam the Prince is
bound never to Love but Fidimira?


Bellesa. I yield the Prince is free, by her neglect.


M^r. Why did you couple us Madam, and now let us lo^se both together?


Bellesa. I should not tax you neither, if you loved never so many.


Mo^amente. I do believe Madam, I am so unhappy as to be thus indifferent to
you. And yet I think if you knew who I loved, youl'd punish me, though you
could not blame me for it.


Bellesa. Pray tell me not then, I do not love to be unjust.


Moramente. I am so unhappy Madam, a^ it were insolence in me not to believe
you would be so. And yet it were a freedom, that all but you must be beholding
to me for.


Bellesa. Then I should be beholding to you, not to tell me, if it will set me
a^ difference with all the World.


Mor. The difference I make between you and all the world will make you
disagree most with me, and therefore I Will forbear to let you know it.


Bellesa. I would fall out with nobody for so little as to satisfy a light
curiosity, therefore I enquire no farther of it.


Mor. Give me leave Madam, to beg this satisfaction from you that you would be
pleased to guess at it, for I have such a divine belief of you, as I conclude
you cannot so much as be mistaken in any thing.


Bell. To guess by your opinion, it should be with Gemella. She makes you such
a full return, at least her commendations promise it.


Moramente. It Is a strange fate that crosses, to be despised where e're I
love, and to be wished well but to my prejudice. But you Madam, have guessed as
near as if you had named any other in the whole society. And now Madam, I dare
say, that your knowledge is but thus wrapped up in darkness to disguise it. I
know it by my curse, your being thus insensible.


Bellesa. I must give over then the being your Pupil, since you would teach me
more then I would Learn.


Moramente. If I remain but with the merit of teaching you your power Madam,
though my sufferings be the demonstration of it, I shall endure all with joy.


Bellesa. In these high points Moramente, I understand you not. I Will bring
Martiro to dispute with you, he may be your Master, and teach you how to rise
up to the loving impossibilityes, he has promised me to prove the reason of
it. I Will show it you Moramente, that will reconcile you to despair.


Moramente. You have already Madam showed me the impossibilityes, and I already
find reason enough for loving them, your will.


Bellesa. You are mistaken Moramente, in the finding of my will, more then I
was in the finding of your Love; even my ill will is not easily found, and much
less that which you seem to seek.


Exit Bellesa. Mor. No certainty has been a torment great enough for me; must
I now suffer doubt, which has not so much ease as a despair was curse enough
to fit me with?

I could have resolved on any thing that could have fallen on me; but this
suspension is a Rack, whose wavering flackness is the height of torture, which
excludes a patience toward the ease of the indurance. I cannot impute these
words to chance. I am enlightened even thus far for a curse, to see she
understands my passions. I shall declare my self, and join the name of Prince
to that of Lover, to assist me. No, I will try once more the single strength of
Moramente, which if it prove too weak, I Will call that of Prince for my
Auxiliary; which must needs help me to be wondered at, if not beloved. Sure
Martiro has not broke his faith for so little as Bellesa's information; it
must be for his own indearment, and my distance from her.


Enter Martiro. M^r. Is the Queen this way, Moramente?


Mor. She Is newly parted hence, Martiro.


Mar* I am seeking her with a command of hers, and so have only time to tell
you that freedom to a noble heart does not let loose a secret, but allows it
more room as 'twere a recreation, and that impression trust makes on virtue,
seals in that instant what it opens. And believe me M^ramente you shall
always find the marks unbroken up. Exit Martiro.


Mor. This must be true too for the exactness of my curse, that there may not
be so much reason, as an ill office for her scorns, but all Antipathy. I will
dispatch to my father as I have promised Genorio, The circle now of Bellesas
reign is almost closed, and the last point that perfects that, shall open me
away unto that end I owe my fate.


Ex^t Moramente Enter Mellidoro and Camena Mel. If my own joys were not
sufficient to proclaim the debt I owe you Camena, the terror of those
sufferings of which I am judge, and not a party, might well indeare this, even
security, that you have settled me in.


Came. Methinks indeed we two are only fixed, the rest in perplexed motions
cross on another. What a storm of passions is amongst us now?


Meli. We Camena are arived at Love's supreamest region, where there is all
serenity and evennesse; there is not a breath of wind to ruffle this our
smoothness: and from thence we look down on others, that are gone no higher
then the second region yet, where is allwaies roughness and storms that blow
against them.


Came Are there not some so happy loves as to arrive at this high station of
secure joys, without ere passing through this harsh uneasy way?


Meli. There is a lower region Camena, where common unrefined lovers stay, and
joy in flat security, whose pleasure is but an acquiescence. But all aspiring
love that seeks to pitch it self in this sublimity of joy and glory, must
pass through this middle region, where it finds a stormy opposition.


Came. This is the passage then, which Moramente, Genorio, and Martiro, are
disputing now; I do confess I do pity Moramente, and I could wish mine into
Bellesa.


Mel. Why? do you think, Camena, that Bellesa and Pantamora are not moved? do
you think that women are like winds, that do not feel the storms they raise?


Came. I do believe Bellesa so unmoved, she does not understand the storm you
speak of by the noise of it, Pantamora has a restless humor, to which no
motion is disquiet, nor no noise a storm.


Meli. Do you not believe Camena, that Bellesa does act the Queens part more
then her own, in this distancing of her self from any sense of Moraments love?


Came. I do not know. Methinks she has so equal and ^ignificant a liberty, as
it speaks all things that she does natural, as I believe her the perfection
of our sex. I cannot think her void of sense but I beleeeve it sinks no deeper
then the face of that civility, where men do see it set, and make a return ^o
Moramente.


M^l. Love Camena makes his aproaches according to the heart it sets upon. All
hearts well fortified have outworkes, which must be taken first, civility and
freedom of discourse; and lodged once there, there he begins his batteries.
Moramente has taken these outworks* and therefore I believe he may endanger
all the rest.


Came. I believe so well of Moram^ntes discretion, I think it will not pretend
to more then Bellesas honor promises. Which is enough to make him happy, to be
so discreet to humor him.


Mel. How much do you think her humor will afford?


Came. Leave to be adored, and to be told so discreetly of it, as you may give
her leave to answer.


Mel. And is this enough for a discreet love to live upon; So you will allow Love
nothing but his wits to live upon.


Came. It Is the best portion he can have Melidoro, and upon that stock Love
cannot want, though he be often put to his shifts. There Is nothing so sure a
maintenance to leave, as wit. It Is subject to no casualty.


Mel. You have given me the reason I sought, how Martiro's love subsists: no
body knows who he serves, or what it has to entertain it self. Sure th^n it
must live by its wits.


Came. Martiro's love is a proof of what I say. We see it lives nobly, and is
beholding unto no body.


Mel. That which is a disease in nature then, is a good constitution in love,
The living without nourishment. And I do so little envy this singularity, as I
may sa^ely be allowed to wonder at it, how this dark pa^sion could hover so
long above us without ever making of a point.


Came. I will comply with him so much, as not to guess at it, for fear I light
of it but by chance. Methinks Genorios clouds begin to break already, and send
forth some light that glimmers yet between Bellesa and Pantamora.


Mel. Do you think, he that so lately was deaths Herald, will so soon change
sides, and serve the adverse party Love?


Came. 'Twas in loves service that he took that commission, and it is but
changing colors, and serving the same party still.


Enter Bellesa and Gemel^a. Bell. Fear not Gemella, Men are not so subject to
despair; the least ambiguous word will hold them* they will stay themselves
even by the finest thread they can but catch before they sink. Gentle Camena,
as much joy wait on your wishes, as I dare say you wish to mine.


Came. Your condition and person Madam, save your servants the pain of wishes,
and leave them only that of being incapable of admiring you enough.


Enter Genorio, looking on a Picture. Gem. I was here before him, but now must
venture my patience and my love.


Genesis I am now grown so strong, it is too much odds to be thus armed, and too
great a revenge on Bellesa to show her this my strength, she will believe
herself weakened by it. I shall be so far from loving her, she will not love
her self.


Bell. What Is that Genorio, your eyes so fixtly seem to call your mind upon?
Has it withdrawn your tongue too?


Genesis It Was a little manual of devotion I was looking over. It was so long
Madam since I had read it, I had almost forgot it.


Bell. Let me see it, Genorio. I do not think but I can show you as good a one.


Genesis I beleev that, M^dam. Sure never any body contested with you to your
face. And I, Madam, yield without showing.


Bell. No Genorio, I will show with you: flattery is so ill in nothing as in
piety.


Genesis Give me leave Madam only to yield now* and another time, to show you I
had reason. I will put the book into your hands, you shall peruse it.


Bell I will be civiller then you Genorio. I Will yield to your refusal, since
you will not to my desire.


Genesis To show you, Madam, that even your curiosity is already above my
devotion, and more dear to me, I Will put this into your hands, whose showing is
a ^ark of yielding.


Bell. Now I must ask your pardon, Genorio. This is a devotion which I yield to
at first sight, without examining how much you are addicted to it. Look here
Gemella, here is a face that makes your color better then mine as you cannot
blush to see it.


Gem. It Is a lovely face, and you may safely commend it, Methinks I have seen
somewhere a face, that upon a little thinking I should know this picture by.


Genesis As beauty is best exalted by comparison, you Madam may receive this as a
devotion to you, but I believe all beauty is so assuredly your trophy, as it is
no merit to bring any to you.


Bell. This is such a face Gemella, there must go much virtue in a woman to the
loving of it, because it is not easy to do so.


Gem. Madam, I remember now who it is. As I past by the Court I had curiosity,
hearing Fidamira so much talked of for the Prince his Mistress, to see her,
and I remember perfectly Madam this is her Picture.


Genesis It Is true Madam, it is her you have taken from me.


Bell. I have borrowed it Genorio, to restore it you better, by as much as our
admiration can improve it.


Gem. It would be cruelty Madam to keep it, for surely he is in love with her.


Genesis As I am with you Gemella. And if you Madam are but pleased with looking
on it as you seem to be, you may be pleased to keep it, and I shall love it then
better than ever, as it pleases you.


Bell. Let not your civility Genorio be so bold with your Love, make much of
this Picture, for they may say she is fled out of all knowledge, so, that not
so much as her Picture is likely to be had again.


Genesis It may be Madam, she is gone to search that loft which she once cast
away, the Prince. Women's esteems are governed by uncertaineties: but had I
loved her near so much, she could not take this ill, ^o be left in your hands.


Gem. Fidamira's valuation of her faith above a Crown assures me she cannot let
it fall so low, as the seeking to put it off.


Bell. Here Genorio, take your Picture; and in your private devotions recant
this dissembling of your faith.


Enter Martiro. Bell. Here comes Martiro that is so tender of his Mistress
Picture, he is afraid the air should fade the colors, and therefore shows it
us but veiled.


Mar. My Love Madam is not material but elementary fire, whose purity and
rarity makes it imperceptible. I have obeyed you Madam in making the
impossibility of the knowledge of it visible.


Bell. We will all hear it then, since we cannot see it, Come Camena, and
Melidoro, this is your love inverted, and you may safely hear without
conversion.


Mar. I will read them to you, Madam.

I Will ask no more love's strangest rapture^ why
They speak so much impossibility
Since love has taught me to believe, and prove,
It is the essence of transcendent love.
To make even love corporeal, and subsist
You must allow't a soul that may resist
Reason: and wonder needs must be that soul,
For nothing else can reason so control.
If gross material love do then aspire
So high as wonder for a soul, then higher
Must that spiritual and sublimate,
That Is not extracted out of will, but Fate,
Derive its soul, and higher must imply
Then wonder needs, impossibility.
Since then pure love will take its soul but thence,
From whence is vilified our noblest sense,
This sets supreamest love above event
And proves all sensual lovers impotent.
My love's not that material flame,
That Is let but by attraction from the same.
It is a lightning in my soul, which is
Kindled by an Antiperistasis.
It is so far above our commonsense
As contrarieties make it more inte^se.
Nor can this meteor Love remit it is heat,
It needs no fomentation, but it is seat,
Where no terrestrial exhalations are
It shall be fixed, and be a blazing starr.

Bell. Sure Martiro they that could understand these verses might know your
Mistress, the impossibilities to me seem equal. But we will send for
Moramente. It concerns him to disprove them; Gemella, pray call Moramente:


Mar. This is the reason Madam, not the passion which is to be understood.


Mel. Why? will you bring reason Martiro for impossibilityes?


Mar. I Melidoro, and so good as it is impossible for you to understand. You
have a limited Horizon terminates your thoughts, that reach no farther then
your senses carry them. They must be shot up to the top of speculations, to be
eaven with the understanding this.


Mel. And I shall not envy these your winged thoughts that help you thus above
ground.


Mar. And I shall still think my self above any foundation you can stand upon.


Enter Gemella, Moramente, Pantamora. Gem. Madam I met Moramente and Pantamora
coming.


Bell. I sent for you Moramente, to make good my promise, that Martiro would
prove the height of love reached to impossibilityes. And he has written on
that argument.


Mor. I should be glad to hear that it were possible to say near reason on
this theme.


Bell. I pray Martiro read your verses over again they may endure repetition.


War. I shall obey you, confident of Moraments judgment, if not assent. [
Martiro reads his verses again.]


Mor. I conceive your meaning Martiro, that since all love must have a soul as
high as wonder, some may rise as high as impossibility: this, Madam is a point
of faith, not to be disproved by reason, because it denies all principles in
love. I would only ask Martiro whether his love did not pass first through
his senses up to his imagination; and so the impossibility of staying there,
conveyed it where now it is pitched; and it was necessity, not choice that drew
it up so high.


Mar. No Moramente: My love had never so low a thought as hope, it rose within
my soul which did disdain always to wish for any thing out of its own power.
I never did expose it to the hazard of a wish, the nature of it was Angelical,
at first infinite, without need of propagation.


Mor. As miracles Martiro are not to be disproved, so are they not to be
alleged for arguments, in this case Martiro you may not only allow your
wishes, but your contribution to all others love.


Bell. Sure Moramente, it is a great security in love Martiro has attained, to
have all his wishes in his power.


Mar. You Madam are in such a security as you have not power to wish.


Bell. Learn Moramente of Martiro to assure your love thus by making it
impossible.


Mor. I will learn that Madam of none but you.


Gem. (Whispers to Moramente) And learn of me to hope.


Exeunt all but Genorio, and Gemella. Genesis Vouchsafe me a word Gemella. What
injury did you foresee I would do you, that you would advance me such a
discourtesie?


Gem. That I may assure you Genorio, I did not suspect any injury from't. I
would certainly have forgiven you if I had, and not have been in danger of
revenge which this discourtesie I know not of, might by a careless innocence
seem to resemble.


Genesis It seems indeed you did not care so much whether it were true, or no,
when you told the Queen I was in love with Fidamira, since you could not so
much, as guess by any thing you know.


Gem. If I had said, she had been in love with you, you might have been
offended at such a temptation unto vanity, considering her story. But I thought
the Queen's opinion of the Picture would have indebted you to me for such a
choice.


Genesis Do you think Gemella that any face, even with a promised faith to help
it* could defend it self against Bellesae? Could you think then that a Picture
could have life enough, even to remember what it was?


Gem. I believe Genorio faith much more lovelier then beauty: and it must needs
be so; since all beauty does but aspire to it, and it is the greatest Miracle
beauty can wish, creating more then it self, which it does producing faith. I
would not allow all the worlds beauty to contest with Bellesa; but I should
prefer the least faith before all her beauty my face with such advantage
might dispute with hers.


G^n. I am glad Gemella you have told me how precious and excellent a thing
faith is: sure, it is the fitter for a sacrifice to the divine Bellesa.


Gem. It Is of a strange nature Genorio, it is only precious kept, not given
away: as soon as we would lose it; to transfer it annihilates and becomes
nothing, to show us, that as soon as we intend its profanation, it can punish
us, by leaving us only an impotency of having any, instead of the power we
would take to dispo^^ of it.


Genesis I do confess Gemella, all passions but love break faith, as they carry
it from one unto another: but that may convey it as entire as spirits may be
powered from one glass into another without loss of virtue.


Gem. It Is true Genorio, when love begins to work upon it to transfer it, it
cease then to be in us; and therefore love would disguise the loss of it by
the pretense of our disposing of it: when indeed there is no faith left, but
the believing love, by which we seem to justify our infidelity.


Genesis Would you censure one of infidelity that should but change his
invocation, to raise his devotion up to a more dignified, and glorious Saint?
why, Bellesa is the supremacy itself of love, and all appeals are due to her
from all love's lower seats.


Gem. Methinks Genorio, it were an injury to such a Judge to appeal upon
confession of a perjury. Think G^norio, what a sentence you can expect, when
you are so bold to bring guilt to plead for you. I perceive you did love
Fidamira, and now you would bring your broken faith unto Bellesa, as a scarre
you have received in her service, by which you would pretend reward. Suppose
she should receive you into love's Hospital, feign charitable pity; this were
all the preferment you could hope, to be entertained to praise her goodness,
if she forgive the crime.


Genesis My crime to Fidamira must needs be meritorious to Bellesa* and Methinks
I cannot fear any thing so low in love with her as all that I could hope with
Fidamira.


Gem. Mark Genorio, how you are already punished for your inconstancy, in your
own choice of an assured torment; for 'twere a derogation from her not to
believe it; and consider what an affliction it will be to you to be the first
that must make her a curse to any thing. And I confess I cannot pity you.


Genesis O say not so Gemella, I was resolved to beg more of you. Do you think I
would have cast away such a secret without the hope of a return? I have
lessened that to you, which you call sin, the breach of faith, by having so
entire a one of your virtue and honor as to trust you so.


Gem. Faith, Genorio, is all the beauty nature has bestowed on me; and I am
interressed as much in her disfiguring, as handsome women would believe
themselves obliged, not to protect a man, that had by violence defaced one of
that company. Therefore all you can expect from me, is not to conspire a
revenge, which I will promise you.


Gen* I do believe you so generous, Gemella, as even an injury done you would
not discourage me, from a pretense to courtesy. This is one, I may believe,
you take upon you, to endear the charity you may vouchsafe me. You may defeat
even my ill destiny, which cannot have malignity enough to resist the virtue of
your intending my felici^y.


Gem. I will already be so charitable, as to prevent your saying that, which
must oblige me to a contribution to your misery. You may know by this, I
understand what you would ask of me: I will forget it, and leave you, and only
tell you my fears, and not my wishes in your fortune. You shall live to see
your wishes so enjoyed, you shall not dare to own them. And you shall so repent
this your sin, your sad contrition shall be such, it shall not hope forgiveness
when you see your Judge, whose sight shall, notwithstanding, make your wishing
it, a well proportioned torment.


Genesis There cannot be, Gemella, such a sin in loving of Bellesa, as repentance.
You have forespoke a curse is not in my misfortune's power.


Gem. I will assure you, I am not so unhappy as to wish it. Exit Gemella.


Genesis I broke my heart to pieces, Fidamira, first, before I broke my faith, to
try if I could loosen this chain, Bellesa's eyes, Love's surest Engines had
fastened it: And as it was falling a pieces, it fell upon Bellesa's eyes, that
have so joined it now, I find it a chain of flame that cannot be unlinked.
Those links of faith and hono^^ that should pull me back to Fidamira, I find
are now so soft, as they melt away, set by this chain of Love. Sure, Love has
strange joy in store for me, for it already has turned all the blessings that
I had, into frights, the memory of Fidamira, and the Prince's trust. I must no
more appear to Basilino the figure that I was; I must become a perspective,
looked on at distance, whose hollowness is a delight, though a deceit. I must
have Arches and Vaults to hide my love, when I do show my self. Methinks Love
prompts me this to answer all my fears.

Why should we fear, bold Love, when though it brings
Us to a Precipice, we know has wings?

Enter Moramente. Genesis Look where he comes* I must now try whether his love be
above his trust to me. What melancholy is this, Moramente that is so dark, as
seems to draw a traverse between your trust and me?


Moramente. Can you be in doubt Genorio of the causes of my sadness when you
brought them me? do you think the world can furnish any more after Saphira's
death, and Fidamira's flight?


Genorio. Yes Moramente I do believe a present passion may over-cast more then
the darkest memory of misfortunes past; which both those are, which you have
named.


Moramente. It seems Genorio, you rely so much upon your prophesies, as you
believe I have exchanged my sorrows here.


Genorio. No Moramente, I believe that all the virtue of this place is vented
upon your happiness; and that you are possessed of joys, which your modesty
makes you even scrupulous to show me, lest it might resemble vanity.


Moramente. I could not have so much as ease Genorio, which would not be
lessened by the fault of the concealment of it from thy trust. If I had a new
affliction, the tenderness of thee might justify the keeping that unto my
self.


Genorio. This needs not Moramente, I am already prepared with as high a sense
of your joys as this descent to the extremity of fear can raise me to; and
let your blessings be never so sacred, you ought not to keep them veiled from
me.


Moramente. You suppose then Genorio, I love, and with success. I did not
think I had been so near a happiness as even a friends mistake. I had thought
my crossefate had been known to every body, to warn them even from wishing me
well, lest they might share in my misfortune. But I perceive your love Genorio
will venture so far, as to suppose me happy.


Genesis Nay sir, I am so confident of your fate, as I dare refuse your belief in
the discredit of it. I can disprove you by instinct of nature. Bellesa and you
have an Identity in your beings, you are the perfection of both sexes, and
therefore cannot be a verse to one another.


Mora. I thought how probable your guesses would prove, Genorio. Why, they are
grounded on a parity with Bellesa: you could not have found in all the world
such an impossibility to have inferred my good fortune by. And I believe you
now Genorio, I am now as near being happy, as being equal to Bellesa, between
whom there is as much distance as between possession and despair.


Genorio. Had I believed there could have been a greater exaltation of
Bellesa's worth, then being made to make you happy, I would have raised her by
it, for I dare vye admirations of Bellesa, even with you.


Mor. You must learn higher expressions then, Genorio than to match her with
mortality: but it is a subject silence can better comprehend, then you or I
illustrate; therefore lets fall lower to what we understand, my fathers
condition, and his desire of my return. I have already writ to him in promise
of my return, and assured him Fidamira is only thought of now by me, by the
fears of his affliction, not my Love.


Genorio. You have done piously, and wisely Sir: this next election which is
very near will give you a fair opportunity for your fathers wish, if not your
own.


Mor. Come Genorio let us go see the Queen, and prepare our selves for the
ceremony instituted for the Foundresse, and the Princes memory.


Genorio. I will wait on you Sir,

Exit Moramente. I am happy thus far even in this reservation from me, which
allows my prosecution of my Love without more breach of my faith to my Prince.
Exit Genesis


Enter Gemella. Gemella. The contemplation of inconstancy has justified Agenor
to me; 't has taken off the fault from him, and laid it upon nature. I find all
things were made for a viciscitude of exchange; not only here below, but even
above: they say the heavens are in restless motion, and I am sure that the
earth which they say is fixed, is in continual change. It alters so, as we
should not know it were the same, did we not know that it must change. And
time, that changes all things, is it self by fortune changed in this general
earthquake. Then how can we hope for an unmoved constancy in Love?

And men that single are so variable before, and joining lightness so much
more.

It Is I then for being constant among all these changes am unnatural, this was
the miracle Agenor prophesied at our parting. I was destined to the retaining
of my faith, after the loss of his, provoked by his intent of making me the
procurer of my own spoils unto another, This injury I lay on my disguise, and
to discharge him of it, he shall not have so much an ill office from me toward
his being despised by Bellesa. I begin now to find, that there is no danger of
his being preferred by any but my self, before the Prince whom now I find the
gods so justly love, as I am made a sacrifice to his presage of never being
enjoyed by man. I doubt not but his fate will soon accomplish mine upon
Agenor, and were it not for his happiness, I would not wish any thing so ne^r
revenge.


Exit Gemella. Enter Pantamora. Pan. Unless I should my self unvail my love,
and so profane it by showing that, which I would have sought to with
reverence; I cannot put a more transparent cover over it. I have showed it
through so clear a tiffany as the least breath of Morament's would have blown
away. And he me-thought did hold his breath, as if he had been afraid to see it.
Sure women's loves are emblemed well by cockatrices eyes It gives, if it be
first seen, a power ore it self, which it gets on another that it discovers
first. I have not yet so little reason for self love, as to venture it upon so
doubtful a return, as Moraments seems to be. Sure he has discovered some
modest tenderness in Bellesa, that begins to bow her from that straight
indifference she seems planted in. There cannot be so much difference between
us as between hope and despair.

Sure Gemella is the dark lantern that opens some light to Moramente. I will
rather give my own sex the advantage of doubting there may be one preferred,
than any man the vanity to think that I could^ else be thus indifferent to him.

As soon as I this truth shall prove
So soon shall I leave off to love.
And love will lose by 't more then I,
Men will find other ways to court me by.

Enter Bellesa, Martiro, Gemella. Bell. That were too much Gemella, sure vanity
is rather in your country then here: it is true, it is of another color,
lightsome and bright, therefore it may be unknown amongst you.


Gem. Why Madam, are men in love here subject to so much leightnes, as they
must always keep in the dark for fear of running mad? do you use here to make
love and scorn both of a color?


Bell. No Gemella, but the first ground whereon all love's figures are wrought
must be somewhat dark; it sets off all the colors that are laid upon it.


Gem. But these colors M^dam must be set within distance, else the ground and
they are all one.


Bell. There is no man but has a perspective of vanity about him, by which he
lessens the distance of his wishes which he looks upon.


Gem. I believe Madam there are some men so over-cast with humble diffidence
they could not know love if they saw it. Madam ask Martiro.


Bell. What say you Martiro, Is not vanity now a days so quick fighted, as it
perceives the least color of kindness women can show at any distance?


Mar. Vanity Madam sees by the emission of its own rays, not by the reception
of the object. And therefore may not only reach most distant lights; but, as it
were, strike fire in the dark. But this irradiation of themselves is not in all
men's eyes. There are some filled up with admiration so, as they see nothing but
an optic light.


Bell. Why even such men are vain, Martiro, in this elevation of their thoughts
above the height of wishes.


Mar. If this be vanity Madam, it is elementary and not material. The purity and
delicacy of it, is such, it does not burn, it is only nutritive to love, and not
offensive.


Gem. You need not Martiro read such lectures in the air unto the Queen, she
is already distant from love's vi^ibili^y above imagination.


Bell. Gemella would persuade me Martiro, I might love without a declination of
my self.


Martiro. Love, Madam, appropriates what it joins unto it self, and do you
think a partner in the soverainty of your self were not half a deposition?


Gem. This insensiblenesse you counsel Martiro, is rather an admission to
equality, leaving all hearts free, and Bellesa's can be no more it self. It Is
an enlargement of her sovereignty to take homage from such hearts as shall bow
down to offer it. If you will give self-love Martiro the empire that women
should glory in, how limited will that be when they shall have no subject but
themselves? All I counsel the Queen is, that she would know her self too. For
beauty sees it self best, by the rereflexes that it makes on objects whereon
it shines.


Mar. A heart that looks at first for so much from the Queen as an
acknowledgment, sets too high a price upon it. Should every meanest subject
pretend to have his name known to his Sovereign because he is what he should
be? It must be some eminent service must allow him that pretense for a reward.
And the sovereignty of love is distanced more from the approach of any subject
to it. No blood, qualities, nor no fortune rayseth nearer then the common
prostituted crowde. All are commons in an equal slavery, and the pretention to
advantage is rebellion.


Bell. Therefore Gemella, the Queen is not obliged to look so low as even the
knowledge of any of her Subjects, till their services not their subjection
challenge it, and then the taking notice of it, is all she should give.


Bellesa. This an Empire you have found for your Mistress, Martiro, and it is a
spacious one, it is all air, your thoughts are not subject to any thing sure so
low as earth.


Gemella. I dare say Madam, his Mistress, who e're she be, reaches not so
near divinity in any of his exaltations of her, as you do in this humility.


Mar. You have exalted Madam my Mistress higher then e're my thoughts could set
her, the taking of her Name into your mouth. I believe she is so much worthier
than even my Imaginations of her, as even the noblest of your thoughts cannot
exceed her. I am glad Madam, to hear that miracles are not ceased, it lessens
much the wonder, the being made for you.


Bellesa. You are in such a transcendent height above all sense Martiro, as
methinks miracles should not amaze you. Come Gemella, we must prepare our
selves for the funeral Ceremonies of the Foundresse and the Prince.


Gemella. I Will wait on you Madam. But shall I carry him no comfort, not so
much as an ambiguous word?


Bellesa. You see Gemella, I have so little confidence in men, I dare not trust
Marti^oes counsel, that ought to be the most unsuspected, as my ancient friend.


Gem. If I can make something out of this nothing Madam, you cannot be offended.


Mar. I must fly to silence to collect an admiration great enough for this
miracle I hear.


Enter the King. Exeunt. King. As dying men whose spirits having run out their
course are now so out of breath, they can scarce carry the soul one step
farther; yet sometime as she is going out of them, refreshed with some strong
cordial, the spirits rise again, and hold her there a while: Like lamps
exspiring when they shut their eyes, given but a drop of oy^e, dart forth an
instant flash, and live a while, not by that life that they had left, but did
receive anew. This was my case. My spirits had scarce so much motion left as
panting, when they received this Cordial, this so sovereign remedy, as it has
recovered a King, whose disease it was before the being so. I find more then a
reflection of my spirits in change of them into a youthfullnesse. I am already
grown better then he that ministered this cure Basilino, by as much as I Love
Fidamira more then he. [I think on Fidamira now only by the sense of your
afflictions for her, which if He reads i^ Basilinoe's Letter. you had forgot I
should once more think of her to rejoice at your forgetting her, and never
more.] Now Fidamira I am free to think of thee which I do fully. I will forget
even that which is so hard, to do, my age. I cannot be so old. I have been all
this while in wardship to my Son, he has till now disposed of my love. I am to
d^y but come of years, and now my passions come into my own hands, which I will
all bestow on Fidamira.

This from Basilino must imply that some success has so possessed his thoughts,
as the remembrance of his sufferings cannot get so much as one, and only my
affliction now can make him think that he is capable of any: he has such
superfluities of joys, as I am fed out of his waste. I find my body and my
soul so reconciled, the one offers curiosity, the other strength to satisfy
it. A visit to the Shepherds Paradise is a design worthy the newness of my
thoughts, the election of their Queen is now within three or four days, and I
have heard of such eminent beauty there, that it will be the greatest right I
can do Fidamira to carry her memory thither to dislustrate even their faces.

I Will ask no more of love but being thus kind
He would conform my body to my mind.

Exit King. Enter the Society to the Ceremony; and after other ceremonies past,
Votario approaches the Tomb. Votorio. ADmired payr! whose wonders did perplex
All judgment to decide to either sex
Advantage, so each chose to live alone,
Left joining so, the one might the other own
And so you both, did one another love
Too well to be but one, until above
Meeting, you were ordained to be but one
And now shine in a constellation.
Vouchsafe that by your sacred influence
We may be drawn to follow you from hence.

Bellesa. Peace wait upon your souls which seem ^' hav' been.
Such as you dyed, but for reward not sin.
Our virtues here even in their best extent
Are but erected for your monument.

Pantamora. Fair parallels whose souls so purely met,
It seems that they your bodies did forget,
Each being more then all the world forbore
The having one another to have more.
So short of you our imitation stays,
As we can hardly reach you with our praise.

Mor. Wonder of women on whose chastity
H^^ven has bestowed such a posterity.
As is a self perpetuation
Without the help of propagation.
We thus your Children in our yearly task
Come here to leave our prayers, and blessing ask.

Came. Rest glorious couple in that greater bliss
You went to take, when you did leave us this.
Be pleased your virtues back to us to send,
Now they have brought you to your journey's end.

Mel. You that were such your virtues ask't no less
Reward from Heaven, than all the world to bless.
Even after you were gone, so did entice
The Gods to let you make a Paradise
For mortals, which your virtues still implore,
That following you, we may yet owe you more.

Mar. Divinest Lovers, 'bove the praise of breath,
So much you scorned to join by less than Death.
By which emission you so much enjoy,
As one another would but seem a toy.
Accept this tribute, and our souls inspire,
So far toward your example, as desire.

Gem. Illustrious Lights of honor, and of Love,
We but your shadows are that shine above.
Vouchsafe to obtain that we, as shadows do,
May be admitted too, to follow you.

Genesis Blessed souls that coppied Heaven here so
Together, as each other not to know.
I find these marks which Paradise imply,
As gain of sight, and loss of memory.
This scruple only now does here remain,
That I cannot from wishing yet refrain.
If it were meant this Heavenly residence,
Should but refine, and not extinguish sense.
Let it my grosser spirits so refine,
As my undarken'd soul may through them shine.

The Fifth Act.
After the Ceremony of the Toomb, Genorio stays alone. Genesis Methinks I find
my mind on wing, loose from my senses, which like limed twigs held it till now.
It is so light, and so ascensive now, it means to work it self above
Martiroes. I am already so far toward it, as the belief that I did never
love till now. O how I was deceived, while I conceived that Love was so
Material it could be touched, and grasp't! I find it an undepending ayrinesse
that both supports, and fills it self, and is to be felt by what it
nourishes, no more then air, whose virtue only we discern. I knew before,
all I could have. I am so far above that now, I cannot suppose what I can
hope, and yet am better pleased with this, this inoffensive purity of my love
emboldens me to show it to Bellesa, and in humility to her, it shall ask
somewhat of her, as begging is the only Present impotency has to make to
power, and it shall be so far from being sensual, it shall be nothing but
belief.


Enter Bellesa. Bell. Your sadness seems so welcome to you, as I may excuse
the interruption of it.


Genesis You are so far from interruption of it Madam, as you bring the cause
along with you.


Bell. Have you not yet forgiven my curiousity to see the Picture? are you of
Martiroes mind?


Genesis Why she is an Angel even in the knowledge of men's thoughts. I? what,
Madam, do you think I am of Marti^oes mind?


Bell. In keeping your love invisible, and therefore are displeased that we saw
so much as the shadow of it.


Genesis I am not of his mind in that. I would show mine, because it is such a
wonder, 't will not else be believed, and as wonders Madam hardlyobtaine that,
so mine shall pretend to no more.


Bell. Do you pretend Genorio to be a friend unto the Prince, and will make the
Loving Fidamira a wonder in any body?


Genesis Yes Madam, that were a greater, after having seen you, then that which I
shall tell you.


Bell. I have only leisure now to tell you Genorio, that in revenge of this
flattery, I will accuse you of it to your friend Moramente, who loves the
Prince so much, a^ he will chide you for it. I am now going into a privacy, I
must desire to leave you.


Genesis I am so cursed Madam, as truth seems dis-lustred by my bringing it. I
never committed sin enough against another, to be equal to this punishment
As He goes out, He says. of leaving you. [To what am I transformed when the
name Fidamira is a torture to me?]


Bellesa alone. Bell. Sure M^ramente has employed his friend Genorio to save
him the shame of speaking for himself, Genorio speaks so boldly it must needs
be for another. I need not be so shie of this my though^fullnesse, since all
the virtues they should fix upon, are here objected to them in Moramants
carriage; Love and honor bent by humility into a lovely Arch, on which my
thoughts may safely pass on toward his person, which when I consider I find
it such, as scarce needs humility to recommend it. His Fate has so directed
him to me, as he has had a real sense of my misfortune, and his destiny has
been so kind to him in that, as to indebt me some pity to him, as my self and
the reviving of Saphira, though it be by Bell^sa's death, it will not be welcome
to him. Methinks my tho^ghts would take air a little to refresh themselves.
That Infant love that is come to visit them, would carry them abroad with him;
they shall go with him, and be so civil as to entertain him with music.

Press me no more kind love, I will confess
And tell you all, nay rather more than less.
So you will promise me, when I have told you then
Not to bring m^ to witness it to men.
Though thusy 'are strong enough to make me speak,
Helped out by virgin-shame you will be too weak
If I find thus I may be safely free,
Best by this freedom I engaged may be.
I find a glowing heat that turns red hot
My heart, but yet it does not flame a jot.
It does but yet to such a color turn,
It seems to me rather to blush than burn.
You would persuade me that that flaming light
Rising will change this color into white,
I would fain know if this whites inference
Pretend pale guilt, or candid innocence.
If you you will tell me which, without deceit,
I will allow you light as well as heat.
Then take you care of me, a mean^ so rare
B^twixt men's vanity, and their despair.

I find so gentle drowsinesse flow over my senses, as if my thoughts had
wearied them in carrying them thus far; and my thoughts are so innocent they
do not oppose the rest my senses ask.

She falls a sleep. And Moramente enters to her. Mor. Was it the rapture my
soul was always in, when she contemplates the divine Bellesa, that did
present her voice unto me here in heaven? Sure it was: her soul, useless now
unto her body, is gone to He sees her here lie sleeping and stands wondering,
visit heaven, and did salute the Angels with a song. Let sleep no more be
called death's Image, here is an animation of it. Sure, all the life that sleep
takes from the rest of the world he has brought hither and lives here.
Methinks I should be innocent too now. Sure had I but even an ill colored
thought, her soul that is in heaven would know it, and come back to awake her
with the alarm. I will stay at this distance still, and only take this
advantage now to wonder. Nearer her thus parted from her soul then I can do,
united [he goes to step toward her] Does the ground move to carry me nearer
then my soul durst go? It Is true, I find it is the earthlynesse about me moves
me nearer, then my reverence should keep me. Methinks I am so near her now, as
I all soul, my body by whose carriage it was brought, is now recoyl'd and my
spirit is now shot out upon Bellesa. And thus all spirit I may touch her and
not be felt. Therefore thus all my soul abstracted shall fall upon her hand, to
do it reverence. My spirit has found a body in He kisseth her hand, this
touch, and such a one as it cannot contain from venturing to lose it self to
touch but this again [he kisseth her hand again, and she begins to stirr] I
was afraid the least mixture of a body would disquiet hers by that a version
she has to all, the first spiritual touch moved her to note then several
airs that join move one another. Never was so much fear in any body without
the will of flying it It Is but just my body thus refined should be stayed here,
now to expect its sentence.


Bell. My soul's centinells kept not so ill watch, as not to rise up against
this attempt upon them. I should be glad to find some body else here Moramente,
to whom to impute this insolence which is so great, as it almost justifies you
to me for not having been the committer of it. Was it not sombody that is fled?
I can hardly think any body durst do this and stay till I did wake to punish it.


Mor. No Madam, he is so far from flying, as he is stayed here to glory in it.
My spirit that was innocent that fled for fear of being suspected, and I
remain all body here exposed to your displeasure. And if you will give me leave
to call back my soul with suspicion of it, that shall beg punishment for this
offender. And you shall reward her innocence in parting from this guilt that
was about her. And you may punish this body opportunely now. For life sure was
never so dear to it as now, it is so affected with its crime. And do it quickly
Madam while your power will allow it, that my soul may leave you in this world
what it has so much wished to see you continue in, the quality of Queen.


Bell. It Is a new insolence, this punishment you ask, that I should descend so
low as but think upon your body. I shall think your mind less worthy then I
did, and so much, I shall not think it very sensible of its declination in my
thoughts.


Mor. Mistake not Madam, the only thing in this world impossible to you is the
guiltiness of my mind. It Is not in my power to be so complacent unto you, as to
afford i^ you. Your ill opinion of it may lie so heavy on its innocence, as to
bow it out of its own frame* But even then It will become an arch tryumphant,
whose very incurvation will become a beauty, as it was made so by the weight
you laid upon it. And the more you press i^ you shall make it but the stronger
still to bear all you^ will.


Bell. Why this excuse adds still unto your fault. If your mind was innocent, it
seems you did it but by chance and had no mind to it when you did it. And I
can le^^ forgive this profanation of my self than an intended insolence,
which passion does some way excuse, when it does avow.


Mor, O Madame, you have found so refined a torture* as it reaches to my soul,
which I called innocent for having been so wholly and so purely fixed upon your
hand as it is there, and therefore innocent: that which is once there and is
removed, I did think worthy of such a punishment as even your displeasure.


Bell. Why your insolence inlargeth it self still Moramente; you would have me
displeased because it was no greater, that it lasted not longer, and would put
your soul into my hands, but by the delivery of your body.


Mor. You can put me to no greater torment then this willing misunderstanding
me, you would make me criminal, for being but mortal, because my soul is
carried but by my flesh and blood, nothing but this despair could make me so
insolent as to wish my body and my soul might once meet again where the one
remains, though after that they parted with mortality.


Bellesa. Now I understand truly your crime, you shall not have so much favor
as my delivery of the sentence. G^mella shall deliver't you; till then, see me
no more.


Mor. The sentence cannot be so cruel, but the having it will be a
mittigation, for this suspension is the execution.


Enter Genorio sadly. Mor. What sadness is this Genorio that diverts even
mine, as to take notice of it?


Genesis The joys I owe you Moramente, may justify this sorrow: Is not this a
strange curse?


Mor. So strange a one, I understand it not.


Genesis Had I not had already the joy of all your trust, it could not so afflict
me, the not being trusted now with such a joy of yours, as all the society
believes, and I have no other reason to doubt but your not having told it me.


Moramente. My curse is so malignant, it infects thee for being my friend; and
it is much now Genorio for me to say, that I have any sense left for thy unjust
affliction. I had no ease left but the belief that I had made thee happy, and
thy mistake is never come to rob me even of that.


Genesis It would be as hard for me Moramente, to find a cause for the least of
your benefits, as it is to repeat them all; they began so much before my
memory, as I must trust report for that, and what I know may warrant my belief
of that you saved my life, when my Infant-innocence was guilt to you, as it was
cursed to be born your enemy. The education you gave was such as might make my
life worthy your owning, since after having given me so much wealth, and
honor, as an accession unto that could expect no more sense of it. Then as if
you did study my blessing in making you some return, you have given me the
disposing of your life, and the treasure of your trust, such a gift as but by
keeping it, I might make you a retribution, but you take it away without a
daily addition to it. I have repeated this to you, which is too much for you
to remember, that you may see I am thus far toward the deserving this, as the
accounting all this is a curse, if the only means of gratitude which I have
left, the joying in your joys, be but suspended from me.


Mor. Thou art too partial to me Genorio, to believe me in my misery, which if
I have not let thee know, 't has been for fear thy misbielefe should add to
it: but now I find even that misfortune which I only thought I could avoid, thy
distrust, is fallen on me.


Genorio. I shall easily MORAMENTE believe you as miserable as you would have
me, if you were capable of any, loved by BELLESA as they say you are.


Moramente. Though I had tenderness enough Genorio to be sensible of thy
distrust, as thy affliction; I have no sense left for this thy scorn, because
it is mine.


Genesis Pardon my duty, Sir, that did believe there could not have been guessed a
blessing for you greater then your merit. That did make it more probable to me.


Mor. Believe me Genorio I am as far from that, as if I wished it, I could
fear.


Genesis Let it not seem insolence then in me, in this your affliction, to
profess my self happy. For I think my self so only, as I hope to transferr
it upon you. If Sir it be the memory of Fidamira that darkens all things else
unto you, I do believe the miracle of my gratitude shall draw light out of that
darkness for you. For it can seem no less to you that Fidamira should be
given away; but the wonder of my obligation will lessen much this miracle they
make I am that subject Sir you would not know for fear of envying, in whose
hands Fidamira has deposited her faith. And now you shall know to be envied by
him, and all the rest of the world whose merits heaven will not honor with a
less miracle then a lover's resignation of his Mistress. And this Sir I now
beg of you the acceptance of a blessing, and that you may have her so purely
her self without the abatement of inconstancy, I will give her reason for it,
and only for that wait on you to her once to bring my self so criminal unto
her, as her loving me shall be one, which then she can no longer do, as she can
never do ill. I do not ow you less then breach of faith, but this apparency of
guilt is less.

Therefore Sir, resolve at this next election which is within two days to
declare your self and so begin with this blessing of your self, the comforting
your father.

I will wait on you till I may deliver Fidamira to you, and then return
hither. And the only favor I will ask, shall be the leave to live here, with
your belief of such a pleasednesse in my condition, you may think you have
given more in acceptance then you have received.


Mora. It is so hard Genorio to believe that Fidamira can be given away, as it
had need of such a faith as mine in thee to credit it, but to assure thee that
I believe that thou not only can, but would do so strange a thing for me, I
will not venture to accept it. Glory in this Genorio, that from the depth of
this dejection, thou have had the power to raise me up to joy that thou shall
have Fidamira as fully with my wishes as thy own.


Genesis What a strange curse were this, If I believed this offer were your wish;
But it is true Sir, it is not fit you should wish any thing that can be offered
you. And I must needs owe my good fortune less sense then ere I did, since
even the first of it affords me no means of retribution unto you.


Enter Gemella. Gem. I have a message to deliver you Moramente, from Bellesa.


Mor. It Is wellcom Gemella, what so ere it be.


Gem. She has commanded me to tell you she has thought much of your crime.
And the more she thinks of it, she finds it such that there is nothing ill
enough to punish it. Which being such a crime as nothing, committed but once,
can be punishment enough for it, she has ordained you not only to wish it, but
hope it too, and to see her as often as you will that upon the rack of hope she
may daily torture you by the intention or remission of it, as she shall please.
This only she thinks an expiation proportioned to your fault; and has sent me
with this sentence to you, which I hope I have delivered so, you understand it.


Mor. I know not whether I do or no, methinks it is somewhat above my orb,
humble despair. Which makes it harder for me to conceive, then if 'twere
there. But I will instantly go Gemella, and study it before her, in submission
to my sentence.


Genorio I must leave you now. Exit Moramente


Genesis How justly am I afflicted by my own offense, inconstancy? The Prince's
change is fallen out to punish mine And he is so happy that even his change
does prove a service unto Fidamira, as it revenges her on me. I will not add so
much unto my guilt, as a detraction from her, in the belief that he could
prefer any thing before my offer, but a well grounded hope of Bellesa's Love.

None but I could do so new a thing, as to prefer despair. How well does my
curse suit with my sin? My address to Gemella for conveyance of my passion to
Bellesa, that had already undertaken Moraments? My observation has assured it
me, without the help of my suspicion. And I am punished as it were by fate
with an exclusion from the Prince's trust, before he can know a reason for it. O
how deceitful and ensnaring joys, are Prince's highest trusts? They do
subject us more then even our nature or their power can. They raise us so above
the sense of all their other benefits, as we are only fixed on that which they
may so easily take away, as even cessation does remove it. And ^o we do expose,
not only all the joys we have acquired, but even the imbred ease of our own
souls. Which might have rested in their own level, but cannot in a
declination from that height. So subjects hazard more then Princes give! Yet
methinks love is so much above reason now, as it proves the Princes trust a
convenience, not a loss, as it may warrant my profession of my passion to
Bellesa, which I will do in so resolved a boldness as it shall be significant
humility, as it must imply the extreme of all despair.


Exit Genorio. Enter Martiro Martiro. There Is nothing speaks so truly of
Bellesa as my opinion of her. I will believe my admiration before my senses. I
am so far from crediting what I hear of her, as I do not believe her self. Her
modesty will not admit the knowing of her self so well as I do. For though my
thoughts in their highest ecstasy pitch not at the top of all her virtues, yet
they get up so high, as to assure how low and near the earth her soul can
fall. Though I cannot imagine all the good that she can do, yet I can satisfy
my self how near she can come to doing ill, to which she can never approach
so near as loving; Though that be far from ill, yet as it is but ordinary, it
may be counted too much ill for her. She Is somewhat of her self; I know not
what to call her, so unlike to all things sublunary, that we may better think
the humility she bears chose rather to be a woman, then that heaven meant her
one; Unless it set her in this way, that passing through it she might rise
unto a higher glory, then if she had been first created an Angel. I do not
wonder at the received opinion of her loving. I would not have the knowing of
her be common as to undeceave every body; and for those that hope it, they have
made themselves a curse. I cannot pity enough, as it is a madness they will
never believe it to be one. Moramente is a person worthy the knowing Bellesa,
Gemella's womanish officiousness will be punished in the frustration of it.
The election is now within two days, we shall see who remains here.
Accordingly I will apply my pity of Moramente to his conversion in the belief
of the divine Bellesa.


Exit Martiro Enter Fidamira Fida. I have left the Queen and Moramente
together: I believe between them two, the execution will be gentler then the
sentence. I am come my self to such a perfect knowledge of all men, as I am too
far from envying even Bellesa, as I am scrupulous of my contribution toward
her loving one. The best of all the sex which I will allow the Prince to be,
can secure me no farther of his faith, than that, if it be possible that there
can be one in all the world prove constant, it is he.

I do now so much neglect all men, as I have no sense so low, as to be moved
with any of their injuries. I do forgive Agenor so, as all the memory I have
now left, is of my own fault, that it was ever in the power of a man so to
offend me. I confess I could wish his repentance, only to expiate that fault
of mine, by showing how much I repent of it, by being now incapable of such an
exposure of my self again. I am not so vain as to believe my looks can
persuade him to this repentance, therefore I have thought a way how they may
fright him to it, and for that I must put on this colour's contrary, and like a
ghost appear unto him. His guilt will join with me in the persuasion of it.
Thus I will watch him the next evening, as he goes to the Temple. His fears
would now be welcomer then his love; but he may chance be so vain, as to
believe that even dead I cannot choose but follow him: for vanity even feeds on
dreams and apparitions, and loving Bellesa: he had need sustain his love with
such like airey nourishments. I am resolved I will once more change my
disguise: I am sure it cannot succeed worse with me then this has done.

My Fate inverting these two colors right
Puts innocence in black, and guilt in white.

Exit Gemella. Enter Bellesa Moramente. B^ll^sa. This is presumption Moramente,
not humility, to be pleased with so severe a sentence: But are you not so
humble as to take more of the sentence on you, than I sent you, Hope?


Moramente. I take no more Madam, then serves to keep my senses warm, lest they
should fall into so dead a despair, as I should disappoint your cruelty by an
unsensiblenesse.


Bell. Your hope and your wish Moramente, are then far distant yet from one
another.


Moramente. As far Madam as my wish and my desert. I am as near deserving you,
as hoping what I wish.


Bellesa. You may then hope a little more Moramente: for I would not have a man
so near deserving me, as I might give him leave to hope, that would lessen the
grace I did confer, to have merit the pretender to it.


Moramente. You may safely trust my hope Madam; hope seems so dull and slow a
thing to me, I can scarce think it is a function of the soul. I must have it by
infusion, not inherencie. If you fear Madam the approach of merit, you must
lessen your rigours, for in your cruelties an humble soul may challenge more
merit then it has reward, but the least of all your favors sets all desert at
such a distance, as, by the same degrees they advance, merit goes back, and so
the distance is still enlarged. Therefore Madam, you cannot remove your self
so much from men's deserving you, as by a sense of their humility.


Bellesa. I do believe Moramente that the least kindness of a worthy woman,
does set all man's merit out of distance: but I have heard that as you say their
desert goes so far back then, as it goes quite out of sight, and vanity comes
on without it.


Moramente. If this vanity were inherent in the nature of us all, you owe your
self no less then the belief that the virtue of your love might even correct
our nature, your love is so divine a thing, as not to be subject to the defects
of it.


Bell. Sure Moramente., it were ill done to give such a meritorious humility as
yours, such a temptation to be perverted as a favor.


Moramente. It were vanity Madam to tell you, how much a favor of yours would
make me humbler then I am, there could be no such ill in any body, that your
wishing but well to, would not amend: much less any virtue that it would not
improve. And methinks you now should do me a favor, as it is the strangest
thing in all the world, the making me happy.


Bell. You have already forgot your sentence, the giving of you hope to punish
you by the frustration of it, and so now I give you this.


Mor. I need not then ask you forgiveness for it, since it punishes it
self, how strangely am I destined to your subjection, when even my
forgetfulness proves a contribution to your will.


Bellesa. Me thinks Moramente, since you are so subject to forget your sentence
of favor done, you would give me a great advantage over you, for you would
quickly forget why I did it, and entertain such hopes as would enlarge my power
of punishing you.

Moramente to himself. [It were more injury unto her to think this treachery,
then insolence to believe it pitty]. I will instruct you Madam in this design
of making my punishment notorious. Let me suffer on the same place where I
committed my offense. If hope punishes it self proportionably as it offends,
this will be a well fitted torment for me.


Bell. A Prince's eye by a casual look suspends the execution, but an admittance
to their hand is an abolition of the crime.


Moramente. That holds not with me Madam, for your sight was appointed for my
execution; and so, the rule inverted, your hand must be the higher punishment.


Bell. Yours Moramente, is so new a case to me, I know not what to say to it,
and I had need apply my power while I am a Queen; it may be that only makes
the defeature of your hopes a pain to you.


Moramente kisses her hand. Moramente. Soon only this might prove a cure to
me, if I could profane it with the thought of being a Queen: there are a
thousand qualities in this hand, the least of them above all mortality can
name. I consider so little your quality of Queen, as I dare say that is the
least disproportion betwixt us. Had you all those titles united into one, which
all the world contests but for the parting of, even this were a declination
brought you to a name, which, as your self are unexpressible Could I believe
that you could think so low, as to be pleased even with the name of Queen, it
may be hope might not prove a punishnishment.


Bellesa. Why Moramente? had I that desire, could you satisfy it?


Moramente. Easier Madam then deserve to be beloved by you. Even when I had
done it the conquest of a kingdom would be easy, you being but proposed to it
for Queen.


Bellesa. I could afflict you then Moramente, by telling you I had a mind to be
a Queen; but I will not, because I have forgiven you. Therefore now Moramente
after this pardon, hope no more.


Exit Bellesa. Moramente. Did not the virtue of her hand hold me up I should
fall back into a fearful doubt. Sure this is but to show that her will masters
love it self. I am confident she is moved so much with my sufferings that the
profession of my self may indear my humility. The election is to morrow, and
it shall be in her choice, whether she will continue Queen or no.


Exit Moramente. Enter Pantamora. Pantamora. The reason why Moramente sees not
Bellesas love that is fixed upon him, must needs be that he looks too high for it.
He thinks it must fall down a^ from heaven upon him. If he had but looked in a
natural and easy level toward her, he must needs have found her very near
him. Sure his eyes were thus stretched up into the air, when I showed him my
love so fair before him, and he saw it not, I will not think he did look from
it of purpose. But I can envy Bellesa in nothing, that is so near such a
declination, as the descending from a throne: the expectation of which has
raised me now above all other thoughts. Bellesa sure will leave the paradise
with Moramente; the advantage is so sure among the rest, as it lessens the
glory of it.


Exit Pantamora: Enter Melidoro, Camena. Mel. What think you Camena? how much
does Bellesa love?


Camena. What think you MELIDORO? I know how much.


Mel. Have you gotten the model of it? I would not at all adventures build my
hope by such a one, therefore pray do not proportion yours to it.


Came. They that have taken the true dimensions of Love and Honor, may model
hers by that. She is so exactly what she should be; as they that know that, may
know directly what she is.


Mel. What, do you think then she answers Moromente's Love?


Camena. If women at first be but so civil as an Echo, it is enough if she but
show that she did hear.


Melidoro. I believe that Morament's complaints have not been so unhappy, as
never to end with love, and so I think by this time he has had an answer
ecchoed to him.


Camena. Women may answer Love so, and disavow it too, as repetition of an
others oath is not accounted swearing. The most I think BELLESA has done yet,
has but obliged Moramente and not engaged her self.


Mel. Do you think Bellesa was so careless, as not to provide, against her
falling from her throne, the lighting in Morament's arms.


Camena. It Is but a year since they first knew one another, and that is scarce
time enough for a woman to make all her objections against loving of a man,
much less to be so satisfied, as to resolve to give her self away. Will you be
content to have my promise Melidoro to your wish, on those conditions if
Bellesa yields to Moramente?


Mel. If I must still depend upon the uncertainty of a condition, I do not
dislike this you have proposed. And sure Camena, this belief of mine does not
imply less value of Bellesa, then those scruples you allow her.


Camena. I love freedom so well, I would not venture an engagement but upon
terms I thought even improbable. But when your wishes hang upon my will, you
ought not to think them desperate. Look where Genorio comes! methinks he
looks as if he would Enter Genorio. out-act all that has been writ of sorrow;
this sight methinks Melidoro should make no hope seem little.


Melidoro. Pray Camena lets leave him, he looks as if he would taint the air,
and make misfortune infectious.


Exeunt Melidoro, Camena. Genesis How well has fortune showed, I am her own, in
having thus employed my self to betray that strength of happiness which was
impregnable, and must have been delivered thus by me, since her self could not
take it? Sure fortune grew Jealous, least the world should think she was in
love with me, and there is nothing so detracting from fortunes reputation, as
the opinion that she can fasten her self to any one. She is the whole world's
Mistress, and her loose variations entertain all her servants in variety of
hopes, and so draws on those general addresses which busy and divert her so.
Methinks she might have counted me her child, and so have justified unto
herself her tenderness of me. For when my Infant-bloud seemed destined to the
thirst of multitudes; even there she took me in her arms, and set me at the
breasts of Princes to be nursed; and not content with that, endeared me so unto
them, as if I had sucked their hearts into me, and they lived by me. This has
been confirmed unto me by such a disposition of their powers, as if they had no
power but this of giving me so much: and because all this might be thought
subject still to fortune, she provided me a blessing above her power of
resuming Fidamira's Love. And sure it is that which has incensed my mother
Fortune thus against me, that repulse that she received in her attempting
Fidamira: for never was fortune more affronted, than in her refusal of the
Prince. It must be so that she grew jealous of my being set above her reach,
and finding her self so weak, has got Love to join with her to take me by my
self, that I might give away what could not be resumed. And now I am so
compleately miserable, I cannot call my affliction misfortune. I have this
circumstance to perfect it, the attribution of it wholly to my self. I have
told Bellesa my passion so directly, she seems not to understand it. Sure it
had so wild a boldness, it looked liker Madness then Love. It is but just,
that I that have so much neglected truth, should be discredited by it. Whither
but to my self should I repair for satisfaction, since I am my own offender?
Therefore from thence I derive a happiness that shall defy even fortune, the
adoration of the not epitheted Bellesa; it shall be so little subject to chance
or change, it shall make despair a reason for it, to be sure to defy both
those. Nay I will not exact less of my self then the doing what was never done
before, the allowing Bellesa to love another, and even proportion my joy in
this, to what she shall receive in that. Thus I am so resolved, as I could even
already tell it Fidamira.


Fidamira like a Ghost* Genesis Though fortune has taken me at this disadvantage,
before my resolution had time to fall from my mouth into my heart: Yet thus
half armed I will defend my self, though Beauty and Death, even those great
enemies, are reconciled to join against me; Nay I will give thee yet more
odds, I will suppose thee an Angel and so conclude thou know my thoughts,
and justify them even against any reason thou can bring: By naming but
Bellesa, thou must needs know her, if Angels know one another. She is here
your delegate on earth. Tell me, blessed spirit, were thou not sent down to
visit her? To fright me thou can not come in such a shape, and less to
change me, that am fixed above the power of miracles. When you have seen
Bellesa, you will think constancy to any but her self so ill a miracle, as you
will not approve it. How blessed am I in this descent of yours? For if you came
but to reproach me, I shall have this merit to Bellesa the having brought an
Angel down to see her, which may describe her, where she only can be praised
enough, in heaven; Go then, fair Spirit, and when you have but looked on her,
the impatience of the news you carry will quicken your ascent again, to
entertain the blessed Quire with a relation may endanger your being envied
there. For me, I doubt not but you will approve so of my adoration here, as in
pity of my want of spirit and soul enough you will inspire some such
transcendency, as may lessen the disproportion is between the admiration of all
mortals and the divine Bellesa.


Ghost. I am so unhappy, I can think my self less so, for the improbability
of thy ever being so, which to remove from thee, I am content to impart to
thee. All the Angelicallnesse I will own is the prevision of thy misfortune, to
which thy belief may prescribe some remedy. I know Bellesa so much better then
thou, as I can tell even what she shall be.

She a woman unto one shall be,
But still an Angel unto thee.
And to thy shame too, Fidamira lives:
And is an Angel but as she forgives.

Genesis Sure, the heavens have conspired this miracle of my love. And by an
Angel have been pleased thus to assure me of the conjuncture that must make it
so, Bellesa loving Moramente. And what a joy has heaven sent me to begin with?
The making me an Angel unto Moramente by the delivery of these news which is
such as even the relation of it overpayes all his benefits. I will instantly
seek him, with this obligation must remain to me. For Fidamira, I can wish
nothing in her life, but her being here for an exaltation of the wonder of my
love unto Bellesa.


Exit Genorio. The King at the other door following Fidamira, she flying from
him. Fida. In what distress am I? as I was going out of the temple the King
meets me thus. Sure he has believed me dead, and searched out my ghost. For
thus he follows me rather joyed, then frighted. And since this habit cannot
deliver me from him, my tongue must needs deliver me to him.


King. Stay Fidamira what so ere thou art, Angel or Ghost. I do not mis-call
thee by that name. O do not soul that pure reverence I bear thee with such a
stain as violence. It Is thou that offerest the first violence by flying. And if
I shall dare to touch thee, it is in my defense, to stay thee here. Tell me if
thou be^st a ghost, and I can quickly think my flesh away, and die instantly by
thinking thou art dead, and so wait on thee as a ghost. But in thy looks I
find no other sign that thou have ever died, but that in Paradise thou do
reside. Thou can not be a ghost and thus out-looke all Angels. Tell me
fair, fair spirit, what is become of Fidamiras spirit. Thou know I am to
account for it. Tell me or I must follow thee till thou do vanish. And then,
as soon as I can open this Cage that holds my spirit, let it fly after thee.


Fida. [I must reveal my self and trust him, or his wilfulness in following
me must needs discover me. Besides, to morrow is the day that shall unriddle
all our stories. I shall not advance his knowledge of me much, and so prevent
his finding of the Prince unopportunely. I will resolve it]. Heaven has been
so careful of your comfort Sir, as it has made me my self again, I believe
only for that, and has employed another guilt to advance this ease unto your
innocence


King. Your body Fidamira is but lent you then again, for apparition unto me,
not life to you. And it was kindly don to call my knowledge of it an ease,
since it will surely deliver my spirit from the cords and ligaments that hold
it yet.


Fida. You are mistaken Sir, I am not dead, only transfigured into this
colour's contrary. Which I have put on but as a case to keep it from fullying.


King. If thou live Fidamira speak on. For I will believe thee so, as well as
if thou were an Angel.


Fida. Will you forgive me Sir, if I call that, which it may be you meant an
honor, your resuming of your grant of privacy, an intermission of my peace.
From whence I did derive such fear, as the protection of a King did most
expose me to, the apprehension of such an eminence intended me, as I could only
come near the deserving, by the avoiding: And yet so possess my self of a
more affected happiness, your estimation of my virtue; which I tendered the
preservation of the more, because yours must have suffered with it.

For, the honors you had designed for me, were raised to such a height, as
being above the capacity of the greatest part of the lookers on were likely to
be misunderstood. Therefore to avoid the occasion of being but so much as an
error in your unqu^stionable worth, I chose this as the less danger, the
flying into some concealed retreat; and not trusting so much to my legs, I
made my face run away to carry me securely. And in this disguise of a Moore I
fled hither, where I made bold to use your name to be received. And here I
found my flight and my disguise so much outdone by strangers, as I had no
wonder left for my own condition. And these upon your promise of taking no
knowledge of, till I shall advise you to it, I will impart unto you.


King. Ask no other caution Fidamira but thy belief that I cannot disobey
thee. Should thou tell me that my son were here, and you two in love with
one another, I would never take notice of it, till all your blessings did ask
me mine for consummation of them. In which gift I would ask nothing but the
breathing out my soul upon it. So willingly I would give it you.


Fidamira. Your own guess has engaged you Sir. The Prince and Agenor are both
here, admitted into the order by the names of Moramente and Genorio. The
approbation Sir, which you have promised of his choice, if it had miscarried so
as to have lightt on me, is a joy that over-pays me this comfort I have brought
you, as it assures me of your consent unto his wishes, which are so
justifiable, and I believe want nothing else for their perfection. To morrow is
a new election of a Queen, and that light will clear all that must yet remain
obscure to you. And the d^y warnes me to be-night my self again. For no light
ever interposed it self between this darkness since I put it on till now. And
the reason of this Eclipse of my darkness^ (I may call it so) shall no longer
then to morrow be clouded to you. Therefore give me now leave to return to
Gemella, the name my darkness ownes. And I doubt as little the justifying to
you to morrow the fitness of all my requests, as I do of your observance of
your word till then.


Exit Fidamira. King. Go Fidamira, and doubt not of my obedience though you
leave me in a doubt, which is a pain equal to that of thy preserved life or
hastened death. Which shall I trust to? Basilinos hand or Fidamiras word? My
fears that find nature too steep to climb directly up against it, do thus by
circular and turning motions seek to wind themselves up above it. As violent
storms repulsed by senses that they meet, seem to fly back, and part
themselves to go about; and so at last insinuate themselves through those
fences, that they could not break: thus do my doubts of Basilino's and
Fidamira's knowing one another, and loving here, work themselves into me by
winding-circumstances, which are so weak as must go about, my reason cannot
get over it. Thus does all jealousy run on in crooked serpentations, and seems
to embrace all reason that it meets, but it is but to incompasse it, and leave
as it were so as an Island, as it cannot get out, mine must stay here all night,
exposed to those cold blasts my fears can shake it with. To morrow Fidamira's
promise will deliver me.


Exit King. Enter Bellesa. Bell. How surely do they think themselves away, that
let Love close with their thoughts, intending they shall wrestle with it? for
love in that instant that it is let in, falls under our wills, and like an
inundation, all it finds portable it raises up, and carries forward on it
self, and love finds our wills so leight and so ascensive then, as it does but
take them up with this humility, and carries them along with it, and by this
subjection of it self, raises them higher then they could e're have got
without it. So that love, entered into our thoughts, as it uses no violence to
them; So it is liable to none from them. This have I learnt of my Tutor
Moramente, and I am yet so strangely bashful, as my having my lesson so
perfect makes me ashamed to repeat it. Gemella assures me I have had a Prince
for my Tutor, I am glad of that: for though birth and quality be not the only
foundation to build love upon, yet it is a fair roof to cover it. I owe some
satisfaction to Moramente for all his humble sufferings, and '^is enough my
going now to Loves Cabinet to consult, whether I shall yet tell him my sense of
them or no. The bringing it so near a question is a reparation for more then
man can suffer. I must resolve.


Exit Bellesa. Enter Moramente. Mor. I should be so scrupulous of being so much
my self, as having power to resolve any thing without Bellesa's leave, had I
not two such necessityes, as Nature and Time to justify still my incapacity,
by their impulsion of me to it. Nature's internal force would be too weak, I
could forget I have a father, I am so Bellesas creature, had not time power
over me, and that this light must see me a Prince, and her none. Her words by
whose reflex we only can see thoughts, have sometimes been clear enough: yet
they have been always so unsteady, as like glasses turned up and down, their
reflex has rather dizied my brain then assured my sight. Now I must resolve to
beg of her to fix them, so as I may see what figure they have made for me.
She is now gone toward Love's cabinet. I will follow her thither, expecting
nothing from the place but privacie. She Is love's influence, and only can
affect her self. And now to balance the boldness of this resolution with an
equal humility, I will oblige my self not so much as even to wonder at the
worst she shall resolve for me.


Exit Moramente. Enter Bellesa in a wood called Love's Cabinet. Bell. Hither
where all things look so pleasingly, and so well pleased, as you must be all in
love with one another; hither where the best of loves secr^^ie does flourish
so, as you know not one another love, and yet live still, adding still to the
delights of one another, as't were by mere instinct, by being bu^ together.
Whither but unto you should I repair for company? To your so pure innocence as
ill can never come so near, as to be withstood. For in your vein runs
water instead of blood. My breath is yet so innocent it will not bl^st your
tenderest purity. And I will trust you as to take counsel of you in the
discovery of my thoughts of love you are the fitter because you cannot speak.
For you may answer me by instinct, as you seem to entertain one another, and
not speak.


Ec. Speak.


Bell. Alas Echo you are too generally free to be trusted You will answer any
body, and that they please. Therefore the gods when they placed you here, to
secure the secrecy of solitude restrained your voice to a present answer only
to those that spoke unto you, and so disinabled you to tell any thing from one
unto another, otherwise I would not trust even this privacy with this word Love.


Ec. Love.


Bell. Could I answer at that distance thou do and not be seen, I would word
that love. I think sure thou could not be so confident had thou not all
these curtains drawn before thee, and did not know, that they that seek thee
after thou have spoke can never find thee But let the spirit of this
unsuspected place tell me, if it avow thee for its Speaker, and I will yield
unto its Genius, and will resolve what methinks it would have me do.


Ec. Do.


Bell. Now you have answered so well for him, will you now answer for him to
me? Dare you promise me his constancy?


Ec. Constancy.


Bell. If he prove so, our prayers shall intercede for thee unto the gods, that
this thy service in our love* may expiate thy former fault. And that thou
may be restored unto thy body, and thy voice doubled to thee, to have speech
enough to tell the wonders of our loves, which no less then such a miracle can
do. But if he now prove vain or e're inconstant, I will come back hither, and
with my curses blast the beauty of this place. I will be so revenged, I will
not leave it so much as solitude. I will be always here, and with my loud
complaints storm it with a troubled tumult. And for you, Echo, I will with my
reproaches force you to answer so much, as it shall hoarse that little voice is
left you. Nay I will search all the earths concavities, and fill them up, so to
choke you quick, there shall be left you nothing to reside in but Moraments
heart. That I will leave you, even for a greater punishment, then death, upon
these terms if you will stand to your counsel, I am content.


Ec. Content.


Enter Moramente. Mor. Hearing Madam you were gone this way. I made haste after
you, lest you might light by chance into this place. Do you know where you are
Madam?


Bell. It Is you Moramente that are you know not where; if you had known where
you were, you would not have hastened to divert me from this place: this is
Loves cabinet, is it not?


Moramente. It was Madam before you came hither, but all that was Loves, is
yours where you are.


Bell. Do you think, Love loses any thing in what I take from it?


Mor. Yes Madam it loses more by what you keep from it, then it gives or
receives from all the world besides, this place is believed to have a tacit
influence, and works all hearts into a ^endernesse that it does receive, as if
the air contracted with the heart it should take Love, and breath together.
This I tell you Madam, only that you may glory in mastering virtue, that seems
to have power over nature.


Bell. My heart Moramente is harder to be known then it is when it is known. Do
not you think it can allow Love as much virtue as any other?


M^^. Yes Madam, as I believe all virtue improves in its ^^ssa^ion more then in
its exercise meeting with yours, as it is a greater virtue to yield to that
then trust unto its own: So your heart may allow love more virtue then any
other by a resignation of its power to your neglect.


Bell. This opinion Moramente, makes me apprehend so little your guessing why I
came hither, as I may now in return of a request you made me once, to guess at
your love, desire you to do so at the reason of my coming hither.


Mor. It may be Madam, that Love himself in love with you has giv^n you this
curiosity of rifling his Cabinet to try who he holds intelligence with. So, to
discover Love's secrets, you came hither.


B^l. Ha^h this Echo run under ground, and carried him my voice? It Is true
Moramante, I am come to discover Love's secrets but more to trust, then to
suspect: and I have found here so uninterested a Counselor, as he asks nothing
but words to gratify him; and he has answered me so fitly, as if he had
studied my cause before. If you have any suite Moramente speak to him, he is in
his closet here amongst the trees; he is old and a little deaf, you must
speak aloud, and it is likely he will answer you.


Mor. This is clear enough. I understand it. You know I have a suit Madam. And
I will try if you have entertained him against me. Tell me thou faithful
speaker, does Bellesa love.


Ec. Love.


Mor. It is too much a miracle to be believed from any voice but yours.


Bell. Why Moramete, would you have me so strange a creature as to make an Echo
speak false?


Mor. You were but dallying with love, and he had not strength enough to get
above your other words, and so the air sent Echo back with it along to you.
Had love any power over you, it would not lose so much of its sweetness, as
the being deluded by any voice but yours.


Bell. It is my voice Moramente, and I have let it loose from me, that it might
not have so much as modesty to hold it back. Believe it. For if you put me to
take it in again, I have virgin cold that would not let it speak so clear.


Moramente kneels. Mor. I will believe it so as I will worship it. All my
souls faculties shall be converted into this one belief, and give me leave to
beg for this kind voice, that for my sake is so unhappy as to go out of you,
that you would take it in again, and let me h^are it, in that temple where it
should be inshrined, your mouth, though it speak lower. My belief has ears
to save you the pains of straining it too high.


Bell. Rise Moramente, unless you wish an answer from a Queen, and not Bellesa.
I have had long a sense well fitted to your sufferings, and I have believed so
well of you as I did not fear the seemingnesse of my indifferency would divert
you from a meritorious persistency. And I have been so just to you, as you have
lost nothing by my differing your admittance to the knowledge of my thoughts For
they have been studying you all this while, wi^h this advantage to, of your not
knowing it. So they have informed themselves of your nature streghtly in it
self, without the ply it takes, bent by design. And I have so satisfied my
self, as I believe my time well spent.


Mor. You might well tell me Madam I was I knew not where, if I have been in
your blessed thoughts; and thus you only could have done so new a thing as to
re-call time, and in an instant bless all that was past, as well as what is to
come. I have now no way of humility left but, valuation of my self ascribing
so the more to the virtue of your thoughts, which have made me what they have
been, so modest as to say they have found me. For you have such a singularity,
as you cannot think on any thing unworthy of you. Therefore give me leave to
ask you, what you have thought of my love to you? For this was the only thing
in me worthy of your thoughts, before you thought of me, I m^st therefore
believe you have thought most of that.


Bell. For the first thought, I did allow your love Moramente, it was so civil
it brought me many in return of it. And by this exchange stored me with
thoughts which wereso clear, as they seemed glasses for virtue to dress her
self by, ^ot shadows to draw over her. Therefore I have continued the
entertainment of your love.


Mor. Judge Mad^m how absolutely you are Mistress of love. It has had
intelligence with you. And given and received presents from you, without my
knowledge. I will not call this treachery, for I will allow all that is mine, to
be yours more. But has not my love been so true to you Madam, as to propose to
you its perfection in the admittance of my heart into yours to lie under it,
that it may rest it self upon it?


Bellesa. It has proposed that which I cannot answer yet, because it knows
not who it speaks to.

[The heavens conspire a parity in all] Oh Mor^m^n^ himself. Bellesa give
meleave to wish you any thing rather then an Angel. For so only your promise
may defeat it self. If you be mortal, you can have no scruple, but the making
me happier then your self by the disparity between what you give and can
receive.


Bell. I can give nothing now Moramente but my promise to be shortly my self,
and so it may be I shall be able to give you more then now: and Gemella though
she has not told me who you are, has assured me you are not what you seem,
and so an agreement now would be void on both sides. Therefore now take this
watch with my promise, that before it measure three hours more, you shall know
my story, and then I shall have a fuller power to give: for having promised
nothing, the time now admits not the telling your story, if you would advance
the knowledge of you. Therefore we must now part, I for preparation of the
ceremony of the new election.


Mor. I will then confess Madam only as much as the time will give you leave
to know, which is, that I am more then I seem even more in love with you then I
can seem to be: but there will nothing now seem strange in all my story, but
your qualification of me with more honor then nature can bestow. I accept this
pledge of your promise, and shall thus by you try both experiences.

If time in the despair does seem to move
Slower, or toward the promised joys of Love.

Exeunt Mor. and Bell. Enter Romero. Romans Sure, Nature did make up our lines in
wreathes; and the first instant motion is set against the Scrue; and so we move
in a continual revolution to unwind our selves, and by the same degrees that we
unwreath our lives, we find a flacknesse, and an enervation in those parts that
loosen first. Our legs are first unjoynted. So by degrees this looseness
rises up and slackens. So the frame of man, as all the parts, unfastning at
last, seem but to have a contiguousnesse, and no connection to one another: for
all their functions part, while they hang yet together, till the last turn
devolved falls to the dissolution of them all. So that man is only brought by
ruin unto rest, I am so near this last dissolving turn, as I will now lay my
self down here on this soft ground, that I may fall in pieces with less pain*
I have visible misery enough to assure me of pity, this head on which the sun
it self did snow, and cold can only thaw.

There Is nothing fitter for the virtue of this place then age, as nothing so
unrelievable: but I have such unspeakable misfortunes, as makes my age a
blessing, as it promises a speedy delivery from what yout^ could have no hope
but death, the loss of three such Princes in my charge, as the safety of a
kingdom dep^nd^^h successively on each of them, the ones blo^d powered out at
his nations sacrifice. So innocent, as his infancy better ass^reth us now what
he is; th^n it could have promised what he would have been the other a
Princess, such an emission of nature, as it were above it self, as she
promised nothing so low, as could be hoped before, and yet the miracle of her
obscured all that he did promise. She was so acceptable to all, as she made the
loss of her brother and sister a p^blick joy, as it conveyed the Kingdom unto
her, this angel then vanished from amongst us out of my hands: or if she were a
woman, now she is above an angel, for she might dye obscurely, but could not
live so. My enquiry, had she been upon the earth, must have met with the report
of her; no nation b^t must have sent out proclamations of their glory in having
of her. Should I go back now to the aged King that has no soul left but an
expectation, and so take his soul too away, and then live to see unfortunate
Navarr lie like a headless trunk, subject to the first power that would sease
it? Nay, I will lay my life down here, and by the application of all these
sorrows to my soul try if I can ^right it out of this weak body which has no
strength to oppose the passage of it.


Enter Genorio. Genesis I have sought Moramente every where but in Love's Cabinet,
and cannot find him. Sure Fortune is scrupulous of letting me have so much joy,
as ^h'obliging him. Here is a stranger, the gods assist you Sir in all your
wishes.


Romero. Pardon me Sir, if I do not so much as wish you well, least fortune,
that has undertaken the opposition of all my wishes, might be by them brought
against you.


Genesis It seems then you were chased hither by Fortune not led by Curiosity.


Romans I have been so inconsiderable to fortune as she has not thought my
personal affliction^ worthy her intention; but has run through me and wounded
others, whose loss has brought no less then the curse of a whole nation upon
me.


Genesis Have you ever been in love?


Romans Never Sir, I have not known so light a grief in all my life, you are
happy whose youth knows no true pain; and therefore does account the frights of
love, which imagination brings, the height of all affliction.


Genesis Comfort your self then, for you are not so unhappy as you might have been.


Romans You may brag Sir, you have made me smile to think, to how little
disquiet this place is subject: thereforepray Sir, be so charitable to tell me,
whether this place does certainly make all happy, that are admitted to it; if
so I would avoid it. It is a curse, I have not the wishing my self happy by
forgetfulness.


Genesis If there be any certain virtue in this place, I believe it is in the
inversion of the conditions it receives. All the effects I have found of it
yet, have been so. I thought my self when I came hither, as unlikly to become
unhappy as you can now your self to be relieved. And I have seen another's
fortune turned to the opposite extreme of what it was brought hither. And if
you would not forget, stay not here. For I am such a witness of that effect,
as if you knew my story, you would believe that virtue unresistable.


Romero starts up. Romans How miserable am I? that even you, that pretended to be
an oblivious Trophy, are my remembrancer, and of a misery greater then your age
is capable of. Will you give me leave to look upon this jewel? Pray Sir, do
you remember so much, as how long you have had this jewel?


Genesis I have had it longer then I can remember any thing; it is part of my story
which is so strange a one as if you knew it, it would make you think your self
happy. I am so subject to forget, as I had almost forgot my haste, Which if
you knew the occasion of, you would leave wondering at your self.


Romans This fond young man's in love. And is grown vain of his afflictions,
because they are of his own making. He carries a greater misfortune of mine
about him, which he knows ^ot of, than he takes upon him. That cross of
diamonds the prince Pallantus had about him, when his infancy was smoothered in
that crowd of death Pamlona did sink under, taken by assault some twenty years
ago by this king of Castile. That there could be so little providence in fate!
as to preserve this, and cast him away. Some soldier in whose bloody hands
this spoil remained, must have sold it to this young man. His years will not
allow him the honor to have bought it with a drop of blood. I will go rest me,
left my spirits faint under the weight of misery they must bring for their
pretense of ease.


Exit Romero. Enter Bonorio. Bo. I have lost the King strangely at the entry of
the Temple, he took another way, but he cannot be straied far hence.


Enter the King. King. I have watched my fears all night, lest while my reason
was a sleep, they might have got the advantage of a dream to fright me from
my trust of Basilino. And methinks this mornings light shoots such a cheerful
clearness into me, as my presaging thoughts do smile on one another. Well met
Bonorio. Since I have lost you, I have found such a miracle, as the surprise of
would have killed you with joy. This company must defer your knowledge of it.
Let us stand by a while.


Enter Bellesa, Gemella. Bell. What do women say Gemella, for discovery of their
loves?


Gem. As the humors are Madam, some say all they think, and yet think all
they can too little. Others say no more then what just will serve a man to
guess at what they think.


Bell. Sure that is best Gemella. For so women retain a power of rewarding
modesty, and punishing presumption. Which is so easily don, as by saying
nothing. But what say you Gemella of Genorio's passion, that is so bold as to
fly to me for sanctuary? I had thought friendship had been the highest passion.
Believing that Moraments greifes running through Genorio had left this sad
tincture on him. Is there no friendship so bold Gemella as to admit a rival
to the trust of emulous desires?


Gem. Passion, Madam, is so shie of all things, as it scatters our thoughts
abroad upon all aproaches can be made to it: And is so far from admitting any
body, as it is afraid even of its own shadows doubt, and suspicion which it
never shines but it will make. But I wonder most that Genorio in so desperate a
passion, should seek a reason for your will, though it be to neglect him.
Perfect humility bows into it self, and finds reason there to justify its
adoration, by an incapacity of a fault in her it is devoted to.


Bell. And sure, Humility is encouraged so, as by finding this reason, it leaves
neglect less reason then it had before: but what reason does Genorio's
wildness prey upon?


Gemella. My innocence; which his suspicion seiseth on, and disfigures with the
imputation of malice: which I am so far from, as even his provocation can bring
me no nearer it then joying in Moraments fortune.


Bell. Sure, he is in a desperate condition Bellesa, that is so far from
knowing the cause of his ill, as the ascription of it to thy malice. I wonder
that the flaming virtue of thy soul, that lightens through these clo^ds, does
not dispel them quite, and leave your body a fair sky, where it may shine. Here
is a stranger, you shall to day here my story, which if my person could spare
all this while, it may well expect improvement in your estimation, by that
addition to your knowledge.


Gem. If I could make you Madam as full return of all your favors, as I can
do of your story, I should owe you nothing.


Bell. Are you he Sir, that demands audience for your pretense?


King. No Madam, it was my curiosity lead me hither; and I have been so well
paid for following it, as I believe the virtue of this place must needs be
miraculous for devotion, since it is so propitious to curiosity. The first
instant I arrived, I was made happier then I dare tell.


Bell. I wish it may afford you that happiness to the telling of it.


King. The seeing you Madam, is a happiness above relation.


Gem. This is the Queeen Sir she is now going to give audience to a new
pretenderbe: you there, and bring your promise entire with you.


King. O Fidamira. I have already seen Moramente, and Genorio, and have looked
upon them, ke^ping my promise unto thee, between them; and they have not
discovered me.


Gem. The audience will be within this hour, and the election presently after.
Then my promise shall make you a full return for this your patience.


King. This Queen is a strange (...), why may not I be so completely happy, as
to have (...) Son in love with her? ^hey are all ^uspicious thoughts that fancy
me to day I will let my belief anticipate part of this joy, left all at once
be too much for my senses to support, would not you b^ content Bonorio to be
(...) find your daughter, that (...) were that Moore you saw speak with me?


B^no. A father that loves a chil^ as I do Fid^mira had rather mourn for her
death, th^n see her mourn in such a life.


King. You speak as if you were in love with her. I will keep thy fondness
no longer in pain. Th^^ Moore is Fidamira, thus disguised Basilino and Agenor
ar^ both here too. I am bound to secrecy while that Fidamira shall release me,
and so I engage you. Let Us set forward to the audience, in the mean time I will
tell you my strange discovery of Fidamira.


Bonorio. This is a joy Sir, becomes your delivery as the greatest blessing I
can value, the seeing you so pleased.

O why did nature suffer love to know
Only this secret hid from all below?
Why should not nature tell her st^a^th?
Then suffer love to curse her self.
What hope has he to ease a hidden pain
Where it is less to suffer, than complain?

Exeunt. Enter Martiro. Mar. Sure, even imagination has a vertical point,
from whence it must decline: mine has touched that, and now it stops again nor
does it charge Bellesa with a declination, to say it follows her, but accuses
its self of a rapture, that carried her along with it. I have been guilty all
this while of treason to her, of parting her body and her soul, which sure
heaven united for no less a miracle, then the propagation of them on earth. My
fancy had restrained her to the being one her self, her disposing of her self,
will make more such as her self, and so exceed even my fancy. And now I find
it was a suppression, not an exaltation of her, to believe there could be any
thing impossible to her, which I confess I did believe her loving was.
Moramente, who was most concerned by my opinion, has already begun to correct
it by his scorn of my counsel, which I gave him as boldly, as if Bellesa had
been no where but in my fancy. I will allot no less then all my life for
recantation, and pay this blessed place all that for my conversion.


Exeunt Melidoro, Camena. Melidoro. What speculation are you in Martiro? Were
you not thinking what stars were in love with one another? and how by their
tacit influence they entertain themselves! You never think so low as the moon,
because she has been said to have been enjoyed.


Came. They say Martiro there is a Sagittary above, that answers to our Cupid
here, and that the stars which we see shoot, are shot by him to inflame which
of them he will will aim at. Pray Martiro, do not the melancholy loving stars
delight much in the music of the Spheres?


Mar. No: I was thinking lower, how the globe of the earth might be made flat,
and so the Antipodes laid level with us. Inmy mind I have seen as strange a
thing as this come to pass.


Melidoro. There is hope Martiro, you may fall ^o think of possibilityes; this
is somewhat toward it to meditate so low as earth.


Mar. I do begin already to think all things so possible on earth; as I think
you two may be happy in enjoying one another.


Mel. This is an exposition of flatting of the Globe. We that were your
Antipodes are now level with you.


Came. Rest your thoughts then here, Martiro, on the Center of the earth, and
you will find more ease in that stability then you have don in the swift
motion of the orbs above, where they have been till now.


Mar. I am but yet like one that is fallen high, whose sense at first does but
assure him he feels a foundation: so by degrees his senses begin to com
again. I do begin to hear already, I may come to taft at last.


Mel. You will find Martiro, that fancy on the ground of sense may run
division enough, and make much better music then in air. Here comes Genori^,
we will tell him the news.


Enter Genorio. Genesis Happy Martiro, I must acknowledge, you showed me first the
way to this supreme beatitude in love above the orbs of wishing. And give me
leave to brag, that I am risen a degree above you, to the joying in her
loving another proportionably as it affects her.


Mar. My recantation must confess my opinion. And you Genorio have now brought
me a reason to confirm the change of it, your having got a point above it: You
have not left me so much as a singularity to glory in, I was never higher then
the allowing her I loved impossibility. For all that you are many degrees
further. And my new opinion assures your happiness that all women must love.
For whom soever your Mistress^ loves, your security keeps time with that.


Came. Here is the expired Phoenix, and there the issue of his ashes. And there
can be but one at once.


Mel Come Camena, let us leave them both together, there is no danger of
Genorio's making a sect.


Came. We will leave you together. If the st^anger bring so good a pretense to
misfortune to day as this your opinion Genorio he shall have my voice.


Genesis We will follow to the audience. If all happiness be but opinion, as some
say it is, then mine is a High one. How, Martiro, comes this declination of
your thoughts from that high belief can hardly reach, to this which sense can
touch?


Mar. It may be Genorio, your thoughts and mine are a counter-ballance. And the
fall of mine has raised yours.


Genesis Sure Martiro, you have reached the imp^ssibility you soared at. And
having wrought your self above it, have stooped with it, and come down (...)
of it.


Mar. No Genorio, but I have seen it fallen down by me, seized by another. And
now I conclude there is nothing impossible in love. And this my discovery does
advance your joys, that are c^ried on with h^rs you love though an other be
the bearer of them.


Genesis Why Martiro, Is not this an ingenious revenge on scorn, to reduce the
woman to make you happy by the same degree^ she can think her self so? For so
is he that derives his joys from hers.


Mar. Do you know, Genorio, do you know, that they that love after the knowledge
of the delivery ^f their wishes to another are inconstant in the act, for they
I (...) another? For in that instant she is no more her self. And he that will
begin again, must love two at once. For of lovers none knows which is which.


Genesis I am so far destined to this singularity, as this your intended diversion
is my direction, for my passion is fixed so, as he that shall enjoy my wishes is
such a one as my reason may dispute with my passion, which I should love best.
If you knew my story Ma^tiro, you would think heaven had blessed me with my
love for a miraculous gratitude. I must speak with Moramente before the
audience.


Mar. Go Genorio, we will go several ways to Bellesa with my recantation. This
is Bellesa he is in love with, and his friendship to Moramente is, that he
frames the wonder to himself upon.

This were to stoop to let my passion fall
To less than what is impossible to all.

Exit Martiro. Enter Moramente and Gemella. Mor. All that I can say Gemella
near a return, i^* that even in this my happiness my debt to thee finds sense
enough to be a pain by the difficulty of an acquittance. But if ever Bellesa
and I join, then nothing can be difficult, even a compensation for thy merits
will be easy.


Gem. I am so far from seeking a recompense, as I dare brag you owe me more
then I do know: the concealment of which, I will only call merit. And I will
leave thus much more the helping you to ease your self of what you will owe
me, by asking you somewhat which will seem easy to you, though it must take
up all your life the giving it.


Mor. There can be nothing so hard to me as a cessation in my gratitude to you:
therefore the time it does require will not only welcome, but satisfy the
act. Lose no time Gemella, that I may begin.


Gemella. To be constant all your life unto Bellesa.


Mor. Thou have ask't the only thing which I can do, but cannot do for you:
this is a pretention even above thy merit to wish to have Bellesa thought upon,
one instant, for thy sake. I should forget Bellesa in that promise to you. This
I will assure Gemella, for her sake to be so constant unto you, as you shall be
her shadow in my thoughts.


Gemella. Did I not trust more to Bellesa's virtue of making a miracle for her,
then to your being made one of your self, I should not have asked you so
impossible a thing as constancy.


Mor. Why, do you think constancy in a man a miracle?


Gemella. Such a one, as it is in no man's power to be assured of for constancy.
Moramente is to be judged of, as other miracles, after death; and so may be
allowed deification.


Moramente. I should choose Gemella, that time for the Judgment of mine: for
every instant of my life shall add more to my love, then all the rest of the
world does love in all; and my last instant's breath shall only sum it up.


Gem. Make not so unlimitted engagements Moramente, it is ominous, it is a defy
to fortune and time, that both subsist by change, to resolve so bold a
constancy.


Enter Genorio. Gem. Here comes Genorio, we will be judged by him, whether
large professions be not temptations unto fortune to glory in the frustration
of them.


Genesis I do believe sometimes that destiny is provoked by our undertakings to
be so much our selves, and uses such violence as justifies our honors, not by
a surrender, but by a defeature of our faith.


Gem. Sure Genorio thus to accuse sat of such a depravation is to provoke it
more, than to conclude it will not be offended with a virtuous confidence.


Genorio. I believe too there may be such a subject for a miraculous passion,
as inconstancy may be the greater miracle.


Gem. Pray Genorio, do you think a Salamander can be sensible of the change of
flames? passions may be in some so natural, as they cannot distinguish their
own alterations.


Genesis If this Si^ile hold for a reproach, it reaches to both sexes. Will you
be pleased Gemella to let me change this discourse for some privacy with
Moramente?


Gem. You, I believe, have not the same business with him as I had to
recommend constancy.


Genesis The impatience I have sought you with, Moramente, all this morning will
be proved to you by the occasion of my seeking you.


Mor. No impatience can be welcomer to me Genorio, then this of showing me this
clear cheerfulness risen in thy looks, that have morning in them now again;
they have been so long be-nighted.


Genesis It Is all reflex't from you Moramente, to whom such beams shine as must
needs by repercussion clear one so near to you as I am. It is Bellesa's love
to you that sends these sparkling joys to me from that great flame of glorious
happiness that does blaze on you.


Mor. Thou have matched two impossibilityes so well Genorio, as I knew not
which to believe least, Bellesa's loving me, or thy knowing it.


Genesis You do well to wonder at it, Moramente: for heaven thought it news worthy
of an Angel's sending to the earth to be the bearer often: and the gods knowing
my gratitude to you, could ask no less then a miracle for an expression of
it; and chose me first to impart it to you, left you might have been indebted
too much to any body but one whose life was yours, by the delivery of such a
blessing. An Angel that took (...) assure me of her speaking true, appeared to
me l^^t night in the Temple, and told it me.


Mora. The gods know, Genorio, that Bell^s^^ loving was a blessing too pure
(...) mortality, ^n therefore did ^llay it with ^idamira's death.


Genesis Nay Mo^amente, I have the same authority for F^damira's life, as for
B^llesa'^ love: the angel told me both at once.


Mor. Then Genorio the blessing that thou bring^st is so divine, it leaves me
no^ a wish (...) ^ouch't too with an equal reflex of those joys ^hin^ on thee
in Fidamira's love. The wonder of thy gratitude to me in preferring me before
thy self did require no less then such a miracle for thy reward.


Genesis Believe me Moramente, my heart is so set upon your joys, as I have
scarce any sense left for Fidamira's love.


Mor. Thou do affect out-meriting thy self. Here comes the Queen, Genorio.


Enter Bellesa, Gemella. Bellesa. This freedom is a double obligation as it
gives me some means of return. Till when, it shall not be perceived that I am
trusted with it. Does it not grow late?


Gem. Look on your watch Madam I believe the hour of the audience draws near.


Bell. It is within half an hour of the time. How goes your watch Moramente?


Moramante. Will you be pleased to tell your self Madam.


Bell. As just with mine as if the same wheels moved them both. Have you seen
the Sun to day.


Mor. I have been in heaven this morning Madam, and set it there, and it is as
great a proof to me of the truth of it, the keeping time with yours.


Gem. Moramente is so happy, he believes he governs time.


Bell. Sure the pretender is impatient of his audience which I have promised
him, and the hour I have prefixed draws near.


Mor. Sure, you your self Madam should be impatient in the interim between your
promise and performance, for that is the only time you can owe any thing. We
will wait on you now to hasten your discharge.


^ellesa. We will go, Moramente. I should be glad to see Genorio's looks tuned
to bear a part in this general harmony.


Genesis Mine Madam are the discords which must be in this composition.


Exeunt. Enter Pantamora. Pan. The Queen is gone before to the audience: her
inclination now to Moramente is so declared, as even his looks avow it. The
election is to be presently after the audience, in which I can think on nothing
to fear, unless confidence be ominous.


Exit Pantamora. Bell. Let the pretender be called in.


Enter Romero. Romans Pardon this amazement Madam! All my Soul's faculties are
drawn into my eyes to decide a doubt. In which if I durst so soon believe my
eyes, they had already looked away my pretense, but they are too partial to me
to believe so soon. Therefore give me leave Madam to bring them nearer the
object they are now disputing on, that they may ask some Questions of my
memory, so to decide this doubt. It must be she, nature could not make two
such! Blessed Saphira, I conjure you by the remove of what only can be objected
against your innocence. The affliction of your father and the hazard of a
nation to answer to this name, and in a word to speak me happier ^hen even the
youngest here can live to. You know who asks this pity of you now. One whose
misery is a reproach to you. Therefore answer to this name Saphira, and with
one word over-pay him to whom you owe the first you ever had.


Genesis The virtue of this place reaches not to cure distraction. You would have
Bellesa revive the dead. He may be dismissed, Madam.


Bell. Stay Genorio, sure I owe him more pity that would revive me, than one
would antedate my death. Worthy Romero I will answer to that name, and in this
instant make thee so happy as to indebt all the Society to thee for the
knowledge of me. And to enlarge this present of my self unto thee, I will bring
a witness thou will willingly believe, thy son, whose flight with me if it do
need forgiveness cannot be denied now.


Mar. I will not weaken so much the Queens desire as to add my prayers to it.
She that has blessed you so, cannot be denied yours for me.


Mor. What say you to this Genorio*


Genesis Since my fault is an exaltation of your happiness, that I will ask
pardon for it.


Romero. Pardon me Madam, if I refuse a thought yet so low, as the joy of
finding a son. You must have all my soul a while, till I have discharged my
self of what I owe your father. In whose name I am to beg of you, and conjure
all this society, whom I esteem so justly blessed, as I doubt not of their
wishes to my success, to join with me in a pretense, I am to deliver to you
in the name of the King, and of a Nation, which by me now begs relief of you.
This Society understands you so well as I may better ask of them then tell
them, what a blessing your company is. And if it be such an one to strangers,
let them judge what a joy it will be to a father, to whom you have been so long
a stranger. And though it seemed misfortune cannot afford you less then a
Crown, yet you ought not to make that Crown, which nature has made yours,
unfortunate. Therefore hear the distresses of the King your father, that cry
so loud in the complaints of the loss of you, as they hear not the cries of
all his kingdom for their exposure to the first strong power that will seize
it. His age must quickly leave the first invader for his heir. You know your
brother and your sister, the Prince Palant, and the Princess Miranda, perished
both infants at the seige of the cursed Pamlona. Since, the King your father
having destined you to the Prince of Castile, a Prince thought a match for your
virtue as well as your condition. In the time of this treaty you fled, attended
only by my son. I upon whose trust this misfortune lay like Treason, have been
ever since in the search of you, and now the gods have been pleased to bless
my despair with what they have so long denied my hope, the finding you, Madam.
I must now address my self not only to you, but all this society for judgment
of this pretense of a King, and a Nation, which in a new way demands relief,
not by admittance but dismission.


Bell. I must confess Romero all you have alleged against me: But, in my
defense, desire this fair Society, whose judgments would be injured in my
unnaturallnesse, to believe that even these and the honor of this place did not
divert me from the sense of my fathers afflictions, whose relief I did deferr
to bring thee more entire, after the Prince his marriage should, have removed
all subject of dispute between us.

Here I resolve to stay till then, confident that my fathers consent to the
estimation of my self, in the expression of my equal unwillingnesse, ^o that,
his passion to Fidamira did avow, would justify my presumption on his patience.


Romans This was a sense Madam you ought your virtue, while the Prince's
unsensiblenesse seemed to provoke it to a valuation of its self. But now the
same virtue that did convict him will plead for his acquittance. Now as your
goodness ought not to avert it self from his repentance, which his leaving
Fidamira, and his journey devoted to your pardon, do assure: therefore Madam in
my mind you owe the King your father this satisfaction for all his sufferings,
A return of a full obedience ^or all the hazard he has runn with you I have
heard (...) late, that he has pitied so the Prince as your admission of him
into yours, would b^ a joy that would ind^are your presence. I remitt my self
to this Society. And b^g of them, that if their judgments agree with (...),
their prayers may do so too


Gem. We have our own interests me-think^ that ask our solicitations* that we
that know the blessing of such a Queen, may still enjoy it, both exal^^d for
hers^l^^ and us.


Came. Even this our derived light of Sovereignty must grow brighter, so drawn
from a more glorious body then it was ere before.


All. We all join in this ^upp^ication for the Prince.


King. I think my (...) the good f^rtune I owe this place, to contribute what
my power aff^rds to all the wish^s of this Society. And my admiration to you
Madam engages me to what I owe my country and my Prince, to let you know
that I was lately a witn^ss^ of the Kings wish^s to the h^ppy conju^ction of
the Prince, and Princess^ of Navarr. And I am so ass^red of his consent, as I
dare answer for it with my life.


B^l. I wish the King and Prince so much happiness, as it were presumption in
me to think I could afford it them. Let me ask you some questions of my father
Romero.


Gem. M^thinks, Moramente, you are too cold an interceder for the Prince, that
are so much concerned in all his wishes.


Mor. Therefore Gemella I may be thought too partial to him. Your uninterested
prayers may challenge more success^ Now Genorio, you that can report Princes
lives away so easily, can you speak me dead too, and be believed? For only so
thou can get trust of me again, when I perceive thou can deceive all the
world. Did not some such Angel tell you of Bellesa's love, as of Saphira's
death.


Genesis Consider Sir, how meritorious this report prove^ to your life, and you
may think that an Angel prompted i^ for your justification to the Princess,
and the rest of the world to whom your vow was known. Does not this your
belief approve to her the cessation of your design, which else might have
been objected to you even by her? And must not the sense that you express^d
then of her death, indeare you to her now? And when you know the reason of this
my report, even the falsehood of it will justify my trust to you.


B^^. Sure, ^oramente knows the Prince best of any body. I will infor^e my
self of him. And take his counsel before I do res^lve.


Gem. You cannot resolve better.


B^llesa goes a part with Moramente. Bell. What say you Moramente? Have I not
chosen a (...) couns^ll^^ in ^his cause? Now you know me fully and (...), giv^
m^ your advice. For I am resolved to be (...) b^ you in the disposing of my
self.


(...) Confident of what you say Madam, I shall beg of (...) ^he Prince.


(...) I^ your charity Moramente so much above your lov^?


Mor. No Madam, It is my love that is so humble as to expect nothing but by
charity. And if my intercession for the Prince obtain pardon for him, I shall
esteem it as a favor done to me.


Bell. I thought you would desire nothing but pardon for him; and for your sake
Moramente it will be easy for me to yield to as much as you shall desire for
him.


Mor. I will no longer seem to owe you less Madam then I do. I do accept this
pardon which is so strange an one, as it makes me a Prince, and the same that
you have pardoned. And to deserve this grace, I do resign it back to you, and
so expose my self to all your wills, without claiming any thing, that your not
knowing me might seem to engage you to. You already are acquainted with my
story, which I must thus far enlarge. That taking this place in the way of my
design of seeking your pardon, I was stayed here by you. So I have promised my
self to plead it as your self you shall excuse. So that the dispute will be
between Saphira and Bellesa. And now Madam to be no longer guilty of concealing
any thing from you, I must let you know, that, that stranger which so boldly
answered for the King, might safely do it. For it is the King my father. Of
whose being here, you know the reason and the time just as I do, for I have but
now discovered him. Now Madam I do so entirely prostrate my self unto your
will, as I forge^ any thing that might direct me to an expectation and bow my
self to take your pleasure on me.


Bell. Thus then Moramente, I retract all I have fayd as Bellesa, but 'ti^ to
say more as Saphira. Me thinks fate it self is so much interested in this our
union, as it seems to have directed all which your humility can call a fault.
Therefore now I confirm my promise of being counseled by you in the d^sposing
of my self, as far as my fathers consent shall go along with it, which we may
safely expect for the perfection not retardance of our joys.


Mor. Vouchsafe to call me your self Madam, and so believe you shall always
be counseled and obeyed together.


Bell. Moramente has prevailed so much with me, as I have not only forgiven
the Prince, but resolve to entertain such thoughts of him hereafter, as his
affection shall present worthy of me.


Gemella. You are born for no less then the blessing of nations.


King. Give me leave Madam, to present the Prince to you, that he may lose no
more time in the application of himself to the desert of your farther pity.


Bell. He has lost no time in that. If he were now to begin, I should not so
soon assure you Sir, that I trust you so much, that if I had one to answer for
me, as you may for him, upon your two words I should not fear to engage my self.


King. By this it seems you know I am his father Madam, and you would not
doubt how much I should joy to have the blessing of that name enlarged so far
as to comprize you.


Bell. You that are a father Sir, know so well what I owe unto that name, as I
believe you will chose to ask it of him, whose giving it must justify my
joining.

Now Sir give me leave to retire to the new Election, that I may not be charged
so much as with the breach of an order here, nor be reproached by the
impatience of her* whose beauty and virtue is destined to the reward of this
happy day. We will leave you Sir with your Son, the time cannot seem long to
you.


King. I forget to day Madam I am a King, and only one that joys a fathers
name. If you will have me remember I am a King, it shall be to obey you with
more merit.


Bell. Come Ladies, let us to the election, we shall return presently, and
return a present worthy of a King, a fair and virtuous Queen.


Gem. I beseech you Sir conceal me still.


King. I am all obedience here, Bellesa.


Bell. Let me, Camena, desire your voice to follow mine to day. Though it seem
to oppose your reason for a while; It shall not do so long.


Came. I resign my voice so freely to you Madam, it shall not be mine so much
as to ask a reason.


They all go out to the Election. Mor. Now Sir be pleased to transferr all my
joys, with your blessing upon Basilino.


King. I will not own to day so old a joy as the name of Basilino. This is thy
birthday wherein all is new; and low more to thy name Moramente, then thou
do to me for B^silino.


Mor. You may Sir, for a just improvement of your joys derive mine from the
blessings Heaven ought you, that have had credit enough to crown me with your
fondest wish.


King. I have Moramente private joys of mine own. Thou know not yet,
enough, not to need the asc^iption of all thine to me. And I will own only the
giving thee that happiness, the knowing them. Which it may be thy goodnature
will allow an equallshare with all thine own. But first show me the highest of
thy good fortune. Fear not mine will rise unto an equal parallel.


Mor. I owe so much to my good fortune, I was not long a seeking it. You know
Sir, it is now a year since I left you. And my curiosity was imploved. I think
by heaven, to bring me hither, first to the Election of the Queen. And coming
into this peaceful harbor, my sails were taken off, and I coming a passenger
put my self into service here. The difficulties I have met with cannot be
expressed, b^t in the same words that made them. This Princess is a creature
no body can gu^sse at, but by knowing her to be a woman. A great while in a
seeming neglect of all the lov^ ^y wit could make, her own made love, which
none but its own ma^er could understand. But since, she has (...) pleased to
interpret it so fairly, as you Sir underst and it too. This opinion, of her
being dead, Genor^^, is to answer for. And now at this Election I was resolved
to bring you back (that, which you have thus advanced unto your self) the
joys of a contented father.


King. I must tell you in private how I came thus to anticipate my joys.


Romero. Give me l^ave to consider well this Jewel Sir.


Genesis You have been so luckie in finding what you have lost to day, as I may
fear you will challenge it.


Romero. If I could challenge it rightly, you should get by it. It Is the same.
Are you now at so much leisure as to tell me how you came by it?


Genesis I can direct you how you shall know. Ask the King or Prince, I know
nothing of my self but what they have told me. What a reviving happiness is
this sight of the divine B^lles^? Your eyes, that were this morning two
expiring lamps, flame in a cheerful brightness. Now Nature by Be^l^sa's
perfections can repair her own defects.


Romero. How happy are you then, whose youth has so long re^^iv'd new vigor
from those beams?


Genesis I am so happy Sir, I will not hazard this present with expectation of
more which you might give me.


King. I have told you all which you must keep concealed.


M^r. Is Gemella, Fidamira? and you in love with her? and do resolve to marry
her?


King. You will believe me when I shall tell you I love her, as much as you can
Bellesa. Methinks Moramente, you seem troubled. Is it that any body should love
as well as you?


Mor. It Is but the admiration of the strangeness of this day.


Romans Give me leave I beseech you Sir to beg somewhat of you this day,
wherein there is no joy left you to come but giving.


King. It is no longer mine whatsoever you desire.


Romans It Is but a true answer to a question.


King. That cannot be called a gift, I owe it.


Mor. My quarrel to thee Genorio cannot be great enough to consent unto thy
misery. I must needs pity thee.


Genorio. There can be nothing, that has thus reconciled me to you, that can
be called misfortune. Tell me Sir what I am beholding to you for this your
pity?


Mor. O Genorio, Fidamira!


Genesis Is it to her I must still owe more and more?


Mor. The more thou know her Genorio, the more thou art to be pitied. My
father is in love with her, and is resolved to marry her.


Genesis Mine shall not then be the least contribution to the wonder of this day:
for your sake I can resolve never to see her more, and so make my happiness
the sacrifice of this solemnity.


Mor. Stay Genorio, let us think a little how to make you rather an offerer than
an immolation.


Romans Is this certain Sir, that he was saved at the sack of Pamlona? and this
jewel found about him?


King. It Is as certain as any thing on earth, and that my Son then being a
child in the camp, begged his life of me, which he has since loved better then
his own, because he ought that, and this was due to him.


Romans Then I believe 'twill be to your brave mind some satisfaction to let you
know how happily this your mercy was disposed. So as it may seem a reparation
for all other losses, having in this one blessed a whole nation. This is the
Prince Palante you have saved. I that was trusted with him, and the government
of Pamlona, can assure it. Now you may remember Sir, that you surprised the
Town when I was absent, two Princes were then in my charge, this and a daughter
of the Kings, both infants. The general execution that was committed then left
us no hope of safety for these Princes. And since, the King having this
Princess Saphira has razed out the memory of any loss, and now the finding
of the Prince Palante must be a joy to the King, and her, scarce to be
believed; They did not come from Paradise: Let me then beg of you to be a
witness to this claim that I shall make.

Romero goes to Genorio. Now Sir I must not only challenge this jewel, but you
too.


Genesis You will lose in the value of this jewel by taking me with it. I am not
so ill natured as it would not add to my misfortune to be owned by any body.


Romans I am so happy as I can change you from what you do believe your self, and
so part you and your misfortunes.


Genesis Grow not too confident upon this days success; undertake not such a
difficulty as the making me happy.


Romans You can have no such personal afflictions as the blessing of a nation
will not outweigh. Therefore be pleased to know your self, and it may be you
will find your misfortunes depend on that mistake.


Genesis If you could teach me to forget my self, that were a more probable way.


Romans Would you not think your self happy to make these two Princes a return of
all their benefits?


Geno. I will not hazard to be more miserable by the frustration of such a hope.


Romans You, that did remit me to the king even now for knowledge of your self,
will not refuse him credit. Therefore be pleased to put off that unfortunate
name Genorio and call your self Prince Palante, Son to the now blessed king of
Navar.


Genesis What plot is this, Sir, between your father and this Gentleman?


King. It Is to make you what heaven has destined you, a happy Prince.


Romans This j^well, I have so enquired after, is the witness of what the King
has bin pleased to acquaint you with. In the last war between the King your
father, and this brave Prince I had the honor to be trusted with the town
Pamlona, and the persons of all the King, children; who had then only your
self, and a yo^ng Princess called Miranda, your sister. The town in my
absence was surprised, and the impartial execution that was committed to the
incensed So^ldiers, destroyed all our hope of either of your safeties. Now the
King assures me that you were then brought to him with this jewel about you,
who^e command saved your life by the intercession of the Prince. The time which
has changed all things else about you but this jewel, leaves my memory no
other certainty. Your sister had another too, which concurring with the Kings
relation, makes it unquestionable. It seems even your infancy had some such
divinity in it, as did infuse a soul into that body, should have taken yours
away, and so at once enlarge your obligation, and invest your self with the
power of acquittance too, to th^se brave Princes.


King. All this I am a witness to, and I think my Sons memory will retain this
mark of his charity, this jewel which was then about you.


Mor. If this jewel be a certain mark of your birth. I can assure you that you
were brought to me with it, and then I called you Agenor, a name fitted to the
not-knowing who you were.


Romans I dare say upon this security your father will willingly put his kingdom
into your hands, therefore put off this amazement, and put on your self Pa^ante.


Mor. Why are you thus sad at the taking leave of Genorio, and Agenor?


Genesis I can say nothing at all in answer of what you have said, but can object
one thing which you cannot answer. How can I be Bellesa's brother?


Romans As she is your sister by father and mother.


Genesis You that are so mistaken in her may easily be so in me. She is a creation
of her self apart from all things, there can be nothing so near her as brother
or sister. Should I call her sister?


King. Call your self Palante, and give me leave to embrace you so: then this
your reverence to her will oblige you to answer to what nature shall direct her
to call you.


Mor. This is the last emission of it self your dying passion makes, as it
contests with nature, whose reviving is the others death: therefore I do not
wonder at the force of it, and I do not fear but you will share joys with me
in that little, I hope to owe Bellesa of your brother; and from this instant
that I hope indebts me to you.


Genesis The improvement of my life must be the same still of my obligation unto
you Sir, that must owe it you. Nor could it be a part of a discharge for me to
begin but now to joy in Bellesa's loving you: but I did it then, when my
passion unto her made a burden unto my life.


Mor. Have you this blessing to give, that my fathers having Fidamira shall
prove your wish?


Genesis I have now only that devotion left, you had for the Princess of Navarre,
for expiation of my fault.


Mor. Conceal this purpose awhile, and you may chance find her, where I found
Saphira.


Ge^. This change of my fortune if it prove happy to me Romero, will assure me
of a recompense of thy fidelity, though it cannot of my obligations to these
Princes.


Romans I have not a wish left now but the finding of the Princess Miranda, and
the miracles of this day make nothing desperate here.


Genorio. Would not you wonder Sir now, if I should challenge you of being the
occasion of the report of the Princess Saphira's death?


King. Miracles are here in their own element.


Genesis Do you remember Sir when you thought your self the universal monarch of
despair, and would admit no rival?


King. I can remember when I gave the odds between a Pilgrim and a King into
the balance, and yet out-weighed misfortunes.


Genesis I can witness it Sir, for it was to me you gave it, who then in the
habit of a pilgrim employed by the Prince in the search of the Princess of
N^varr, met you in a lamentation, I thought belonged singly to me, Fidamira's
loss, whom I had been then to seek. The sense of your affliction agreeing with
mine own design, made me resolve to come back to the Prince, whom I had left
here to try if the belief of the Princess Saphira's death, who was then the
pretense of his remove from you, could bring him back. And your own direction
of me hither will justify this my charge against you Sir, by which I only
pretend your intercession to the Prince for my pardon.


Mor. Noble Palante your own revivall must be a new life to her. So you will
recompense her in effect for taking from her but by report.


King. Remember all this Palan^e. Moramente what is the meaning of this between
Fidamira and him? Am I not yet fixed faster then fear can remove?


Moramente. Assure your self Sir, your wishes with Fidamira shall not be
crossed without a wish of his.


Melidoro. Are not these strange things that we have heard? Sure Martiro your
impossibility, that is fallen to the earth, has engendered here this day, and
is delivered of so many miracles.


Mar. I confess this day may justify my wondering again.


Enter Pantamora hastily. Pan. Heaven has sent you hither Sir opportunely, to
defend the rites of the Society, which must appeal to you for your
preservation. The will of the Foundresse, which appoints the Queen to be chosen
principally for her bea^ty, is now violated in the choice of the Moor Gemella,
who is now chosen Queen.


King. Was she chosen Queen as Moor?


Pan. Unless the gods have wrought a miracle for her, she was when she was
chosen.


King. I will assure you Pantamora, my consent shall not ratify the election.
[to himselfe] This way obliges her to stay here.


Enter Bellesa, and all the Ladies leading Gemella. King. Could forgetting
justice be in you Madam? you are so much interested in gratitude to beauty to
be consenting to this choice of your Queen.


Bell. I should be unjust to beauty should I disavow this choice.


King. Sure she knows her I expect no less then miracles from you. And
therefore will suppose you can make her handsome, if that will not approve this
choice, which could not be made upon a justifiable appearance.


B^l. Suppose I knew she was but thus disguised, and I had been trusted with
her beauty; such a trust had been broken in the concealment of it in this case.


King. That answers this Ladies complaint, if the beauty you produce be subject
to no new objection.


Bell. Then thus I justify my choice [pulls off her vaile] expecting all
admiration, no exception, now every body remains wondering.


Gem. None can wonder Madam so much as I, tha^ you would expose your self to
the blemish of an error for my sake. Nothing can seem handsomer in me now then
blushing, which may pass for beauty as I am bound to blush for you, that are
less to be credited in beauty Madam, than a^y body, because you may be so
safely charitable, Therefore I must desire these more competent judges not to
look upon my face but your favor in it, and as that is the loveliest thing in
this world, so your choice may be justified.


Bell. What say you now, Ladies, and (...) of the Society, have I forfeited this
Lady's trust by thus revealing it? or my faith to the Orders, in this (...)


C^m. It Is such a one as leaves as much beauty here, as your leaving of the
place admitts of.


Mor. Her beauty was d^st^n'd to no less glory than the neglecting all power
bu^ yours to be inthroned by.


Genesis Heaven to acquit you Madam, has given you this reparation for her beauty.


All. We all admit the choice.


Gem. Nat^^e carries me to pay this duty.


Bon. I dare own the joy, though scarce the honor of this day.


King. If I dissent, it shall ^e to raise her higher yet. This place is so
fruitful in miracles this day, as there has been one wrought Madam out of
your sigh^, which is no way a less miracle then yours, but as it is a blessing
sent to you.


Moramente takes Genorio by the hand leading him to B^llesa. Mor. It is so
strange a thing Madam, as we may brag we have a present worthy of you, a
brother, this Prince Palante.


G^n. O do not over-charge me Sir, I am not yet strong enough to bear (...),
much less Bellesa's brother.


Mor. You must be pleased Madam to lessen the distance his reverence keeps him
at, and bring him in, in the name of Brother.


Genesis I shall not change Madam, in being whatsoever you will be pleased to call
me.


King. We have been so curious in this present we have m^de you Madam, as we
have refined the truth of it. Romero, whose testimony you have approved to us,
will answer, this jewel is no counterfeit, which he assures us the Prince
Palante, your brother, had about him at the the taking of Pamlona, before you
were borne* Which proves this must be he. Whose single life my son then asked,
saved by the mercy of a soldier, whom the price of this jewel could not
persuade to an obedience of my commands. So his safety has many miracles in
it. Romero is to answer for the jewel, we two for the rest.


Romans I will affirm no truth more confidently then that this jewel is the
same the Prince Palante had about him.


Mora. And I, madam, owe you so much as I may own, the saving of your brothers
life, without reproach to you or him.


Genesis Sure Madam nature saw her defects in me, and meant to cast me away; and
since made you so corrected a perfection, it cannot be believed you were of the
same hand.


Bell. I will answer all your complements Palante by calling you brother, and so
return half back upon your self.


Genesis It Is a title Madam brings many joys along with it, but none so great as
the daring, in your love to this Prince, to own a compensation of my life to
you.


Mor. I owe you the more Palante, that have furnished me with what I thought
impossible, some merit to this matchless Princess.


Genesis I have a suit now which I deserve so little as I must join you two in an
intercession for me to the Queen. I will not so much undeserve her pardon as to
desire her love.


Bell. Were your fault greater then my credit with her, her own goodness would
assure you pardon. It Is but the imputation of ill offices.


Genesis It Is more I perceive then you know Madam, I pray you lend me this veil,
not to cover, but to reveal it. For it is so black a fault as passion even
through this color will lighten it. Let this Fidamira, that proved a cover to
your innocence, prove one unto my guilt.


Gem. I had so long ago forgiven you as I was afraid you would have asked
somewhat of me I must have refused you. Since you are so civil, as to think my
good wishes useful to your happiness, I must esteem that a satisfaction for
any thing you can remember, which I had long forgot. Therefore put off this,
which is now the only mark for my memory?


Bell. Can you tell Moramente my brothers fault to Fidamira?


Mor. I believe I can Madam.


Bell. Pray tell me, I long to know it.


The King takes Fidamira aside. And Romero looking on her jewel talks to her
father. King. Now Fidamira it is time for me to challenge the reward of my
obedience, which I think so meritorious, as I shall ask no less the^ your
self for recompense. My joys are yet to come. I have had no sense of all that
you have had to day. I have reserved all my soul for this blessing I beg of
you. I am no^ yet happy, only in the power of dispensing with the election.


Gem. O Sir, settle your happiness on the joys of King and Father, and be not
so cruel to me, as to make me guilty of your discontent to day, since it is
not in my power to satisfy you.


King. I am so unhappy that you Madam that have had till now so much power over
your self, should lose it now for its confirmation.


Gem. The having had so much power over my self is that, which restraines me
now, the having made a vow of chastity, which is not in my power to recall.


King. What strange crosses do my passion meet* first, it was to contest with
Nature, now with Heaven.


Bell. If I had known this story Palante, I should not so easily have owned you
for my brother. But it is forgiven you now.


Genesis Had I sooner known you for my sister Madam, I should not have been in
need of this forgiveness.


Romans Then this is certainly she. Will you be pleased to hear me Sir in the
behalf of this worthy man.


King. Alas Romero, it is not his fault, I impute nothing to him.


Bell. What sudden cloud is this Sir, that overcasts all our joys?


King. It Is Madam, that no body asks me any thing but pardon to day. And I
would give any thing my self, and it will not be accepted.


Romans Will you be pleased to hear me sum up all the wonders of this day? This
is the Princess Miranda. This gentleman, her suposed Father, has by my
knowledge of a jewel, and a mark upon her arm, confessed to me that he saved her
life at the same time when the Prince saved the Prince Palante's. and to avoid
the ruin you had pronounced against such a disobedience he owned her for his
child, and has so bred her ever since.


Bo. This Sir upon my conscience, upon Romero'^ challenge bids me acrew, and
joy in these means of retribution unto her, whom I owe all your benefits, the
giving her the knowledge of her self,


King. This, Bonorio, is a merit to me above the being her father, as it will
help to (...) me from a desire would have disquieted the peace of this blessed
day.


Gem. I must acknowledge more to you Bonorio then to a father, whose giving life
is but casual, but mine was given me by the hazard of yours.


Bon. You have given me means to despise death, which is my despair.


Mor. There was but this one point wanting to close up all the blessings the
circle of this world contains.


Bell. Lovely Miranda, sure heaven did desert the knowledge of you till the
acquaintance with your Prince should make the finding you a sister such a joy
as now it proves.


Gem. Matchless Saphira I cannot now tax nature for any of my wants, since
she may answer me, She did reserve all, that she could give, for you. And it is
too much for me to come so near, as being sister to such perfections.


Bell. What I will thank nature most for, is, for that instinct by which she did
persuade me to love you so, as Gemella.


Genesis There is none can challenge so much joy in this discovery, as I dare
Miranda. For I have not only found a sister, but my self worthy to be a
brother to you both; then before, as nature now, makes my inconstancy, her
predomination, not the defection of my faith.


K^n^ Nature and heaven joining now have mastered my passion. Now Miranda I
must ask you pardon, that my cruelty should indebt you to another for your
life. And heaven fo^bids me now so much the wishing the defeature of your vow,
as it directs me to present you with the reward of it. And since your vow has
chosen this residence, I will propose to the Society the confirming you Queen
during your life.


Bell. You have spoke Sir all our wishes.


All. We agree to it with joy.


Gem. I accept this as an accomplishment of your prediction, Moramente, of my
never being enjoyed ^y m^n. And methinks heaven gave me a prevision into this
your happiness, which I dare assure you of.

Bellesa's love which you do now possess,
May by you only be made more or less.

Mor. I will leave her only the power of improving it; and will but own an
incapacity of ever contribu^ing to the lessening of it.


Bell. I will now ease your complement Sir of having nothing asked you to day.
I will ask a blessing will add to my sense of this days happiness: It is so
great a suite Sir I will join Moramente with me to obtain it, leave for my
brother to be received a servant to the Princess Mirabella your daughter; for
whose beauty fame promises as much, as her birth assures for her virtue.


King. This day is so auspicious to my wishes, as it affords me all my suites,
I will advance somewhat to you Madam, this promise, that she is already by your
desire ready for Prince Palante's acceptance or refusal.


Mor. There can be no dispute or scruple Madam, but this disparity between his
sister and mine. If he will be content with so unequal a choice.


Genesis This raises the value of my new condition by the procurement of such an
honor as the Princess Mirabella, whose perfections seem rather to add unto
the lusture of your crown, then to need to be set there to ^hine. Therefore I
shall beg Sir, that you will procure me to be accepted.


Gem. Bellesa was to bring in the last joy. Sure now all this day's miracles
are perfected.


Mor. I have a suite more to you Sir, that you would be pleased to let me keep
this happy name Moramente.


King. You may in gratitude qualify that name, that has served you so.


Bell. And I will keep Bellesa all my life.


Mor. There is no life Madam that name is so due to, a^ yours.


Bell. What say you Melidoro and Camena? You are tuned for your parts in the
consorts of this day.


Came. I am so transported with your joys Madam, I have forgot my self.


Mel. Give me leave then to remember you of your promise, if Bellesa left the
Society with Moramente.


Mor. All is d^e that was promised on that condition.


Came. Then Melidoro you are master of your wish.


Be^. We will carry you to Court with us, where we will be witnesses of your
joys. You see Pantamora, every one that durst scarce hope their wishes,
possessed of them to day, and your security only left empty.


(...) I shall stay here Madam, and learn to assure my wish^s by bounding them
within the peace of this blessed pl^ce.


Bell. Come Martiro, I have nothing to think on now but the making thee happy,
which is so hard it will require my st^dy.


Mar. That may be easily Madam, by leaving me here, and receiving this
offering. May you always carry with you my accomplished wishes, and prayers
instead of me, [gives her a paper].


Bell. These be verses Ma^tiro, pray read them.


Mar. Reason and Wonder are so reconciled
In you, as married they have had a child:
Whose first conception was the birth
Of more then was conceived before on earth
So Love that did so long in labor lie
Delivered of impossibility
Is now at last, and so can never more
B'in danger of miscarrying as before.
For your divine example needs must prove,
The height of virtue does consist in love.
So Love shining in you by this reflex
Raises both light and heat to either sex.
Since your example does to all declare
None innocent that love not, nay not fair.
For they can neither handsome be, nor true,
That may and yet refuse to be as you.
If any thing impossible be now
In love, it is that your virtue may allow.
For even your loving does become a proof
It is impossible to love you enough.

Bell. These I understand Martiro, and will answer them with a wish to you. May
your elected solitude enlarge, and fill your soul at once with such delightful
thoughts as you may never think that you want any thing but time.


Mar. Your wishes are divine Madam, and must fulfill themselves.


Mor. Will you be pleased to think Madam who we shall dispatch to the King your
father with these news and to desire his consent to the Prince Palante's wish
and mine.


Romans Let me beg this commission, that I may employ this new life that you
have given me on your service.


King. None can be so fit as Romero, that can inform the king of all that is
past.


Bell. I will write by you to my father, who I think will not know my brother's
and sister's hands. It Is no time Sister to perform the rites of your
inthronement.


Mir. There can be nothing welcome to me so near the loving you Bellesa.


Bell. I will promise Miranda, if Moramente will join with me, to come hither
once a year.


Moramente. Promise me Madam never to doubt your will.


Bon. Give me leave Madam to make the last suite to be received into the
Society without the publication of a pretense.


Mira. It Is a grace Sir you may be sure of, since it is in my power.


King. Among all these joys it is no wonder if no body think of sleeping. Let Us
retire Madam to that rest, may prepare us for to morrows ceremonies, where
these couples must be beholding to your dismission.


Mar. It becomes me Madam, to leave the last wish with you.

May you have all the joys of innocence
Enjoying too all the delights of sense
May you live long and know not till you are told
T'endear your beautie's wonder, You are old.
And when heavens heat shall draw you to the sky
May you transfigur'd, not disfigured dye.

FINIS.

