A DEMONstration of God in his works. Against all such as either in word or
life deny there is a God. By George More Esquire.

Quicquid patimur mortale genus
Quicquid facimus venit ex alto.
Annaei Sen. Oedip. AT LONDON Printed by I. R. for Thomas Charde. 1597.

TO THE MOST EXCELLENT AND MOST RENOWNED Princess, Elizabeth by the grace of
God, of England, France, and Ireland, Queen: defendour of the faith, etc.
MOst excellent Princess, since it has pleased the God of heaven, so to bless
the realm of England by the continuance of your Majesty's reign, as that like
happiness no former common wealth has been known, no foreign kingdom at this
day can be said, to enjoy; graceless were the people of the Land, if with all
gratefulnes of mind they should not, first to God as the supreme cause, then
to your highness as the Sovereign means of that their exceeding good, most
dutifully acknowledge the same. Whereunto though every one will readily
subscribe, as hating the imputation of an unthankful person, yet he should be
thought more curious then wise, who so would examine the performance of men's
duties in that behalf. Wherefore (not accusing any, Plutar. de curiositate.
nor excusing all) that I might not seem to have the eyes of Lamia, which were
laid up at home, and never used but to behold others abroad, J have thought
fit to look upon my self, and to seek how to quit my self of that foul
crime of ingratitude, which in this case toward the Almighty, and your
Majesty, I had rather not live, then live to be justly suspected of. Of which
there should need no other evidence, then mine own conscience to condemn me,
if considering the world as it is, and perceauing how many, many ways are
employed, I should sit still and be idle. But what should I do? Surely
rather then nothing, Guido. Bitu.
J have chosen to do as did Diogenes at Corinth; he seeing upon occasion of
danger, every man laying his hand to some one thing or other, about
strengthening the walls for defense of the City, bestowed his labor in
rolling his tub up and down. So I, beholding in this busy age of the world,
some employed in the wars abroad, an honorable and now most needful
service, others in government at home no less necessary, then of necessity to
be maintained, have busied my self in turning my books too and fro: which
being in him a stranger, in a strange common wealth commended, I hope in me in
mine own Country shall not be reproved, and the rather, for that proceeding
further, I have delivered faithfully, what of those faithful friends which
never flatter I have learned, tending to the good of the common good, as I
conceive. For, it serves to occasion the dutiful remembrance of God, and
performance of duty to your highness, whose hands bestow the benefits, which
from his bounty do proceed. Of default wherein though there were no special
cause, specially to suspect any, yet what is done to that end, ought not to
seem vain, partly, for that much is above all possibility of satisfaction
due, but principally, because even the best to good things are often slow. For
(to say truly) while men are, they are but men, who being clothed with sinful
flesh, cannot be so cleansed from sin, which lives and dies with the flesh,
but that some corruption thereof of necessity will remain, which will in all
fortunes minister just cause of blame. Whereby it comes to pass that being
afflicted in any sort, we murmr, complain, and lament, and in the greatest
happiness we can have, sildome are we thankful, or well content so far forth as
we ought to be. The consideration whereof has moved many, whether feeling in
them selves, or finding in others of faults so great, too great a mischief,
highly to commend valiancie as the chief virtue, above all to condemn
ingratitude as the worst vice, and constancy in what estate of life soever, as
most auailing, and best beseeming to advise. And yet such, though obtaining, as
deserving the names of wise men, have showed them selves no more wise in their
counsels, then men in their actions, being unable to perform what they could
persuade, and failing to run the course them selves, whereunto they directed,
and provoked others. He which said, M. Cicero. Tus. 2.
A viro dicitur virtus, virtue has her name from man, that if we will be good
men, we must be valiant men, Dion. Cass. lib. 38.
and that true valor does consist in contempt of death and grief, even he was
out of Rome, no sooner banished, but in mind he was dejected, and showed him
self far other, then others he taught to be. The Athenians. Vale. max. 2.
They which decreed an unthankful liberty for ever to live a bondman, did
notwithstanding most unthankfully reward the best men living amongst them: Wise
Socrates with deadly poison, Aelia. 1. Aemil. pro. in Miltia. Plut. in Pho.
Idem in Aristi.
valiant Miltiades with chains in prison, good Phocion after judgment of
death with threats of torment, just Aristides after many good deserts, with
most injurious banishment. J say not this by way of comparison, to draw into
question the good Subjects of England (whom with that weak minded Roman, or
those light unsettled Graecians, I have no lyking to compare) but to show, as
well what difference there is between the words, and the works of men, as also
that the most forward, being far to short in discharge of that which is
required, especially toward God, not any ought to be grieved, how often soever
they be put in mind of that duty to his Majesty, whereof never they can be
mindful enough. It is he who does behold what we do, to whom we owe
infinitely more then we can do; his power is over us, his goodness toward us,
none living can withstand the one, none can live and lack the other: our
weakness is strengthened, our dulnes quickened, by him; enabled we are by his
only means to serve your Majesty, and our Country. Wherefore, what of him
dutifully I shall say (albeit J shall say nothing, which to the most is not
already known) my hope is will be acceptable to the good, to some profitable,
to none offensive. If in a City the greatest of calling mislike not, that in
the dead hour of the night, the chief time of rest, a poor man passing by
their door should cry, look to your fire, J see no cause why the best of
understanding, enjoying the sweet rest of worldly peace, should be offended, by
the simplest to be put in mind of the Lord God, in what hour soever, who
being forgotten, as a consuming fire, Nations great and mighty, Deuter. 9.
Cities great and walled up to heaven, will destroy, bring down, and cast out.

Hereby enboldened most excellent Princess, J have adventured to write,
challenging to my self nothing, in knowledge above the rudest, in desert
before the unworthiest of your kingdom, and what J have written, I presume
(with humble desire and hope of pardon) to dedicate unto your Highness, knowing
that as you are, (...) Menan.
not only for your high place of rule over many, the living image of God, but
for defense of his true religion, above all other Princes, his chief
Lieuetenant upon earth. So you will be pleased favorably to hear, and
graciously to protect, what shall be published to his glory, how simple soever
the Author be, as he no doubt does lend his merciful ear, to the meanest
within your realm praying faithfully for the preservation of your Majesty,
which great God, of goodness and power infinite, that has raised your Highness
to the dignity of a Prince, and has made you in all princely virtues, all
other to excel, settle and seal up in the hearts of your people, such love,
duty, and obedience toward you, as that the best Subjects through the world,
of the best Sovereign under heaven, they worthily may be said to be, and
suffer me not longer to live, then so I shall live,

Your Majesty's, most humbly, most loyally, to serve you, George More.

The Preface to England.
ENgland my dear Country give me leave, out of love and duty, a dutiful
and loving Servant to speak unto thee. Contrary passions affect my heart, as
diverse thoughts distract my mind, when I compare the woeful plight of thy
distressed neighbors, with the joyful estate of thy blessed self. While I
think of their misery, I fear what may happen to thee, weighing thy many
dangers by thy many enemies, and mistrusting a change through the changeable
course of the world, which turning round like a wheel, places those allow
which stood aloft, and long suffers none in one state to continue. This
having seen painted before mine eyes in the Histories of the greatest
kingdoms, and heard sounded into mine ears by the sayings of the wisest men,
grief has pierced into my head, and bewraying it self in the windows
thereof, has passed down into the very bottom of my heart. Wherein if I go
to far, impute it to my love which knows no measure, Musae: de Hero. et
Leand. Of other love spoken but in all love true. Ovid. Epist 1
and cannot be left void of care, being always attended on with fear. It
is said to be (...), sweet, but bitter withal, because the sweet it tastes
is bitter seasoned evermore, and otherwise it cannot be, when as Res est
soliciti plena timoris amor.
Love is full of careful fear.


But turning to thy self to my joy I see, that yet thou stand where thou
have done, and thou art as thou have been by the space of many years, high to
the view, happy to the wonder of the world. As a field often trodden with the
foot of the owner, as a garden still subject to the sight of the Master, thou
art both fair and fruitful: and no marvel, being manured continually with
the careful steps, and ever looked unto with the watchful eye, of the
greatest Mistress, the most worthy Princess of the earth. For thy defense,
Nature has compassed thee with a strong fence of that which is by nature
weak, it self lying open to every storm, keeps thee close from the fury
of thy foes, and serves as well to disburthen thy abundance, as to supply thy
wants. Thy walls are of vvood yet surer then stone, made by Art to strengthen
Natures work, which without them might against her will import thy hurt, being
intended for thy good. Thereby long sithence Greece was delivered from the
innumerable forces of the proud Persian seeking her dominion, Herodo. urania.
and by the same a few years past thy self wast preserved from the invincible
Navy of thy professed enemy, thirsting after thy destruction. Look nearer
home, and thou shall see thy strength to be greater yet, not in Castles or
fortifications artificially framed, nor in mass of riches politickly gathered,
though there be want of neither, but in the brave minds and faithful hearts of
thy people whereunto no force is to be compared, no treasure is to be esteemed
equal. Eutrop. lib. 2.
Such were the Romans of whom Pyrrhus said, that if such Soldiers had
happened unto him, he could have been Lord and commander of the world. Yet is
not that thy strongest guard which consists in the strength of men: by
wisdom thy dangers are foreseen, and by counsel prevented of those, which
Lyon-like, sleep not but with their eyes open, and are lifted up, and placed
next before thy gates, in regard they are both watchful, full of courage and
might. Contar. de rep. vene. lib. 3. There the chief Magistrate is a Duke, but
all govern by the Senate.
The chief means which long have held the Venetian state in security, and
might seem to suffice, for thy safety: but pardon me, if those with the rest
for thee, I think to be nothing of themselves though wise, provident, and
careful in all, as they ought to be. For, they are limbs but have no life,
arms but out of joint, dead eyes which do not see, deaf ears which cannot
hear, without thy Sovereign, which is thy soul, that gives life, strength,
and sense both to them and thee. She living thou can not dye, she reigning
thou shall command, thou shall flourish, while she does prosper, Inuitis
dentibus et ensibus maugre the might, and malice, of thy greatest foes. For
why? her life is precious, her government is pleasing in his eye, which is Lord
of Lords, and rules both in heaven and on earth. Her study is to enrich her
self with understanding and wisdom, wherein as there can be no excess, so
no measure can slake her endeavor, such is her desire to obey God, and to order
thee. And to the end blind ignorance should be banished out of thy bounds, and
knowledge seated in all thy quarters, it is not her least care that al good
arts and learnings, should be taught and trained up in thy Schools, and sent
forth into thy Cities, Villages, and Towns, especially to attend as
Handmayds upon that Lady Science, Divinity, more to be honored then all the
rest besides. So as who so looks into thy Universities, may think that the
liberal Arts, which are said to have been borne in Athens, and long sithence
expelled thence, are now bred, and harbored with thee, and wheresoever he
goes, he may hear the full quier of Muses in thy Temples to make music to
the Almighty. Wherefore of her excellency thou may be proud, in her
Majesty thou ought to rejoice, and as of Judith the Servants of Holofernes
said, Judith, 11.
There is not such a woman upon the earth for beauty of face, and wisdom of
speech, so lifting up thine eyes to her highness, what thou may see I need
not say, but for heavenly and worldly wisdom, thy happiness incomparable to
the world does pronounce, her highness is not to be compared with. Then looking
upon thy self, remember what Queen Saba said to Solomon, 2, Chro 9.
Because thy God loves I sraell to establish it for ever, therefore he has
placed thee King over them, that thou might do judgment and justice; and
take it for an assured argument of Gods great favor toward thee, that over
thee he has set such a Sovereign, as of wisdom and virtue, does judgment
and justice, sincerely before God, and uprightly in the sight of men. So having
the favor of the mighty Iehoua, witnessed by the reign of her excellent
Majesty, thou may boldly say, Proper. 2.
Viuam siviuat, I shall live if she do well, and may thou not as truly say?
Si cadat illa, cadam, I shall fall, if she do fail? the beginning of the
verse the eyes of all men see to be true, but who would not wish his shut
before they behold the trial of the end? But even now is not danger of thee to
be feared in respect of war daily threatened, which seems as a cloud to
hang over thy head, and to darken the shining beams of thy Sun which is thy
Sovereign? Deal plainly, and thou will confess with me, that thou have long
seen the cloud, but never felt the storm, for that by the heat of her
princely power, it has been so wasted from time to time, that only a thin
mist thereof has fallen upon thee whereby thou art warned, the better to be
armed for thy defense. It does whet thy courage, stir up thy mind, exercise
thy body, increase thy strength, teach thee to fight, and keep thy weapons
from rust. So have thou a taste of war, but so, as it is no war unto thee.
Thou see the shining of armor, the glittering of swords, the marching of men,
the running of horses: Thou hear the sound of the Trumpet, and of the
Drum, the report of small and great shot, but how? thou see the one with
delight, thou hear the other with pleasure, and grief thou feel of
neither; whereby terrible war is delectable to thee, and that is fair in
thine eye which is nothing less the^ fair in it self, it is called Bellum,
which has in it nihil belli, as the cruel Sisters are named Parcae, quae
nunquam parcunt, as if they did spare, which never do spare any. Wherefore
having the show without the sense of war, thou enioyest the fruit without
the show of peace, and reapest good of that, which of it self is ill. Wherein
thy happiness is far the greater that through her care thou art secure, who
watches that thou may sleep, and holds war out at the arms end, that
thine may find their rest at home.

Aurea rumpunt tecta quietem Seen. Her. Oetens.

Vigilesque trahunt purpura noctes.
Rooms of state are ill to rest in,
Purple roabes most nights are watched in.
Agamemnon could never take rest when the rest of the Grecians were fast a
sleep, Homer. Ilia. 10.
but looking toward Troy fetched many a deep sigh to behold the preparation
of his enemies, and the perrill his army might fall into. So be thou well
assured that when thou art most quiet, and suspectest least, if any danger
approach thy Coasts, the eyes of thy Sovereign are open to foresee, her head is
busy to prevent all hurt which may befall thee. She lacks not a wise Ulysses
with counsel to assist her, nor a valiant Achilles to draw her sword for her.
But above all, her hope and help is in the Lord her God, who stands at her
right hand, gives her victory, and works thy safety, to set forth his own
glory. How much then art thou bound unto her, and for her unto God, that by
the means of her Highness, through the favor of the highest, of all Nations of
the earth thou art the most happy. If I seek the world through, at this day I
can find none to compare unto thee, and if I look back I can only say
Talis Roma fuit cum caput orbis erat.
Such Rome was when the head of the world it was.


And that can I say but in comparison of the happiness of that estate when it
was quiet at home, and made war abroad beyond the Alps, and from it self
on the other side the Sea. Ammia. Marcell. lib. 14.
Then was it in the farthest parts known to be Regina gentium, the Queen of
Nations, when at home by the courteous entertaynment of all Strangers it was
found to be Virtutum omnium domicilium, the receptacle of all virtues, Vellerus
pater. 2.
whose virtue had not vice supplanted, and driven out of her gates, she had
never within her own walls embrewed her hands in her own bowels. Let
therefore the example of that famous City be an instruction and forewarning
unto thee. Be not covetous, over delicate and proud; spare not thy purse to
keep war from thy doors; think thy bargain great, if thou disburse the most
of thy substance, to purchase thy peace. Think it not shame to thy men of
authority to dye, not leaving wherewith to bring their bodies to the grave,
for so it was with Valerius Publicola, Liui. Deca. 1 lib. 2.
who having four times been Consul of Rome, and by the consent of all men
said to be Princeps belli pacisque artibus, the only man for government in
war and peace, his poverty is recorded not to his shame, but to his praise:
nor hold it reproachful to the widows of thy best men to be relieved by the
benevolence of their husbands friends, Ammia. Mar. 14. Eutrop. 2.
as it happened to the wife of Regulus, then whom there never dyed Roman with
better mind to his Country, nor greater honor to him self: Ammia. Mar. 14.
neither let it seem much unto thee, that the daughters of those which spend
their lives in thy service be endowed out of thy treasury, as was the daughter
of Scipio, the nobility of Rome pitying the long absence of her Father, and
the loss of the flower of her age. It was well with Rome when virtue with her
was so embraced and so rewarded. But when waxing proud, she wasted her wealth,
in sumptuous buildings, superfluous feasts, and rich attire, wantonness was in
her streets, vice possessed her houses, and misery soon after ouertooke her
self. Be thou therefore at desiance with pride, forbear all vanity and
superfluity of expense. Know that houses are places to bayte in for a while,
and not to abide in for ever, that they are provided to serve necessity,
rather then to nourish delicacie, and that for the common wealth much better it
is that good hospitality be kept, then that fair houses be built. Remember
also that men should eat to live, not live to eat, and that the throat being
given but for a passage to the stomach, from whence to every part nouriture is
to be sent, for maintenance of the body, absurd and vile it is, for the throats
only pleasure, to burden the stomach, to weaken the body, to dull the mind,
to empty the purse, and to shorten the life; none gayning by a carcass
pampered, but worms by which it shall be devoured. Lastly think, how vain
the excess of apparel is, whereof the great variety shows the extreme
vanity of the people: all cost being lost, which is bestowed in the needless
bravery thereof. It serves to effeminate the minds of men, to provoke the
lusts of the flesh, and to kindle pride in the heart, and causes many to want
in their old age, which had too much in their youth; whose folly seems no
less then theirs, which lade them selves with many clothes in the Summer, and
for want go naked in the VVinter. Of all these the use is needful, but
hurtful is the abuse, which being discovered is to be restrained in a well
ordered common wealth. O that thy people would consider this, and make profit
thereof, in sparing from their bellies to feed the hungry, in saving from
their backs to cloth the naked: So should they abstain from evil, and do
good, they should avoid the offense, and procure the favor of Almighty God,
and much more able should they be to serve thee for defense of them selves. Now
here I seem to hear thee say, that calling to mind what before has been
said, of the continual change and never resting course of the world, and
finding thy self guilty of those blemishes, wherewith the beauty of Rome was
defaced, before she fell, thou can not but fear an alteration of thy
fortune, and think thou shall resemble Rome hereafter in the days of her
sorrow, as heretofore thou have done in her flourishing years. I deem not but
that all things of necessity must alter, which are brought forth by nature,
and I know that as in natural bodies, so in the condition of men, of Towns,
of Cities, and of all estates, there is a time of growth, and a time of decay,
an hour to flourish, and an other to fade, seasons of pleasure which have
their terms, and turns of grief to succeed, when they are gone: so that the
same oft-times are not yesterday and to day the same.

Nulla sors longa est dolor ac voluptas Seen. Thiestos.

Inuicem cedunt, breuior voluptas
Ima permutat breuis hora summis.
No lot at all does last, pain and pleasure
Each other succeed, shorter the pleasure,
Low and high soon find of change like measure.
I doubt not therefore but thou may be as Rome was, or as France is
embrewed in thine own blood, wounded with thine own hand, and torn in pieces
by thine own strength, or otherwise invaded and subdued by foreign power, as
heertofore thy self has been, especially the sins of thy people provoking
the wrath of thy God against thee. Yet give me favor to speak, and have
patience to hear what truly I shall say. Far other thou art then Rome was
when it fell to decay; that being set on fire by the burning ambition of great
Potentates, Marius and Silla, Pompei and Caesar, equal in power and in place,
in degree and in dignity, having under them many to kindle, and not any over
them to quench, the flame of their desire: which being insatiable became
intolerable, and not being bridedled in time, could not be endured long of the
common wealth. Neither art thou like thy sister France whose territories are
large, far removed from the eye of their King, whose Towns and Castles are
many and strong, apt and easy to be held being surprised by seditious men;
having neighbors at hand in love with her beauty, envying her greatness,
desiring her spoil, and both ready and able to assist her disobedient Subjects
and unnatural children; and thy self, thy self do resemble in no sort,
thy present face being compared with the picture of thy former age. When the
wind of glory, under pretense to revenge an injury, drove Caesar cross thy
Seas, thy name not being then, by which now thou art known, no wonder if
unacquainted with arms, and naked without armor, thou gave place at length
to a mighty people, Romans.
practiced in wars, and led by the chief Commander of the world. When
distressed by thy Northern near bordering neighbors, thou were enforced to
pray aid for thy defense, and seeking friends, Saxons.
did foes entertain to cut thine own throat; how could it be thou
should escape, thine enemies being strong in the field, and thou committing
thy self to a faithless guard? who first by deceitful beauty entrapped thy
King, and after by open hostility possessed thy Crown. When thy body was
parted into seven parts which was but one, and had not one but many heads,
what strength, what direction could thou have to withstand an united force
of powerful enemies, Danes.
attempting with preparation, and pursuing with resolution thine overthrow?
while two of one name, Harold.
but of Nation diverse, contended for thy Scepter, Edgar.
a third being by force put from it, which of right should have borne it, Norma.
opportunity was given to set a conquering foot in thy troubled Land, not
unlikely to be subdued being discontented for the wrong at home, and dismayed
with the sudden sight of an unlooked for invasion. So wast thou at a battle
well fought, and well followed, brought under the new yoke of a foreign
Ruler, William Conque.
the end of thy former toil being the beginning of thy future woe. Since
when, often times thou have been a woeful spectacle to thine own eyes,
beholding the fearful face of civil wars, wasting thy fields, burning thy
Towns, destroying thy people, and shedding the blood of the highest in
authority over thee: which has happened through the unjust government of thy
Rulers, the ambitious humor of thy Potentates, or the rebellious hearts of thy
Commons. But this now is not, nor has been many years thy case. Thou art
ruled by law, agreeable to justice, and executed with mercy, thy Sovereign
submits her self thereunto, that the greatest may not disdain, and the
meanest be willing, to obey her according to the same. Besides, thou art
instructed in the knowledge of God, that of conscience thou should perfome
thy duty, both to him and her. If the weak be oppressed, in her grace they
find relief, if the strong presume too far, her Majesty does hold them
under, whereby it comes to pass that either for conscience sake, or by force
of government, thou have peace and know no war at home. And that thou
may be strong against foraine invasion, thou art furnished with arms, and
trained to use them, many brave men have thou practicing the wars abroad,
ready to return when thou shall need them for thy succor, and so fast knit
are the parts of thy body, the lower with the higher, all with the head, that
thy strength is redoubled within thee. Thy body then being one, and thy weapons
in thine hand, having strength in thine arms, courage in thy heart, and
wisdom in thy head, whom can thou fear? what need thou mistrust?
Although thou do not shine with virtue without all stain of vice, though
thou breedest and feedest weeds with thy Corn, some wicked amongst many good
Children, yet if thy vice deface not thy virtue, if the weeds ouer-grow not
the Corn, and the wicked do not overcome the good, thou have no cause to
suspect thine overthrow. So long as a disease take not the head, possess not
the heart, nor run through the whole body, there is great hope of cure, no
danger of death. The scarre of vice is not high in thy face, it stands low,
and serves as a foil, set under to set forth the virtue of thy Queen, which
is thy eye wherein thy beauty does consist. Thy greatest wound is in thy
inferior parts, where, if it will not be cured, what is the worst. Ense
rescidendum est, Ovid. Meta.
ne pars sincera trahatur.

If by the salve of mercy it cannot be healed, which often is, as often it
should be applied, by the sword of justice it must be launced, that the sound
parts may be preserved, which course being held as it is held, so that the
poison of the wound, feaster not too far, thou may be assured that the
Lord God which often spares the wicked for the sake of the good, and never
punishes the just for the faults of the ungodly will in mercy hold thee up,
that thou shall not fall. While thou art subject to thy head, which is so
careful of thy health, that contempt of the majesty of God she does cut off,
and will not suffer sin, and iniquity, to grow up within thee, thou art safe
under her government by his protection, from all thy enemies. As the mighty
Oak fastened by the strength of his roots, so do thou stand fast, blow the
wind where it shall, it shall but blow down thy withered leaves. But that
cannot ever be, what has been united must be dissolved, and nothing is more
sure, then that the Sun shall set which once does rise, no man knowing how
soon the brightness thereof may be darkened with a cloud. That being true yet is
it no less true, that as all Creatures were in their first creation, so are
they all both in their preservation and destruction, still subject to the will
of their Creator: he has set them a race, which they cannot choose but
run, what he does order, is not in their power to alter; nevertheless his
own hand is not shortened, he is able to cut short, and to prolong, he can stop
and turn the course how long, and which way his pleasure is. Iosu. 3, 4.
The waters of Jordan coming down from above he stayed, so as they rose upon
a heap, until the Priests bearing the arc of the covenant, and all the
Israelites went through Jorden, Joshua. 19.
and passed over dry. And when the Lord fought for Israel against the
Amorites, he stayed the Sun in Gibeon, and the Moon in the valley of Aialon,
until the people avenged them selves of their enemies. So as the Sun abode
in the mids of the heaven, and hasted not to go down, for a whole day, and
there was no day like that before it, nor after it. In like sort it is greatly
to be hoped (which above all things with fervent prayer is to be desired) that
the same God will stop the stream of whatsoever may hurt thy Soueraigns
health, and stay the course of her life so long, that no health, no life, of
any mortal Creature shall be like unto hers, that shyning amongst the Princes
of the earth, as the Sun amiddest the stars of heaven, she may give light
and life unto his church for a long while, and be very late, if not the last,
in going down. No doubt as it was the pleasure of the omnipotent God to
deliver her out of the hands of her adversaries in miraculous sort, and to
raise her to her princely seat over thee, and as of especial and exceeding
favor, he has in wonderful wise ever sithence preserved her from the
mischeeuous practices, and dangerous attempts of many enemies abroad, and at
home, first that she might be, since for that she has been, a careful nurse of
his church, and tender mother of his children, and so has blessed her with
honor and riches, that her breasts flow with milk, and her bones run full
of marrow, to the continual feeding, and strengthening of his Gospel. So
may thou be well assured, I speak what I heartily wish, and am verily
persuaded, that, that good God by whom she now lives and reigns in Majesty,
will show his power to the worlds wonder, in the length of her days, and glory
of her kingdom, if for the rebellion of thy people against him, he take not
her to him self, as more worthy to reign with Angels in heaven, then to dwell
with sinners, (wicked, and unruly sinners, in denying God, and disobeying her)
upon earth. Beware therefore thou provoke not the Lord thy God, by presumptuous
sins to change his countenance, and to turn his face away from thee.
Remember that for the transgression of the Land there are many Princes thereof.
Let thy people fear God, so shall they not fear the loss of her under whom,
by his goodness, infinite blessings they enjoy, and thou art famous above all
Nations. Jerusalem is fallen, and Judah is fallen down says the Prophet, and
why? because their tongue and works are against the Lord to provoke the eyes of
his glory. That which was said concerning Jerusalem and Judah, think to
concern thee, and know, that if thou committest the like fault, thou art like
to feel the like smart, for he that spoke it is one, and the same yesterday,
to day, and for ever. Number. 23.
He is not as man, that he should lie, neither as the Son of man, that he
should repent. If thou cast behind thee his goodness, Psalm. 73.
if thou set thy mouth against heaven, and not desiring the knowledge of
his ways, thou say out of the pride of thy heart, who is the Almighty that I
should serve him? Job. 22.
and what profit should I have, if I should pray unto him? and because thou have
no changes, Psalm. 55.
therefore thou do not fear him. Thou shall not only dry up the fountain
of his goodness, and dew of his mercy toward thee, but shall kindle the fire of
his wrath to consume thee. Iere. 44.
So shall he take from thee thy stay and thy strength, and visit thy people as
he visited Jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, by the pestilence: thy
Cities shall be burnt with fire, Strangers shall devour thee in thy presence,
and thou shall be desolate. Thus far has love which stirred me up, carried
me on, and here does not suffer me to stay, but forces me further to put
forth the best strength I have, whereby to remove out of the minds of thy
people, that heavy block of gross ignorance, which may hinder them from the
knowledge of God, and hasten destruction to fall upon them. For he not being by
them honored, they cannot be by him preserved, wherein before they can
perform the least part of duty, they must know his being, believe in his
power, and depend of his goodness: which his being, power and goodness,
endeavoring to lay open, by the testimony of natural reason, and common sense
of some, I may be thought to lack both sense and reason; in that I labor to
prove that which needs no proof, and do bring that into question, which is
out of question, and cannot be doubted of. How that is it will appear, but be
it how so ever, it shall much more grieve me if my travail be fruitless,
leaving any to whose hands it shall come ill persuaded, then repent me that it
should be needelesse, finding all well instructed therein.

The Table of the Chapters following.
1. THat man not so much by the instinct of Nature, as by natural reason,
confirmed by outward means, knows there is a God. Page, 19. 2. That the
fool which denies there is a God, may in some respect be denied to be a man.
Page, 26. 3. That out of the works of God, to sense and reason it is evident
that there is a God. Page, 35. 4. That reason and sense may judge there is but
one God. Page, 55. 5. That the power of God is over all, but extended most,
over and upon the greatest men. Page, 67. 6. That God is good to all, but best
to the best men. Page, 103. 7. That God is good to the worser sort, but to
their greater hurt, and that good men should not be grieved thereat, but receive
comfort thereby. Page, 122.
A Demonstration of God in his works.
Chap. 1. That man not so much by the instinct of Nature, as by natural
reason, confirmed by outward means, knows there is a God.
IT has been an opinion very ancient, and common it is at this day, that all
men by nature have such an impression of GOD in their minds, as that never any
Nation or kind of people could be known, which had not without teaching a
natural understanding, that there was a God; as if every one brought into the
world a secret feeling, or found bred within him self a certain knowledge, of
some divine power happy and immortal, excelling the state and condition of all
human things whatsoever. Cicero. de Not. Deo. lib. 1.
Epicurus is said so to have thought, and first by the word (...), aptly to
have expressed that preconceipt, which of God by anticipation of nature, before
all other instruction, he supposed every man to be endued with: so now, that
the most carnal profane men, have an inward sense of that natural instinct,
which while they are men they cannot shake off, generally for the most part it
is conceived. It were to be wished that so it were, that the knowledge of God
being rooted in the minds of all, not any could say in their hearts, there is no
God. But when experience as well of that former wicked age, as of these latter
wretched days, is a witness, that in all times some there are, who not only
dare say in their hearts, but glory with their lips to pronounce, that all
religion of God is a mere devise of man, found out of policy to contain men
in duty, what force can nature be said to have, or what rule to bear in the
minds of those touching God, whom so godless a resolution has taken, and does
possess? For, they deny God in very deed, whatsoever in word they seem to
profess, which take from him that reverence, and that fear, which in respect
of excellency and of power, is due unto him as he is a God. Wherefore not
Diagoras alone was to be named (...), who in plain terms denied, that there
was any God at all, Lucretius.
but Epicurus also, who first troad the religion of God under his foot; and as
many as for like impiety, seem to be of his posterity, worthily are to be
termed Athiests: of which sort the number being such, as the lewd lips, and
lives of many show it to be, how should I believe, that all men by the force of
nature are enforced to believe, that there is a God? But were it, that never
man had lived so foolishly wicked, as once to make doubt thereof, yet except it
be granted, Plato in Phedo.
that to learn, is nothing else, but to call to remembrance things before
known, and that there is a continual (...), whereby in the world the souls
of men ever live, and are immortal, Old. Meta. 15.
as Pithagoras thought, remembering that he had been Euphorbus in the war of
Troy, it cannot be that of God there should be a (...) in the minds of men, as
fondly that Grecian seemed to suppose; Epicurus.
or a natural instinct, as many, I know not upon what ground, or in what
sense do conceive: for, that nature being that of necessity, must be
understood, which is the beginning of motion, and of rest, Arist. 2. Phisi.
Cice. 2. de not. deo.
that inward power, whereby every thing is moved or quieted of it self, how
may it be said, that man thereby is stirred to the knowledge of God? It must be
answered, that his soul (which being but a part is in steed of the whole)
by reason an inseparable quallity of the same is moved thereunto, and that, so
to know God, as to have reason, is like natural unto him. True it is, that man
being a reasonable creature, by reason the eye of his soul, cannot but see God
who gave him the same wherewith to behold him, and has laid him self open
thereby to be perceived. But when and whence is that sight had, which breeds
such understanding within him? Not at the hour of his birth, coming into the
world in soul as in body, naked and impotent, neither yet at any time after by
the secret working of nature, begetting the same inwardly in his mind, without
all help of outward means, but when by instruction of others, or at the least
by view and consideration of other creatures, How a natural man is brought to
know, there is a God.
the seeds of reason sowed in his soul, are grown to some measure of ripenes
and perfection, then truly it may be said that he sees and knows there is a
God, if for sense and understanding he may be thought to be a man. For when God
made the world, and all the creatures therein, he created man amongst them the
best, because above all the rest he would be honored by him. Wherefore all
other being finished, lastly, his body was made, and his soul created, his
body with eyes to behold, and his soul with reason to consider, as well them
as him self, Which together with him self being creatures, were all made as
lively witnesses of God that Creator, whom he especially was bound to honor:
But although the first man being made in all perfection of body and of soul,
was no sooner a man, but he perceived, and knew there was a God, so as to him
that knowledge was natural, as his nature was perfect even at the first, yet
when through the fall and disobedience of that first Father of mankind, the
perfection of man's nature was utterly lost, it could not be that they which
after succeeded, not being made by the hand of perfection, but by the seed of
corruption begotten and engendered, either so soon or so well, should attain
thereunto: nay, rather, considering the great transgression of that offender,
in being not only unthankful to so bountiful a God, as had given all things
for his use, but rebellious to so mighty a Lord, as had power over heaven and
earth, worthily all weakness was to have followed, and the dark mist of
ignorance, for ever to have blinded the eyes of his posterity. But God having
an eternal purpose both of justice and mercy, was pleased to leave reason the
natural eye of the soul unto all, by course of time to obtain a measure of
perfection, whereby to know there is a God, and to his moreover to give faith,
a supernatural and more excellent eye of the mind, whereby to believe in God,
and to live for ever. And accordingly it was his will to set forth a double
book to the world, the one his works, the other his word, that in the one as
many as were appointed to be his, might learn to know him a right, to serve
him after his will, and to repose their trust in him for their endless
comfort; and in the other, all whosoever might so behold him, as they should
not choose but perceive him to be a God, and have no cause in excuse of them
selves, to say that he was hidden from them. That sacred book of his saving
word may be shut to many, and in many places be unknown, but the huge volume
of his works lies ever open, and every where to be seen. Gene. 11.
The Sons of Noah for their pride and ambition, were scattered upon the
earth, and their language was so confounded, that they understood not one
another, yet all, and every of them saw the heavens, and perceived the
firmament, which declared unto them, the glory of that God whom they had
offended, and the work of his hands by whom they were disperced: For there is
no speech nor language where their voice is not heard. Their line is gone forth
through all the earth, Psalm. 19.
and their words unto the end of the world. Who sees not the glorious arysing
of the Sun, his coming forth as a Bridegroom out of his chamber, and his
rejoicing like a mighty man to run his race. Cicer. acad. quest. lib. 1.
It has been said that from the Cimmerians, the sight of the Sun is clean
taken away, and that only they enjoy the light of the fire, but where do they
inhabit upon the face, or within the bowels of the earth? or who could witness
that to others, which had not been there him self? The course of the Sun,
goes round the earth, and his light will have entrance, wheresoever the body
of man can have passage. Miserable it is for a man to live in a dungeon, though
but a short while, wanting the comfortable shyning of the Sun; but impossible
it is for a people to enjoy life, where the air is not tempered, and the earth
nourished with the warmth of the same. Wherefore a fable it is to be noted,
Homo Odysi. Ulysses sailed thither in his way to hell.
not to be believed, that any there are to whom the Sun is such a stranger,
as that his beams are unknown, and his light never seen unto them. But the
purpose of God being in his works, to manifest him self to all the Sons of
men, it cannot be that from men, that glorious star should be hidden; and
most strange it is, that amongst all, any one should be found to deny God, and
to live within the view of the heaven, where he has placed so many his
creatures, so shining bright, and so exceeding clear, that they pearce the eye
lids through, and strike even the closed eyes, that as well instruments of his
power, as witnesses of his nature they may seem to be. Aclian. histo. 2. lib.
Aelian meruailed at the wisdom of the Barbarians, that of them never any had
the Gods in contempt, or was in doubt whether there were Gods or no; but rather
he should have wondered at the folly of the Grecians, of whom some were
doubtful, others resolute, that there was no God at all, or at the least, none
such as had care of the world. I surely am amazed to consider how it can be,
that a man there should be, Grecian or Barbarian, Turk or Christian, one or
other, whose feet tread upon the earth, or whose eye lids are opened toward
heaven, who does not believe there is a God, and thinks not with reverence of
his holy name: yet is it said that such there have been, and such there are,
whatsoever causes them such to be. Surely, as it may be supposed that
Anaxagoras would never have affirmed Snow to be black, but that he was stark
blind of both his eyes, so it is to be judged, that never man could think
there was no God, were he not altogether blinded in understanding, and
bewitched with folly. True, it is the fool that has said in his heart there
is no God, but yet a man (it may be said) though never so much a fool; that
can I not easily confess, for well it may be doubted, whether such a one so
diseased in mind, or rather so dispossessed of him self, may truly be said,
to be a man or no.

Chap. 2. That the fool which denies there is a God, may in some respect be
denied to be a man.
He that cannot away with society, Aristo. poli. 1
is said of a great Philosopher, not to be a man, because to be sociable is
agreeable with the nature of man, but to be reasonable is much more natural
unto him; take reason from him, and the best part of his nature is gone. That
which causes him to differ from a brute beast, and to be esteemed a man, is
the mind, which without reason, is as an eye without sight, and as he which
lacks his sight is truly said to have lost his eyes, so that man which has
not reason may justly be thought to want his mind, and not be a man at all. Man
of the Grecians is called (...) of (...), which signifies considering, and
(...), Plato in Cratylus.
that is to say, sees, for that he alone amongst all living Creatures does
both see, and consider, those things he sees. Which being done, only by the
use of reason a fool cannot perform, and therefore in that he has not the
nature, he deserves not the name of a man. But such notwithstanding have the
show of men, and for men are taken throughout the world: mistaken they are in
very deed, by such as they are them selves, of which sort the world is over
full: who as pictures or images, of wood or of stone, carry the resemblance but
not the substance, of those bodies which they represent. Xenocrates, Vale. mani.
because he was not provoked to lust by the wantonness of Phryne, was said of
her, and of others, reputed to be an image and not a man, Dioge. laerti.
so Carneades and Archimedes were accounted as dead men, when they were alive,
for as much as their minds being distracted through earnestnes of
contemplation, the natural action of their bodies seemed to cease and give
over, the one being forgetful at his meat to reach forth his hand to the
dish, the other not knowing what the matter meant, when the Town of Syracuse
was taken wherein he lived, his house spoiled, and the sword drawn over his
head whereby he perished. But they rather in truth are to be thought dead,
whose souls are dead for want of understanding, and such not to be men as want
that which causes men to be. For, it is not the bark that makes the tree,
but the vegetable power whereby it does grow and flourish; nor the hide that
makes the brute beast, but the sensible life by which it has motion and
appetite; neither is it favor, countenance, or shape, that shows a man, but
that reasonable soul, whereby he does discern good and evil, true and false.
Wherefore a young man being brought to Socrates to be seen, Dioge. Laer.
he bad him speak that he might see him, as if by his inward conceit, and not
by his outward shape he could perceive what he was: Idem.
and Diogenes being asked at his return from the games of Olimpus what
assembly was there, answered, that there was a great assembly, and few men,
accounting the greatest number not to be the same, which in outward appearance
they seemed to be. And Cicero interpreting that precept of Apollo, Tuscula, 1.
(...), know thy self, says, Non credo id praecipit, vt membra nostra, aut
staturam figuramue noscamus, neque nos corpora sumus, neque ego tibi dicens
hoc, corpori tuo dico, cum igitur nosce te dicit, hoc dicit nosce animum tuum,
nam corpus, quasi vas est, aut aliquod animi receptaculum, ab animo quicquid
agitur, id agitur a te. I do not think he commands that, to the end we
should know the stature, or feature of our outward parts, for bodies we are
not, neither I speaking this, do speak to thy body. When then he says,
know thy self, he says, know thy mind, for the body is but as a vessel, or
receptacle of the mind, that which of thy mind is done, is done of thee. And
he again entering into consideration what man was, in express words delivered
that he could not be poynted out with a finger, In Some. Scipio.
because, men's cuiusque is est quisque, the mind of every man, is every man
him self. And, which chiefly is to be regarded, the word of truth which
cannot err, Gene. 1.
has defined him to be the very image of God him self, who being spiritual
without bodily substance, and full of all wisdom and perfection, cannot be
said by the face of a fool to be resembled, without extreme folly and
impiety. Albeit therefore that the greater part, which is the grosser sort,
will hardly be persuaded but that a foolish man is a man, yet nothing may more
assuredly be resolved, then that such wicked fools, as by reason be no^ led,
to think there is a God, are not of the number of those which are made in the
likeness of God, and are to be accounted men, by the judgment of all learned
men, divine, and profane. But least I may seem untruly to affirm that, which
the world with common consent will gain say, calling generally all men by the
name of men, be they wise or foolish, good or bad, religious or ungodly; it
behooves me to render some reason why the worser sort are so called, and to
show as well what they are, as what they are not; albeit much harder it be, to
prove that which is true, then to disprooue that which is false. It cannot be
denied but they have the birth and the shape, they lead the life, and dye the
death of men, yet are they not half men, but monsters amongst men to be
reputed. That they are men in name but not in truth, the reason is because
double is the nature of man, and a perfect man is a double man in him self,
one without, and another within: without his body is man, and within his mind,
so as there is both an outward, and an inward man, and both in one, if that one
have the perfection of a man. The inward man.
That within is that same, which is said to be endued with reason, desirous of
knowledge, apt to society, the image of God, the best of all creatures in the
world. Gene. 2.
That which God breathed into the face of Adam, whereby he became a living
soul, Gene. 1.
that whereunto he said, Rule over the fish of the Sea, and over the foul
of the heaven, and over every beast that moves upon the earth, and that same
whereof the Prophet of God to God him self pronounced, Psalm. 8.
saying, thou have made him little lower then Angels, and have crowned him with
glory and honor. The outward man.
The other, first was made of the dust of the ground, Gene. 3. Gene. 6.
of whom God said, he was dust, and to dust should return, and after, that
his spirit should not always strive with him because he was but flesh, and
that as water he falls upon the ground and does not return, a, Sam. 4.
as grass he withers, and fades as the flower of the field. 1, Kings, 2.
Which accordingly was understood by David, when his days drawing near that
he should dye, he said, I go the way of all the earth, and being considered
in his beginning, and after his end truly as he is, by an ancient Father, is
said to be, Bernard. medita.
Semen immundum, cibus vermium, post hominem vermis, post vermen, faetor et
horror. Unclean seed, Man's natures by name distinguished.
worms meat, after a man a worm, an ill savor and a horror. Which two
natures in man, as they were found to differ, so were they by name
distinguished even at the first; the first earthly man being of the Hebrews
called Adam, as homo tanquam ex humo, Ambros. de Isa. et anima
and the other heavenly of the Chaldeans Enoch, which signifies true man, or
that man which has undertaken, and hops to call upon God, as if he were not
a man, or at the least, not a true man, whose hope is not in God. So as a
godless fool which has no knowledge or sense of God, being that earthly man
which is dust, flesh, and corruption, beginning in uncleanness of seed, and
ending in the food of worms, is truly said to be a man, though in truth he
is not half a man. For that he wants the inward, that is the heavenly man,
which being much the better part, is much to be esteemed the greater half. And
yet must it be confessed that in respect of that lesser and worser half, he
does bear the name of the whole. And for as much as that part does only
appear, and without that, the other can have no being in the world, nor can
exercise his power but by means thereof, therefore it comes to pass, in
regard of that secrecy and near conjunction between them, that the open show
of the outward man, causes all a like to be taken for men, because the better
sort are apt to think the best of that which is doubtful, and the worser will
not suspect others, least they should condemn them selves. But when it
happens that a shameless mouth, bewrays a a godless heart, and that the
folly of a senseless brain, breaks out into the forehead, evidently to be
seen, then boldly because truly, that mouth and that forehead, may be judged
not to be of a man, since manifestly it does appear, that the inward man is
extinguished and gone. But whereof then should they be thought to be? The
proportion remains, and the living body of man: True, but the mind wants
which is the breath of life, whereby not the body but the soul of Adam was
said to become alive; before which breathed into him, he was a dead body, and
without which breathing within us, we are, though not dead bodies, because our
flesh lives, yet dead in soul, for as much as the soul only of a brute
beast does live within us; and so being, we are inwardly beasts, and men only
in outward appearance, and therefore to be named rather beasts then men, for
that it is the life and not the shape, the nature and not the picture, that
causes true things to be discerned from counterfaite, and truly gives the
denomination to every thing. Wherefore it has pleased God, who alone is
truth, and knows all things as they are, in his word to call him by the name
of a man, which is according to the likeness and image of him self, and all
those wretched sinners in whom that image is defaced, and that likeness blotted
out, according to their brutish nature by the name of some brute beast or
other. Math. 7.
The corrupt and unclean he calls dogs and swine, forbidding that which is
holy to be given unto them, Math. 23.
and pearls to be cast before them: the mischeeuous and hurtful, Serpents and
vipers, the subtle Foxes, the cruel Lions: Luke, 13. Psalm. 5, 6, 32.
and those which have no understanding, Horses, and Mules. So does God name and
note them to be beasts, which in wickedness or folly degenerate from the nature
of man, and not only them selves, but even their works he marketh with the
same brand, saying, that they hatch Cockatrice eggs, Isai. 59.
and weaue the Spiders web, and he that eats of their eggs dies, and their
web shall be no garment, whereby it is to be gathered that their wickedness
brings forth poison, and their folly, that which serves to no use. And to
show to the world that amongst all the wicked, and foolish children of men,
such wicked fools as in the pride of their heart, dare stand at defiance with
God, as if his name were a vain thing, and his power of no force, are least to
be accounted men, and that they are brute beasts in very deed, Daniel, 4.
it pleased him to make Nabuchodonozer being a King, an example very notable
thereof, in causing him to be driven from men, and to eat grass as the Oxen,
His fashion, not his shape was altered, for he retained the shape of a man,
living without understanding after the fashion of a beast.
his body to be wet with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like
Eagles feathers, and his nails like birds claws. So was he transformed into
the fashion, and lived the life of a beast by the space of seven years: which
days being ended, he lifted up his eyes to heaven, his understanding was
restored, he gave thanks unto the most high, and praised, and honored him
that lives for ever. Wherefore, that all fools which deny God be denied to
be men, and be taken for brute beasts, which have no understanding, let it not
be grievous to them selves, nor seem strange unto others, for that the Lord
God has proved it to be true, whose power is an everlasting power, and whose
kingdom is from generation to generation: but rather by remembering
Nabuchodonozer, they may learn to know them selves, both what they are, and
what they should endeavor to be. When his heart was puffed up with pride, and
his mind void of reason: then he said to Shidrach, Misach, and Abednego,
Who is that God that can deliver you out of mine hands? But after, being
humbled by the mighty hand of that same God, and his understanding restored. I
Nabuchadnezer, praise and extol and magnify the King of heaven, whose works
are all truth, and his ways judgment, and those that walk in pride he is
able to abase. Which example teaches what they are, and ought to seem, who
think with them selves, and say with their mouths there is no God; God showing
by the outward show of him, what inwardly he was, and such like are, being
blinded with ignorance of the Almighty: a beast he continued, and was not
restored to the fashion of a man, until he returned to the knowledge of his
God. Happy were it for all Atheists if in like sort God would lay his rod of
correction upon them, whereby at the length, though after many years, they
might be brought to know both God, and them selves; that here they might see
the end of their miseries, which hereafter will be endless, if they continue
in their wickedness. But if they enjoy the society, and take the food of men,
yet let not the sufferance of the Almighty cause them to glory, and to think
that God is not, which is, and them selves not to be that, which they are. For
assuredly the Lord God will pour out his wrath upon those heathen which have
not known him, whereby they shall perrish in their folly, and he triumph over
them in the end. Because living, they were dead in sin, dying, they shall
live in torment, being justly rewarded with punishment of continuance, What
they are which continue in Atheism.
for continuing in deadly ignorance without repentance. Wherefore in a word to
say what they are, men they are without the nature of men, men of chief
imperfection, borne to utter destruction; better never to have been, then such
to be.

Chap. 3. That out of the works of God, to sense and reason it is evident that
there is a God.
Darkness and light, sight and blindness, are not more contrary, then wisdom and
folly, then ignorance and understanding, which as in all things sufficiently,
so most assuredly touching God, appears to be true. The fool sees not that
there is a God, and says in his heart there is none; for his eyes are not in
his head, and his heart is at his left hand: wherefore it is no marvel that he
is blind, and consider nothing aright. But with men of reason contrariwise it
is, they walk not in darkness, nor stumble at noone days, to them things seem
as they are, and God above all things is manifest unto them. For heaven and
earth yield testimony of his divine nature, and magnify his infinite power,
yea all the creatures of the world are lively witnesses, be they dead or
living, and evident proofs, though they lie hidden and cannot be seen, that a
God there is, who has made them, and does rule them, according to his will. So
as man having sense and reason, cannot be ignorant or doubtful thereof, when
by sense he may perceive, and by reason consider, what those creatures are
which so notably set forth the being of their Creator. Opening his eyes toward
heaven above, or to the earth beneath, he does behold such variety, such
excellency of work, so much beyond his skill to judge of, so far above his
power to reach unto, that not only his mind is moved to a sudden admiration
of that he sees, but his heart is touched with a solemn reverence of that,
whatsoever is Author thereof, though what it is he does not conceive. For
reason, Reason leads to the knowledge of God.
his guide, by nature leads him to think that strange and notable effects
cannot proceed but from some rare or worthy cause, and that although the cause
in the effects be resembled, yet are the effects by the cause excelled, being
that which from it self gives being to another, but more to it self
reserueth, then on the other it bestows. VVherby it comes to pass that
looking only upon the frame of heaven, and face of the earth, and beholding
the great beauty of them both, the one being adorned with stars of sundry
forms and bigness, the other set with trees, and decked with flowers, of diverse
colors and proportions, he cannot but think that frame and that face, of so
exceeding beauty, to have been made and devised, by some skill of excellency,
whereunto of duty reverence does belong. Which are things so manifest, and
apparent, as by men of common reason they are seen and perceived. But who so
with a sharp eye does enter into the world, and with sound judgment examine
the parts thereof, he easily does find, that the whole, and every parcel of
the same, is like a glass of Crystal, wherein the might and majesty of God
does shine in such sort, as that the eyes and minds of all, be they not stark
blind, and void of understanding, are striked and pierced therewith, so that
they are enforced to see whom to acknowledge, and they cannot but acknowledge
God, whom their eyes do behold, to be the maker and ruler of heaven, and of
earth, and of all things therein contained. By the swift, constant, and
continual motion of heaven, by the course of the stars, all observing order,
though thousands in number, by the due succession of day and night, the true
pattern of life and death, by the seasons of the year still fading, and never
failing to return, what can be thought, but that there is a moouer, and a
ruler, of being eternal, and of wisdom infinite, which first turned round
the wheel, placed the lights, distinguished the times, and has caused them
all, so long in such order to continue. But let us examine a part, the sundry
parts, of the great and little world, whom God that Lord of all, uses as
instruments, and imployeth as officers, to execute his will, and to show his
power, and we shall see that with one voice they witness all, and all agree in
one, that they had a maker, and have a Master, by whose power at the first
they were, and at whose commandment continually they are. The throne and
footestoole of this great Lord, is heaven and earth, which are the roof and
foundation of the whole world, of which the one is of substance thin and pure,
and the other thick and corrupt, the one light, the other dark, the one still
in motion, the other ever at rest. Wherefore being most contrarily disposed,
impossible it is, that either of the other should be caused; so as in the
contrariety of their nature, they acknowledge they had a Creator, who at the
first made them to be such, as neither could have being by the others help.
Between them, to fill and take up, The Elements the ministers of God.
the height, and the depth, the length and the breadth of the whole; fire
reaching heaven, water touching earth, and air possessing the middle room, are
placed and joined to, and with them both, as universal Ministers of that
mighty general: But what are their natures? Most repugnant, The repugnancie of
their nature proves there is a God.
and utterly disagreeing, fire hot and dry, water moist and cold, air hot and
moist, earth cold and dry, more apt to destroy, then able to make or preserve
one another. And why are they such? To show that they are not of them selves,
and that all things of them should consist. For all natural bodies whatsoever
receive constitution from them, as they their power from the iustnes of their
temperature, which being unable of them selves to make, by reason of their
contrary and disagreeing qualities, they crave an vmpier, not only of fulness
to supply their weakness, and of indifferency to join them with equallity, but
of aucthority absolute to command their service, and of wisdom infinite to
direct their course; which ever tending to the worlds good, and never failing
to the worlds end, excludes chance, and proves choice, as well in their
placing, as in their ordering, and that by him to have been made, which could
do all, and would do best. Consider how they are placed, The power and
wisdom of God in placing and ordering the Elements.
and how ordered, and both will appear to be so as therein the power and
wisdom of God does so appear, as wonderful it is to consider. The fire
being full of motion, clear and pure, as best agreeing with heaven which ever
moves, with the clear substance thereof, and purity of the bodies therein,
is set next thereunto, whether it may seem easily to have been carried, being
light of nature, and given to ascend; but how strange is it that there against
nature, it should be held within a sphere, and not suffered to mount. The
earth massy, heavy, and full of dross, was fittest to be at rest. Wherefore
it was laid lowest, and from heaven that rests never, removed farthest, and
although it cannot but press downward by reason of weight, yet can it not fall
down from one appointed place, Pondere terra suo subsedit. Ovid. fast. 3
where it hangs, and vpholdeth it self in miraculous sort. The water that is
cold, and moist, and least meet of all the rest to have the company of fire,
far from that, and next unto the earth, wherewith it well sorteth, being cold
and somewhat heavy, is bestowed, but so, as in wonderful wise it co^passeth,
surmounteth, and ouerfloweth the same, being penned in with banks, not made or
devised by any creature whatsoever. Then is the air which is warm and moist,
placed between fire and water, as between two adversaries a stickler, being
friend to either side, through qualities agreeable to either part. It reaches
up to the one, and down to the other, and although it be joined to them both,
which are mighty and merciless, yet being weak and of small force, it does
both preserve it self in safety, and hold those in continual peace, which
continually are disposed to war. So are they martialled in places best
agreeing to their natures, that according to their most power, they may execute
their best service, at the will of their Commander. And to the end they should
all agree in mixture, which are diverse or contrary of nature, for that all
natural bodies, have being and constitution of them, they are each to other
so joined, and coupled in fellowship, that they are all in all, and hold
together a perpetual friendship. The transmutation of elements
For fire extinguished, passes into air, air thickened, grows into water,
water mudded, incorporateth into earth; and again, earth into water is
dissolved, water into air exhaled, and air into fire extenuated: whereby it
comes to pass, that none is alone without the others company, and all are
settled in a common society, which holding, they give constitution to other
things, and bring no destruction to themselves. For as in themselves, so in
other things considered, they are mingled in such sort, as one is Master, and
the rest give place, which causes them to rest in peace. O the depth of that
wisdom, and riches of that power which has placed, disposed, and joined them
in so wonderful wise, and to so necessary use. Hereof it is, From whence the
variety and diversity of creatures.
that within the bowels of the earth, veins of sundry mettalls, and quarries
of diverse stones are found, in color and nature, one differing from another,
that out of the earth variety of herbs and flowers do spring, whereof none
in sent, leaf, and virtue do agree; that trees are unlike, in bark, and in
fruit: that all brute beasts, are known so well a sunder, and that as well
the fishes of the Sea, as the fowls of the air, are seen infinitely to
differ. For as the earth is a receptacle of all influences descending from
heaven, and like a mother brings forth, and feeds those things which are
begotten with in her, herself receiving nourishment from water, breath from
air, and natural heat from fire; of which according to the several
quantities which she receives, she yields forth her brood, more or less
perticipating of every of them, but taking most from herself, because in
herself she ouermatcheth all the rest, so after the like manner, all living
things bred or fed upon the face of the same, and within the depth of the Sea,
have their being, being earthly, watery, or ayriall, according to the place of
which they are, and temperature which they receive; and all by the inward
power they have, to move, or to rest, to increase, or to decay, show forth that
first power whereby strength was given to those elements at the first, to
strengthen all things which of them should consist.

Hoc opus immensi constructum corpore mundi Manili. Astro. 1.

Membraquae naturae diuersa condida forma
Aeris atque ignis, terrae pelagique iacentis
Vis animae diuina regit, sacroque meatu,
Conspirat Deus, et tacita ratione gubernat,
Et multain cunctas dispensat faedera parts,
Altera vt alterius vires faciatque feratque.
This work of world so huge framed into a body
And parts of nature formed forms diverse to bewray,
Of air and fire, of earth and sea, which low does lie
Souls power divine does rule, and by a sacred way
God does with all conspire, and govern secretly,
And so does many leagues between al parties make,
That each, each others virtue may both give and take.
He which so said, was deceived in that he thought the heaven and the
elements to have soul and life: whereby they are moved, and ordered, but he
perceived truly, that by the secret working of God they all are governed, and
by him sundry ways united, to make and to suffer each others virtue and power.
But daily experience may seem to control what has been said touching the
places, and the peace, which the elements are said to hold. For it is seen
that water is drawn up near the fire, which ought to remain below the air,
and air passes down into the earth, whose place is prefixed above the water,
whereby their peace is broken, and they are at war amongst them selves, the
air thundering above, and the earth trembling below. True that so it is, and
fit it should be so, the more to show his aucthority that does command, and
their duty which do obey; for thereby appears his power in heaven and on
earth, when he thundereth from heaven, and shakes the earth, and that the
elements are his instruments to use at his pleasure, when he makes them to
follow and to forsake their nature. Which is done, the water ascending, and
the air passing down, and after the same water falling down when the cloud
is broken, and that air going up when the earth is opened, and both returning
to their appointed quarter, and executing as before their prescribed order, to
the quiet preservation of the world. The care and the eye, perceive there is a
God.
So as sounding the thunder, the ear does hear, and the earth shaking the eye
does see, and when both are calmed, of both we are assured, that one supreme
there is, whose only will as dutiful servants to their only Sovereign they
all obey. Whereas were they of them selves, and subject to no higher power,
which could command their service, and correct their disorder, in the world,
nothing should be but a general Chaos and confusion of all together. They
could neither be divided for each others safety, nor mingled but to each
others hurt. For, would fire continue under heaven and above air, without
consuming the one, or wasting the other? The nature of it being continually to
befed, or immediately to be extinguished; or should not the earth by the air be
rent a sunder, or by the water be overwhelmed, the air pearcing into every
corner, and not i^^luring to be smothered, and the water ouerflowing whatsoever
it lies over? No more possible were it they should be mingled, and not
destroyed, following their nature, which being contrary, would never suffer
them to agree. So should they have no being, nor cause any other thing to be.
Wherefore the heaven, and the elements, the placing and the ordering, the open
show and the hidden strength of them all, bear witness, and make proof, not to
be denied, impossible to be disprooued, that there is a God. The consideration
whereof might suffice, and needless it were to seek further, were it not too
great an oversight for man to ouerlooke him self, who being the worthiest
creature of all other, is the fittest to set forth the glory of his Creator,
by whose admirable wisdom he is of such incomparable perfection, The body of
man the pattern of the world, and his soul the picture of God.
that his body is the pattern of the universal world, and his soul the
picture of the immortal God. So that in him, more then in all the rest, God is
to be seen and known, his body showing outwardly the work of his hand, and
his soul inwardly bearing the image of him self. His body of earth does
represent whatsoever is between heaven and earth; yea, the very heavens them
selves are figured, all natural causes contained, and their several effects
produced therein. Three heavens resembled by the body of man, divided into
three parts.
Three heavens there are said to be, which the members of the body divided
into three parts, make a lively resemblance of. The lower serving for
generation and nouriture, are like the lowest heaven, within the compass
whereof, the elements are found: for as from them all beasts, plants, trees,
living, and other things, have being, receive nourishment, growth, motion, and
sense; so of four humors there ingendered, all the members are made, fed,
moved, and augmented. The same agreeing in nature, as in number, with the
elements, and producing effects in all aunswerable unto them: choler being
hot and dry as fire; blood warm, and moist as air; fleame as water cold and
moist, melancholy as earth, cold and dry; of which altogether a perfect
mixture, and just temperature being made, the growing life of plants, and that
which to brute beasts gives motion and sense, in the body of man is found and
does appear. The upper part in which the heart is seated, may be compared to
the higher heaven, the eight sphere wherein the stars are fixed, which
holding one just and continual motion, gives light and life to all the world
beneath, through shining beams, and comfortable warmnes it sends down, and
every where bestows: for so the heart being still in motion, after a just
proportion preserves the whole body, in life and health, by sending forth the
spirits of life, wherewith it is well stored into all the parts by veins and
arteries in due course to be conueighed. Lastly, the head the uppermost part,
is as the third and highest heaven, there sits the mind as in a Tower, and
does behold, govern, and direct all the actions of the whole body, causing it
to move and to rest, to perform and to forbear, what seems good
thereunto, even as that excellent almighty power from that high throne his
seat, moves the heavens, directs the stars, and preserves all things
within the compass of the world. Man a little world.
Wherefore it is not without cause that man is said to be (...), a little
world, when as his body alone being but the one half, and the worst part of
him is the figure of the whole, and with good right may be termed (...), in
regard of the great beauty which above other creatures it has; and serves no
less then all the world besides, to show the great excellency of that power,
which first was the founder and framer thereof. Whose exceeding beauty caused
some to think that God himself was like thereunto, Cicero de natu. Deo. 1.
supposing the fairest and finest shape, to be most fit for the best and
diuinest nature. Wherein they were like deceived, as if they should have
thought, the counterfaite of Venus to have resembled the countenance of
Apelles, the same being for excellency of work the chief spectacle of his
Art, but altogether unlike the favor of himself. But strange it may seem, and
incredible it may be thought, that man alone, either in part or in whole,
should represent the world, which consists of things both contrary in
nature, and infinite in number. I confess it is so strange, that it is a
vvonder, but vvonderfull is that God, who to show the greatness of his power,
could make man so strange a creature, that in variety what of outward shape,
Man in him self resembles all creatures,
and what of inward conceit, he should express and excel all other things
whatsoever. Sundry are the sorts of metals and stones hidden under the ground,
infinite are the kinds of herbs, trees, and fruits, growing, and of beasts
going and creeping on the earth, so of fish swimming in the Sea, and of foul
flying in the air: all which are framed of so just a shape, and of proportion
so agreeable, as of each kind found within the same region, and upon the same
Coast, all, or most of all are so like, as not the like, but the same they
would seem, were they set a sunder and not seen together; and yet if all at
once could be viewed, sufficient difference to show the diversity of each
kind might be noted. But amongst all the children of men, not any two, though
bred within the same climate, though borne of the same parents, could ever be
found, in whom difference did not appear, of height or of breadth of feature
or of favor, Albeit for number and place of all members, and parts, they are
all as one. Many have been said exceedingly to have resembled each other,
Valor. Max,
and none more then Alexander and Ephestio, whereby the Mother of Darius was
occasioned in steed of Alexander to salute Ephestio; but though both were
strangers unto her, she soon found that she was deceived, and craved pardon
of her error. Somewhat there is which better is discerned, then can be
described, that causes amongst all men such difference to appear, as easily
one from another, and every one may be known a sunder. By which diversity of
shape in his own kind, expressing the variable show of all kinds of things
whatsoever, In man some thing resembling every creature.
it is to be thought that he was made to represent not any one, but all the
creatuers of the world: which yet to make more manifest, some things he has
of them all, whereby in him alone their counterfaite may seem to be drawn,
and laid open to be seen. His flesh is as the earth, sound, substantial, and
firm, it is braunched with sundry veins, as the earth is distinguished with
diverse metals. Which therefore are said to lie in veins, because they
follow the like course, and are dispersed a like: inwardly with bone, as the
earth with stone it is strengthened, it is quickened and nourished, with the same
life that causes plants to spring and herbs to grow, and like times it has
for the renewing and decay of blood, as they have for the rising and falling of
their sap. It feels a VVinter and a Summer, a spring and a fall, it is also
furnished with those senses, which every sensible thing has, of which some
others want sight, some hearing, some one sense, some an other, and yet perfect
in their kind, that not wanting any, if nature be not wanting unto it. And as
in the outward fashion and disposition of his flesh, so in the inward motions
and dispositions growing from the same, he is to him self unlike, Man unlike
to him self, and like to all creatures in their affection.
and like to all the rest besides, that are moved or affected in any sort. Of
diverse creatures the motions are diverse, and as by kind they are severed, so
are they severally affected. Serpents are wily, Doves simple, Lions are bold,
Dear fearful, VVoolfes are cruel, Sheep gentle, Asses are dull, Horses
quick, Cammels slow, Roes swift: and not one, but all are most of all of the
same kind a like. Whereas of men, one is simple, an other subtle, one
fearful, an other hardy, one is gentle, an other cruel, one quick, an other
dull, one swift, Difference between men. Man differs from him self.
an other slow; such difference there is between one man and an other. Yea,
oftentimes such odds there is between a man and him self, as not the same,
but an other then him self he seems to be, for he is both simple, and
subtle, both gentle, and cruel, both hardy, and fearful, both dull, and
quick, both swift, and slow: subtle to deceive an other, and simple to avoid
his own danger, cruel where he hates, and gentle to those he loves, hardy
against a naked faint hearted enemy, and fearful against an armed resolved
adversary, swift to revenge, and slow to forgive, dull in learning the best
things, and quick in apprehending the worst. So is he most unlike to him
self, and like affected to all the rest, yea sundry more affections he has
then all the rest besides. For what beast is jealous or malicious, what given
to revenge, or moved with compassion, which does hope or despair, which
counterfaite, or dissemble? The Leopard is not so changeable in the spots of
his skin, as man is variable in the affections of his mind. Innumerable are
his fancies, unspeakable his conceits, infinite his devises and desires. The
daily new fashions of attires, the sundry forms of sumptuous buildings, the
rare inventions of all kinds of arts, faculties, and mysteries, are evident
proofs that the humors of men's minds are ever flowing, and like the river
Nylus, Semper aliquid apportant noui. Bring ever forth some new thing or other.
Wherein I must confess, he goes beyond all creatures by reason of reason,
Reason following affection gives strength thereunto.
wherewith alone he is endued. Which being captiuated by the strength of
affection, follows the sway, and alters the course thereof, adding force
incredible thereunto. But by that which has been said, evident it is, that
of all worldly things the lineaments are drawn in the very body, and bodily
affections of men, be they never so many in number, and so diverse in nature:
his outward proportion, and inward disposition being infinite in variety.
Which notwithstanding, is not a more fair picrure of the world, The soul of
man the lively image of God.
then his soul is a lively image of God, the same dwelling in that earthly
tabernacle, as God sits in his heavenly throne. It is simple without
mixture, and spiritual without bodily substance, it moves, and is not
moved, it never rests, and is everlasting, it is one in nature, and divided
in power; and being in one, and the same place at once, and in the same time,
it runs through all the places of the earth, it remembers things past,
perceaueth things present, and beholds things to come; it sees all, and of
nothing is seen again; rule also it bears, and cannot be ouer-ruled in
thought, or judgment, joy, or grief. All which are properties belonging to the
nature of God, and not found in any natural thing, but only in the soul of
man, God said to be an immortal man, and man a mortal God.
which from God was breathed into him. Wherefore, for the true resemblance
between them, the heavenly God has been said to be an immortal man, and an
earthly man a mortal God, Caelius Rhodi. ex Mereurio.
man being taken in respect of his divine soul for a God on earth, and God
esteemed in regard of that human image, to be a man in heaven. Such was the
conceit of a mortal man, who perceauing that divine part of him self, far
to excel, and greatly to differ from his earthly nature, could not but think
that there was a deity of like quality, The being of God proved, by the being
of the soul so like unto him.
that was Author thereof. So is the being of God fully proved, in being so
truly resembled by that, which such a creature could never have been, had it
not by such a Creator been caused to be, as is a God spiritual and immortal,
that ever was, and ever shall be. For impossible it were that a bodily
substance should beget a spiritual essence, and that from mortal seed an
immortal soul should spring. Remove the opinion of God, whose works are as
well above the compass, as within the course of nature, The cause by the
effects discovered.
and it cannot be, but that affinity there must be, between the spring, and
the stream, the seed, and the fruit. Wherefore, what could not be made by
natural means, whose bounds are certain, must be thought to have been
created, by a power supernatural whose limits are unknown; which being
discovered in effects to be wonderful, is to be deemed a cause admirable, in
all height of reverence rather to be esteemed, then either to be denied, or
doubted of. Since then the image of God is lodged within the body of man, and
continually does present it self, to the view of reason, no less then the
face lies open of the eye to be seen; as impossible it may seem that a man
should think that there is no God, whose picture within him self the eye of
his mind does still behold, as it is incredible that seeing his own face in a
glass, he should not judge it to be the face of him self. For more certain
is the sight of reason being sound, and less subject to deceit, then is the
judgment of the outward sense, which sundry ways by outward means may be
deluded. But if any be so blinded with the mist of ignorance, that by looking
into his own nature, he cannot discern that image of God, yet turning from
him self, and casting his eyes upon the creatures of the world, if any thing
he can think, he cannot but think, that there is a God. For what can be
thought to move heaven, but that which made it? What to open and shut the
gates thereof, one whereat the Sun goes forth in the morning, the other
wherein it returns in the evening, but that which dwells therein, and has
rule over the same? What to set in order such an army of stars, and to cause
them all to hold one certain and just course, but that to which all things are
easy, and nothing is impossible? What to restrain the fire from ascending,
and the earth from falling down, to keep the Sea from ouer-flowing, and to set
peace between fire and water, in discord to make unity, and a friendly
conjunction between things of contrary disposition, but that power which has
power over heaven and earth, and does command and control, both nature her
self, and all natural things whatsoever; and what should that be, but even
that which in power, wisdom, and perfection, is infinite, admirable, and
incomprehensible? That of the Grecians is called (...), for the sharpnes of his
sight, and swiftnes of his course, because he sees all, and rules over all in
a moment. Of the Latins Deus, for that of his fulness and bounty, having all,
he gives all that the world has; of the English, God, for as much as in
respect of excellency he is only good, and goodness it self to be esteemed. If
then it stand with reason that nothing can make it self, and no power other
then God, can be found or imagined sufficient to perform the least of those
things before mentioned, reason does assure us that there is a God, and over
and above reason, every sense: for the light of heaven does show it to our
eyes, and the birds of the air do sound it into our ears, we taste it in the
fruits of the earth, and the sweet sauouring flowers breathe it up into the
very brain of our heads, so as we are enforced to feel, perceive, and
understand the same. Wherefore unreasonable and senseless is that man that
sees not, and believes not that there is a God.

Chap. 4. That reason and sense may judge that there is but one God.
THe world consisting of heaven and earth, it may seem to have been the
pleasure of God, the maker of them both, to place in either of them, one
special creature, that for excellency and unity of nature, should be the
picture and image of him self. The sun in heaven, and on earth the soul of
man; to the end that man, of whom chiefly he would be honored, beholding the
sun with his bodily eye, and with reason the eye of his mind, looking into
his own nature, as well without, as within him self, might perceive, that a
God there is, and that there is but one: who does both shine in heaven, as that
glorious star the Sun, and rule on earth, as that excellent creature the
soul, whereunto all other living creatures are subject. Of this it has been
spoken, The Sun a resemblance of God.
of that it may be said, that being in the firmament above, it exercises his
power on all the creatures below, and holding an unity in it self, it
disperseth it self through the corners of the world, and gives light to every
star that shines, and causes life in every thing that lives, and is of
such brightness, that it darkneth the most glittering stars, and dazeleth the
sharpest eyes, although neither star have light, nor eye sight, but by means
thereof. So as very notably it expresses the nature, and the power of that
only and mighty God, who from above beholds, and orders all things
whatsoever or wheresoever being, and gives sight and understanding to all,
albeit in his greatness and glory, of none he can be seen or understood, and
yet as the Sun is visible to the eye, and the soul subject to the sight of
reason, God of man in a measure seen and conceived.
so God in a measure, is truly said sensibly to be seen, and iudicially to be
conceived, of all those which have eyes to behold, and reason to consider such
creatures, as he has ordained to be witnesses of his nature. But the soul
being buried in the body, The body the grave of the soul.
as in a grave, which therefore is called (...), quasi (...), the grave of the
soul, and the Sun shining in heaven openly to be seen, the eyes of men have
been drawn to look upward, and there to seek God, where manifestly
appearing, they could not but see him in all glory and majesty to shine.
Howbeit, in searching to know what he was, their errors were as gross, as
their opinions were diverse; Some thinking the Sun, others the Moon, and
other-some the whole circuit of heaven, By natural reason impossible to know
what God is.
to be a God. And no marvel that they were deceived, when by the low reach of
natural reason, they sought to apprehend the high mystery of that
supernatural power, which is infinite and incomprehensible: But that it was
only one, otherwise they could not think, reason manifestly teaching, that
otherwise it could not be. For when by consideration of all natural things it
is evident, that nothing is of power sufficient to make or to move it self,
and that consisting of contraries, they are more apt to destroy, then able to
cause or preserve one another, most reasonably it is that there be, because of
necessity it is that there must be, a maker, a moouer, and a ruler of them
all, and how? A maker, of omnipotency to do what he will, a moouer, of
authority to dispose as he will, and a ruler of all goodness and excellency,
to order and preserve all according to his will; else were it impossible that
the world should have been made, moved, and ordered as it has been,
consisting of parts no less repugnant in nature, then infinite in number.
Which the Grecians well observing, found out three names aunswerable to those
three properties, Aristid. in hymno, in Iouem. Dioge. Laerti. Caelus Rhodi. The
Grecians by three names expressed the nature of God.
and gave them all to one God; as agreeable only to one alone, calling him
(...), and (...), sometimes by one, and sometimes by the other; (...), as that
whereby all things are caused to be, (...), for that he gives life and motion
to all, and (...), in regard of his excelling goodness, in governing and
preserving both the whole, and every particular whatsoever. Who so being as in
very truth he is, the original cause from which all things do proceed, the
root of life out of which all life does spring, and the fountain of goodness,
from whence all good does arise and flow, then is he but one, for it cannot be
that more then one, that cause, that root, and that fountain can be. The
cause of causes can be but one.
That cause of causes, that is, the causer of all things, was to have being,
before any thing had beginning, and be he must only by, and of him self, for
be he could not by participation of any thing else, when all whatsoever is, or
ever was, by him was made, and from him did proceed. So was he the first, yet
not by priority of time, by worthiness of nature, or by order of beginning, for
he was before time, above nature, and without beginning, but first, because all
were after him, and none equal and together with him: And as the first, so the
last, for having no beginning, he can have no ending, being unborn he cannot
dye, if nothing had power to make him, what can be able to destroy him? Then
being the first and the last, the beginning and the end, he is that he is, and
shall be that he shall be, when all things that are shall not be, not as now
they are, but changed in nature, as he can never be, that is above nature, and
therefore one alone, and the same. And being the first and the maker of all, he
was almighty, and had all power in him self. But so he could not be, if any
other were of like power, and could do as much as him self. For what is given
to the one, is taken from the other, so as what the one has, the other
wants, and to have any want at all, were against the nature of either, there
being no fulness where there is want, nor perfection where defect is found. If
then a maker and almighty, as he must be that is God; there can be no partner
of his power, there ought to be no pertaker of his glory. Neither possible is
it that life should be given by more then one: whereof the root must be one or
none, for when all things that can be living of contrary qualities must
consist, and life is nothing else but an union of body and soul, which can
never be united but when those contraries of disposition to one just, and
peaceable constitution are reduced, whereby nouriture grows, and strength does
ensue, it follows that whatsoever gives life, must be of all unity, without
any the least diversity within it self; otherwise, if any difference it
should have, and not altogether be one, wherein it wanted indifferency, more
to the one, then to the other it would incline. So should there be no equality
of mixture for partiality of favor, and so no peace, no unity, no life should
be, wherefore one in nature, one in number, one in all, that one which is the
author of life ought to be. If it be said that Gods may be the same in
nature, and yet sundry in number, and that in them giving life, no such unity
is required, but that which may fall into more then one, no affinity being
between the life giuers, and the living things, between the nature of Gods,
and the natural parts of the world, it must be answered, that in truth to
God neither nature nor number can be ascribed, he being an essence in no sort
to be conceived; if not supernaturally and al in singlenes he be considered.
For although he be not seen of men, God seen of men in the glass of nature.
but in the glass of nature, yet therein his greatness does appear so much to
exceed her compass, as easily they perceive, and assuredly resolve that he is
so much above, and so far without her reach, as that he cannot be subject to
the force of her laws. Wherefore, when mortal men according to their natural
understanding search for him, they find what he is not, and there-vpon
conclude him to be that which most probably their weakness can never be
comprehended. Whereof it has been, that sundry wise and learned men have
thought no better way to define what he was, then by way of denial, to show
what he was, not saying that neither the heaven, nor the sky, nor the sun, nor
the moon, nor the elements, nor the world was God, but the works of God, and
therefore God to be the maker of all. So reason teaching that multiplicity must
needs be after unity, and that one there must be, before many ones there can
be, the same concludes, that God which is the first, cannot be multiplex sed
vnus, not many but one. Again, since nothing can be compounded which may not be
dissolved, it follows, that God which is everlasting without dissolution,
could not be but eternal without composition, and therefore ens vnum et
simplicimum. And so being most reasonable it is to think, that he that is
only, and merely one, one in all unity and simplicity, is fittest to set at
one those things which are of contrary disposition, he being not likely to
lean to either side, who has nothing in him bending to either part, whereas
being many and diverse (as diverse they must be, if they be many) they could not
possibly make a peace, where contrariety moves a war. For how should
things subject unto them, by them be drawn together, who through diversity of
them selves are not one, but stand asunder? How should fire end water, become
friends, if as Thales thought, Dioge. laerti.
there were one God to do all out of water, and one other, as Heraclitus might
as well have thought, to do as much out of fire. There could not, nor there
needed not an atonement to be made between them, if both Gods had power a
like by either, without the help of other to do what he would. But they must
be united and coupled as man and wife, before any living thing can be brought
forth.

Quippe vbi temporiem sumpsere humorque calorque
Concipiunt, et ab his oriuntur cuncta duobus, Ovid. meta. 1.

Cumque sit ignis aquae pugnax, vapor humidus omnes
Res creat et discors concordia faetibus apta est.
For when moisture and heat have had temperature
They do conceive, and from them two springs al increase,
While fire with water strives made is the creature
By vapor moist, for breed being apt the warring peace.
Fire as the man, and water as the wife, are to be considered, who being joined
in marriage, their issue it is whatsoever has life, for all living things
consisting of body and soul, there must be moisture to breed a bodily
substance, and heat to bring forth a living soul, whereof the experience is
seen in the egg, and in the bird, the egg being first a substance full of
moisture without life, and after a bird by long and continuing warmth,
quickened, and made alive, yet of it self neither moisture can make the body,
nor heat the soul, but both well tempered, cause and join together both a
body and a soul. Wherefore, since fire and water must be made friends, that
heat and moisture may meet and join in one; since a just temper by an equal
temperature of contraries must be made, that one constitution of diverse
natures, as one harmony of sundry times may consist, before either life can be
had, or nouriture can be yielded; great reason it is, that he that should draw
all into one, should be but one, and alone, without the fellowship of any
other, that none there should be to resist his power. And not otherwise can it
be supposed, that he is, or can be, being that (...), from whom as from a
fountain all good does flow, he must be summum bonum, and sum bonus; the
chief good, and chief in goodness; and therefore one God, without match or
peer. Goodness in him, and he in goodness ought to excel, and that
incomparably, because all good into all parts of the world is derived from him,
and he alone in good estate does preserve, govern, and order all. The Sun
shines, the earth flourishes, trees grow, beasts move, and man through him
and by him, does enjoy whatsoever is good in every of them. How then can he be
compared with, if all good from one, nothing from an other can proceed? If any
be his equal, then does he not excel, if he alone command, and all the rest
obey, who is his fellow ruler, whose aucthority is like unto his? It was not
without ground that of old tota Musarum chorea, Caelius Rhodigi. 1.
all the whole company of Muses were said to sing and dance ad imperium
Apollinis, at the commandment of Apollo: and of him, Orphe. in hymno
Apollinis.
(...), with his loud Citherne he gouernes all the world: thereby the rule of
one God above all, and the thankful obedience of all on earth, to one alone
was intended and signified: who therefore is said to be called Apollo, quasi
(...), that is simple, Plato in Cratilus.
and one or (...), as sequestered from others, and without company alone. But if
it be thought that for the rule of the world there needs not a chief King,
and that there may be fellow Gods in heaven, as men have peers on earth, and
that one God is not sufficient to be the author and worker of all good; let it
be sought if it be reasonable, and by reason it shall be found to be
impossible, Impossible the world should be ruled by more Gods then one.
that the whole world should be ruled, as it is, and so long as it has been,
all things being ordered with such wisdom, and held in one settled course
without destruction, if there were more rulers of the world then one, who being
of equal power, and of divided rule, could not but strive to excel, which of
all things to the nature of God is most agreeable. Then should there be war
in heaven without end, for who should give place, the warriers being equal
that do contend? And in the world nothing but contention and trouble; the fire
with the water, the air with the earth, the stars with the planets, all
powers both high and low, both heavenly and earthly would fight; for how should
the Subjects be at peace, their Sovereigns being at variance? Which so being,
what could ensue but confusion and destruction? Wherefore, the quiet peace of
earthly creatures, the wonderful harmony of heavenly bodies, the just return,
and never failing course of every time and season, does show and prove, that
to one power and one will, that is to one God, whose power is his will, they
are subject all. Day to day, and night to night; the Moon to the night, as the
Sun to the day, the one to the year, as the other to the month, is a witness
that more rulers then one they know not, that more Gods then one they have not.
If it be said notwithstanding, that which has been said, that by the
judgment of ancient Poets, men of learning and wisdom, it may be thought
there are more Gods then one. For that by them several kingdoms to sundry
Gods were allotted, as if one were not sufficient to govern all. Why many Gods
by the Poets feigned.
It may be answered, that thereby their meaning was to beat down the pride
of earthly Kings, who could not be contented with their own, but thought them
selves fit, and ambitiously sought to rule the whole world. And that therein
also did appear that multiplicity of Gods, does overthrow the dignity of a
God, that from many, many mischiefs would ensue, and that to rule in order,
keep in peace, and in happiness to preserve the world, there needed but one,
and more then one there could not be. For their aucthority being divided, and
severed sundry ways, they were ever at strife and contention together, about
the saving or destroying of men, armies, Cities, and common wealths.

Mulciber in Troiam, pro Troia stabat Apollo, Quid. Tristi. 1. Eleg. 2.

Aequa Venus Teucris, Pallas iniqua fuit.
Mulciber against Troy, Troy might Apollo trust,
The Trojans Venus found upright, Pallas unjust.
Mulciber at the request of Juno, Homer. Iliad
made armor for Achilles, delivered him from Xanthus, The contention of the
Gods.
pursued the Troianes with fire, and was ready to burn men, City and all, but
was pacified by Juno again. Apollo being angry with the Grecians, sent a
plague amongst their ships, encouraged the Trojans against them, saved Troy by
repulsing Patroclus, and hid Agenor from Achilles, by casting such a mist about
them, that the one had opportunity to fly, and the other no light to pursue.
Venus was indifferent to both sides, she rescued as well Parris the Grecian,
from the force of Menelaus, as Aeneas the Troiane, from the fury of Diomides.
Pallas being wholly for Greece, stopped her ears at the prayers, and regarded
not the tears of Hecuba, and other the Ladies of Troy, and in favor of the
Grecians, reasoned with Jupiter, when all the rest kept silence. At the length
they fell all together by the ears, Pallas with Mars and Venus, overthrowing
the one, and ouercomming the other. Neptune provoked Apollo, who refusing to
fight, Diana was offended, and reproched him for a coward. Then Juno took her
up for her boldness, and Jupiter sat laughing in heaven to behold the folly of
them all. Such are they by the Poets noted, such their actions and affections
described to be, not comely for mortal creatures, but more unseemly for
heavenly wights, and most unworthy such as should be rulers and governors of
the world. Here if my purpose were to stand upon the opinions of men, I could
show their judgments by reporting their sayings, which being infinite, are not
so many as they are manifest to prove there is no God but one. Orpheut.
One naming him (...), the first borne, an other (...), Sibilla.
and (...), unborn, and unmade, an other (...), and (...), borne of him self,
and of his own nature, and sundry others by sundry other speeches expressing
the nature of God, to be of all unity and simplicity. Lactantius.
As well may appear by the religious labors of learned writers, Mornaeus.
as well ancient as modern, faithfully collecting the same. But why should
man seek the testimony of others, for proof of that, whereof his own eye is
a sure witness, and his understanding an assured evidence to him self? For as
he cannot but see that there is but one Sun in the firmament that lightneth
the world, warmeth the air, comfort, and brings forth whatsoever grows,
and flourishes upon the earth, and one only soul in man, which gives life
to his flesh, light to his understanding; causes his actions, orders his
affections, imployeth and directs all the parts of his body. So therein may he
most evidently see and know, that one God there is, and only one, which has
made the Sun, and created his soul, and has framed them both to be such as
they are; of purpose to express his own nature, that appearing to be one to
him alone, and to none other, all honor and glory should be yielded for ever.

Chap. 5. That the power of God is over all, but extended most, over and upon
the greatest men.
GOD being the maker of the world, and the Lord of all, it is not to be doubted
but that he has power over the world, and that all things are subject unto
him. The heaven and the earth, the fire and the air, the Sea and the Land,
men, beasts, every, and all wheresoever, and whatsoever being, are the work of
his hands, and therefore his alone, and only his to be commanded.

Jupiter est quodcunque vides, Lucan. 9.
quocunque moueris,
Estque Dei seeds nisi, terra, et pontus, et aer,
Et caelum, et virtus.
Thine eye thou can not turn, nor move thy foot from God,
The earth, the Sea, the air is but the seat of God,
So heaven, and power also.
No man can look besides, God every where to be seen.
or turn away from God, no place is without the view of his eye, and
th'aucthority of his presence, his power is in, and through all, it is
wonderful, and above all to be considered, whether living in heaven, fixed in
the firmament, swimming in the Sea, growing within the bowels, or moving upon
the face of the earth. For how should it otherwise be, he being able by saying
the word, to perfect the whole work of heaven and earth, out of dust to create
the body of man, and with his breath to make him a living soul; what power can
be greater, or what is able to express the greatness thereof? If heaven and
earth had a voice, if the birds of the air, and the beasts of the field could
speak, they would open their mouths, and strain them selves, to sound out
the wonderful might of their almighty God. But since they are not framed so, as
so they can do, let man which is fashioned for that use, and to whom it
chiefly does belong, never cease to pronounce, and to proclaim how wonderful
that God is, whose creature he is, and by whom power is given unto him, not
only more then unto all, but over all the creatures of the world. Surely, it
is the will of God it should be so, for having made him his Lieuetenant upon
earth, both to supply his place, and to hear his voice, necessary it is that
he should both know the power of him whose person he does represent, and
acknowledge that aucthority whereunto he is to be obedient. Yet as in the
first beginning, such was the pride of the first man's heart, that where eyes
were given unto him to cast them upward to behold heaven, and therein to
glorify as well the maker of him self, as the Creator thereof, he looked down
upon him self, and lifted up his mind into heaven, desiring rather to be as
God, then to honor God as he should have done, so ever sithence the offspring
of his seed, being lineally infected with the corruption of his attaynted
blood, has offended in the proud conceit of it self, and in forgetfulness of
the Lord God; every branch drawing venom from that poisoned root, though all
bring not forth like bitter fruit. All the children, but not all like heirs
of Adam.
All are the children, but not all alike the heirs of Adam, all are stained
with his sinful inclination, but such chiefly are defiled with his undutiful
rebellion, as enjoying the glory of the world, give ear to the alluring voice
of flesh and blood, The glory of ye world, occasion of the greater sin.
and follow after the false persuasion thereof. Riches, reputation, and
aucthority, lift up the mind, give boldness, and cause the heart to swell:
whereas poverty deiecteth, contempt causes grief, and subjection is
accompanied with fear. Every of those does minister occasion of sin, which,
who so has them, cannot be freed from; but not being of one nature, they
breed offenses not of the same measure, before the face of almighty God. In
time of necessity the poor man's tongue is hardly restrained from blasphemy;
Hard in poverty not to sin.
when the sweat of his brows does not gain bread for his mouth, when he
labors with his hands, and goes naked without clothes, when notwithstanding
that he rise early, and sit up late, cold does pinch his body, and hunger his
belly, so as he goes to bed with heavy cheer, and rises with a grieved
mind, want standing before him, and behind him, ready on every side to devour
him. What is he, which trusting in the Lord looks up to God, and calls on
him as the young Ravens do, for their food, and does not murmur or despair?
All are offenders.
No man can be thought so free from the corruption of nature, which in that
case does not offend, in word, or in thought, open ly before the world, The
greatest men the greatest sinners.
or secretly within him self. But it is the rich and mighty man, he whose eyes
swell with fat, and is clothed with purple and gold, who feeds daintily, and
lives sumtuously in all abundance, not feeling want, or fearing danger; which
beholding what he has, and not looking to him which gave it, is proud of his
own strength, forgets the Lord God, and in the midst of his happiness, is
most unhappy. It is not to be doubted but that private men, men of mean and
base account, sin often against God, both in thinking too well of them
selves, and in performing not well their duties toward God and man. But it is
to be observed, that the higher in place, and greater of estate, being not
contented with that they have, but still aspiring, and greedily seeking what is
none of theirs, soonest forget they are under the Lord of heaven, and therein
most grievously provoke his anger against them. Rulers and Magistrates duly to
be regarded.
Here I would not be thought to draw into question the lives, or into hatred
the names of those, which are rulers, and live in chief place of aucthority
under God: of whom far be it from my pen to write, or from my heart to think,
otherwise then with all duty to their place, and reverence to their name.
Neither by taxing them, do I seek to clear those, whose offenses are held
within compass by want of means, and who sin not, because they cannot in so
high a degree, for in ill as in good, voluisse sat est, the mind makes the
matter. But as after the curse given, the most fertile ground has been found
to bear thistles and briars most, if it lie at rest, and follow the nature of
it self, and yet the soil not the worse, though not manured it yield the
worst fruit: even so, if since the transgression, the greatest ones have
brought forth the most grievous sins, out of that natural corruption
whereunto they are subject, not being restrained by force of laws, nor
lacking means whereby to pursue their desires, yet, being graced with the
place of aucthority, they are and ought to be reverenced of men accordingly,
the person, High Magistrates the special images of God.
not the function deserving blame. They are called to be the special images of
God, which being, they are lightened with knowledge, and endued with
understanding, they subdue affection, and follow reason, they excel in virtue,
no less then they exceed in dignity, all other of other sort, how good, and
how great so ever. For, for a private man not to be an oppressor, for a poor
man not to be proud, for him which is under law, not to pass the compass of
law, though it be not always common; yet ever as a common thing it is
regarded: but to have power over all, and to do wrong to none, to sit in the
highest seat, and not be puffed up, to be lawless, and not to do that which
is unlawful, is a virtue so divine as aproacheth near to the nature of God,
and cannot be found in any but in those, which are next under God, and as Gods
are set in chiefest place of rule. He said truly, which said Est virtus
placitis abstinuisse bonis. Quid. Epist. 16.

From pleasing things, it is virtue to abstain.


And he again, Cicero pro Muraena.
Non Asiam nunquam vidisse, sed in Asia continenter vixisse laudandum est, Not
never to have seen Asia, but in Asia temperatly to have lived, is to be
commended. But that virtue as many may seem to have, as abstain from pleasure
for fear of pain, and that praise, all such to deserve, as live temperatly in
the midst of delicacie, against their will. Which is not the case of
Princes, with whom no fear is of punishment, all pleasures are present, and
nothing able to withstand the force of their desires. Wherefore, Good Princes
truly said to be Gods.
all good Princes and rulers, which rule their affections by the law of reason,
and govern them selves as they ought to do, being subject to no earthly
power, are truly said to be Gods, and ought accordingly of men to be
reverenced, admired, and not to be compared with. Which sort I mean in no
sort to touch, neither any as Kings, (for great is the name of a King, and not
rashly or presumptuously to be spoken of.) But if any, as men offending against
the majesty of God, through the pride of their hearts, or iniquity of their
lives, against whom the Lord God has been pleased, as against other sinners to
stretch forth his arm, that they with the rest might feel his strength, and
find their own weakness, and know that as out of dust he made, and raised them
to be such as they are; so not being as they ought to be, he is able as dust,
with the breath of his nosthrils to blow them away. Hereof, if times and
places be examined, in all ages, of all Nations, examples sundry may be found,
to show that so it is, God from time to time has advanced the poor, and
pulled down the rich.
and has been ever, ever since there have been men in the world. So has the
Lord God from time to time as well advanced the poor, as pulled down the
rich, and caused no less the weak to prevail, then the mighty to fall, that
both the poor might receive comfort, and the rich advertisement, the weak
encouragement, the mighty warning: they to depend of the providence, these to
stand in awe of the power, and all justly to be occasioned to give all glory to
his name, Adam the first man and the gretest Lord.
that is almighty. He that was the first, was the richest, and greatest Lord
that ever was on earth, with whom I think fit to begin, because he began the
fray, whereof his successors have felt the blows, his fall being their foil,
and his punishment the pattern of their pain, if not warned by his example,
they turn from the right way, Genesis.
and tread in his wandering steps. God of his power made him out of the earth,
and from his side took a woman without his grief, The power of God seen in
the example of Adam.
which he gave him for the comfort of his life. And that God of his goodness
granted unto him, being but a lump of earth, rule and aucthority over all the
earth, whereby he was as great as he could wish, and more happy then he did
conceive him self to be, all things being ready to serve him, and nothing able
or apt to resist him. But when rebelling against that good God his maker, he
showed him self an unthankful creature, and was not pleased to be a chief
Sovereign in bearing rule like unto God over all the world, but would be a
very God on earth, as God him self was in heaven, having all knowledge of good
and evil, what followed? He saw his own nakedness, whereof he was ashamed, and
durst not come forth into Gods presence whom he had offended, but finding him
self to be stripped of all, and that of that God, who most frankly had given
all, even all power, and perfection, perfection of his own nature, and power
over every creature unto him, he knew nothing more, then the power of God, and
the weakness of him self, and that for his presumptuous desire to know both
good and evil, his knowledge then was of Gods former goodness, which justly he
was deprived of to his shame, and of his present ill estate, which to his
grief deservedly he was entering into. For his wife being punished in the
sorrow of her birth, and the earth cursed for his sake, and for his woe, out of
Paradise his princely seat was thrown, by the hand of his God, and by the
sword of the same God there drawn, and shaken against him, he was kept from
ever coming in again. So being banished from his native blessed soil, and
turned into the wide world where the earth yielded thistles and briars unto
him, as testimonies of her rebellion toward him, in regard of his presumption
against God, the present use of a toilesom life, and the perpetual memory of
his happiness lost, Gave him abundantly to understand, how bountiful and full
of power the hand of God was unto him at the first, in giving, and forcing all
to be under his rule, and then how hard and heavy it was upon him, that for
maintenance of his life, he was driven to strive with the earth, which though
he trod under his feet, he could not subdue without the strength of his hands,
and the sweat of his brows. In the example of Adam the pour of God is to be
seen of all sorts.
Here, of all sorts, the power of the God omnipotent, is to be seen: the
poorest are not of less value, nor the basest of meaner account, then dust,
which was raised to the possession, and commandment of all worldly things:
the richest, and greatest have not more, nor more aucthority then had he, which
was owner and ruler of all, between heaven and earth, from the uttermost
bounds, and round about the compass of the same; who notwithstanding, became
naked, banished, and forced to labor, or not to live. After the sins of the
world, with the Sons of men growing to be infinite, and infinitely to
exceed, in contempt of God, and height of pride, God to make known to all
the people of the earth, that he could both destroy, and preserve, both call
together, and scatter asunder, Genes. 7.
at his pleasure, he first opened the windows of heaven, The flood.
and brake up the fountains of the deep, whereby all the mountains under
heaven were covered, and the whole earth ouer-whelmed with water, and none
saved alive but only Noah, with such few as in his arc, by the commandment
of God were preserved; and when being increased and multiplied, they went about
to erect a Tower, which standing on the earth, should reach up to heaven, Gene.
11.
as if they would clime up to the highest, and sit with him above, he made
their own tongues the instrument of their own punishment, by confounding
their own language, in such sort, as speaking, they were heard, and not
understood: whereby they were scattered, their weakness appeared, and the
building was left undone, but standing high, The Tower of Babylon a monument of
man's vanity and Gods omnipotency.
as a monument of their vanity, and of his omnipotency, far, and near, to
be seen. What diversity then was there, between the rich and the poor, the
mighty, and the weak, when all of all sorts were drowned, eight only, not for
wealth or dignity, but for justice, and virtue excepted? Or what pre-eminence
had any, when all could speak, and none deliver his mind, all hear, and not
one understand? The rich soil about Sodom, brought forth great sinners. Gene.
13.
It followed that the rich soil about Sodom and Gomorra, which was as the
Garden of the Lord, before it was destroyed, brought forth wicked and exceeding
sins against the Lord. But was their riches their ransom, their power their
defense? Gene. 18.
Nothing less, only righteousness might have been, if amongst thousands it
had been found in ten, which not being, and the cry of their sins
ascending up to heaven, the Lord rayned fire and brimstone out of heaven upon
the two Cities, whereby they were ouer-throwne, and the inhabitants of them
destroyed all, save only just Lot, Gene. 19.
with his wife and two daughters, which immediately before, were by the Angels
taken by the hands, and set without the City. Genesis 25, 27
Though Jacob had gotten the birthright, and his Fathers blessing from Esau,
yet when he departed from his parents to go to Laban, it does not appear but
that he went alone. When he slept, Genesis 28.29.
he laid a stone under his head, and desired of God only meat and apparel,
and being come to Laban, he served twice seven years for Rachell, first upon
agreement, secondly constrained by deceit, wherefore poor was his estate, his
condition base, and pains with patience, his only means to recover his
right. Genesis 30.32.
Yet being contented, and depending upon the goodness of God, he became rich,
above measure, and was named Israel, because he had power with God, and should
prevail with men. Genesis 37.39.
Joseph stripped out of his coat, was by his brethren cast into a pit, from
which being lifted out, he was first sold to the Ismalites, after by them to
Potiphar: lastly being falsely accused of his Masters wife, Gene. 41.
he was cast into prison. But he fearing the Lord, and the Lord being with him,
whatsoever he did, did prosper, till at length he became ruler over all Egypt.
Great was the poverty, and the misery extreme, Exodus 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 10.
which the Israelites did suffer under Pharao, a King, but proud, and hardened
in heart, against the great King of heaven and earth. While they (poor souls)
were cruelly afflicted, The misery of the Israelites under Pharao.
all manner of bondage being laid upon them, to make them weary of their
lives, Pharao affying in his own strength, scornfully asked, who is the Lord,
that I should let Israel go? And seeing the miracles performed by his
Sorcerers, and wise men, which were done by Moses and Aron, he persisted in
rebellion against God, and cruelty over his people; and albeit the Enchaunters
perceauing their skill to fail, when they could not turn the dust into Lyce,
were enforced to say unto him, this is the finger of God, and he saw the Lyce
to be over his land, upon man and beast, the morraine to fall upon the cattle,
the plague of sores upon the people, and thunder, and hail, and lightning upon
the ground, whereby men, beasts, herbs, and trees, were smitten and broken to
pieces, and Grasshoppers strange and innumerable, to cover the ground, and to
devour whatsoever was left, and darkness by the space of three days, to be in
all the land of Egypt; that not a man during that time, could see an other, or
rise up from the place where he was; yet God being willing to get honor of
him, he hardened his heart so as he still pursued Israel. Exodus 14.
But they flying, and he pursuing, The great power of God in delivering
Israel, and punishing Pharaoh.
the Sea was divided and brought together again, that Israel might escape,
and he be drowned with all his Host. Which variety of grievous punishments,
partly by base and conetmptible creatures, and partly by fearful and unusual
means inflicted, is an argument that God is able sundry ways, and can use as
well the least, and most silly instruments, as the greatest, and most terrible
weapons, to punish the sins of men, and amongst men to pull down the pride
of the highest, and to overthrow the strength of the greatest, and that he so
does, to make it known, that none is like unto him in all the earth: and where
the Sea was made dry land, and the same the bottom of the Sea again, it
appears that both Sea and land are ready to execute his will, and serve to
show his power, no less in destroying his enemies, then in preserving his
chosen; how poor, how weak, how distressed soever. Wherefore the
Israelites being afraid when the Philistines went up against them, and having
no hope by their own strength to escape, being unarmed and altogether
unprovided; 1. Sam, ^7.
they said to Samuel, Cease not to cry unto the Lord our God, for us, that
he may save us out of the hands of the Philistines. They then coming to fight
against Israel, and having full assurance of victory, not seeing a man to
draw a weapon, or to lift up his hand against them; as Samuel offered the
burnt offering unto the Lord, the Lord thundered with a great thunder out of
heaven upon the^, and scattered them, so as they were pursued and slain before
Israel. 2, Chr, 20.
Ichosophat in like sort, the children of Moab and Ammon, coming with a great
multitude to battle against him, was dismayed, for he saw nothing in him and
his, able to withstand so mighty and many enemies. He thersore sought the
Lord, and set his eyes toward him; who laying ambushments against the children
of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, which were coming against Judah, caused them
to slay and destroy one another. So by the strange working, and mighty power of
the Almighty, the enemies of Judah, were killed of themselves; their own
hands serving, nay striving, 2. Chr, 32.
to cut their own throats. Senacharib inuading Judah, and besieging the
strong Cities, and thinking to win them for him self, proudly vaunted what
Nations he had overcome, and spared not blasphemously both to speak and write
against the Lord God of Israel. But Hesechias the King, and the Prophet
Isaiah, praying against him, and crying to heaven, the Lord sent an Angel
which destroyed all his valiant men, and the Princes and Captains of the
Host, so as he returned with shame into his land; and being come into the
house of his God, they that came forth of his own bowels, slew him there with
the sword. Infinite it were to rehearse the notable examples of Gods wonderful
works remembered, throughout the whole volume of holy Scripture, both in the
confusion of the rich and mighty, being wicked, and preservation of the poor
and weak, being godly: they are every where to be read in the History of the
Prophets, Judges, and Kings, and as well in the time, as before the coming of
Christ. Wherefore, leaving the same to the view of all, which of all lie open
to be seen, I will of much remember somewhat, that of profane men has been
recorded, wherein the strength of Gods hand is to be admired, when it pleases
him for the secrecy of his judgment to put it forth, and to execute his will
upon the Sons of men; which being of less credit, and of no worth, in
comparison of the assured testimony of the word of truth; it may serve for
better use to some, as ill food does best agree with bad stomachs, and dim
light with sore eyes. It is not to be doubted but that the burden of poverty
is great, The burden of poverty great.
and that by the strength, not of the body, but of the mind, it is to be borne
out. VVherof it has been truly said, Menander.
(...) to endure poverty is not every man's case, but his that is wise; and
accordingly it has been seen to fall out in the example of Socrates,
Diogenes, Anaxagoras, and other Philosophers, whose minds being fortified with
wisdom, by no force of poverty could be overthrown; whereas the common sort,
being led by the present sense of outward things, admire riches in others, and
finding want in them selves, are dejected in mind, and carried on to foul
actions, or unseemly complaints, to whom I may say as Paulus Aemilius did to
Persius, lying down at his feet, and uttering base words, and requests
unmeet for a King, Plutarch in Aemilius.
though a Captive at that time, they seek to amend their ill hap with a worse
fault, and show them selves both worthy their mean condition, and unfit for
better fortune. But how, and whatsoever the wickedness of man is, such has God
evermore showed his power to be, in giving honor to the poorest of estate, and
raising the basest to the highest place, that men beholding and considering the
same, how so ever they are weak, cannot but acknowledge his strength, Poverty
exalted.
and therein repose their comfort, Plutarch in Pho. 1.
and their hope. Phocion of a poor man, became the General, and Commander of
the Athenians, by the space of twenty years, wherewith his wife thought her
self more graced, and honored, then she could be with all the riches and
jewels of the world. Doubtful whether Phocion or Alexander the greater.
He contemned the gifts of Alexander, and there-vpon it was doubted whether
was the greater man, because it was doubtful whether had the greater mind.
Poor Aristides was a principal actour, Herodo. vraria Calliope.
and had not the least honor in the service at Salamis; and at Plateas; was the
chief leader of all the Athenian forces; whom virtue did put forward, poverty
could not hold back, nor daunt, nor dismay in any sort. Eutrop. 1.
The mean estate of Cincinuatus, did not stop his passage to preferment; from
the plough he was called to be Dictator, which was to be the greatest ruler in
the common wealth. Which office having discharged to the good of his Country,
and his own glory, to his former course of life, with no less contentment
then comendation he returned again. Fabritius being in poverty, Eutrop. 2, 3.
was sent in embassage amongst other Romans to Pyrrhus, of whom Pyrrhus
conceived such lyking, that to win him to be his, he offered him the fourth
part of his kingdom: which offer he contemning, Pyrrhus admiring the greatness
of his mind, and esteeming the Romans according to him, was ready to accept
most reasonable conditions of peace: which being not accorded on, and Fabritius
disclosing the treason of his Physician unto him, he said with admiration,
Ille est Fabritius qui difficilius ab honestaten, quam sola cursea suo auerti
potest. This is that Fabritius whom it is harder to draw from honesty, then to
turn the Sun from his course. So does God make virtue often to shine through
the cloud of poverty, causing it to be graced rather by the show, then
ouercomed by the shadow thereof. And as it pleased Alexander the great to
prefer before many of noble birth, Just. 2.
Abdolminus, a man of no parentage, and base condition to a kingdom, because
that his benefit should seem rather to be given freely, then deserved by
nobility, and that his own greatness therein might the more be seen. So is it
to be observed, that the Lord God has raised many from the lowest step to the
highest seat, from unknown houses, to the greatest honors, as well to show
his power, as that the glory might be wholly his, August. de ciuita. dei. 18
no worth or desert being theirs. Ptolemey, a man of base birth, of a common
Soldier, grew to be King of all Egypt. Liui. decad. 1, lib. 5. Just. 2. Ioui.
elo. 1. Pompo. Laetus.
So it happened to Seruius Tullius the Roman, to Agathocles the Siracusian,
to Narses of Persia, to Justinius of Thracia, and to sundry others in sundry
places the like. Of whom though it cannot be said that they knew God, and
acknowledged his goodness therein, yet may it not be denied to be done by God,
and thereof the glory to belong unto him. The power of God in pulling down.
And as in lifting up, so in pulling down his hand has not been idle, to show
how much he disdaineth pride, and that his will is, to be feared, even of the
greatest, and highest, and strongest amongstmen. Herod. Clio.
Cresus a King, and infinitely rich, yet not satisfied with the greatness of his
estate, his mind was to make war against Cyrus, his desire being to conquer
the kingdom of Persia. Wherefore with might and maine, and full assurance of
victory, he passed the river Halys, entered the Country, and encountered the
forces of Cyrus; where the fight ending by reason of the night approaching, and
the victory resting doubtful, thorough the valor of the Lydians,
counteruailing the number of the Persians, Cresus retired and was pursued, till
at the length, at Sardis his chiefest City and greatest strength, he was by
Cyrus besieged, and surprised. So as in a moment he fell from his throne of
glory to a plight of misery, and of the richest King, became the poorest man in
the world.

Irus erat subito, qui modo Craesus erat. Ovid. trist. 4,

Irus he soon became, which was Cresus but even than.
In whose example, being so great a King, the weakness may appear of the
greatest man, if it be considered how weak he was in mind, The weakness of man.
to vvithstand the greedines of desire, in judgment to understand the Oracle
of Appollo, and in providence to preserve himself in the midst of his friends,
and safest place of his kingdom. VVeake in himself, and not strong in any
thing that he had. Solon.
Solon before told him when he boasted of his treasure, that therein he was
not, nor in any thing could be happy before his end. And Appollo foretold him,
that if he invaded Persia, he should overthrow a great kingdom. But no more he
perceived the one the^ he regarded the other, and therefore he perished, his
pride, and his folly, being both rewarded with his fall. And being fallen into
the hand and heavy judgment of his enemy, by whom he was committed to the
merciless execution of fire, all flaming, ready to consume him, when no
worldly mean could serve; Cyrus relenting for pity, and his servants
laboring for his delivery, his tears pierced the clouds, and drew down the
dew of heaven in so plentiful wise, that the fire was suddenly quenched, and he
miraculously saved. Which history be it true or false (as false I do not
think it, though true some will not allow it to be) it may notwithstanding serve
well, truly to show, or profitably to resemble unto us, that only God is
omnipotent, and the greatest Monarchs weak, and frail men, easily carried
with desire, deluded through error, and overtaken with danger; and that being
set highest, they are subject soonest to be ouerthrown, Perflant altissima
venti, the highest, to the strength of the winds are subject most. But were
they fastened to their kingdoms, as are the stony mountains to their
foundations, yet were they not of power sufficient to withstand the power of
that heavenly Jehovah, who commands the lightning, and sends forth the
winds, and is able to shake the world, and to rent in sonder the mass of the
earth. Wherefore, when his will is to stretch forth his arm against the
Sons of men, which being set alost, lift up their heads too high; as earthe^
vessels they are broken, and as water cast upon the ground, they sink and are
not seen. And on the other side, being pleased to turn his countenance
toward them, he can at an instant raise them from death to life, and of
nothing restore them to what he will. For millions of means he has in store,
The power and means of God infinite to execute his will.
and at hand, whereby to effect his pleasure whether to save, or to destroy.
The elements stand before him, whole armies of Angels attend upon him, infinite
powers and virtues unknown, are in his eye, ready to be disposed of at his
beck. Will he consume? Fire is sent, and in vain is the help of man. Is he
pleased to spare? Water is poured down, and help given in a moment. In other
sort, yet to no other end as sundry ways, and still to the same purpose, the
ouer-ruling power, and pleasure not to be resisted of that supreme King did
appear, both in the foil of Cyrus, taken at the hands of a woman, Herodo.
Clio.
whose kingdom he thirsted after, and would not be satisfied till he was
drowned in his own blood, and also in the fall of his Son Cambyses, Herodo.
Thalia.
who having upon a false suspicion caused his brother Smerdis to be slain, and
after fearing no danger from any mortal creature, as he lept to the back of
his Horse, the scabberd fell from his sword whereby his leg was hurt, and he
quickly dead of the wound. What man is, and what of him self he is able to
perform by all the wealth he has, and all the forces he can make, may well
appear by Darius and Xerxes, two mighty Monarchs, the one the richest, the
other the mightiest of his time in the world. Darius to be revenged of the
Scithians, Herodo Melpo. Iusti. 2.
being a King of infinite treasure, raised an army of seven hundred thousand
men, besides a Navy of five hundred sail of ships, wherewith passing into
Europe, and through Thrace, he went into Persia, with full resolution to
subdue, and subvert the whole people of Scithia, wheresoever found. But what
ensued? They flying before him, and he following after them, into deserts and
solitary places, still hoping to constrain them to fight, at the last his
victual failed, whereby his men perished, and he was enforced to hasten home,
his enemies driving him homewards with pursuit, and he not without difficulty
escaping with his life. So was his voyage lost, his purpose made void, his
desire of revenge wrought grief to him self, and his great preparation
against his enemies, had end in the destruction of his own forces. Herod.
Polym.
After him Xerxes pretending revenge of the Athenians, but desiring to be Lord
over all Greece, set forward with so huge an army both by Sea and Land, that
for the multitude of his men, and number of his ships, wherewith he seemed to
cover the Seas, he was said to march upon the Sea, and to sail upon the Land.
But what was his success? After that he had prevailed at Thermopylas, and
surprised Athens, supposing that all Greece would have yielded unto him: at
Salamis with a small fleet his huge Navy was beaten, and there his honor
being drowned, he was easily persuaded to hasten home, and with great loss of
his people, hardly saved him self. So was the Sea made the instrument of his
overthrow, which proudly, but foolishly he took upon him to command, and to
correct, as if nothing had been able to resist his will. Who so thirsts
after honor, Summumque credit gloriam, Roethius de consola. 2.
and esteems glory above all, and thinks to do great things aunswerable to
the greatness of his desire; let him consider the proud minds, and the miserable
ends of Caesar, and Pompey, both Romans, and both conquerers over many and
mighty Nations; but being ouercomed of them selves, both came to destruction,
through the insatiable ambition which forced them to pursue one another, and of
all others to be maligned. Dion. Nicae. lib. 42.
Pompey living to see and lament his ruin, and in shame through treachery to
leese his head, and Caesar falling in that place, Suet. Eutrop Dion.
which was the theater of his glory; and at that time when he sought highest
to be raised, and amongst those of whom he thought him self unfeignedly to be
beloved. So has the mighty power of the God almighty, appeared to the world,
in the fall of many great Monarchies, how long, and how strong so ever seated
upon the earth. That which was the first of the Assirians, then which, never
was any of larger dominion, and longer continuance, extending over the fourth
part of the world, and flourishing in all glory, Vellerus pater. 1.
above a thousand and three hundred years, the Son succeeding the Father
from Ninus to Sardanapalis, Diodo. lib. 3.
at the last in the overthrow of that last effeminate unworthy King, had a
sudden and a miserable end; the Assirians of the Persians being vanquished, and
enforced to serve them, whom by the space of many years they had commanded
before. In like manner were the Persians brought under by the Grecians, and by
the overthrow of Darius, Herodo. 7.
in his third fight which Alexander dispossed of all in one hour; after that
they had been famous by the many conquests of Cyrus, Qu. Curtius.
Cambyses, Darius, and Artaxerxes, and had been Lords of the world two hundred
and thirty years. Neither did that Monarchy long endure, Appia^n in proae.
histor. Roma.
though raised, and extended by the exceeding virtue, of a most excellent
Soldier; but as in short space, it grew to a wonderful height, looking over,
and ouer-ruling, the known then bounds of the earth, so in few years it fell
to be divided, and rent in pieces, Liui. decad. 5 lib. 4.
through the ambition of four Kings, who never ceased to strive for all, till
all became a pray to the Romans. Lastly, they which from a small and base
beginning, waxed the wonder and terror of the world, so that they commanded
whom they would, and refused to be Lords over some who desired to be their
subjects, the Sea with the Land witnessing, and striving, for the honor of
their virtue, at the length ouer-burdened with greatness, they sunk under the
weight of them selves, and for lack of enemies against whom to draw their
swords, they sheathed them in their own bodies; first opening by ease and
wantonness the way to destruction, Vellnus pater. 2.
and after through civil dissension, occasioned by intolerable ambition,
running headlong to destruction. For albeit after the loss of sundry kingdoms
and provinces, whereof they had been Rulers, they seemed in the succeeding times
of the better Emperors to hold up their heads again, yet was that smiling of
Fortune like the shining of the sun, which ouercast with a cloud, is
suddenly vanished and gone out out of sight. As the time had been, when Rome
was said to be Terrarum gentiumque Dea, Pompo. Laetus in hist. Romana.
cui par est nihil, et nihil secundum, of all kingdoms and Nations the God,
who^ nothing does match, or come near unto. So was the time again, when
forsaken of her inhabitants, she was left desolate by the space of forty
days. Such was th^^ variable estate of that mighty Monarchy as of the rest,
though seeming to be built upon pillars of Marble, and knyt together with bonds
of iron, soon shaken, and soon overthrown. Whereby it is evident, No
worldly thing able to resist the power of God.
that multitude of men, heaps of treasure, strength of horses, valorous
minds, pollitique heads, all give place when God is pleased to punish.

Sardanapalus was settled in a most glorious estate, the Army of Xerxes was
above number infinite, as the wealth of Darius, not to be valued; Mars
himself not more valiant then Alexander, of the Romans for valiancie and
policy both, the world never knew the like; Time.
yet time which knew them all great, and standing aloft, saw them all down,
and brought to naught. Two objections.
But here two objections may be made, Alexander was taught of Aristotle, to
know that he was a man, and yet may it seem, that he thought he was a God, in
that he challenged no less unto him self. Insomuch as by the Lacedaemonians it
was so decreed, (...), since Alexander will be a God, let him be a God. Aeli.
hist. 2.
But when being wounded at Assacana with an Indian dart, he saw his blood, he
said to those that flattered him in that his foolish conceit, this surely is
blood, not (...) Hom. Iiad 3. Spoken by Venus wounded by Tytides.

that humor which flows from the blessed Gods.


Neither would Phillip his Father, have willed and straightly commanded one
of his servant every day at the rising of the Sun, Caeli. Rhodi. 10.
thrice to cry unto him, (...), Phillip, thou art a man; but that being a
King, he feared least he should forget that he was a man, finding how hard it
was, for him living in all happiness, to know what he did know, in that which
should lay open unto him the frailetie of his nature, and the uncertainty of
his estate. Wherefore since easily men forget, what they like not to call to
mind, and soon wax ignorant of most known things, which sildome or never
they have in thought, it has been, and may be judged, not inconvenient, to
put those great ones in remembrance, which would have none great but
themselves, that a greater there is above them, which has power over them, and
is able to bridle their immoderate desires. While they command others without
resistance, they love not to think of of a Co^maunder whom they are unable to
withstand, especially being guilty to themselves that they do offend. But
necessary it is, as well for them selves, as for themselves, as for others, that
in time they be awaked out of that sleep of forgetfulness, whereby lying
buried in the grave of ignorance, they dream what they are not, but neither
know what they are, nor what they ought to do.

To the second objection, Tit. Calphur.
Vilia sunt nobis quaecunque prioribus annis
Videmus, et sordet quicquid spectauimus olim.
The things seem vile our former years have seen,
Of no account is that which we before have known.


So as what we have never seen, I know we hardly believe, and therefore old
histories are fained fables we commonly hear and receive; yet in truth,
according to the judgment of the vvisest, habet in exemplis antiquitas,
Cicero. de orato.
vt in atatibus authoritatem senectus, in examples antiquity, as in ages the
most ancient, The authority of antiquity.
has most authority. For since God is, as he ever was, one and the same, and
all men, since the first man, to reason and affection, to like virtues and
vices are subject, it comes to pass, that amongst the sons of men, nihil
est sub sole nouum, there is nothing new under the sun. Why then should not
the first time serve as a glass, wherein to behold our present age? and the
examples of our eldest Fathers, be documents of our selves, and our youngest
children, as discipulus pioris est posterior dies? the second day is scholar
to the first? That God which reigns in heaven, and has ever ruled in heaven
and on earth, made man at the first, and first and last disposes his actions,
orders his course, lifts him up, and throws him down, at his pleasure.
Wherefore, all is one, whether yesterday or to day, in the beginning, or in the
end of the world, this, or that has happened. But because such is our
weakness, that we are carried more with sense then the understanding, and so
dull we are, that we have no feeling of that, which is not done at our
elbowes, and before the very threshold of our doors; it shall not be amiss,
for the better satisfaction, and full instruction of all sorts, to call to
remembrance what we have heard to have been done not long before our days, and
what our eyes have been witnesses of, even amongst our selves, wherein that
unspeakable power of the almighty has so appeared, as that the blindest of
sight could not but see, and the dullest of conceit but understand and perceive
the same.

It is not long since the Emperor Charles the fifth at the entreaty of the
Spaniards, 1541. Iouij hist. 40
sailed with a great Navy out of Italy into Africa, to be revenged of
Hasauaga; who being Governor of Argiers under Barbarussa, maintained there,
certain notable Turkish Pirates, which greatly had molested and spoiled the
Coast of Spain. Wherefore having levied a royal Army of Spaniards, The
enterprise of Charles the fifth at Argiers.
Germans, and Italians, he came before Argiers with an exceeding strength,
and making full account by means of his great Artillarie, and thorough the
number and valor of his soldiers, to surprise the town; he sommoned
Hasanaga (by a messenger sent unto him, and suffered to land, upon
signification of a parley) to yield and deliver up the Town, Carolo Caesari
terrarum Domino, to Charles the Emperor, Lord and Commander of the world.
Which Hasauaga laughing at, and refusing to do, he landed his forces, being
above twenty thousand men, and straightly besieged it, both by sea and land.
But within a short space after, there arose such a tempest, and such plenty of
rain fell from heaven, that with extreamitie of wet, the land forces were
exceedingly weakened; not having Tents wherewith to cover themselves, nor being
able to discharge their shot, wherein their chiefest strength did consist; and
the shyps riding at anchor, with vehemency of wind being shaken and driven
together, a hundred and forty of them, in the view as well of the enemy, as of
the Army, to the encouraging of the one, and discomforting of the other, were
miserably sunck and cast away, not without the loss of a great number of good
horses, and which much was the most, of many gallant and brave men: so as the
great losses sustained, and the victual waste, enforced the Emperor to
rise, and to depart from Argiers with all speed; to embarque again, and to
hasten home, for safety of the remainder of his army. But scarcely were his
men shipped and launched into the maine, but that a new tempest, far greater
then the former, ouer-tooke him, which scattered them a sunder, drove them upon
sundry places of danger, some backward, into the mouth of their enemies,
others upon rocks and sands, and drowned the greatest part in the bottom of the
sea, very few escaping; and Caesar himself, with much a-doe ariuing, as a man
without life, though alive. -- tanquam Iouis ignibus ictus, Ovid. Trist. 1.
Eleg. 3.

Vixit, at vt vitae nescius ipse suae.
as stricken by the almighty hand,
living, of his life he did not understand.


Such was the will of God, to punish the wilfulnes of that man, which neither
by advise of counsel, nor persuasion of friends could be stayed, from
pursuing his desire of revenge, Charles the fifth, reposing his trust in earthly
means, was deceived.
and that with affiance only in his own strength. For being asked of
Hasauaga, what moved him to think he should be able to win the town? he
presently answered, pointing to the fleet with his finger, The force of my
Artilerie, and the valor of my men: not seeming once to think of God, who
did not so much as lift up his eye to heaven. Wherefore the Lord God, to show
himself to be himself, that is, the Lord of hoasts, the giver of victories,
and the Ruler of all worldly powers, with the winds, the messengers of his
anger, as with the breath of his nosthrils, shaked, scattered, and consumed
those earthly means, wherein that worldly Prince reposed his trust. A great
example of the weakness of man, and of the might of God: to teach the Princes
of the earth, not to be resolute in their purposes, nor over confident in
their own forces, but to seek for help where it may be found assuredly,
without failing, and powerfully, beyond all resisting of flesh and blood. The
like of late years, even before our eyes, The overthrow of the Spanish fleet,
1588.
and touching our selves, has evidently appeared, in the happy overthrow of
that Spanish fleet, prepared to inuate the kingdom of England, and to make a
blody conquest of the Nation, and supposed and said, by the setter and sender
of it forth, to be inuinsible. What success it had, we saw, they felt, the
world knows: and time will never forget, but all places, and all ages, the
farthest and the last, shall remember, to the glory of God, whose work it was,
to the renown of Queen Elizabeth, whose Lieuetenant she was, and to the
honor of Englishmen, whose soldiers they were, Char. Lo. Howard of Eff.
commanded by a noble Admiral, the happy leader of that fleet: all manfully
fighting under the banner of Christ, for the defense of his Gospel, the
maintenance of their own faith, and safety of this noble Realm. Therein that
mighty King may see what he did, and know what he can do. He sent to conquer
the kingdom, but with his own overthrow gave honor to the Nation, he meant
to destroy the people, but killed scarce a man. His Admiral saw the Ports,
but could not land a ship, his Navy went round the Realm, but found no creek
to rest in. Chased it was, beaten it was, it felt the rage of the winds, The
elements seemed to conspire against the Spanish forces.
the fury of the Sea, and the torment of fire: as if both fire, and water, and
air, had conspired to fight against him, which sought to possess that earth
which was none of his. So the Lord God, high and mighty, stretched forth his
arm, to make his strength known, that all the world might learn to fear and
honor his holy name; especially that he, which was proud in his own
forces, and lifted up in his own eyes, might see and understand, that God
favored not the ambition of his heart, and the greediness of his desire: and
that his strength was weakness, and his greatness nothing, God bending his
countenance, and putting out his hand against him. And that we, which were
defended and kept safe, with the shield of his mercy, might evermore with
thankfulness acknowledge his goodness, and with continual praises, set forth
his everlasting glory, to the uttermost parts of the world, (if it may be) and
to the worlds end. But if he proceed as Pharao did in the hardness of his
heart, it is to be thought, that the purpose of the Lord is, to get more honor
of him. And if we forget, as Israel often did, to walk after his Law, and to
serve him aright, it is to be feared, least before we come to the Land of
Canaan, we shall feel the bitterness of famine, and the sharpnes of the
sword, and the destruction of many thousands amongst us. The Lord GOD which
has done so much for us, make us mindful of him, and careful of our selves,
which we shall be, if truly we think of him, and of our selves; that is, if in
his favor, and not in our own power we repose our safety; if we set our
strength in his arm, and look for defense from his right hand, resolving that
all flesh is corrupt, feeble, and frail, and that even the purest, the
soundest, and the mightiest, consisting thereof, as a flower in the field is
easily pulled up, and as the greatest Oak, is cut down in an hour: the one
assuredly to wither, the other never to grow again. So, when the mightiest
Prince of the earth, affying in himself, makes war against us, and
threatens with fire and sword to devour us, we may with comfort think, and
say with assurance to our selves, as did the Athenians, when Xerxes with his
huge and unmatchable army, Herodo. Polimma.
came to conquer Greece, his quarrel being specially to them, (...) that he is
not a God, but a man, which warreth against Greece; and that neither is, or
ever shall be any mortal creature, void of evil from the hour of his birth;
and that the greatest, to the greatest mischief is subject, and therefore
being a mortal man, he may fail of his purpose.

But further, they which knew not but the God unknown, may we, which know and
serve the true God, and Lord of all, with joy and comfort say, and pronounce to
our Leaders, as Hesekiah did to his Captains, when Senacharib invaded and
threatened Judah. Be strong and courageous, fear not, neither be afraid for the
king of Ashur, neither for all the multitude that is with him, for there be
more with us, then are with him: with him is an arm of flesh, but with us is
the Lord our God, for to help us, and to fight our battle. Even so, (no
doubt) said that princely Lady, above all Ladies and Princes to be renowned,
to her Generals and Commanders; when being by a mighty King threatened, and
injured sundry ways, she was provoked, Not by malice of revenge, Her Majesty's
own words, then which better cannot be, in her prayer to God, when she sent
her forces to Cales, in the year 1596.
nor quittance of injury, nor desire of bloodshed, nor greediness of lucre,
to put forth her strength: but of a heedfull care, and wary watch, that no
neglect of foes, nor ouersuertie of harm, might breed either danger to her,
or glory to them. And so resolving, humbled herself before the most
omnipotent maker, and guider of all the worlds mass, and prayed victory from
him, for the surety of her Realm, and the glory of his Name, with the least
loss of English blood.

Wherefore, that mighty Iehoua, to whom she bent her heart, heard her voice,
favored her enterprise, gave a speedy and happy victory to her forces, with
best fore-winds sent them out, and brought them home, the blood of very few
being shed, and that not spilt, but well bestowed, no valor wanting, nor
policy forgotten, before the conquest, and all temperance used, and mercy
showed after the victory, by those her noble Generals, which with exceeding
virtue, to their everlasting fame, discharged the great trust reposed in them,
and the most honorable place they served in. Wherefore her Highness is,
thorough the power of the Highest, safe without fear to be surprised at home,
as Craesus was for his greedines of the Persian treasure, and has not been
overthrown, and put to flight at Sea, as Xerxes was, pursuing his revenge of
the Athenians, nor discomfited and vexed by the fury of the winds, as Charles
was, indeuouring to quit the injury of Hasauaga, nor chased and beaten in the
eye of her enemy, as the Spaniards were, by and before the forces of her
Majesty, gaping after the spoil of her kingdom, and thirsting after the
blood of her subjects. For her strength is in the arm, and and her hope in the
help of the most mighty God, whereby she is, and may be assured, that he in her
will show his power, and she through him, shall gain that honor; for which
as his most especial image, she shall be throughout the world, and to the
worlds end, renowned and admired. So be it, Amen. Amen.

Chap. 6. That God is good to all, but best to the best men.
With God is power infinite, and wisdom incomprehensible, as he is a God,
he cannot be but omnipotent, but altogether and exceeding wise; wise above the
reach, omnipotent beyond the judgment of any mortal creature. Yet in nothing
is he to himself so like, and to man so well known, as in that he is good, and
therein, both his power and his wisdom are excelled, although from him,
neither the one nor the other can be divided. By his power, he made the world
of nothing, and by his wisdom he made it to be of all perfection, The goodness
of God, the cause of creation and preservation of the world.
and the same thorough both he does daily rule, order, and preserve; but it
was his goodness, which first caused him to make it, and it is that, which
makes him still to be careful of it, to the end all should be pertaker of
that, which of nothing but of it self can participate. Other cause there could
be none, because being of all fullness, he could feel no want, nor any thing
could be added unto him. Not excellency, wherein he ever was above all that
have been, or could be incomparable. Nor glory, which filling heaven,
surmounted far the measure of worldly honor; his goodness only was enlarged
when it was communicated, and so much the more, by how much the less it was
deserved. When he had framed the goodly vaute of heaven, and established the
sure foundation of the earth, Gene, 2.
and finished all the host of the^ both, he saw all that was made, and all was
good; for nothing other then good from him could proceed: but to man much
more, though not more worthy, Man the end of gods creation.
that goodness did abound. He was the last of his creatures, as the end of his
creation, all made for him, and all represented in him; the rest, by his word
commanding, whereas his body by his hand working, and his soul by his breath
quickening, Man the image of God.
became alive: whereby he was the very Image of his Maker, pure, full of
knowledge, and a Lord over all. And albeit he fell wilfully to be ignorant,
being unthankfully disobedient, and was deprived of his lordly estate, being
thorough his own default both in body and soul defiled, yet would GOD,
because he would be Goo, as infinitely above measure, so everlastingly without
end, vouchsafe to restore him again, in clensing his thoughts, instructing his
heart, and holding all things in subjection unto him. What the state and
condition of man, were, being fallen, and not restored by god.
Which if he had not don, and did not still continue to do, man should not
differ from a brute beast in understanding, his whole life should be filthy and
corrupt, and not a day, nor an hour, he should live in safety. His reason
should be as the subtlety of the Fox, his desire as the lust of the Horse,
his life soiled in vice, as the swine wallowing in mire, and soon ended should
it be, by the assault of devouring beasts, or fury of pestilent diseases. This
were the condition of man, were it not for the goodness of God. God is ever
working for the good of man, generally and particularly.
But for the good of man, or rather for his own goodness sake, he is ever
working both generally, in the behalf of all mankind, and particularly, for
the benefit of every one, but especially, for the preservation of those which
are his, and repose their trust in him. Sundry ways he offers instruction
to their hearts, and gives correction for their faults, he strikes a natural
fear in the creatures, whereby they become, and remain subject unto them, and
discovers the virtue of whatsoever has or wants life, for their necessary
use, for the strength and comfort of their days. Let some instans be produced.
The Sea he holds within banks to the good of all, least they should be
ouer-whelmed, and drowned with the earth. The Turk he boundeth within lymits,
to preserve the Christians, that they may not be ouer-runned and devoured of
infidels. The Sun he causes to shine upon all the world, for the health and
comfort of all Nations; and with his Gospel he lighteneth some special
places, for the spiritual comfort and souls health of his chosen. So is he
good to all, The goodness of God in withholding and bestowing
but in greater measure to some, and good he is as well in bestowing benefits,
as in withholding mischiefs; but chiefly good, in that out of his own mere
goodness, without any the least their worthiness, he does whatsoever he does for
them. For all being guilty of the transgression, and all under the sentence of
condemnation alike, no grace is of duty, nothing but punishment is due. This
the world cannot but see, and every one as he receives most, ought most to
acknowledge the same. Not a man living upon the face of the earth, but in that
he lives and is a man, in that all the creatures are under his rule, in that
he knows how to rule them, and to make them serve his use, which for his use
are appointed, is infinitely bound unto God, Every man bound infinitely to God
for his goodness.
and to confess how good a God he is therein. For whatsoever man he be,
without hurt to God, or wrong to him, he might have been a stone, without
life, or with life a brute beast without reason. So to have made him, was in
the power of the Maker, and no cause in himself, why of better condition he
should be. Wherefore in this the goodness of God is generally upon all, even
upon the most barbarous people of the world, that they live, and that in life
they enjoy many plesures and commodities, through the commandment they have,
and good they receive of the creatures, knowing how to overcome the strongest,
to tame the wildest, The goodness of God specially is to those, which have
knowledge of him, and his service,
and to employ them all to some good use or other. But incomparably more is the
blessing of God extended unto those, which over and above the common benefits
of natural life, and human reason, have the true knowledge of God, and of
his Son revealed unto them, whereby they live a spiritual life, and are in
the way to everlasting salvation. Who being inwardly touched with religious
love, and fear of God their Creator and their Savior, are led and
strengthened by his spirit to rule and bring into order, the most subtle,
cruel, and forcible beasts of the world: Lust. Seneca Thiest.
That whereby Thiestes deceived his brother, and defiled his bed: That, Anger.
Plutarch. in vita Alex.
which stirred Alexander to murder his dearly beloved Clytus: That, which
drove Heliogabalus to hide himself there where he dyed a most contemptible
death: Fear. Aelius Lam.
That which soon killed Diodorus the Logitian, Grief Dioge. Laert.
because soon enough he could not answer the questions of Stilpo: That which
suddenly took away the breath and the life of Dionisius of Sicilie, Joy.
Fulgos.
when he was in his best health. Hope. Maxi. Tirius.
And that which forcibly carried Alcibiades from Licaeum to the Bar, from the
Bar to the Sea, from the Sea into Sicilie, out of Sicilie to the Lacedaemonians,
from the Lacedaemonians to the Persians, from the Persians to Samos, from Samos
to Athens, from Athens to Helespont; and so tossed him up and down from one
part of the world to another. Which being lodged in our breasts, The danger of
unruly affections.
are still at hand, make sudden and dangerous assaults, and are not to be
resisted, but when by the good Spirit of God they be subdued. Not only the
Heathen men before named, and infinite others which might be remembered, have
felt the sting and the strength of those mischievous and mighty enemies, but
even the children of God, and the best of the best beloved of them, being left
to the course of nature, and counsel of flesh and blood, have been by the^
vanquished and led captive away. The force of affections.
Not the sincerity of David, nor the wisdom of Solomon, nor the strength of
Sampson, was able to withstand the poison, Math, 26, Acts Apo.
the craft, and the force of them. The Apostles themselves, before the coming
of the holy Ghost, being ouercommed thereby, denied their master, and forsook
him: The spirit of God only able in some measure to conquer affections.
but after, being strengthened with that spirit, they spoke with confidence
before Princes and Tyrants. It is that spirit alone which is able to conquer
those enemies, and to make them serve as friends to the good of men; whereby
being ruled and brought into order, The good of affections well ordered.
one becomes the root of amity and concord, another, the whetstone of
fortitude, a third, the watch of safety, a fourth, the ground of patience, a
fifth, the mother of repentance, a sixth, the preservation of bodily health,
and quietness of mind; which so had and held, honorable is the condition of
man, his life is pleasing to God, and full of comfort to himself. So as
inestimable is that goodness, whereby such happiness is obtained; and right
happy are they, which by that especial testimony may be assured, that
especially they are beloved of the Almighty, who is the true author and free
giver of all goodness whatsoever. All the children of god not in one degree of
happiness upon earth.
But as all the children of God are greatly blessed in that government over
themselves, whereby they lead a godly and contented life upon earth, yet are
they not all in one degree of happiness, neither do they receive one measure of
his goodness therein. The Princes of the earth, the special images of God, Good
princes specially endued with the good Spirit of God.
they which represent his person and his office, and are therefore said to be
Gods in the world, are most endued, when they are endued therewith; and not
without cause, for that they are not only to have care of themselves, but of
many thousands committed to their charge, whose affections being unruly, are
by them as their own to be governed: but not being their own, that government
with much the greater power and wisdom is to be performed: Wherein,
impossible it were, but that the mightiest and the vvisest should fail, were
they not continually assisted by the spirit of that God, who being not only
full of power and wisdom, but perfect power and absolute wisdom it self,
can never fail in performance of whatsoever he will have brought to pass.
Thereby it is, Whereby Commonweals do flourish and are maintained.
that Commonwealths are maintained, and do flourish, that good men are
defended from the wicked, that Princes and Rulers are established and set fast
in their kingdoms, being guarded with the love of good subjects, and from the
malice of wicked persons preserved. For although the good example of the King,
be a law to good men, and law is the curb of the wicked, and the bridle
whereby to restrain their wilful practices and ungodly attempts, yet were not
the best by the inward working of God, made inclinable to follow that which is
good, and the worser sort secretly touched and troubled in conscience, or
frighted and dismayed in mind, by the power which GOD has, and exercises
over their hearts, examples would not suffice to draw the one, nor law to hold
back the other, which as a weak net laid open to be seen, easily they
would by subtlety avoid, or violence break through. Therefore we see it
falls out, 2, Kings, 19
that when God will, Senacharib a king, is killed of Adramaleke and Seleuster,
and Viriathas an Emperor, Eutrop. 4.
is murdered of his own guard; the hearts and hands, God the only ruler of
men's hearts, and disposer of their actions.
of sons and of servant, are stirred up, and strengthened against parents
and masters, though Kings and Emperors; without fear of law, or feeling of
nature. And again, of his goodness toward the good (such as he favors and
is careful to preserve) he keeps down the hearts, and holds fast the hands
of wicked men, that they have no power over their own will. Absolon aspyring to
the kingdom arises, 2. Reg. cha. 15.16.17.18
and takes counsel with Ahitophell against David, the son against the
Father, the servant against the Master. Absolon young and lusty, has the
hearts of the men of Israel turned after him, and the counsel of Ahitophell is
as the Oracle of God. Wherefore David flies, and forsakes Jerusalem. But God
being mindful of his servant David, to deliver him out of the hands, and from
the treason of his enemies, Ahitophell his counsel is turned into foolishnes,
he hangs himself, the people of Israel are slain before the servant of
David, of very few infinite in number, Absolon caught of an Oak, is taken up,
and killed between heaven and earth; and David is restored, and remains
King. We need not look far of, nor far back, to find examples of the
goodness of GOD, in the defense of good Princes, and of the weakness of their
estate which are destitute of his help: the one sort standing safe inuinciblie
protected; the other as naked of defense, subject to all danger, and easily
overthrown.

Our neighbor Countries have seen the sudden fall of their Princes, by the
bloody hands of cruel murderers, even of late in these last days of the
world, days of disobedience, and of treason, of unnatural affection, and of
all sin and iniquity, unworthy to be graced with the light of heaven, whose
pureness if it were possible would be defiled, with the noisome vapors of
wickedness, arising daily from the face of the earth. The great power and
goodness of God in the preservation of her Majesty.
But yet notwithstanding all malicious conspiracies, traiterous practices, and
dangerous attempts, against the annoyted of the Lord, our most excellent
Sovereign, Queen Elizabeth, she lives; and reigns in safety and in glory,
to the glory of him, by whose goodness no less carefully, then by his power
miraculously, she has been preserved; her wicked enemies by the feruencie of
his displeasure, as stinking mists by the burning beams of the Sun, being
dispersed and consumed. All Princes may seem to have means sufficient, by
their own strength, of their own defense, being furnished with strong guardes
ever attending, and many eyes still watching to foresee, what is intended
against them; so as nothing can be thought so subtle, or secret, which is not
like to be discovered and prevented; but all will not serve, where GOD is
unwilling to preserve. All means of me^ without the help of God are vain.
Psalm. 127.
If GOD do not keep the City, they labor in vain that watch it, their
eyes are dim, and their ears deaf, manifest dangers pass by their sight,
and never come to their understanding. So many are the devises of mischief,
and so cunningly disguised, under the color of love, and pretense of
friendship, God only searches and sees the heart. I^ue Saetyr. 1
that God alone who searches the heart, and sees the inward thought, is able
to discern the malicious mind of a wicked man. It was not said without cause,
fronti nulla fides, no trust to the outward countenance, and in animis hominum
multae latebrae, multi recessus, in the minds of men there are many dark
corners, and secret places; for, there are not by many, so many furrows and
wrinkles in the forehead to be seen, as under the scull near the brain,
there be privy corners, and close angles, which the eyes of an Eagle are unable
to pearce into. Wherefore, when man through the corruption of his nature,
inclining more to ill then to good, is not so ingenious in the devise, nor so
industrious in the practice of good, as of ill; no marvel it is, if evil
conspiracies overcome good counsels, Faithful counselors the surest defense
of the King.
and designs of mischief go beyond all means of defense. Faithful
counsailers, loving truth, and hating couetcousnes, are the surest strength of
the Kings life, and best instruments of his safety, for not being delighted
with lies, they are not deluded by flatterers, To love truth and be liberal,
fit for Counsailers to Kings.
nor by gifts or rewards are they blinded, which are not coueteously disposed.
But truth possessing their hearts, and their hands being full of liberallity,
they advise faithfully without fear, and wisely without error, and so clear
are their eyes, that they see far and near. For money which often dazeleth,
The force of money.
and darkneth the eyes of the taker, as often brings light, and sight to the
giver; many secrets are made known, many practices laid open, from every
quarter aduertisements are given, to such as will draw their purses, and are
not sparing of rewards. Doors and locks are easily had to keep money in, but
to hold it out, hardly can a lock or a door, strong enough be found.

-- Precium si grandefer as custodia victa est, Tib. 2. Eleg. 4.

Nec prohibent claueis, et canis ipse tacet.
Bring money store the keep is overcome,
The keys let in, the barking dog is dombe.
Wherefore, right happy is that Prince, whose counsailers and servants, love
truth, and hate covetousness. As without such it is impossible for a King to sit
safe in his kingdom, so by the means of such, as great safety is had, as by
the help of man can be obtained; for they are friends that flatter not, and
watchmen that sleep not, and such alone, as for friends and watchmen are to be
esteemed. But be they in all, as they ought to be, yet are they but men; do
they what they can; without the help of him that sits in heaven, all is in
vain. If God be not their guide, they run astray, following their own
ways, they easily miss the path of truth, and fall into the pit of error:
though greedily they seek and hunt after truth as a most precious jewel, Yet
truth being buried in the deep, Truth buried in the deep.
and covered over with many pleasing veins of right show, but counterfaite
substance, they stick in the shallow, and fall in liking with the deceitful
shadow of that they desire. For by nature being slow to conceive, and dull to
understand, we soon turn away from matter of difficulty, and lay easily
hold on easy and ready things, which euer-more are the worst, both in respect
of themselves, and in respect of the hurt they bring to the possessors of them.
Lies, errors, vices, are the smyling baytes whereby we are quickly caught,
and willingly carried away to mischief and myserie. The baits of mischief
and misery.
Lies are ill told, but well heard, errors dangerous guests, but entertained
as dear friends, vices the bane of al our happiness, but used, fostered, and
delighted in, as the only pleasure and comfort of our lives. All which being
the seed of the Serpent, our ancient and first enemy, creep into us, as he
did into our old beginning Parents; whose posterity we are, and are deceived
as they were, by the alluring face of ease and glory. Men drawn to il by ease
and glory.
An easy thing to eat an Apple, and what more glorious then to be as God, in
the knowledge of good and evil? But it was a lie that first was told, and
being believed, ignorance was our understanding, and our knowledge error;
then vice got the possession of our hearts, and rule of our minds: so were
we of our selves not Gods, but devils in the world, and so are we still, if by
the spirit of God we be not lightened, and guided in the ways of truth,
wisdom, and virtue: wherewith who so is endued, is in some measure enabled, to
discern truth from falsehood, knowledge from ignorance, virtue from vice; and
by means thereof not being deceived, is delivered from the malice of satan,
and from all the practices of his wicked ministers, be they never so secret,
subtle, and mischiuous. Wherefore, it is the goodness of God, which only
can, and assuredly does, save and protect, as well Princes as others, out of
the hands of their enemies; so as he which said, Seneca Thebais.
Eripere vitam nemo non homini potest, every man may take away the life of any
man, said most untruly, and false and foolish is that opinion, that who so is
careless of his own life, is master of another man's. As if that desperate
wretch which does not regard to be killed, had power to kill whom he would. It
might be so if men's actions were framed of themselves, and that by no other
guide then by their own nature they were directed. Then might a traiterous
servant, or a disguised stranger approaching near the person, take away the
life of the greatest Emperor, who being of innocence without fear, and
magnanimity without suspicion, could not but lie open to the wicked will of the
vildest caitife in the world. And then should not a good Ruler live, amongst
sinful and ungodly men, He seeking to correct their faults, and to bridle
their disordered desires, and they to be void of punishment, endeavoring to
remove him from amongst them. But far otherwise it is, men's hearts are not in
their own hands, neither are their hands directed after their own wills, God
moves the one, and carries the other; and stays both the one and the
other, according to his pleasure.

Marius being declared an enemy to the people of Rome, Appian de billis
ciuilib. lib. 1.
and put out of the protection of Law, so as any that would (that could I
should say) might take his goods and his life, impune, safely, without fear of
punishment; a French soldier offering himself for the purpose, was sent by
the Magistrates of Minturna, with a sword in his hand to kill him in his bed;
he to hide himself, lying secretly in a poor house of that City. But the
French man coming to perform the deed, when he saw him, and heard him say,
Dare thou kill Marius? he ran like a mad man out of the chamber, and cried
out, that to kill Marius was not in his power. Calphurnius Crassus, Dion Cass.
lib. 68. in vita Ner.
conspyring with others the death of Nerua, the true pattern of a good
Emperor, Nerua knowing their conspiracy, placed the^ at a public show next
unto him, and not fearing danger, being strengthened with a great mind, and a
clear conscience, delivered swords ready drawn unto them, and asked them
whether they were sharp enough? who having the swords in their hands
wherewith they might have killed him, had not the courage to lift them up
against him. Ehud, Judge, 3.
a man lame of his right hand, killed Eglon King of Moab, but it was the will
of God it should be so; for he styrred up Ehud for a savior, to deliver the
Children of Israel out of the hands of the Moabits. But Abishai going down
with David by night to seek Saul, and finding him a sleep, 1, Sam, 26
and being minded to smite him with a spear to the earth, so as he should not
need to smite him again, yet had not the power to touch him, because he was
told by David, No man may lay his hand on the Lords anointed, and be
guiltless.
whose heart was directed by the Spirit of God, that no man could lay his hand
on the Lords anointed, and be guiltless. Wherein, diverse did appear the
will of GOD to be toward those wicked Kings, in destroying the one, and saving
the other: but euer-more to be full of goodness, and full of power, God ever
good to his
as having all power over the actions of man, and using the same always to the
good of his chosen. Eglon in his Court, amongst his friends, in his parlor
amidst his greatest strength, The wicked never in safety.
by the left hand of a lame man lost his life; he saw Ehud come, but did not
foresee, nor could avoid the mischief he brought with him. On the other side,
The good in the midst of danger defended by the hand of God.
Saul a sleep, enclosed with his enemies, was not suffered to fall into their
hands, but was in danger without fear, and in safety without defense; being
then by the will of God, ruling the heart of David, and leading the hand of
Abishai, strongly defended, when in no sort he could defend himself. And both
Eglon was killed to deliver Israel from the servitude of Moab, and Saul
preserved, to teach Israel obedience to the Lords anointed: but reserved
withal, to be distressed of the Philistines, and to fall upon his own sword,
God uses the wicked against the wicked, for ye good of his, without good to
themselves.
that thereby might appear the exceeding goodness of God, in using the hand
of the wicked against the wicked, for the safeguard of his people; whereby what
good soever arises to the^, no more turns to such instruments thereof, then
came to the builders of the Arc, they being drowned in the displeasure of God,
when Noah alone with his, thorough the work of the others hands, The goodness
of God toward Princes and Rulers, continues to the end. 1, Reg. ca. 2.
was saved alive. In other sort the Lord deals with good Princes and Rulers,
he stands by them while they live, and does not forsake them when they die.
David, after that he had reigned many years over Israel, in Hebron and
Jerusalem, and had established his soon Solomon in his throne, being old and
stricken in years, slept with his Fathers, and was buried in the City of
David. 1. Reg. cap. 11.
Solomon, although his heart turned after other Gods, and was not perfect with
the Lord his God, as was the heart of David his Father, yet for David's sake he
made him Prince, and kept him safe in his kingdom all his life long; so as he
reigned forty years over all Israel, and at the last, slept with his
Fathers, 2. Chr. cha. 17, 18, 19, 20.
and was buried in the City of David. Ichosophat walked in the first ways of
his Father David, and sought the Lord God of his Father, and walked in his
commandments, and lifted up his heart unto the ways of the Lord; wherefore
the Lord established the Kingdom in his hand, and gave him rest on every side,
and he reigned five and twenty years in Jerusalem, and then slept with his
Fathers, 2. Chr. cap. 27.
and was buried with them in the City of David. So Iothan became mighty,
because he directed his way before the Lord his God, and his life ended, he
slept with his Fathers, and was buried in the City of David. 2. Reg. ca. 18
Hezekiah reigned many years, and had exceeding much honor and riches, and
prospered in all things he took in hand, for he trusted in the Lord God of
Israel, so that af ter him, was none like unto him amongst all the kings of
Judah, neither were there any such before him, wherefore he slept with his
Fathers, and was buried in the highest Sepulcher of the sons of David, 2,
Chr. cap. 32.
and all Judah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem did him honor at his death.
Good Kings are favored of God, and through his goodness enjoy infinite
blessings both of life and death. No practice, no enterprise of the wicked, is
able to prevail against those whom God protecteth. The judgment of God
against wicked Princes. 2. Reg. ca. 1,
It was Ahasiah which consulted with Beelzebub, that fell thorough the lettice
window in his upper chamber, and dyed. Iehoram, that wrought evil in the
sight of the Lord, which was killed by the hand of Iehu; both ill sons of an
ill Father, 2. Reg. ca. 9.
and by God were punished, no less for their own, then for their Fathers
iniquity. Ioash it was, against whom his own servants conspired, and whom
they slew in his bed, because he fell to Idolatry, killed Zachary, and
forgot the kindness which Ichoiada his Father had done unto him. 2, Chr. c. 15
Amaziah, against whom treason was wrought in Jerusalem, after he had turned
away from the Lord, who flying to Lachish, 2. Chr. c. 26.
was pursued and there slain. Vzziah, that was a Leaper unto the day of his
death, and dwelt as a Leaper in an house a part, because he was cut off from
the house of the Lord.

It was Ahab, 1. Reg. c. 22,
who sold himself to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, whose blood
the dogs licked, in the place where before they had licked the blood of
Naboth. 2, Reg. c. 28.
Benadab, which had done wrong and much hurt to the people of Israel, who by
Hasaell his servant was stifled, when he lay sick on his bed. Acts, 13.
And Herod it was, that wicked Herod, who imprisoned and beheaded John the
Baptist, and despised and mocked our Savior Christ, who sitting on the
judgment seat, arrayed in royal apparel, was suddenly stricken with the
Angel of the Lord, because he gave not glory unto God, so that he was eaten
with worms, and gave up the Ghost. VVherby manifestly appears the different
estate of good and badde Rulers, the bad, being by the justice of GOD, though
not in the course of their life, yet at the hour of their death, assuredly
punished: as the good, by his goodness are, if not while they live, at the
least when they die, most graciously protected. Which when the vvorser sort
happen to observe, and consider, although they hate to live the life, yet do
they wish to die the death of the righteous, and to have their end like unto
theirs. Numb. 23, 24.
As did Balaam the wicked Prophet, when from the top of the Rocks, and from
the hills he beheld Jacob, and that the multitude was, as the dust, and that
no man was able to number the fourth part of Israel, notwithstanding all the
malice and the might of Balaack against them, they being still prescrued by the
blessing of GOD; so as he could not curse them, but was enforced to confess,
that if Balaack vvoulde give him his house full of Silver and Gold, he could
not curse whom GOD did bless, nor could pass the commandment of the Lord,
to do either good or badde of his own mind. Wherefore safe is the seat, and
singular ought to be the comfort of all good Princes and Rulers, being by the
powerful hand of the omnipotent and everliving GOD protected. They may be
assured, that without his sufferance, who is their defense, no power, no
practice of man, or of satan, can prevail against them.

Chap. 7. That God is good to the worser sort but to their greater hurt, and
that good men should not be grieved thereat, but receive comfort thereby.
WHen it pleases God in the secrecy of his judgment, to afflict good men, and
to suffer the wicked to flourish in this world, such is our weakness, that we
stagger in mind, and seeing it often so to come to pass, we often fall into
doubtful and undutiful conceits, even of God him self, as if, either he
were not, or regarded not, the doings and deseruings of men: which unjust
surmise, springs out of that old root of unthankfulness, wherewith mankind
was corrupted at the first; whereby fond opinions grow up in the mind, and
shadow the light of reason, so that we cannot discern true things from false,
and good from evil; for so blinded by the dark mist of ignorance, Ignorance
causes men to ascribe to fortune, what is don by God. Fortune.
we make Fortune the Author of that, whereof God is the dooer, and ascribe to
Chance, whatsoever is performed by the providence of the Almighty. Her we
call a Goddess, which is more often bad then good, and is never so like her
self, as when to her self she is most unlike; now favoring, now frowning,
ever the same, and never the same, constant in nothing, but that she is
unconstant in all. This men say of her, and yet believe in her, when with the
best it goes ill, and well with the worser sort.

Res humanas ordine nullo, Seen. Hyppo.

Fortuna regit, spargitque manu
Munera caeca, peiora fouens.
Men's matters quite out of order,
Fortune does rule, and gifts scatter,
Blindly, fostering the worser.
If courage prevail against fear, Audentes fortuna iuuat. Virgil. aneid. 10.

Fortune helps the hardy.


If cowards triumph, and valiant men go down, O fortuna viris inuida
fortibus, Sen. Her. Fure.

Quam non aequa bonis praemia diuiolis?
O fortune that of valiant men envious art,
How ill do thou reward men of desert?


Are men raised from base account, to honor? -- Ex humili magna ad fastigia
rerum, Iuuenal. Sat. 3.

Extollit quoties voluit fortuna iocari.
From base to place of highest sort,
Fortune does lift, disposed to sport.


Are they spoiled of their goods, and fall they from high to low estate? Nempe
dat et quodcu^que libet fortuna rapitque, Ovid. trist. 4.

Irus et est subito qui modo Craesus erat.
Fortune does give and take at her pleasure,
Now poor, which but now had infinite treasure.


Is the course of the world observed often to change, and that it is with men
of either part, now well, now ill? Passibus ambiguis fortuna volubilis errat,
Ovid. trist. 5,

Et manet in nullo certa tanaxque loco
Sed modo laeta manet, vultus modo sumit acerbos,
Et tantum constans in leuitate sua est.
With doubtful steps Fortune wavering does wander,
In one place she stands never still or fast;
But now does smile, and now again does lower,
And constant only is in leuitie at last.


So that he said truly, which said: Sunt qui in fortunaeiam casibus omnia
ponunt, Iuue. Sat. 13

Et nullo credunt mundum rectore moueri.
There are which fortune say, by chance all things to guide,
And therein do the Ruler of the world deride.


They accuse Fortune of injustice, but they believe in her power, they blame
her as a blind dispenser of her gifts, but they extol her, as the only
disposer of worldly goods; they say she is unconstant, full of leuitie, and of
no assurance, and yet in all attempts, whether of war or peace, they pray for
themselves, The blindness of men concerning Fortune.
and wish to their friends, above all other things good fortune. So blindly
are men led, to think all things to be ruled of that, which of it self is
nothing: nothing but a false light, given in the darkness of ignorance, and
never seen, but when the true cause lies hidden, Fortune in truth nothing.
which is that heavenly, spiritual, incomprehensible essence, the Lord God of
heaven and earth: whereby the whole world, and every part thereof, is daily, and
continually governed and disposed of. He it is, and he alone, which lyfteth
up, and pulls down, which gives wealth, and causes want, which punishes
and rewards, preserves, The benefits of God sometimes toward the wicked,
when his rod is upon the godly.
and destroys when he will, and where it pleases himself. And although his
benefits are often seen to be heaped upon wicked men, when his hand of
correction lies heavy upon his chosen: and base and cowardly persons he
suffers to triumph, when men of good minds and great virtue are trodden under
foot, yet in neither is his goodness, or his justice to be taxed, but both in
both, the more to be extolled, if duly as they ought to be, they be considered
of.

This may seem strange in the eyes of men, but his ways are not the ways of
men, neither does he tread in the steps of flesh and blood. It is more easy
to see what he does, then to perceive the secrecy and depth of his purpose,
which not being discovered, his works may be thought void of judgment, when
they are full of all wisdom and understanding. But why should he favor the
ungodly, which are careless of him, and frown upon those who give themselves
to his honor and service? Why was Toby after many good works of mercy and
charity made blind? and Haman, Toby. 2.
a man full of pride and cruelty, Hest. 3. God in the end blesses the good,
and punishes the wicked.
extolled above all the Princes next after the King? Surely good men have no
more cause to be grieved thereat, then had Toby, when his sight being
restored, he saw his son, and the sons of his son with joy and
gladness, nor the wicked more to rejoice then had Haman, when he was highest
upon the gallous, which he provided for Mardocheus. The Lord God, the God of
justice and mercy, so deals with his chosen, as a loving Father, with his
beloved children, he scourges them, but has pity on them, his hand is
heavy, but to keep under their rebellion, and his rod sharp, but to cut
of their corruption, that they may be fit heirs of that heavenly kingdom,
which no impure or defiled thing can enter into. God both just and merciful to
his, in what sort.
So is he both just and merciful, shevving mercy in justice unto them; for
sinning, he does not spare them, and punishing, he does preserve them. His
justice is great, but his mercy does exceed: he corrects and stays his
hand, for he is not angry for ever. He strikes, and strengthens to bear
the stripes, which never are out of measure, nor above their power: and at the
last, after that he has drawn the blood, and bound up the wound, the
punishment being passed, and the pain ended, endless is their joy, and their
glory everlasting. In what order ye mercy and justice of GOD is toward the
wicked.
With the other sort far otherwise it is, though God be, as he cannot but
be the same, that is, both just and merciful euer-more, yet does he not deal
in the same manner with all: with the wicked his mercy goes before, and his
justice comes after, whereby it comes to pass, that their end is far
worse then their beginning. The sun shyneth, and the rain falls upon them,
they grow in the fat, and are fed with the sweet of the earth, which is
the singular blessing, and the great mercy of God: for if he should be toward
them as they deserve, the air should be darkness, and the heavens brass unto
them. But being but weeds, and still the more noisome, the more they wax and
have continuance, though God suffer them to grow, and ouer-growe the corn, at
length when harvest comes, the corn is laid up, and they as weeds are cast
out, and thrown into the fire. So are they at last ouer-taken by his justice,
which before by his mercy would not be taken: which was the greater and
sweeter toward them, because their condemnation should be the iuster, and his
judgment the sharper against them. Wherefore when we see them flourish, and
have proud looks, what may we say, and say truly? -- tolluntur in altum
Claud. in Ruff. lib. 1.

vt lapsu grauiore ruant.


They are lifted up on high, that their fall may be the more heavy: which they
themselves seem to see, when they say -- quicquid in altum Seen. Agam.

Fortuna tulit, ruitura leuat.
What Fortune has exalted,
She lyfteth up with mind, to have dejected.


For they cannot but see it so to be, beholding the variable course of the
world, and of the greatest worldlings the daily fall. Though they wander which
are not led, and are blind which are not lightened by the spirit of God, yet
time teaches them to say, as experience forces them to know, that as of trees
the highest growing, so of men, they which most are exalted, are soonest
overthrown. Agamemnon considering the destruction of Troy, and his own
tryumphant estate, said -- magna momento obrui
Seen. Troas.
Vincendo didici
That great things in a moment are ouer-whelmed,
So much by ouer-comming now have I learned.


And fearing least his feet might slip, from that high step where Troy stood.

Tu me superbum Priamae, tu timidum facis. Idem.

Thou Priamus, do make me both proud and a coward.
The overthrow of Priamus made him proud, but afraid with all, least through
pride, as Priamus was, he might be overthrown. Good it were that they which
are proud of their good fortune, would after the example of Agamemnon,
conceive what they might be, by considering what others have been. Whereby
they might show themselves the more temperate, while they stand aloft, and the
less abject when they are down. But much better it were, both for themselves
and others, that they were not proud at all. So should they escape that
judgment, which being proud, by no fear they can avoid; for, Prouer. 16.
calamitatem praecedit superbu^, et ante ruina^ cor extollitur. It is pride
which goes before calamity, and ruin which follows after the heart puffed
up, and, Seen. Her. Fur.
sequitur superbu^ a tergo Deus. A proud man God follows at the heels, to be
revenged of him. The folly of vain glorious men.
Well may a vain glorious man out of the pride of his heart, being dazeled
with the glittering false show of his own greatness, say to him self Mayor sum
quum cui possit fortuna nocere. Ovid. Met. 6

I am too great to be beaten by fortunes rod.


But be he never so great, and so high, so great, and so high, he can never be.
Non sit vt inferior suppositusque Deo. Ovid. trist. 4

But that he is inferior and subject to God.


If he be a man, God is above him, and has power over him, to abase his
height, and to turn his greatness into nothing, even in the twinkling of an
eye. He is not a man, which is not subject by the heat of the Sun, by the
cold of the air, by the force of sickness, by the subtilty of enemies, and by
other infinite means often felt, before mistrusted to be brought into danger,
if not into loss of his life; how then can any be out of his reach, who
commands the Sun, and sends out the winds, who brings sickness, and
stirs up enemies, and can both strike with all, and kill with any one, when,
how, Ieremi. 51.
and as often as he will? Though Babell should mount up to heaven, and though
she should defend her strength on high; yet from me shall her destroyers come,
says the Lord. Obediah. 3.
And to Edom, though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle, and make thy nest
amongst the stars, thence will I bring thee down. Of all vaninities, the
vainest to be proud.
Wherefore, of all vanities it is the vaynest, for a man to be confident in
pride, since the Lord God, who is best able to punish it, of all faults can
least endure it. But the purpose of God, being to bring them low, which are
puffed up, and to turn his blessings upon them, into cursings against them,
their minds become as empty of understanding, as their hearts are full of
pride, The wicked fall by their own folly, or by others envy.
so as their eyes look ever upward, and never down, till they fall down
through their own folly, or others envy. While ambitiouslie they climb,
suddenly they slip, and feel the mischief, before they fear the danger,
their proud eyes being then forced to bewail their misery, when mercy is
gone, and cannot be found. For God will not suffer them to see the pit they shall
fall into, least they should escape the punishment they are appointed unto by
his divine unsearchable providence. If the question be, what the means are
whereby they are overthrown, the answer must be, that means they are not, but
extremes, whereby extremity is brought unto them; which proceeding from their
own corruption, as diseases bre^de within their own bodies, are the cause of
their ruin, or (if not so) occasion others of like disposition, to spinne the
Spyders web, wherein filly flies they are entangled and surprised unawares.
For it is the will of God, that sinful men should stumble at their own sins,
and that one sinner should be scourged by the hand of another. While then
they are of their fortune proud, and yet not content, but ambitious without
end to gain that whereto they aspire, Prodigality or covetousness, overthrows
the glorious wicked man.
they are prodigal or covetous above measure, aiming alike at the top of
glory, but seeking by contrary steps to ascend thereunto. Some, desiring to be
gracious, the more to be glorious in the eyes of men, think gifts and expense,
the only means whereby to win the hearts of men unto them: but measuring their
purses by their desires, as they are infinite, infinitely they spend, until
like lamps lacking oil, their light is out, and their glory gone. Others,
thinking riches the best friends they can have, and liking to depend of none
but of themselves, suppose by the closenes of their hands, to to uphold the
pride of their hearts, and therefore never rest per fas et nefas, by hook and
by crook, to increase the mass of their substance: whereby it comes to
pass, that they abound in wealth, and are laden with authority and credit in
the world. But wanting wisdom to dispose the one, and virtue to support the
other, as men carrying heavy burdens on weak shoulders, their shoulders
shrink, and they sinck with their burdens to the ground. I speak only of
wicked men, in whom there is no virtue, no good disposition at all, and yet
nevertheless by the sufferance of GOD get wealth, and place of account by
craft and deceit, or by some other base and dishonest course. Whose happy
estate being compared with their little worth, and examined why they should be
so happy, to the best the best that can be said, is -- fati plus valet horae
secundi
quam si te Veneris commendet epistola Marti.
It better is to be borne in a happy hour,
Then that Venus to Mars should write in thy favor.


Other I doubt not but many there are, as well poor through spending, as
through sparing rich, whom God does love and favor, and in both, does for
both, that which turns to their good: which happening sundry ways, I will
not conster any way but to the best. Men of great and good minds often poor.
So are there which out of great and good minds, for love to the Commonwealth,
for honor of their Country, and service of their Prince, open their purses
wide, and pour out their substance, to their utter impouerishing, esteeming
riches as did Epaminondas, Aemil. prob. in vita Epa.
whom all the gold in the world could not with-drawe from any the least duty
to his Country: or as Perdicas, who refused a great revenue in Macedonia, Plu.
in vita Alexan.
to follow Alexander into Asia. But such men, of such minds, how poor
soever, are rich in true honor, and cannot so well be said to spend, as to
bestow, nor to waste, as to employ, neither ought to be co^nmned for their
poverty, but for their virtue to be commended, as most worthy men, most
worthy praise. Of which sort which would have nothing theirs, but what was
their Countries, and had rather live poor in a rich Commonwealth, then rich
in a poor, being covetous only of their Countries good, and of their own
good name, it were to be wished, that now there were, as heretofore there have
been many; but were they sought out to be numbered, in what one kingdom might
it not be said, -- numero vix sunt totidem quot
Theborum portae, vel diuitis ostia Nili, Iuuenall Satyr. 3.

-- they rather are the fewer,
then Thebes gates, or Nilus mouths in number.


I will not affirm those to be few which I wish were many, but boldly I dare
say, that the City of Theabes being famous for seven gates, and the river
Nilus for as many Mouths, that city or country which had seven such worthy
men, should in fame no less exceed, then the safety of the Citizens, is of
greater price then the beauty of the City, and the honor of the land more
worth then the richnes of the soil. On the otherside, to call in question
those which by frugalitie increase their patrimony, or use the favor of the
Prince to the raising of their estate, or grow rich through the benefit of
their service, were most injurious, and very indiscreet; except the increase
of their private gain withdraw from the common good, and their exalting be
the pulling down of the state wherein they live. Riches the blessing of God.
Riches are the great blessing of God, which enable men to the best things; and
being well gotten and well used, draw many followers after the possessors of
them.

Diuitioris enim sectam plerumque sequntur Lucre. lib. 5.

Quamlibet et fortes, et pulchro corpore creti.
Each richer sect, most commonly as true,
Both strong, and fair of body do pursue.
Plutus the God of riches, Plutus the blind GOd of riches, made to see. Caeli.
Rho. lib. 11.
which at Sparta was kept blind and laid on the ground along, as having
neither life nor sense, with Herod the Sophist was said to have received his
eyesight: because being very rich, he was very bountiful, and knew how to
use his wealth to the relief of the poor, which caused many to follow him
and to love him. Though Plato being a wiseman, S^. de legib,
thought it almost impossible for a man very rich, to be honest, yet Solon,
Plu. in vita Solon.
as wise as he, desired to have riches, but not to get them by wrong; as if
being lawfully obtained, they might of good men, as good things be justly
possessed. Plu. in reipgeren. praecip.
Agesilaus is said to have contemned riches for himself, but withal, that he
loved to enrich his friends; wherein showing a great mind, meet for so great
a Prince, Riches of a King not to be rejected.
he signified, that riches of a King, were not to be rejected as unprofitable,
but as things most necessary to be laid up: for being with his friends, they
were ready for himself, when he should have, as often he must have cause to
use them being a King. And for the same reason they are not of servants to be
neglected, whom it is fit to be enriched, when for their Kings service they
are to be employed. Themistocles after a field fought, seeing many chains of
gold about the necks of dead men, willed a soldier to take them, saying to
him, Thou art not Themistocles: Plutar in reipgere. praecep.
as if for himself, being a great Commander, he thought it altogether
vncomlie, to rifle the bodies of dead men for gain. But how necessary he
thought wealth to be, as well for his private, as for the public state, may
well appear by his pollitique devices to get money, for the enriching both
of the Athenians and of himself, after the war ended against the Persians,
wherein their treasure was consumed, (...), Heroda Urania.
for he ceased not to enrich himself, so is it witnessed of him. Wherefore I
commend both Themistocles, seeking without ceasing to be rich, and Epaminondas
spending without care to be poor, being affected to the good of the common
good, as they were.

But Chrisogonus, who laid hands on the goods of Sextus Roscius, vt per
luxuriam effunderet, Cicero pro Rose.
quod per scelus adeptus est, that riotously he might spend that which wickedly
he had gotten. And Plantianus, Dion. Nicae. in Sever.
who being in chief honor, and credit, with Seuerus the Emperor, left not a
Country, or a City vnspoiled, to uphold thereby his greatness, and his pride.
And as many others as either wastfully spend, what wickedly they have gotten,
or heap treasure up to lift up their estates, and to hold up their ambitious
minds, I think to be in the number of those wicked ones, whom God does exalt,
but to throw down, and whom he does bless at the first, the more to punish in
the end, causing either themselves through folly, or their like through envy,
to be instruments of their fall. For so is it seen, that the one sort in vain
humors of expense go many times on, and never look behind them, till
poverty be at their heels, and misery light on their heads; wherewith being
cast down, they are trodden upon, and are no more pitied, if desperately or
reprochfully; they end their days, then was Anthony, Dion Cass. in Octauiano.
who dyed upon his own sword, and Clodius, who being dead, was cast out sine
imaginibus, sine canta^, Cicero pro Milone.
sine ludis, sine exequijs, sine lamentis, without any solemnization of his
memory, by picture, song, play, funeral, or mourning; both extreme prodigal,
of that which by craft and violence they had gotten: men full of glory, and by
their own folly overthrown. And the other contemning others, through too much
affiance in them selves, cannot be but envied, and maligned, so as hardly they
escape the mischief intended against them. For the more haughty they are, Men
the more hauty the more subject to envy.
the more to envy they are subject, and to malice the more, the mightier they
show them selves, and the faster they seem to stand, being not endured of
those, who are equal in mind, but inferior unto them for want of means.
Though pride be often beggarly attired, Envy the daughter of pride.
yet is she always by her daughter Envy attended on, who never dies, while
her mother lives; and as a foul bird, of a black Crow full gorged with
malice, she wayteth the time when, She loves none of her mothers kind.
and watches the occasion whereby, to work mischief to as many of her
mothers feather, as she sees to be pearched above her; Envy looks upward.
whose eye being observed evermore to look upward, it has been truly said,
crestentis dignitatis semper comes inuidia, Iouij. hist. 33
he that rises in honor, is ever accompanied with envy. And again, Esummo
quasi fulmen deijcitictos inuidia, Lucre. lib. 5.
envy as lightning strikes down from the top to the foot. For never
sleeping in her business, and fearing no danger being armed with malice, she
leaves no way unsought, nor lets any opportunity slip, Pride by envy
ouerthrown,
that may serve to undermine that glorious Tower of foolish pride, which being
built, upon the false ground of vvorldly wealth, is easily overthrown. Proud
men especially being rich, look high, and are like unto high trees, which
ouer-looke all the rest; whereby it comes to pass, that standing only by
the strength of their own roots, their helm lying open without defense, (for
friends they have none to shroud them) is soon stricken with the lightning of
envy, or thunder of malice, and being swayed, is made serve to way up the
foundation of them selves. Dion Cass. in Nero et Antoni.
Hereof Pallas, and Celander, the one Servant to Nero, the other to Marcus
Anthonius, Emperors of Rome, are examples very notable, both of them being
made through their Masters favor, mightily rich, and exceeding proud.
Wherefore, being of the Romans, which could not endure their insatiable
greedines and greatness of power, envied, and maligned, they were conspired
against, and never left vnpursued, until they changed their hateful life,
with miserable and reproachful death. But many seem of estate to be greater
then the wind of malice can shake, Princes in their kingdo^s above the reach of
envy.
and higher to be advanced, then the fire of envy can mount up unto. It may
seem true, that Princes over their people, and Sovereigns over their
subjects, are placed in that height of pre-eminence, as suffers no envy
toward them, in those which are set under the^, as the sun shining directly
over our heads, does permit no shadow to be of our bodies. None I suppose, did
or could envy the greatness of Alexander, when the world was under his scepter,
nor the glory of the Romans, when Carthage was rased, which before only
was, Velleius pater 2. What envy is.
Romani amulaimperij, that City which envied the greatness of Rome. For envy
is a grief stirred by the prosperity of another, then whom we think our
selves to deserve better. Wherefore for the most part it is between neighbors,
Envy between men of a faculty and equality. Self-love a cause of anuie.
and men of a faculty or some equality, figulus inuidet figulo, faber fabro,
one beggar bideth woe, that another by the door does go. We have all by
nature a touch, if not a full measure of self-love, which causes us partially
to prize our own worth, and inwardly to grieve when others be preferred,
though worthily, before us. From which mischief, kings in their own kingdoms,
by all reason should be free; because being anointed of God, they shine as
Gods, and by the brightness of their majesty, dazell the eyes of envy, so that
they cannot pierce unto them. They have no peers, they suffer no equality,
none has power, or can have desire to compare with them, except some monster
in nature, who graced with too much familiarity, can think himself an
equal, where he ought to be a vassaile: and where he is bound to do service,
dare presume to show contempt: as Ixion dealt with Jupiter in attempting to
dishonor Juno, The fable of Ixion.
being of a base and vile wretch, deserving all torture, most unworthy favor,
(as having treacherously deceived and wickedly murdered Deioneius his Father
in law) taken up into heaven, and made of Jupiters privy counsel. But
vaunting of his villainy, both for his vaunting, and his villainy, he was
thrown down into hell, and there bound to an iron wheel, bound about with many
Snakes; that the wheel still turning, and the Snakes tormenting, he should
never be at rest, whereupon by Virgill it was aptly said. Inuidia infaelix
furias, amnemque seuerum
Cocyti metuet tortosque Ixionis angues, Georgico. 3.

Immanemquerotam, et non exuperabile saxum.
VVretched Envy, the Furies, and Cocytus lake,
Merciless shall fear, and snakes wrethed round Ixion
And the cruel wheel, and the never settled stone.


A fable, but serving as well the favorites of great Princes, as the Princes
themselves to good use, teaching Princes to beware whom they advance and draw
near unto them: and warning fauourits not to grow proud through the grace they
find, least in thinking too well of themselves, they fall to envy those, whose
presence they are happy in, but most unworthy of, if thankful and dutiful
they be not as they ought to be. Which happening sometimes thorough the
wonderful unhappy wickedness of man's nature, Calligula offered sacrifice to
envy. Dion Cass. 59.
(for man is the greatest wonder that nature has,) Calligula may seem not
without cause, to have offered sacrifice unto Envy, as fearing himself to be
subject to her force, and therefore desirous to stand in her grace: so as I
dare not say, that the greatest are altogether free from the mischief of that
fury. But if greatness hold any out of the danger of envy, yet being wicked,
they are not so great as that they can hold up themselves: for he that is the
greatest, God throws down the greatest
sits over them, and being offended at their wickedness, thrusts them
with his foot from their seat, and causes their own weight to break their
own necks. Whose fall men beholding, and not knowing the cause, say of such
as was said by Rome overthrown, Inse magna ruunt. -- Lucan.

Great things throw down themselves.


Imputing that to ouer-greatnes, which was provoked by wickedness, and performed
by the powerfulnes of the Almighty. Never man in the eye of the world was more
highly, and seemed more surely to be seated, then Dionisius the second, The
greatness of Dionisius. Aelia. lib. 6.
his Navy great, four hundred ships at the least, his forces, a hundred
thousand foot, and nine thousand horse, the City of Siracuse, where he
lived, furnished with goodly Havens, and environed with high and strong walls,
having ever in readiness munition, and whatsoever warlike provision needful; of
wheat laid up in store, many thousand quarters, and above all, his friends and
confederats were infinite, wherein trusting, he thought his kingdom fastened
with bonds of iron. But exceeding in wickedness no less then he did excel in
greatness, he put to death his brethren, cruelly murdered his sons, The
wickedness of Dionisius, the cause of his fall.
and caused his daughters first to be dishonored, and after naked to be
slain; so as not any one of his progeny came so to be buried, as was to be
expected; some being burnt alive, and others cut in pieces and cast into the
sea. Wherefore by the just judgment of God against him, it came to pass, that
his latter years he spent in extreme beggary, and thorough drunkenness having
lost his sight, Shameful and miserable the end of the ungodly.
he became a scorn to the world; and in the midst of Greece shamefully spent
the remainder of his life. Such is the end of the ungodly, though rich, though
mighty, though in all prosperity they flourish, yet at the last they wither,
their wealth is laid up for their woe, of glorious Tyrants they become
miserable caytifes, for the Lord GOD will not suffer their sins to go
unpunished. Which who so feels not in this life, is but spared for a while,
that he may be punished for ever. The wicked are punished, if not in this life,
assuredly in the life to come.
For otherwise the Lord God should be, which he cannot be, unjust: if he should
exceed in goodness toward the^, and should not revenge their rebellion against
him, if both in life and death, and after death, to everlasting life they
should find favor, which with most unthankfulness, the worst part of
wickedness had provoked his displeasure. Then should the condition of them, be
far better then of the best, his benefits toward them being in this world
much greater, and their happiness no whit lesser in the world to come. But God
to put that out of doubt, in respect of our weakness, which ought not to be
doubted of, in regard of his vprightnes, often is, if not ever wont, to lay
open his judgment by some notable way of punishment, either upon themselves or
upon their heirs, before the eyes of men, which is blindness not to see, and
wickedness not as a good lesson given for our instruction, thankfully to
receive. Great were the Emperors of Rome, and the Tyrants of Greece, but as
wicked as they were great for the most part; Slayd. de 4. Monarchijs. The
miserable death of ye wicked Roman Emperors.
and therefore of the Romans, thirty were slain, by those in whom they
did, or in likelihood might repose their trust; being servant, or soldiers,
children, or wives unto them; and four being fearful of their enemies, or
weary of their own lives, became murderers of themselves, being all justly
punished by the hand of God, who wickedly had provoked the displeasure of God,
by pride coueteousnes, or cruelty. So of all the Tyrants of Greece, Aelian.
lib. 6.
three only left their progeny heirs of their tyranny, The tyrants of Greece
punished in their posterity.
Gelon in Sicilia, Lencamor in Bosphorus, the Cipselides in Corinthus; the will
of God being to revenge the Fathers sin, by cutting off the children, and not
suffering them to reign. Of all Nations, examples are to be found, of the
constant course of Gods justice, toward wicked and ungodly men, be they never
so great, evermore showed, either upon them selves, or their houses, in rooting
them out from the face of the earth. Some have been visited in their own
persons, by foul and loathsome diseases, whereby they have been made unwilling
to live, and yet unable to dye as, Sylla, Hadrianus, and Maximianus. Some fed
upon alive, Pluta. in Silla. Dion. Nicae. Pompon. Latus. Iosep. Naucle. Baptis.
Egna. Justin. and Egesippus.
and gnawne till they were dead, by worms, and lyce, as Herodes Ascalonites,
Honoricus King of the Vandales, and Arnulphus the Emperor. Some tormented in
mind, living in horror of conscience, and dying in base and fearful sort, as
Atalus King of Pergamus, and Aristobulus Son of Hyrcanus. Some also when they
were in health, and strength, suddenly and miraculously taken away, as Fabius
the proud Senator with a hair swollowed in milk, Abbas vrsper.
and Pope Adrian the fourth, after that he had accursed Frederick the first,
choked with a fly in a draught of cold water. Which sharp corrections of
God, in so maniefold wise inflicted, serve to show, that his means are, as his
power is, infinite to chastise and scourge, the proudest, and greatest, under
heaven offending against him. Whereby the fairest and goodliest of body may
learn to know, that being ungodly, they stand in danger by grievous diseases,
or vile creatures to be consumed, the soundest of understanding to be tormented
in mind, the richest in treasure to be spoiled in an hour, and the best in
health to be delivered unto death, by many and strange ways, not to be feared
or suspected; which if they happen to escape, yet have they cause still to
fear, that what is held from them is laid up for their children; The Parents
feel pain in the after punnishment of their children. 1. King. c. 14 2, Chro.
13.
who being part of them selves, proceeding from out their loins, as they
foresee, they cannot but fore-feele their own present pain, in the future
punishment of them. Iereboam rebelled against God, and did cast him behind his
back, by whom he was exalted, and made Prince over his people Israel.
Wherefore the Lord God, albeit he was made strong, by vain and wicked men
gathered unto him, did not only smite him before Judah, The bitter sentence of
God against Jeroboam and his posterity.
and plague him that he dyed; but pronounced a fearful judgment against his
house, that he would cut of from him, him that piffed against the wall, and
would sweep away the remnant of his house, as a man sweepeth away dong, till
it be all gone; and further, that the dogs should eat him of Ieroboams stock
that dyed in the City, and the fowls of the air, him that dyed in the
field. Which sentence provoked by the wickedness of Jeroboam, was by the
justice of God performed accordingly upon all, save only Abiah, who was
suffered to come to the grave, because in him there was found some goodness
toward the Lord God of Israel. 1. Kin. c. 16.
The like was threatened by Iehu the Prophet, and executed by Zimri, against the
posterity of Baasha, because being by God made Captain over Israel; he
walked in the way of Jeroboam, and made the people to sin. 1 Kin. c. 17.
Ahab sold him self to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord, yet having
humbled him self before the Lord, evil was not brought in his days, but in
the days of his Son it was brought upon his house. The Lord God has said
it, and it cannot be but true, Exodus 20.
that he will visit the sins of the Fathers upon the children, unto the
third and fourth generation, of those that hate him. What comfort then can the
ungodly have in their greatness, when they see by the example of others, what is
like to happen unto them selves? Can the high Tower of prosperity whereon they
stand, be delightful unto them, when they behold the deep dungeon of misery
before them, whereinto they are ready to fall, and cannot but fall, continuing
in their sin? The life of the wicked cannot be but sorrowful.
The whole body is out of frame, if the least member thereof suffer pain, how
then can the mind be at rest, and take delight, when it is vexed with grief,
and tormented with fear of that, which no fear can avoid? Is it possible for
that man travailing on the way, to have a pleasing thought, who is enforced to
think, that the end of his journey shall be the beginning of his calamity,
that his place of rest must be the bed of sorrow, his passage unto it the way
of shame, and that for his sake, his whole train as him self, shall have
entertainment alike. The threatening of that only so black a cloud to fall in
this life, might seem sufficient, to make men lay aside the glorious and rich
attire of pride and wantonness, which serves to no good use, and to put on the
sober habit of virtue, and torn cloak of true repentance; which like the
Vine leaf might serve, both to let in the shining beams of Gods mercy, and to
defend the sharp shower of his wrath in this world. But if that prevail not
to withdraw them from their sinful ways, The punishment in this life nothing
to yt which is to come.
the^ is that punishment nothing, in comparison of the torment that is behind,
that as a cloud passes, and like a shower scatters, and is soon done. The
thread of life is quickly cut asunder, be it spunne how long so ever. The blow
is sharp, but short, the pang is no sooner come, but the pain is gone. Though
the way to bodily death, be to the body grievous, which loves no grief, yet
the mind has patience, The mind finds comfort in hope of the end of pain.
and finds comfort, by thinking it shall have end; which so armed, resists
the force, and overcomes the fury of the sharpest assault, that by grief
can be made, against those earthly walls which compass it about. Thereby
Anaxarchus was hardened to endure what punishment soever Nicoreon could lay upon
him, Cicero Tus. 2
without entreaty to be spared in any sort, and Caius Marius unbound, to hold
still his legs, until the swollen veins thereof were launced: and many are
confirmed to contemn the most exquisite torture that can be devised. The
exceeding punishment in the life to come.
But the other which begins when this life ends, never ends after it
once begins; and laying hold as well on the soul, as on the body, holds
both body and soul in torment perpetual, and intolerable, vexing the soul,
with extreme horror of Gods displeasure, with knowledge of happiness lost, and
misery found, and with utter despair, ever to recover the one, or to remove
the other; the body with fire violent and unquenchable, still burning, still
scorching, and never consuming, and both together, with continual sight of
continuing pain, and never dying sense of everlasting woe. Who fearing to
feel much less would not say, O ego ne taleis possim sentire dolor^, Tob. 2.

Quam mallem in gelidis montibus esse lapis.
O rather then I ever would endure such grief,
I wish a stone to lie within the frozen cliefe.


Surely with good reason, the highest under heaven may wish, rather to live a
brute beast in the vvoods, or to lie a dead stone in the rocks, then by living
out of the favor, and dying in the displeasure of the Almighty, to suffer in
hell the misery of that punishment which is due to their sin. But every one
is not of that mind; in so saying I may be said, surdo canere, to speak to
those which have no ears, in regard of some. It may be that some there are, it
were to be wished that none there were, which think with Lucretius, The
opinion of Athiests touching hell. Lucre. lib. 3.
the irreligious Poet, that after the soul from the body shall be divided,
Quibus e sumus uniter apti,
Of which we are comely made,
Scilicet haud nobis quicqua^ qui non erimus tum,
Accidere omnino poterit, sensumque mouere,
Non si terra mari miscebitur, et mare caelo.
Nothing then to us, which nothing shall be then,
At all whereof we can have sense can happen,
Though land with Sea, and Sea be mixed with heaven.


And that in fearing the torments of hell, we fear in the light, -- Nihilo
quae sunt metuenda magis quam Idem.

Quae pueri in tenebris pauitant fing untque futura.
Those things which nothing ought more fearful to be
The which in the dark, boys fear and feign to see.


Or some such, who forgetting themselves to be men, Suet. in Cali.
as Caligula, for his greatness amongst men thought him self to be a God,
commit all wickedness with greedines, and never think of their end. But as that
vain glorious Tyrant then felt, when he least thought to feel, that he was a
wretched man, ending his days in extreme torment of body, through many
wounds given him by his own Servants, and in no less anguish of mind, with
the sight of his dear wife, and only daughter murdered together with him. So
can they look for no better end which are of no better mind, and for all such
sensual Epicures, as believe they shall feel no more after they are dead,
then before they were borne, they did, (the soul and the body being asunder,
as they were before they came together) much happier it had been never to have
lived, then by such misery to learn, as learn they must in the end, how
miserably they were deceived. Job. 22.
The wicked is kept unto the day of destruction, and they shall be brought
forth to the day of wrath, whom leaving to the secret judgment of the
Almighty, who is a God of justice, as of mercy, and as of favor so of revenge;
I say there is no cause why any servant of GOD, how mean of degree, or poor
of estate so ever, should grudge at the prosperity of the wicked, but
considering that nothing happens by chance to either part, and that all
things be they good or bad, come by his providence to both, who is wise and
cannot be deceived, just, and will not be corrupted; they ought with patience
to abide his pleasure, and with full assurance to expect his favor, at such
time to come as shall seem good to him, and shall be best for them. If ever
delay bring comodity, and stay to be rewarded with advantage, it is when the
Lord God with affliction tries his chosen, and they with sufferance attend
his pleasure. Then truly if ever it may be said, Habent paruae commoda magna
morae. Ovid fast. 3.

The least delay is rewarded with great comodity.


In that case delay be it never so great, is to be esteemed small, because the
profit ensuing, is infinitely more then can be supposed, before it be enjoyed,
which with less grief is to be looked after, and greater comfort to be longed
for, in regard of the undoubted performance thereof. The sure hope of the godly.
For if of any thing men may be sure, which they see not already done, well
may they be assured, that the Lord being a God of mercy, will never forsake
those that put their trust in him, and so being of revenge, will surely take
vengeance of those which proudly and maliciously rebel against him. If it be
long before he come, let them know that the slownes of his feet he will
recompense with the weight of his hand. Wherefore it becomes, and behooves
the servants of God, still to attend the will of their Master, and never to be
impatient, or discontent; for any thing he does, or ought he hasteneth, or
slacketh to do; which notwithstanding must be confessed to be a matter
exceeding hard, of flesh and blood to be performed, considering what David, a
man after Gods own heart, witnessed of him self, The weakness of the best.
Psalm, 73.
saying, that his feet were almost gone, that his steps had well-nigh slipped,
and that he fretted at the foolish, when he saw the prosperity of the wicked.
Psalm. 37.
But the same David advises not to fret because of the wicked, but to wait
patiently upon the Lord, and to hope in him, adding that evil dooers shall be
cut off, and they that wait upon the Lord shall inherit the Land. Therefore
says he, yet a little while, and the wicked shall not apeare, and thou shall
look after his place, and he shall not be found. So as in confessing his
weakness, he witnesses what man of his own nature is, but teaches what he
ought to be, being the child of God, newborn, and led by his spirit. Job, an
upright and just man, feeling him self afflicted, and seeing the wicked to
flourish, Job. 22.
asks wherefore do the wicked live, and wax old, and grow in wealth? and
with all rehearses many, and great blessings of God upon them; as if there
were no reason why the Lord should deal so well with them, which behave them
selves so ill toward him. But forthwith he answers. Lo, their wealth is
not in their hand, and says, therefore let the counsel of the wicked be
far from me. And further, how often shall the candle of the wicked be put out,
and their destruction upon them? He will divide their lives in his wrath. They
shall be as stubble before the wind, and as chafe that the storm carries
away. The judgment of God against the wicked.
God will lay up the sorrow of the Father, for his children, when he rewards
him he shall know it, his eyes shall see his destruction, and he shall drink
the wrath of the Almighty. A fearful judgment which cannot be but true,
being set down in the word of truth. Most wretched are they that now believe
it not, and shall feel it hereafter. By the example then of Job and David, two
specially beloved of God, Job and David examples of patience.
the godly have to learn, upon what stay to rest, that they slip not: and how
to instruct their minds, that their mouths sin not, when they behold the
prosperous estate of evil dooers; if as natural men they grudge, and cannot
but grieve, let them like spiritual children correct and comfort them selves,
in full assurance of the Lords favor toward all which repose their affiance
in him, and of his wrath in the end, to be poured out upon as many as have been
contemners of his name. So having hope, they shall have patience, to attend the
end of his work, and performance of his good pleasure. But it is too common
even with the better sort, to think too well of them selves, which causes them
to open their mouths against God, and to vpraide him with their good deeds,
and his injustice, if the world go worse with them then with others, whom they
suppose worse to deserve. Herod. Clyo.
As Cresus being a Captive with Cyrus, prayed leave to expostulate with
Apollo, wherefore receiving his gifts, he had deceived him with an answer: but
at the last, he found it was his own ignorance in mistaking, and not Apollos
fault in mistelling, which caused his overthrow. For the words gave him
occasion, as well of fear to leese his own kingdom, as of hope to gain the
kingdom of Cyrus. Even so it is with us, lack of judgment moves our
coffeehouse, and as first lack of knowledge makes us apply that to our
hurt, which is intended for our good: so lastly, want of grace forces us
undutifully to challenge, and falsely to charge God, whose name we ought, with
all praise to honor, and with all obedience to submit our selves unto his
will. What greater fault can there be in man, then being but a worm, Job. 23.
Psalm. 103.
but dust, and in his best estate altogether vanity, to lift up his voice
against the Lord God, his first maker, his daily preserver, his only and
everlasting Savior. Wherefore men cannot be too careful, to contain them
selves, within the straightest bounds of modesty, and humility, in that
behalf, least giving way to the corruption of their nature, they go farther,
and become of evil speakers, evil dooers, and turn away from the performance
of those duties, which by God they are called, and appointed unto. When
unworthy men are advanced above those which deserve well of the common wealth,
when dissolute, and ungodly persons, are placed over such as fear God, and
live in vprightnes of life, it cannot be denied, but that to the better sort
held down, and kept under, great provocation is given, of mislike, and
offense. For an unseemly and heavy thing it is, that virtue should be subject
to vice, which being contrary, Virtue.
will ever be an enemy thereunto. But as virtue is a good habit of the mind,
Good men ought not to forsake for any respect the performance of their duties.
which no assault of vice can overcome, and alter from the nature of it self.
So virtuous men should be such, as no disgrace, or disdain done by the
wicked, should drive them to forsake the performance of those duties, which
to God, and to the common wealth they owe. Marcius Coriolanus being banished
out of Rome (who not long before in taking the Town of Corioli, Liui. decad. 1
lib. 2.
had showed great virtue, and won much honor) took in such disdain that
disgrace, that he became an open enemy, and chief leader against his Country.
But his mother Veturia, coming unto him, and vpbrayding him with his fault, he
found his error, laid down his arms, went out of the field, and dyed with
grief of mind. How much more ought they which know God, and are tied with a
religious fear, to do according to his commandment, to be steadfast and
constant, in the obedience of his will, and if by injury of the world, they be
drawn a side, from the right way, at his voice to return again, and to leave
all, rather then proceeding in a wrong course, to go forward in his mislike.
The consideration hereof, may serve to strengthen thy mind o man, who soever
thou be, if thou be a good man, to continue in thy honest calling, and never to
shake off the least duty, to thy Country, notwithstanding that thou see, the
wicked to flourish, and thy self to live in no regard. For looking first upon
him who is made rich, What good men should do, beholding the prosperity of
the wicked.
and whose house does increase in glory, remember that when he dies, he shall
take nothing away, and consider whether all his worldly pomp, which lasts
but a short while, be aunswerable to that hellish torment: which dying out of
Gods favor, he shall feel for ever. Then turning to thy self, know what thou
art, a simple instrument, in the hand of thy God, used by him to some good
work, and to some good end or other, not being in thine own power, to do
after thine own pleasure: and think with all, thou seruest a Master, which
can abundantly, and will assuredly reward thy travail, and that thy treasure
laid up with him, neither moath can eat, nor canker corrupt, nor thieves
steal away; and weigh whether all the pain thou take, all the scorn thou
suffer, all the affliction thou feel, in the swift passage of a short
life, be equal in any measure to that heavenly rest, and everlasting glory,
which the Lord God has provided for thee being one of his. Then judge of it be
not fit, if not good, if not of all things, thou can think of the best, for
thee to be patient, to obey the will of thy God, and to attend his pleasure.
Surely what soever thou art, if thou be the man thou should be, thou have no
cause at the prosperity of others to repine, but at thine own happiness great
reason to rejoice.

FINIS.
Feb. 1596.
Faults escaped.
THE first number notes the page, the second, the line, r, fignifieth read,
a, signifies add. Page, 4, line 25, r, thy, before temples; page, 14, line,
26, rescindendum: pa. 18 li. 28, make a comma, after common sense, pa 26, l.
21, to, before be, pa. 30. l. 28, before, an ill, r. after a worm. p. 50, l.
29. r. apportant: p. 51 li 19, a comma, after place; p. 60. l. 14, a comma,
after not. p. 61 li. 9, for end. r: and p. 61, l. 24: r, strives: pa. 62, l 16:
r, tunes: p. 72. l. 16; to, before be: p. 40, l. 16, a, not before ouerfloweth:
p. 74, l. 3, and, after encouragement. p. 75, l. 14, he, before was: p. 76, l.
30: leave out, own p. 81, l. 28, for it, r, yet: p 83, l. 28: r, honestate:
16, l, 29, r, cursu: p. 91, l 14, Goddess: 16, l, 17, r, the, for that: p 94,
l, 13, vidimus: p, 95, l, 13, r. with, before understanding. p, 98, l 7, r, to,
before resolute: p, 100, l, 23, (...) p, 110, l, 8, r, Sharezer. p, 98, l, r,
invade: p, 101, l, 1, then: p, 129, l, 4, r, superbia, 16, l, 6, r, superbos:
a, vltor: 132, l, 30, r, condemned, for commended: p, 133, l, 14, r, for
months, mouths: 16, l, 18, mouths: p, 136, l, 17, r, cantu: p, 137, l, 10,
r, crescentis p, 144, l, r, what, for, which: p, 146, l, 29; r, Nicoreon: p,
148, l, 6, for comely, r, jointly: p 148, l, 15 for fugiunt, r, fuigunt.

Quotations in the margent, either wanting or false printed.

Page, 14. Ovid meta. 1. pa. 16: Joshua 19, 1, Iosu. 13, p, 17, Proverb: 28,
Isai, 3, pa, 30, r, Samuel, 2, ch, 24: pa, 33, r, Psalm, 5, 6, 32, pa, 78, for
Ge, 40, r, Genesis 41: pa, 80, 1, Sam. 7, pa, 80. 1, Chro. chap, 32, pa, 90,
Hero. 7, 16, Q Curtius, 8, p, 93, Ho, Iliad, 5, p, 101, 2, Chro. chap. 22, p,
119, li, 30, 2, Chro, chap, 24, p, 120: for Acts, 13, r, Acts, 12: pa, 134, 5,
de leg^. p, 147. Tib, 2, p, 150, Psalm, 73.

A Table of the special things contained in the former Treatises.
A.
ABsolon and Ahittophell take counsel against David, but prevailed not, and
why. Page, 110. Adam the first earthly man, so called of the Hebrews. Page,
31. Adam by the breath of life made alive in soul. Page, 32. All the children,
but not all like heirs of Adam, Page, 69. Affections ouer-commed the children
of God. Page, 108 Agamemnon watched, while the Graecians slept. Page, 7.
Beholding the destruction of Troy, he considered his own estate. 128.
Agesilaus, his love to enrich his friends. Page, 134. A hab punished in his
posterity. 145 Alexander preferred Abdolminus a base man, and why. Alexander
his pride and blindness. 92, 93. Stirred with anger, he killed his friend. Page,
107. Alcibiades tossed with hope, to and fro. 107. Haman, a wicked man exalted.
125. Anaxagoras thought snow to be black. 25. Anaxarchus his parents. 146.
Antiquity has authority in examples. 94. Anthony his death. 136. Anthropos
whereof derived. 26. Apollo why so called. 63. Archimedes, his earnest
contemplation and death: taken for a dead man, being alive. 27. Arts banished
from Athens, and harbored in England. 4. Athenians commended thankfulness, but
were unthankful: and their comfort being threatened by Xerxes. Page, 100.
Athiests, who are to be thought. 20.
B.
BAasha punished in his posterity. Page, 145. Babell her Tower a monument of
man's vanity, and Gods omnipotency. Page, 77. Barbarians, never Athiests. 25.
The body the grave of the soul, 56
C.
CAlligula offered sacrifice to Envy, 140. his pride and end. 148. Carneades
living, said to be dead. Page, 27. Carthage envious of Rome. Caesar blown
into England with the wind of glory. 12. His proud mind, and miserable end.
89. Cambises his fall. 87. The cause more excellent then the effects. 37. The
cause by the effects discovered. 52. Charles the fifth, his expedition to
Argiers, and ill success, 95. Chrisogonus. 135. Cicero his weak mind in
adversity. E. Cleander, rich and proud, 137. Clodius his death. 136. Common
wealths subject to change. Page, 10. By what means they flourish. 109.
Contention of the Gods, 65. Counselors faithful, chief instruments of the
Kings safety. 112. Coriolanus through disgrace, an enemy. 153. Creatures,
subject to the will of the Creator, 15. Diversity of creatures from whence.
Page, 41. Their great likeness. 48. Craesus his fall. 86. Cyrus his soil. 87.
Cymmerians, see not the sun. 24.
D.
Darius his overthrow. 88. David, not suffered to smite Saul. 117. His feet
ready to slip. 150. Day, the longest in the year. 16. Delay brings benefit.
150. Diogenes, his care not to be idle. E. His opinion of a multitude. 28.
Dionisius killed with sudden joy. Page, 107. Dionisius of Sicilie, his
greatness and fall, 141. Disgrace should not drive men from their duty, 153.
Divinity the Lady Science. 4.
E.
EHud kills Eglon by the will of God. 117. Elements the ministers of God. 38.
Elements, how placed and ordered. 40. Their transmutation. 41. They follow,
and forsake their course. 43. Their strength and working. 42. By Nature strong.
2. England preserved from the Spaniards. 3. Strong in her people. 3. Her walls
of wood. 2. Strong in ye counsel of wise men. 3. Chiefly preserved by the
life of the Q. 4. Her present estate, 13. Her security. 15. Like Rome. 7.
Enoch, signifies true man. 31. Envy her definition. 138. The daughter of
Pride. 137. She looks upward. 137. She never sleeps. 138. Her punishment.
Epaminondas his-contempt of rithes. 132. Epicurus, his opinion of the
praeconceipt of God, 19. He first troad religion under his foot. 20.
F.
FOrtune. 122. 123. 124. The fool has said in his heart, there is no God. 25.
G.
GOD, how known by Nature. 21. His eternal purpose of justice and and mercy.
23. His two Books published to the world. 23. His works open to all. 23. His
power, and wisdom. An immortal man. 51. Why so called. 54. Resembled by the
Sun and the soul. 55. Expressed by three names. 57. Seen in the glass of
Nature. 60. Without the compass of Nature. 60. How to define what he is. 60.
Only and merely one. 60. Everlasting, and eternal. 60. His sundry names,
showing he is but one. 66. Every where seen. 68. His power upon the greatest.
73. 84 His power in creating, and punishing Adam. 74. In preserving Noah, and
drowning the world. 76. In throwing down Monarchies. 90. 91. In the defense of
England. God in goodness most like to him self. 103. His goodness. 103, 104. He
works continually for the good of man. 105. Good to all but in greater
measure to some. 106. He punishes the good, and favors the wicked: and is
both just and good. 126. His proceeding, with the good, and with the wicked.
126. Good deserts ill rewarded: E. Good men should not be grieved at the good
of the wicked. Graece preserved from Xerxes. 3.
H.
Heaven bears witness of God. 36. Heavens three. 45. Resembled in man's body.
45. Heliogabalus his death. 107.
I.
Jacob, raised by God. 77. Jerusalem and Judah fallen down, and why? 17. Job of
the prosperity of the wicked, 151. Joseph raised, delivered, and preserved, 78.
Iehosophat delivered. Jeroboam his death, and punishment, 144. The Israelites
preserved and delivered. 79. Ixion, an example of Envy. 139.
K.
THE King, the living image of God. E.
L.
LAmia, her eyes laid up. E. Lies, baytes. 114. Learning the remembrance of
things before known. 21. Love bitter sweet. 2. Lucretius an irregligeous
Poet. 148.
M.
MAN, the image of God. 29. 104. A little world. 46. Sociable. 26. Reasonable.
26. Not to be poynted out with a finger. 28. His mind him self. 28. His body
the pattern of the world. 45. His shape fair. 47. Man outward, and inward.
30. Termed a beast. 32. Like to all, but unlike him self. 48, 49. The
Lieuetenant of God. 69. His rebellion from the beginning. 69. His corruption in
either fortune. E. His weakness. 85. His ignorance in the power of God 92, 93.
Forgetful what he is. 92, 93. Affected with present things. 94. Through Gods
spirit, a great ruler. 108. His heart and hand in the power of God. 110. Easily
deceived by ease and glory. 114 Magistrates special images of God. 72. Marius
his patience. 147. Money, and the force thereof. 113
N.
NAbuchadnezer, as a beast. 33. Nature what. 21. Nicoreon. 146.
O.

P.
PAllas rich, and proud. 137 Perdicas love to Alexander. 132 Poverty a
provocation to sin. 70 Plato his opiniou of riches. 134. Poverty a heavy
burden. 82. Poor men raised to great place. 73, 82. Pride, a vain thing.
129, 130. Subject to envy. 130. Goes before calamity. 129, Easily
overthrown. 130. Princes take least rest. 6. Changed for the transgression.
17, Of the people. Blessed with greatest measure of Gods goodness. 72, 73, 109.
In their kingdoms above envy. 138. The sudden and strange ends of some. 142.
Pyrrhus of the Roma. 3. Pythagoras of the soul. 21.
Q.
QVeene Elizabeth, her due praise 4. Her victory of the Spanish fleet. 98. Her
speech to her Generals. 101. Mightily preserved by God 98 111.
R.
REason the natural eye of the soul. 21. It leads to the knowledge of God.
36. It teaches there is but one God 60 Religion thought a devise of policy.
20. Riches the blessing of God. 134. Rome, the receptacle of virtues. 8.
Embrued in her own blood, 8. When she fell to decay. 9. Rulers to be regarded.
71.
S.
SOcrates ill rewarded. E. His knowledge of a man, 28, Solon his opinion of
riches. 1^4. The sun a resemblance of God. 55 The soul the lively image of
God. 51.
T.
THemistocles. 135 Thyestes deceived his brother. 107. Toby after many good
works made blind. 125. Truth a precious jewel, hardly found. 114.
V.
VEnice governed by the Senate. 3. Virtue has her name from man E. She often
shines through the cloud of poverty.
VV.
WIcked men used against the wicked for safeguard of ye good. 118. They are
never safe. 117. Their miserable end. 119. Tehy desire to dye the death of the
good. 121. How God proceeds with them. 126. They are lifted up to their
greater fall. 127. They are reserved to the day of destruction. 149. The world
like a wheel. 1.
X.
XErxes his overthrow. 88. Xenocrates said to be an image and not a man. 27
FINIS.

