A CHRISTIAN ALMANACKE.

NEEDEFVLL AND TRVE FOR ALL Countries, Persons and times.

Faithfully Calculated by the course of holy Scripture, not only for this
present year 1612. but also for many years to come.

Written by I. M.

LVKE 21. VER. 36.

Watch and Pray continually, that you may be counted worthy to escape all these
things which shall come to pass, and that you may stand before the Son of
man.

LONDON Printed for John Budge, and are to be sold at the Great South door of
Paul's, and Britains Bursse, 1612.

To the Christian Reader.
OF what moment and importance this Christian Almanacke ensuing may be unto
thee (good Christian reader,) it will easily appear, if thou will but
vouchsafe the reading thereof, and wilt also consider with thy self, that the
days and times wherein we live, are very dangerous and sinful; for that
Satan, 1. Pet. 5. 8,
the common enemy of Mankind, goes about continually like a roaring Lion
seeking whom he may devour; and how by all manner of subtilty, by the world,
and the flesh; by the commodities, pleasures and vanities of them both; by
prosperity and adversity, Bernard.
he endeavors, leaving no means unattempted, Mundus, Diabolus, Caro etc.
to the intent that he may destroy us both body and soul; it is high time
therefore, that we look unto our selves, and by a Christian Almanacke recount
and Calculate our days, and with that most holy Arithmetician the prophet
David, and with Moses the man of God, pray unto the Lord to teach us, so to
number our days, Psalm. 90. et verse* 12*
that we may apply our hearts to wisdom; that we lay hold on opportunity, and
make the best use of our time, that we may profit our selves in holy and
religious excercises, that we may walk as the children of light, in the light,
before that darkness come upon us unawares, John 1^. verse. 35 36.
that we may not harden our hearts in the day of the Lords visitation. (...).
3. ver. 7. 8.
Oh let us consider that our life is short, and that the lamp thereof is
quickly put out, before we are aware; that our time is precious and therefore
to be redeemed; irreuocable, and being once past, cannot be called back
again; it ^s the rarest Jewel, and the greatest treasure of all treasures;
time and tide will not always last, it will tarry for no man. The children of
this world be wiser in their generation then we, who profess our selves to be
Christians. Who is there of them, that makes not great account of his
Almanacke, to observe both days, times and seasons, to follow his affairs for
his best profit and use? The Mariner observes time, wind, and tide, that he
may hoyse up Sail and be gone: the Lawier observes the Term time, that he
may dispatch his Clients suites, for when term is done, there is no more time
for their business, the trauailer has regard to the weather and season by his
Almanacke, and if he can learn thereby that he shall have a fair day, he
rises early to be gone away in the morning; every thri^ty husband can make use
of his time, observe his days, hours, months and weeks, for his profit;
shall not we then, that would be Christians, show our selves more careful for
the spending of our days, times and hours, that we may profit in
Christianity, it is always terme-time with Christians, every day, every hour
requires a religious employment for the good of our souls, yea this present
time is our terme-time. The neglect of time and opportunity, is a sin much
condemned in the scriptures, and especially by our Savior Christ, whenas he
rebukes the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 16. 3.
calling them hypocrites, Luke 12. 56.
because they could not discern the face of the Sky, but could not discern
the signs of the times. And God himself by the prophet Jeremy, Ier. 8. 7.
complains, that the very foul, and birds of the air observed their times
and seasons, but his people were ignorant. And verily of all follies and
Ignorances, this is the greatest, not to know the times and seasons after the
manner of true Christtians, not to know the day of our visitation, when God
offers this mercies to us, by the ministry of his word, by stretching out his
hands all the day long; Romans 10. 21.
he stands at the door of our hearts knocking by the sound of his word
outwardly, and by the motion of his spirit inwardly, by threatenings, promises,
mercies, judgments, and yet we listen not, we care not, we are lulled a ^^eepe
with ease and prosperity, and we continually make excuses and delays through
slumbering and sluggishnesse, like the spouse in the Canticles, Cant. 5. 2. 3
notwithstanding her Bridegroomes fer^ent love toward her, waiting all the
^ight long at her door until his locks were hoary with dew. wherefore we
ought to be wary and circumspect, how we spend our time, for God will require
an account of us for the same, and therefore let us redeem it with an high
estimate, let us look into our ^aies, weeks, months, etc. and earnestly
^epent, least the Lord surprise us on the ^uddaine, and so call us to the bar
of ^is judgment, and let us make this use of ^his christian Almanacke, that we
may ^etter our selves thereby to our eter^all comfort and consolation through
Jesus Christ our Lord Amen.

The contents of this Almauacke.
CHAP. 1.
Concerning the Governors of this year.
CHAP. 2.
Concerning the increase or growing of fruit e^^ and the dearth of the same.
CHAP. 3.
Concerning the Sickness and diseases of this year.
CHAP. 4.
Concerning the strife and trouble of this year^ and the causes thereof.
CHAP. 5.
Concerning the Estates of Kings and Princes and superior powers.
CHAP. 6.
Concerning the darkness of this year.
CHAP. 7.
An admonition to every Christian, what they ought daily to do, and what to
leave undone.
A CHRISTIAN ALMANACKE, NEEDFVLL AND TRVE FOR ALL Countries, persons and
times, faithfully calculated by the course of holy Scripture, and especially
for this present year to come. 1612.
CHAP. 1.
Concerning the Governors of this year.
WHEN I look well and consider the high Master of the Stars in his Doctrine,
and in writing I find that this year and from henceforth unto the end of the
world, the Sun, Mars and Mercurius shall reign: Now whereas other men seek
their speculation out of the stars, that do not I respect so much as
experience in the Doctrine of Christ, and for the exhortation and warning of
all estates, I will describe the nature and properties of these three
governors, the Sun a mighty Lord over heaven and earth, Psalm. 2.
is Jesus Christ our only Redeemer and Savior in all things like unto his
heavenly father, John. 14. Ver. 10.
The brightness of his glory, Heb. 1. Ver. 3.
the image of the invisible God by whom all things that are in heaven and earth
were created, Col. 1. Ver. 15.
things visible and invisible, whether they be Majesty's or Lordships either
rulers or powers.

This Jesus Christ the everlasting word of his heavenly Father, Heb. 2. 6.
which took our nature upon him he is Alpha and Omega, Phi. 2. 6. 7.
the beginning and the ending, Reu. 1. 8.
which is, and which was, and which is to come, even the Almighty, and shows
us his Fathers will, coming into this world, brought with him Mars, that is
the Gospel even out of the bosom of his Father. But wonder not that I call
the Gospel Mars. Math. 10. (...)*
Christ our Savior says, Think not that I come to send peace upon earth, I
come not to send peace but a sword; for I am come to set a man at variance
against his Father, and the daughter against her mother, and the daughter inlaw
against her mother inlaw, and a man's enemies shall be them of his own
house-holde, is not this a battle that shall put you to trouble says he and
kill you. Math. 24. ^
And of all people shall ye be hated for my name sake. Persecution follows
the Gospel.
Therefore may the Gospel well be called Mars, for where it is preached, there
is y^ sword, there is trouble and persecution, there will the enemies rage at
the preachers thereof, as for Mercurus the Poets feign him to be the messenger
and Orator of the heathen Gods, for the which cause he may well be liked unto
the world, which with eloquence, painted words, and outward appearance
performs the message of the devil, and entiseth men so long until it bring
them into destruction. But as Saint John says in his Epistle, 1. John. 2. 17.
the world passes away and the lust thereof, and as Saint Paul says, The
fashion of this world passes away, 1. Cor. 7 3^
therefore must we so hold us within the fear of God, that we suffer not our
selves to be deceived or seduced by Mercurius from the Sunn and Mars, least we
be corrupted with this deceiptful world, and so be defrauded of the joy of the
everlasting world to come. Neither should the painted wisdom of this world
move us, 1. Cor. 1. 18
in as much as God makes it very foolishnes; and his word, which seems to be
but foolishnes in the sight of the world, Romans 16.
that shows he to be the only wisdom, and the very power of God to the
salvation of as many as believe therein: whosoever now has the Grace to
perceive and consider this, let him not go after Mercurius, let him not follow
the world, and the beautiful lust thereof, Math. 7. 13.
let him not enter in at the wide gate and broad way, John. 14. 6.
that leads to destruction, but let him go in at the straight gate and
narrow way, which is even Jesus Christ, He is the way the truth and the life.
John. 10. 9.
The only mercy-seate and mean to come by the favor of God, by him whosoever
enters, he may be sure to be saved to receive mercy, find grace, and to be
helped in the time of need, which God the father grant us for his Sons sake.

CHAP. 2.
Concerning the increase or growing of fruits, and the dearth of the same.
THe Sun shows plainly that All such as fear God shall have a very
fruitful year, Psalm. 1^^
and plenteousnes in the days of dearth, Psalm. 37. 19
in so much that though Christ send without shoes, yet will he so provide for
them, that they shall lack nothing, for he says himself. Mat. 10. ^ 10.
The labourer is worthy of his meat. Who so now will labor shall eat, Mar.
6. 8.
but whosoever will not work ought not to eat, Lu. 10. 7. 2. These. 3^ 10.
now if we labor I say, we shall eat also. And God said to Adam, Genes. 3. 19
in the sweat of thy face shall thou ea^e bread, but you will say to me where
shall we get ^t? Christ our Savior says, Mat. 6. (...)*
Be not careful for your life, what ye shall eat or what ye shall drink, or
yet for your body, what ye shall put on, is not the life more worth then meat,
and the body then raiment; Behold the fowls of the Air, for they sow not,
neither reap, nor yet carry into the barnes, psalm. 147. 9.
and yet your heavenly father feeds them, Psalm. 145. 15
yea he gives to the beasts their food, and to the young Ravens that cry. The
eyes of all wait upon thee and thou give them their meat in due season,
thou openest thine hand and fillest all things living of thy good pleasure:
Therefore though our hands should be always occupied in some good labor, yet
ought not our hearts to take thought what we shall eat or drink, Ephe. 4. 28.
but first to care how to seek the kingdom of God, and so shall all things
necessary be ministered unto us. And if you would care or take thought, follow
the Counsel of the Apostle, And this I say brethren, because the time is short
hereafter, ^or. 1. 29.
that they which have wives be as though they had none, and they that weep, as
though they wept not, and they that rejoice as though they rejoiced not, and
they that buy as though they possessed not, and they that use this world as
though they used it not: for the fashion of this world goes away. And why
should we not care? because Man lives not by bread only, but by every word
that proceeds out of the mouth of God: Deuteronomy. 8. 3.
which thing Christ our Savior declared manifestly, Mat. 4. 4.
in that he fed so many people with so few loaves and fishes: like as he had
done before unto the Children of Israel by the space of forty years in the
wilderness, where they wanted no thing: for he himself fed them and blessed
them in all the works of their hands. John 6. 27
And Christ forbad us to labor for the meat that perishes, but for the meat
that endures unto everlasting life. Wherefore insomuch as God our merciful
father takes such care for us, 1. Pet. 5. 7
and his Apostle Peter his bidding was, Psalm. 55. (...)
Cast all our care upon him for he cares for us, as also the Psalmist David,
Cast thy burden upon the Lord and he will nourish thee, he will not see the
righteous to fall for ever, as also the holy prophet David in another place,
Psalm. 37. 5.
Commit thy way unto the Lord and trust in him and he shall bring it to pass;
we should then by right cast all our care upon him and faithfully to clean
unto his word in our hearts, so that we neither mistrust his Godly provision,
nor lead an Idle life, and if we mean well in our hearts, and deal truly
with our hands, doubtless he shall send us necessary meat by some body, as he
did to Elias the Prophet, first in sending y^ Ravens to feed him, 2. Reg. 17.
4. 6.
for the Ravens brought him bread and flesh in the Morning, and bread and flesh
in the Evening, and he drank of the River: and secondly he fed him by the
widdowe of Sarepta, Cap. eodem. And like as he provided a breakfast for Daniell
amongst the Lions by y^ ministration of Abacuck. Da^. 14. 37.
This I say, they that fear God shall have plenty and abundance of all things
this year: As for the multitude of the ungodly in general, there shall come a
great dearth upon them, according to the words of a certain true Astronomer:
Amos. 8. 12.
Behold the time comes, says the Lord God, that I will send a famine in the
land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing the word of
the Lord, and they shall wander from sea to sea, and from the North even to the
East, shall they come to and fro, to seek the word of the Lord, and shall not
find it. But because they receive not the love of the truth, that they might
be saved, These. 2. 10.
and therefore God shall send them strong Illusions, that they might believe
lies; Luke 17. 22.
so that the days will come when ye shall desire to see one of the days of
the son of man, Luke 19. 24.
and ye shall not see it. I pass over many other plauges that Mars threatens
unto them, because they will not know the time of their visitation.

CHAP. 3.
Concerning the Sickness and diseases of this year.
THe Eygptians had a manner and use ni their banquets to carry about an Image
of death, and to say to every man that was at the Banquet, Look^ upon this,
eat, drink, and be merry, such an one shall thou be when thou dyest. And this
they did (no doubt) to put men in remembrance of temperance and of death, least
they indiscreetly through excess of eating and Drinking should happen to dye
before their age, for so does God use to punish such sin: wherefore if we
diet and temper our selves, through the influence of the Sun we shall have
few diseases, except Mars bring some other thing to pass that we misknowe not
our selves, as for such as follow Mercurius, living night and day in ^oyot and
uncleanness, these, I say, shall through the Sun have great Diseases in all
the members of their bodies, in the Lungs, Liver, Hands, and Feet, yea, and
perils of their ^oules. I pass over the poverty that drunkards and ryotous
persons shall have. Keep no company says Solomon with drunkards nor with
gluttons: Pro. 23. 2.
for the drunkard and the glutton shall be poor, Pro. 23. 29. ad finem.
and the sleeper shall be clothed with Rags, and in the same Chap. he says.
To whom is woe, to whom is sorrow? to whom is strife? to whom is murmuring? to
whom are wounds without cause? and to whom is the redness of the eyes? even
to them that tarry long at the Wine, to them that go and seek mixed Wine: and
therefore he subioyneth this counsel, look not thou upon the wine when it is
red, and when it shows his color in the Cup, or goes down pleasantly in
the end, therefore, says he, it will bite like a Serpent, and hurt like a
Cockatrice, and thou shall be (...) one that sleeps in the midst of the sea,
and as he that sleeps in the top of the Mas^e. They have stricken me, shall
thou say, but I was not sick, they have beaten me, but I wot not when I awoke.
Therefore will I seek it still, and though drunkenesse make them more
insensible then beasts, yet can they not refrain, let the^ remember our
Savior Christ's warning, Luke. 21. 34.
which he gives in these words of the latter day, take heed, says he, to your
selves, least at any time your hearts be oppressed with surfeiting, and
drunkenness, and cares of this life, and least that day come upon you unawares.
There is doubtless a marvelous sore punishment to come upon the whole world of
the wicked, sword, wars, hunger, not only spiritual, as I said before but
temporal, which plagues have bin aforetime, but are not yet all past. I need
not to rehearse the pestilence, and those great plagues that God will send to
the reformation of as many as will be warned, as for the common (...) of the
ungodly there shall such a fearefulnes of death come upon them, that they
shall not tell where to turn them, nor how to escape death. O how bitter and
grievous shall the remembrance of death be this year to such as seek rest and
consolation in transitory substance of this world, to such as know of no
adversity, but have good days, live in voluptuousness, and to such Epicures
as say, Luke 12. 19.
Thou have much goods laid up for many years, live at ease, eat drink, and
take thy pastime, but God shall say, O fool, this night will they fetch thy
soul from thee, then whose shall these things be, which thou have provided?
But oh death, how acceptable and welcome shall thou be unto such as are in
adversity, in their last age, or in despair, whosoever thou be therefore that
would escape the sickness of this year, beware that thy body be not
ouer-laden with over much eating, Eccles. 37. 39. 30
or with drunkenness; for excess of meats brings sickness, (...) gluttony
comes at the last to an unmeasurable heat, and Chollericke diseases. By
surfeit have many perished, (...) he that dieteth himself, prolongeth (...)
life: Eccles. 30. 20.
as for insatiable eaters they ^^all not only sleep unquietly this year, but
shall have Ache and pain of the body. Concerning the spiritual disease and
sickness that shall reign this year, as it has done before, Paul an
ancient and true Astronomer says plainly, that we be all sinners, if we say
that we have no sin, Romans 3. 9.
we deceive our selves, Gal. 3. 22.
and the truth is not in us. 1. John. 1. 8
This is now the spiritual disease that shall commonly reign this year,
John. 9. 39.
but especially in them that feel least of it and will not acknowledge it, if
we acknowledge our sins, 1. John. 1. 9
he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all
ungodliness: for the Sun has such virtue, that whosoever can see his
disease and will complain of it, it shall cleanse them and make them whole. Yea
Paul says plainly, 1. Tim. 1. 15
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. And Saint John gives
us a good comfort, 1. John. 2. 1^.
and says, if any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father even Jesus
Christ the just, and he is the reconciliation for our sins, and not for ours
only, but also for the sinne^ of the whole world. Whosoever therefore has
this disease (as there is no man without it) let him do wisely, 1. Cor. 11. 28.
let him prove and examine himself all times, 2. Cor. 13. 5.
and go to Physic before he be sore sick, Eccles. 18. 28.
and above all things let him beware of such false Physicians and feigned
Surgeons as heal the hurt of the people with sweet words, and say peace, Ier.
6. 14.
peace, where there is none. And as a true Astronomer reports, with fair
speech and flattering, Romans 16. 18.
desceiue the hearts of the simple, and all for their bellyes sake, such serve
not the Lord Jesus, such false Physicians lay wrong plasters to men's sores, and
speak the meaning of their own hearts, Ie^. 23. 16.
but not out of the mouth of the Lord. Psalm. 147. 3.
But go thou boldly unto him, John. 6. 37.
which only heals the contrite in heart and byndeth up their wounds, he
shall not cast thee away: Mat. 11. 30.
But if thou come unto him he shall refresh thee, Mat. 9. 12.
he shall ease thee, for his yoke, says he, is easy, and his burden light,
if thou be sick go unto him: for he is the right Physician for such as are
diseased, if thou be thirsty and come unto him, he has to give thee a well of
water, John 4. 14.
springing up unto everlasting life. If thou be hungry for righteousness sake
and thirst, Mat. 5. 6.
blessed shall thou be for thou shall be filled: Isay 55. 1.
yea he cries, every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and ye that
have no silver, come, buy, and eat, come, say, buy Wine, and milk, without
silver, and without money, he will feed his sheep, Ezech. 34. 15
and bring them to rest, though thou be lost, he will seek thee; though thou
have gone astray, he will bring thee again; though thou be wounded he will bind
thee up; though thou be sick and weak he will make thee whole and strong.
Seek him therefore this year and as long as thou live, for with the Lord is
mercy and with him is great redemption. Psalm. 130. ^.
He has salvation enough for thee, thou need not to seek help at any
other, neither is there salvation in any other, therefore bids he thee ever
come to himself, he never bad thee seek other Physicians to heal thee of
this disease: Acts. 4. 12.
for there is no help in the Children of men. Psalm. 146. 3.
As for Corporal diseases God has ordained outward medicines for them, in his
creatures, by the ministration of true Physicians, which gift of God no wise
man will abhor, Eccles. 38. 1. 2.
and thou art commanded to honor the Physician, with that honor that is due
unto him, because of necessity, for the Lord has created him; for of the most
high comes healing, and he shall receive gifts of the King: but against the
sickness of sin there is no help or succor, but only in himself, as there
is no salvation without him, so is there ever grace, mercy, pardon, and
remission freely in him, for all such as will receive it and be thankful for
the same.

CHAP. 4.
Concerning the strife and trouble of this year and the cause thereof.
THe sword that I spoke of partly in the first Chapter, is like to be drawn
this year; for why the Sun, Mars, and Mercurius cannot agree together; how
accords the world with Christ and the Gospel, they shall never be at one. 2.
Cor. 6. 41
Sore eyes cannot abide the clear light of the Sun, they will not consent to
the works of darkness, neither will the believers have part with infidels, and
no concord with and betwixt Christ and Belial. Thus can there be no agreement,
for they be of contrary natures, again a scorner (as Solomon says,) loves
not him that rebukes him, Pro. 15. 12
the children of this world are scornful, and therefore are they not content
to be reformed by the Gospel, which nevertheless, though it have many
enemies, as it has ever had, yet because it is the truth it shall bear away
the victory, and that shortly, Reu^. 17. 16. 7
for God has put into the heart of diverse Princes to fulfill his will, and to
hate the whore of Babylon, to make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her
flesh and burn her with fire, and utterly to set her out of her soil, so that
it appears evidently, that Satan shall no more have so great dominion, as he
has had in times past, and now because that he sees that his kingdom shall
have a fall, he works and shall do all that he can by the Children of
unbelief, specially by the shaven Madianites, Jesuits, Seminaries,
excommunicate Papists, and Catholic Romans, as they term themselves, to
stir up wars, seditions, secret treasons, and utter defiances, both
amongst Princes, and Communities, for such adversaries of the truth do
wickedly resist the ordinance of God, in the authority of their prince, and
not submit themselves to the Gospel. And whereas God has raised up good men
to preach his word, the devil is so mad at it, that he has sent them a letter
of defiance by some of his members, even with such an answer as was given to
Jeremy the prophet, for they say plainly, Ierm. 44. 16 17. 18.
the word that thou have spoken to us in the name of the Lord, we will not
hear it of thee, but we will do whatsoever thing goes out of our own mouth,
as to burn incense unto the Queen of heaven, and to power out
drinke-offerings unto her, as we have done, both we and our Fathers, our Kings,
and our Princes in the Cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem, and
what is our peoples saying, I pray you? we will have liberty of conscience
according to other Nations yea and some have their privy Mass as is well
known, and they say we will do as our rathers have done before us, for when
we so did, then had we plenteousnesse of victuals, and were well, and felt no
evil, but since we left off to burn incense to the Queen of h^auen, and to
power out drink offerings unto her, we have had scarsenes of all things, and
have bin consumed by the sword, and by famine, and is not this the speaking of
the Papist, Atheist, ignorant and profane people altog^ther, never grace since
this religion came up, ignorantly ascribing Gods plagues and punnishments for
sin, to the word and the preaching thereof, such strife and debate shall
h^ppen this year, because of the word o^ God, or the enemies thereof had
rather draw their daggers at it. and I am persuaded it is the thing they daily
look for, then to be reformed, but ^h^ lovers of it, shall spare no labor to
con^ert them, 2. Tim. (...) 25. ^6.
and specially the Ministers and teachers must not (...), but must be gentle
toward all men, apt to teach, suffering the evil men, patiently instructing
them with meeknes, tha^ are contrary minded, proving if God at any time will
give them repentance, that they may know the truth, and that they may come to
amendment out of the snare of the devil, which are taken of him at his will,
therefore thou lover of God and of his word, when any trouble happens unto
thee (for great are the troubles of the righteous, Psalm. 34. 19
but the Lord delivers him out of them all,) marvel not at it, as though it
were a strange thing, but rejoice inasmuch as thou art partaker of Christ's
afflictions, that when his glory appears, thou may be merry and glad, and
be as content to be reviled as he was, 1. Pet. 2. 23
who when he was reviled, reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened
not, but committed it to him that judges righteously, for there is no disciple
above his Master, nor the servant above his Lord, it is sufficient for the
disciple to be as his Master is, and the servant as his Lord, Mat. 10. 24 25.
if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more, them of
his household. So these and many other sweet words says he himself unto thee,
that in him thou may have affliction, John. 16. 33.
but be of good comfort, for he has overcome the world.

CHAP. 5.
Concerning the estates of Kings and Princes and superior powers.
THe influence of the Sun and Mars, declares evidently by all conjectures,
yea certainly without all doubt, that Kings and Princes shall have a
prosperous year, and me thinks, I dare be bold to say, if they begin to
seek the true honor of God, and to deliver people from oppression, and to
make no doubt herein, Solomon which was a King himself, and that of great
experience, says these words, take away the wicked from the King and his
throne shall be established in righteousness. Prou. 25. 5
Seeing now y^ God begins so graciously to work in Princes, who have not
occasion to hope for great increase of prosperity in them: for like as when ^
Prince delights in lies as says the wise man, Pro. 29 12.
all his serua^ are wicked, even so when the King or Prince is a favorer and a
maintainer of the truth, his people shall the more be given to the fear of
God, and I doubt not bu^ God this same year, by the faithful Ministration of
his author^ty in Kings and Princes, shall bring noble acts to pass to the
great deliverance of poor people, and reformation of the ignorant. And let
Princes remember, that the power which they have, is given them of the Lord,
and the strength from the highest, least they being Officers of Gods empire be
neg^^gent in keeping y^ law of righteousness, Romans 13. 1.
but if they delight in much people, Wis. 6. 3.
let the^ love the light of wisdom, which is Gods word, for by it they shall
govern the people, Wis. 8. 14.
and the nations shall be subdued unto them, whosoever he be then that loves not
to resist the ordinance of God, let him submit himself to the authority of his
prince, and let him not bite his lip at it. Good Ezechias brak^ the brazen
s^^pent, that the Children of Israel worshipped so long, and let it not grieve
him, that the virtuous King Josias expelled South-sayers, 2. King. 18 12.
Charmers, them that had familiar spirits, and the images and the Idols, and
all the abominations that were espied in the land of Judah and in Jerusalem, 2.
Reg. 23. 24.
to perform the words of the law, which were written in the book that Hilkaah
the Priest found in the house of the Lord, let every man rather give thanks
unto God* Dan. 14.
and be glad that Bell is delivered i^to Daniels power, that the falsehood of
Bells* Priest is come to light, and that (...) Dragon is devoured, whom the
people was (...) to worship, let no man th^^refore resist this power of God,
that (...) such acts by the ministration of Pr^nces, but let every man be
content to be reformed of his error, to do well and fear^^, Romans 13. 4
for he bears not the sword for naught, for he is the Minister of God, to
take vengeance on him that does evil, and be ye subject, not because of wrath
only, but also for conscience sake, and as the wise man says. The wrath of a
King is the messenger of death, Pro. 16. 14
be thou therefore thankful unto God, and obedient to thy Prince.

CHAP. 6.
Concerning the darkness of this year.
WHen I consider the corrupt nature of Mercurius and how he has bin and is,
and ever shall be, contrary vnot Mars, and the Sune, I find by all experience
that he shall be cast a great etc. dark, for though that the light shine in
darkness, 1. John 5.
and be come in the world, yet shall they whose works are evil, and after the
conditions of Mercurius, (...) the darkness more then the light, and this
darkness shall be in the^ that live naughtily and follow their own
abominations, John 3. 20.
for because they do evil, therefore shall they hate the light and not come
to it, least their deeds should be reproved, and as Paul says, if the Gospel
shall (...) yet hid, it is hid to them that are lost* (...) whom the God of
this world has ^linded the mind, ^. Cor. 4. 3* 4.
that is, of the infidels, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ,
which is the Image of God, should not shine unto them. But where the Children
of God are, there shall be light and the works of light, seeing therefore that
the light is with thee, Exo. 10.
yet a little while walk, whilste thou have it, that the darkness fall not
upon thee, for he that walks in darkness knows not whether he goes. But
believe thou steadfastly in the light, whilst thou have it, that thou may be
the Child of light, and escape the horrible darkness of the wicked.

CHAP. 7.
An admonition to every Christian, what they ought daily to do, and what to
leave undone.
FOrasmuch as Almighty God has charged by Moses, that we always should have
his Commandments in our sight in our mind, in our heart, and that we should
rehearse them continually unto our Children, Deuteronomy. 6. 8.
and should talk of them when as we tarry in the house, Number* 18.
and as we walk by the way, and when we lie down, and when we rise up, and we
should bind them for a sign upon our hands, and they should be as frontlets
betwixt our eyes, and we should write them upon the posts of our houses, and
upon your gates, to the intent that we should not forget his word, his will and
commandments, and least we should follow our own imaginations, therefore
good Christians, I thought it fruitful to put thee in remembrance of thy
duty, and this could I do no better, then by these Godly Textes of holy
Scripture, which I have brought here together, specially to the honor, la^d
and praise of God, exhorting ye that yet are negligent and forgetful in
keeping of his laws, to take better hold, and go forward in his ways, and
turn not aside, neither to the right hand, nor to the left, but beware of such
as teach thee ought, saving the Doctrine of God, and that thou may be sure
what thou do, I pray Jesus Christ our only mediator, obtain for thee his
holy spirit, and give thee a good wholesome new year, with the true knowledge
of his Godly will and increase of his faith.

To day if ye will hear his voice, Heb. 3. 7.
harden not your hearts, Psalm. 95. 78.
every day it is good to believe, to learn and to do that God has
commanded, and so likewise it is good to leave undone that God has forbidden.
This day it is good to learn Gods word, for it is y^ incorruptible seed,
whereof we are borne anew, by y^ word of God, it is the food of the soul, 1.
Pet. 1. 2. 3
whereby man lives: the word of God is quick and mighty in operation, Mat. 4.
4.
and sharper then any two edged sword, Heb. 4. 12.
and enters elen unto the dividing asunder of the soul and the spirit, and of
the joints, and of the marrow, and is discerner of the thoughts, and intents of
the heart, it is good indeed to learn Gods word, Wis. 7. 11.
for all good things come to us with it, and innumerable riches there through,
Luke 11. (...)
therefore are they blessed that hear the word of the Lord, and keep it, it
is good to believe the word of God, for he that believes, and is Baptized
shall be saved, yea God gives them power to be his children, that believe in his
name, wherefore he that comes unto God must believe, Heb. 11. 6.
for without says says the Apostle, it is not possible to please God, and
what soever thing is done without faith is sin, it is good to keep the word
and commandments of God, for he that loves me, says Christ, John 14. 15.
^t. 21.
will keep my commandments, and my father will love him, and we will come
unto him, and make our dwelling with him, he that has my Commandments and
keeps them, is he that loves me, and he that loves me, shall be loved of my
father, therefore it is good for every one of us to keep Gods Commandments,
Exodus 20.
that is, to have no Gods but one, to sanctify and hallow the name of God, to
call only upon him in all need and necessity, not to take his name so
lightly in vain as we do, for no cause, and upon a very small and fond
occasion, the which if we do, the threatenings pronounced, that is, he shall not
be holden guiltles, that takes his name in vain, that is he shall not be
unpunished. To sanctify the Saboth day, namely to rest from our works, as God
did from his, to the intent that he may work in us, and we to fulfill his will
by hearing his word and steadfast faith, and prayer, to honor father and
mother, that is, to be obedient unto them, to help them in their need, to
cherish them, to comfort them in adversity, for it is acceptable and well
pleasing unto the Lord. To do no murder, that is to hate no man, to bear no
malice in our minds, to give no evil words, Mat. 5. 44.
but even to love our enemies, and to do good for evil, not to commit
adultery, to break no lawful wedlock, to commit no whoredom, nor
uncleanness, but either to live chaste, or else to marry, to steal nothing,
that is to use no false Merchandise, neither in bargaining, 1. Cor. 7. 1.
weight, nor measure, but truly to labor in some good calling, Ephe. 4. 28
for the sustaining of the poor, to bear no false witness, that is, to hurt
no man's name nor fame to lie of no man, but either to say the truth, or else to
keep silence. Ephe. 4. 25
To covet no man's house, Romans 7. 7.
wife, servant, goods, nor any thting that is his, not once to lust after our
neighbors evil, but heartily to love him even as our selves, and to do unto
him after the manner, as we would be did unto us, these Commandments it is
good for us to keep, not only this day, but as long as we live, to the
honoring of the blessed name of God, to the increase of his Kingdom, and to
the fulfilling of his Godly will all the days of thy life, it is in good faith
and steadfast belief to love thy neighbor as thy self, love is the fulfilling
of the law, and love hides the multitude of sins, love has many noble
conditions, Romans 13. 10
love is patient and courteous, ^am. 2. 8.
love enuieth not, love does not frowardly, 1. Pet. 4. 8.
love is not puffed up, it disdaineth not, Prou 10. 1^
seeks not her own, is not provoked to anger, thinks not evil, rejoices
not of iniquity, 1. Cor. 13.(...)
but rejoices in the truth, it suffers all things, believes all things, it
hops all things, it endures all things, whosoever now has the spirit of
God, and has truly received the light of his word, will use these works, these
fruits of the spirit, and this Armor of light, this is the new Commandment
that our Master has given us, John 13. 34 35.
for by this shall every man know, that we are his Disciples, if we love one
another, 1. John. 3. 12.
not in word and tongue only, but indeed and verily, not to suffer them to
want, and we have not to let them perish, and we may help them, but lovingly
and with a good heart, to distribute to the necessity of the S^int^, Romans 12. 13
to feed the hungry, to minister drink to the thirsty, to lodge the
harbourlesse, Esai. 58. 7.
to visit the sick, Ezech. 18. 7
and shortly, to do to every man even as we would they did unto us. It is good
for every one of us to tell another his fault, and that lovingly after a
brotherly correction, without any desire of vengeance; Leuit. 19. 17
for it is written, Thou shall not hate thy brother in thy heart, but thou
shall plainly rebuke thy neighbor, and suffer him not to sin; Thou shall
not avenge, nor be mindful of wrong against the children of thy people, but
shall love thy neighbor as thy self, Eccles. 19. 18.
and as the wise man says; tell thy neighbor or friend his fault, least he be
ignorant, and say, I have not done it, or if he have done it, that he do it no
more. Reprove thy neighbor that he may keep his tongue; and if he have spoken
any thing amiss, that he say it no more: for the doctrine of Christ and the
Apostles is, Gal 6. 1
That if any man be fallen by occasion into any fault, Mat. 18. 15
they which are spiritual, should restore such an one with the spirit of
meekness, considering themselves what is their own nature, least they also be
tempted. If thy brother trespass against thee, says Christ, go and tell him
his fault between him and thee alone: if he hear thee thou have won thy
brother, but if he hear thee not, take yet with thee one or two, that by the
mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be confirmed, and if he will not
vouchsafe to hear, then tell it unto the Church, and if he refuse to hear the
Church also, then let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican. Now if
any that is of the number of the brethren in Christ, and would be taken for a
Christian man indeed, be a whoremonger or covetous, or a worshipper of images,
or a rayler, or a drunkard, or an extortioner, the Doctrine of Paul is plain,
that we should not eat nor keep company with such, this day it is good to be
ware of false prophets, of men's own imaginations and dreams, least we receive
the poison of Antichrists laws, in steed of the blessed word of God, least we
shoot at the wrong mark, and be deceived by such as walk in humbleness of
mind and worshipping of Angels, and beware of false prophets, Col. 2. 18.
which come to you in sheep clothing, Mat. 7. ^5.
but inwardly are ravening wolves, 2. John 9.
and whosoever transgresses and abides not in the doctrine of Christ has not
God, he that continues in the doctrine of Christ, he has both the Father and
the Son: If there come any unto you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him
not to house, neither bid him God^ speed, for he that bids him God speed is
partaker of his evil deeds, for by false prophets the Lord our God does prove
us, Deuteronomy. 13 3
to know whether we love the Lord our God with all our heart, and with all our
soul, or not. wherefore it shall be good for us, not only this day, but as long
as we live, to walk after the Lord our God, and to fear him, and to keep his
Commandments, his statutes, his laws, and his constitutions, to harken unto
his voice; to serve him, and to ^leaue unto him. It is good for every subject
to be obedient, 1. Pet. 2. 13
and to submit himself unto all manner of ordinance of man* for the Lords
sake; Rom 13. 1.
for there is no power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God;
whosoever therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and
they that resist, shall receive to themselves judgment, for Princes are not to
be feared for good works, but for evil, will thou then be without fear of the
power, do well, so shall thou have praise of the same, for he is the Minister
of God for thy wealth; but if thou do evil, fear, for he bears not the
sword for naught, for he is the minister of God, to take vengeance on him that
does evil, wherefore we must be subject, not because of wrath only, but also
for conscience sake. Prou. 16. 14
And let us remember the saying of Solomon, that the Kings displeasure is a
messenger of death. At is good for Kings, Princes and temporal Judges, Wis. 6.
3.
to execute their office as out of the power that God ministers unto them, for
in very deed the power is given them of the Lord, and the strength from the
highest, therefore seeing they a^e the Officers of his Kingdom, as says the
wise man, they ought not to be negligent, but to execute true judgment, to
keep the law of righteousness, to walk after his will, to love the light of
wisdom, to expel Southsayers, Charmers, expounders of dreams, Idols,
Masses, and all abominations out of their land, to set up the words of the law
of God, to put down the houses of Idolatry, and to see that the law and word
of God be taught among the people, to spare neither cost nor labor for the
maintenance and defense of the same, to seek the peace, wealth and prosperity
of their Commons, to judge every man righteously without any wresting of the
law, Deuteronomy. 1 15
to know no man's person in judgment, to take no gifts, but ever to have the
laws of God, and to do thereafter by them, and to read therein all the days
of their lives, that they may learn to fear the Lord their God, and to keep
all the words of his law, and to do thereafter, that his heart be not lifted up
above his brethren, that he may prolong his days in his kingdom. It is good
for servants to be obedient unto them that are their Masters, according to the
flesh, Ephesians. 6. 5.
with fear and trembling, with singlenes of their hearts, Col. 3. 22.
as unto Christ, Tit. 2. 9.
not with service to the eye, as men pleasers, Pet. 2. 18.
but as the servants of Christ, doing the will of God from the heart. etc. as
also Peter: Servants be subject to your Masters with all fear, not only to
the good and courteous, but also to the froward. And therefore was Saint Paul so
earnest to see this ordinance of God kept, Tim. 6. ^.
namely, that as many servants as are under the yoke, should count their
Masters worthy of all honor, that the name of God and of his doctrine be not
evil spoken of. It is good for such men as have s^^^ants, Ephesians. 6. 8.
to put away threatenings doing unto their servants that which is just and
equal, and know that they also themselves have a Master in heaven, and use
the counsel of the wiseman, whereas thy servant works truly, Eccles. 7.
entreat him not evil, nor the hireling that bestows himself for thee, let
thy soul love a discreet ser^ant as thi^e own soul, defraud him not of his
liberty, neither leave him a poor man, and if he be not obedient, bind his
feet, but be not excessive toward any, and without discretion do nothing,
therefore should evil servants be corrected, seeing they will not be the
better for words, for though they understand them, yet will they not regard
the^: tame thy evil servant with hands and correction, If you set him to
labor, you shall find rest, Pro. 29. 21.
but if you let him go idle, he shall seek liberty, for as Solomon says, he
that delicatly brings up his servant from his youth, at length he will be even
as his Son. It is good for women to be obedient, and to submit themselves
unto their husbands, as unto the Lord, for the husband is the wives head,
Ephesians. 5. 22
even as Christ also is the head of the Church, and the same is the Savior of
his body, therefore as the Church is in subjection to Christ, even so let the
wives be unto their husbands in every thing, as it is comely in the Lord, that
even they which obey not the word, may without the word, Col. 13. 18.
be won by the conversation of their wives, 1. Pet. 3. 1.
while they behold their pure con^ersation which is with fear, and let not
their appareling be untoward, as with brodered hair, and Gold, put about the^,
or in putting on of apparel, but let the hid man of the heart be vncorrupt,
with a meek and quiet spirit, which is before God a thing much set by, for
even after this manner did the holy women, which trusted in God, tire
themselves, and were subject to their husbands, as Sarah obeyed Abraham and
called him Lord: Genesis 18. 12
it is good for men to love their wives, even as Christ loved the Church, and
gave himself for it, that he might sanctify it and cleanse it by washing of
water, thorough the word, Ephe. 5. ^5
that he might make it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blame, so
ought men to love their wives as their own bodies, he that loves his wife,
loves himself, for no man yet ever hated his own ^^lesh, but nourishes and
cherishes it even as y^ Lord does the Church, therefore ought every man to
do, so that he love his wife even as himself, Col. 3. 19.
and not to be bitter unto them, but to dwell with them as men of knowledge,
giving honor unto them as unto the weaker vessel, even as they that are
heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers be not interrupted.
Ephesians. 6. 1.
It is good for children to obey their parents in the Lord, Col. 3. 20.
for that is right and well pleasing unto the Lord, yea the Lord will have the
father honored of the Children, and has confirmed the authority of the mother
over the children. Eccles. 3. 4.
He that honoreth his mother is like one that gathers treasure, whosoever
honors his Father shall have joy of his own children, and when he makes
his prayer, he shall be heard, he that honors his father shall have long life,
and he that is obedient to the Lord shall comfort his mother: he that fears
the Lord honors his parents, and does service unto his parents as unto the
Lord, honor thy father and mother in deed and word, and in all patience, that
thou may have Gods blessing, for the blessing of the father establishes the
house of the Children, and the mothers curse rooteth out the foundations:
rejoice not at the dishonor of thy father, for it is not honor unto thee, but
shame, seeing that man's glory comes by his Fathers honor, and the reproach of
the mother is dishonor to the children, help thy father in his age, and
grieve him not as long as he lives, and if his understanding fail, have
patience with him, and despise him not, when thou art in thy full strength, for
the good entreaty of thy father shall not be forgotten, he that forsakes his
father shall come to shame, and he that angreth his mother is cursed of God. My
Son perform thy duty with loving meeknes, and so shall thou be beloved of
them that are approved: Ephesians. 6. 4.
It is good for fathers not to provoke their children to wrath, Col. 321.
but to bring them up in instruction and information of the Lord: for as the
wiseman says, whosoever loves his child, Pro. 13. 24.
holds him still in nourture, and under correction, that he may have joy of
him afterward: withhold not correction, Pro. 23. 23.
from the child, if you smite him with the rod, he shall not die: thou shall
smite him with the r^d and shall deliver his soul from hell. 1. Tim. 3. 2.
It is good for every one that is a Bishop or other spiritual Shepherd to be
unreprovable, the husband of one wife, watching, sober, modest, harborous, apt
to teach, not given to wine, no striker, not given to filthy lucre, but gentle,
Tit. 1. 6.
no fighter, not covetous, one that loves goodness, wise, holy, temperate,
holding the faithful word according to the doctrine, that he may be able also
to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and reprove them that say against it, and
above all things, it is good for a Bishop or spiritual Shepherd, to lead an
holy and Godly life, going before others, as the Ensigne-bearer, and to be unto
others the good salt of the earth, the light, Dan. 12. 3.
the Star that shall bring many to righteousness and shine euelastingly. And
now to conclude, whosoever thou art, or of what estate soever thou be, take
heed that there be not in thee an evil heart and unfaithful, Heb. 3. 12.
to depart away from the living God, but exhorting one another daily whilst it
is called to day, least any of you be hardened through the deceiptfulnes of
sin, and redeem the time, as says the Apostle for the days are evil, and
learn ye to be sober, to watch, to fast, and to pray, and to be ready with
the wise Uirgins to enter in with the Bridegroom into our Masters joy, which
shall never be taken from us, and shall endure for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

