THE Mahumetane or Turkish History, containing three Books:

1 Of the original and beginning of the Turks, and of the four Empires which
are issued and proceeded out of the superstitious sect of Mahumet. 2 Of their
Conquests and the succession of the house of Ottoman, until the present
reigning of Mahumet the third. 3 Of the wars and seege of Malta, which
Solomon the great made to the great Master and brothers of that order.
Hereunto have I annexed a brief discourse of the wars of Cypres, at what
time Selimus the second, took from the Venetians the possession of that Island,
and by reason thereof I have adjoined a small discourse containing the causes
of the greatness of the Turkish Empire.

Translated from the French and Italian tongues, by R. Carr, of the middle
Temple in London, Gentleman.

Dedicated to the three worthy brothers Robert Carr, William Carr and Edward
Carr, in the County of Lincoln, Esquiers.

AT LONDON, Printed by Thomas Este, dwelling in Aldersgate street: 1600.

The Right Honble. Francis North Baron of Guilford 1703


To the right worthy and worshipful his loving cosen Robert Carr of Asuerby in
the county of Lincoln Esquire, one in her Majesty's Commission of peace there.
SIR the worthy estimation which first your Father, then your self with your
Worshipful Brothers have gotten, and ever retained in your country; for
hospitality and many other your much commended virtues, together with the
desire I have always naturally had to do that declining name: (arightly so
called if in you and them it decay, whom all the rest hop'te to have seen the
everlasting propagators of the same, and in which number I a sapplesse branch
of that trunk am one) to whom I owe all service or aught which might add
thereunto reputation; has drawn me to make tender of these my traductions,
from the French, Latin, and Italian tongues, of this Mahumetane or Turkish
History, to your said self with your brothers, as true tokens of my devoted
mind, whereof to the utmost of power you and they may dispose; Not for I
think this Dedication or any other act of mine, can give aught to the
fullness of your praises whereof every tongue that knows you plentifully
speaks: But only for I seek in some honest office being an admirer of your
and their virtues, to make known my affection (though my self unknown) which
in many meditations has often wished any occasion, that in true coullers to
you and them might once make it appear; And now not expecting longer any
greater: (for what might he in occasion expect further whose value only
consists in his mind) being importuned by the much entreaty of friends, that
these my pains taken in this History might come abroad, I thought none so fit
as well in regard of my said affection, as of your and their worthiness to
whom to consecreate these my less worthy labors. Wherefore to you sir the
first both in time and place I present this first book co^tayning the
Original of these Turckes with the four Monarchies descended of them as the
forerunner both in time and place to the other following, and not unfitly
appertayning: Because this book being furnished with much variety of matter
as translations of Empires, change of government, small things from their
mean beginnings growing to great persection; great things by indiscretion and
little consideration, ruined, and overthrown: Occasions happening and happily
pursued, drawing estimation and advancement; neglected, pulling on dissolation
and destruction. I say these and such like in this every where appearing to
whom might I commend then your self whose ripe age cannot but be freshly
stored with multitudes of such good observations, gathered from presidents, and
examples, foraine and domestique, both of these and former times: And surely
when my self aright enter in consideration of these things (whereof these
books are a rich storehouse) let me speak it with a reverend regard
always (and under control of religion) I am in opinion often a Platonist,
assigning all mortal affairs necessarelie a periode in their perfection, to
which having attained, they fall into a retrograde of declining, until they be
brought to the lowest degree which misery, can alot: nor there long
continuing, again and again revive and arise from forth the ashes like to
the Arabian Phaenix, (or as the Physicians talk of the state of our bodies)
always either mending or impayring but never standing at one stay; So as
houlding on this continual course, the utmost point ever of felicity or
infelicitie is conjoined in the self same instant to his next contrary; which
Macrobius well observing has worthily depictur'd in these words.

Non possunt primi esse omnes omni tempore
Summum ad gradum claritatis cum veneris
Consistes egre, and citius qua^ discendas decides
Cecidi eg^, cad^t qui sequitur, l^^s est publica:
And as we see in casting up accounts those, and the same counters to fall in
places now of pounds now of pence, without any certain continuance other then
sorts to their course: So not unlike is our condition here, commanded still
with the change either of better or worse, whereof Seneca according to his
grave manner has thus said;

Nulla sors longa dolor and voluptas*
I nuicem ^adunt: breuior voluptas.
I ma permutat breuis ho^a summis:
Nemo confidat nimium secundis.
Nemo disperet meliora La^sis.
Which reasons whilst more narrowly I do examine (though not so nicely as
Plato to say that thorough the operation of the superior bodies in these
inserior, or by the revolution of the heavens in this or that time this or that
shall fall forth) have beegotten in me a belief for maintaining a second of
his assertions viz.

Omnes serui ex regibus and omnes reges ex seruis oriundi.

For if in the restless variation of things and progress of time, unavoidable
ruin attend the succession of greatness, but advancement on the posterity
of misery: who lives in so base and abject fortune who may not challenge his
being from worthy auncesters, and assure himself in him or his to see the
arising Sun of bright shining honor; As on the contrary, what other advanced
to the highest degree of dignity, who may not suspect the means of his first
beginning, and justly fear in the weaning of his fortunes to what condition
(by the violence of this current) he or his may be brought; All this I say am I
drawn more redely to lean too; by reason of this present history, for
behoulding herein from how lowly and small beginnings the victorious and never
degenerating race of these Ottamans, together with the invincible nations of
their Turks are grown; that being but bare breach Tartars only, run out of
the caves of those horrid countries of the Rifean and Caucasus mountains, yet
have with glorious success in their attempts led captivity captive, made
themselves now conquerours over the whole East; and in fine are become even the
terror of the West. Sacking infinite numbers of Cities and Countries:
dispoyling multitudes of Princes and high descended families of their lives,
together with their crowns and kingdoms: and this done in so few years space
above all opinion, or what else before was ever executed by the antique world.
It cannot be but to that which the course of things does daily cast upon them;
(if there be a course in things which is not my purpose further here to
dispute:) God almighty in his secret judgments does hasten their proceedings,
to chastise the ingratitude of us Christians for the small thankfulness we
show for so many his gracious benefits liberally, (though unworthily) bestowed
on us. But my office is not of a divine, having in purpose to make known only
what they have even from the first done, and daily do, rather then the reason
of the deed, how it is or can be done. In which I here present you and your
Worshipful brothers with three books. This of their Original, and the
several Monarchies descended from them; Another of their conquests and the
succession of the house of Ottaman, whose greatness has in manner drowned all
the rest; The third of the small gainefull attempt given by Soliman (great
Grandfather to Mahumet the third of that name who now reigns) to the Isle of
Malta, or Melita, defended chiefly by the forces of the great Master, and the
valiancy of the worthy brothers of that order. By which last book I would thus
much infer, that since the prowess of so small a handful was not only able
to withstand, but repel the fury and huge forces of so confident an enemy,
puffed up with pride and assurance of so many rich spoils and gained
victories: O what then would the forces of Christian Princes united do, so we
might but once see the glorious beams of that bright shyning day appear. To
this I have annexed likewise an abstract (borrowed from the Italians) of such
causes as are said to give greatness to the Turckish Empire a breuiate only
of a larger work yet by me unfinished, divided into three books which by gods
grace shall come forth shortly, shadowed with the favors of you and your
brothers names. These former in the mean time if it shall please you to
respect with that kind acceptance which from you they seek, though not well
deserve: I of my pains receive a large requital, who desire nothing more;
Lastly whereas severally I assign dedications of these books to you and your
brothers, upon my several reasons in their Epistles set down: it is not of
any purpose to divide you or them from the pleasure of any part, which I wish
should be common unto all: but rather to express thereby your mutual natures
co^formities, for as these books though diversely directed, yet thus together
perticipate their content to all readers alike if they please, whereto the
dedication gives no hinderance. So you of all living brothers (with the mighty
admiration of men) in distinct bodies are said to have in every good thing
one and the same unchangeable will and mind always resident: where meum and
tuum the worlds sole contentions never take place. Thus wishing to your
Worship all content of your desires, and therein the full fruition of your
health, with much affection prayed for by many, I take my leave and to your
good opinion commend me; From the middle Temple this 20. of March. 1600.

Your kinsman in all faithful service at command R. Carr.

I: S: To his kind friend R. C.
THe well fed paunch, sound sleeps and proud attire
From face of men has banished virtue quite
Whereby the course of natures free desire
Is clean corrupt by customs foul despite.
So every light is spent which gracious heaven
Assignd* this life our staggering steps to stay
That now a worthy wonder it shall seem
If any one shall glorious acts assay.
The Laurel wits reward, the Myrtle eloquent
Drowned in contempt with fair Philosophy
The gayning people hold for time misspent
And few folks feet the strayter path do try
Yet gentle friend let me of you require,
Pursue* the praise due to your hearts desire.
C: S: To his loving cosen and good friend. R. C.
I Speak no praise to thee my Cosen kind (...)
(For well of aught I know you seek no praise)
But joy to see that these our better days
Shall be adornd with beauties of thy mind.
O how I feared thy modest thoughts inclinde
To sit in silence musing mourning layse
In scorn of fame and all that honor raise
would drown the parts which heaven to thee assignd
I know thy worth and so shall many more
(Unless thy self and many more thou wrong)
And since begoone to set thy self in shoe
Bring out thy store in darkness hid too long,
Nor doubt not aught for if (as erst) I see,
That pleases others which once pleases me.
R: M: To hiis friend. R: C:
NO little glory gain they I confess
who fitly fo^ein^ tongues our language teach:
Yet he far more deserves without impeach,
His own brains birth who well did ever express.
Then gentle friend make you your self not less
To post us French and Latin in our speech:
But broach those quieres of rare conceit and reach,
Which I have seen most worthy of the press.
Those love sick Sonets, those pleasing Comedies,
Which often with much attention I have heard;
That rich discourse, where love in loving dies:
And of all wits those, paradoxs preserd.
(O) let this age but some of these behold
And praise thy pen writ in a vein of gold.
The answer to his friend. R: M:
MY dearest friend I willingly confess,
That I whose life should other lead and teach,
Am not deuoide of blame, and foul impeach,
Which (O,) I would no tongue could ere express.
Now for I have my self in wotth made less:
Too stale a fable to the public speech,
Is It not enough: but that I furthther reach
To blaze my follies in a printing press.
No pardone no, both songs and Comedies,
And what besides pleasing applause has heard,
Without remorse in their creation dies:
To birth and burial rites at once preserd.
Too much of these did men in me behold,
O would time past could be regaind with gold.
FINIS.
The Preface, To the courteous Reader.
IT is no small wonder unto me gentle Reader, though the worth of the argument
contained in these books were less, why the examples of other nations (as in
other things) should not so much prevail with our country men, as to stir up
some, according to the presidents in many other languages (wherewith the world
in large volumes is fraught,) to have written somewhat of these Turkish
affairs; For if we regard the greatness of their attempts, their
fortunatenesse in success, their discipline, or what else may add aught to
military glory: you shall find them in my conceit not inferior but superior
far in every thing which has given estimation to former ages, of which
books we see every hand and study full, whilst these alone are hid from our
people for want of some pain taking pen that might transfer so rich treasure
from strangers unto us. If new things delight, (according to the natural
ingrafted condition of man,) these are new; If benefit be expected in books,
(and especially in histories,) for counsel and forewarning mischiefs in the
examples and harms of others, from what former history may we reap greater
then this: stored with so many and notable presidents of all sorts, fresh
bleeding as it were before our eyes, (and which should be a greater motive)
telling of ensewing danger, not much divided from our own doors, when daily
we lamentably see our neighbors houses not far of flaming. New fashioned
clothes derived from strangers, are every day much esteemed, new fashioned
manners, new fashioned wits are affected: then either for the worth or
fashion, let these French and Italian traductions receive your favorable
censures: I did propound no greater gain in my pains, and hope of your
courtesies to obtain no less, which granted shall encourage me to show you
yet somewhat more worthy ere long in this argument, wherein I having first
(for aught I know) broken the ice (saving only the History of Scanderbegg of
the late Persian wars, and that of Tamberlain though exceeding well done yet
but particular parts of this discourse) shall be glad to hear of any
companion* for further pains, to whom this subject will afford enough of
sufficient and worthy matter; And so craving you would friendly correct what
faults in the Impression have passed either by me or the Printer, I take my
leave, and rest the servant of every well willing reader.

R. Carr.

The Original and beginning of the Turks, and of the four Empires which are
issued and proceeded out of the supersticious sect of Mahumet.
COnsidering that I have the pen in hand, I make so mine account, that I were
as good to make an end as to stay, until you required of me, from whence the
nation of the Turks are come, and what manner people they be, that have been
so much unknown to our predecessors saving about three hundredth years agone,
and that Pomponius Mela, and Pliny have made some mention of them and numbered
the^ among the Scythians. But, to declare truly, their original and
beginning, it behooves to begin at the Sarazines, and than to write of the
Empires, that have been engendered of their wicked and abominable
superstition and sect, as the Caliphe of Baudras, the Miramamolin of Aphrick,
the Souldain of Egypt, the Assan or Sophie of Perse. For these are they from
whom the Turks are proceeded.

MAHOMET, (whom some do call Muhamet, and the Turks mehemet, that is to say,
loved or praised,) was an Arabian; and borne in a village (nigh to Mecque)
called Itrarip, about the year, of our Lord and savior Jesus Christ 600. at
such time as the Emperor Heraclius governed in Grecia, and king Dagobert
reigned in France, his father was named Abdala, which word may be interpreted,
the servant of God, though in deed he was a Gentile and very Idolator. But
Mahumet being an Orphan at the age of eight years, was left in the regiment of
one of his uncles, named Abutaliph, who caused him to be instructed by a Jew
in the Mathematical and natural Sciences* and after that to be married at the
age of fifteen or sixteen years, and then instructed him in the trade of
Merchandise, which he practiced both in Egypt and Sury, where not a little he
frequented the company of Jews and Christians, but chiefly with a Moncke of
the order of saint Benet called John, (as the Bishop of Ptolomais or A^on
reports,) as also with another Monck called Sergius an heretical Nestorian,
of who^ he learned the holy Scriptures, and especially the old and new
Testament. To which knowledge when he had attaigned and considered with
himself, that it was no great difficult matter under the shadow of Religion, so
to draw to him the Arabians being but gross, rude, and Idolators: he therefore
absented himself out of company and remained secret by the space of two
years. And after that presented himself to the people saying, that all the
while of his absence, he was with the Angel Gabriell who taught and gave to
him the law of God; and that to believe in Idols was foolish and vain. But
perceiving, that at that time, his words could obtain small credit, he
invented another policy. For which purpose he had an Esclaue called Zeidimy to
whom he told that the will of God was, that all men should be free, and
therefore did give him immediately his liberty, whereby from every part, all the
Esclaues in a country repaired to Mehemet, and gave him such credit, that
whatsoever he commanded, they obeyed him: In so much as this company, thus
drawn togethers, brought no little dread and fear to some great and welthie
families in Mecque, as were the Caraxins, Haximins, and Benimitains, who upon
the intelligence of the drawing togethers of this wicked pack, took armor
against them. Whereof Mehemet getting intelligence, fled immediately, and
retired himself to the town of Almedine, since called Medinathalmaby, which
is so much to say, as Medin of the Prophet, where he began in such sort to
preach to the Jews, that in steed to believe him, they beat him in sundry
fights and his Esclaues also. So as in one of these skirmishes Mehemet gat such
a stroke overthwart his face, that not only he lost two of his sore teeth,
but also was left for dead in a dike there, wherein he was cast: though in the
end he overcame the Jews. And because the Arabians, (which indeed be
descended from Ismaell the son of Abraham, and of Agar his wives maid,) were
called Agarins; he caused to be ordained (in that it was not honorable for his
people to carry the name of a woman servant,) that from thence forth they
should be named Sarazins, deducted from the name of Sara, the lawful wife of
Abraham, alleging that Ismaell was engendered of Sara and not of Agar her
maiden. The which name of Sarazins, so long endured, unto such time as the
Turks did abolish both the name and the nation, as hereafter I will declare.
Mahumet having thus crept into credit among ths ignorant and rude people, that
he was a Prophet and messenger of God, he acquainted himself with a Lady of
no little wealth and riches; named Tadiga or Cadiga being a widow, and so to the
purpose, he behaved himself toward her, that he married her, although he
had three other wives besides her, whereof the one was called Anosse, the
second Ahasse, and the third named Seick, or Zeich, whom he ravished from one
that was one of his bringers up, beesides a Concubine that he had called Marie
a Christian woman of the sect of the Iacobits. And than he began to publish his
damnable law that it was lawful for any man to have four wives. Howbeit,
thorough the marriage of this Lady, Mahumet was wonderful re'nforced and
strengthened, in such sort, as that thorough his wealth that he did get, he was
able to wage soldiers. Whereby partly by sorce, and partly by good oppinion
that was had in him, all his neighbors obeyed him, and so as his train
growing to such a number thorough the multitude of Sarazins that repaired to
him, the Emperor Heraclius (who at that time had under his dominion, both the
countries of Surie, Egypt, and Africa) served himself with these people in his
wars against the Persians. Howbeit, it so afterward came to pass, that at a
pay of the Emperors army, among who^ at that time were certain bands of the
Sarazins, so as money was not so plenty there at that instant, able to pay the
whole army: And that he, which had the order of the pay of the army among
whom the bands of Sarazins also were attending for their wages, vndescretly
gave answer to the Sarazins, that the Emperor had not money enough, there to
pay the Chrictians, that were Soldiers; and therefore they being but dogs,
ought not to demand for wages. With which aunsvvere, the Sarazins being not
a little moved, departed from the service of the Emperor, and returned into
Africa where they found Mahumet. The Emperor Heraclius, afterward sent into
Africa to levy his tribute there, which seemed to be not a little grievous to
the Africans to be so much troubled with subsidies, as they were: they falling
into a mutiny, (and stirred thereto also with the subtle persuasions of
Mahumet, that told them, the pleasure and will of God was that each one should
live at liberty,) the Commissaries of the Emperor were there slain, and the
countries of Egypt and Africa reuoulted wholly from the obedience of the Empire;
of which rebellion; Mahumet was chief and their General: Who by reason of the
same was immediately pursued both by the Christians and Jews. And albeit the
Emperor did send against him a great army under the leading of one of his
Nobility called Theodore, who fought sundry battelles with the Africans: yet
in the end Theodore being overthrown and slain. Mahumet with his Sarazius
after this victory departed from thence, and invaded the countries of Sury and
Mesopotamia, and made conquest of the same. Thus then the Greeks, lost the
countries of Sury, Egypt, and Africa, and other territories which the Emperors
of Rome and Grecia, had ever in possession from the time of Julius Caesar,
saving that part of Africa which the Vandalls held who were Christians, though
Arrians, and there had continued from the time that the Romans, suffered them
to inhabit: And so Mahumet was crowned king in Damasco, about the year of our
Lord God 630. and lived after about ten years.

After the death of Mahumet the Sarazins preferred to his kingdom one of his
disciples and familiars, named Othamar whom* the Turks do call Othmar.
Howbeeit some affirm that he that next succeeded Mahumet was one called
Bubacher, otherwise named Caliph which word signifies enheritor or successor,
because he was placed in the rome and authority of Mahumet, and so after him
were called all his successors, though some Italian authors do call them
Alipha. The chiefest place where the Caliph had his residence, was established
at the city of Baudars which the Italians call Baldat, and the Turks Bagdet,
that sometime was the famous city of Babylon though others hold opinion that
this City, was that, which in times past was named Susa, and is situated upon
the river of Euphrates. About this time the Sarazins conquered in a little
space (upon the Greeks) the territory of Caramanie aunciently called Cilitia
where the city of Antioche stands, and Pamphilia which at this day is called
Scauri, and the town of Selucia named by the inhabitants there Scandalor, and
after that they made enterprise upon the kingdom of Persia, which they call
Pharsie and this was about that time when the Greeks did cut of the nose, and
the tongue also, of the Empress Martine and Heraclion her son and of the
Emperor Heraclius, because they enpoisoned Constantine the eldest son of
Heraclius begotten upon an other wife at such time also the Lumbards entered
into Italy. Of Persia, at this time, was king one called Hormisda, named also
by Hayton (that writes of these matters) Ascaiorth elected king next after
Adaesar, son of Syroe son of Cosroe or Cosdroe whom the Emperor Heraclius
took prisoner when he recovered the city of Jerusalem. Hormisda, having
assured intelligence* that the Sarazins were coming to invade him, ^ought for
succors at such as were his neighbors and chiefly of those of Turquesten who
frontered upon the Persians on the West and toward the East on the realm
which Hayton calls Tarsie, and upon the famous river of Indus toward the
North, and to the Corasmins and Med* on the South (which are the very confines
and limits which Pliny and Strabo do appoint to the Parthes) whom the Turks
do call Turguestain as Francis Freinston says. This nation which since by
the Frenchmen and other have been named Turguimans, and afterward Turks, (who
among them at that time had no manner of law or policy, departed out of their
country, to the number of six thousand fighting men, to come to the succor of
king Hormisda. But because (according to their custom) they brought their
wives and children with them, they were the longer in coming, so as before
they came, the Sarazins and king Hormisda had sought togethers, and Hormisda
overthrown and slain, about the year of our Lord God 640. And so the
Sarazins became Lords of Persia and of the whole countries about, saving the
realm of Abeas, which is in Georgia, and a part of the greater Armenie called
Haloen who were the refuge and receptacle of Christians. The Turqui^^ains being
by this arrived, (in that part of Persia named Chor^^^e^ or C^^^osley and by
some C^roz^i^) they understood of the overthrow and death of Hormisda: for
which cause, they stayed there, and fortified themselves in the best wise they
could, and sent unto the Sarazins, requesting to accept them as their friends,
and withal that they would receive tribuit from them, for which alvvaies they
would be at their commandment to serve them faithfully in their wars, if it
would further vouchsafe the Sarazins to beestovv on them the place, where
they at that time were to inhabit. The Sarazins received their embassage
courteously and accepted them as their friends and offered Tributaries, howbeit
they caused the Turks to lodge further of in a part of another country which
they appointed them; to the end that if they revolted; they should do the
Sarazins less harm. In this manner remained the Turks or Turquimains,
tributaries, and as it were subjects to the Sarazins, whose customs, laws,
and manners, they quickly learned through continual trade and frequentation
which they had a among the Sarazins; insomuch, as in the end there was no
manner of difference betwixt* the^, either in religion, law, or form of life,
which was very easy for the Turks to do considering, that be ore they lived
without any law, rule, or policy, which they were sooner moved to embrace
only to be pertakers of the honors and riches which the Sarazins, of whom
these Turks became familier companions and meruailously well beloved, for that
they tried themselves to be every where in their wars, their best soldiers.
Thus they lived togethers about three hundred years, that they were accounted
in manner to be of one nation. Howbeit the Turquimains kept themselves always
a part by themselves and grew to be of such wealth and might, that about the
year of our Lord God 1400 they became masters over the Sarazins, by occasion
of discord growing among the Sarazins themselves, as hereafter shall be declared.

This first Caliphe, endured not very long, because another Sarazin named
Ascaly, chased him from his place, purposing to have usurped his rome, howbeit
he could not so attain it, for he was slain by the Sarazins, who preferred
another (to that dignity) called Haly.

Haly the second Calphe: was coosen Germain to Mahumet, and his son in law
(as some affirm) having married Fa^^ma, (whom the Turks pronounce Fatma) the
daughter of Mahumet, whose laws Haly changed, or rather anulled, and made new
of his own invention, through which innovation of religion, or rather
supersticion, the Sarazins beecame meruailously divided: Insomuch as those
which follovved Mahumet made a Caliph in Egypt. The others remained in Persia
with Haly who alvvaies continued in such reverence and estimacion as well
among them as with the Turks at this day, that incontinently next to Mahumet
when they go about any of their affairs, they say Alla, Mahumet, Haly, God
Mahumet and Haly. Thus the Sarazins began to be divided among themselves the
which division has ever since continued and endures yet: For albeit the
Turks and the Persians also are in effect very Mahom^^ists, yet differ they so
in ceremonies, and other contrarieties of opinion, that the one do account the
oother very heretics. The Caliphe does execute his office as though he were
both their Pole and their Emperor. For these Caliphes do ordain governors
and officers through every province where they have authority, which they
call Sultans, which may be interpreted Prouosts o^ governors* But by
succession of time, this term Sultan, ^s converted to an ^ppellation or name
royal, and signifies the word king. At the time of this As the Latin word
Imperator at the first was no name of Regal power and authority.
first division there was a Sultan of Alexandrie named Selym that killed the
first Caliphe of Egypt, and returned in obedience to the Caliphe of Baudras to
have favor.

After this, part of those Sarazines of Egypt that would not come to the
obedience of the Caliph of Baudras, passed into Africa and chased from thence
the Vandales, which were Christians, but heretics, maintaining the
abominable error of the Arrians, where these Vandales had domination since
the time of their king Gencericus, who with his nation being Vandales were
chased out of Hispain by the Goths (that were Arrians as they also were) and
so arrived in Africa in the time of the Emperor Theodosius the young son of
Arcadius about the year of our Lord God 410. and after were tributaries to the
Emperors of Constantinople where they remained unto the year of our Lord God
668, that the Sarazins (as above said) there first entered; and established a
general to rule over them, whom they named a Miramamolin, which is so much to
say as a ruler or lord over ye people, and ordained his residence and place of
dignity, to be at M^r^hque, at this day called Tunes nigh to Cartage. Which
name of Miramamolyn has since been changed: for at this day they call
their king Moulee, as he that at this day reigns at Tunys, is called Moule
Assan that is to say, king or Seigneur Assan.

I would not discribe to you further at length what the Sarazins did, after
their conquests of Persia and Afrique. But will admit a little intermission
unto the year of our Lord God 1040. at which time they were subdued by the
Turks or Tursquimains their tributaries. For otherwise that were against my
purpose, determining rather to make an Epitome or abridgement, than a whole
large Chronicle of their doings.

THE year of grace 660. Mehua (which signifies sudden or hasty) Sultan of
Egypt, successor of Selym took the Isle of Rhodes, and carried away the famous
Colosse or pillar of Brass that was esteemed on height three score and ten
else, which an Earthquake overthrew as Pliny affirms.

IN the year of our Lord God 660. Abdalla (the Sultan of Egypt after Mehua,)
came to Syracuses; where sometime was slain the Emperor Constantins son to
Constantine, whom his mother in law Martyn, wife to Heraclius caused there to
be poisoned: where the Sarazins sacked the town with a great part of the
riches of Rome which the said Constantins before had caused to be brought
thither to have conveyed the same to Constantinople.

ABOUT the year of 690. Abimelech (which word may be enterpreted the father
of the King) invaded Hispain, with a navy of 270. ships, but was repulsed,
and from thens, passed into Africa, from whence, again the Sarazins were
chased by the Emperor Justinian the second: And so Abimelech was the first
Miramamolyn among the Sarazins, against whom, the Emperor Leonce sent a Captain
of his, named Tiberius who by the army was made Emperor, and so without
executing further his charge, returned to Constantinople, against his Master
Leonce, where after he had taken him, and cut of his nose; he cast him in
prison in which the miserable Leonce remained all his life: These matters being
done at the time, when Sergius, the first of that name, was Pope. And
Theodorick or Thierry son of Clouys reigned King in France.

IN the year of our Lord God 712. Sultan Selyman (which is so much to say as
peasible) whom, some do call QVLEMEN, the Caliphe of Baudraz besieged
Constantinople, but thorough pestilence and famen, poslessing his Camp, he was
driven to raise his siege, which before had been continued by the space of two
years. And this was, at what time the Emperor Theodoxe had taken his
pre^ecessor Anastasius and made him a Monck, when Giegory the twelfth was Pope,
and Chilperick the last King of the line of Pharamonde reigned in France.

IN this time, also Mizza Miram^molin, successor of Abimelech, ^t the request
of Julian the Conte of Consuegra (who was sent as Ambassador to him, fr^*
Rodrigo King of Hispain) caused twelve thousand men under the leading of his
general called Cariph, to pass into Hispain against the said King Rod^rigo
to revenge the injury done to the said Conte Julian, in that Rodrigo had
deflowred the daughter (or as some do say the wife) of the said Conte Julian,
called Caba, as the Chronicles of Hispain do make mention: Who landed at
Gibraltar which place our ancients name Calpe and the Sarazins, Gibelcariph
(the Mount of Cariph,) and from thence marched along the famous River of Bet
is (and by the Sarizens named Guadalquiber) which is so called unto this dav.
Where nigh unto the same, in a foughten battle the said King Rodrigo, (who
was the last king of the line of the Goths) was slain.

And taking hold of occasion the Sarazines so far then proceeded, that they
conquered in manner the whole kingdom of Hispain, where they lost the name of
the Sarazins and were called by the Spanierds, Moors of the name of the
country in Afrique (from whence they came) called Mauritania.

THE year 725. Eudes Duke of. Aquitain, otherwise called the D^chie of Guien
(descended from Alarie king of the Goths, who in the year of our Lord 412. at
such time as the Emperor Honorius reigned) did possess the same duchy of
Guien, from whence passing into Hispain, and from thence chasing the Vandales,
as before I have said, brought into France (against Theoderick brother of
Chilperick, sons of Dagobert the second of that name: which Theodorick was
the last king of the ligne of Pharamond.) Those Sarazins, (who at that time
were in Hispain, conducted by Abderaman (whom the French Historiographers do
call Adramar) King of Cordoua, who after their entry into France, took the
towns of Bourdeaulx, Tholose, Narbone, Nimes, Arles and Auignon, Platina,
Blondus, Sabellicus, and other Historiographers do write that those Sarazins
came even to towers, where they were fought with, by Charles Martel, (father of
Pipin,) and overthrown so as all that ever was won by them before, was
again recovered by the same King Charles, and the Sarazins chased into
Hispain, where after they remained more than 700. years. Unto such time as
Ferdinand the king of Aragon did win from them the City and Country of
Granado: (which was in the year of our Lord God 1487.) Howbeit, there tarried
and remained still sundry towns and villages entier, peopled with the
Sarazins whom the Emperor Charles (the fifth of that name) coming to his
dominions in Hispain found there dwelling, and caused to embrace the christian
faith, yet they could never be compelled to change their habit or the
language of the Sarazins, nor perhaps secretly their abominable Mahometical
sect, what face outwardly so ever they show.

In the year of our Lord God 500. the Sarazins of Africa, did take the Isles
of Corsica and Sardinia, and two and twenty years after they pilled and
sacked the Isles of Candia and Sicilia, and so held them more than two hundredth
years: at what time Pope Leo was persecuted by the Lumbards, and succored by
Charlemain.

The year of our Lord God 837. The Sarazins under the leading of Sultan Saua
wan the port of Ciuitauechia, in Italy and sacked the city o Rome, and the
Church of Saint Peter, with the Mont Cassin (otherwise called Saint Germain,
which is the chief monestary or abbie of Saint Benet. And twenty years after
that they took the port of Ancona and over ran all the coasts on that side of
the Golfe of Venice, and likewise those on the other side on the coast of
Sclauonie: and this done in the reigns of Lotharie son of Lois le Piteux king
of France, and Michaell Emperor of Constantinople about the year of our Lord
God 900. they likewise assailed the territories of Pulia and Calabria in the
kingdom of Naples, and wan Mont Gargan, otherwise called Le Mont Saint Auge)
when as Constantine son of Leo, who was son of Basilius. Emperor of
Constantinople reigned and that Berengier (of the ligne of the Lombards) caused
the eics of Jews (who was last Emperor of the ligne of the French men and
son unto to the Emperor Arnold) to be put forth.

In the year 923. Roman the Emperor of Constantinople, did stir the Sarazins
to invade the territories of Pulia and Calabria which rebelled against him:
Howbeit the Sarazins were overthrown at the river of Garriglian by the Marquiz
of Tuscan named Aulbry or Alberic, at the especial instance of Pope Iehan the
eleventh of that name.

In the year 930. the Sarazins won the town of Gennes, and spoiled all that
coast of the Sea, when the Berengiers occupied the Empire, and fortified the
town of Fraxinet which they kept 100 years.

Thus the Sarazins continued inuading and spoiling the sertile regions of Italy
(while the controversies were depending about the right of possessing the
Empire, between the French, the Greeks, and Lombards, and the discentions
were on foot between the Popes and the people of Rome in such sort, as they
enjoyed the most part of Pulia and Calabria which they kept even unto the year
of Grace 990 or thereabouts, that they were chased both from thence and out of
Sicilia also, by Tancred de Haulte Ville, or Haulte Fu^ille in Normandy, (who
first beegan with them) but ended by Guillaume Ferrabach son of the said
Tancred, with the help of Maloch leiuetenant of Michaell Cathalau Emperor of
Greece: And so they did bring back from the hands of the Sarazins Pulia,
Calabria, and Sicilia, whereof the said Guillaume remained lord, in the time of
Robert the French king, and of the Emperor Otho, the third of that name.

In the year of our Lord 1040. the number of Sultains or Soldains began to be
many: For in every Province, the Caliph) as I before declared) did institute
one as at Damasco one; at Hames another; at Halep the third: in Egypt another,
and the like in sundry other places; who falling at dissension one with the
other, did in the end reuoult from the obedience of the Caliph. In Hispain
likewise, every of the Moors that could get under his obedience a city or
town, would immediately usurp the name of a king, as at Granado, Cordoua,
Toledo, Sarragosa, Ciuilia, and Valentia. In like manner was it used in Africa,
as at Tunes, Tripolis, Bugia, Maroch, Fesse, and Tremessen and other places
also there, so as in manner no kind of amity or friendship was maintained
among these kings, but for the most part continual dissension and wars. Whereof
when the Turks had got intelligence (who as yet rested under the obedience of
the Caliph who were meruailously this while increased both in wealth and number
of people) and withal perceiving that the Sarazins were wonderfully weakened
and diminished through these intestine deuisions and wars thus among them
selves; they made a king who^ they called Sadoc (which name is so much to say
as Just) and invaded the Sarazins whom within short time they overthrew, so as
thereby they made themselves shortly dominators over whole Persia and Syria,
always with great reverence regarding in no wise to touch the Caliph, for the
high estimation that they bare him who was suffered still to live quietly at
Baudras. And at whose hands the said Sadocke would be named and created the
Sultan of Asie, howbeit he lived not long afrer.

After Sadoc, his son Dogriz succeeded, who did annex to the gotten Empire of
his father the country of Mesopotamia which Diogines the Emperor of
Constantinople had recovered from the Sarazins at such time as they had wars
among them selves as likewise the whole country of Cilicia, which he gave to
his cosen Arthot.

To Dogriz succeeded Aspalam his son; who about the year of our Lord God
1080. did send his Nephew Solomon into Cappadocia (being than under the
possession of the Greeks) to whom he gave all there, that he could conquer:
Who in such sort guided his affairs, that he brought under his obedience the
whole Asia the less; except the Sea coasts toward the South, and the Isle of
Cipres: And this was that valiant Soliman that gave charge upon the famous
Godefroy de Buillon and the army of the christians remaining in siege before
the town of Niece, in Asia the less, as before I have showed; which Solomon
the said Hayton does name Solimansa.

About this time a Gentleman of Hispain named Rodrigo de Vuiar, chased the
Moors out of a great part of the realm of Valence in Aragon and from much of
Whence ^ family of Mendoza in Spain had their beginning.
Castile, who was named by the Moors, through his excellency, Cyd: (that is
to say, Lord) and Cyd Ruydas, from whom the noble and famous race of the
Mendozzas are descended.

To Aspalam succeeded Melechla his son who sent Arthot the Sultan of
Mesopotamia to Antioche, whereunto also by his commandment, came the said
Solomon and took the same city with all the country about, and thus you see
how the Greeks lost all Asia the less.

Belchiarot, son of Melechla reigned after his father, who lived when as
Godefroy and the christians passed into the holy land, and besieged the city
of Antioche in Suria, being then under the dominion of the said Belchiarot, and
by him committed to the defense of a Turk named Assan or Cassan whom in
Antioche he had ordeigned his General, to whom after he sent in succor one
named (by Hayton) Cerbagat, and by the Frenchmen Corbadas, who arrived there
when the christians had already gotten Antioche, where upon he beseeged them
in the same city a long time, but in the end Corbadas was fought with by the
christians overthrown and put to flight, as in the History of that iourny
plainly appears, wherefore Corbadas now returning back into Persia found that
Belchiarot was dead, and that his youngest brother pretending right to the
crown was slain. Now when the Turks of Persia could not accord and agree whom
to make their King, but fought long among themselves thereupon, the fame of
their dissension came to the ears of the Georgiens and Armenians their
neighbors, being christians, who considering the great army of the other
christians than remaining in Sury, immediately invaded the Turks thus divided
among themselves, and did beat and chase them out of Persia, so that such of
the Turks as could escape some retired toward Solomon, and some to Arthot, and
others of their nation, being than in Asi^ the less. And this was in the year
of our Lord God 1106. at such time as Baldouin brother to Godsrey reigned king
in Jerusalem. This Georgiens after that they had thus chased the Turks out of
Persia pilled and spoiled the country, and forbearing from farther pursuit of
their good fortune (as they should) against the Souldans of Damasco, Halep,
Hames, and others that remained in quietness. But with the Armenians departing
from the realm of Persia, a certain people among the Corasmins (whom some
Latin Historiographers do call Grossiones) neighbors to that province which
diverse do think to be those whom the ancients do name to be the Medes who
upon the East have the Sea called Mare Caspium, Hircanum or Abucuth, and on the
South Turquesten or Parthia, and upon the North Cumania or Alania, and upon the
Occident or West Persia and Armenie the greater) who had none other vocation,
trade or condition of life, but lived like herdmen and keepers of cattle,
having among them neither house or town (howbeit very valiant in wars) these
entered then into Persia, where, of very poor catiues, they beecame a rich
people and made a King among them called lalaladin (which signifies the gift
or grace of God.) With this their king they became so hardy and bold as to
invade the Turks being in Asia the less: howbeit they were encountered by the
Souldan of Turque named Aladin and overthrown in a sore foughten field in
which conflict lalaladin their King lost his life, and the rest that escaped
did assemble themselves in the plain of Rohai^, with purpose to have entered
into Sury. But the Souldan of Aleph did enbarre them of that passage, and
chased them even unto the deserts of Arabia, who from thence, trauasing the
territory of Caldee or Assyrie, they passed the river of Euphrates nigh to a
castle there named Cacabe, and entered into Judea (otherwise called the
Jerusalem) where they committed much outrage and damage. Howbeit in the end
this multitude of disordered people could not long abide togethers considering
every of them would be a ruler, so as their Captain that should have
commanded could not be obeyed, and so they departed by troops and companyes,
whereof some retired toward the Sultan of Damasco, others toward him of
Halep, and some to him of Hames, but the most of them repaired to the Sultan of
Egypt, to whom likewise repaired their Captain Bartat; seeing himself so
abandoned and forsaken of his own soldiors. And thus decayed the force of this
nation of the Corasmins (whom the writers of the passage and journey of Godfrey
do call Hoarmins,) who maynteined their reputation but a little time.

IN this manner the Turks remained in Surie, chiefly the Corasmins. Now for
the Sarazins they divided themselves into little realms unto the year of our
Lord God 1240. or thereabouts, that the Tartares overthrew them as hereafter
shall be declared; whilst in the mean time the Turks daily continued wars
against the kings of Hyerusalem as follows.

IN the year of our Lord God 1103. the Turks took prisoner Boemund the
Prince of Antioche (son of Robert Guiscard surnamed Courbespine descended
from Tancred, the Norman of whom before I made mention.) Who, three years
after, was redeemed by his nephew Tangrey.

IN the year 1105. the Turks made head against Baldwyn the first of that name
(King of Hyerusalem brother Ptolemais Opp: nunc Acre. Laodicea Opp nunc,
Licquee Berythus Opp: nunc, Baruth.
of Godefray) as he besieged the town of Acre, and were overthrown, after
which that town (otherwise called Accon and Ptolemais) was taken by Baldowyn
together with the town of Licquee, which the ancients called Laodicea. And
four years after that he took the town of Baruth sometime called Berythus,
and so likewise the town of Sydon.

In the year of our Lord 1115 the Turks vanquished and put to flight king
Baldwin the second of that name at Montreal.

In the year 1120. King Baldwin took Gazis (whom some do call Gary,) from
the Souldan of Damaz.

In the year of our Lord 1122. King Baldwin was taken prisoner by Balach
(named by some Alaph) Gamela Opp: nunc, Hames.
Souldan of Hames (aunciently called Camela or Gamela and Gaucamela.) which
word Balach signifies a destroier: So as he remained there prisoner by the
space of one year.

The year of our Lord God 1128 King Baldwin discomfited Doloquin (of some
named Baldoquin) and of others called Baldecan, Souldan of Damaz, who succeeded
to the Souldan Gazes.

The year 1132 Foulques Daniou who married the daughter of King Baldwin, and
succeeded in the kingdom Geth: nunc Ybelim.
of Jerusalem, overthrew the Turks at Ybelim which Place holy Scripture
calls Geth.

The year 1140 or there abouts, Alaph (or Balach) Souldan of Hames, took the
town of Rohaiz and there unmercifully murdered a great number of Christians.

The year 1143 King Baldwin the third of that name, son of king Fulque
discomfited at Hierico, the valiant Norradin (son to Baldecan,) Sultan of Damaz.

The year 1146. The Emperor Conrad and King Jews of France, son of Jews
le Groz passed into Surie, where with king Baldowin they besieged the town of
Damasco, but could not take the same, and therefore they returned home into
their Countries.

The year 1148 after the departure of these said two Princes, Norradin the
Souldan of Damasco besieged Antioche, where Raimond the Conte of Antioche
issuing forth in a skirmish was unfortunately slain, the Contes of Rohaiz and
Tripoli taken prisoners, which Contee of Tripoli, after, was shamefully
murdered by an Assassin.

The year 1160 Almery king of Jerusalem brother to king Baldowin, took the
town Alexandria, and beesieged the great city of Caire in Egypt.

The year 1170. Saladin the Souldan of Egypt began to invade the holy land in
the time of king Baldowin the fourth of that name king of Jerusalem, at what
time likewise the Emperor Frederic made war upon the Pope and the church in
burning and destroying Italy.

The year 1174 king Baldowin discomfited the Souldan Tyberias Opp: nunc,
Tabaria
Saladin, at the town of Tabaria (which sometime was called Tiberias) and
after that overthrew a second time at the town of Ascalone.

The year 1179 king Baldowin aforesaid fought again with the Souldan Saladin
at Margelion nigh to the town of Tabarie, where king Baldowin then was
discomfited.

The year 1184 began that discention among the Christians in the holy land,
which was the cause of the loss of the same: The original of which was this
Guy of Lusignen, having married the Lady Sibil sister of the late king Baldowin
(and widow of William Longuespee Marquis of Monferrato) by whom she had a son
named Baldowin who at that time but sucked his Nurce to whom appettained the
kingdom of Jerusalem; the said Guy of Lusignen father in law of the infant
would needs have his title and wardship against the will and mind of Bartrand
Contee of Tripoly to whose tuition and governance the child was given by force
of the testament of king Baldowin, brother of the said lady Sibell, when in the
mean time the infant died and there upon Guy of Lusignen named himself king in
the right of his wife, wherewith the Contee of Tripoly was wonderfully wroth.

The year 1186 Saladin took prisoner Guy of Lusignen king of Jerusalem, with
the masters of the Templars and of the order of Saint John that came to
succor the town of Tabarie, which the said Saladin had then besieged, so as
upon restoring of king Guy, and the both aforenamed masters to their
liberties, Tabarie, Lique, and Ascalone were rendered to Saladin, who in the end
wan also the city of Jerusalem, and after yt the town of Acres.

The year 1147 the Templars reencountred Saladin, nigh to Casal Robert, where
Saladin ouethrew them, and slew in fight the master of the order of Saint
John Jerusalem named Brother Roger dez Molins, which happened the first day of
May that year.

In the year of our Lord God 1149 there passed to succor the holy land the
Emperor Frederic Barberossee, Philip the French King, and Richard King of
England: Frederic took his way by land, and coming into Cilicia, where
thorough extreme heat, desirous to bath himself (or as some say in passing
the river, which some do call Cauno, and the frenchmen, the river of Salif,
and the latins do name Cydnus which passes through the famous city of
Tharsus, at this present named Therasso) was unfortunately drowned. The two
kings his confederates arrived in Sicilia, and from the town of Mossana they
passed into the holy land, and came to the town of Acre, which after two
years beesieging they took. King Richard in his passage thither took the
Island of Cypres which he gave to king Guy of Lusignen in exchange for the
kingdom of Jerusalem: But after the taking of Acre king Phillip being sickly
returned into France.

The year 1204 Baldouin Earl of Flaunders and Henry Conte de Saint Paul,
with his brother Loys Conte de Sauoy, and the Conte Boniface and Mont ferrat,
with a great company assembled themselves at Venice, to pass from thence into
the holy land. To whom the Venetians did grant ships upon condition that
before they passed they should aid them to recover the town of Zara in
Sclauonie (which before had revolted from them) and so having done they after
proceeded on their voyage to Constantinople whereof they possessed themselves
in the Empire which remained in the frenchmens hands about threescore years
after.

The year 1210. Ichan de Brene, married the daughter of Conrad of Montferrat,
and the Lady Isabell daughter of king Amaulry: who was sister of Baldouin the
Meseled; and of the Lady Sibel that was wife to Guy of Lusignen: Which said
Ichan de Brene was made king of Jerusalem, and crowned at the town of Tyrus
(which commonly is called Sur and Sor) by reason that it is situated upon a
rock in the sea. But Alexander the great to the intent to win that town
filled up all that distance of the sea betwixt the same and the land with stone
and earth, so as at this day the same remains firm ground, which town of
Tirus, came into the possession of the said Conte Conrad who afterward was
shamefullie, on a sudden, murdered, by a couple of the sect of the Assassins.

In the year 1216. Pope Honorius the third of that name did send the Cardinal
Colonne into Surie accompanied with Henry Contee of Neuers and Gualtier of
Sancerre constable of France with others in a great number: who after their
landing in Acre, descended into Egypt, and took there the town of Damiat,
which within six years after, upon composition, was surrendered to Cordier son
of Saladin, Souldan of Egypt: whom the frenchmen do call Le Admiral des
Cords; In which time also Iehan de Brene king of Jerusalem accompanied with
his brother Garin de Montaguae great master of the order of Saint John's came
into France, and in passing through Italy, the said king of Jerusalem gave
his daughter Yolant By what ti^ the kings of Spain challenge the right of the
crown of I rusalem.
in marriage to the Emperor Frederic (second son to Henry, who was son to
Frederic Barberousse) with the whole interest and title which he had to the
kingdom of Jerusalem, which the Kings of Sicilia do entitle themselves to
and claim at this day.

The year 1229. the said Emperor Frederic departed out of Italy giving hopes
that he would pass into Surie, but incontinently he returned again as one
having small devotion to perform that voyage.

In the year 1230 the aforenamed Sultan Corder caused the walls of Jerusalem
to be overthrown at such time as the Emperor Frederic persecuting the
church, gave beginning to the partialities of the Guelfs and Gibelins and
therewith not contented; did call in the Sarazins of Africa to his service, and
gave to them the town of Nucera in Italy (which yet is called Nucera des
Sarazins) from which afterward they were expulsed by the Frenchmen.

In the year 1237 Theobald king of Navarre, Emery Contee of Mont fort, and
Henry Contee of Campaign, and Bar with a great army passed through Hungary
and Constantinople into Surie, and recovered sundry towns which the Sarazins
before had won, but encountering with the Sultan Corder beetwixt the towns
of Acre, and Gazera (sometime called Gaza) there they were discomfited and
overthrown by the same Sultan.

In the year of our Lord God 1244 the christians were discomfited at a place
called Forbye, where were taken the Master of our order of Saint John's called
brother Guillaume de Chasteln^uf and the Master of the Templers named brother
Herman de Pierresort, the Archbishop of Sury, and two sons of Signeur de
Boteron, (which otherwise was called Botrus) with more then three hundred
Gentlemen; At which time likewise the cruel wars by sea began betwixt the
Venetians, and the Geneuoys about the intrest and possession of the Monestary
of Saint Saba in the town of Acre in Sury, which may well be said another
cause of y loss of the holy land.

In the year 1249 Jews the French king, otherwise named Saint Jews, passed
the Seas and was taken prisoner before the town of Damiat in Egypt, by the
Sultan Melechsalem, but after his atteined liberty he recovered the towns of
Sidon and Iaffe aunciently called Ioppe before that time taken by the said
Sultan. I am now come unto the time that the Tartares invaded the Turks or
Turquimans, but to the end it may be better understood how this came to pass,
and from whom this people of the Tartares have their being, it behooves me a
little to turn back, and to begin a little before this time.

In the year 1231. in that country of Tartaria which at this day is called
Catay, (and the Oriental Scythia) at which time the Tartares lived without
knowledge of any law, or sorme of government: there was one (by Hayton) called
Cangy, and by Paulus Venetus, Chinchis, but by Michael a Michou, (Cinguis)
beegotten upon a widow during her widdowhood: who having other children by her
former husband, they would have stain her all for she had conceived this
Cangy while she was widow: howbeit she so wittely behaved her self in her
words, that she caused them believe, how she conceived that birth by force of
the beams of the sun; and other father in name the child had not, which
opinion so taking place, was not only available to the mother, but also
afterward to Cangy, who coming to perfect age, brought this barbarous people
to believe that the almighty God, had sent him to be their king; and to make
them Lords of those other nations to whom even unto that time they had been
tributaries, by reason they never had head to guide the.

And so prudentlie this Cangy can led himself that he subdued all his
neighbors, and therefore was ^u^named Cangy Can, (or Cham) he reigned twelve
years, and died by the stroke of an Arrow which had wounded him in the knee at
the aslault of a castell^^ his Cangy was the first that persuaded the Tartares
to believe in one God.

To Cangy Cham, succeeded Hoccata his son, who to know countries further of,
sent ten thousand horse men to invade the territory of Cappadocia than
possessed by the Turks by whom these Tartares were overthrown: with which
loss Hoccata being not a little moved, he sent again, thirty thousand men,
whom he called Tamachi (that is to say conquerers) against whom, upon the
fronters of Cappadocia (which the Turks call Genech) came Guijatadin king of
the said Turks, (whom Sabellicus does name Goniat.) In whose army were two
thousand christians (the remainder of the forces, that before came into Surie)
conducted by two ^ aptains where of the one was called John Liminad of the
Island of Cypres, and the other Boniface du Chasteau a Geneuoys ( Sabellicus
calls this Boniface, Boniface du Molin who he says was a Venetian,) but in
that days deed Guijatadin and his Turks were discomfited in the year of our
Lord God 1239. about which time also Hoccata died, leaving behind him three
sons, the one named Cin (whom Paul the Venetian calls Cui) and of others
Guys and Guyscan,) the second was called Iochy, and the third Baydo or Batho
(as Michaell of Michou says.)

After Hoccata, his son Cin or Cui succeeded, whose reign not long continued.

Next to him, Mango or Mongu whom (Sabellicus calls Metho) cosen to the faid
Hoccata possessed the Empire of Tartaria. This is that Mango Cham, to whom Pope
Innocent the fourth, of that name, did send Frees Ascelin, (one of the order of
the Freers Preachers:). in the year of our Lord God 1266. as Vincent the
Historial and Michael a Michou do report.

IOCHY whom some do call Iachis one of the sons of the said Hoccata took
his way toward the West (being the countries of Turquesten and the Corasmins
and part of the Region of Persia) even unto the river of Tygris which Hayton
calls Phison (but I believe that Phison is that River which is called Ganges)
where Iochy remained.

BAYDO or Batho, the third son of Hoccato passed thorough Russie, Cumanie, or
Comanie, and Moscouia and entered into Polone, Hungary, and Austruhe burning and
destroying the countries before him which afterward thorough famine he was
enforced to abandon and so, to return into Tartarie Comanie, which is beeyond
the sea Mayor, (called Pontus Euxinus) but at this day Zauolha and Zahady. Some
do affirm that this country of Comanie is that which Strabo calls Cataonia
part of Capadocia, at this day called Cricassj. The said Baydo was called by
the Polonians, Bathy and Zaim Cham, of whom Tamberlane the great descended (as
Michael a Mechou says, who did write of these great distructions in these
North Regions done by Baydo) which was in the year of our Lord God 1263.

To Iochy in the orient, succeeded his son (named according to Hayton,)
Barath, and (after Paulus Venetus) Barachim.

IN the year of our Lord God 1250. or there abouts at such time as king Jews
(otherwise called S. Jews) the French king passed the seas: The king of
Armenie being a christian (and named Hayton, perceiving that the Tartaires had
conquered so many countries, and were entered into Natolie, purposed to
enterteine amity and league with the said Mango Cham or Mongu; Who (as
before) succeeded to his cousin Gin or Cuj, son to Hoccata in the realm of
Tartarie, only to have aid against the Caliph of Baudraz and the Turks of
Damasco, Halep, Haman and other places: for which he sent toward him the great
Constable of Armenie named Sinebaud, but the year after, he went in person;
where he obtained such favor with the said Mango Cham, that the same Cham
received the holy law of the christian faith and was baptized by a Bishop being
the chancellor of Armenie, with a brother also of his whom Hayton (being cosen
Germain of the said king of Armenie) calls Haullon, and Paul the Venetian
Allau. This Allau was sent by his brother Mango Cham with the king of Armenie
aforesaid, accompaned with a mighty army to make war on the Turks, who
passed the river of Tygris and took the realm of Persia which remained
without governor since the Corasmins had inioyed the same.

After which he invaded and took the country of the Assassins (whom the
Latins do call Arsacides) of Arsacides.
which people there is much mention made in the histories of the passage of the
famous Godefride de Boillon.

For which cause it cannot be much from my purpose if I declare partly where
this country of the Assassins lies, and what people they be. This territory
being no great country is situated at the foot of the mountain Libanus toward
the Orient (as Brocard the Monk affirms) beyond Antaradus otherwise called
Tortosa, and frontereth upon Persia toward the North (which both the said
Hayton and Paul the venetian do call Mulete.) The Lord of this country was
called Aloadin or Aladin which signifies Divine or of God.

THE Histories of the said passage do name it le viel de la Montaigne (as
also do Hayton and Paul the Venetian, who were then living.) This territory
is, as it were a plain, environed round about with mountains, into the which,
was but one only entry and passage: upon the which, Aladin aforesaid caused
a great fortress to be builded named Tigado. All the said plain naturally
Tigado.
is very fertile and pleasant to the eye, by reason of the fair meadows,
brooks, woods and groves, wherewith the same does plentifully abound. Besides
which natural contents, this Aladin had furnished the said plain every where
with beautiful Gardins, vergers, rich palaces, and houses of pleasure, in most
sumptuous wise that could be devised; and therewith caused the same to be
enhabited with the fairest young men and women of the best faces that any where
he could find. For which purpose too he waged certain soldiors, to awaite and
watch the getting of such young men and beautiful women. Hayton says that
this Aladin cared for no manner of Religion. Paul the Venetian says that he
was a Mahemetist.

When Aladin had thus surprised any young man, he was brought to this castle
of Tigado, and within a little time on some fair day when the sun did shine
very clear, one should come and bring this man (thus taken) a drink, which
would enforce him so strongly to sleep* that he should so remain a very long
space without any manner of moving or feeling as though he were plainly dead.
Than would he cause him to be borne into this vallie and so thorough his fair
palaices and gardens among his beautiful women, and withal, to be clothed in
rich apparel. So as, when he waked he found himself an other man, and as
though comde into a new world. In such his galantrie, he was straight ways
enterteygned feasted with the Ladies there, and wonderfully welcomed, with
the show of all manner of pastimes and trained to all kind of pleasures: which
youth and lust could desire, and this so long as all that day would endure. At
night after a certain banquet prepared, whereupon to repast, the like drink as
before, to make him sleep, again was given him. Thus being made to sleep;
his sumptuous apparel was taken of, and his former garments put on, and so
brough again into the said fortress from whence he went, and into such place
as might be much unlike to that which he had been before. So as upon his
awaking, he should soon perceive himself in an obscure and evil sented old
chamber clean changed, from the place, where he could not but remember he had
been before. When Aladin upon conference with him, would declare that the
place where he had been was Paradise, and that it was in his power to send
him thither when he would, if therefore the young man had mind to continue
such blessedness for ever it was granted upon condition that he would take
courage and hardiness to adventure his life and to die for him in such service
as upon occasion he would command. To which numbers of young men for
recovery of that felicity and Paradize whereof before they had tasted, would
soon give their consent, as not esteeming any adventure dangerous whereby to
atteigne that which he most desired, when Aladin to make these men the more
fervent to execute his desires would cause them sundry times to be had to
these places of pleasure and to taste thereof as before: And thus served this
pestilent Viel de la Montaigne for sending abroad his wicked Ministers to
murder and kill Princes even in their own houses, who cared not of the loss
of their own lives in executing their dampnable purposes, so that they might
atteigne their vain Paradize as they expected, before hand promised by Aladin.
Of this pernicious band, were those Assassines, that had almost killed Richard
King of England in his own Pa^ilio^ being in the holy land, one of which
likewise murdered at Sur, Conrade the Contee of Montferrat; and an other that
valiant Contee of Tripoly in his own house, whereby I think the Italians do
call those to be Assassins* which we in our French tongue do call Brigans,
that is to say, spoylers and cut-throtes.

The said Allau therefore besieged the same strong fortress of Tigado; where
before he could get the same he did lie there in siege the space of three
years. Hayton says he beesieged it by the space of seven and twenty
years and in the end for want and lack of clothes to cover their bodies
(though they had victuals enough) the Soldiors defendaunts yielded the castle
which afterward was razsed and laid level with the earth: while the siege
thus continued Allau returned into Persia, and king Hayton into Armenye.

IN the year of our Lord God 1255. Allau with the king of Armenie returned and
came against the Caliph of Baudraz, where they besieged him in Baudraz, which
in the end they took, with the Caliph also, and all his treasure, being of an
inestimable value. Which treasure when Allau had seen, he demanded of the
Caliph, why he did not therewith, leauie and wage soldiors for his own
defense, considering his so great means. Whereunto the Caliph answered; that
unto that time, he always supposed, his own subjects had been sufficient
enough to have resisted any ^orreine enemy, which Allau understanding,
immediately caused all that treasure to be had into a tower and the Caliph
there to be set in the midst of the same treasure, prohibiting that any
should give him either meat or drink, whereby he miserably dyed thorough
famine in the middle of his riches. And thus ended the Empire of the Caliphes of
Baudraz which unto that time had endured about six hunderd years.

THE year of our Lord 1260. Allau and the King of Armeny again did assemble
their armies in the plains of Rohaiz, to the end to recover the City of
Jerusalem and the residue of the holy land. Who when they had taken the tower
of Rohaiz, they removed to Alep, which was rendered to them, the ninth day
after the besieging thereof, though the castle of Alep held forth unto the
eleventh day after that they besieged the City of Damasco, which also was
rendered where the Souldains of these two places, being taken prisoners, were
sent into PERSIA with their Wives and Children.

The Prince of Antioche at that time was called Raymonde de Austriche, that
married the daughter of the said King Hayton of Armenie, to whom were given
back all the lands and territories which the Turks before had bereft him.
And to the said king of Armenie was given the said town of Alep and other
places which were frontering and nigh to his dominions.

Howbeit, as Allau was nigh to Hyerusalem, there came intelligence that his
brother Mango was dead: Whereupon Allau, purposing to depart into Tartarie,
leaft in Sury with the king of Armenie, a nephew of his called Guibogan (named
by Sabellicus, Garbocao, and by others Guithboga) with ten thousand horsemen.
And so ALLAV departed out of Sury toward the town of Almalech where MANGO
deceassed.

But there he understood, that the Tartaires had chosen to their King another
of his brotheren named Cobila, (whom Paul the Venetian does call Cublay) with
which Cublay, the said Paul was very familyar; by whom, the same Paul was
sent into France unto Pope Clement the fourth of that name in the year of our
Lord God 1268. at such time as the French lost the Empire of Constantinople,
and that Carles de Aniou brother of the king saint Jews, was made king of
Naples and Sicilie.

Guibogan pursuing his enterprise, conquered a great part of Surie, with the
help of the king of Armenie. Howbeit he would not utterly drive forth the
Turks, but only made them Tributaries. Whereby it came so to pass, that the
Christians of Sydon could not there abide the Turks to be so nigh their
neighbors, invaded certain villages of the Turks, their neighbors being
tributaries to the said Guibogan; and spoiled them and took prisoners of them,
and drove away their cattle: Such as escaped, came to Guibogan to complain.
Who immediately sent to the Christians at Sydon for redress: Howbeit in stead
of amends, the Christians slew the messengers of Guibogan. Whereupon Guibogan
gathered his power against Sydon, and in the end he overthrew the wall of
Sydon, and the castle of Beaufort, and therewith also did set a side a great
part of the amity that before he did bear to the Christians of Surye.

The Christians in Sury, being thus at dissension with Guibogan who also was a
christian, and come unto their aid: the Souldan of Egypt named Cathos, and
surnamed Melechmees, that is to say, a King of people, made wars upon Guibogan,
so that in a battle, Guibogan was overthrown and slain, whereby the country
of Surie remained under the obedience of the said Melechmees saving certain
towns which the christians kept still; in the year of our Lord 1274.

At which time the town of Damasco was shamefully lost and beetrayed and sold
by a Sarazine that had the same in guard, to Melechmees. Allau, this while
being in Persia, and advertised of this overthrow of Guibogan and the victory
of Melechmees, and thereof giving intelligence to the kings of (...)ie, and
Georgie, he raised a great army, that joining with the forces of these two
kings, he purposed to have entered into Surie, to have recovered that which
there was lost, and being in readiness to have set forward, he was suddenly
taken with sickness, whereof within a while after he died.

Abagan son of Allau succeeded his father and would not become a Christian,
as his father was, but took upon him the supersticion of the sect of Mahumet,
and made wars upon his neighbors, whereby the power and might of the Souldans
of Egypt began meruailously to augment and increase, insomuch as Bendecar
otherwise called Benedecadar whom Hayton calls Benededar, and by himself
named Melechdaer which signifies the abundant or puisant king, being Sultan
of Egypt, did win the city of Antioch upon the christians, with sundry other
towns, and after allied himself with the sarrares of Cumdnie and Cappad^^^,
and after invaded Armenia, during such time as king Hayton the king of Armenia
was tournied and gone to A^^al^^^ toward Cobila or Cublay cham. The two s^^^
of the king of Armenia, upon such inua(...) made by the Souldan, encountered ^he
Souldan with a great Army, which consisted of twelve thousand horsemen, and
forty thousand f^^^^^^n: (...) Souldan overthrew them and did (...) with the
(...) of one of those sons of the king of Armenia, and the other so^ led
captive into Egypt. Hayron hearing of this overthrow hastily (...) Armenia, and
p(...)g that he could not (...) of Abagan to (...), he proceeded no farther but
fell to composition, with the Souldan Melechdaer, and rendered to him the town
of Alep with Sangolassar a nigh kinseman of the said Souldan for the recovery
of his said son, being prisoner as aforesaid, who upon the same conclusions
was accordingly redeliuered to his said father. King Hayton upon the return of
the same his son did crown him king of Armenia, whose name was Thyuon; and
after that Hayton entered into religion, and named himself Macarie, which
signifies blessed, when he had reigned over the Armenians forty and five
years, and died soon after, how beit before he died he pacified king Abagan
with his neighbors the year of Grace 1273.

After the death of king Hayton, Melechdaer that had conquered Antioche and
Cilicia, purposing further to enter into Natolye where were sundry governors
and Captains of the Tartares being subject to Abagan, among whom thene was a
Sarazin named Paruana, who had secret conference with ye Sultan Melechdaer,
where of Abagan getting intelligence, raised a great army, and marched toward
the Souldan, which the Souldan understanding, the Sultan would not abide him
but fled, and Abagan followed him into Egypt, so far as he could for the great
heats of the country, which enbarred him to proceed any further, nevertheless
in this chase he overthrew ^oe than two thousand ^^^^emen pertaining to the
said Souldan, and after Ab again returned into Natolie, and took Paruana, and
caused him to be sawed in sunder with a saw after the manner that the Far^^res
do use, and so to be cut in go^^i^s and pecces, wherewith they being served at
their table* they did ^ated (...) as the same meat endured.

After that Abagan, had thus set in quietness the country of Natolie, he
offered to give the same to King Thyuon of Armenia, but he durst not receive
the same, through sear of the Souldan of Egypt, in excusing courteously
himself and aledging that the realm of Armenia was big enough for him to
govern, so that to have greater dominions were but further troubles to him,
and therefore most heartily he thanked him of his most gentle offer; which he was
bounden to remember upon due occasion, upon which refusal Abagan committed the
gouerna^ce and regement of Natolye to sundry of his own Captains, among the
which one named Othoman was one, from whom the Princes of the Turks, that
presently reign, are descended.

Abagan returned into Persia, where he stayed a certain time, and in the mean
season he was stirred by the said king Thiuon of Armenia to make war upon the
Sultan of Egypt, named Melechsayt (that is to say the king desired) who
succeeded next to Melechdaer and molested the said king Thiuon: for which cause
Abagan did send Mangodanior his brother with thirty thousand horsemen joined
with the army of the same King of Armenia against the said Souldan Melechsayt,
and came before the town of Hames, where they found encamped the army of the
Sarazins, and thereupon each side preparing to fight; they ordered their army,
and divided them into three battelles, whereof the one was under the leading of
Mangodanior, the second was guided by King Thiuon, and the third by a Captain
Tartarian named A^^^ech or Achmat, (which signifies gracious) these two, so
worthily behaved themselves with their battails against the like number of
Sarazines, that those Sarazins were vanquished and put to flight. The mean
time, Mangodanior who had no manner of experience (as it seemed) in wars,
without giueing any manner of charge upon the enemy, which toward him was
ready to encounter against him, he gave himself shamefully to fly, and
stayed not a whit until he came to the river of Euphrates which they call
Euphra, though he was not pursued or chased at all by the third battle of the
Sarazins, which consisted of those people called Beduins: who in the holy
Scripture are named Madiani or Madianites, and to succor their companions that
were overthrown and fled, followed their fellows so fast as they could; but
the next day, when king Thyu on and Achmet were returned from the chase to
Hames, and perceiving that Mangodanior was in such order departed, they
follovved him, and ouertooke him at the said river; and instantly required him
to return, declaring to him how they had vvon the battle and put the
Sarazins to flight, but for any thing they could say or aledge he would not
return but immediately retired toward his brother into Persia, about the
year of our Lord God 1282 Abagan being not a little displeased with the
flight and cowardnesse of his brother, was purposed to have gone in his own
person against the Souldain, howbeit he was enpoisoned by a Sarazin and died
leuing behind him two sons, the one named Argon and Ragait.

Tangodor nevertheless succeeded to his brother Abagan being elected by Tartares
to be their king, this Tangodor was sometime a christian, and at the time of
his baptism he was named Nicolas, but through his tomuch keeping company with
Sarazins, he became a Mahomatist and was named Mahumet, he caused to be
destroyed and overthrown all the churches of the Christians within his
dominions, and entered in amity and league with Melechsayt Souldan of Egypt,
wherefore one of his own brethren together with his said nephew Argon, accused
him before Cobila Cham of the aforesaid crimes, whereupon Cobila Cham sent him
word and commanded him to amend and redress those injuries which he had done
and from thence forth to live in a better sort, or otherwise he would extremely
punish him: but Tangodor, nothing amended with this advertisement from Cobila
Cham, in dispight, he caused his said brother to be apprehended, and to be put
to death. Howbeit his nephew Argon, upon this escaped from him, and fled to the
mountains, and after, with the aid and help of his friends and servants of
Abagan his faide father, he surprised and took Tangodor and caused him to be
sawen in sunder in the middle after that he had reigned three years in the
year of grace 1283.

Argon after that he had put to death Tangodor his uncle was elected king, but
he would never accept the name and title of Cham without the leave of Cobila
who perceiving the same gladly thereto did condescend. This Argon was a
christian and caused to be reedified and repaired the Churches which his uncle
wickedly before had destroyed. He was visited by the kings of Armenia and
Georgia to whom he promised he would go with them to recover the holy land,
but the mean time he died, as one that had not the leisure to perform that
worthy promise, after that he had reigned three years, at such time as
Melechnazer Souldan of Egypt flourished.

After Argon, succeeded Ragayt his brother, called by Sabellicus Queghat, and
by others, Tagadayt, a man most unprofitable to rule without either faith or
law, hated of his own, and utterly abhorred of strangers, he had a son named
Cassan Baydo or Bathy and according to Sabellicus called Bandon, and had a
cosen also called Cassan which succeeded him anno domino 1290. This said Cassan
Baydo was a christian, and honored the Churches of God, and prohibited that
none should speak of Mahumet, which those that followed the sect, took it in
marvelous evil part, and secretly advertised the said Cassan or Assan which
was son to the said Argon that if he would forsake the christian faith
being also a christian, they would proclayme him king; unto whom this Cassan,
son to Argon accorded, and under this promise and hope Cassan son to Argon
raised war against his cosen Baydo, which Baydo hearing gathered his power
togethers and encou^tred Cassan; and joining in battle Baydo was shamefully
forsaken by his own subjects being Mahometists, that revolted to the part of
Cassan, and so Baydo there was slain.

After the death of Baydo, Cassan was called king, but at the first, he durst
not declare what was resting secretly in his mind against those who brought him
to this dignity by the means abouesayde. Howbeit when he thought himself
assured and confirmed in his regal authority, he beegan first to show
himself a friend to christians, and then he commanded to be put to death
those who counseled him to deny the christian faith.

And after he addressed an army against the Sultan of Egypt and the Sarazins
of the which his purpose Cassan advertised the kings of Armenia and Georgie,
who with their armies came and joined with him at Baudras, and from thence
marched to the town of Hames which is situated in the midst of Sury, where the
Souldan of Egypt called Melechseraph who had chased the christians out of Sury
came against them with a great army and encamped in a great meadow, thereby
supposing to have surprised the christians, and albeit he found the christians
partly in disorder, and so gave charge upon them, yet Cassan with the rest of
the christians so manfully fought it out, that in the end the Souldan was there
vanquished and put to flight: this battle was fought the seventh day before
Christmas day in the year of our Lord God 1300 At which battle the said
Hayton (that was cosen to the king of Armenia) says that he was present, and
did put the acts and doings of the same in writing. Cassan pursuing his
victory marched unto the town of Casana, where the Sultan had lodged a mighty
deal of his treasure, insomuch as Cassan took the town with all that
treasure there, and meruailed greatly what the Sultan meaned that in going to
the wars he would bring so much treasure with him, which treasure Cassan took,
and divided it among his soldiers. After that he marched to the city of
Damasco which was rendered to him, where he sound that City was no otherwise
furnishied but only with victual very plentifully, where the whole army of
Cassan stayed forty five days, saving sortie thousand horsemen under the
leading of their Captain Molay which pursued after the Souldan. Harton not a
little meruayleth that in so little as this Cassan was, were resident so many
virtues and valiant courage, though among thirty thousand men, there was not
a worse shaped and deformed person then he was.

Cassan being at Damasco, he received intelligence that one of his Cosens named
Baydo was entered into Persia with a great army, to invade him. For which
cause he returned into Persia to encounter Baydo, leaving behind him in Sury,
one called Molay with twenty thousand horsemen and at Damasco a Sarazins
named Capehach to be general of the same, who sometime before was in
marvelous favor with the Souldan of Egypt and through certain displeasures
betwixt them revolted from the Souldan, and to obtain his favor again this
Capehach shamefully rendered to the Sultan the town of Damasco, and other
towns thereunto adjoining.

Molay thus perceiving whole Sury stirred up into rebellion, he vvithdrew and
retired himself into Mesopotamia, and after gave intelligence to Cassan of the
troubles of Syria, who purposed the next winter ensuing, to return into Syria
because through the fervent heat of the summer then present there was noe
grass or other feeding for horses, how be it the mean time Cassan sent an
other Captain named Cotuloze otherwise called Caroloz with thirty thousand
horsemen giving him also in charge, to advertise immediately the king of
Armenia, and other christian Princes nigh to him adjoining of the journey, who
upon the intelligence, with their powers repaired and chiefly Thyuon king of
Armenia, Emery of Lusignen king of Cypres, the master of the hospital of
Saint John's Jerusalem, named brother Guillau de Villaret, and the Master of
the Templars, who all arrived by sea, at the town of Sur, and from thence
marched with their army, to the town of Tortosa aunciently called Antaradus:
But the mean time Cassan fell sick of a grievous disease, that so as these
wars for this time, proceeded no further, and every of the said princes with
their powers returned home into their countries.

Two years after Cassan determining to return in to Surie, again gave
intelligence of his purpose to the king of Armenia, and that he should meet
him at the river of Euphrates, where he and his army should abide for him,
which army of his, was so great, that the same occupied the grounds of three
days iourny in length. And as Cassan entered into Sury the said Baido invaded
the kingdom of Persia again, out of the which, before Cassan sundry times had
chased him, and therefore Cassan made toward him, with so much expedition as
he could, leaving Cotuloz with the king of Armenia and forty thousand
horsemen, to proceed in wars against the Souldan, who marched forward and
took the towns of Hames, and from thence went and besieged Damasco, where,
Cotuloz and the king of Armenie had intelligence, how that the Souldain came to
raze their siege: wherefore they leaving certain bands to continue their
siege, with the ^est of their army, they marched toward the Souldain, and
finding him so strongly encamped in such a place where they could do him small
harm, and that the Tartares through scarcety of fresh water, departed from
them by troops: Cotuloz and the king of Armenia returned to their siege of
Damasco, whereas in one night after, the waters about Damasco, began in such
sort suddenly to grow, and that the Sarazins thereabouts brake in sunder the
Sluses; that in less space then an hour, all the places where the army of the
Tartares and christians encamped, was drowned and overflowed with water, which
through the sudden coming of the flud, and the darkness of the night, was
the more dreadful to the whole army, as those that did not foresee that
water and inconvenience, whereby many of the Tartares there were drowned, as
ignorant of the passages to escape, considering the dikes that environed the
place of their encamping were both deep and filled with the ouerflow of this
water, so as a great number of the horses of the Tartares there likewise
perished, and all their baggage likewise: so as they that escaped had none
other mind but in have to return home into their country* and the truth to
say, they being thus turmoyled with waters, they were not good or meet to
abide any fight.

Considering as well their bows as arrows (which are the chiefest weapons that
they do use) were all to wet, and made unprofitable thereby to serve: so as if
the Sarazines that were very nigh them, had in this disorder given charge upon
the Tartares, they might have had a ^ight good market on them: Howbeeit, the
Sarazines as it seemed durst not issue upon them: so as the Tartares had
leisure enough to escape, who stayed not much until they came to the river of
Euphrates which they passed according to their custom (for Michaell de Michou
says, that every of them that had a horse did pack and fasten his wife
children and baggage upon the horse, and than the husband would take the tail
of the horse fast in his hand: and in swimming, the horse brought them all, so
to land, and thus, they used to pass rivers, were they never so great or broad.

The Armenians and Georgians that were in this army were enforced to retire, as
the Tartares did, though a great number of them also perished and were drowned,
and durst not abide, through the great doubt, they had of the Sarazins.

Hayton the Historiographer being an Armenian borne, says, that he himself
among others was in this army, when this departure chanced, and alleges,
that the whole fault of this disorder and departure was in Cotuloz, that would
not be advised by the King of Armenia, but only would follow his own wilful
brain: But the King of Armenia marched on to the City of Niniuie (which
stands on the river of Tygris,) called by Eusebius, Nicibis, where most
courteously he was receued by king Cassan, and at his departure Cassan
commanded ten thousand horsemen, paid at his own charges, not only to
attend and conduct the King of Armenia, into Armenia: but there to abide at the
kings appointment, to guard and defend the dominions of Armenia: unto such
time, as he the same Cassan could conveniently raise an other army to return
again in person against the Souldain of Egypt, but (alas to the great
infortunity of christendom) this valiant Cassan dyed soon after.

Some do suppose that of him Sury, took the name of Azamie, for that the Turks
call Azam or Assam, Assamie: Howbeeit, it may be, that this word Azamie is
derived from the ancient name of Aram, son of Sem, who were sons of Noe, of
whom, the same country once was named, and by the Hebrux, Aram, yt is to say
high or excellent, which they would pronounce Aramie.

After this Cassan or Assan, succeeded Carbagan, whom some do call Cerbagat,
and the Frenchmen name Corbadan son of the said Cassan, who also was christened
and at his baptism was named Nicolas, and so remained a good christian man
during his mothers life, but after his mothers decease, he wickedly fell into
the abominable sect of Mahumet, which all his successors after him, did never
forsake, and at this day do maintain the same.

Of the said Cassan or Assan are descended the kings of Persia, who in honor
of this Cassan, have taken upon them the Surname of Cassan, unto Vssun Cassan
of whom otherwhere we have made mention.

But now, we name the princes of Persia, Sophies, for that Seichayder Sophi,
married the daughter of Vsun cassan, and begat upon her, Ismael Sophi, who
reigned a little before our time, and was father to Taamar Sophi, who at this
day reigns in Persia. The Turks do call Persia, Pharsie: and the Persians,
Quezelbach: that is to say red heads, as before of them I have spoken, which
Persians and Turks, are perpetual mortal enemies one against the other, and
very different in opinion touching their supersticious law and belief.

A little before, I have made mention of the beeginning of the Empire of the
Caliphes of Baudraz, unto their end. Likewise of the Miramamolins unto their
deuisions, and in such sort of the Persians so much as I could get knowledge of
them. Of the Othmans I have amply enough spoken before, so as I need not,
further so entreat of them, least I should pass and exceed the measure of a
Summarie or an abridgment? I have written also of the beginning of the Empire
in Egypt, and therefore now it behooves me to show how the same fell into the
puissaunce and dominacion of the Mamaluchs.

In the year 1160. that Almery king of Jerusalem besieged the great city of
Caire as before I have spoken, the Souldain named Quare who as then was also
called the Caliphe, perceiving that he was not able to resist the christians,
he required succors at the Souldan of Halep, who sent him a Captain named
Saracon or Syracon, and by some called, Syrasson, who (by his nation) was a
Corasmin: this Syracon having in such sort given aid to the Caliph that his
countries were defended from the enemy, and therewith perceiving how unmeet
the Caliph was to rule through his cowardnesse and to much fear in him
resident; and considering also how few friends he had to lean to him, in time
of necessity, he took the Caliph and put him in prison where he died, and
Saracon made himself Souldain of Egypt. Thus the Empire of the Sarazins or
Arabians was transferred into the hands of the Corasmins or (...)

After Melechnazer, was Souldain, Melechseraph (which word signifies the
ardent or bright Prince) who did win upon the christians the town of Acre in
Sury in the year of our Lord God 1293. and chased the christians out of all
Sury, which he joined to the kingdom of Egypt: he was the first that caused to
be coined in Egypt the Ducats of Gold, which are there called Seraphes. This
Soldain is named by Sabellicus and others Melecastraphus.

Thus proceeded the said Mammeluchs, to dominate and rule in Egypt, and did
choose their Souldains either upon christians that became renies or that were
christians children, bought as abouesaid, and educated in that form of
religion and trained so, to the wars as above is declared, albeit therwere
none of these Ma^meluchs that durst go alone through the city where they were,
but by express commandment of their Emyrs, who were their superiors; they
should go two at the least togethers: and to be brief, these Mammeluchs had
the authority and dominacion over all the people of Egypt and Surie, from the
time they chased the christians out of Surie until that Selim the great Turk,
as before is mentioned, utterly ouethrew them and their name for ever.

Thus, the first of the law of Mahumet, that reigned in Asia, were the
Arabians, whom the Hebreus and Suriens do call Saba, and the Greeks, Sab^i,
and they themselves do name Sarazins: after the^* there did the Turquimans or
Turks rule, who chased from thence the Sarazins: these Turks were Parthians as
Hayton does fronter and limit them. The Turks likewise were driven from thence
by the Tartaries, being Scithians oriental, who have taken upon them also the
name of the Turks though they be none in deed, and at this present reigning
under the name of the Turks, who of very truth are but Tartaires and Scithians
by their descent, which, their manner of fight and weapon therewith that they
use, as their bows made of horn, which our elders do appoint and attribute
to the Scithians, sufficiently do witness. Again the language Tartaresque,
and the Turks speech, are not much different: for Michael de Michou says that
the Tartairs who destroyed Russia, and the regions thereabouts named in their
language Tartaresque, the tops of steeples of Churches there, Altum Bachne,
considering those tops of steeples were gilded* so in the Turks language this
word Altum Bachne signifies a head of gold or gilded. Wherefore according to
the opinion of Authors, one may judge that they are Scithians and Tartares to
whom the name of the Turks are given at this day, whose elders, in that they
possessed the country of Turquestan; of that region, they have left the name
of Turks, to the Turks that presently reign, being their posterity, which to
others perhaps is unknown, being ignorant both of the difference of these two
nations, so far of, and barbarous, and of the chaunges fortuned in their
kingdoms.

Here ends the first book.
To the Worshipful his very good Cosen William Carr of Stafford in the county
of Lincoln Esquire, and one in her Majesty's Commission of peace there.
SIR, to you who are the second possessor of my here expressed rich will,
though weak power: I commend this second book of my French and Italian
traductions, concerning the succession of the great house of Ottoman, and those
their fortunate arms whether in offense, or defense taken; The rather for that
your self being resident in court where this argument (by reason of the
present Hungarian wars and the often assemblies of the German Princes to
provide some remedy for their feared harms) is much spoken of* you may with
others see the manner and growing of this continuing and admired felicity,
(here by me deciphered) though the means how, by very few is seen, save such
only as are true spectators and obseruers of high reaching policy; what my
pains has effected in this point, I freely give as you may boldly challenge it
for your due; who desire nothing more then ever to be found the general and
particular servant of your self and your most worthy brothers true iointenants
by undivided moieties (as our lawiers term it) of me and what I may, whereof
the suruiuor whilst I survive may dispose of the whole: And so with all duty
done which may be demanded of a most affectionate kinsman and serviceable
friend: I take my leave, from the middle Temple in London this 20* of March
1600.

Your worships of all others most at command R. Carr.

The second Book
Of the conquests made by the Turks, and the succession of the house of
Ottoman.
I Supposed to have been acquitted and dispatched from your earnest suits, and
fully to have satisfied your demands, to the best of my knowledge and power,
touching the affairs and matters concerning the Turks. Now you desire of me
their progress, and continuances, as it were from the father to the son, how
they have proceeded and attained unto the conquests of so many regions, which
at this day they possess and keep: Yet you consider little the affairs,
wherewith I am continually occupied, nor the imbesilitie of my memory, that so
redely should write unto you a History of matters that have passed two hundred
years and more in Countries, so far of and sundry, full of vocables and names,
both right strange and different, from our vulgar language. Wherefore in this
request, if I satisfy you not in such good sort as your desire, yet you ought
to accept my pains in good part, for be it well or evil, it beehoueth me to*
do as you will have me.

In the year of our lord God one thousand and three hundred, at such time, as
the Emperor Henry, the seventh of that name, purposed to renew in Italy the
partialities and divisions of the Guelfes and Gibelins (at which time also
reigned in France Philip le Bell,) there were in Natolie or Asia the less,
certain Captains of the Turks (where this nation had continued ever since
the passage and famous journey of Godefroy de Bologne, duke of Boullon, and
there had remained, ever since the time that they presented themselves against
the army of the christians, before the city of Nice, which we may name
Victoire anciently called Antigonia, under their valiant general named Solomon
or Soleyman. After which passed an hundred years and more, that not any did
speak of this Nation, unto such time (as I have said) there were in Natolie
sundry Captains among the which, more famous than the rest, were Othman,
Caraman, and Assan or Azam, called by way of dignity Begy or Bey, which is as
much, as Seigneur or Mounsi^ur, and in our English tongue Lord, howbeit the
Turks do abstract and withdraw from this word Begy, this letter y, and so do
call them Othmanbeg, Caramanbeg, and Assambeg. Othmanbeg (who was very valiant
and a man of great actiuitie) allied himself with two Greeks Reniez, and a
third being a Turk borne, the one of these Greeks was called Michali, and the
other Marco. Of the said Michali, are descended the Michalogli of whom, there
continue some at this day, as likewise such of the lignage of Marco, who are
named Marcozogli, the Turk was named Aramy, of the race of whom, called
Auramogly, none can be found, that any knows: the successors of this Auramy,
are accounted and reputed to be of the blood royal of the Turks, and to them,
the Empire of the Turks should appertain, if ever the Othmans line should be
extinguished. With the help and aid of these three, Othmanbag aforesaid became
of marvelous credit and puissance, in such sort as he conquered sundry cities
and towns situated upon the sea side of La Mer Maiour otherwise called in
latin Pontus Euxi^us, and among them the town of Syuas which the Greeks call
Sebasie was one, which is named by us, in france Auguste. Caraman did draw
himself toward Cilicia, where he rested, and called that region according to
his own name Caramania. Assam repaired into Persia, which the Turks do call
Pharsic, as also into Assiria which according to his name, he caused to be
called Azamie. These last two and their successors have ever since been
unmercifully persecuted by Othman and his posterity: In such sort, as utterly
they have destroyed Caraman his blood, and gotten his countries. But Assambeg
notwithstanding (which is called the Sophi) right valiantly does defend his
own, and lives in continual wars and enmetie with the Othmans. This Othman
reigned twenty and eight years unto the beeginning of the reign of Phillippe
de Valloys the french King. Which Othman was so surnamed of a certain town or
castle called Othmanach situated in Natoly betwixt Synope and Trebisonde the
famous cities, and left a son named Orcan, who succeeded his father in his
dominions.

Or^an the son of Othman married the daughter of Caramanbeg, and after made
cruel war upon him, causing to be put to death his eldest son brother to
his wife, whom before he had taken in battle: he took also the city of
Bursie, which the ancients named Prusias. At this very same time Andronico
Paleologo, then Emperor of Constantinople dieng, did leave his sons named
Caloiany and Andronico under the governance and regiment of John Catacusan, who
though he very prudently, behaved himself during the time of this his
regiment, yet through the malice of the Patriarch, and of an other person of
base conditions and birth (howbeit of marvelous credit after with the
Emperor) Catacusan was expelled, who notwithstanding found the mean, after,
to return again to Constantinople more strong than before, and for the more
assurance of himself, he caused his daughter to be given in marriage to the
young Emperor Caloiany: howbeit they could not so long remain in concord,
but that the Emperor secretly departed to the Isle of Tenedo, where an army of
the Geneuois to the number of threescore Galleys came to succor him, who
brought him back to Constantinople and chased from thence Catacusan. Now he
immediately repaired for aid to the Venetians, through whose help retourning
home assailed the army of the Geneuois riding with their Galleys in the Canall
of Constantinople aunciently called Propontis: howbeeit the victory remained
to the Geneuois, and the City with Caloiany, who in recompense of their worthy
service, rewarded them and their Captain named Francis Cataluz, with the gift
of the Isle of Methelin, in times past named Lesbos: Who continued the
possession thereof unto the time that Mahumet the second did win the same
from Nicolas Cataluz the last Duke thereof: This little division engendered
after most cruel wars betwixt the Geneuois and the Venetians: which as it
brought the City of Venice to such extremety, that it seemed ready to render
it self to the mercy of the Geneuois, so in the end it was cause by the
alteration of fortune that the Geneuois (being in sundry fights and conflicts
on the seas after overthrown by the Venetians) came to miserable ruin and
servitude, for thereby they were enforced to yield themselves, to the
Archbishop of Milane whom they made governor of their City of Geanes, and to
sell all their lands and Seigneuries to the communaltie and brotherhood of
Saint George, which is within their City, and lastly to submit themselves to
the french Kings protection under whose subjection they remained a while,
until he gave them to John Duke of Calabre son to Reignard King of the
realm of Naples, until they reuoulted to Philippe Duke of Milane, whom in the
end they forsook to, in such sort as (through their inconstancy,) they did
not know well, to what good Saint, to vow themselves: howbeit the greatest
mischief was, that this forenamed wars gave an undoubted occasion to the
utter loss of Surie and the realm of Jerusalem (and what was worse then
that) the same opened to the Turks, the gate and entry to Greece and other
parts of Europe, as hereafter I shall declare, all which was about the time
that Jews de Bauiere, and Frederic of Austrich contended about the obtaining
of the Empire of Alemaign. The said Orcan reigned two and twenty years unto the
beginning of the reign of John the french king which was in the year of our
Lord God 1350. leaving behind him his son Amurath.

Amurath (whom the Hungarians and the Scla^^nes do call Ammarat, and the
Turks Moratbeg which is as much to say, as the Lord Morat, (but Frossart
supposing to pronounce this name, as they do, calls him Lamorabaquin,)
entered to his dominions when as Catacusan, pursued the Emperor his son in
law, through the aid of Mar^ Carlouich the Despot of Despot: what it means.
Bulgaria: this word Despot is so much to say in our English tongue as Prince
or Lord: and the Province of Bulgaria Bulgari^
is that Country which anciently was named Gaetae and Gepidae. This Amurath was
secretly favored among certain of the Nobility of Grecia, whom the Emperor
Caloiaun hated, who finding that he was to weak, to encounter with the
Nobility that reuoulted, he was constrained to demand and require aid of
Amurath, who forthwith sent him twelve thousand horsemen, through whose help,
when the Emperor had pacified his affairs, he gave the Turks leave to
return home. But they having seen and tasted the sweetness and beauty of
the region of Grecia, after their return persuaded (as it was easy to do)
Amurath to go in person to invade Grecia. Which he so did, who accompanied
with threescore thousand men, by the help of two great ships of the Geneuois
(among whom he bestowed a threescore thousand ducats) Amurath passed the famous
straits called by the ancients, Hellespontus (and now the straits of Calipoli
or the Castells by reason of two castells whereof the one is situated in Asia,
and the other in Europ) wherein ancient time were also the towns of Sestus and
Abydos. The french do call these straits Le Bras de Saint George, Saint
Georgesarme, where the said Amurath wan the town of Calipoli being on this
side those straits in Grecia, and than took Adrianople and Philippopoli
aunciently called Olympias* and so* ouerran the Province of Romany, in times
past called Thracia, unto the Mountain Rhodope, which the Greeks do name
(...) the Queen and Lady of those Mountains, which some a so do call, the
mountain of Silver by reason of the mines of silver that are found in the
same: and after overcame in ^attaile the aforenamed Marc Carlouich taking
prisoner the Conte Lazaro of Seruia, which is Misia Inferior, (whom Frossart
calls Le Conte ^e Lazaran) whose head he smote off, which was when Charles
the fourth was let from resisting the sons of the Emperor Jews of Bauer
to de^end himself against Frederic Marquiz of Misne and the County of
Wittenberg his competiteurs, leaving the Empire after him to his son
Lancelot, who sold the Cities and Segneuries of Italy (as Milane) to the family
of the viconts and others. In the end Amurath was slain by a servant of the
said Conte Lazaro as revenging the death of his said Master, the year of our
Lord God 1373 after that he had reigned 23 years, about the beeginning of the
reign of Charles the fifth the french king, and left two sons Pasait and
Seleyman.

Pazait or Basait as the Turks do name him, who never pronounce this letter P.
(and called by Frossart le Roy Basant, son of Lamorabaquin and sometime
^morabaquin, according to his fathers name. Enguerran and Master Nicol^^ G^les
that collected the Annals of France call him the king Basaa^g. This Pazait
was hardy, diligent and very courageous, he s^^w^ia^ battle Marc Carlouich,
where with him the whole Nobility of Seruia and Bulgaria ended their lives,
and after did ouerrun the territories of Thessalia and Macedonia, now called
Thumnestie and Albanie. He wasted whole Grecia unto Athens which at this day is
called Cethine and spoiled the territories o^ Bosna (which is called Misia
Superior,) Crocia and Sclauonie (that are named aunciently Dal^^tia and
Liburnia) and this at that time when the Emperor Lancelot son of Charles the
fourth lived so virtuously, that his subjects sundry times did enprison him,
but in the end was deposed by the Alemans, who elected at one time two
Emperors, the one called Ioce Nephew to Lancelot, and the other Robert of
Bauiere otherwise called Ruebrecht which is interpreted in their Alleman
language Trouble Peace. But to return to Bazait, who then invaded Hungary, and
there overthrew king Sigismond, (that afterward was Emperor of Alleman, called
by the Historiographer Engerrant de Mountralet, Sagimont) in the renowned
battle of Nicopoli: the cause of the loss whereof was, for that the french
men there serving would not be advised by the king Sigismond, nor frame
themselves according to the policy of these wars as the Allemans also
counseled them, the which Frossart imputes likewise to the orgulitie and
pride of the french, where was taken prisoner the Conte of Neuers, John who
afterward was Duke of Burgoign son of Philippe the first duke, Philip
Darthois, Conte de Eve constable of France. John le Maingre called Boucicault
and sundry others being men of estimation to the number of seven or eight,
who all were sent to Bursie, the rest of that nation were slain to the
number of a thousand horsemen.

This battle was foughten on Michaelmas even Anno Domini 1396 and these
prisoners, were after redeemed for no little ran some, in expedicion vvherof
great diligence was used by one James Hely a gentleman of Picardie, who also
was taken prisoner among them, and before had served in the Court of
Amorabaquin. After this battle, Bazait beesieged the City of Constantinople,
and had won it, if it had not been that into Natolie was entered the great
Prince of Tartary called Tamerlaine or Tamburlaine, (but by the Turks
Demirling,) and by some French Historiographers (as Enguerrant) named Le Grant
Tacon de Tartarye, but the Tartariens themselves do call him Temircutlu, that
is to say, the Fortunate Sw^ord or luckie iron, descended of the race of one
Cham of Tartarie called Zaym Cham, of the Horde or multitude of Zauolba and
Czahaday, which is toward the river of Rha or Volha, which falls into the
Sea Dabacuth, by the latins named Mare Caspium and Hircanum, which Zaym was he
whom the Polonians do call in their Histories Bathy, the first Mahum^tist of
all the Tartares. Tamerlaine, was afterward Lord of Tartarie Precopie, called
by them Prezelzoph, situated betwixt the rivers of Tanais which they call Don,
and Boristhenes called N^per and D^r^^z, the which country of Precopie was in
ancient time called Scithia Inferior, now in possession of the Turk. This
Tamerlayne was for the most part resident in the great City of Samarcand,
which is toward the sea Caspium, who caused himself to be called the Scourge
of God, though his very title of his dignity was Vlucham, which is to say,
the mighty Lord.

Bazait having intelligence of the entry of Tamerlayne into Natoly, thought it
requisite to raise his siege of Constantinople, and with all diligence, to
encounter with the innumerable army of Tamerlayne, where nigh the city of
Dangory, by our ancients called Ancira (not far from the mountain Stella,
which Enguerrant de Monstrelet, does call Appadi, where Pompeius Magnus
overthrew the famous Mithridates,) the mighty armies encountered, and cruelly
did fight, in which conflict Bazait was vanquished and taken prisoner, whom
Tamerlaine caused to be bound and made fast with chains of gold, and so to be
put in a cage as though he had been a Lion, in which sort he carried Bazait
about with him, through every region of Asia as he passed, so long as Bazait
lined, which was not above two years after or therabouts, who died Anno
Domini: 1400 after he had reigned twenty seven years, about the twentieth
year of the reign of Charles the sixth the french king. From this conflict
escaped certain of Bazaits sons, who supposing to have passed into Europe,
chanced to fall into the hands of the Emperor of Constantinople who caused the
seas surely to be kept at that time. An other of his sons named Cyris, and
by the frenchmen Quirici, whom some also do call Calapin or Calepin escaped
over to Adrinopoli whose surname being called Ciris Cheleby was but a little
of dignity and Noblesse given to the children of the great Turk, as Achmat
Cheleby, Mahumet Cheleby, or Mustapha Cheleby, which is as much as to
denominate a gentleman, according as the Spaniards do name their Nobility Don
Alonso or Don Rodrigo, and the frenchmen Charles Monsieur or Loys Monsieur,
being appropriate to their blood royal. Cyris reigned six years or
thereabouts, and left behind him a son named Orcan, when as his three brethren
named Musach, Mahumet, and Mustapha escaped out of Constantinople, while the
Emperor was gone into France to the said king Charles to require succors
against the afornamed Cyris, Musach slew Orcan his nephew, and for recompense
himself was after slain by his own brother Mahumet: And than first began
they to devise how the one brother might kill another, which unto this time,
they have right well practiced and put in ure.

Mahumet the first of that name, after he had slain his brother Musach,
usurped the Empire, and recovered all the whole Countries of Natolie which
Tamerlayne before had won of Bazait. This Mahumet removed his seat imperial
from the city of Bursie in Natolie, to Adrianopoli in Grecia. He made wars
upon the region of Valachie (which some french histories do call Valaigne and
other Blaquie, and of the ancients named Bessi and Triballi.) He also overthrew
in battle the Emperor Sigismond in the plains of Selumbez and was the first
of his nation that passed the river of Donaw or Danuby: he subdued the
country of Bosnia made war upon Caraman and died the year of our Lord God
1418 and in the xxxviii year of the reign of the said King Charles, after he
had reigned eighteen years reconing therewith the years of Cyris (which some
do not) and left a son called Amurath.

Amurath the second of that name was in Natolie, when his father died, whereof
so soon as he was advertised, passed into Europe; albeeit the Emperor of
Constantinople did what he could to stop his passage, who sent against him
Mustapha his uncle, son of Bazait, whom the said Emperor had kept prisoner
since the taking of Bazait, as before I have told: howbeit Mustapha being
to weak, was vanquished and slain in battle by Amurath, who to revenge
himself upon the Emperor of Constantinople* spoiled and burnt the whole
territory of Thracia in Grecia: and took from the Venetians the notable town
of Thessalonica called now Salonichi, which Andronico Paleologo before had sold
them in dispite of the Emperor Constantine his brother: after that, the said
Amurath entered into Seruia or Rascia and constrained George Vucouich the Despot
or Prince of that country, to give him in marriage his daughter named Irinye,
surnamed Catacusine, notwithstanding which affinity he afterward came against
this Despot with an army, and enforced him to fly into Hungary, toward the
Emperor Albert son in law to the late Sigismond the Emperor, leaving his
son George for the defense of his said Country, this George was taken by
Amurath, who caused his eyes to be put forth, though he was his brother in
law. After the death of the said Albert; Lancelot brother to the king of Pole
was chosen by the Hungarians for their King, albeit that Albert had left his
wife with child, who after the death of her husband was delivered of a son,
that at his Baptism was also named Lancelot, who after, wa^ nourished and
brought up under the keeping of the Emperor Frederic the third of that name,
and was the only cause, that the said Lancelot of Polen, durst make no manner
of enterprise against the Turks nor to invade them, least in the mean time the
Emperor Frederic should have annoied him upon some other part, and so have set
the other Lancelot (the true king in his realm of Hungary. During this time,
Amurath who could not long rest, besieged Belgrado (which they call Nandoralba,
and Alba Greca, and by the Hungariens, Chrieschisch, but by our elders
Taurinum,) situated betwixt the rivers of Danubia or Donaw, and Sauus or Saua
upon a very neck of land, where those two rivers do join togethers, the
which town of Belgrado the said George Vucouich before had given in exchange
for others to the said Emperor Sigismond for that it was the key and entry to
the kingdom of Hungary: After which at the suit and persuasion of the same
George Vucouich, the said king Lancellot raised a very great army against
Amurath, and therewith recovered the territories of Seruia and Rascia, which he
rendered again to the said Despot George Vucouich: to revenge which wrong,
Amurath levied a great power, under the leading of one Carabey who encountering
with the Christians, nigh the mountain Costegnaz (anciently called Hemus) was
there overthrown, and Carabey taken prisoner. The which two victories, with
sundry others before and after, were obtained by the famous prowess, and
valiantness of John Huniad called by Enguerrant de Monstrelet, and Philip de
Comines, Le Blanc Cheualier de la Velaign, and by the Hungarians Ianc^ Ban, or
Vaiuod, that is to say, Prince of Transiluania at this present Moldauia, and by
the Hungarians named Sibenbourg, that is to say, Septemcastrum, but by our
elders Dacia. This worthy John Huniad was father to the valiant Mathias king
of Hungary, who not long agone reigned there. After this battle there was an
abstinence from arms condicioned betwixt the Hungarians and the Turks, for two
years, by reason whereof, and with the payment of fifty thousand ducats of
ransom, Carabey was delivered: the which trewse being soon after broken by
the said king Lancelot, at the instance and persuasion of Eugenius the Pope,
the fourth of that name, to king Lancelot was very unfortunate, for afterward
he was slain in the battle soughten beetwixt him and Amurath nigh the town
of Verna, aunciently called ^yonisiopolis upon Saint Martins day, the eleauenth
of November Anno Domini 1444 where the said John Huniad was put to flight. Of
this victory Amurath had small cause to rejoice considering it cost him very
decre both in loss of his* best friends, and choice soldiers: after this
Amurath took the town of Sophie, being the head town of whole Bulgaria,
Scopie, and Nouomont, and ouerran all the territories of Acarnania (called at
this instant, Ducat or Duche) and the Province of Cymera (aunciently called
Epirus) where he spoiled and wasted along the river of Achelous (at this day
named the river of Pachicolan) unto the mountains Du Diable (in times past
called Acroceraunii) which are part of the Mountains called Pindus, he took
also the famous port town, named Velone (sometime called Aulon) and passed the
Gulf of Larta, in latin called Sinus Ambracius, unto the town of Oricus (now
named Rigo) and so went forward toward the Gulf of Cataro (which is called
Sinus Risonicus) being five and twenty miles from the town of Ragusa, (in
ancient ^^me named Epidaurus.) He enforced John Cos^^i^th the Despot of Cymera
to give him the enpregnable town of Croia with his three sons in hostage,
and pledge of fidelity, all which he caused to be^ come Turks the youngest
named George Castrioth, at that time not above nine years of age, was called
by the Turks Scanderbeg that is to say Alexander* the great, who after, became
so valiant a Captain, that for his worthy acts he was comparable to the
famous and most renowned Pyrrus, and others his worthy predecessors,
dominators and rulers of Epirus: for having command under Amurath, he
conquered Seruia, and did bring to the Turks obeisance the Country of
Carmania* how beit afterward this Scanderbeg retourning to the christian faith,
caused Amurath to loose the territory of Seruia, and then took from him the
strong town of Croia with all the countries, towns, and castells that before
belonged to his said father John Castrioth, besides that in twenty or thirty
battles, wherein valiantly he fought with the Turks, he always carried away
with him the victory, so as Amurath had never iuster matter to object to this
Scanderbeg, then to reproach him with unkindness, that being so carefully
brought up by him, in his tender age, should so without cause reuoult* calling
him by sundry letters the ingrate and unthankful son: howbeit Scanderbeg
cared so little for Amurath, that upon occasion he departed from his own
Countries, to succor in person Ferdinand king of Naples against John Duke of
Galabre, which Ferdinand he restored to his realm, and expelled the Duke from
the same: for which deed Ferdmand afterward, curteoushe received the spoiled
and calamitous children of Scanderbeg (whom (...) the second, after the death
of their father exiled and (...) of all their liuelihoode) and gave them lands
in the kingdom of Naples, so as they became Marquizes of Saint Angelo, and of
Tripaldo: so as a worthy gentelman of that race named Ferdinand Castrioth
Marquiz of Saint Angelo was slain, valiantly fighting on the imperial part in
the late battle before Pauia. Amurath after that did win the country of
Moree (which in latin by our elders is called Peloponesus) through the discord
of two brethren, the one called Thomas and the other Demetrius, Despots of the
same country, being brothers of Constantine Paleologo last Emperor of
Constantinople, who by reason that the Albanois moved wars against them,
sought for succors to Amurath, and became his tributaries, but after denying
to pay their promised tribute, Amurath drove them out of their whole country
of Moree. Howbeit Demetrius afterward retired himself toward the Turque, but
Thomas repaired to Rome, to the Pope where he ended his life, leaving four
children, two sons and two daughters. Amurath being now become aged, and
weary both of the world and of his victories, withdrew himself among certain
Heremits and other Religieux, of his supersticious sect, pretending to lead
the rest of his days solitarilie and in quietness: and established in his
place his son. Mahumet being but young of years, to reign and govern his
Kingdoms, appoynting for his governor one Haly Bassa, called of some, Caly
Bassa. Howbeit when the famous John Huniades, with the Hungarians had gathered
togethers a mighty army, to have invaded the dominions of this young Mahumet.
Amurath (at the great instaunce and suite both of his son as also of the said
Haly Bassa (that could not be obeyed) was enforced to take upon him the
administration and government of the present affairs, who making head against
the said Hungarians in the end, vanquished and put them to flight. After
which Amurath invaded the dominions of the valiant Scanderbeg, beesieged his
strong town of Croia, howbeeit he could not win the same. And in his
retyring by the Mountains there, he was spoiled by the Paisaunts, and very
many of his army slain, whereby Amurath entered into such a meruaylous
melancholy and displeasure, that what by disease therewith taken, and his old
age togethers he dyed, in the year of our Lord God 1451. of his age seauentie
five, and of his reign thirty two, and of the reign of Charles, the French
king the seventh of that name twenty six. Thus Amurath was the first, that
instituted the Iannisaries.

MAHVMET, the second of that name, called by Enguerrand, and other french
Historiographers Morbesan, perhaps they would have said Morbesalem, which is as
much in the Surien or Moresque language, as these words in the Gospel, Vade
in Pace, depart in peace. This word Morbesan among the Turks signifies so
much as Duke or Duchy. This Mahumet was son of the said Amurath, and of
Iriny a Christian woman daughter to George the Despot of Seruia, who began to
reign the one and twenty year of his age, and two years after did win by
assault the City of Constantinople Anno Domini 1453. where the Emperor
Constantinie was slain, by which it so came to pass, that as one Constantine
son to Helen, was the first Emperor of Constantinople: so an other
Constantine son of an other Helen, was the last Christian Emperor there.
This Mahumet proved in the end, neither Musulman or Mahometist, for in his
infancye he was instructed in the christian faith, by his said mother, and
after by others in the Turkish supersticion, howbeit, when he came to age, he
cared neither for the one nor other. In the beginning of his reign, he caused
two of his brethren being but of very tender age (the one, of a year and a
half, the other not passing six months old) to be slain: howbeit some do
affirm that the elder son was secretly saved, an other child being put in
his room, who was carried to Venice, and from thence to Rome to Pope Calixt,
who caused him to be baptized and named Calixt Othman, upon whom the Emperor
Frederic afterward did bestow great livings.

Mahumet having thus taken Constantinople as I have declared, did invade the
dominions of Hungary, and besieged Belgrado, from which, he was repulsed by
the worthy John Huniades, that was then within Belgrado, with the Cardinal
Angelo, and the famous gray Friar called John Capistran* From this siege
Mahumet withdrew himself and his army with shame enough, for beesides his own
hurts and wounds, he lost wholly his artillery and baggage, with his for ever
hope to have the realm of Hungary: besides he was compelled wholly to attend
the recovery of the dominion of Moree, which the Venetians had won from him,
having repaired the Examilo ila.
(which is a long wall of the length of six Italian miles extending from the
Gulf Patras, which the latins do call Sinu Corinthiacus, unto the Bay of
Egino named in latin Sinus Megaricus, between which two Gulfs, (as it were in
the midst of the Istmus, not passing six miles broad, being a piece of ground
comparable unto a bridge tyeng the dominion and territory of Peloponesus, unto
the maine land of Grecia) the City of Corinthe stood sometime of notable fame,
but now reduced to a little village called Coranto) the which long wall named
the Examilo, Amurath in his life had caused to be demolished and cast down,
to the end to have the more easy passage into Peloponesus: but when Mahumet
came, the Venetians hoping they had been strong enough, in a battle which
they fought with him, were clean overthrown, where a great number of
Italian Captains were slain: so as Mahumet recovered the chief of the
territory of Peloponesus, foorthvvith again after which in the very sight of
the Venetians he did win from them the whole Island of Negropont called
also Euboea, joined to the firm and main land with a bridge, with the Islands
of Stalimene anciently named Lemnos, and Methelin called Lesbos, appertaining
then to Nicholas Cataluz a Geneuois: and so prosecuting his good fortune he
took the Isle of Saint Maura (called Nerytus, and by some Leucas, and
Leucadia) together with the Isles of Zante (aunciently named Zacynthus) and
Cephalenia, (called now Chiphalonie:) He recovered the strong town of
Croya, after the death of Scanderbeg, spoiled the town of Scodra called now
Scutare from Seigneur Aranith Comino, or Comnenus surnamed Golent father of
Seigneur Constantine, who then governed the Marquesdome of Montferrato, after
the death of the Duchess his niece, at which time Charles the eight the
French King returned from Naples: after all this Mahumet invaded the
territory of Bosne, and took the Despot thereof called Stephan Hierchec, and
of some Historiographers the Duke Latic, and caused his head to be smitten
off, compelling a young son of this Despot to be made a Renie, and to be
circumsised, in surnaming him Achmath. He took from the Geneuois, their town
of Capha (auncientlie called Theodosia) situated in Prezocopie, named by the
Geographers Taurica Chersonesus: which is as though it were half and sland, as
is Peloponesus, and has on the one side the Gulf of Nigropila (called Sinus
Carcini^^s) and on the other, the Baye called La Mer Noir, named in latin B^cis
Paulus, from which not very far distant is the famous Gulf called Palus Meotis
commonly named the Gulf de li Tana, during which time of these his expedicions
and exploits in war in countries so far distant the one from the other; he
was assalted in Natolie by Piramet Caraman, who enforced him to relinquish his
further enterprises. Notwithstanding before his departure, he took the strong
fortress of Mancup or Manlzup, situated in the Isthmus or strait piece of
ground which knitteth or joins Prezocopie unto the firm land called by the
ancients Taphre, now Azan or Assou* standing upon the shore of the Gulf* of
T^na. That done, Mahumet retired into Natelie, and repulled from thence
Caraman, inuading the countries of the same Caraman, whereof he did win a great
part: and in his return took the city of Sinopes, the Metropolis of
Pap^lagonia, which stands upon the coast of the sea called anciently Pontus
Euxinus, and now La Mer Maiour, as also upon the same coast* the renowned city
of Trapezonda, being the chief city of the Empire of Trapezonda, where he did
put to death the Emperor thereof called David Conino or Comnenus, who was a
Christian, descended of the valiant Isaac Conino, who from a mean Captain
became Emperor of Constantinople, after the Emperor Michaell: all which
troubles above said came to pass, when as the Hungarians, and those of
Austrich moved wars against the Emperor Frederic to recover Ladislaus (whom
some do call Lancelot) the son of Albert, to be their king and lord, whom
Frederic had in keeping, yet would not restore him, though he was adjudged
meet to reign: while Mahumet became thus victorious, there did spring a new
enemy against him named Vssuncassan or Assambeg the prince of Persia, who with
a great power of the Persians (whom the Turks do call Keselbach, that is to
say, red heads, by reason that they did wear red hoods) entered into Capadoce
and Trapesonde, and fought two battles with Mahumet; in the first of which
Mahumet was overthrown, but in the second Assambeg had the worst, and thereby
lost sundry of his dominions. This Vssuncassan or Assambeg was son in law to
the said David Conyno Emperor of Trebisonde, of whom before I made mention,
who reigned in the year of our Lord God 1472. Mahumet thus delivered of his
adversary, returned into Caramany after the death of Pyramet Caraman, and
enforced Abraham his son to seek for succors from the Christians, and
chiefelie of Pope Pius the second of that name, who was determined in person to
have gone against the Turk, and for that purpose was repaired to the City of
Ancona, where he had in readiness a great army on the sea: but while he
stayed there for the Venetians that should have accompanied him in the voyage,
Pius dyed, without any further exploit done at that time.

Whereby it so came to pass, that this army being scattered, and the Allemans
and the Hungarians continuing still at wars, this unfortunate Caraman not
able to resist Mahumet, was in the end miserably slain by him, and by this
mean the race of Caraman was utterly overthrown, and his dominions rested in
the subjection of the Othmans. Mahumet now assured and safe upon this coast of
Cilicia, sent Omarbey, the Sangiac of Bosnia, who was son of a Geneuois, to
pill and ouerrunne the country of Istria (called Liburnia) as likewise to
spoil the territory of Carinthia (commonly called Crayn) and so to furrow the
land of Stiria (anciently called Valeria, now at this day named Steirmarck) all
which countries are comprehended under the name of Illirium. This Omarbey in
executing his princes commandment, passed unto the region of Frioll, (which in
latin is called Forum Iulii,) trauesing mighty and great rivers, both by
foords and bridges made on boats as occasion served, and overthrew the army
of the Venetians that came to debat his passage, in which conflict were slain
and taken a great company of notable good Captains of Italy. Of another part
Mahumet did send Athmath Bacha (surnamed Ghendich, that is to say with a great
Tooth, son of Stephan sometime Despot of Bosnia, of whom I did speak
before) with a great army by sea into Italy who took the town of Otrant^
(called in latin Hydruntus and of the ancients I^pigium) situated in the
territory of Apulia in Italy: a little before which Mesith Bacha Paleologo,
descended of the race of the Emperor of Constantinople, did beesiege the
famous city of the Rhodes with a mighty army, from which he was repulsed by
the Christians that valiauntly defended the same. Now Mahumet not contented
thus with these three Armies, in person went against the Soldain of Egypt, but
being arrived nigh unto Nicomedia (a City of Bithynia in Natoly, which City
at this day is called Comidy, and of the Turks Nichor, Mahumet died in the
year of our Lord God 1442 of his age 54. And of his reign 31. About the end
of Loys the eleventh, and the beginning of the reign of Charles the eight the
French king. This Mahumet was called by the Turks, Mahumet Boiuc, that is to
say Mahumet the great, who left beehinde him, two sons the one called Pazait
and the other Zizimy, which is to say love, for Mustapha his eldest son, who
was Governor of Icony called Iconium in Latin, dyed soon after the second
battle fought as above said against Vsuancssan, in which battle Mustapha had
very valiantly behaved himself.

PAZAIT otherwise called Bazait the second of that name, and the youngest as was
supposed of his three Brethren (thorough the aid and favor of the Ianizares
of whom their Laga or Captain was his son in law,) seized and atteigned the
Empire. And Zizimy his brother, was planted in the City of Bursie wherewith
and the dominions of the same he could have very well contented himself. But
Bazait would not let him rest so nigh, for which with the army that was put in
readiness by his father to have gone against the Sultan of Egypt he drove his
brother Zizimy out of Bursie. So as Zizimy for succor, was enforced to repair
to the Soldain of whom he was aided both with men and money, yet nevertheless,
after he had fought two battles and lost them both, he was in the end utterly
put to flight by Achmat Ghendich Bacha, and not knowing how to recover
himself, retired into the Isle of Rhodes to require succors of us Christians,
being then of the age of eight and twenty years. Whereof Bazait being
advertised sent great gifts and presents to the great master and counsel of
the Rhodes, beeseeching them to keep well his brother Zizimy and for the
maintenance of his estate and entertainment, he would cause yearly to be
paid to them the sum of forty thousand Ducats, as also during the time of
his keeping he would make no manner of invasion upon the Christians. For which
this Zizimy, for saftie, and to keep Bazait in continual fear and subjection
was sent, into the realm of France where he continued very long in a house
of the order of the Rhodes, called Bourgeneuf, but after he was given to P. P.
Innocent the eight of that name, and had to Rome where he was resident, when
Charles the eight invaded the Realm of Naples, who needs would have Zizimy
away with him, hopeing by his means to recover the Empire of Constantinople
but the P. P. Alexander the sixth of that name (perceiving he must depart with
Zizimy whither he would or no) enpoysened him in such sort (as was said) that
after such his delyuerie he dyed within three days at Tarracine. Baizait thus
dispatched of his brother; beeganne to invade the Countries of Transyluania and
took Moncastro standing on the River of Neper called in Lattin Boristhenes,
with the town of Lithostomo at the mouth of the river of Danubye. After which,
he caused to be put to death, his famous General Achmat Ghendich Bacha,
comparable in valor to any excellent man of war of his time. He was son to
Stephan sometime Despot of Bosnia as before I declared. This being done, to
pursue the intent and purpose of his father Mahumet against the Soldain of
Egypt and partly to revenge himself upon the same Soldain for mayntaining of
his brother Zizimy against him, he sent a mighty army into Sury. Of the
which the Mammaluchs getting intelligence, assembled themselves at Antioche,
marching toward the Turks whom they found encamped under the mountain
Amanus (now called Monte Negro) where they courageously encountered their enemies
betwixt the same mountain and the Golfe of Layasse (which is called in Latin
Sinus Issicus. Where sometime also Alexander the great, discomfited king
Darius) overthrew the Turks army, and took prisoner the General of the
same, called Cherseogli son in law of Bazait whom they brought to the Soldain
than being at his great City of Cair (which the Turks called Mitzir.) But
seeing I am thus chanced to make mention of these Mammaluchs I shall not much
digress from my matter, if first I show you what these Mammaluchs are.

This word Mammaluch in the Surienne tongue, (being Mammaluch
the common language used in Africa which we call Moresque and the most
enlarged and extended vulgar speech that at this day is used in the world*)
betokens or signifies a seruiteur or soldior. This Soldain and the
Mammeluchs were of one manner of Religion, and lived without marriage, as those
that are of the order of the Rhodes and the knights of Malta do, who above
their other apparel, used to wear a gown of white Bocassin bright and
artificially made to shine. And as the great Turk has four Visir Bacha
exceeding the others in dignity: So has the Soldain four Emir Quibir
surmounting the rest Emir Quibir
in honor next unto the Soldain.

For this word Emir betokens an Admerall and Quibir signifies great. So as
this word Emir Quibir, is as much to say a great Admerall. Besides, they had
in their society a great constable called in their tongue Derdard Quibir, whom
Paulus Iouius calls the great Diadaro. The Soldain being but a Mammaluch is
chosen to that dignity by the rest of the brothers, as they do elect the
great Master of the Rhodes, and most often he is of one of their Emirs. Who
being thus elected to be Soldain gives to every of the other Mammaluchs by way
of reward a hundred Ducats for his welcome. All which Mammaluchs were
Christians Renies, or sons of Christians as are the Ianizaries; (who in no
case would receive any Turk Moore or Jew to be of their society) being all
Liuerous for so the Turks do name them. This Liuerous were aunciently named
Hiberi and Circassi (whom they call Cercaz,) among whom the Colchi, Georgii,
Albani, and others Christians who were Iacobits and Nestorians, remaining about
the river of Phaso otherwise called Phasis) were accounted. This Circassi
being young when the Tartarians did surprise and take them, were carried by
troops and sold to the said Emirs, with whom they were brought up in the
exercise of arms but chiefly on horsback, who beecomming very valiant; were
made Mammaluchs observing the Mahumeticall law. This order of the Mammaluchs
began at such time as the king saint Lois was taken prisoner before Damyate
(which some call Heliopolis) among whom the first Soldain was named Melechsalem
whom they did kill and was the cause that the said saint Loys was the more
easily delivered. But to return to Bazait, this overthrow that the Turks thus
received nigh to the Golfe of Layasse by the Mammaluchs, was the greatest
calamity that ever came to the Turckes, whereof Bazait having received
intelligence, and perceiving that his affairs had small good success on that
side, retired his force into Sclauonye, and there took the town of Durazo
(aunciently called Dirrachium) and Epidamnus perteigning to the family of the
Carlouichs who affirmed themselves to have descended out of the house of the
kings of France. That is to say from Charles of Durazo surnamed de le Faix
son of Peter Duke of Grauyn son of Charles second king of Naples, and of
Hungary in the right of his wife. The which Charles was son of Charles
D'aniou king of Naples brother to the said king saint Loys.

IN the year of our Lord God 1493. Bazait sent eight thousand horsemen under
the leading of Cadum Bacha to over run the Countries lying between Hungary
and Sclauonie, against whom, certain of the Nobility of Hungary Croace and
Sclauony did assemble themselves and encountered the Turckes nigh unto the
River of Moraua (auncientlie called Moschus) where the Christians were
overthrown. Five years after, Haly Bacha the Albaneze and Enuch with a great
army by sea made toward the town of Iara or Iadera situated on the shore of
the Golfe of Venice in the coast of Sclauony. And albeit that the forces of the
Venetians (which was very mighty on the sea,) pursued the Turks yet durst
they not charge the^, which Haly Bacha perceiving, took at their noses the
town of Lepantho, aunciently called Naupactum.

IN the year of our Lord God 1500. Bazait came in person to Modon, that
sometime was called Methones, in Moree and took the same. And after, when Jews
the twelfth, the French King joined in aliaunce with the Venetians against
Ludouic Sforza the usurper of the Duchy of Milayn, Bazait at the request of
Sforza caused ten thousand horsemen to invade the territory of Friol,
insomuch as they approached even to the town of Triuiso in the view of the
City of Venice. For which the Venetians prepared immediately a great army on
the sea against the Turks, with whom the Galleys of France under the charge
of Seigneur Rauestaing, as also the Galleys of the king of Aragon under the
leding of the famous Don Ferrando Consaluo joined, with which army they did
win from the Turks the Islands of Cephalonia, and saint Mauro. But (upon
certain conclusions of peace traicted by the means of Messire Andreas Gritti
(who afterward was Duke of Venice) betwixt the Venetians and the Turks) were
again surrendered, yet the Galleys of France, passed forwards to the Isle of
Lesbos, (otherwise called Metheline) hopeing to have subdued the same, but not
able to bring their enterprise to pass, they returned home again. About this
time beeganne the fame and renown of Siach Ismael the king of Persia, by
surname called the Sophie according to the name of his father, who was son to
the Daughter of Vssuncassan, and of one Seich Ayder (that is to say the good
Religioux) for he was reputed among the Persians to be a very good and holy
man, and a Prophet called Sophi, of that sect new begun among the
Mahumetists, which they call Sophi or Sophilar, of the which I did speak
before, according to the which he lived.

Some hold opinion that he was called Sophi of the Country of Sophena which
was under his dominion. But neither the Turks nor yet the Persians know what
Country Sophena is: The said Seich Ayder after the death of Vsuncassam was
shamefully slain by the commandment of Iacopbeg his brother in law, doubtting
that the people of Persia (who meruailously were affected owardes Seich) would
have deposed the said Iacopbeg and made Seich to have been their King.

For which Seich Ismaell hearing of his fathers death being than not passing
eight years of age, fled to the town of Leziam situated upon the Sea of
Abacuth (commonly called Caspium,) where he remained until he came to man's
age, and than returned into Persia, where finding means to assemble but three
hundred men thorough their help he took the town of Sumach, and after,
increasing his number, he wanne the City of Taurys in Armeny with the town
of Syras, where the good Armours are made.

He afterward vanquished and slew in fight Aluant son of Iacopbeg who made
himself King after the death of his father, who was son to Vsuncassan
(Uncle to the said Ismaell) and entered in league with the Prince Aladulad or
Anaudule and the Soldain of Egypt by whom he was drawn to move war
against Bazait, against whom he obtained sundry victories. About this time
Selym, the youngest son of Bazait, departed from Trebisconde whereof he was
governor, and without the knowledge of his father, married with the daughter
of the Cham of Tartarie Prezecopie.

Thorough whose aid and a great number of Horsemen, which his brother in law
(called of the Turks Chamogly or Canogly:) brought to accompany him, (having
already gained the hearts of his fathers Iannizaries.) He enforced Bazait his
father to leave to him his Empire. Which Bazait, purposing to draw himself to
the cost of the sea Mayor otherwise named Pontus Euxinus and there to lead the
residue of his years in quietness, dyed in his going thither, empoysonned as
was judged by his son Selym, in that they did drink togethers at their
departure. Bazait reigned thirty years, lived threescore and three years,
dyed in the year of our Lord God, one thousand five hundred and twelve. And
in the fourteenth of the reign of Jews the twelfth, the French king, leuing
behind him Selym, Achmat, and Corchuth.

SELYM, thus having attained to the Empire, through the means above declared,
endeavored himself above all things to dispatch himself from the fear of his
brethren. For which first he caused Corcuth his brother to be put to death,
who before had fled to the sea cost over against the Island of the Rhodes and
there had hidden himself until he might have gotten shipping to have past
unto the great Master, but being shamefully discovered by one of his own men,
in the end was strangeled with a bow string. Achmat his brother dyed by like
death, being taken in battle, accompanied with an able army which he had
gotten togethers thorough the aid of Siach Ismael, and of Campson Ciauri
Soldain of Egypt. Yet through his fatness and vnweldinesse of body whereby he
was not able to abide labor on horseback and so to fly, was taken and put to
death. Selym, being thus delivered from his father and brethren, deliberated
to invade the Sophy, as well for the ancient enmity that was betwixt them, as
to revenge himself of this new injury, for ayding his brother Achmat, to make
wars against him. Howbeit, that the more easily he might bring his purpose
about, he found means first to make peace with Lancelot the king of Hungary,
and than for his greater suertie, renewed the alliance and league that he had
with the Venetia^s: after which he set forward toward the Persia^s, whom the
Sophy met, accompanied with a great number of men at Arms, nigh to Assiria,
where these great Princes with their Armies fought a wonderful sore battle, in
which the Sophy through the Turks Artillery had the worst, and was put to
flight: for so much as the Persian horses were never frequented to the noise and
thundering of artillery, which they could not abide to hear. This battle was
fought in the plain of Calderan, betwixt the cities of Tauris, and Coy: which
city of Coy sometime has been called Artaxata. The manner of this battle is
painted in the counsel chamber at Venice, which there I have seen, and is
reported that Selym caused so to be done, and sent to Venice, to the Senate
there. After which conflict the city of Tauris came into the hands of the
Turks, with a great part of the Realm of Persia: Howbeit the Turks had no
long possession of the same: For Siach Ismael recovered all that he had lost,
right soon after. In such sort as Thomas the son of the said Ismael holds
the same at this day. Selym now retourning out of Persia came to Trebizonda,
where he tarried all the winter, but the summer next ensuing he invaded the
prince Aladolus, otherwise called Anardule, (who frontered upon the Soldain
of Egypt, toward a Town of his called Alep, by the french men named Halappe,
by the Turks Adelphe, and by our anciants Epiphania, supposed to be called
Aleph, because it is the first Town which that way leads into Sury). Upon
an other coast, he bordereth on the Turks, toward the province of Icony, and
unto Armenia the less pertaining to the Persians. All this country of Anadule,
was subdued by Selym, Anadule himself taken, and his head smitten off, by
command. There rested now no mo in the contrary of Selym, but only the
Soldain of Egypt, who with a great Army was come against Caythby, the Emyr
of Alep, who being subject to the Soldain, had revolted against him. The army
of the Soldain was supposed to be about eight and twenty thousand Horsemen,
the most part of which consisted of the order of the Mameluchs, who little
esteemed the Turks, considering that heretofore they had encountered them in
other wars, and given them the overthrow, as before is declared. But Selym
politickly feigning as though he purposed to invade the Sophy, whereof he made
a bruit to run: when he was come nigh unto the Town of Aman, (called by
our ancients Apamea, situated betwixt Alep and Damas,) was instantly required
and prayed by the said Caithby, to give him succors and aid against the
Soldain: Whereunto, Selym accorded right soon, as he, that found what he
desired, and a ready occasion, for which he had long looked. Yet would he not
utter his thoughts therein, least the two armies of the prince and subject,
being ready in the feeld to fight, and perceuing his purpose, (who in taking
part sought so to over throw them both) should accord togethers against him.
Wherefore immediately he reigned with the Emir Caith by, bidding defiance to the
Souldain Campson Ciauri, with whom he fought in set field, where the Souldain
was slain, and Caithby also as some do say,) vvherby Selym remained Lord
over all Siria, Damas. Jerusalem, and Judea. The M^mcluchs who saved
themselves in that battle, returned into Egypt, where with the others
there, they chose an other Souldain named Tomombey, who before, was Emyr of
Alexandria, howbeit Selym hotly follovving his fortune and victories, entered
into Egypt, vanquished Tomombey in an other battle, took the great city of
Caire, (which of some, wrongfully is called Carra) and named of other by more
aparant reason Memphis,) where whilst Tomombey would have saved himselse on
the other side of the river Nyle, he was pursued by Canogly, who passed the
river by ships, with ten thousand Horsemen, (the bridge that was made on
boats over the same, being cloyed with Ianizaries, so as he was not able to
pass that way,) by which Canogly Tomombey, being taken and brought back to
Selym, caused him straight to be strangled, whereby the said Selym remained
King of Egypt, Anno Domini. 1518. These victories thus attained, Selym returned
to Constantinople, and purposing to remove to the City of Adrianople, died in
his iournyeng, at a village called Chiorlich: where before with his
Tartarians, he did fight with his father Bazait, and was overthrown. Thus he
died in the year of our Lord God one thousand five hundred and twentieth, of
his reign the eightenth year of his age the six and forty year: and of the
reign of the right Christian king Erancis the French King, the eight year
After that he had put to death three of his most worthy Bachas, Chenden Bacha,
because he would have mutined his Iannissaires, entering into Persia. Bostangi,
otherwise called Constantin Bacha his son in law, for sundry exactions and
spoils that he had committed: and Ianus Bacha, where of none could tell the
cause, saving that Selym thought him to be high minded. This Selym left but one
son named Solomon, called by the Turks, Selyman: whom he recommended to the
custody of Peribacha, who before had governed him in his youth.

SOLOMON came to his reign the xxviij. year of his age, who the year next
ensuing by the cou^sail of Peribacha, beseged Belgrado, and did win it from
king Jews of Hungary (the son of Lancelot.) who at that time was very young,
having the Princes and Lords of his Country at discord among them selves,
about the Regiment of their King and of his Realm: Whereby it came to pass
that no manner of Order was foreseen, either for the defense or succoring of
that famous Place.

The next year after, he beesieged the Rhodes, espying always after the
custom of his elders, the discords and divisions among Christian Princes, the
which enterprice was clearly against the mind and counsel of Peribacha, who
accounted that Journey very doubtful and of no little adventure: Howbeit the
same succeeded too well with him, as he desired.

In the year of our Lord God 1527. when Italy was in wars and troubles,
Solomon entered into Hungary in favor, as he said, of John de Ziphs, the Vayuod
of Sibenbourg, who pretended that the kingdom of Hungary did to him only of
right appertain: where it came to pass, that the young King Jews, coming in
person to the fight, was slain: after which, the said John attaining the
kingdom, dyed, leaving a young son, an Infant, behind him, under protection of
Solomon, with his Kingdom likewise.

The same Selyman in the year 1535. going in expedicion against Thomas king of
the Persians took from him the whole country of Mesopotamia, with the city of
Babylon, and in 1538 continuing at Aulona he gave an attempt to the vvinning
of the Isle of Corcyra. 1540 he both besieged and took the strong fortres
called Castle Nouo in Dalmatia. In the year 1541 John de Ziphs king of
Hungaria being dead as aforesaid, and his widow calling Solomon to her aid,
who as then was besieged in the city of Buda, by Ferdinand king of the
Romans. The said Solomon not only came to relieve her, but beating back the
army of Ferdinand, took the said city, placed therein a Bassa, and sent the
vviddovv with her infant son into Transiluania. The year following the same
Solomon defended the city of Pestum in Hungaria against the united and
assembled forces of the whole Germain Empire, and after took from them the two
strong holds of Strigonium and Alba Regalis, and in fine concluded peace with
Ferdinand king of the Romans and Hungaria, upon condition of a yeerelie
pension (which they do call a tribute) to be paid him. In the year 1549 and
1550 he undertook another expedicion against the Persians, and established a
Beglerbeg at Vanum in the confines of Media and Armenia, after which he
possessed himself of Tripolis in Africa, Temeswar in Hungaria, the which with
the adjoining countries he committed to the defense of a new Bassa. In the
year 1553* he commanded his eldest son Mustapha to be put to death at Halep:
gave order though in vain, that Zegethum in Hungaria, should be besieged and
afterward enforced his son Baiaseth (desirous to succeed his father) having
first overcome him in battle, to fly to the king of the Persians, where being
apprehended, he the said Baiaseth, with his four sons, Solomon, his nephews,
were cruelly slain* 1560 the Turks gave a great overthrow to the Christians,
at the Island of Garb, while the said Christians were desirous to recover the
town of Tripolis, formerly taken, as is said by the Turks. After which the
said Solomon attempted (but with small succes) the Island of Malta, yet took
that of Chios belonging to the state of Genua. Lastly being again recald into
Hungaria by John of Transiluania he died before Zegethum in the year 1566. and
of his age seauentie six.

To whom succeeded his son Selimus the second, this Selimus made peace with
Maximilian the Emperor every eight years to be renewed, took from the
possession of the Venetians, the Isle of Ciprus, and in the year 1571 received
that memorable overthrow in that worthy sea fought battle at Lepanto. He
likewise by Sinamus Bassa his general, took in the kingdom of Tunis in
Africa, forty years after that Charles the fifth the Emperor had held it in his
command, and caused that famous fort of the Gulet, to be overthrown and
leueled with the ground: This Sinamus Bassa, is he who at this day is the great
co^mander of all ^ Turkish forces in Hungaria. And so the said Selimus in the
end of the year 1574 died. Who left behind him a son called Amurath the third,
the which Amurath, for the space of 14 continued years, held wars both long
some and variable with the Persian king called Mahemet Hodobende, (as much to
say as the servant of God,) which wars scarce determined he began to make head
against the Christians and the Emperor Rodolphe, by whose soldiors the Bassa
Bosnensis 1593 and others at Sisciam in Hungaria had been slain. This Amurath
after many miseries inflicted upon the poor remaynder of Hungaria, and the
confines of Austria in the end of March, the year 1595 concluded his days. To
him succeeded Mahumet the third his son, who now reigns, a young man then of
the age of thirty two years, little more or less, of a great spirit, able
body, and infaligable mind, who before the performance of his fathers funeral
rites, caused xviii of his brothers, and fathers sons by several concubines to
be strangled, all which with their said father he took order should honorably
in the same monument be enterred, seven and twenty of his sisters he enclosed
in the Seraglio, a place in manner of a monestary, deputed for the retyring of
the great Senior his children, and the safe keeping of his concubines. This
Mahumet is thought to prosecut the wars against the Christians, which his
father left unfinished, with more fervent desire and greater forces then any
other before him. In this sort as you see, have I for your content entered and
finished this matter, which required more largely to have been touched, and to
have busied one of better knowledge, which things though but slightly run over,
may suffice to make aparant, that since but mean princes in regard of the
united Christian forces, have thus encombred the course of their conquests it
is not Impossible the like again may be done, and greater when God shall
encourage us thereunto.

The end of the second book.
To the Worshipful his very good cosen Edward Carr of Sleford in the county
of Lincoln Esquier, and one in her Majesty's Commission of peace there.
SIR, one and the same love and duty, derived from an infinite desire to serve
and honor you, formerly protested to your worthy brothers, and now continued
toward you, has drawn on this third book, in such sort, as you see, not
without some special reason, for herein being in most lively and fair
lines, laid forth, the perfect modells of true valor, and resolution, with
many other parts of action and exact military discipline, admired presidents
both for rule and example: I could not in my own conceit better dispose of,
then in commending unto you, being as I hear, a man in action, and one whom
your country has built their better hopes, when service or the like occasion
may call them thereunto: what I wish, and well hope, that the two first books
have obtained from them, of favorable acceptaunce and entertaining, my honest
will according to my meaning: the same I would entreat most earnestly of you,
for this: which granted shall engage me ere long to some greater task, better
fitting your worth, and in conformety more fully squared to my own desire,
till when I take my leave and rest, for ever in what I can.

Your worships exceedingly devoted R. Carr.

The third Book.
The History of Celimus secundus: of the wars and siege of Malta.
WHO soever that complain of the inconstance and imbecilitie of human
affairs, and the estate of mankind, truly they do it not without cause: for
well observing they shall see all things, with the heavens themselves, sometime
flow, and sometime change, though not according to the face of the heavens, and
the positions, motions, and courses of the stars, (which in their times
appointed, do make return,) the matters and state of mankind are always
like, for neither mankind it self, nor their worthy acts, policies, arts,
regiments, and laws, (whereof the most part are either at this present,
changed, or else utterly decayed,) which any conuercion or return of the
heavens can come again, whereof example unto us, are the Assyrians, Meds,
Persians, Aegiptians, Carthagians, Greeks, and Romans: For* time changes and
consumes all worldly things, which had enfolded and utterly ouerturned, the
famous acts of these worthy nations, in the horrible darkness of oblivion
and forgetfulness, if that an other (as it were a resplendishing and most
bright sun,) had not ben reserved from the first beeginning of mankind, that
should counteruaile such in constance and imbecilitie of human things,
whereby not only to prepare an immortality, to sliding and fluxible matters,
but chiefelie which all we mortal creatures ought to desire,) to show the
perfect way, to joyful felicity. And that is, the memory of the acts and
doings past of mankind, which we use to call and name a History: for when
that in mankind, there is by nature an engraued appetite and desire of that
goodness, which is called felicity, so as what soever we think, we justly
do any thing, we refer it to that end of goodness and felicity, but verelie
that true goodness, and most certain felicity consists in this point, that
we may be assuredly joined and knit with almighty God, and to be like to
him, as he has appointed us: Which unfeignedly they may affirm, to have
attained and gotten, who that having brought in obedience to reason, the
desires of their minds, and appetites, will found and establishe their
universal life upon virtue, accordingly as to the perfect dignity of mankind
is required: howbeeit, none there is, that would suppose to have gotten
certainly and absolutely this felicity, except he will live and be
conversant in that kind of society and company of men, which by policy and
wholesome laws, being congregated and gathered togethers is rightly to be
called a city or common wealth, which truly, then shall be accounted happy*
if that three things, (whereupon due felicity consists,) shall aid and help
the same, that is to say, That it may be, that well it may be, that Vt sit,
et been, et semper.
always in that stay it may be: And for so much as there be two especial
points, whereunto every well ruled City or Common wealth ought to have regard,
that is to say, to peace and war, and that by peace, rather than wars, we
enjoy and have happy lives, considering that wars ought to be taken in hand
to the end, that we may in peace live quietly: and such desire of peace is
in mankind, that no travail, no charge, no dangers and perilles will be
eschewed that peace may be attained and gotten, when as thorough the same,
each necessary matter for quiet life is purchased.

But truly, of that kind of peace I mean, nor when armor is laid a part,
we stay from moving of wars, and in the mean time rancour and malice to
have domination in our breasts: but rather of such peace, I mean, that is
grounded upon the love of God and benevolence in the hearts of each good
Citizen, to be good unto every one. Albeeit, Sapience and Wisdom must be the
Queen and vnfallable guide of us mortal people, who if she be our guide to
felicity, she is plain and able enough, of her self to accomplish the same,
it is she that has Fortune in obedience, it is she that gives virtue,
deligence, and other good acts, and the same can make fast to remain in us:
but unto her there be two ways addressed, the one by Philosophers and
establishers of wholesome laws, the other, by Historiographers, the one by
general precepts of good life and demonstrations of reason, the other, (by
show and declaration of worthy facts, coming to pass, and sequels of the
acts and doings of mankind, joined with variety of examples, and matters of
themselves.) leads and guides us to wisdom, and so much this exceeds the
other, as the very acts and doings has the superiority over words and sayings,
and as it may be well perceived of what force it consists to alure the minds
of any, to the enbrace of the same: for this path way of history, both kings,
generals in wars, and chiefelie rulers in common wealths, citezins young, and
old, rich and poor, miserable, and fortunate, ought to have in price and
estimation, in this to delight, this to love, and of this to make to themselves
a fellow, companion, and familiar, as it, which unto every age, degree, and
fortune, is most apt, and replenished with every kind of examples, as well of
private as public fortune: for when we perceive, how that fortune changes or
ouerturneth and abolisheth high, low, and mean, men, families, common
wealths, nations, Empires and kingdoms; if there be any thing amongst men,
that has power to encounter and counteruaile fortune, and to stop her of her
pretended course, it must be either, only history, or else none other art can
be found, that with the consideration of the ends and examples of the good and
evil of all estates and callings, set before our eyes, we may thereby be
brought unto the desired port of felicity: For in history, as a most pure and
clear glass, or as a most ample and large Theater, and high scaffolde, one
may ponder and way, the course the race, and mutations of human affairs, the
causes, and motions of the events and commings to pass of the fortunate and
unfortunate, and of their prudencies and temerities: wherewith, except we be to
much guided with folly or sloth, we may be brought and led (as it were with
hand) to the seat of quietness and felicity: in which, only tranquillity,
and abundance of all things to be desired, glory and immortality is found.
Wherefore having not a little considered of what valor, the memory of things
done is, and how much utility and profit the same brings to the affairs of
mankind: I have (so much as in meelieth) not only endeavored my self in much
reading of histories, but also the same written in other languages, have put in
latin, and I my self likewise, to write the history of the wars of Malta.
Howbeit in the great plenty and abundance of the famous acts and doings of
worthy persons as, that which pleases one, likes not an other; so to me,
though not a little it seems hard and difficult to give due ornament of
words, unto the arts and doings of valiant seruiters, I have taken in hand, to
put in perpetual memory, the worthy wars done in the said Island of Malta,
of the which so briefly as I can, I will show unto you the truth.

The wars, which Solomon the Emperor of the Turks moved against the knights
of the order of Saint John, heretofore founded in Jerusalem, and now resident
in the Island of Melita commonly called Malta, I purpose to write: not only
because the same seemed to be marvelous cruel, and doubtful to which of
the parts the victory would incline, but rather the worthy virtue and force
of those excellent defenders, no less may unto each one appear, then likewise
it may be well perceived, how much the force of Christian nations, joined
togethers may prevail, and which being sondred and disioyned how little the
same can do: But before I make mention of the beginning of the wars, it is
requisite that I should touch somewhat of the original and beginning of the
knights of this order of Saint John, and by what means they first came into
this Island of Malta, to the end that every thing may the more easily and
plainly be understood and known. At such time as the christians of the Latin
Church, moved wars against the Sarazins and Turks, and other barbarous nations,
for obtaining of Jerusalem and other cities of Syria: there were that vowed
themselves, and all the goods that they had to serve in defense of the most
sacred religion of our savior Christ: Among these, were some that builded
Hospitals in Jerusalem, for receiving and lodging of Pilgrims, and that
defended the ways and passages of Pilgrims from the invasions of the
Infidels, who always studied to annoy the christians^ of these, some were
called Ioannits, some Templars, some Teutones. Howbeit the Templars (about CC.
years agone (by means of Philip le Beau the french king, and Pope Clement the
fifth of that name condemning that order) were utterly destroyed, the orders of
the Ioannits, and Teutones did remain: Nevertheless the truth of the name of
the Ioannits, is not according to the common fame, which supposes that it
took name in the honor of Saint John the Baptist, but rather (as says the
Bishop of Tyrus, who at that time right gravely wrote the acts and worthy
doings of the Christians in the Orient:) that the hospital and house, (whereof
the Ioannits do account themselves to be brethren) was founded by the
Amalphitans people of Italy, who traded about affairs of merchandise into the
Orient, (at such time as the Egiptian Bishop whom the Egiptians called their
Caliph ruled in the city of Jerusalem) and by them, their order was
consecrated to Saint John a Ciprian borne, Patriaroh sometime of Alexandria,
who by reason of his great charity toward the poor people of God, was
called Saint John the Eleemozinar* But unto those, that think the name to be
ascribed to John Hircanus one of the Machabais, they seem, they would crave
authority from to much antiquity: Howbeit I will leave the credit thereof,
unto the authors and inuentors of the same. Notwithstanding, it is most
manifest, that the white Cross, (which the Ioannits use upon black apparel,)
the first took of one Gerard sometime master of the hospital in Jerusalem:
but their institutions and rules, (wherewith their order is governed) one
Raimund^ Poggio a Florentine (created with no little authority Magister
Equitum, (according to the warlike order of the ancient Romans) did establish,
and so in process of time (both by the liberality of Princes, and other
nations) they increasing with wonderful wealth, and riches, they builded to
themselves (by virtue and good order,) such dominacion as it were another king
do me, and attained therewith no little fame and glory, howbeit when as by the
space o^ CC. years, they had worthily served in Siria against the infidels: at
the last when the infidels had taken Jerusalem, they retired themselves unto
Ptolemais, a city in Phoenicia, and from thence, being expulsed by the Souldan
of Egypt, then with a great navy (which they gat together, partly by their
own wealth, and partly by the help and aid of the Templars, and other
christian nations, which succored them) they invaded the Isle of the Rhodes,
being possessed at that time by the Turks, whom they expelled from thence,
where they and their posterity remained, unto such time as by the aforenamed
Solomon, with a great and marvelous navy inuading and besieging the Rhodes
(when as with their own only force they could no longer resist, and were
forsaken, as it seemed, of all other Christian aid and help) they were
compelled to yield up the Island of the Rhodes into the hands of the Turks, and
so to forsake the same. This fortress of the Orient in such sort being lost,
and that the Ioannits, had retired themselves into the Island of Sicilia: than
by the liberality of the Emperor Charles the fifth of that name, they
obreigned the Island of Melita commonly named Malta, in the year of our Lord
God 1529. and there ever since have stayed themselves, which Island (as
opportunity shall serve when hereafter in this history, I shall entreat of
the besieging of the fame, and of the counsels and preparations of Soliman,)
I will at length discribe. The Ioannits, thus rested and settled in Malta, and
their power not a little increased, they sea^ed not by all the ways and means
they could to endamage and anoy the Turks, as well on the ^eas to spoil the
Turks, as also in every war that our Emperor moved against the Turks, they
ever joined their forces with the powers of the Emperor. With which so doings
Solomon moved as well by his usual insatiate appetite of dominacion and rule,
as with his ancient hatred conceived against Christian religion, was
meruailouslie offended, and beegan to note and mark this their doings, and
devised with himself by what means he might drive the Ioannits, from the
seas, and utterly (if he could) to destroy them: therefore with no little
diligence and have, he caused a great navy to be prepared and rigged forth,
and so commanded to his Admiral and Captains of his places on the sea costs,
to be in a readiness at the next spring, when as, a little after, in person he
had viewed part of such things as he had before commanded, and part by
intelligence he had understood, to be in readiness. Than calling his
nobility together in counsel, he used these kind of words to them (as was
reported) which follow.

That, which by these forty years I have always desired, The woor Solomon,
his Nobili
that after mine other wars, I might get so much leisure, whereby I might
once drive out from their nests these bosting Cruciats, glorying so much
themselves, to be the chiefest propugnacle and fortres of the Christians. The
same occasion, (me thinks) I have now obtained thorough the help of the
great God and Mahumet. For, as touching the attempts of the Persians I have in
such sort repressed, that they cannot harm us. And as concerning the troubles
fained to be in Hungary, I trust to give such orders in that behalf, that our
enemy there, shall be glad to get and hide himself in the furthest part of
Germany, and to be feign to demand and crave peace at our hands.

You, your selves, are not ignorant what complaints are daily made unto us by
our subjects and marchanuts whom those of Malta (whom rather pirates than
soldiors I call) when they get themselves to the Seas, they utterly spoil and
reaue from them all that they have. The injuries of whom, and others unto us
done, both Gods law and man's, does move us to revenge. Nor truly there can be
any thing more acceptable, or joyful to me, or more aptly can purchase to me an
Immortal fame, than that I might bring to pass (before I depart from this
mortal life,) two things, the one to win the Island of Malta, the other is
to have whole Hungary and the lands and dominions of Sarmatia in subjection.
Except some will think that it will be greater difficulty to me, to expel
these Cruciats out of their Rocks of Malta, than to our elders that drove their
predecessors both out of Jerusalem and whole Syria, and to us also that after,
expelled them out of the Isle of Rhodes. But this Island (you will say) is more
nigh Itally, from whens aid may soon come, and with their Nauies the easilier
to be defended.

Beeleeue and credit me, that the Itallians dare not fight against us on the
seas; when they remember howoft they have had the overthrow at our hands. As
for any great garrisons, the place being so little and straight, they cannot
have. And if they have, they cannot feed them long. Wherefore for their
affairs, we entende this next Spring, to set forwards our mighty Navy, and
for that purpose we have already given in commandment to every of our
Captains of the Seas, that with their Galleys and Ships, they may be in a
readynesse to depart.

The King of Arger will be there to serve us. Our Garrisons remaining at
ALEXANDRIA, in EGYPT are in readiness. The Navy of Dorgutes, are likewise
rigged forth to serve us, by my means. To this great and mighty Navy of
ours, we doubt not but that the force of the Occident will give place: Which
with the aid of the grear God and Mahumet, and your invincible courage, I
firmly hope will come to pass.

There rests no more, but for you to think, how these wars may
conuenently proceed, and to give to us your faithful aduises and counsayles
in the same.

Which that you may the better do, beeholde here before your eyes the plat
of the whole Island of Malta, and of every fortress in the same, which I
received from certain friends of mine right expert in discryuing of such
matters. The words of The shows counsai^ of the of Mal^
Solomon thus declared, and thoroughly considered by those, to whom both the
Island and the order of the same, was right well known, and by them declared,
what, conveniently was in that beehalfe to be done.

It was fully resolved and concluded, that the Navy so in a readynesse at the
appointed time should set forward, and to depart. And so the Navy being
vitailled, and the Soldiers shipped, tarryed only for winds. Of these
proceedings of the Turk, Seignior Iean Valet, a French man borne, and at that
time great Master of Malta, both by letters and Espialls getting intelligence,
for that he had at Constantinople such friends, as most prudently gat
knowledge of the secret counsel and doings of Solomon, as one not affrayde
but always thincking that victories remained in the hands of God, and that
the part of a prudent General and others at his commandment, is to be
always vigilant, dilligent and to work by Counsyle, and therefore he called
togethers a Counsel of the Knights of the order, to whom in few words he
did speak to this effect following.

What, Solomon the Turk (most noble and valiant words let the mastar to
^ann^ts.
knights) prepares, and how great and mighty wars he entendeth to move
against us, I think of late you have understood, so well, as I do, whereof
to make any long circumstance of words to you, ^ need not. The enemy is
known, his insatiat desire of dominatio^ and rule is known, his might and
force is known, yea, and his continual hatred against us and the Christian
faith is no less known to you. But now rather let every of us, do our
endeavor to have first almighty God to be our friend, and than to prepare
every thing for the wars. Almighty God would be our friend, and we
assuredly shall please him, if we do two things. One, if we from hence
forth, amend our lives, the other is, if we honor him with pure religion
and to have a firm hope and trust in him, which is called Piety. With these
virtues, our famous elders, obtained innumerable victories against the
infidells, in the Orient. And there is no doubt, but, if with the like virtues,
we be furnished, we shall give overthrow to the cruel purposes of this
bluddie Tyrant. Howbeit, for so much as Almighty God is ready to aid such as
would be circumspect and apt to do well, and not the slowthfull, and cowardes:
Let us therefore provide for those necessaries as both our profession
requires, and order of wars, wills. Whereof part, in our selves
consists, and part in other Christian Princes remains. As for victual,
money, armor, and other things which order of wars desires, we shall so
provide for the same, that you shall well understand, that money, in
necessaries, I will not spare, and much less, labor, where I may enploy it.

In these affaiers I will be ready to spend all that I can make. And for any
safeguard of my life, I will not eschew any peril. As touching other Princes, I
cannot beeleeue, that (upon such weighty occasions whereof the peril no less
touches them, than us,) they would be negligent to give us aid. As for the
Popes holiness, the Emperor, and the king of Hispain, I doubt not (for the
Piety and godliness in them remaining) but that they will succor and aid us
to the uttermost, and that also they will move others to do the like; And as
for you, most worthy lamps and lights of Christians and others of our most
loving brethren knights of this sacred and martial order, I doubt not but
that you all, will so courageously and valiauntly fight against this most
cruel tyrant, subuerter and ouerturner of the true religion of God, and
oppressor of all good conditions, manners, Arts, and discipline, in defense of
our Christian Religion, lives, goods, and glory of the Latin Church, that the
view of the glorious Cross of ours, (which this vile dog) so much abhors
and contempneth) may be seen to his perpetual care in Constantinople (where
he dwells.) We have not now affairs in the Isle of Rhodes, far from our
aids and succors out of Asia, Europ, and Aegipt, compassed about, with the
enemy, both by land and sea: but rather in the view and face of Italy and
strong fortified places, whereby the enemy may be easily overthrown. That it
may so be, let us make ernest prayer to almighty God. When the great master
had thus given end ^^ his most prudent words. The Knights of the order which
than were present, with one voice answered, that sooner their lives should
take end, than that so comman a cause for want of their endeauours should
quail, or that they on live, to come into the hands of that cruel tyrant
Solomon.

After common prayers and general processions, commanded to be done in
every Church in the Island of Malta: there were immediately of the order of
the Knights, three chosen, to be Tribuni or general surueiours, whereof one
an Italian by surname called Imperadore; the other a French man borne, named
Bornye; the third, a Spaniard, borne in Aragone, called Quatrius, gentlemen of
great providence, foresight, and right expert in knowledge of wars. Who
according to their prudence having considered every thing meet to this war,
they immediately did put the same in readiness. For they, considering, that the
suburbs and trees, nigh unto places of fortification would not a little be an
anoynce to the fame, they immediately caused them to be cast down. Thus the
fortifications being viewed, and the Garrisons of every fortress there,
augmented, and the same abundantly victualled according to the considered
necessity thereof. Letters were immediately sent from the great master both to
the Popes holiness and other Princes, together with diverse messengers into
sundry places, that might give intelligence hereof as well to the knights of
this order remaining among other nations, as to others. Of which letters, one
written to Pius the fourth of that name, Pope of Rome, that of this, the others
may be well considered, this (as follows) is the Copy.

WHile that I endeauored my self with the force of The Letter from the great
master of Malta to Pope Pius the fourth of that name.
this our order to withstand the great Turkish navy now in readiness to
approach toward us: I found my self in manner unarmed from every necessary,
which of my self I cold never have furnished, if your exceeding goodness
(most holy father) both with your Letters, money, and one Ensign of valiant
Soldiors had not aided me. So that otherwise I had not known, how well to have
done.

For considering by reason of the sundry threatenings which the Turcke made
these sundry years past, against this place and order; I have been brought
to such intolerable charges that I know by no means, how to come out of
debte, of the money that I have borrowed, besides the interest daily thereof
increasing.

Howbeit a greater matter encombereth my mind, which is, (whether this army
of the Turks either shall proceed, or stay,) when I perceive, him, being our
general enemy, so dilligent to set forward his Navy and continually busy
about his other afayres of wars, and we of this order, to be put to these
intolerable charges.

Will not any think, that, right great is the folly of us Christians, that
will suppose, that when the power of the Christians is such, that scarce it
being able to defend themselves: The Turk will fear to receive any
detryment at our hands. What courage will he conceive, when none of us
encountereth his intolerable pride.

Besides he well knows, that if he might get but togethers his only pirates
that remain here in the Ponent or West parts, he were able, of them, in mine
opinion to make a greater Navy and Army by sea, than that we Christians with
no little difficulty made against him the other year. Which the like again,
this year, I would be right glad to see. Howbeit who is so ignorant that if
such a Navy and force may be made of his only Pirates, what if a great part
or the whole power of his Countries in the leuant and Orient, were joined
togethers, may not he than do us a greater detriment, if God of his goodness
do not stay him, unto such time as Christian Princes have convenient space to
gather themselves together to encounter so puissaunt and mighty an enemy.

And when as it seems that the Princes of the Christians so much neglects
the favor of God, that with no detriments and with no infamies, they will
awake from their too long sleep and sloth, it is to be feared that God will
take of his hand and to let slip to this cruel tyrant, occasion and power to
accomplish his long desired mind and fury upon all us Christians, that no
power which hereafter shall be against him made, can be able to withstand
his cruelty.

Which inconveniences, I doubt not, but that your holiness, long, before this
time, has considered, and that worthy mind of yours is enflamed with the
desire of so holy and Godly reuengement as is to be done upon so common a
cruel enemy and hethen dog. But I fear to seem to much arrogant, in your
holiness sight, that have taken so much boldness upon me to entreat upon such
affairs so rudely with your holiness, to whose divine providence these things
are better known than to me. Nevertheless when as such things, which by eyes
are seen, do a great deal more move us, then that which we hear with our
ears, then I having these things continually before mine eyes, am so afected,
that I cannot in such weighty affairs hold my tongue, but most humbly and
lowly do beseech your holiness, not for this sacred order of knights sake,
only, which always is and shall be ready to live and die for the defense of the
Christian religion, (considering by our profession no kind of death must be
refused, where due occasion shall be ministered,) but also in the name of whole
christendom that so much already has tasted your most godly and paternall
zeal and love toward them, that for the public tranquillity of the same
touching matters of faith, you laid aside all your own private commodities
and affairs, calling together of late a counsel general: now that you would
vouchsafe, to call some other counsel togethers (being a matter of no less
importance, to repair the woeful ruins of long times past, and to eschew
worse to come) whereby Christian princes gathering themselves togethers may
convert and turn their powers against this pestiferous serpent; and to drive
him into his ancient limits, that no longer, he have power to devour such
multitude of Christians; as to the great shame of Christendom he has done:
For so far we have seen him spread his deadly poison, that now he has in
manner compassed the little limits of the christian kingdoms: now considering
that all domestical and civil wars being utterly extinguished, and assured
amity and peace by the providence of God being resident among Christian
princes, it beehoueth us now to awake. For if by misfortune our princes again
should fall to any new vvarres among themselves, this importunate beast would
not sleep, but would seek how he may work our utter ruin. Truly most holy
father, for the great piety and singular prudence in your holiness remaining,
I hope that so great an occasion of laud and perpetual glory (whereby you may
deserve well toward both God and man,) you would leave to no successor of
yours: With this hope I will comfort my self, trusting before I shall depart
fro this mortal life, to see this saored^ourny to be advanced against our
cruel and commoneenemie of Christ's religion, beesides which, nothing can
happen to me more joyfully, or be to me a greater felicity: If therefore in
these matters, I have been either longer, or more liberal of writing, than to
me has appertained, I hope that of your fathely clemency, you will give
pardon unto me, whom no little care of our Christian religion rather then
rashness has moved me thus to wright: And for my part for your perpetual
goodness or rather piety toward this our order, I most humbly render to
your holiness immortal thanks, and so will continue to do during life, and
so do beeseech almighty God to preserve your holiness in good and prosperous
life. About this time Dom Garza di Toledo, the Viceroy of Sicilia, under Philip
king of Hispain, and governor of all his graces navy in those parts, fearing
that the navy of Solomon, under color to seem that he would invade Malta,
would straight pass to the Gulet, a Castle standing in the straites and
entering of the poole or stagne of Tunes, and to beesiege the same, therefore
he passed over to the castle of Gulet, both to furnish the same with new
supply of Garrison, and other necessaries thereunto appertaining, and in his
way, the Viceroy touched at Malta, and there landed to confer with the great
master, touching the wars pretended against Malta: But they having
intelligence that the navy of Solomon was departed from Constantinople, so as
by reason of small time, they could not tarry so long togethers as the weight
of the cause required, Dom Garza immediately departed from Malta, unto the
castle of Gulet in Barbaria, which when he had viewed, and furnishing the same
with such necessaries as it lacked, he returned with all possible diligence
into Sicilia, to rig and set forward there the kings navy. But the mean time,
the 1565. The 22 of March the Turks navy unloosed from Constantinople.
navy of Solomon the xxii. of March in the year of our savior Christ M. D.
lxv began unloose from Constantinople, and the next day after departed from
that port toward Peloponneso, and so came to Methone. There Mustapha Bassa a
man of the age of lxxv years, being appointed to be general of the Turks army
by land, there mustered his army where of his horsemen called Spachi, which came
out of the lesser Asia, were seven thousand, having to their captain a
gentleman of the same province of Asia, with two liuetenants. Out of Cilicia
came v. C from the Island of Mitilena came also iiii. C yt of every of their
provinces had captains from whence they came: he had also of old soldiers,
whom they call Ianizers, four thousand five hundred, to whom Solomon himself
appointed two Captains to be their leaders, considering that their general
whom the Turks (in their tongue) call Aga, never departs out of
Constantinople: Beesides this, there be among the Turks, a kind of soldiers
that live of the fruits and stipends of their spirituality, of these in this
army were thirteen thousand, who at Constantinople had vowed themselves to
serve for the defense of their faith and Emperor. There came also out of
Thrasia and Peloponneso two Captains, and one liuetenant with a thousand two
hundred horsemen, and three thousand and five hundred other soldiers that came
from diverse places, voluntary to serve for wages: there likewise, did Pial
Bassa the Turks Admiral, muster his navy where he found to be a hundred and
thirty galleys, eleauen ships of burden of the lesser sort, a eleauen ships of
burden of the greater making, beesides a great ship that was broken beesides
Methone, in which were then six thousand barrells of gun powder, thirty
thousand shot, and six hundred Spachi, of the which scarce two hundred were
saved. There came also from the Island of the Rhodes ten galleys, under the
guiding of Haliport a man of the age of threescore and ten, two galleys from
Mitylene under the leading of Salach, brother to the king of Alger, that newly
was dead, also there were othersoists and pirates ships, about the number of
seauenteene. With this great and mighty navy, the Turks departed from Methone
the thirteenth day of May, and arrived at Malta the eighteenth day of the said
month of Male, and took first port at the North cast part of The 180 Ma^^ the
Navy of the Turks arrived at Malta.
the Island, which the inhabitants call Marzasirocco. But the Turks perceiving
that they had not a safe rodested there, they removed from thence to an other
rodested of that Island, called Maiaro. All this time the famous pirate Dorguta
was not come, it was said, he was tarieng in the Island called Meninges,
commonly named Gerbas, with his ships, and in readiness to come, and that he
had sent to the king of Tunes, four pieces of artillery of brass, and other
things, which he gave to him, to the end that the king should not aid the
Christians in these wars, but rather to help the Turks with a certain portion
of victual according to the agreement made beetwixt them, and for these and
other causes it was feigned that the Turks would first go unto the Gulat, or
else of purpose these news were sowed, to the end that those of Malta
crediting the same, should at unawares be surprised: But the great master of
Malta (being a man of a marvelous quick and ingenious wit, and therewith
right expert in the act of wars, and also wonderful constant and circumspect
against the practices and policies of the enemy) did fore cast these devises
and counsels of the enemy, and right well did epsy their purposes on every
side in his gentlemen and soldiers all, there was espied to rest an assured
constancy and marvelous liveliness to serve in so worthy and most honorable
cause: how beeit before I further proceed, this place requires, to discriue
unto you the situation of this Island called Melita otherwise Malta. and of the
especial places thereof (wherein so many worthy acts were done,) to make
mention. The Island Malta is placed beetwixt Africa and Sicilia, and doubted
descript^* Malta.
whether it should belong to Africa or Europe, if it had not ben that the
ancient inhabitants of Melita time out of mind, having used the common
language of those of Africa, have always reputed the Island to be a member of
Africa. This Island from the North east to the North west is drawn in length
twenty miles, and in breadth twelve miles, and from the place where it is
broadest, it proceeds to be strait and narrow upon the south toward that
part of Africa, where those famous quick sands remain that are called Sirtis
Minor, upon the cost whereof is situated that town which is named Leptis
Parua, and upon the North faceing Silicia, being more toward the Promontory or
lands end thereof, called Pachino than unto Lilybeo, and in compass and circuit
threescore miles the Carthagians first inhabited this Island, and after, as I
understand one Battas, the first builder of the famous city of Cyrenes, did
reign there in the time of Dido, which afterward came again in subjection of
the Carthagians and so remained under their dominion unto such time as the same
in the second wars of the Carthigians, that they with their navy on the seas,
being overthrown came into the hands of the Romans: at which time those of
Malta were supposed to be very wealthy by reason of the repair and much
concourse of s^ndry nations, through trade of merchandise that frequented
thither, and famous, through sundry notable arts there used, and also of their
notable Cotton which is very soft and white, there growing, of which sundry
garments are made by those of Malta and had much in estimacion. This Island is
well replenished with honey there growing, whereof some suppose this Island to
have the name, and also very famous with the growth there, of sweet roses: the
trees there, have fruit twice in the year, and often times two haruests there,
in one year, chiefly of barley flax and Cotton: How beit the ground there every
where, is stony, uneven, as here an hill, there a valie, very unfruitful for
trees, albeeit there grows, the fig tree, Aple tree, Almonde tree and Vines
planted with the much labor and diligence of the inhabitant, they have wild
date trees but unfruitful, they have exceeding plenty of great thistles, which
they use for their fuel and fire. In this Island of Malta is marvelous
scarcetie of sweet water, which neither the skies (by reason of little rain
there) gives, nor yet the grounds there, yields.

And ^^ for such fountains and wells that there be, (...)y I beeleeue that it
is the rain that falls in winter (...)t makes them, and yet they be half
^alt and brackish, and dry in summer. The Inhabitants through the exceeding
heat of the Sun are so ^anned, that they look in color much like to the
A^thiopians so that rather in winter each thing that there grows, seems to
be more pleasant to the view and sight. The men of this Island for the most
part are very healthful of body, of sclender diet, very diligent and
painful rather than apt to wars, whom old age sooner than disease and
sickness, does take them from this life: Their form of buildings (except
their city which is situated in the midst of the Island somewhat more toward
the South which also is called Melita) having certain suberbs about the same,
are long and low not much unlike the sheep cotes of Barbaria, covered with
reed or thacht: the little and pretty dogs called the Miletean Dogs, are
supposed to come forth of this Island, which Pliny rather ascribes to the
other Island likewise called Malta, lying in the gulf of Venice, between the
Island Curs^^la and the shore of Dalmatia. In this Island of Melita called
Malta, some affirm that Saint Paul the Apostle after shipwreck there did
land: howbeit let them beeware, it be not the other Malta, in the gulf of
Venice that Saint Luke makes mention of, when as Saint Paul in the the sea
Adriatico otherwise called the gulf of Venice, was tossed too and fro with
cruel tempests of weather, but that he came out of that sea, into the other
sea of Mediterraneum, where the Island of Malta stands, it appears not in
Saint Luke. And as to that, which they say, no venomous beast neither there is
engendered, nor, if from any other place, any venomous beast be brought into
that Island does harm, and the same so has continued there, since that time
Saint Paul, did cast of from his hands the viper and adder, that would have
stung him: howbeit it may be thought that this Island has naturally had that
property, as likewise those Ila^ds therabouts called Gaulo, Galata, and Clupea,
at this day have the like virtue by nature, and sundry other Islands in that sea
of Mediterraneum, as others other where: for the Island of Candye nourishes no
manner of venomous beast, as England has no Wolves, nor Ireland any Serpent,
considering both the air of the places and nature of the grounds, are
contrarious to the same: but touching this matter, as sundry have their diverse
minds, so, that which has seemed to make against the common opinions by any
probable manner, I have thought good by the way not to let pass but to my
purpose I will return. Malta upon that part, which is toward Sicilia, is
bowed and crooked into sundry bays and rodesteids meet for the riding of
ships: as for havens and ports this Island of Malta has two, besides the
haven upon the East part of that Island, called Marzas^^acco* and besides also
the rodested of Saint Thomas, and an other which is not far distant from the
same, called Seal or Scala: of these two aforenamed havens or ports, there is
one which st^^^^heth from the South to the North, alongest the side of a long
piece of ground of the said Island, in form like unto half an Island, and
this haven of the inhabitants is called Marzamusetto, the other haven
stretching from the East to the West is likewise named Porto Mayor. Upon the
uttermost part and front of this half Island is situated a Castle or fortress
right strongly fortified both by nature and art, called Saint Elmo, whom
hereafter I will name Saint Hermes. To him that enters into the other haven
called Porto Mayor, there do appear upon the left hand thereof, four long
pieces of ground toward the sea, as it were certain little half Islands or
promontories, with as many rodesteds or baies for ships thereunto appertaining:
upon the first of these said four promontories is situated a certain Gallos,
being the common place of execution for offenders: upon the second promontorie
is planted an exceeding strong castle upon an incredible high and ragged rock
of stone, called the castle of Saint Angelo, nigh unto the which, there is
adjoining a town severed from the castle but with a dike and wall called
B^rgo, and sometime the new town, cut and made out of a rock right well
fortified both with the sea, and art of the soldier. In the Castle of Saint
Angelo, the great Master of Malta remains, and in the town, the knights of
the order are resident. Upon the third promontorie there is a town also called
B^rgo, and a Castle called Saint Michael. The fourth promontorie is
uninhabited: having a mighty baie in the same, stretching to the water of
Marza, and in manner to half the Island as before I have said. Again from
the haven or port of Musetto toward the West, there appears an other
rodested, which is dedicated to Saint George, and an other called Benorrat:
beyond lies the port of Saint Paul, not much less then that, which is on
the Oriental part of the Island, after, is the rodested called Salynarum. Upon
the other side of the Island which is toward Africa is the rodested called
Miliaria: there be also sundry other little Islands not far from Malta, as
the Island of Gaulos, which some suppose to be C^sira, at this day called Gozo,
in compass thirty miles, toward the West of Malta, not passing five miles
distant, by sea from Malta, which Islande of Gozo, in the year of our Lord
1551 was taken and wasted by the Turks and six thousand captives, out of that
Island were taken and had away, at such time as the town of Tripolis in
Afric, (which sometime was called Leptis Magna,) was wone by the Turks, from
the knights of this order. Between Goza and the West side of Malta, there
lies two other Islands, whereof the greater, commonly is called Cumino, and the
lesser Cuminetto, severed the one from the other, with the sea, being there
very narrow.

At the South and by West part of Malta, there is an Ad Eurotiotum.
other little Island called at this day Piper: All which Islands are in obedience
to the great Master of Malta, the rest for the mos^ part are compassed with
huge rocks, and raging seas, thus of Malta and the inhabitants thereof,
(so much as appertains to the knowledge of this present matter,) I think
there is enough said. The mean time, what power and army Mounsier Valet the
great Master of Malta, had to withstand the Turks ariuall, I will show unto
you first of all. In the Island were a thousand and three hundred soldiers,
that took wages: of a thousand of those, some were Spaniards, some French men,
and some Florentines, the rest were Neapolitai^s: There also were a thousand,
that frequented the seas, pertaining to the Navy of the Knights of Malta, and
five hundred in the town of Saint Angelo: Of the inhabitants of the Island were
about five thousand, that were trained for the wars, and were retired from
their Country habitations to Borgo, where the great Master was resident.
There were also five hundred Knights of the order, beesides the Priests and
esquires, for there be three sorts of them, that in this order of Malta are
called brethren: And this was the whole number that defended the Castles and
Towns of Saint Hermes, Angelo, and Michael, into the which the soldiers
were distributed, accordingly as each place was thought requisite to be
defended. In the City of Malta (whereof before I mentioned,) were placed
two hundred soldiers besides the citizens, and four hundred chosen out of the
rest of the whole Island, and three hundred, also that served on horseback,
unto this garrison of the city of Malta, was appointed to be general, one
Sor* Io* Vagno a M^ncalerio, a gentleman borne in the country of Piemont:
besides these things, was prepared a marvelous furniture of victual, armor,
weapon, and necessaries, which usually was to be provided, meet for abiding of
a long siege and other wants, and above all other, that which is to be desired
against every infortunitie, there was planted in every one that there served,
an invincible courage, which often times makes the overthrown to be victorious.
Things being in this order and readiness, and understanding that The Turks
landing in Malta.
seven and twenty of the galleys of the Turks had taken the port of
Marzasirocco, and had landed certain of their soldiers: Immediately Gyon the
Captain of the navy of the order of Malta, a right diligent and forward
gentleman accompanied with fifty Arquebusiers was sent to view the enemy, and
in so much as he could to endeavor to draw the enemy to some open places: But
the Turks espying them, right quickly retired to their galleys again: at an
other part, where the greater part of the Turks navy rode, there were landed
two hundred Turks, and upon them gave a charge, one Riuier a gentleman of
france, accompanied with eight other horsemen, who having his horse slain
under him, and with the loss of one of his companions, came into the hands of
the enemy. While these matters were in doing, a christian man a captive among
the Turks slipped from them, as they rode in the port of Vulturno, and fled into
the city of Malta, and discovered there to the general, the purpose of the
enemy, saying that the devise of Mustapha the general of the Turks army was,
that the most part of their army should land with their great artillery, and to
besiege and give battery to the fortified places, whose opinion Piale Bassa,
the Turks Admiral, did utterly mislike, saying that if he so did, he should
but come to his manifest destruction, considering they had not passing eight
thousand Ianizers, and ten thousand Spachies, besides a rude and untrained
company of mariners to be left in the ships, wherefore unto such time as
Dorguta should come, who every hour was looked for he would enterprise
nothing* at whose coming, he would then agree, that the castle of Saint
Hermes should first be beesieged. For Solomon the Emperor of the Turks, did
command that nothing should be done without the advice and counsel of
Dorguta, such confidence and credit had this barbarous prince in the warlike
knowledge and practice of Dorguta: But whether this intelligence were true or
feigned, the Turks nevertheless riding in the port of Vulturno, landed twenty
thousand of their soldiers, with five field pieces, and encamped themselnes
right strongly Azorbar.
in a place, which those of Malta call Azorbar: that done Pial Bassa
accompanied with seven thousand with him departed to view the situacion of the
fortress of Saint Michael, upon that part which looks toward Saint
Katherines Church, and durst not approach nigher, because the artillery of the
fortress began to shoot of a pace, against him and his company, besides,
certain of the garrison of the fortress, made a salie and issue upon the
enemy, and in such sort behaved themselves that one named Curfeline, by
surname called Prata a gentleman of right singular worthiness, having in his
company but one only Spaniard, valiantly berest an ensign from the enemy,
and killed a Sangiaco, and certain others of the Consultation of the Turks.
Turks. So the Turks retired to their camp, vvher among the Princes of the
same, consultation was had, whether it were better, that battery should be
first laid to the fortress of Saint Hermes, or to the town of Saint Michael:
Finally it was concluded that the fortress of Saint Hermes should first be
beesieged. So the Turks to view the fortress, mounted upon a hill, who being
perceived by those of the fortress, issue and salie was made, and therewith a
skirmish on both sides beegan, and after a few slain on each part, each side
retired. Matters in this sort growing hot, the Prince of Malta, having in
memory those things that were to be done, thought it most convenient to urge
and stir the Viceroy of Sicilia, in have to set forward his Navy, that then
was in rigging. Therefore he commanded a gallie to be with all diligence,
set in a readiness to depart toward Sicilia, for the conuaying of one named
Saluago, a knight of that order, for the exploit of such matters of charge,
wherewith he then commanded him. The mean time the Turks began to erect a
Mount, of intent both to Vallum ex^^uunt. Pa. 40.
batter the fortress of Saint Hermes, and to anoy the ships of Malta, as they
rode in the port, that thereby they might open a more safe entry for their
galies that were abroad. Howbeit the fortress of Saint Elmo otherwise called
S. Hermes, so troubled them with the strokes of their great artillery, that the
Turks were saine to forsake that piece of fortification, before the same could
take end, which partly discouraged the boldness of the Turks. During which
time, the Turk Ochial with six ships having in the same nine hundred soldiers
deducted, out of the garrison of Alexandria in Egypt, came as a supply to the
increase of the force of the Turks. Therefore the Turks beegan an other
fortification upon an higher plat of ground then before they did, whereby, not
only they wonderfully annoied, the port where the ships of Malta had their
rodested, but also troubled with their great shot, the castle of Saint Angelo,
and besides with entrenching they gate night the Castle of Saint Hermes,
albeit, at the first they had much to do therewith, considering they of the
fortress did what they could to enbar them, notwithstanding in the end the
Turks with much labor and diligence wherein they exceed all other nations,
they accomplished their trench. Wherefore the Turks, with no little
expedition, in such sort and place planted their great artillery, that they
determined, both the castle of Saint Angelo and Saint Michael, should be
encombered with the stroke of their Canon. This while, there was in the Camp
of the Turks, a Spaniard, a gentleman, A fugitive.
albeit a slave, he, when he had assuredly learned a part of the pretenses of
the Turks, gave intelligence of the same to Mounsier Valet the prince of Malta
by a Christian that was a fugitive, which when the prince understood, he sent
two ensigns of Spaniards into the castle of Saint Hermes, under the leading of
the valiant captains Cerda and Miranda, to supply a certain want there* which
after was to the great defense of the castle of Saint Hermes, and detriment of
the enemy. This season arrived Dorguta the Turk, the general of Tripolis
accompanied with thirteen ships and one thousand six hundred soldiers in
them, after him also came ten Brigantines, which brought December B^emes.
two ensigns of men of war, from the town of Bona in Barbaria, and out of the
Island of Meninges. The mean time Saluago (a Genuan borne, a knight of the
order and a very forward gentleman) who (as before) was sent into Sicilia,
arrived at the city of Messana, who (after he had declared to the Viceroy,
his charge, and the state wherein Malta was,) was commanded to ship himself
again in a barque that was prepared for him to depart, for whose safe
conduction two galleys under the regiment of the Captains Cornissone and
Santalo, knights also of that order were commanded to accompany him, who left
him not until he was nigh the Island of Malta, and then returned back into
Sicilia, but Saluago, not without marvelous danger of his person, and but
with loss of one of his men, passed with his ship through the midst of the
enemy into the town of Burgo, about three of the clock in the morning. This
while, the Turks seemed to change their devise, where they once determined to
have besieged both Saint Hermes and Saint Michael, but now encamped themselves
at the water of Marza, being a fountain there, which made the entry of
Saluago to be more difficult and perilous: Howbeit after Saluago had declared
to the great Master his charge, from the Viceroy of Sicill, immediately the
great Master caused him to depart into Sicilia again, and to show to the
Viceroy, that they had great need to have more aid of soldiers, and that for
the time he would vouchsafe to help them with the supply of an other ensign
or two of chosen soldiers, that the better they might withstand the fury of
the enemy until further aid came. Saluago neither sparing labor, or
dreading peril, immediately gat himself to the sea, and in short time landed
in the Port of Sarragosa* in Sicilia, where he found those two Galleys,
whereof I told you before, and in them caused forthwith to be shipped (as
was appointed) four hundred soldiers, among whom, were sundry knights of the
order of Melita, and with them also were sent certain expert Gunners and
Cannoners.

These so shipped, Saluago gave advise that they should eschew the West part of
the Island Melita, and compassing about, should endeavor themselves to draw
toward the East part thereof, and so to get unto the South coast of the
Island, and there to land at the port called Miliare, and from thence by night
to conduct the soldiers (by places of covert,) unto the City of Melita which
from their landing place was not past four miles distant, and so from thence
easily to get unto the Castle of Saint Michaell. Which advise so given
Saluago departed to Messana, and there showed to the Viceroy the fury of the
wars in Melita, and the great lack of soldiers there, and required that he
might have but a thousand footmen beesides those which he had already sent,
and than he verily hoped that the fury of the Turckes should for a time be
endured, unto such time as the Viceroy with his navy should give further
succor.

While these matters were putting in readiness, which might have had more have,
if that our Christian Princes in so weighty and dangerous causes had not
seemed to have slept too much: the third day of the month of June, which was
the holy day dedicated to saint Hermes, The first assalt.
the Turks suddenly went to assault the fortress of saint Hermes, supposing
to have gotten by scaling of short ladders that part of a new fort which the
Christians had builded joining nigh unto the conterscarpt of the Castle. But
the Christians with the help of a new Casemact made strong and large in the
dike, with faggot and earth, (which before had no manner of defense there) and
by the aid of the Castle also, worthelie withstood the enemy; In such sort
as that they filled the dike of the fort with the dead bodies of the Turks.
The Turks notwithstanding (by reason of their multitude, wherewith rather than
manhood they obtain the victories that they get) did meruailously stand to
their mark, in such sort, as yt with very force (though late at night) they
did win that part of the fort which vieweth ye port of Mussetto, and immediately
there, with a marvelous expedicion they entrenched themselves with a new work,
to the end they might not be endamaged by the Christians. For by the help of
the Turks artillery which were planted upon the other side of Marzamusetto
they were not a little aided to entrench, considering upon that part, their
Artillery in such sort scoured, that our men durst not abide there, in that
part of the fort to resist, wherewith also the corner of a bulwark and the
curtain of that part of the fort were likewise beaten in sunder. Whereof
though the height and greatness was very troublesome to the enemy; yet was
the same little profitable to us, because the sides thereof was not bending and
crooking enough that thereby both the same might the better have been defended,
and the enemy more conveniently have been beaten on the flank. But for as
much as the night approached on, the Turks to the number of five thousand
remained there still, for about nine thousand gave the assalt) and the
Christians were compelled to retire themselves out of the fort into the
fortress, and to leave the fort to the Turks that wan the same. The Turks
through the benefit of the darkness of the night with pokes stuffed with okam
and earth, filled that part of the dike, that was under the ramper, that the
breadth and deepenesse of the same, upon the approach, might less annoy them.
In this aslalt, above eight hundred Turks were slain, whereof part were
Ianizaries, and part of the Spachies, besides not a few Spach^, qui seruent
auec trois ou quatre cheualls chascun, et aut 200 ducats per An, et sont tous
Azamoglan et esclaux dudict grand Turc.
that were hurt, of whom a good part remained in the dikes, half dead and
half alive, for that part of the dike which was filled with them, did stop
both them and us from coming to help them, considering there was no passage to
them, but only that one which was in the front of the rampire, wherefore those
that so remained hurt, of very force must needs perish, when none could come to
help them. Of us christians at the first encounter, were slain about xlv, of
the which were certain knights of the order of the Ioannits, as Gaurdamps
borne in Auern in france, Masius of the province of Narbon in france, Contilia
a Spaniard, Somatia a Florentine, and Ninecas a German, and certain wounded,
as Captain Motta, who afterward dyed in the fortress, of his hurts. The great
Master thinking requisite, as reason was, that a supply of soldiers should be
sent to succor the fortress, to the aid thereof, immediately he sent not only
ii C soldiers but also ii C gentlemen of his own, that were knights of the
Ioannits, who if they had been more, together with the four hundred that were in
the castle, perhaps they might have beaten the enemy both from the walls and
the utter forts also, and to have defended the place longer time: But because
the great Master lacked soldiors, therefore he did send Saluago into Sicilia as
before is declared, that he might obtain but five hundred soldiers for the
time. And in the mean season he would abide the malice of the enemy and to
eschew no labor or perrill: Albeit he thought that he had no little occasion to
lament the infortunitie of christian Princes, that by their long stay, the
apparent occasion to overthrow so cruel an enemy, should be ouerslipt.

Howbeit he did greatly marvel that he heard of no manner of aid out of
Sicilia, nor of the two Galleys furnished with soldiers, which Saluago (as
before) did send: but the Galleys thorough the fault of one of the Mariners
kept not their appointed course; For whereas they were commanded to eschew the
West part of Melita, and to keep course toward the East, they did not so, but
sailed only toward the West unto the Island of Gozo, which only was thorough
the default of the Mariner affirming that he did see certain Galleys of the
Turks riding in the port of Miliare for the defense of the same. Which (as it
was after well known) was utterly untrue, when in deed, the Marryner only
thorough fear (which often times not a little hinders notable enterprises)
durst proceed no further. Whereby the great master wanted his most necessary
aid, which meruailosly grieved as well the Viceroy and others, as chiefly
Saluago, for they evidently did see, that if the Turks did win the fortress
of saint Hermes, being the chiefest hold of Melita, the rest of the places
there not only should be brought in marvelous danger, but also those of the
Island Melita should be utterly debarred from their entrise to have succors.
It was not impossible but that the fortress might be easily won and gotten,
considering that the enemy had gotten one of the Bulwarks of the fortress,
and that the fortress being but narrow of it self, was in manner on every
part continually assalted, which being considered by those, that could skill
in wars, did greatly move them, chiefly when they perceived that aid so
secretly came. The mean time by the commandment of Pope Pius the fourth of
that name, certain soldiers were gathered to the end that by his example,
other Princes might the better be encouraged to give succors to the order of
the Ioannits, and therefore he commanded that one hundredth pound of gold
should be given to Cambiano, Lieuetenant of that order in Rome, and certain
furniture of ponder to be delivered to him out of the Castall of saint Angelo
at Rome, that nothing should on his part seem to want, that possibly he could
do. For, unto his holiness soldiers, which were in number sixth hundereth,
he appointed Pompeio Colono to be Captain, and Camillo Medices to be
Lieuetenant. After this band, followed many voluntary soldiers that both
vowed themselves to serve in so holy a cause, and also to win immortal
fame, proceeding with such ardent and courageous minds, that every little stay,
seemed to them to be an whole year.

Therefore they departing unto Naples, found there Joan Andrew Auria, with a
leaven long ships, and the Prince of Populonia with nine, Lanicio Prouano
with three, and so many other that were rigged forth at the charges of other
private persons. Into these ships that came from Rome, all the bands of
footmen there, were shipped and carried over into Sicilia, to the City of
Messana, where the kings navy was in riging.

While that the Christians, considered not that the peril was so great as it
was in deed. The Turks not ignorant of the same, determined to prove the
uttermost, before that the powers of the Christians should augment, thinking
that if they could get the fortress of Saint Hermes, the rest were easily to
be had, first thereby they should be only masters of Porto Musetto, whereby
they should gain a safe and sure rodested for their navy, so long as they
liked. Besides, to have all that piece of land, betwixt the two ports, both for
the beating of the fortress of Saint Michael, and that no ship should enter,
or go forth out of the haven of Porto Maiore, without their leave. These
things and others, when the Turks had pondered, they beeganne to give a
terrible battery to the fortress of Saint Hermes, in such sort, as the great
artillery seafed not to thunder by the space of four days continually. The
next night after, the Turks suddenly assalted the breach with ladders, and
almost had gained the top of the curtain, when as our Christians desiring
nothing more then to come to hand strokes, courageously gave charge on them,
that in the end the Turks, were in such sort repulsed, that never after (until
they wanne the fortress) they durst raise a ladder against the same.

While on this side these matters were in doing, the soldiers of the Turk
Dorguta, puffed up with a certain pride, as though they would seem to exceed
the rest, gathered themselves togethers at Martia Scala, being a little baie,
beetwixt the place of execution and the rodested of Saint Thomas, whom when the
garrison of Borgo perceived, they immediately issued, and so hot handeled
them, that after the killing of a great number of them, the rest of those Turks
were compelled to retire from whence they came.

In which conflict was slain Bonnemio a gentleman of France a knight of the
order of the Ioannits, with seven others.

At that time, Monserrato was sent into the castle of Saint Hermes, to be
Captain there in the place of Brolio, who before, there was Captain, and
thorough his intolerable watchinges and trauayles, about his charge, was
fallen very sick. Which Brolio often times before did write to the great
Master that the fortress of Saint Hermes, was in such sort fortified and
furnished, with every thing thereunto appertaining, that he thought that it
was in manner impossible that the enemy should get it, for the knights of the
Ioannits and others that there served, took such encouragement by his worthy
exhortacions, that coming to hand strokes they fought it sorth above all men's
expectation, nor the Turks though they had these repulses, left off so, but
beegan a new battery with their artillery by the space of certain days, and
assalted most suriously the fortress, with all the ingins that they could
devise.

Among which they had invented a marvelous bridge A Bridge of mastes.
framed upon mastes, of such a breadth that ten persons might easily fight on
front thereupon, and of such a length, that it ouerreached the dike and rested
upon the cortaine of the fortress: Besides they placed four thousand
harquebusars along the dike, to beat the top of the Cortaines that none
within should approach to the defense thereof, and than caused all their navy
to come nearer the shore of Saint Georgis port in landing their whole force.

And when as by the space of eighteen days they had battered this poor
fortress, and had cruelly rent the bulwarks and Cortains thereof with
thirteen thousand shot, and in assured hope to have won the fortress.
Beeholde one Baragamo a Biscaian borne, one of the order of the Ioannits,
accompanied with Captain Medrano a Spaniard, and sundry other valiant
seruitures repaired to this dreadful Bridge, and to the great marvel of all
that did see them, there incountred the Turks.

The fight on both sides was marvelous vehement, and in such sort the Turks
manfully beehaued themselves that they had planted one of their Ensigns upon
a Bulwark there, which when as Captain Medrano, had worthily bereft, and
held in his hands, and departing therewith, both he and Baragamo, with the
shot of The death of Medrano and Baragamo.
harquebuses were slain. At that time those three hundred soldiers whereof I
told you before, which were sent thither from the great Master, showed
themselves, in doing notable service: For so soon as they perceived the
fortress to consist in that apparent danger, some of them hurled wild fire
upon the bridge, some burning pitch and brimstone, another sort of them tumbled
mighty great stones upon such as would have entered, another part of them, kept
the enemy occupied with continual shot, that they durst not come nigher. The
bridge of Masts, burnt.
So that after a dreadful fight this new devised bridge of the Turks was burnt
in sunder, and with the ruin there* of perished eight hundred Turks, the
remnant, so well as they could (whereof few escaped unhurt, and the most part
very sore wounded,) retired to their shames, leaving behind them whether they
would or no, two of the chiefest ensigns they had, the one pertaining to
Mustapha, the other to Dorgutes, which our Christians to the great grief of
the Turks, fixed upon the height of the Cortaine. During this cruel assalt
upon the one side; the Turks upon the South West part of the fortress, gave
another vehement charge, in such fort, as they had won the Va^mure of the
same, which when the garrison that remained in the Castle of Saint Angelo did
perceive, and thinking that with their artillery they were able to drive the
Turks, from the place which they had gotten, they vnbended at the Turks, a
great piece of artillery, and in steed of them, taking one for an other,
seven of our Christians, being on the Ramper of the fortress, were
pitifully slain, which when they had perceived, and to amend their former
error, they caused another great piece to be blown off, with the stroke
whereof, were torn in pieces four of the Turks most notable Captains, and
twelve other of their best and hardiest soldiers, that the Turks had. While
thus furiously that the fight continued, the Turks entrenched upon that part
of the fortress of Saint Hermes which is toward the Castle of Saint Angelo.
But our men espying their doing, with pots filled with wild fire and burning
pitch, hurled among them, caused the Turks right soon to depart. The Turks
(thus being expulsed by the valiant hardiness of our Christians) returned
carefully, into their camp, leaving beehinde them dead in this terrible
assault about two thousand of their soldiers, where two hundred of our men
were slain, and as many hurt. In the day of this assault the great Master
espying opportunity caused a foist to be prepared, and to be had over a piece
of a ground unto Martia Scala, and one therein with certain Mariners to pass
into Sicilia, with letters to inform the Viceroy, and the Popes holiness
also, of the manfull defense of the fortress of Saint Hermes* and in what
extreme danger, the same remained except speedy aid and succor, were
given to the same: the tenor of which letters written to the Viceroy, is as
follows, having of purpose thought convenient not to set forth unto you the
contents of the Popes letters, when as the effect of both the letters being
one, the rehearsal of the letters of the Viceroy may well enough suffice.

To Dom Garza di Toled^ Viceroy of Sicill and High Admiral of the Kings Mauie,
most bartie greeting.
Since Saluago departed hence, I have sent unto your Grace two several
letters, which were conn^i^d through the city of Malta, unto the Ilandos Good,
which I would of god, that they had come to your hands. But after, perceiving
that neither messenger nor yet letters came from you, I commanded one of my men
with certain letters, to be put in readiness to depart unto you, unto Messana*
who after that he had proved to get forth, sundry nights, and at last
escaped, he had not fully passed two miles on the sea, when he was espied by
the Turks Navy, that in all have made towa^d^* him, which when my messenger
perceived, with all the speed he could, retired from* (...) de parted, and so
ran his ship on land, ^^d with the loss of his letters hurled into the sea,
saved himself and his company from the hands of the Turks.

Albeeit perceiving now that the Turks have brought their Navy out of the
Port of Vulturno, and thinking with my self, how much it is requisite that your
Grace should have intelligence of matters here already passed, I have
therefore caused a foist to be set in readiness at Martia Scala, while the
Turks were occupied upon an other part of this Island, so as now I hope these
my letters may shortly and with safety come unto your hands. But what I have
thought convenient, your Grace should understand, are these. The fifteenth day
of this month, the whole Navy of the Turks, about night passed this port, and
because the night was dark, we could not perceive the inconvenience of their
navy, for we learned so much after that their galleys though they were left in
manner unarmed, they could not well be towed from the place they had them, and
chiefly for lack of water, they were enforced to depart from the port of
Vulturno, and perhaps the fear of your Navy, which they understood (as I was
informed) to be a hundred and fifty ships riding at an ancre in the port of
Messana, was likewise the cause that they would not ride in the port of Saint
Paul, but planted their ships above Porto Musetto, and a good part of their
galleys at Saint Georges, howbeit their ships and galleys are not so far in
sunder, but if your Graces navy should come at the sudden, in the fear that
they are in, they would make speed, a pace to their navy, if they were
further off distant. At the port of Vulturno, appears not one Turcke, as for
their first encamping places at Saint Katherines, and Saint John's, after the
burning of the villages, they have forsaken: and now the Turks have their navy
riding, whereas I told you, and their army on land lieng before the fortress
of Saint Hermes, which as almighty God has hitherto defended, so I hope, he
will still conserve the same, and the more it is to be hoped, in that (as
yesterday) it so came to pass, that after a most furious assalt continued by
the Turks, by the space of four hours, with four charges given, and
valiantly sustained by our worthy soldiers, with the overthrow of a bridge,
which the Turks had planted over the dike of the fortress, the Turks had the
repulse not without some loss of our Christians, where among others Captain
Medrano, (to my great care) was slain: with this victory our christians are so
encouraged, that I hope with Gods help, the fortress (until your Graces
coming) may be defended, chiefelie, in that the enemy has partly deminished
the fervent heat of their usual shot of their great artillery, so as if I had
now any aid or supply of soldiers from your Grace, or mine own two galleys
that are with you, furnished with soldiers, I am in assured hope that the
enemy should never get the fortress from me, for the defense whereof, while I
look every hour for succor, both the soldiers and municions, which I had,
in manner are consumed, determining not the less, with that little number which
is left, to continue in the defense thereof, though it should cost us all our
lives, until such time your Grace shall send aid, who (as we assuredly hope)
for the piety and famous virtue in your Grace remaining, you would not forget
us in this distress, but rather your Grace considering the great danger that
we are in, (which must needs be the ruin of us all, if you defer any longer,)
you will help us out of hand, with some supply of soldiers, when so easily
you may now send them, for the Turks are departed from the East part of this
Island, so as those which you will send may without any peril land at a place
in this Island called Saxa Nigra. In your Grace (after Almighty God) is
situated our health or hope, therefore we most heartily beseech your Grace,
forsake us not in our imminent dangers, for unto your approved wisdom and
piety, we commit all that we have, and so fare your Grace most heartily well.
From Malta this seauenteene of June.


The Viceroy having received these letters, and considering the great danger,
of the besieged fortress, was as it appertained wonderfully moved therewith,
and showed a marvelous desire to set forward the kings whole navy against the
Turks, howbeit because the ships that should come unto him from Geanes, was at
that time not arrived, it was thought expedient, that his Grace should not
adventure to fight with the Turks, until their coming: therefore it pleased
his Grace to send Signore Giouanni Cardono, with four long ships called
Galliaceis, of the which two pertayned to the knights of Malta. Unto Cordono
the Viceroy joined a gentleman called Robles, with an ensign of Spaniards,
being chosen soldiers. There were shipped, also with these about four score
knights of the order of the Ioannits, that only at Messana, tarried for
passage into Malta, among these of the order of the Ioannits, were Signore
Parisoto the nephew of the great master of Malta, Vincentio Caraffa,
Boninsegna, and Maldonado, both Spaniards, Centio Aquitano and others, who
though through tempests and foul weather, they came not timely enough to the
Island of Malta, as was desired, yet their coming was a meruaylous great help
to the other Christians. Which new supply if the same had come before the
losle of the fortress of Saint Hermes, perhaps therewith the fortress might
have been saved. These four Galliaceis departed from Messana the seventeenth
of June. But the Turks, the mean time (not caring for their great loss of
soldiers, no more then they had been beasts gone to the slaughter house,
determined desperately to renew their fight,) beegan their furious battery
again, with the great artillery, continuing the same, both day and night,
unto such time as such breaches were made, as conveniently were to assault,
then the Turks gave so furious a charge with such a multitude, and courage
therewith, that unless the most valiant virtues of the defenders, joined with
contempt of death, and hope of immortal glory, had had the superiority of the
apparaunt terror: truly, the Turks had either put our Christians to flight,
or else to have compelled them to yield willingly the fortress. Right hot was
the fight on each side, in such sort, that both parts seemed to be so desprate
in fight, the one to win the fortress, and the other to defend the same, that
it appeared that day would have given end to those wars: five hours it was
furiously fought, so that in the end the Turks through the worthiness of our
christians were repulsed, howbeit the Turks the night following rested not, but
still beat at the fortress with their great artillery, that therewith the
curtains being so torn and rent, our christians had much a do to stop the
enemy from scaling, a^^o^^ the which our christians had marvelous
prouid(...). In this terrible conflict, were slain of the side of the
christians two hundred, and of the Turks part, an innumerable sort, among whom
the famous Pirat Dorguta, The famous pirat Dorguta wounded to death.
while he executed no less the part of a prudent captain, then also the
function of a worthy souldior, through the stroke upon his head with a great
stone at this assalt, was wounded to death, and so within two days after died,
and his dead body from ^^^n^e, honorably was transported to Tripolis in
Barbaria. But with this worthy Constancy, and valiant acts of our
Christians, the Captains of the Turks (being made more furious and raging,
then before they were) collected all their Navy into one place, and
commanded that the fortress on every side, both by land and sea, should be
assalted and that ever fresh soldiers should continually be sent, until the
fortress were won by assault. Therefore the Turks immediately caused, both
bridges, ladders, ingins, weapon and other necessaries meet for the assault, to
be with all diligence put in readiness which when Mounsier Valet being then in
the castle of Saint Angelo perceived, fearing (as reason was) that the
fortress was not able to abide and bear the furious charge that was in
preparing against the ^^me, therefore about two days before this last assault,
he called together the counsel of the order of the Ioannits, showing them,
that they all did The counsel of the Ioannits
perceive, so well as he, in what marvelous danger, those rested, that were
defenders of the fortress, nor he doubted but that every of them, for the
piety, and Godly hearts in them remaining, had no little compassion of the
peril of the rest of their brethren, and other worthy soldiers, there yet
remaining, no less^ then if the cases of the defenders were their own, and
therefore required, to show their best advise, what were requisite for the
safeguard of such valiant persons. The matter being thoroughly considered, the
counsel gave immediate The sentence of the couns^^^l.
resolution, that for so much as the fortress no longer could be kept, that the
lives of the defenders should be saved, and that for the bringing away of the
defenders, twelve foists should be sent. For which cause there was elected,
three knights of the order, that they in the night following should pass over
to the fortress and not only to declare to the defenders, the determination
of the great Master and counsel, but also to survey, in what state every
thing in the fortress were, after so many cruel assaults suffered, and that,
if there were cause, to forsake the fortress, then the waters there to be
poisoned, and the whole artillery, to be cloied up with nails. For executing
of which embassade forth with departed Medina a spaniard, Rocca a frenchman,
and Constantino Castriota an Italian, not without marvelous danger of their
persons, considering the Turks espying the^, charged at them sundry shot of the
harquebuze, and after their ariuall in the fortress, they expressed to the
defenders, the pleasure and determinacio^ of the great master and counsel of
the order. The defenders understanding, the The answer of the worthy
defenders.
great care and thought, that the great Master and counsel had for their
safety, most humbly gave thanks to them all, for the same. Then so much as
concerned the estate of the fortres, if the straitnes thereof, the small number
of the defenders, and the great number of the enemy, should be considered,
truly the fortress were in marvelous danger, chiefly in that the enemy
was purposed to give of new another desperate assalt, howbeit insomuch as
hitherto, they had tasted of the merciful aid of almighty God, that unto
that time had defended them, from the rabious fury of so terrible an enemy,
in that the place as they thought was defensable, with munition enough, there
yet remaining, and that chiefly they had required of the great Master the
honor of the charge in defending of the piece or place if they knew all to
loose their lives, they intended to defend the fortress, to the death, perhaps
such occasion of most honorable defense, never would come to them again,
therefore they were utterly determined to spend their lives, for the glory of
almighty God, and his holy religion. The race and cource of this britle life
is but short, but the glory of eternal life, is perpetual. And considering
that to each one there is an appointed death, it is to be desired of every good
man, that this life of ours being subject to casualties, might rather be
employed about the service of Almighty God, and his common wealth, than to be
reserved to the extremity of old age. And if their chance should be that
there were none other way but to dye, they hoped to leave such victory to the
enemy, that the joy and pleasure, which they would gain thereby, should cost
them the best blood that remained in the worthiest Soldiers that the Turks
than had. And therefore they required the messengers to show to the great
Master, what they had vowed, and to continue his good opinion in them, as
pertained to have, in worthy Seruitures: and chiefly of such as had given
themselves to that order of Knighthood.

The three Messengers having thus received the defenders answer, containing
greater courage than good hap, returned to the great Master, who calling again
the Counsel togethers, and hearing the valiant answer of the defendours, was
likewise desirous to hear the opinions of the messengers, Castriota was of
opinion, that insomuch as the defendours were yet Masters of the dikes, the
fortres might be kept, and that he Castriota, (if he were commanded) would take
the defense of the Fortres in charge, and that rather he would lose his life,
than to forsake the place. But Rocca the French man was of contrary mind,
saying, that he verily believed, the Fortres was not able to be kept, if Julius
Caesar were on live, and had the defense thereof, and saw to what extremities,
the place was brought unto, and that every Bulwark there for the most part, rent
in sunder by the enemies artillery, and hurled down, and compassed with such
number of desperate enemies; he would never suffer, that the lives of so many
worthy soldiers should, through inconsidered partinacitie, have end, but
rather to forsake the place, and to reserve the lives of so many valiant
Seruitures for other places of greatet importance. It is a valiant and worthy
man's part, to do that which a man may do, and not to stretch beyond that,
which a man cannot do. And, that to be done, which as he thought, was used to
be considered in diseased members incurable in man's body: that for the safeguard
of the life and the rest of the whole body, it was meet the incurable member
to be cut away, and not to care of the loss thereof.

The Spaniard agreeing in opinion with Castriota, thought convenient, that the
place should not be forsaken; for that the dikes and Rampers of the Fortres for
the most part were yet not beaten in sunder, and that a marvelous unity of
mind was resident in the defendours, joined with a lively courage and desire
to come to hand strokes with the enemy, which in manner promised an assured
victory to the defendours.

The several opinions of these three Messengers being thoroughly considered, it
was thought good, by the most part of the Counsel, that the defenders should
continue in their charge for certain days: For that it was never the usage of
that order, to forsake with ease such places, as once were committed to their
guard: but rather to continue in defense of the same to the death; to thend that
the barbarous enemy might understand, with what kind of men he had to do, to
the repressing of his temerarious arrogance and pride: Least, in forsaking the
place, the enemy would perhaps think it were done through fear. Whereby the
courage of the enemy would increase, and the ancient honor and estimacion of
this sacred order would abate.

The Turks this while, minding to put in effect, which The last assalt given by
the Turks to the castle of Saint Hermes.
they before determined, the three and twentieth of June, with their whole
Armies both by land and sea, about my dnight, assalted cruelly the Fortres on
all sides, erecting their ladders, bridges, and other Ingins meet for that
purpose. First vnbending at once two and thirty great Cannons, that with the
furious strokes thereoff, that which remained up of the fortificacions, were
utterly thrown down. The Christians on the other side manfully stood to their
defense, some they overthrew into the dikes, some they repulsed, and some they
slew, but a great deal being more courageous, to vvound and annoy the enemy
than to look to their own safety: insomuch were the greatest concourse and
thrust of the enemy was, there were the Christians ever ready to show their
force and prowess. The noise of each side was great, mixed with vehement
exortations, ioies and mournings: the face and countenance of the fight was
variable, ambiguous, uncertain, horrible, and pitiful to behold. Thus it was
foughten unto three of the clock, when yet was doubted to what part the
victory would incline. And except the Turks had begun again furiously to
unbend continually their great Artillery, (whereby they ouertbrew all the
Courtains and Bulwarks unto the hard Rock vvhereon the Christians stood:) the
Christians might well enough have sustained for a few days more, the fury of
the enemy, but the Rock thus made naked both of the defendours and vvalls, and
more than four hundred of the garrison slain, rested nothing up, scarce that
could hide the head of the Soldier: So as none, could once mount or show
himself, to stand to the defense, but immediately he was torn in pieces
with the shot of the Canon, that never seized. And now Monserrato the General
of the Fortres, together with one Garas, ruler of Euboeae, with one bullet
were miserably slain togethers, gentlemen of like virtue, piety, and
worthiness, who for this short life, and most honorable beehauiour in the
same, have now togethers gained eternal glory. Nevertheless, the other. that
remained on live, and that stood manfully to their charge, nothing discouraged
with the loss and slaughter of their compagnions, but rather as such as
seemed to have received new force and strength out of Heaven, they encountered
the enemy most courageously, in tearing and rending the Ensigns, which the
Turks had fastened upon the Fortres, and killing the Ensign bearers, Captains
and others, of the chiefest of the enemy. So that the Christians looked for
none other thing than to give up their lives, for the Religion of Christ, to
obtain eternal life.

Now the Sun in his race, had ascended the midst of the Heavens, whereby
was such raging heat, weariness, and continual thundering of Artillery,
again the multitude of the enemy so great* that still sent fresh men to renew
the assalt. On the other part, the little number of our Christians lest on
live, weakened with marvelous labor, watchings, drought, and wounds. The
Turks at last gained by force the fortress of Saint The Fort of Saint Hermes
won.
Hermes, but with such an incredible loss of their soldiers that it was
wonderful that so great a multitude of the Turks, could be slain by so
little a number^ of the Christians: thus our Christians valiantly fighting
were every one slain.

Here I cannot let pass, to touch the unmerciful cruelty of these Turks,
exercised against the knights of the order of the Ioannits, whereby one may
understand, of what nature and property Cruelltie is of, which ever shows,
what will it has still to revenge, when the death of the person cannot
suffice. For after the winning of the fortres, the Turks finding there,
certain knights of the order, beetwixt death and life, caused most cruelly
their hearts to be cut out of their breasts, and their bodies invested with
their scarlet cassocks, and white crosses (for that the knights of the order of
the Ioannits, in warers do ever wear scarlet, and in peace black) to be
hanged up by the feet to the number of a thirty of them, in the sight of the
Castles of Saint Angelo, and Saint Michael, but when this beastly cruelty
seemed not to be enough to Mustapha, he also caused these dead bodies to be
tied togethers, and to be hurled into the sea, howbeit the sea being moved as
it were with greater mercy, then was in the Turks, the next day after did cast
the dead bodies fleeting into Porto Maiori, where the great Master knowing who
they were commanded that the corses should be taken up, and buried honorably,
with no little lamentation made for them.

In such sort that the great Master straightly commanded that from thence
forth no Turks should be taken, but immediately to be slain, whereby such as
alreawere taken, by and by were put to death, and their beads thrown over the
walls. From the beeginning of the siege, unto the winning of the fortress of
Saint Hermes, there were slain of that garrison, the number of a thousand
three hundred persons of the which there were a hundred and thirty knights of
the order of the Ioannits. The great Master Valet, having thus lost the
fortress of Saint Hermes, though he had (as reason was) a careful heart, yet
in dissembling the same, he showed outwardly a good countenance, to the end,
that he should not discourage the rest of his soldiers. Saying that nothing
has chanced but that almighty God has provided the same, for such is the
fortune of wars, and the will of God, that sometime one, and sometime another,
may suffer overthrow. It is only cowardnesse and not the worthy virtue and
immortal courage of these valiant seruiters, being dead, that should cause
us to make care and mourning, nor, for all this the enemy ought so much to be
dreaded, considering his loss in deed, that rather it seems he should
account himself to have received the overthrow then to be named victorious.
And as to such of our christians as are dead in this worthy service, let us
firmly believe, that they are recompensed with glory and immortallitie in the
kingdom of heaven, which ought to inflame the hearts of every good man, to
serve as they have done, and as for himself, he had not yet laid aside his
hope of assured victory to be gotten of the rest of the enemies, rather by
the help of almighty God, then by his own power, and that he supposed, all
there being present, to be of like mind, and so to be and continue, he
required them. These words being spoken, the great Master being ready
against all extremities of Fortune, departed from the rest, and after much
devising with himself alone, he determined with himself in the end to write
to Petro Mesquito general of the city of Malta, and to advertise him, and the
brethren of the Ioannits at Messana, together with the Viceroy, of the loss
of the fortress of Saint Hermes. The copy of whose letters I have thought
expedient to discribe to you, to the end that the marvelous providence of
Valet the prince of this order of the Ioannits, may the more appear unto you,
which is as follows.

DVring such time as the knights of the order, abiding The letter of the great
Master to Mesquito.
at Messana, are preparing their passage hither, the miserable overthrow and
taking of the fortress of Saint Hermes has chanced, which as you ought to
know, has left unto me no little care, so I assuredly think, the ^ame has
fortuned, not without the secret permission of almighty God, which I take in
such good part, that rather the father of Heaven, will correct us by this
loss, then utterly to suffer us to perish. And albeit in mine opinion, it is
not requisite, to doubt any wise of his merciful goodness and mighty power.
Yet I cannot but complain that it has seemed, I have been forsaken of those,
that should not have becommed them so to have done, that in the space of seven
and thirty days, wherein our most worthy Christians now dead, sustained such
furious charges of the enemy, (as rather a marvelous matter done by God, then
man,) of our own (who of duty ought to have regarded us) we have been
succored with no manner of aid, which sundry times in this space, they might
have done, how beeit as I perceive, we must hope no longer of man's help,
considering that neither our letters, diligence, earnest requests, admonicions,
or commandments, can in any wise take place with them, whom duty rather ought
to have moved to obedience, then negligence to have stayed them all this while.
Lack of time will not permit me, to write as I would to the Viceroy, but
rather your part shall be, to give intelligence as well to his grace, as to
others our brethren there of the occurrants of this Island. Which our
brethren, if they had obeyed our commandments as had appertained, or else had
sent us any aid at all, perhaps we had not lost the fortress of Saint Hermes,
about the defense whereof, so valiant and worthy seruitures as ever lived, have
lost their lives therein. Wherefore except the Viceroy make have to deliver us,
I fear he shall come to late to do us good, chiefly if we be besieged,
before we have the little succors, which as I dream, are in coming to us, and
as I fear scarce will come in time. Nevertheless we do not mistrust of the
love and providence of almighty God toward us, but that the divine virtue of
the Viceroy, within few hours, to be moved and stirred up by the holy ghost,
will with speed deliver us. The mean time, the enemies has gotten together
all their navy into the port of Musetto, and are very dilligent in purging of
the places of the fortress, and reedifieng of the rampers and bulwarks which
with the strokes of their artillery they did cast down. Therefore upon the
sight hereof, I require you to send to us, the captains Catharinensis,
Belcarensis, Belmestio, and Zoric, with their bands, that in our necessities,
we may use their faithful and valiant endeauours. So requiring of God to send
us aid from some place, fare you heartily well. From the castle of Saint Angelo
the four and twentieth day of June.


MEsquita the general of the City of Malta, after that he had read the
letters of the great Master immediately caused a foist to be rigged to the sea,
and in the same sent one Masio Co^onello, to whom he gave both the great
Masters letters to him sent, and also other letters of his own of like effect
directed to the knights of the order of the Ioannits remaining at Messana,
requiring Masio with all the have he could, to pass into Sicilia. The mean
time, Mustapha Bassa sent a messenger to Mounsier Valet, and with him an old
Spaniard, a prisoner to the which prisoner Mustapha promised liberty upon
condition that he would go to Borgo with his messinger, commanding them both
that they should practice with Mounsier Valet to yield himself, and the whole
Island upon any reasonable appointment. Who after they had arrived at the town,
the Turk remained without, and the christian entered in and was brought to the
prince, to whom he disclosed the charge and commandment to him given by
Mustapha. When Mounsier Valet heard the Spaniard once name appointment and
yelding, he began to enter into such a choler, that if he had not been a
christian man, he had commanded him immediately to have been hanged, therefore he
gave the Spaniard choice, whether he would tarry still among the Christians in
Borgo, or else immediately to depart, and to tell to the Turk that came with
him, except he did get him away in have, he would cause the artillery of the
castle to constrain him to speed him away. The Turk with this answer
returned to the camp, wherewith Mustapha fell in such a rage, that he openly
said that from thenceforth he would use all the cruelty that he could
against the Christians. At this time with Mustapha Philip a Turk a noble man
revolted and came to the Christians.
was a gentleman named Philip, descended of the noble family of the Lascares
in Greece, who at such time as he was a child, was taken by the Christians,
when as they won the town of Patras in Achaia.

During which time, that he was a prisoner, he was so courteously used by
them, that ever after he bare marvelous affection and good will, toward
Christians. This Philip being privy to sundry counsels of Mustapha, (moved
as it seemed by divine inspiration from Heaven) thought that he might
meruailouslie aid and profit the Christians, if he should come to them, and
therefore determined with himself to pass to the fortres of Saint Michaell.

Which as he proved many times to do, so in the end in the Calends of July,
he did cast himself into the sea (considering he could not get to the castle
by land) and so did swim to the castle, not without great danger of his
life, for he being espied by the Turks he was shot at, with sundry arrows and
arquebuses. Upon his landing, he was immediately brought to the great Master,
to whom not only he discovered sundry counsels of the enemy, but also
showed, what ought to be done at a corner of the fortress of Saint Michaell,
to the end to make frustrate certain devises of the enemies, which they
purposed to practice against that place, and of sundry other things which
afterward turned to much commodity of the christians. Who also, as opportunity
served, right valiantly, after, fought against the Turks: So as, that after the
siege, and Malta being delivered, he repaired to Rome, with marvelous
commendacion of the great Master, where the Popes holiness courteously
entertained him, and for his virtue and good service done as well toward those
of Malta, as toward whole Christendom, he rewarded him with sundry gifts.
Where likewise, be did forsake his Turkish faith, wherein he was brought up,
utterly detesting the same, and from Rome he repaired to King Philip, to whose
Majesty he discovered likewise certain pretenses of Soliman the Emperor of
the Turks. While these things (as above) were done, Colonello (of whom
before, as I showed you, that was sent into Sicilia) arrived safe at Messana,
vvher he found the Christian Navy not as yet ready, so that the afflicted
affairs of Malta could not out of hand be succored. For neither the ships
that should come out of Spain were than come, nor yet Gouianni Andrea Auria,
with his eight and twenty Galliaceis, who stayed to enbarque four thousand
footmen, under the leading of Capino Vitellio, that were collected in Etruria.

The knights of the order at Messana considering this tedious tarieng, and
what peril would ensue upon longer stay, fully determined with Gods
help, to succor their brethren of the orderin Malta. And with such power as
they had gotten togethers, under the leading of two notable gentlemen, knights
of the Ioannits, the one of the house of Messana, and the other of Baroleto;
they purposed to pass into Malta. Albeit before their departure, they repaired
to the Viceroy: and in consulting with him, they required his Grace, to call
to memory what service the knights of the Ioannits had done, not only for the
King of Hispain, but for all Christendom; and what charges the Ioannits were
at the other year, at the vvinning of Pinon de Beles, where they neither
spared victual, artillery, or ships, nor yet their own proper lives; where
their service might either profit the Kings highness, or any part of the
Christian common wealth. And besides this, that he would vouchsafe to
consider with himself, that the loss of the Island Malta, not only should
touch the Ioannits, but universal Italy, and chiefly the Island of Sicilia; by
reason it should be a neighbor to so mighty an enemy as the Turk.

For which causes and others, that shortness of time prohibiteth to report,
they required of him four thousand footmen, with whom all the knights
there, of the order of the Ioannits, accompanied also with sundry noble
personages and other voluntary soldiors, would pass over into Malta, to
succor their brethren there: with which supply, they said they assuredly
hoped, if at the least, they could not repulse the enemy or win again the
lost Fortres, ^et to stay the further procedings and pretenses of the furious
enemy, unto such time as the whole Christian Navy being in a readiness
might invade the Turkish Fleet, and also (as they trusted) utterly to destroy
the same.

Upon these words, while the Vice Roy, deliberated with himself what he
should do, there came a messenger out of Hispain, but what the effect of his
letters was, which he brought, though some judged one way and some an other,
none certainly could tell: but so it came to pass, that through his coming,
the Vice Roy gave a brief answer to the Ioannits, saying, that he could not
satisfy their request, considering the same were an utter vveakening and
diminishing of the force of the kings navy. vvherby it should come to pass in
so doing as they requested; that he could not give them such succors, as
shortly he pretended to do. Howbeit if they would transport all the Ioannits
that were at Messana (with a part of the soldiers which the Popes holiness
sent) into Malta, in those two Galleaceis which they had prepared; he
himself would furnish an other Galliace to be sent with them.

The knights having received this determined answer, when as they otherwise
could not amend themselves, they took the offer of the Vice Roy. While these
ships were making ready to depart; the four ships whereof before I made
mention, which transported the 600 Soldiers, and four score knights of the
Ioannits, by the space of twenty days were on the Seas, tossed with
marvelous tempests, and other stops and stays, that they could not attain to
Malta. And chiefly they had commandment given them, they should not land,
except they knew certainly that the Fortres of Saint Hermes, were still in
possession of the christians. But approaching to Malta, they sent their spiall
on land, and promised him, to tarry on the Sea, unto the next day for his
return. The mean time the Seas by tempestious vveather began so to grow, that
the Spiall could not return at his appointed time. Wherefore the ships that
did abide him, dreaded that either he was perished in the tempest, or else come
into the enemies hands. Whereby, they sailed back to Pozalo, a place on the
coast of Sicilia, to the end to learn somewhat there, of the state of Malta.
Where, upon their arrival they certainly did know, that the Fortres of Saint
Hermes was yet vngotten by the Turks: Which when they had learned, they
departed to the seas again.

But coming within six miles of Malta, where at their place determined, they
were appointed to land, they spied a fire from land, as a sign made unto them,
whereby they judged, both that their former Espiall was taken by the enemy, and
that some Ambush was there laid for them. Whereupon they returned to Pozalo
again, at which place, they learned of one of the Knights of the Ioannits, a
French man, that came out of Malta, of purpose to them, that the forenamed fire
by his commandment was made, that they being instructed by that sign, might
safely proceed to their landing place in Malta. Upon the understanding
whereof, they all with speed did get them to the Seas again, and failed to
Malta, where at a place called Saxa Nigra, (which is situated in that part of
Malta, which is toward Lybia,) they landed in a quiet night, the nine and
thirtith of June, and so being not seen of any others, marched without
impediment, to the City of Malta, where, with incredible Joy they were
received, and there tarried unto the time they knew the further pleasure of the
Great Master.

The mean time there grew about Borgo, and the other places thereabouts such a
mist, being not often times seen there, that none in manner could see therabouts,
when as a boy scarce of the age of twelve years, lokeing out at a window of
the castle, and all afraied, cried immediately, that he saw the Turks marching
toward the castle o^ Saint Michael, which being perceived, and certain of
the knights making toward that part, in their way, they gate a certain
Grecian borne that dwelt at the city of Malta, who being brought back to
Borgo, and straightly examined of the cause of his departure from thence,
considering he had no pasport, without which, it was lawful for none, to stray
abroad, in the end this Grecian confessed, that he was purposed to have fled to
the camp of the enemy, and to have given him intelligence of the ariuall of
this new supply, to the end that the Turks, might in the marching of this
supply toward the great master, surprise them by some ambush. Whereupon the
Ioannits considering, that by some occasion hereafter, this fugitive; might
work to them no little detriment, they caused him to be cut in four pieces.
Three days after, this new supply of soldiers that came out of Sicilia,
about night sa^elie came to the great master, saving two or three lacques,
that were charged with certain armor and other fardels, who came into the
hands of the enemy. It is in manner, incredible what courage was augmented in
the hearts of the beesieged Christians, through the coming of this new
supply, and chiefly Valet, the great master, seeing before his eyes,
assembled, the flower of the Ioannits, and other most worthy seruitures sent
to him by the providence of Almighty God, said (with tears in his eyes for
Joy) I thank thee humbly, most mighty God and heavenly King, that of thy
merciful goodness do hear my prayers, and do not forsake this pitiful
flock of thine; travailing under my charge, being compassed (as thou assuredly
know) with these most raging and furious vvolfes; What shall I say more?
but these are the works of thine only parpetuall goodness, apparent
omnipotency, and inscrutable wisdom.

This new supply, that was come to the great Master, were earnest suitors,
that it would vouchsafe the great Master to grant them that benefit, that
they might serve in the Fortres of Saint Michael, the great Master praising
their valiant courage, did condescend to their request; without changing at
all, there, the ancient garrison. The next day following, such of the garrison
of Saint Michaels, as had desire to come to hand strokes with the enemy,
issued forth, and meeting with the enemy at Saint Margarets; so vvorthely
behaved themselves that they killed above 200 of the Turks, and hurt as many of
them, that none of the garrison returned home to the Fortres, without blood
drawn of the enemy; yea and without loss of any of their company, at that
time. Which when Mustapha parceued, he knew right well that it was the new
supply come to the Fortres of Saint Michael, therefore he found marvelous
fault with those that had the charge by sea; that by their negligence, this
supply gate landing and entry: So as they, to whose charge the utter parts of
the Island were committed, came in vvonderfull suspicion of Mustapha. Whose
suspicion also was augmented through the departure of three Galleys of Argire,
that stole away, vvherby he had small credit to the rest of the Argirians
there, and much less confidence to the Renegants that were Christians, and
there serving the Turk. Wherefore he ordained that none of those persons
should tarry on land out of their ships upon pain to be thrust through on
stakes, and to be burnt to ashes, and so in changing that watch, he
appointed the gallyes, of Salach the Turk, to take the custody of the Island,
that no supply should enter. And to the end that neither of his own, nor any
Christian should surprise their Navy, he caused sundry of his own ships to
be set a longst the breadth of the port of Musetto, and the one to be chayned
to the other. And for so much as that the blody flixe and other diseases had
invaded his camp, he ordained for the sick three kinds of places, one for the
wounded, at the water of Marza, under the guard of 2000. Turks, another on
shipborde, for the voluntary soldiers, and the third upon scaffolds devised
betwixt ship and ship for the Renegants. At which time Mustapha made Ochial the
Turk, general over Tripolis in Barbaria, who passing thither with five
Galliaceis to take possession of his charge, and after setting every thing in
order there, he returned to the camp in Malta. And for the better furniture of
bread for the camp, the Bassa caused two ships frayghted with wheat to be
transported to the town of Leptis, and there to be made and baked because the
camp of the Turks had much need of bread. Likewise Mustapha sent to Solomon
the Emperor Zaloth the Turk, to show him how he had won by assault, the
fortres of Saint Hermes, and bare with him the plat of the Island, as he found
it at his entry there, and to declare to him that he found those of Malta*
better prepared, and more strong, then he hoped in the beginning, to have found
them. And that it his pleasure were, that he should continue the wars there in
that Island it were not a little requisite, to aid him with a great supply of
men, victual, and more furniture of municions. Which if he send, he trusted to
win the remnant of the fortresses of Malta, though not so sone, as perhaps
would be looked for. And in the mean time while he received answer he would
foreslow and protract no time, to prove by assalt and otherwise, to gain the
fortresses if he could. And because, he should seem, not to have written vain
matters to his Prince, Mustapha had beegun his battery with seauentie great
pieces of artillery, (among which, were three mighty Basiliscoes,) in foureteen
several places, insomuch as from the Promontory of the place of execution unto
the water of Marza, and from thence unto the fortres of Saint Hermes, where
they had placed 300 Ianizaries in garryson, they entrenched and fortefied all
that compass of earth right warlike, with meruaylous strength. With which
cruel battery, contynuing day and night, they tormented the towns of Borgo
and Saint Michael, that the walls, bulwarks and houses were there wonderfully
^ndammaged, so as none knew well where to be safe, whereby at the first, both
women and children were meruaylously annoyed. And the Turks themselves were
driven to keep within their fortefied camp, nor durst issue abroad without
great multitude, and for all that they escaped not home again to their camp
all free, for the horsemen of the Garrison of the City of Melita, now and than
scouring the country, would charge them on the back and kill many of them.

When the news of the loss of the Fortres of Saint Hermes came to Rome; the
City was replenished with marvelous care and fear for the tidings: insomuch,
as some there, mourned to see that ancient glory of the Latin Name was in
such sort diminished. An other sort, was in no little dread that the calamity
of Malta would redownd to Rome.

There were also an envious and detracting kind of men more liberal with
carping tongues, than expert in knowledge of wars, that laid the whole
blame of the loss of the Fortres upon Mounsier Valet the great Master:
whom, both his Invincible courage, and no less the valiant and noble
personages there accompanyeng him, than also this History making mention of
all their most vvorthie Acts, would parpetually deliver him from such infamy
and sclaunder. But such, as care not for their own estimacion, by lykelihood
would not spare to defame the Renome of an other. For as Ignorance cannot Judge
well of the Policies and Inuencions of the learned sort. No more can Coward
Varlets rightly discern of the vvorthlie Acts and valiant doeings of
Courageous old and practiced Soldiers. But to return to the matter of our
History, before we told you how three Galiacies were in preparing, at Messana,
and what diligence they used about the same that had the charge thereof; in
such sort as the seventh of July, they departed out of the Port of Messana.
There were in those three ships beesides the Knights of the Ioannites, six
hundred Spaniards, and three hundredth of the Popes Soldiers, under the charge
of Pompeio Colona, among whom, were some that voluntary rowed, and some that
were constrained. To the constrained, liberty was promised if they would do
their endeavors, to bring the^ into the port of Borgo, they should, after, be
advanced to rooms of Soldiers as the others were. So as not only their
purpose was to succor those that were beseeged, with men, but also with
victual. For which cause, they shipped 250 Medimni of Wheat, besides Gun
powder, Sall-peter, and Lead, meet for Artillery and like uses.

And albeit they supposed it very difficult, to enter the Port, being so
strongly guarded by the Turk: nevertheless such desire rested in the minds in
the Ioannits present in those Ships, that they made account the entry might
easily be brought to pass, both to them and the other.

When they approached nigh unto Malta, these ships made forth a Fragot to see
if any sign from the Castle of Saint Angelo could be espied, vvherby they
might understand, whether the ships might proceed to enter or retire. When the
Fragot upon his proceeding, parceuing a sign that he should return back,
returned to the ships showing the sign of retyring: though the Turks when
they provided the sign did what they could to obscure the sign by shot of
great Artyllarye at the same, whereby they replenyshed the Skies with
marvelous obscurities, as though the same had been thorough dark Clouds;
which the ships understood well enough: and so returned back into
Sicilia.

In deed, it was not thought meet by Valet that most courteous prince, that so
many worthy knights of the order, and so many noble personages and valiant
fouldiours, being togethers in those ships, should be brought in manifest
danger, for he did see apparauntly how that certain of Turks ships, lay by
night, at the in coming of Porto Musetto, at a place called Arenula to enbar
all entry and issue, to and fro Porto Maiore, without their leave. At which
time, when as the garrison of the city of Malta, had intelligence what good
success the new supply had upon their issue made (as before) against the
Turks, they taking courage thereby; made likewise asalie upon the enemy, that
spoiled abroad in the Island, as they were driving certain cattle, which they
had taken, and in such sort they of the city valiantly behaved themselves,
that after sundry of the Turks, by them slain, not only they recovered the
cattle, but drove the rest of the Turks to their ships. The camp of the
Turks understanding the chase to come toward them immediately stroke a l'arme,
and repairing to the pauilion of their general Mustapha, seized for that time,
the battery. Which matter, caused the Prince Valet to suppose, that the Turks
was marching to give assalt at the breach* and therefore the prince fully
determined with himself to be there present at the defense of the breach,
thinking thereby that his presence should not a little increase the courage and
hardiness of the garrison of Saint Michaels. For which purpose, immediately he
caused a bridge upon boats to pass both the half Islands to Saint Michaels to
be made. But knowing what the a ^arme meant, he returned to the castle of Saint
Angelo.

There were some that indged this doing of the Prince to be meruaylous bold
and courageous, but not void of great danger occupyeng such a place and
function, as he did, and therefore was worthy to be blamed for the same:
Alleging, that matters of great weight and importance, ought rather to be put
in effect by the force of the mind, counsel, and direct order; given by the
General, than by any force of body by him to be showed. Unto which affairs,
though the General be absent, yet by his prudent orders established, he may be
present among his soldiers. For the decay of the General (which if he come to
handstrokes may easily happen the ruin of the rest whereof he had charge, may
likewise ensue: as we daily see, when the life is gone, the body is dead. Other
again affirmed that the prince Valet, was worthy of much commendacion, Judging
that the presence of the General was most necessary in perils, considering that
the Soul cannot rightly govern and direct the body, except it be present,
yea, in the body: For in such doing has but followed the examples of ye most
prudent Generals Alexander, Themistocles, Caesar, Marius, and sundry others
using these kind of words in effect following: Ego met in agmine, in Praelio,
consultor idem and sotius pericul^ vobis cum adero: Me vosque in omnibus rebus
iuxta geram. Both, in the Esquadron and fight (O worthy soldiors) you shall have
me present a Counsel and compagnion in all perils: Wherein, as your fortune
shall be, the same shall be mine.

Who is so rude of wit, that if the same be requisite in other things, in
Peace, it is much more to be desired in wars.

The presence of the Master often times causes his affairs, with diligence
and greater facility to have fortunate proceedings. Nor truly the prudent Poet
(discriuing the wars beetwixt the Latins and the Ruteli,) was of other mind,
saying Vrget Praesentia Turni, the presence of Turnus provoked the courage of
his soldiers, by which most evident reasons it was judged that Valet the
prince of the order of the Ioannits should have done both manfully and most
prudently according to his function, if according to his determination he had been present at the defense of the breach among his soldiers, if the Turks had
assalted the same. The same time the king of Argire with seven gallyes and ten
other ships, in which were two thousand and two hundred soldiers, came to the
aid of the Turks army in Malta. Who seeming to be very sorry, that he was not
there at the beginning of the wars, required of Mustapha, to have so much
honor showed him, that both for the declaration of his good will, for the
exployt of some notable service and to prove what courage rested in his own
soldiers he might have the foremost place with-his soldiers to assalt the
fortres of Saint Michael, which not only was granted to him, but also
Mustapha caused two thousand chosen soldiors of the army of the Turk, to be
joined to him, which being granted to him, about 90 small ships were commanded
to be brought from Porto Musetto, unto the water of Marza, for that upon that
side the king of Argire purposed upon the water to give the assault unto the
fortres. Which when the Prince Valet did perceue, as also, having had
intelligence of this the Turks preparation and devise, by a certain fugitive
that came out of the camp to him. Immediately he called before him two of the
best practiced and faithful pilots, that were in Borgo, and of them demanded
by what means the Turks might be enbarred from the approaching to the foot of
the wall of the sortresse. The pilots answered that their opinions were, if of
masts of ships, and other timber joined togethers at the ends with ringes of
Iron, and thereof as it were a long chain to be made, and the one end there of
to be sastned from the corner of the castle of Saint Angelo, unto the other
side, where the enemy with their boats were determined to enter, the enemies
devises should be utterly stopped in that behalf. This policy liked the
great Master in such sort, that in the night following, the chain was ended,
and placed accordingly. The Turks in the dawning of the morning, seeing this
chain placed to enbarre their pretenses, were stonished, not knowing how to
land the soldiers: but while the king of Argire and his company were in this
mase, a fugitive a Christian, a man of marvelous hardiness, (to which kind
of persons, rashness serves for virtue, and desperation in stead of
constancy) came to the king, and promised that he would break this chain
before aid. Whereupon (taking an axe with him) did enter into the water, after
whom followed two or three others, to aid and help him, and so swimming to
this chain, this fugitive began to strike at this chain with his axe. Which
when the Christians in Borgo, did perceive, about five or six of them with
their swords drawn did on their part by and by swim likewise to the desence
of the chain, where, after killing two of that company, those Christians did
put the other to flight. After that, none was so bold to put in proof the like
again: Nevertheless, the king of Argire, did not leave his purpose, for the
xv day of July, at the break of day, he proceeded to the assalt, both by land
and water.

The Christians perceuing the pretense of the Argirians, had prepared the most
part of their Artillery to be laid toward that place where the Argirians
came to give the assalt. So as, upon the repair of the Turks, the Artillery
of the Christians were vnbended with such violence by the space of three
hours, during the time of the assalt, that with the bullets of the Canon and
other Artillery, about two thousand Turks were torn in pieces and drowned,
with twelve of their ships. Howbeit the most part of their ships approaching to
the Chain, and perceauing the same to enbarre them to land where they
purposed, they turned the ships upon an other part toward the Fortres of
Saint Michael, but doing nothing, they likewise were enforced to return.
Upon the land, likewise, it was meruailously fought, so as many Turks were
slain, and two hundred of our Christians vvanting, among whom Frederic, the
son of Dom Garza, Viceroy of Sicell, was torn in pieces with an Iron
Bullet, also one Gordio a Frenchman: Francis Senoghera, with his Neuew John,
Hispapaniards borne, and knights of the Ioannits, Medina, there, likewise was
vvounded to death, who afterward dyed of the same.

But the Prince Valet, perceauing in what perils the state of whole Malta
should stand in, if many such battles were often fought, when as, those
that were vvearie, both day and night should continually have to do with the
fresh and new Soldiers of the Turks, and to have no manner of supply of
soldiers, sent to succor them. Therefore the seuententh of July, he sent a
messenger into Sicilia, who by swimming passed from the Castle at the utter
bay: leading to the water of Marza, and from thence escaped unknown through
the midst of the enemies, unto the City of Malta, and so from Malta taking
shipping, came with diligence to Messana. To this messenger, Valet, gave
letters, by the which he required that he might have those two Galleys of his
own, there remaining, and the same to be furnished and sent with those number
of knights of the Ioannits, as were remaining at Messana, and with so many
other soldiers as might fill and replenish those Galleys. And that, upon their
coming nigh to Malta, they should abide a loofe before the Port, unto such
time they had a convenient sign made unto them whether they might safely enter
the Port yea or no.

At which time that the messenger of Malta, came to Messana, there came thither
a fleet of ships out of Spain that brought in the same sundry knights of the
order of Ioannits, of diverse nations. When as the Viceroy purposed to send away
to Malta, the two galleys written for, he first thought meet to write to the
great Master certain letters Ciphered by two several little ships, whereby he
signified to the great Master, that with those he sent the two Galleys for yt
which he wrote howbeit he required that the Galleys might have assured sign
made unto them, when they came in sight of the Island, whether they might enter
without evident peril or no.

These two little ships, thus departing from Messana toward Malta, (whereof the
one was furnished with sundry simples and medicaments pertaining to Physic and
Surgerie, did not both keep one course of Sailing* Whereby the boat that had
the Medicaments for Physic and Surgery, came into the hands of the Turks, as
afterward was learned, the other arrived* safe in Malta. Nevertheless
because, a few days before, all the ways between Saint Michaels and the City
of Malta, were utterly enbarred by the Turks, and that three Christians which
were used to go and come betwixt those places, in their passing were
surprised and taken by the Turks, and most cruelly put to death. And besides,
the entries of the Ports were vigilantly guarded, that none without the
knowledge of the Turks could well enter. Whereby the knights of the order,
resting at Messana, could not tell how to send safely the two Galleys away to
Malta. Notwithstanding considering that the great Master so earnestly vvrote
to have them, and that they thought, Vbirerum agitur summa, vnius particulae
periculum, minus esse metuendum. Where the whole affairs rest in danger, the
peril and loss but of a part and particle thereof for the conseruacion of the
rest ought the less to be regarded and feared, they determined with
themselves to commit the two Galleys to the guiding of Fortune; always
aforeseeing, that all those knights of the order, should not pass in that
hazard, but only forty of them joined with a good number of soldiers, that
furnished up the two Galleys. With these passed Captain Salazar, an Hispaniard,
in a boat towed by the Galleys, into the Island of Goza who after from thence
passed* into Malta to epsy both the state of the City, and the Turks Army.
The mean time, the Turks not forgetting, the great overthrow and repulse that
they received at their late assalt at Saint Michaels, and not a little desirous
to revenge the same, therefore they began with terrible sury their battery
again, against the Fortres of Saint Michaell, in such sort, as that so much as
the defendours repaired up in the night, the Turks by day by their Artillery
overthrew and brake.

While the enemies Artillery, did their feate, the Turks devised their bridge,
which they finished, and did set over the dyke before the Sun rising, the
twentieth of July, whereby they might come to hand strokes* with our
Christians. Which being perceived by the defendours, and considered, what
detriment the bridge would import, if the same were suffered* Immediately
seignior Parisoto the great Masters Neuew, and Agleria, knights of the Order,
with a good company of other soldiers, issued forth of intent to have burned
the bridge. Who in such sort were received by the Turks, that without
executing the matter, they came for, all those that issued together with
Parisoto and Agleria, were utterly slain. The Turks (this space) seized not
to continue the sury of their Artillery* in battering the walls; until the
xxviij. day of July; So as, that afternone, they courageously assalted the For
tres on sundry parts thereof; and thrice did send fresh men, to supply the
rooms of their soldiers that were either vvery in the fight or overthrown in
the assalt, and so manfully the Turks stood to their mark, that they doubted
not to gain the Fortres that day.

But our Christians on their part with no less valyant courage resisted them,
and with very force, what by Gunshot, arrows, wildefire and handstrokes, at
last they compelled the Turks to retire from the assalt, with incredible loss.
With this victory, the hearts of the defenders in such manner increased that
they cared nothing for the malice of the enemy. And because there was not so
often skirmishing on our side, as was wont, and that the artillery of the
Christian side, began to stay from shoting, the Turks supposed, that there was
few soldiers left on live in the fortres, and that their furniture of powder,
shot, and other things, were spent. Which stay from skirmishing and shooting,
was rather done of purpose by the counsel and devise of the Prince Valet,
then for any want of those matters in the fortres, and for a good cause,
considering that he heard of no manner of certain aid, at that time, and that
every day more and more the enemies fury and malice did grow the greater, he
thought it not requisite, to consume his garrisons and other furnitures idely
and to no purpose. But the Turks perceiving, that by these often assalts of
theirs, their pretenses took little effect, they determined with themselves to
prove what they could by myning, and one mine they had in manner brought to
pass, before our Christians did perceive the same, and to the end they might
blind the eyes of the defenders, they caused two gallyes toward the water, to
aproch the walls of the town of Saint Michael, and to beat at the same with
their artillery, supposing by the same that the garrison to have forsaken their
charge, and to have aided the rest, would have neglected the custody of the
walls of the castle, and so by this mine, to have entered into the fortres. But
the defenders, understanding the subtle policies of the Turks, by the means
and prudence as well of certain of the garrison, as chiefly of one of the
ensignebearers there, brought utterly to naught the mine of the enemy, by a
contermine. For the ensign bearer first entering the mine of the enemy, with a
lantern in hand, and casting certain arteficial fire among the enemies in the
mine, that whether the enemy would or no, he drove them out of the mine. For
which good service done, the great master rewarded this worthy ensign bearer
with the gift of a chain of gold wayeng five pounds, and because that Virtus
virtutem parit, eaque in arduo sita est, one virtuous act, allureth another to
do the like, though the same be very difficult to attain unto. The next day
after which was the first of August, certain of the garrison of the fortres
issued forth, and with powder burnt to pieces the bridge which the Turks before
had devised and laid over the dike, which worthy deed so done, turned to the
whole fortres a wonderful commodity. For the next day after, at the Sun
setting the Turks assalted again the fortress, upon that part which was
guarded by Carolo Roffo, where by the space of three hours, it was valiauntly
foughten on each side, but in the end the Christians repulsed the Turks,
leaving beehinde them three hundred slain. And on the Christian part remained
dead, Roffo himself with one Bareso, and certain other soldiers.

This while during the assalt the Turks in such sort exercised their great
artillery with continual shot, that none of the defenders durst scarce show
his head to look into the dike, but immediately he was dispatched, but for all
that, where occasion of any worthy service was at that instant to be showed,
the soldiers of the fortress would not spare his life, to execute the same.
As well appeared in Calderonio the Hispaniard, who when he doubted that the
enemy was breaking that part of the wall of bulwark, called the bulwark of
Castile, he issued immediately to espy and know the same, but in a moment he
was slain with the bullet of an arquebuse. Whose infortunity as to some it
would have been a terror and fear, so was the same not the less an
encouragement of the rest, to endeavor to do the like service. For when they
perceived that the enemy did what they could to fill up the dike of the
fortress, they of the garrison determined rather to end their lives with
honor, then to come into the hands of a most cruel enemy, and therefore
concluded togethers to issue forth that night upon the enemy, and to enbar them
of their purpose.

Whereupon a hundred of the garrison issued forth, part where of were Ioannits
and part soldiers that took wages, and so worthily gave charge upon the
enemy, that they enforced them to forsake the dikes and to fly away a pace,
leaving behind them slain fourscore Turks, and ten killed of our side, among
whom of the Christian part remained dead two knights of the order Giouanni
Cantabro, and one Macrino, whole heads the cruel Turks had cut from their
bodies, and planting them upon spears, did set them in the valie of Saint
Sauiors* to be viewed of the fortress. That day at night, those that were in
the city of Malta* made many bone fires, and therewith shot of their
arquebuses, showing thereby a great token of rejoice: Which both those that
were beseged, and the Turks also hard very well, whereby the Turks supposed,
that either the Navy of the Christians began to approach the Island of Malta, or
else such supply of Christians were landed, that was hable to encounter with
the Turks Army there. But it was none of those two matters, and only of
purpose done, as well to show their own courages, as to make the Turks
estonished with the newness of the matter.

The Turks the mean time filled the dike of the Bulwark of Castile, which
thing caused that neither the Turks could be endamaged by the Casemacts of the
dyke being cloyed up* nor yet by the Flankers from the Bulwark of A^^rne.
Whereby the Turks without any manner of impediment, might easelier enough assalt
the breach which they with their Artillery, before, had made. Also from their
Mount placed upon the right hand of Saint Sauiors, they began to beat
vehemently, with two brazen pieces there planted, so as, that at the first
stroke, they beat in at a window made for the shooting out of Artillery,
vvherwith the enemy was wont to be encombered, of the which place one
Francis Castilia had the charge: so expert were the Canoners of the Turks
part.

Also one Giouanni Barnardo Godineto a Spaniard, and knight of the Order, with
the stroke of an Arquebuze ended his life. That day Francis Aquila^es, a
Spaniard, one of the Garrison of Saint Michaell, having wife and children in
the Isle of Gozo, allured by two wicked counsaillours, that is to say, Fear
and Hope, shamefully fled out of the Town of Saint Michaels, unto the
Enemy, counsailing the Enemy to Assault the Town again, saying, that
without all doubt, they should win the Town, if they would attempt the
same again, because there were scarce four hundred Soldiers left, and yet
what with extreme labors that they had suffered during the seege, and what by
their hurtes and vvounds, they were not able to endure longer, as for the rest
of the Soldiers that were there, they were utterly consumed and dead.
Wherefore the Turks perceuing, that such breaches already were made, by their
Artillery, in the towns of Borgo and Saint Michael, that Carts were able to
pass thorough them, they purposed to assalt both those towns at once, and to
prove whether there rested in the garrisons of those two towns such courage
and force, as were able to give them such repulse again, as before so often
they had received.

Therefore upon the seventh of August, at one instant hour, the Turks
assalted Borgo at the Bulwark of Castile, and the Fortres of Saint Michael,
with such a fury and multitude, that the whole earth thereabouts was covered
with the enemy. And such was the thunder of the great Artillery, the hail
of the Harquebuze shot, the noise of Armor, the faufare of Tru^pets, the sound
of Drums, and cries of men of each side, that Heaven and Earth seemed to
beat togethers.

Which when the bands of Horsemen that were in the city of Malta heard by
the thundering of the great Artillery, and saw the Skies obscured with the
smoke of the same, and doubting that the Turks would not leave the assalts,
unto such time they had vvonne the Towns, as they did, before Saint Hermes:
Immediately all the Horsemen most valiantly issued out of the City of Malta,
and to the end to turn the enemy from the Assault, they gave charge upon
those bands of Turks that guarded the sick and vvounded persons resting at the
water of Marza. Who thus being assailed upon the sudden, fled, and our
Horsemen chasing them in killing and overthrowing them meruailously.

The noise, and cries of such as fled, being perceued by those Turks (who all
this while were occupied in the assalt of Saint Michael) they were enforced
at that time to leave the fight, and to come to succor the rest that fled.
Thus were the Turks repulsed from both the Towns, leaving behind them
slain, above 1500 Turks beesides those that were slain by the Horsemen of
the City of Malta, before they had succors from the Camp. Of the Christian
part of both the Towns were slain more than an hundred, and as many wounded:
both the assaults continued more than five hours.

Here Mounsier Valet, being thus delivered that day, and many other, from
such evident perils, caused general Prayer to be made to Almighty GOD, and
he him self with the whole Towns men, repaired to the Church about the
same.

While these things, were thus in doing, Dom Garza the Vice Roy of Sicel, had
secret intelligence out of Calabria, that Soliman the Emperor of the Turks had
caused certain ships to be set in a redines at Constantinople which were
furnished with soldiers, victual, and other necessaries appertaining to the
vvarres, to be sent to Malta. Wherefore to meet with them, the Viceroy sent the
Lords Altamira and Gildandrada, accompanied with five Galleaceis: who
departing to the Seas, and sailing until they came within xxx. miles of
Malta, they could not see nor hear of the ships that they sought for; but
only of a Gallie and a little Barque of the Turks. The Gallie was taken, and
the Barque escaped away to the Turks.

This while, Mustapha thinkeing there was none so strong, but that continual
labor and watching would in the end break and weaken him utterly, he
thought convenient, to keep the defendours occupied without giueing them any
manner of rest, in all that he could: therefore he commanded that the Fortres of
Saint Michaell, should be assalted again at the breaches before made by the
Artillery. But the Turks by the valiant defenders were quickly repulsed: with
no little destruction of the enemy.

These often assalts, this Bassa did not make, in that he had any great hope to
win these Places, but rather to show him self to execute the function and
office of an expert General, and to satisfy the mind of his Prince Solimane,
who had commanded them, either to win the places, or else there to loss
their lives about the same.

But also the Bassa had dispatched and sent a little Barque away with Letters
to Solimane, by the which he gave him intelligence of the state of his Navy,
with what marvelous inconuenie^ces his army was afflicted, what small hope he
had to win the places of the Christians, and what preparation the Christians
were in making to give succors to Malta, and other such like things. The mean
time the two galleys of Malta, departed from Messana, and came to Sarragoza,
where they tarryed one day, while the ship of Salazar was set on ground to
tallow, to make her more swift of sail, and that the better the next day after
they might pass togethers, the famous promontory and lands end of Sicilia,
called Pachino. The next day, as they departed out of the haven of Sarragoza,
they encountered a boat that came from Pozalo, having in the same one of Malta,
being very sore wounded, who being demanded, who had in such sort euelly
entreated him answered that when as he and a companion of his, that other
night, arrived nigh that port, and so required by two Sicilians, that had houses
upon the shore, to come on land, and to lodge with them that night, which they
did, suddenly the night being quiet, five Turks landed, by whom the two
Sicilians were taken, and his companion slain, and he himself hurt, as they
did see, which two Sicilians that were taken also told those Turks, that in the
port were riding two gallyes, having in the same sundry knights of the order,
with other soldiers, to pass in Malta, by whose words the knights of the
order, in those two gallyes well perceived, that their going into Malta, was
discovered to the enemy, whereby they knew it was either most dangerous for
them, to enter the port of Borgo in Malta, or else utterly impossible.
Nevertheless they dread not to keep on their course toward Malta, toweng at
their sternes the boat of Salazar.

While these two galleyes thus sailed they perceived not far before them two
other Gallyes, and a little Barque, who espying the two Gallyes of the
Christians to follow them, made all the have they could toward Malta from
them, whereby the Christians thought, that without doubt, they were the Gallyes
that had sent the five Turks on land, who had done those hurts, which he of
Malta, before recounted to them.

Howbeeit the two Christian Gallyes continued their course unto Pozalo, from
whence by their letters they gave intelligence to the Viceroy, of occurrants to
them happened in their voyage. And for so much as they could not proceed on
their course, in that the South and Southwest winds, were so much contrarious
to them, they retired with their Gallyes to Sarragoza again, and so to
proceed as the Viceroy should further advise them. About the which, immediately
a knight of the order, was sent from thence to Messana, to the Viceroy, whose
counsel was, that the two gallyes should stay at Sarragoza, for the rest of
the whole Navy, that right shortly would come and accompany them into Malta.

But Salazar being brought to Pozalo, determined in his boat to continue
forward his course, and albeit at the time, that he departed from Pozalo, the
seas were meruaylously troubled with winds, thunders, and other storms, the
other days following were so quiet and calm that within a short time, Salazar
arrived safely at the city of Malta, and there taking apparel of a Turk upon
him, and like weed for a companion of his, that could speak the Turkish tongue
as he could, by night they departed thence into the Camp of the Turks to
espy the estate of the Turkish army, where they espying that, they came for,
they perceived that the whole number of the Turks left on live in their Camp,
amounted scarce to fourteen thousand men, whereof many of them were ^^urt, and
very sick, the residue, were but an unmeet and unwarlike company, considering
that their former fights and assaults had consumed their best soldiers, and
after having secretly viewed the manner and form of their encamping, Salazar
with his companion returned back to the city of Malta again.

The next night after, Salazar with one Pietro Paccio a Spaniard a gentleman
of meruaylous hardiness and courage, repaired to a place nigh unto the beacon
or vvatch place called Maleca, which place when he had thoroughly considered,
he left Pietro there, and keeping in memory the signs and tokens of the
cities of Gozo and Malta, as Pietro showed him, to the end to declare the same
to the Viceroy.

Salazar taking passage in his own boat again, found fortune so much to be
his friend, that shortly after he arrived at Messana, where he discovered to
the Viceroy, what he had seen, amongst many talks, he showed how vveake
the Turkish Navy remained, how slender their Army on land was, void of good
soldiers, and weapon, that their whole number of Turks were not able to
encounter, with ten thousand Christians.

To affirm the words of Salazar to be true, at that time returned one of the
two little ships, whereof I told you before, that were sent to be espialls
in Malta, bringing with him a Spaniard, and a fugitive out of the Turks camp,
beesides, also returned four gallyes that before were sent from Messana, who
brought with them fourteen Turks, whom they had taken about Malta, who all
approved the words of Salazar to be true, that is to say, that the Turks army
was meruailously diminished, and that with beatings, they could not be
compelled scarcely to aproach to the walls, for which cause the Bassa, had
slain sundry of them. And the thing that made the Turks so affraied, was that
they saw never any of them whom the Christians wounded, but he lost his life.

Besides that, they said, they did see the Christians, with incredible
hardiness defend their places, and that no piece of artillery of the
Christians side, was at any time vainly blown of, wheresore the Turks
affirmed, they had right good cause, to be weary and repent and to detest such
wars, which made them to eschew utterly to fight, and utterly to fly away, and
chiefly such as were Renegants, that had forsaken the Christian faith and
become Turks. For which cause there was right strait watch set by the Bassa,
and commandment given by him, that either they should win the town, or else
to loose their lives all, for so had Soliman their prince commanded. These
words and such like (which the Turks that were taken did tell to the Viceroy,)
made the Viceroy to set forth his navy in a readiness more soon then
otherwise peradventure he would. In the Fortres of Borgo, this while, was one
Francis Giuara, a Captain, a very hardy gentleman and vvonderfull Ingenious, he
a little from that place where the enemy with Artillery had beaten down a
part of the wall of the town, builded a piece of Fortificacion, containing in
length fifty paces, and in breadth (...) paces, with two flanking Corners:
which being finished within two nights, turned afterward to a marvelous help
and aid of the defendours of that Town.

The enemies, the mean time, under the corner of the Dike where Boninsegna
the Spaniard, a vvorthie Knight of the Ioannits had his charge, began to mine,
which when the defenders perceued, they encountered the same with an other
mine, and thereby brought the mine of the enemy to none effect.

During this time, while a Fugitive was coming from the enemy toward Borgo
and swimming the water, the Turks took him, which was marvelous hinderance
to the Christians that were wonderfully desirous to know of the estate of the
Turks Army, and of their Counsaills. But the enemies seeing the small success
of their purposes, would yet prove further devises, and therefore caused two
mines to be made, one toward a Bulwark of Saint Michael, and the other to the
Bulwark of Castile, into the which Mines for doing of the feate, were
certain Barrells of Powder bestowed.

Howbeit the pretenses of the Turks could not so prudently be wrought, but
through the vigilances of the defendours, the same was espied, and so came to
pass, that their Mines came to none effect, and the Turks slain in their own
Mines, with loss also of such barrells of Powder, as they had laid there,
which the Christians recovered from them.

With these offenses and difficulties, the hopes of Mustapha and Pial, the
Bassas of the Turks, being utterly overthrown, they with the residue of the
Captains entered in Counsel to know whether it were expedient to tarry any
longer, or else to return home: Whereof the most part, were of advise, that
they should depart. But Mustapha was of an other opinion, saying, that he
thought convenient they should tarry until the Gallie which he sent to
Constantinople to Solimane their prince, with letters, returned again.
Whereby they might understand what the pleasure of the Prince were for them
to do in such behalf: and in the mean time, by force or guile, to seek some
good Fortune of victory. Which in deed the Enemies proved and attempted more
often, than that they gained thereby.

For as they themselves were unquieted, so they purposed not to let be in
rest the poor Christians, sometime in exercising their usual fury with
Artillery, sometime either myning, or entrenching, or filling the dikes, or
else assalting some breach to their own loss: howbeit, all which that they
did, they executed the same with marvelous diligence and in small time.
Therefore when as, Robles Master of the Tents, in the night came to view the
ruin and overthrow of a part of the wall, he was suddenly smitten in the
head with a bullet of an Harquebuze, and immediately dyed, to the great
lamentacion of all such as had known him. For in him were resident sundry
good arts; with which he profited much those that were beseeged. Wherefore
the Great Master sent a notable gentleman right expert in the vvarres, that
was Coronell of the Fautery (whom unto that time he kept about him self;)
to be general of the Fortres of Saint Michaells, who with such singular
prudence guided his charge, with watching, counsailling, and providence, that
so often as the Enemies gave attempt to that piece, they were always repulsed,
with no little detriment and loss. The mean time those two galleys with
the other ships of the Turks (which (as before I did tell you) were espied by
the two Christian galleys of Malta,) arriving among the Turks Navy, showed
unto Pial Bassa, the Admiral, that the Christian Navy was in readiness to
come to Malta, who dreading the sudden coming of that Navy, commanded 70.
of his long ships to be put in a readiness, leaving 40. ships in the Port of
Musetto, being the residue of his Navy, which were utterly out of furniture,
and unarmed both of men and tackle: the masts of which 40. ships, were consumed
about making of bridges, and other necessaries, for the assalting of the places
in Malta, and the men thereof likewise were spent with sundry diseases, and
fights wherein they served: Therefore Pial, for certain days, abode all the day
time nigh the shore of Malta, about a place there called Maiaro, and in yt time
he stayed abroad upon the high Sea; abiding the coming of the Christian navy.
But he perceuing none to come, he landed his company again: and for so much as
that the furniture of powder began to decaie in the Turks Camp, therefore was
given that of every thirty barrels of Powder, in every ship twenty or five and
twenty barrells according to the appointed portion should be taken. Whereby the
Turks, with greater fury than ever they did before, battered the wales of
both the Towns, with such great pieces of Artillery as are called
Basiliscois: whereof every bullet shot out of the same waieth two hundredth
pound, and in compass seven spannes. With these pieces of Artillery the
vvalls of the Fortres of Saint Michael, were thrown down and made flat.
Likewise at that time, Mustapha Bassa, in such sort at Borgo beat the Bulwark
of Castile with Artillery, that in manner the same was overthrown. When as
the enemies perceived that both the towns was utterly made void, both of
their vvalls and other pieces of Fortificacion, so as the Turks might look
upon the Christians, and the Christians on them: without further tarrieng: the
Turks upon the eightenth of August, at noone time of the day, with their
universal army gave charge upon both the towns, at the which the Enemies,
were three times put back, and thrice returned, and in the end the Turks were
utterly repulsed, after five hours fight.

In this most dreadful assalt, the invincible courage of the Prince Valet, was
apparent to each one, who armed with his Curace, and formidable with his Pick
in hand, was seen before the rest of the Christians most valyantly fighting.
Whose manfull presence, not only gave courage to his soldiors there, but also
moved up the hearts of the boys and women in such extremity to do notable
service. For so it comes to pass ofttimes, Magis homines mouentur exemplis
quam verbis. That men are more stirred forwards with examples of well doing,
then by only doeings. Of this great number of the Turks, a part of them had
gotten down into the dikes of Borgo, and there tarried, and to the end they
should not be damaged with the flankers of the bulwark of Castile, they
fortefied themselves on the flank with earth and faggot, which they
accomplished right quickly. And for this purpose they did the same, that they
might vnderminde and sape the walls, about the which they had occupied the
space of fifty yards.

When the garrison of Borgo understood the policy of the Turks, who thus had
gotten into the dike, they immediately caused certain of the great artillery
to be shot off, along that part of the dike, wherewith and with fire also
hurled into the dike, a great sort of the Turks with their fortyfication in
the dyke, were destroyed. The next dey after the enemies renewed at the same
places, their fights again, ever supplyeng the places of their wearied
soldiers, with fresh men. But first of all, ensuing their usual custom,
they beat at both the towns with their artillery until night, then about
midnight, when the Moon shined upon the earth, this furious assalt with raging
cruelty and force began, which at the first made our Christians somewhat
afraied, who having yet memory of their former manhood, and virtue, so behaved
themselves, with their wild fire, shot, and other weapons, that the enemies
were enforced to depart right euelly handled, into their camp, after three
hours fighting.

That day, another mine of the enemies was found made toward the fortyfication
of the bulwark of Castile, in the which were perceived to be a hundred Turks,
who were all slain, and the mine broken. Nor for all that, the day following
the enemy was quiet, but seven times invaded those places again, and sending
fresh soldiers, who not only with vveapon, but also with bags of powder and
fire, continued their fight. At the which Boninsegna having his face burned,
lost an eye. Likewise, at that instant the enemy assalted the fortres of Saint
Michael, at a place called Sperone, assayeng at that part, to have entered the
fort, where Centio Aquitano, with an invincible courage, mounting on the
ramper, with his Pick most manfully fought to the overthrow of such of the
enemies, as enterprised to ascend the ramper, and after killing one of the
enemies, to the fear of the rest, being shot thorough one of his arms with
the stroke of an harquebuze, and retyring himself, until he had dressed his
wound, manfully he returned again to his place, and from thence he departed
not until such time as the enemy forsook the assalt, and he remained
victorious. Thus the Turks at both the places, with marvelous loss of their
soldiers were repulsed, leaving the victory to the Christians, of which our
Christians were then slain, to the number of an hundred, whereof the most part
were torn in pieces, with the Turks artillery. Among whom at the ruin of the
bulwark of Castile, was slain one Frago, and at the fortres of Saint Michael,
Scipio Prato, Giouanni Baptista Soderino, Paulo Boniporto, Marino Fagiano,
Ruffino, all knights of the order of the Ioannits, and sundry others, worthy
of longer life. The Turks again wrought an other mine, at the fortres of Saint
Michael, which when the defenders perceived, they so provided for the same that
the mine took none effect.

With such and many attempts and fights, certain of the knights, and not of
the lowest sort of them, fearing that, which so often is assalted, at the last
may be gotten, said to the great Master, that they thought good that all the
books of good learning and tables, and relics of Saints, and other matters
of religion, were meet to be had out of the town into the Castle of Saint
Angelo as into the most sure and safest place. The great master though he knew
right well, that all which they spoke proceeded of a right good zeal and
mind, nevertheless nothing moved therewith, he answered them in this sort,
that this their advise, was none other thing the^ an utter discouragement of
the minds of all the Christians there, who unto that time had showed them so
valiant, a great deal above any man's expectation, therefore he was fully
purposed to save all, or loose all: and to the end that none should have
further confidence in the castle Angelo, he was fully determined to bring forth
the garrison there, to join them with the rest to fight against the enemy, and
to leave in he castle only gunners to beat at the enemy as need should
require. An answer right worthy given of such prince, and to be commended to
perpetual memory of posterity, for how should the soldiers hope, when he
sees his general in despair, or to do any hardy act worthy of
commendacion, where the general is full of vain fear. While the great master,
thus with this answer, not only made them ashamed that gave him this said
advise, but also renewed the hearts of some that feared, with further courage.

The Turks determyning with themselves that, that day (no less than the other
three days were before) should not be void of some fight, furiously assalted
be times in a morning, those two towns, with greater force, then he did
before, chiefly at the ruins of Castile, where Sanromanus of Aruernia
defending that quarter, lost this britle life, gayning immortality for the
same. At Saint Michaels, Adornio, a knight of the order, with one Fagio, and
sundre others, were wounded, for the enemy tarryed not long at the assault, but
retired. When as immediately the enemy began the usual thundering of his
artillery again, that therewith the whole Island seemed to tremble, and the
Skies to be set on fire. The mean time Valet being weary with the morning
fight, departed for the time, to recreat himself, when sodaynely a Spanish
Priest, with his hands holding up ^o heaven, ran, and met with the Prince
Valet, saying and cryeng out, Malta alas is lost, for three or four ensigns
of the enemies, are already entered the town, in at the ruynes of Castile.
Which when the Prince Valet heard, forthwith he did put on his head his
Burganet, and with his Pick in his hand, came among his soldiers saying.
Beeholde most worthy companions the hour is now come, wherein you must show
your selves valyant defenders of the Christian religion, for if you still have
with you that noble courage, which you have always hitherto showed in the
former assaults, there is no cause why you should doubt in this extremity, for
you see but the same enemy, and we have still our former God with us, who as
hitherto he has mercifully saved us, so he will now defend us. Therefore most
worthy sons all, come on with me; and let us courageously give them the
charge. With these words, Valet him self gave the onset, fighting stoutly where
the greatist peril remained, after him, mansully followed his Soldiers, yea,
the townsmen, children, women and old men, right fearsely striking at the
Turks that were entered. Where the fight on each side was exceeding cruel and
perilous, some stopped the enemies from further entering, some killed them
entering, some gave them the chase in wounding and driving them forth again.
The Turks resisted meruailously, and thus it was courageously fought on each
part: within and without the grounds was covered with all sorts of weapon, dead
bodies, and blood.

The Great Master as cause served, was always present, providing every
necessary: some he praised, some he encouraged, some he monished, and he
himself right lively fought, executing sometime no less the act of a worthy
Soldiour, than also the function of a most prudent General. At last, with the
Sun set, this cruel conflict ended: and the Great Master remained
victorious, but not without loss of two hundredth of his men. Where, of the
enemies were slain to the number of two thousand, besides those that entered,
whereof none escaped. These were four of the sorest conflicts that the
Christians which were beseeged, had with the Turks. During this time, the
Viceroy of Sicel, for setting forward his Navy into Malta, stayed for none
other manner but only for the return of Giouanni Cardono, with his twelve
long ships that before was gone to Panhorm, to conduct and bring with him
four Ships there with victual.

But perceuing that he tarried too long, he sent a Post to him to bid him come
away with all the speed he could, and if he could not bring away those ships
with victual by towing them, for their better speed, than to ship their
victuals in his own ships, and leaving the others behind at Panerme, to
make have away, his own self.

Therefore the Viceroy with his Navy of 72. Galleys the xx. of August,
departed from Messana, and came to Sarragoza, bringing with him in his Navy
ten thousand chosen men, among whom were 200, and more, of the knights of the
order of the Ioannits, and about forty knights of the new order of the
Stephanits, which order of knighthood was lately founded by that most prudent
Prince Cosmo Medices, Duke of Florence, in the year of our Lord 1561. In this
they differ from the Ioannits, where the Ioannits wear the White Cross, the
Stephanits wear a Red Cross, written about with Gold* again the
Stephanit, may be once married, which cannot be permitted to the Ioannit.

The Island named Ilua, anciently called Aemathia, lyeng in the Sea called
Tuscum, is the place of their residence, but unto such time as their new City
called Cosmopolis, be finished, being in building by the Duke of Florence,
being likewise the Great Master of the same, as he is the founder thereof.
The knights of the Stephanits, remain at Pisa, a City in Italy, under the
dominion of Florence. And in that they be called Stephanits, it is not that
they deduct or have their name of Saint Stephan the Prothomartyr, but of one
Saint Stephan, sometime Bishop and Patron of Florence; Canonized amongst the
number of Saints. Besides the knights of th^se two aforenamed orders, there were
in the Christian Navy sundry Noble men, as Ascanius Cornia, the Marquis of
Pescaro, and his brother Annibal Estensis, Hercules Veraus, Aeneas Pius,
Capinus, Vincentius, of the Family of the Vitelli^, and sundry others of Noble
parentage, and famous in the vvarres.

The Christian Navy being thus arrived in the Port of Sarragoza, the Viceroy
sent immediately D'auri with a Gallie and a little boat into Malta, to the end
he should land some person, and to speak with Pietro Paccio who (as I showed
you before) was left at the Watch place of Malta in the Island, and of him to
learn what he had spied, sithence the departure of Salazar. From whom he
understood, that no ship, that way, was seen in the Seas, sithence
Salazars departure saving a Foist which the one and twentieth of August in the
morning made toward Gozo, and that, that day at night (as he received
intelligence from the vvatch of Malta,) sixteen Sales of Ships came and rode
at the rodested of Salinas, but whether after they went, he could not through
the darkness of the night observe the same. Our Christians (this while, right
trimly fortified themselves nere the Ruins of Castile, in sundry places thereof
couched their Artillery in such sort, that both it was able to beat the enemy
on the flank, and to scour also alo^gst the rampers ioining to the bulwark of
Boninsegna. The Turks, meaning again, to assalt both the towns of Borgo and S.
Michael, they first devised as it were a Pluteum.
scaffold made of Timber and boards able to hold ye number of 30. soldiors, and
these to be set at ye breach of S. Michael, yt thorough the Artillery that
should be shot from that scaffold, none of the defenders should be able to show
or mount up his head to defend the place. Which our Christians perceuing, they
thought the same to be intolerable, and immediately made issue forth, and
putting to flight the Turks that guarded the scaffold, and setting fire in the
scaffold, did burn the same. In like manner, were the Turks rejected from
Borgo, that at the ruins of Castile, had prepared such an other scaffold,
which likewise by the defenders there was burnt in pieces. The next night
after, our Christians that guarded the ruins of Castile, issued upon the Turks
and not only destroyed the enemies Fortificacions toward that part, but also
killed those that had the keeping and custody of the same, and without loss
of any one of the Christians, safely returned into their charge again.

And albeit that day and others after, the enemy proved both with their
Scaffolds again, and repairing their Fortificacions that were cast down, and
other Ingins, to drive the defenders from the vvalls: yet all their policies
and labors, through the vigilancies and virtues of the Defenders, came to
nothing.

The Christians devised a Mine under the Ruins of Castile; and in the same
couched an eight barrells of Powder, that if the enemies made attempt again,
that way, they would give fire to the trane, and so blow them up. And while
the Christians were thus vvorking, the Turks was likewise myning toward
that part: But the Christians perceauing the same, did get unto the Turks
Mine, and not only getting from them certain barrels of Powder, and putting
the enemies to flight, but also destroyed the Turks mine, performed their own
mine. In this manner things passing on both sides, Mustapha the general, being
very famous and right expert in the art Military, considering that the most
part of the summer was spent, and that longer he could not well abide, and that
stiffly to stand and continue against an enemy, opens oftentimes an assured
way unto victory, he determined therefore with his whole power to assault
again the Fortres of Saint Michaell, wherefore he caused to be brought forth
the chief standerd of Solomon his prince, upon the top whereof was a globe of
fine gold, and commanded with the same, the soldiers to give the assalt, and
with force to enter the town, thorough the ruins there made. The soldiers
of the Turks therewith gave the charge, and the Christians right courageously
resisted, a doubtful conflict was on both sides. And when the Turks were
twice repulsed, Mustapha in person came unto the trenches, with his soldiers,
and perceiving them to remain discouraged, he began to require and exhort them
not to fail him at that extremity, for that day should perform their former
travails and victories, and not to permit his enemies, in manner overcome, to
spoil them of their long hoped victory, for the Christians have not a piece of
fortyfication left to cover themselves, all are cast down, and that never a
good soldier of them were then left on live, saving a few wearyed and maimed
sort of them, that were not able to abide the sharp edges of their swords,
with such pertinacie and stiffness, they gat at last the castle of Saint
Hermes. Then according to the vocation of each soldier, Mustapha promised
either money or honors, mixing threatenings to some, and gentle words of desire,
to others. The Turks through Mustaphais pretense, whether they were stirred up
with his fair promises, or enforced through his threatenings, they ran freshly
again to the assalt, where the conflict of each part was vvonderfull furyous,
but in the end the Turks were enforced to retire. For our Christians had made
a dyke, and in the same had couched two field pieces, with which they beat on
the flank, a scaffolde covered with raw hydes against burning, which the
enemies had gotten in there. And at the first stroke, the scaffold was beaten
in pieces with the artillery, and forty Turks under the scaffold were also
torn in pieces, with the bullets of the same. And the same night those
Christians that guarded in Borgo, the bulwark of Castile, issued forth upon the
Turks, and brake down all the places of defense of the enemy, nigh unto the
bulwark, and besides wanne a ramper from the Turks, which exceeded in height
any piece of fortyfication that the Christians had left to defend themselves,
and from the same overthrew the Turks, and did put them to flight

By this, the Christians understood right well, that the Turks had no great
will to fight, and that their courages deminished, for at that ramper for the
guard of the same, were left in manner three hundred Turks, and our Christians
that gave the charge were not above twenty five persons, and yet those three
hundred as it seemed durst not abide our twenty five. Again our Christians had
made a mine nygh unto the ramper of Castile, and perceiving that a certain
number of Turks were come to that place to reedefie the places of strength
which the Christians did before cast down, the Christians gave fire to the
place, vvherby sixty Turks there being were blown up and slain. While these
things, thus were in doing, Dom Garza the Viceroy of Sicel with his whole Navy
departed from Sarragoza, and having conuenyent winds, kept his course unto the
promontorie of Pachyno, when a great ship was espied in the sea, which by
foul weather as afterward was learned) was brought to that place. That ship
came out of the Island Meninges, and was fraighted with victual, gunpouder, and
a great number of shot to have been conveyed to the Turks camp in Malta. The
great ship espyeng the Christian fleet, yielded her self. Which the Viceroy in
changing her mariners sent back to Sarragoza, when he with the rest of the
fleet kept forth his course toward Malta, but the wind changing upon him, and
blowing with such a fury, he with the whole Navy was driven to the Island
Aegusa, being 220 miles toward the West from Malta. Now was the first of
September come, when the letters of the Viceroy came to the great Masters
hands, by the which he signified unto him that he would shortly be with
him with his whole Navy, that a Christian, a prisoner, escaping out of the
Turks ships, gate in to the town of Borgo, and told that very few Soldiers
meet for any conflict was left on live in the Turks camp, and that the most
part of that army, left on live, with wounds, famine, and sickness was
wonderfully weakened, and that daily innumerable of them dyed, saying further
that the Turks were purposed to lay siege to the city of Malta, and had for
the same put in a readiness five great pieces for the battery, and for the
drawing thereof thither, they had gotten first twelve horses, and then four,
which sometime pertayned to garrison of the city of Malta.

In the mean time the Viceroy with the Navy of the Christians, which by
tempest was put unto Aegusa, having convenient wind to return, came back
again into Sicilia to Drepano, and from thence did set sail toward Gozo. In
sailing, the two gallyes of the Ioannits espying two foists of the Turks gave
charge upon them, and took them, and so the fifth day of September came to
Gozo. But the Viceroy espying no signs out of Malta, for convenient and safe
landing there, returned to Pozalo in Sicilia again. After whom Auria followed,
and showed that he had seen most certain signs, out of Malta for safe
landing there, to whose words the Viceroy giving credit, came the day
following in the morning betimes with his whole Navy to Gozo.

That day a fugitive a Christian, stale out of the Turks camp, and came to
Borgo, saying he came of purpose to bring him glad tidings, that the Turks,
the day following would prove an assalt at Saint Michaels fortres, and if they
sped well, they would abide, and if not, to give up the siege and depart. And
to the end that the Turks should have the better courage to serve, he
promised to him, that first worthily would sasten his ensign upon the walls,
he should have the reward of five talents of gold, and to promote him also to
the higher rooms in the wars.

The great Master thinking (as always he did) that almighty God ever provided
such men to give him intelligences, he gave most humble and hearty thanks to
God, and then caused every thing to be set in a readiness, to overthrow the
purpose of the cruel enemy.

The Turks all that day, with their great artillery, bett at the houses in
Borgo, and at the ships riding in the port, wherewith a great ship there, was
sunk. But Dom Garza, in the morning betimes departed with the Christian Navy
from Gozo, and passing the straits arrived in Malta, and there landed his Army
sercretly by point of day. And while his ships stayed for him, he marched
forward with the army about a four furlongs, showing to the Captains and
their lieuetenaunts, what they should do, and admonished them all, unto such
time as they came to the great Master of Malta, every edict and commandment
that generally should be made among them, to pass in the name of the king of
Hispain, and than at their coming to the great Master to obey him as they
would do unto the king, if he were in place. And in the mean time,
commanded the army to be under the regiment of Ascanio Cornia, and he to be
advised as the most part of the counsel there should order. And so with
exhortation of a few words, leaving the army marching toward the city of
Malta, the Viceroy about noonetide of the day came to his ships again, and
with the same sailed toward the East part of the Island, and stayed in the
sight of the City of Malta, being but three miles on the South from the sea.

Whom when the city espied it is not to be demanded if they were joyful, for
in an assured sign and token of gladness, they vnbended the whole artillery
of the city.

The Viceroy again hearing the same, caused the gunners of the whole navy, to
answer the city, with blowing of, twice of all the artillery in the Christian
fleet. That done the Viceroy returned into Sicilia, to receive into the Navy,
the bands of the duke of Vrbine, and of certain Spaniards, that were stayeng
at Messana and Sarragoza, and with them to return toward Malta, to follow and
persecute the Navy of the Turks, which in manner was unarmed. The Turks this
while, that purposed to assault the fortres of Saint Michael again, and so to
prove if they could win the same, a few days before the coming of the
Christian navy, had begun to pack, and gather together their necessaries, but
understanding of the arrival of the Christian fleet, and landing of the
Christians army, immediately some sounded the alarm, some crying to remove,
and so meruaylous fearful, every one seeking for the counsel that was
thought best* some began to fly away, some to take weapon in hand, but the most
part of the Turks marching to the trenches retired their artillery, and did set
fire in the forty fications that could be burnt, and so with as much
expedytion as they could they drew their artillery and the rest of their
baggage into their ships.

Which when the garrison of Borgo perceived they manfully issued out, and gave
charge upon certain bands of Turks that were at a place called B^rmola,
garding a great and mighty piece of artillery.

The Turks having no lust to fight, fled away a pace leaving the great piece in
the possession of the Christians, which the Christians with force drew into
Borgo, and if at that time, the new supply of the Christians had been there in
a readynesse, and to have given charge on the back of the enemies, while they
were thus in hasting to their ships, either they had opened to themselves a
manifest path way of victory over the Turks, or else to have spoiled them of
the most part of their great artillery.

But I think if the new supply had been there present perhaps they would
rather have followed the ancient, opinion of famous men of war saying, Hosti
abeunti viam sternendam esse, pontemque vel argenteum faciendum, give way to a
flying enemy* yea and if you make for him a bridge of silver. Albeit the
garrisons of Borgo and Saint Michael, (by reason of their fresh victual and
other necessaries appertayning to further besieging if need were, which
through the vnequallitie of the ways and lack of horses, was very
difficultlie and with much labor on foot brought to them from the city)
thought not requisite to trouble the flying enemy, with further skirmishes.
Whereby the Turks shipped their carriage artillery, and the most part of their
army, without great let or impediment. So the xi of September the Turkish navy
departed from Porto Musetto, when a fugitive a Genoua born came to the prince
Valet saying, that 10000 Turks were landed again, and marching toward the
city of Malta, to fight with the army of the Christians, which were coming
toward Borgo. Which when the great Master heard immediately he sent certain
bands, to seize the sortresse of Saint Hermes, and there to fix the ensign of
the sacred order.

Who accordingly forthwith departing, took the possession of the Fortres
wherein they found four and twenty pieces of Artillery, great and small:
which the Turks (having no further leisure) could not take away with them.

The Navy of the Turks this while departing from Porto Musetto, passed unto
the Port of Saint Paul, and there did set on land seven thousand Turks,
under the leading of Mustapha, their General by land. Who had intelligence
given him that the whole Army of the Christians which newly were come,
exceeded not the number of three thousand soldiers. And therefore being the
more bold to fight, by reason of the little number which he supposed that we
were of, he marched on proudly toward the City of Malta, and in his way
thetherward, Mustapha discovered the Army of the Christians. Who espyeng the
Turks, and ready to fight, marched forward courageously against them, and
encountering upon a hill, the Christians valiantly gave charge upon the Turks;
at which first encounter few were slain of either side. But in the end by
reason that our number was both greater and our force therewith the more, the
Turks gave back and fled, the Christians followed, killing and overthrowing
them, unto such time the rest were driven to their ships, but whilst each
one clustered to get to their navy through to much have, there perished in the
sea about four hundred Turks, and a thousand and eight hundredth slain on the
land. So as if our Christians had been expert of the places, and known the
land, there needed not one of the Turks to have escaped away on live.

The Turks being thus beaten into their ships, stayed still with their Navy in
the port of Saint Paul, all the next day following, and a great part of the
next night then before day in shoting of a warning piece being a sign of their
departure, they set sail and departed toward Grecia, leaving the Island of
Malta, shamefully wasted and enpouerished.

Thus the Turks being driven out of Malta, to their notable calamity and
overthrow, the Prince Valet made victorious with immortal glory, caused
general processions and prayers to be made to almighty God for his infinite
benefits to them showed in this careful time, ascrybing the chiefest cause of
this victory to his inexpressable goodness, then Valet distributed to the worthy
seruitures, that honorably had behaved themselves all this while, condign
rewards, in praising openly every one according to his demerits with continual
thanks to them all for their great pains, and trauayles passed. Unto the
wounded and sick he had such tender regard for the restitution of their
health, as though it had been to himself. He lamented much the destruction and
wasting of the country of Malta, and earnestly devised for the repayring
thereof again. Amongst all these things he did not forget to learn, which
way, or whether, the enemy this while passed, and what he pretended, which
many, in the mids of their victory, lets pass, for which cause every one
has given this worthy Valet the name of a most prudent, valiant, and
courteous prince, and as one prepared of God, to remain on the earth, to the
defense of his sacred religion, that during his life, every thing under his
charge, cannot but remain fortunate and prosperous. About this time Soliman
sent a mighty Army to invade Hungary, which, the Spring time after, he
himself in person followed: thorough whose coming, whole Germany (as it had
good cause*) was meruailously afraied, and gathered themselves together.

The Germans of ancient time have, with other nations, rather for glory than
their own safegarde, made wars* But with the Turks rather for their own
safety they have always foughten, than for any glory that they have sought
thereby. Howbeit Maximilian the Emperor gathering together a great Army
against Soliman, proceeded and laid seege to a place ^^^led Vespe^^^, and did
by assalt win the same from the Turks. But Soliman upon an other part
vvan^^^om the Emperor Segest and Iula, being two places of no little importance.

When as the fifth of September, Anno 1566. Soliman the Emperor in the course
and raze of his victories ended his life in the famous* City of* Quinque
Ecclesie: which of five Churches in the same is so called. To whom his son
Silimus succeeded in his Empire and dominsons* who if he were like in
conditions, either to his father Soliman, or to his grand father Selymus* and
Germany to continue in his Intestine and inward contencions and divisions, as
it still does, it is to be much* f^a^ed* but that it would happen to Germany
^vvhich already ^ath* chanced to the unfortunate countries of Thracia, Dacia,
Maesia, and the most part of their woeful and miserable neighbor the Kingdom
of Hungary.

For it is an assured and very true saying that Nulla tam magna tamque firma
potentia est, quam discordia non comminuat et perdat. There is no Kingdom or
Power, be it never so great and mighty, which discord and civil discencion
in it self, does not distroy and bring to confusion.

The end of the third Book.
To the three worshipful brothers worthy Patrons of virtue and all good Arts,
Robert Carr, William Carr, and Edward Carr, in the County of Lincoln
Esquiers: Raffe Carr their most affectionate kinsman wishes all content.
Having Right worthy Gentlemen, formerly made known to every of you: by such
simple remembrances as my power could aford, how much I desire and daily study
in particular to serve and honor you: I thought it now not amiss, treating of
one argument comd of the same kindred, and derived from the general
observations which every where with profit in these three first books are to
be gathered, thus jointly to you all to perticipate this common good: For if
the use which every one ought arightly to make in the reading of Histories, be
grounded chiefly in the election of taking, or leaving, the better, or worse,
of such things as by examples are faithfully propounded: which upon occasion
should be applied either to the well governing of a private life, or to the
inabling of our understanding for counsel in our countries service: In either
part I say I know none, (of many who have had these Turkish affairs with the
perpetual felicity in consideration) to whom with more credit a man may give
belief, then to Hubert Folieta the Genuoys, whilst with much wisdom,
gravity, and discreation, he handles though briefly, the causes of the
greatness of the Turkish Empire, to his dear friend the famous Captain
Marcus Antonius Columna. A treatise I suppose to every conceauing man, or such
whom the care of a common good does possess very acceptably. This same
therefore for the former alleged reasons, have I here annexed* so faithfully as
I could persuade the nice Italian tongue to speak our proper language. To
which I have further added, (that the occasion of this discourse might the
better be apparent,) the narration of the war of Ciprus, held betwixt the Turk
and Venetians, some xxx. years ago. In which their wars, the Venetia^s being
excedingly ouerborne, (notwithstanding that notable victory obtained by them
and their confederates in the Gulf of Corinth,) made privily their peace,
without knowledge given thereof either to the Pope, or king of spain, who in
these wars had been their associats: whilst Marcus Antonius Columna, Pope Pius
quintus general, always in opinion against the same, persuaded to his power
the contrary: and that so worthy an occasion of further victory, should not so
unworthily be relinquished. Of which matter imparting his mind to his friend
Folieta, it became the subject of this ensuing discourse: wherein Folieta not
intermedling with what the Venetians had done, only lays down in general
such causes, (as by great reason may be thought) of those fortunate successes
which hourly attend the Turkish Ensigns. To which I had rather remit you,
then longer to deteine with the harshnes of an ill pleasing Epistle. And now
having for the present done that due observance to you all, of me long both
determined, and desired: I most earnestly beseech you to take my boldness in
good part, void of all saucie presumption: my meaning as it is, clothed in a
sincere will always to serve and honor you: and my request as I shall deserve,
for ever to be preserved in your good opinion. Wherewith if you shall so much
grace me, I protest there can no one thing give more fullness to much of that
happiness which in this world I affect: whereof nothing distrusting, though
meanly deserving, I take my leave and rest.

Your most bounden for ever Raffe Carr.

THE NARRATION of the wars of Cyprus, held betwixt the Venetians, and the
Turks, ^ during the years. 1570. and 1571.
CYprus, so called by reason of the rich Copper Mines therein contained,
plentiefull, and abounding in excellent Wynes, Wheat, Oil, and Sugar: being
in deed that true Mecarian Isle under xxxv. degrees of the Poles elevation:
stands in the Gulf Issicus, distant twenty German miles from Syria,
containing in length fifty miles, of the said German measure, but in breadth
ten or twelve at the most, and in diverse places less.

Salamis, the City of Cyprus, built by Teucer Aea^ide: held for their Kings
for many discents: the same Teucrians, of which race Euagoras, and Nicocles
were, men celebrated and made famous by Isocrates Orations: To these Teucrians
succeeded the Ptolomees: to them the Romans: under whose government, although
much and grievously vexed by the Saracines, they continued firm and constant,
unto the time of Andronicus Commenus, and Henry the sixth Emperors: For about
the year 1190 Richard the son of Henry the second, King of England, sailing
toward Palestine, and put from landing in that Island, by Isaac Commenus then
the governor; took the same by force: which afterward he gave to Guy of
Lusignan, (son in law of King Almerick, who had lost the City of
Jerusalem) in exchange, for the bare title and name to him and his posterity,
of the said Crown of Jerusalem.

The issue and line of which Guy, enjoyed the said Kingdom of Cyprus 250.
years, until the time that Peter reigned, who was taken prisoner by the
Souldan of Aegipt, but afterward upon Tributarie conditions restored, to which
Peter succeeded Peter the son, who at the death of his Father, being very
young, was afterward married to Haelena Paleologa, and by her had issue
Carlotta, married first to John, King of Portugal. But lastly to Jews, Duke
of Sauoy, which Jews for a small time reigned King of Cyprus.

This second Peter, ^ad likewise a bastard issue, called James, who by the
help of the Souldan of Egypt expelled from the kingdom of Cyprus the said
Jews of Sauoy. James took to wife Katherin, the daughter of Marcus
Cornelius, adopted by the state of Venice, who being with child by her
husband, (and he before her delivery dyeng, in the year 1470.) The said
Common wealth, took to their charge, both the mother, child, and Kingdom.
But shortly after the enfant dyed, supposed to have been poisoned by the
practice of that state: who solely thereby possessing themselves of the
kingdom, reduced the same into the form of a Province: Katherin the mother
being brought back to Venice, who lived to the year 1510. Now Selymus the
first Emperor of the Turks, after the utter oppressing of the Souldans, and
taking of the kingdom of Egypt, caused the yearly revenue which before was
accustomed to be paid to the said Souldans by the kings of Cyprus, of all such
merchandise as were brought in or transported thence, to be set in certain
8000 Ducats, upon condition of which paime^t by way of a yearly tribute he
freely granted to the Venetians as to his vassals, the possession of the said
lle: which paime^t of 8000 ducats* the Venetians only would suppose to be
granted as an honorable reward, or gratuitie, and in no sort as a tribute*

But Selymus the second demanding of the said Venetians by a Harrauld, the Fee
and possession of Cyprus, which hitherto he alleged they had held under
condition of a yearly tribute, affirmed their whole right, (so they had any) to
be extinguished, and the Intrest to be deuolued, and comd back to him, as the
superior and Paramont Lord: Because contrary to the allegance due to the lord
of the Fee, the said Venetians had given harborough, and receipt, unto certain
Spanish Pirates, enemies to the said Selymus, who by the license of the Venetian
Magistrates, had brought into Cyprus, and there made sale of great pillage and
certain booties taken out of Cilicia:

And although diverse other of the Turkish Emperors had tolerated the said
Venetians to vvith-hould what was not their right, yet he the said Selymus
had in determination to have his due: with which if in good accord they
would be content to depart. he was not in any sort to violate their bonds of
amity, or break the peace, but would endeavor in every degree to advance
the estimation of that common wealth.

If otherwise, yet he the said Selymus, was not to forgo his right, vvose
meaning was to recover the same by force.

The Venetians upon this message, although (by the scarcity of provision and
vittailes which for diverse years before they had endured, as likewise by the
firing of their Arsenall, (wherein the year precedent, their whole sea
preparation had been consumed,) they were mightily perplexed and amated, yet
with noble resolution they returned answer, that the said Selymus had no just
cause why to bereave them of their jurisdiction in Ciprus, which now for a
hundred years, in right of inheritance they had peaceably possessed, and that
the yearly pension accustomed to be paid to the Soldans of Egypt, was no
tribute dew to him, as to the superior lord, but only an honorable gratuity,
whereby the kings of Cyprus were accustomed to acknowledge their thankfulness
unto the said Souldans, as to their benefactors and friends, by whose help
Peter sometimes the king there had recoueted the same. In which their good
cause they made no doubt of gods asistance. by whose aid and help, they had
decreed and nothing doubted with force of arms to repel the violence and
injuries of Selimus: and to defend Ciprus.

This answer returned to Constantinople, all the merchants of Venice trading
there, were presently apprehended, their goods seized, and Pial Bassa Admiral
at sea, with a navy, Mustapha Bassa with an army by land, (conducted through
Asia and Cilicia) were sent against Ciprus. Whilst in the mean time at Venice,
Petrus Lauredanus duke of that common wealth, by grief and discontent dyed,
during whose government many heavy mischances, and calamities, had beefallen
that state, others more dangerous daily ensuing. To this Lauredanus with great
applause of the people, Lodouicus Mocinega succeeded. The general appointed for
this war of Ciprus, was Hieronimus Zanius an old man, high fourscore years of
age, yet of much viuacitie and ability in body, who slowly coasting along
Iadera and Corcyra, made thereabouts, whilst the rest of the Navy should
approach, an idle and unprofitable aboade, but in the end houlding course
toward Creet, he there continued, as he had in command expecting the ayding
forces of the Pope, the king of Spain, and of Cosmus duke of Florence.

But now whilst these affairs, were in this sort carried by them, Piall Bassa
the Turkish Admiral, first putting a strong garrison in Rhodes, aryued at
Micarium in Ciprus, upon the Calends of June, whether Mustapha Bassa had
likewise transported both his foot and horse forces, without any worlds
resistance. Now the Venetians a little before had fortified the city of
Nicosia (distant from the sea coast seven Germain miles, and which in
formerages had both ben the seat of their kings and an Archb^shops s^a,) with
eleauen bulwarks and a garrison of two thousand soldiors, under the government
of Nich^^^us Tond ^^us and Astor B^leonius. This city Mustapha (being without
impeachment master of the field) besieged, erecting round about the same many
fortes and sconses; which having by a whole month both battered and often
assalted, was in the end taken by force, where he repayring the ruins of the
said fortifications, and planting therein a garrison, enforcing the course of
his further victory, upon the 16. of September, the same year he began to lay
siege to Famagosta.

On which day, the Christians who had lingered all this while about Creet, with
a navy of 200 ships, wholly ignorant what things had hapt at Cyprus, and now
setting sail from Heraclea Sentia, not far of encountered Lodouicus Bembus, who
recounted the loss of Nicosia, whereupon the generals of the fleet Hieronimus
Zanius, John Andreas Auria, and Marcus Antonius Columna, with others calling a
counsel of war, through different and delaying opinions, whereunto may be
added the misfortune of a horrible tempest which dispersed the fleet, lost both
opportunity, and the advantage of executing any honorable attempt. In which
their consultations it was chiefly argued, that now the harvest being far
spent, and the winter drawing near, the navigations of the Pamphilian seas
would be exceeding dangerous, besides if ought should fall out otherwise then
well, there was no where thereabouts safe harborough for the ships. That the
Turks now becomd insolent through the success of their late vctiory would
fight with greater courage then before, having besides all the havens and other
harboroughs friend unto them, whom it was not now possible by any means as
matters were fallen forth, to expel from Ciprus. The confederates further
alleging that they were sent only in aid of the Venetians, not to recover
things once lost, but to give let least ought should be lost, which occasion
since it could not be holden, it was thought most convenient again to return
^o Creet and the gulf of Venice. Andreas Auria likewise alleged for himself,
how he had in command from the king of Spain his Master to come back with his
navy in the end of September, whereupon this Christian captains casting away
both hope, and counsel, of recovering Ciprus: and retyring back were before
they could recover Creet, with great storms of wind, they and their whole
fleet miserably afflicted.

Now when they were arrived at Creet, Andrea Auria craved lisence to depart,
that so he might obey his princes command, from whom he had in charge, for the
reducing of his fleet to Messana in Sicilia* which the general of the
Venetians did not deny him. Whom Hieronimus Zanius himself, within few days
followed, leaving behind him with the charge of the army and chief command
Sebastian Venerio, but the said Zanius ariuing at Corcira, the senate of
Venice, with much contempt did there abrogate his authority, and from thence
sent him to Venice prisoner.

So this year thus unprofitably spent, and with infinite charge wastfully cast
away, this Christian fleet furnished of every thing requisite, as soldiers,
captains, munityon, money, victuals, and in deed what not, who had in
admirable expectation of some worthy exployt drawn the eyes of all Europe,
most by their variable, different, and deldying counsels, partly by tempests
and the pestilence, which in short time had consumed many numbers of gallie
slaves, and mariners, became utterly frustrate.

When Pialis Bassa (who by spies had understood of the departure of Auria, and
the Venetians from Creet) passing by Rhodes, and after by the (...) Islands,
returned to Constantinople. But Mustapha. Bassa, that had taken Nicosia, and
now enforcing the course of his victory, had besieged Famagosta, he I say
leaving in the harborough and other parts of the Island sufficient strength
against incursions, drew the residue of his forces to winter in other garrisons.

Now the Venetians having their Navy thus returned without aught vvorthelie
executed: created a triumuitate Capital, for the finding forth and punishing
of all such as arightly might be said to have been faulty in that fleet,
whereby that expedition had no better success, their wars provision to so
small purpose spent, and so great an overthrow, with derogation to the honor
and reputation of the Venetian name, had happened.

They likewise labored to compounde a Peace with the Turks, for which cause
they sent to Constantinople, Iacobus Ragazonus, to deal with Mahomet Bassa,
whom they well hoped to have found favorable and better inclining thereunto,
then the rest.

But all this in vain, therefore with great care and industry they procure
the contract of a league, or confederacy betwixt themselves: the Pope Pius
Quintus and Phillip king of Spain: by sundry extraordinary means they levy
huge^summes of money, and repair with larger provision, their vveather beaten
and unarmed Galleys of Corcyra. Committing the whole charge and command of
these affairs to Sebastian Venerio, then Governor of Creet, whilst in the
mean time Pertai Bassa made by Silimus high Admiral of all the Turkish forces
by Sea, landith in Cyprus, a new power, and Mustapha Bassa, chief General of
all the Army by land, with much extremity, as hardly beseeged the City of
Famagosta: when the vvorthie Captains Marcus Antonius Bragadenus, Astor
Beleonius, Lodouicus Martinigus, and Laurencius Tenpolus, most valiantly for
the said Venetians defended.

The City Famagosta, is seated in the East part of that Isle toward the
Syrian sea, not far from Constanti^, famous for that worthy Bushop
Epephanius, which is supposed to be the same Salamis anciently inhabited of
those kings of Teucria. This City of Famagosta, was built and enlarged by
Henry of the Famely of Lusignana, King of Cyprus, about the year of Christ
1295. at what time Ptolemais was lost, (which whilst it was possessed of
the Christians, was that famous Staple wherein the traffic of all
commodities coming either from the East or West continents, was exercised.)
But Famagosta although both by Nature and Art strongely fortefied, being
beefeiged and assalted by this huge Army of the Turks, with all means which
open war, or secret policy, could devise: at length after eleauen months
defense, weakened with extremities, and void of all hope or aid, was
brought to those difficulties, as they were enforced to render the same to
Mustapha, upon composition, that so their lives, goods, and the use of
Religion to those Christians that would remain there, should be free: and to
the rest not willing, passage might be had and safe conduct to depart.

But the perfedious Turk, (little regarding his faith, or Soldiers assurance
formerly given) when the said Captains and Magistrates, accompanied with a
train of their valiant and warlike companions, (to whom by name he had given
their safe conducts) approached his tent, gave order all, should be killed,
Anthonius Bragadenus only excepted, to whom after three several commands in
his presence to have his head cut of, yet changing his purpose for the greater
ignomenie, permitted his nose only and ears to be lopt away.

And vvheras three hundredth besides of the Christians, were come forth into the
Camp upon security of the peace, these as the rest, he bid should be
pitifully slain. And for such as were gone abord the ships in hope to have
sailed for Creet, he caused them besides the dispoiling of their goods, to be
made all Gally slaves. After which, Mustapha the next day entering the City,
Teupolus by his command was strangled. And Anthonius Bragadenus ye cities
governor thus deformed and disme^bred in his nose and ears, after he had by
way of mockery carried in show about the most special, and famous parts of the
city, reuiling him with all kind of villainies, caused his skin whilst he was
yet quick, to be fleane of: the which torment Bragadenus with great constancy
endured, calling God for witness and revenge of so monstrous cruelty, and
perfedious brech of faith.

These things thus executed in Cyprus, the Turkish navy on purpose to
vvith-hould the Venetians from attempting aught for the regayning of the said
Is^e, entered the Gulf of Venice, persecuting all such Cities on the coast of
Dalmatia, both by sea and land, as were under the obedience of the said
Venetians.

Whilst in the mean time the confederate Navy of the Christian Princes very
leasurely were assembled at Sicilta* The General whereof was Don John de
Austria, the base begot* son of Charles the fith, and brother to Phillip King
of Spain, who enbarking at Barcilona, brought with him along to Genua,
Rodolph, and Ernestus, the sons of Maximilian, the second, then Emperor.

From whence goeing to Naples, and thence sailing to Messana in Sicilia, he
there expects the rest of the associate leaguers, which were one hundredth and
eight Galleys of the Venetians, from Creet, and elsewhere, thirty from Naples,
twelve from Panormos, twelve from Genua, under the conduct of Andreas Auria:
twelve from the Pope, whose Captain was Marcus Antonius Columna, four from
Malta, with some others out of Spain which all of them should there meet
together. Where now though late, being assembled upon the fourth of September,
they vveyed their Ancors in Messana Port: and coasting the Salentine, and
Lacinian promontorie, they passed the Islands of Corcyra and Cephalenia, and
came to the Gulf of Corinth, where they understood that the Turkish fleet at
the Islands Echinadas, were then remaining.

In this Turkish Navy, were chief of command: Hali Bassa the Admiral,
Pertai Bassa, Lusalis King of Algier, Hamsam son of Barbarussa, the Sir^ch of
Alexandria, with others to whom the great Seignior had given command, that
in any case the Christian fleet should not alone be fought with, but overcome.

Where joining in Battle with the Christians, in the said Gulf of Corinth,
upon the Nones of October, GOD giueing us the victory, the Turks were
wholy discomfited and enforced to fly.

Their great Admiral ship taken, Haly Bassa slain, and some thousands of
Captive Christians who were slaves in the Turkish Fleet, set at liberty.

For which Victory, generally thorough Europe there was thanks publicly
given to God, with other spectacles and shows of joy, ^et for all that those
worthy captains left no sooting of any other memorable exploit or trophe pulled
from the empire of the Turkish ty^ant, as was well supposed they might, who
notwithstanding the same, held no^ only the whole Isle of Ciprus, but many
towns besides in Dalmatia before taken, amongst which Vlcinium and Docleum
won by force were not the least.

In the year 1571 then next following the Venetians both feeling and fearing
the forces of that mighty enemy, wherewith they were well nigh oppressed, made
preparation again for all things needful to these wars. But whilst new
stirs in the lovv countries, and borders of France, did seem to encomber king
Philip: the succors from the confederates long in coming, Don John de
Austria, about the Calends of September repaired to the place of appointment,
and the associates with their fleet, scarce showing themselves to the Turks
at Peloponesus, without ought else worthy of that preparation, had retired to
their places of vvintering. The Venetians I say, supposing themselves forsaken,
and left to themselves, without the priuity of any other their confederates
privily made peace with Selymus.

Of which while diverse men, diversely did dispute according as affection or
fancy led them, Marcus Antonius Columna Admiral of the Popes navy (who in
this expedicion was a companion and associate to John de Austria, the chief
general) amongst others was in opinion clear against and improuing the same
peace, condoling the deed, and constantly affirming so noble a victory thus got
against the Turks, was to have been prosecuted with all might and main,
which not only in his public and familier conferences, he had osten
protested, but likewise had affirmed by his letters, (writ to his ancient
friend Hubert Folieta of Genua,) whereunto whilst he the said Folieta returns
answer, and his opininion withal, he further takes occasion thereupon, to
touch some causes of the greatness, of the Turkish Empire, with their
perpetual felicity and good success in those their warring affairs, the
which for that it is most worthy to be read, as well for the excellent wit
therein contained, as for the great profit, and pleasure which thereby may be
conceived, I thought it not vnbeefitting heereunto to have it annexed.

The causes of the greatness of the Turkish Empire, written by Hubert Folieta
of Genua, to the famous Captain, Mircus Antonius Columna.
YOU write most worthy Columna, what great grief you conceive, in considering
this peace, thus concluded betwixt the Turks and Venetians, being ashamed as
you say, of the condition of us Christians, that notwithstanding the memorable
sea victory gotten against them by the confederate princes, (wherein your
self, with that most fortunate prince, Don John de Austria was both a
counselor and companion in command,) then which since the suppression of the
Romain empire, there was never seen or heard any more famous, yet
notwithstanding the great joy, thereon conceived is sodaynely settled, the hopes
from so happy beginnings which had enflamed good men's minds in short time
vanished, and the preparations of so high and excellent counsels comd to
naught.

For my own part (sir) I am in opinion, that not only the grief but the
shame is to all noble minds, as to your self in common. What the
determination of the Venetians was therein, as I do not well know, so if I
did, it is not needful that I should detect it. For there are some as it is
well known to you, who mightily disalovv of what is done, and are much
discontent, that they through pusilnanimity, and sudden despair should so
give up their friends, who for their sakes alone, had thrust themselves in the
dangers and charge of those wars, to which opinion I perceive you specially
inclining. Others thinking otherwise and excusing them do answer that the
Venetians perceiving it lay not in their power, alone to manage these wars
with sufficient might, and seeing few other of Christian provinces and princes,
ought provoked by so worthy and good beginnings, or happy success, whereby to
take part either in pains or charge, or to lay hold with the said
confederates of so sayre an occasion, to conioyne the forces, and to revenge so
many iniuryes, in all former times received, now especially when it was
suppoled, that the Turks were utterly dispolyed and left naked, both of
friends, ships, or sea forces, and thereby had opportunity to expel them,
from forth whole Europe.

But chiefly the German princes failing, whom the many attempts of the
Turks, against their state has continually, with offens^ue arms vexed,
afflicted with infinite losses, and nearest of all others, to the danger had
been in these affairs, for their own safety to have given them furtherance.
All which motives to others, smally auayling the said Venetians, and therefore
destitute utterly of hope, nor daring to support themselves, in the succors of
their confederates, knowing what enemy, they had in hand, they were compelled
to prefer wholesome and commodious counsel, rather then plausible, and so
without obstinacy to their destruction, (as was supposed) to provide for their
piuate affairs. Thus these things in both parts, diversely disputed, according
as every man his affection or passion persuades him thereunto. My self will
leave of uncertain estimation, indifferent, to every man's own peculier
Judgment, without interposing mine, especially when the matters handled are
to small purpose, the deed done not to be undone, and that every
expostulation is friuolus, which is without fruit.

But rather let me communicate with you, my honorable friend, in that whereof
your Letters give good occasion, and which may perhaps, bring with it to us,
both some profit, detecting such my cogitacions, as often and long have
encombred my secret thoughts, and manifesting therein my opinion, which without
some gain, I hope shall not return again. For if what my conceit is herein
shall be allowed by you, a man of so great estimation for wisdom, and
accustomed to the managing of high affairs, then shall I think my self
assuredly protected from the caluminations of all maligners: or if not allowed,
yet shall I give occasion by my writing, whereby you may remove the error,
which for long has taken possession in my mind, and so in both these parts,
it shall draw me advantage.

The effect whereof is, that as I have always houlden these Turkish affairs
to be both fearful and prejudicial to the good estate of all Christian
Provinces, yet now more then at any time am I driven into a vvondefull
admiration of the same, who having so great a Navy vanquished, consisting of
a huge number of Ships of war, whereof part were sounk at sea, part taken
by our men, together with so great provision of munition and all other things
befitting the vvarres, devoured by the deepes: besides no small number of
vvorthie vvarriours, Captains of famous memory, expert Nauigators, (whereof
there is great scarcity every where) which in that battle perished* all of
them being such things as by any accident once lost are hardly to be recovered
in many years continuance, yet such and so great is found the forces and
faculties of those Turks, as notwithstanding all these losses with indaunted
courages, forthwith they have fitted a another Fleet, little inferior to the
first, which provided and at all points furnished, against the beginning of
the following Summer, set sail to Sea, daring to show them selves in sight of
our victorious Fleet, with semblance not to yield one foot to flight, so
ours had been so aduenturous to have comd on.

Of which matters whilst often I have reasoned with my self, and searched
what were the causes of so much greatness, what arts and means had
brought them to so much estimation, and how they could attain such excellent
perfection in every millitarie function. Together how it comes to pass, that
so many of our men should continually revolt, and abiuring all Christian rites,
becomes affect^rs of that impious Mahumetane sect, whilst on the other part
we find none or very few of those repayring unto us.

Of these things I say, whilst with my self* I often argue what I conceive,
may it please you here to see set down,

First I hold that in both parts this case gives rather cause of pity, then
admiration:

For beholding so many Nations and People conjoined with us in the
indissoluble bonds of Christian Charity and Religion, who to our and a
number of Christian Princes shames, are dayelie borne down with the heavy
burden of captivity, whilst we neither with care enter into the
consideration of these things, or harbor the least thought in our hearts, to
make them succor:

I say it is to be lamented, that so much blindness should have thus
possessed our minds, when in deed the miseries of our oppressed brothers, ought
no less move us to commisseration, then if the like danger were discending
upon our own heads.

We see this daily increasing flame, catching hold of whatsoever comes next,
still to proceed further, no^ that the insatiable desire of dominion in these
Turks can with any riches be content, or with the gayning of many mighty
and vvealthie Kingdoms be so settled, but of what is this day gotten, to
morrow they build a new ladder whereby to clymbe to the obteyning of some
newer purchase.

And which to fear, is more fearful. That vvheras every bondage in it self
is hateful and far worse in condition then Death, yet that of the Turks of
all other is most crewell, most execrable: Who hold it not enough to bring the
Provinces in obedience, unless all be under, who either excelled in Wit,
Fortune, wealth, or honor, all the Nobility slaughtered, or commanded into
far distaunt and remote Countries, whom beereauing the exercise of every
Noble Science, stripping of all necessary ornaments, deformed and mishapte in
all baseness, at length be brought to what fullness of misery may be
imagined.

And for those our brothers, which is the second point in our grief
propounded,) I know not whether it were better fitting to deplore their
condition, then to detest their hateful Impiety, who bewitched with the
fair shoe of a frail and very small good, renounce the everlasting and
Celestial riches, abjure Christian Religion from Heaven descended, and by the
son of Almighty GOD, to us men delivered, which only all other means shut
up, makes free passage, and lays open the path that leads to eternal
Blessedness, and the Kingdom of Heaven.

These things as I first said, (dear friend) are to be pitied, and wherein
we are with all endeavor to labor, least at any time the like may hap to
us, or we brought to the same pass, then which in miserable misery there is
neither state nor place more abject.

Now for this much admired Turkish glory, and so many years succesfull
Felicity, whereof whilst few aright enter into consideration, perhaps it may
seem with some very strange, yet in my conceit neither are the things them
selves unusual, nor the causes thereof obscure, which then the better shall
appear, if one by one we compare and examine their fashions, laws,
counsayles, and discipline, with those other of us Christians.

First then none will deny me I am sure, but that amongst these causes, which
extol kingdoms and common wealths, to great wealth, much power, and high
estimation, religion before the rest is to be preferred, which religion
contains in it a double function, one is most excellent and divine, and the
same for which at first religion, was by heavenly providence, enspired into
mansminde: this (as I said formerly) being the only and most certain guide,
conducting to immortal blessedness, then which was never greater gift granted
to men by Almighty God, whose operation is such, as in regard thereof it draws
our affections to esteem all riches, all pleasures, kingdoms and commandes,
or what may be thought precious in this life, to be vilde and of no value:
according to that saying, what shall it avail mortality, to obtain the
dominion of the world, so in the end he make shipwreck of his own soul.

A second function of religion is polliticall, appertayning to public
government, and to contain people in obedyence, and dew observation of laws,
wherein all antiquetyes bear witness, that whosoever well and wisely have
founded cities, societyes, or common wealths, they have always had this part
of religion much respected: which as it nothing detracts from the majesty of
religion, so does it make the same, to be holden in higher reverence, whilst
the use and profit thereof, extends it self in each man's eye, to the governing
of all humane affairs, and preservation of every well planted state. Of that
first and excellent part, we have no purpose to speak, for it little
appertains to the argument in hand, wherein it shall iuffice thus much alone
be said, that all the lyse of every Christian man, ought especially to be
spent in giving thanks, to that divine deity, by whose goodness we have our
souls illuminated, with the bright beams of true religion, all clouds of
erronyous darkness driven away, wherewith the minds of such as are ignorant
in the same be hourly blinded, whereby we may find, how much better by
infinite degrees, the condition of Christians is, rather then that of the
Mahumetans, who misled by the lies of that wicked Imposter, and following his
damned positions, diuerting from the eternal path of salvation, are carried
headlong in their misbeliefe to hell torments, and everlasting damnation: but
let the urging of this point, be the office of deuines, and now again to my
purpose.

Then let us come to the point, which is proper to our question, wherein it
shall be nothing pertinent whether any professed religion, be true or false,
(for that as before is said, appertaynes to the souls salvation) but where of
the whole substance will censist in this, that what religion soever received,
may be sincerely and carefully observed, by the supportacion of such a
religion, only kingdoms and nations, have gathered great wealth, and attained
to great estimation, power, and dignity, as may be manifestly proved* both by
forceable reason, and many memorable examples. For whereas it was apparent,
that the chief and best means to enlarge any Empire, is appropriate to the
true knowledge of managing arms, and the glory of millitary profession, in
which two things, are specially respected, obedience and discipline, of both
these, religion I say is the principal foundation, whereby it always came to
pasle, that every nation advanced at any time to greatness, have ever been
studious, and most careful preseruers of the same.

In mayntayning which position omitting numbers, that may be named, I will
content me with the Romans, who far surpassed all other people in
wisdom, as in wealth, valor, and glory.

For these grave and true experienced men, finding that the considerations of
religion, were of great force, both to beautify their state, and enlarge their
Empire, in no one thing labored more then the true observation of the same,
possessing their people still with opinions of fear and reverence toward
their Gods. To which always so great belief was given, as nothing was ever
executed in public or private, which was not attempted, as having the Gods the
first authors thereof. So as what ever of their affairs were finished, what
new designs taken in hand, what expedicion put in practice, what fortune of
war assayed which was not done, the Gods first consulted, nor did they labor
any other thing in those their vowing and rendering vows, dedication of
Temples, observation of progedies (wherein the wise of that age were exceeding
ceremonious) with sacrifice and supplications, beseeching the good will of the
Gods, but to persuade the people that whatsoever was done was all by the
pleasure and permission of the same gods, who observing every action of man's
life, becomes sharp chastisers of wrong and wickedness, but most severe
reuengers of their own neglected or contemned deitye, whereby it came to
pass, that amongst those Romans, no crime was accounted so heinous, as that
of an oath or faith plighted and broken: and of this religion how great the
estimation was, it may perfectly appear, by that example only, when as the
counsel, with so great diligence labored, to diswade them from those
assemblyes of the Tribunes, determining in the favor of the people to propound
certain laws, against which the Senate in oposition, could give no other let,
but that the consulls should proclaim, the leading forth of the legions in
expedicion, from the attendance of which warfare, whilst the people had no
power to resist, neither could the authority of the Tribunes give any
redress, they before having in that case sworn their obedyence to the
consul, and seeing no other means, how to rid them of their religious oath
then by the death of the said concull, consulted amongst themselves to kill
him: whereof they had put the practyse in full executyon, if it had not further
been told them, that no religon could be dissolved by any contryued
mischief: holding murder as it seemed, in a less degree then the violatyon of
their faith. Which one thing, ever held their soldiers so obseruant to the
will of their commanders, to whom they had once given the assurance of the
same, that that people which in a settled peace, was never but stubborn and
rebellious against their superiors, the same in war were ever found quiet and
contented, bound only by this military oath, whereof by peace always they
became discharged. To which again may be said, so great was their regard, that
they would prefer the observation of the same, before the preseruacion of their
own lives: submitting their heads even to the block, if at any time according
to the manner of those wars the Consul should give in command for any service
not well executed, that a Capital decimating amongst them, should be made, and
by this it came to pass, that through the doubtful danger of death, both by
the enemy and their commander propounded: their soldiers always in vvarres
were assured to do the utmost of their iudeuours to overcome: chosing rather
to dye valiantly fighting, then be vanquished, least in the fear of an
incertaine death, whose peril they might perhaps avoid by boldness and
resolution, they might incure that certain slaughter, from avoiding whereof,
Religion cut of all hope: For which cause, I Judge that no wise man will deny
me but Religion as in every public design, so especially in the affairs of
war, is a most firm foundation.

Now whether that this part of religion is either of the Turks or us
Christians, not more sincere care and sacred constancy observed, I rather
leave it to every man's peculiar opinion, then therein to deliver my own
judgment, yet some things I will note by the way: as they come into my mind.
First since that the especial parts of religion consists principally in
this, that all things be referred to that supreme power by whose will we believe
every humane action to be governed, it is vvonder how far the Turks for this
point surpass us, having that opinion with such firmnes settled in their minds
and attributing so much to the divine providence, that there in they seem
rather to exceed to much, then believe to little, whilst necessarily they
will tie what ever befalls us, unto fate, by no humane counsels or provision
auoidable: For which cause they suppose that by ye same fate a certain limit
of time is assigned every man's life, which neither can be prolonged beyond the
same, neither by any means of us shortened, and therefore when the appointed
hour of death shall come, of necessity the same must be undergone: in which
hour, we are as certain to dye, though privately shut up in any chamber and
divided by all means from danger, as if a man were conversant in the heat and
fury of fight, vvher a thousand weapons were bent against his bosom, which
death, if not by heaven decreed, there amongst these weapons of as great
safety may a man assure himself, as in his own chamber: now this opinion
though it may be disproued, in so much as thus it attributes to the necessity
of destiny or fate, yet to ye matter handled, it brings this gteat good, that
the Turks become thereby more confident and bold, whether fighting in
battaill or undertaking any other dangerous exploit, because thereby the fear
of death is fully bereaved the^, the certainty whereof as they conceive,
consists not in perils, but in their unavoidable destiny. Now that all
humane affairs are in the supreme and divine moderation, depe^ding wholly upon
the power of heaven, is a most holy true and Christian opinion, which as every
man ought constantly believe, so must we eschew all causes that seem to
impech the credit thereof. And therefore we are to consider, least by the
contrary persuasions of any philosophy, we may be missed, especially by
that of the Peripatikes, whose opinions are now a days in high estimation. The
great part of whom do so dispute of the divine nature, as though it had no
humane affairs, nor could have any in consideration, being a most damned
doctrine, and unworthy ye majesty of heaven, for so with one stroke they
utterly cut of all religion: For in vain then should we pray, vow,
sacrifice, or by any other act of grace, beseech the goodness of almighty
God, crave his assistance, or desire he should behold us in mercy, when we are
assured before hand, that none of all these he either does* or can regard:
which impediment is bereaved the Turks whilst they are quite forbidden the
study of Philosophy, (though I am not ignorant how that wicked seducer
Mahomet, had therein a further meaning: viz: least by the knowledge thereof, the
great vanity and small ground in the promulgatio^ of his laws might apeare,)
so greatly has this ignorance proved profitable to the Turks, for the
maintenance of their opinion in Religion. But whether the study of Philosophy
brings more good or hurt it is not my purpose here to dispute, reserving it
for a longer argument and more oportune time and place. Now this opinion thus
planted in the minds of the Turks, makes them fearful of the divine majesty,
and inflames the^ with a reverend regard of religion: By which it comes to
pass, that though this their serving of God be full of error, yet shall we
find every where many excellent signs of their blind deuosion, commending
their diligence to the furthera^ce of the same: For none the^ they does with
greater reverence repair to their temples, prostrate with all humility, craving
pardon of their sins by the asistance of Gods spirit, holding all holy things
in high veneration, wherein omitting other, they so much respect, not only
their own Priests, and religions, but even those of ours, as they accounted
it in the highest degree of sin, to injury any one of them any way, which has been approved by infinite examples of pirates, of whom a number (as often it has
fallen out) having taken any Priest of ours, have presently set him at liberty,
least by retayning the servant of God, they might thereby importune the same God
to revenge his wrong.

Another thing to their great commendation is, that none then they more
carefully look to the conservation of their laws, none punishing the public
breach thereof in whosoever, more severely. For which there is never heard with
them, any blasphemy against God, any adultryes committed, or ought else wherein
there is offense, either in the violation or negligent observation of the same.
And yet for all this, I am not Ignorant that by the same impious and execrable
law, more heinous sins are permitted, but that it may appear, how strickt even
the mightiest are in preserving their said laws, we have in this age a
memorable president testyfied in the person of the great Emperor Solomon,
which I will here recount. This Solomon amongst those number of excellent
chosen women, who are kept specially for the kings concubines (for it is
permitted by the law of Mahumet, that every Turk may hold so many concubynes
as he is able to maintain,) calling one among the rest more often then any
other, and she perceiving thereby, how the Emperor was mightily possessed with
her love, by a cunning drift so much effected with him, as she obtained her
freedom, (for it is to be noted, that as well boys as girls, so shut up in
the Seraglio, are his slaves,) after which being by Coatch sent for as at
other times to come and accompany the said Emperor, made answer, how she much
admired, what reason the great Signeor had, who being a prince of so much
majesty doubted nothing publicly, to enfringe the holy law of Mahumet, by
which it was provided in plain words, that no man in such sort should
accompany free women, and thereby so grievously to offend, even in the view of
his people, whose eyes were all cast upon him. Now the Emperor much moved with
this answer, as likewise brideling for the present the heat of his desire,
demanded the next day, of the learned in their laws, whether by law it might
be admitted any man to keep free women, for their concubines, whereunto when he
had received answer, that it was not lawful, and not enduring the want of
that wench, whom he loved entitely, the said Solomon for that reason married
her. Now I need not on the contrary part to recount, how Christions carry
themselves in the like cases, least I further exulcerate those wounds by
handling, which I am sure by admonishing will not be cured.

The next place to religion, whether establing any common wealth, or enlarging
a dominion, is worthily attributed to discipline, wherein beetwixt us and the
Turks, the very truth is, in my opinion, that there is admitted no comparison,
whilst discipline is a thing with them of high estimation, but with us of
little or no account, and that this is so, it appears clearly in this that
every year the great Emperor at certain seasons sends his inquisitors abroad
through all parts of his territories, to make election of the choice children
to be found of an assigned age, which inquisitors where they come, calling
together all the said children of the same place, select from amongst them,
such whose towardness and inclination shows itself, either by the
disposition of the members, or countenance fit for their purpose, those they
take, whom bringing to the court, there by especial masters provided, be they
instructed in all manner of martial discipline, by which and through much
exercise, their bodies and minds are confirmed to endure every labor, nor is
there any one entertained in their warfare, but such as by much exercise are
invred to this discipline: whereas on the other side it is hourly seen, that
our armies for the most part, do stand of men, both rude and unexperienced in
all martial demeanours or discipline.

This above named discipline, has in it a triple use, whereof the first is the
true knowledge of things appertayning to the wars, this drawing with it an
inabling of the bodies forces: by which it falls out, as we have often seen
their strength approved, that an arrow shot from a Turkish bow, has cloven the
shanke of a gallie oar, where the wood has been nine inches thick, so as
the head of the same arrow, has showed it self on the other side: whereas
such soldiers as we put in pay, without consideration, are chosen in
companies ignorant of all things appertayning, and then for the most part
learning the use, and art of their weapons, when there is more need valyantly
to manage them.

Another commodity of discipline is, that it prepares the body to the
enduring of labor and wants, inables the mind to an invincible resolution, in
bearing all extremities, which misery, or the scarcity of things, may cast upon
man.

For their minds accustomed to continual exercise, cannot be daunted with
pains, spare diet, or other inconveniences, wherewith it is daily acquaynted,
content consisting, not in many, but necessary things: so as we see their
great armies long time, often kept together with small provision, their fleetes
and land preparations, executing aught with exceeding expedicyon, whilst a huge
part of baggage, ordenarily (attending other camps) gives to them no let.

Whereas both our land and sea forces, are still encombred, with loadings of
household provision, our souldyours ever faynting without the affluence of
every thing, their bodies impatient of labor, and this not only when they
want not things necessary, but if they abound not with delycates, so as to our
shame be it spoken, a man may observe in our camps, those excesses of
feastings and needelesse fare, which even in the plentifulnesse of peace, might
in Cities perhaps seem riotus, where amongst other things ill beseeming, it
irkes me to think, that men should be brought to so much nicenesle, as in a
fleet, to have Snow carried, for cooling their wine.

The third use of discipline is the profit of obedience, the^ which there is no
one greater virtue in the exercise of arms. This as it is with the Turks more
in estimation then ever in any age the like has been seen with other nations.
So of all people in the contrary hereof we are desperately diseased, even to
the death, our soldiers being mutinous, factious, disobedient, who fashioned
by no rules of discipline, contained in duty, by no regard o punishment, in
their own camps, themselves to themselves for the most part work more
mischiese, then what at any time they receive from the weapons of the enemy:
which foul faults to our greater shame, is as common to the captains and
commanders, as the private soldiers, a number of whom studyeng their
particular revenge, their private ambition, or (then which with men of war
there is naught more odious) their seruyle gain, betray their country,
neglect their Princes command, and without executing aught vvorthie their
trust and employment, cause often Impediments through malicious envy of a
nothers glory, to what soever might be worthily executed: Such things I say,
with us, men dare daily do, freed from fear of all condign punishment, so as
I cannot name a place in shame or dishonor baser, whether these or the like
with everlasting Infamy, have not brought us.

Next now ensues that I speak of the Turkish valor and virtues, no mean
causes or of small regard in the enlarging of any Empire, wherein if I should
affirm that they do much excel us, I might so both become injurious to the
Christian name, and procure my self more envy then I affect. Yet truth is
truth, by whom foeuer delivered, and well I may say that true valor is with
the Turks of more account when to the valiant alone the passage to all
military promotions is laid open, where any ones merit toward his country
by any manly act performed, shall advance him through all degrees of dignity,
even to that which is next the highest with us, on the contrary Nobility being
of greatest reconing, such for the most part every where commanding, who
though they show small or no testimony either of valor or virtue, yet supported
by the greatness of their blood, manage matters as they list. This being that
one thing which so much has exasperated ye minds of many worthy Christian
seruitors, that flying from those ensigns where they found no place for their
virtue: repair to the Turks, who for their good parts fairly entreat them, and
according to the proof any one makes of his vvorth, does so prefer him to
every room of Honor: their condition in that point being exceeding commendable,
who demand not whence the man is, but what he is, neither holding that
virtue and valor are guists of granfathers inheritance, like to riches and
those other of Fortune. Yet for all this, I must not deny but that nobility
ought much to be esteemed, being in it self of great might to stir up the mind
to honorable actions: and a rich ornament to all such as have virtue thereunto
conioined. But barely to prefer nobility before valor and virtue, or for any
man's gentry solly to commend him to the greatest functions in a common wealth,
or to command an army, that utterly I disalow, as full of danger to any state:
I highly reverence the kindred of kings and princes, whom to have placed in
great co^ma^ds, is not alone without peril, but profitable. For if authority
be of estimation in all humane affairs, in those of the wars especially it is
a most material point, wherein the Soul and life of good governing, chiefly
consists: as having obedience always attendant, no one thing more
furthering, as I have said every warlike design; and therefore to such all
soldiers and captains without repining, submit their greatness, not being
subject to envy and misreports, before whom every man forces himself for the
foremost, because the testimony of their valor and virtue shown in their
princes presence cannot be co^cealed by the calumniations of any backbiter,
whereby as often it happens, men do despair of a due reward. In these things
therefore I would thus be understood, that where there wants a due mixture of their
parts together, compounded: it is better in my conceit by the Turkish president
to prefer in command a man endwed with virtue lacking those exterior badges of
great blood, then that any supported by nobility, should bear sway Indigent of
those perfectio^s which at first begot all true Nobility.

Malo pater tibi sit Thirsites, dum modo tu sis
Aeacide similis: Vulcaniaque arma capessas.
Quam te Thirsite semilem, producat Achilles.
The last though not the least of those things which antiquity have attributed
to the necessity of the well establishing any state, stands in measuring
arightly according to every man's merit, reward of well doing or punishment of
it. Now in either part how far we are to the Turks inferior, it is often
admired. But least I give occasion of further offense, and procure from many
that hatred which I desire not to undergo, I will desist from further
prosecuting this course, in preferring these Turkesh considerations with ours,
and only will say that as the whole scope of their counsels and other proiects
tends to the glory to be gotten by the wars, so are all ours in an other kind
more excellent, for the maintenance of common society and the studies of
peace, which with so infinite a desire we hunt after, as all charge, all
expe^ce of time, and money, all care and diligence is held both light and
little, for obteining the same. And this appears first by ye great numbers of
Priests, Mounks, Freers, and other religious, possessing great power, and
wealth, with large lands, and stately erected monasteries, wherewith the
plentisul countries of Europe, are every where pestered: to whom a great part
both of Christendomes revenues and commodities be comd. This I do not disalow
but much commend the piety and wisdom of our ancestors, who have been so
bou^tiful in bestowing to holy uses, so liberal toward the maintenance of Gods
service, releueing the necessity of the poor, and both nourishing and
cherishing the studies of Arts and every good literature. Another thing with us
is, that our seats of Justice prolong the deciding of causes, with many
quiddetyes, and delays, which is the sole reason that we see so many lawiers
and Judges, so many attorneys, solicitors, clarks, notaries, advocates and
proctors, to whom so great rewards and large fees are assigned, as this
practice of ye law (like to that other) has drawn with it no little part of
the wealth of Christendom. Again, the Schools of good learning are by us with
great charge maintained, to which many repair, and perceauing the account that
learned men daily live in, do spend either all, or the greatest part of their
life in that profession. Lastly (good god) what cost is bestowed in every handi
craft thing, what huge foundations hourly laid, what state and abundance of
public and private buildings, what superfluety in ensigns of honor, picturs,
ha^gings, and plate, what delicacy in every household provision: What riot in
feastings: what pride and expe^ce in apparel: with how great stipends are the
masters in these Arts maintained, all which as they greatly beutifie our
Christian countries, malign the Turks in regard of us to appear rude and
unpolished: so are they utterly ill fitting for martial affairs, or enlarging
of an Empire, whilst they consume and wast a great part of that wealth which
were better bestowed in the wars.

Now with the Turks all these things are in proportion, either small or none.
Their Priests and Religious are very few, their living little, supplied with
things only necessary. Their law determinations want demurs, and delatory
plees receiving sentence at the first or second hearing; without tossing so
many volumes of the civil and Canon Codices; with their comments: so many
year books of the common laws course, whereby so great store of counsels and
advocates, such quantity of clarks and notaries are in small request.

There is amongst them no orders of Monks and Freeers, no Pyles of stately
builded Palaces; no sumptuousness in their daily port, but thrifty carriage,
spare diet, wherein the hands of cunning cooks have no meddling: the Turks
neither caring or craving these things, but spending what they have in their
needful preparations for the wars, where wealth and rewards are peculiarly
appropriate to the valiant. No marueill therefore that so many as I have said,
of worthy Christian seruitours, leave the displayed Banners of JESUS, where
small and for the most part, no consideration is allotted their merits,
repairing thither where they find riches and estimation the guerdon of well
doing.

Now since the one and only means, of the Turkish glory, does proceed from
the warlike designs, it is no wonder that all their endeauours, should wholly
be bent to that, which thus alone draws with it honor, riches, and power,
whereby we see how they excel all other nations, in martial estimatyon, and
execution of high exployts, what great numbers of valiant soldiers, they
continually keep in pay, how huge forces of horse and foot they maintain, so
as to all people their name is now becomd fearful, and that always they
return victors from every war once undertaken, for enlarging their dominion,
our men's minds on the other part by multiplicitie of knowledges and
employments, being so distraught as few can spare any time to follow such
service: through as I said the innumerable sorts of handy crafts, studyeng of
arts, and professing of religion, things indeed that have diuerted ye thoughts
of the greater part, of able Christian bodies, from the affectation of arms,
for it is the condition of man, with greater content to follow that course of
life, which is easy, safe, less paynefull, and free from danger, then that
other of the wars, prosessed enemy to rest and quietness: especially when this
first with pleasure, brings nevertheless the commodityes of estimatyon and
riches, manifesting the apparent reason that thus we see all our cities, so
replenished with merchants, craftsmen, inholders, vinteners, and such like:
every place reporting the disputations and different opinions of Philosophers,
and deuines, with continual canuassing of law cases. All which things as they
mightily I say, adorn our peaceable part of the world, so do they wholly
disable all martial credyt, for which we find upon every occasion, how weak
our forces are, for cause of the small number, who follow the wars. In which,
this further I dare affirm, from sound judgment, that of that age, whose
bodies through Christendom are fit for the wars service, the hundredth person
scarce does apply him to that profession, whereas on the contrary with the
Turks, the greater part always do wholly deuote themselves, to the practice of
arms.

But now let us come to the inflicting of punishment due to offenders, the
fear whereof, of equal conteines men in compass, both to the ciuell and
martial discipline: wholesome laws being with us, as well as with the Turks,
to that end established. Yet the vigor and force of good laws, should not
consist in a positive decree, but in a and sacred inviolable observation of the
same: the rigor whereof we Christians, for the most avoid by the cunning
distinctions of lawyers, mitigate by the favor of great personages, or break
through by our own power. Where with the Turks these things are otherwise,
there being left no means to obtain pardon of any offense, no hope of
escaping punishment: so as we see with us all things to be corrupt and
dissolute: liberty for each one to do what he list. Our soldiers licentious
and freed from fear of punishment, with careless carriage, executing what ever
is committed to their charge, still mutinous, and sedicious, respectlesse of
command, great doers in words, little indeed, in skirmish making courtsie, who
should first begin, or rangd to fight, running away the first squadrons
scarcely chargd, or before any honest hasard of fortune were attempted: and
although we have as cannot be denied diverse worthy captains, who are not
impechable, of any these crimes, yet what shall those few excellent men affect
in re^orming the general corrupt conditions of time, in faith little: whose
virtues are to feeble, to encounter the outgrown vices of this age. Again it
is well known, that many great commanders there are, who casting away their
private counsels and consideratio^s, prefer the public good: yet even these
have such for inferior leaders, who are no less, (if not more) faulty* then
the ordinary soldier: the greater part of whom follow the service for gain,
and make a traficke of the wars. Who when a muster of men is to pass, and
pay to be made, beelie their number, either borrowing, or subborning base
fellows, to fill up such rooms as are failing, whereby it falls out that the
pays be ever strong, but the companies weak.

Now none of all these defaults be conversant in the Turkish camp, where the
soldier is ever serviceable, and at command, executing what they have in
charge carefully, reserving their heat of courage to encounter the enemy, which
with high resolution they both undertake and maintain: nothing dismayed, with
a first overthrow, nor discouraged with the enemies second good success,
whereby to leave the field, but valiauntly fighting contained, more by the
force of their laws, and the punishment thereof, then by fear of the enemy,
keep their assigned ranckes, expecting the best, and enduring the utmost of
good or bad fortunes chances, who always bearing in mind, the fearful
spectacles of those their barbarous chastisements, as there may be caused,
etermine either to depart the field as victors, or if fortune envy their
valor, rather there to receive an honest death, from the edge of the enemies
weapon, then at home to be strangled, or have his throat cut, by a hangman.
Again whilst the valor, of the leader strives with the obedience of the
souldyour, who never have their private counsels, derived from the public
good, we find them to perform most excellent offices: in their several places
both toward their king and country.

These are such observations (true honored Columna) as formerly I said, have
long possessed my mind, touching the greatness of this Turkish Empire, which if
you allow, I shall the better like, if otherwise, conceal them to your self I
pray, least they may chance into such men's hands, as may detract from the
estimation of my judgment.

FINIS.

