A GODLY MAN'S GVIDE to Happiness.

A Manuell of necessary Motives, holy Meditations, and godly Prayers, to stir
up the hearts of men unapt to pray.

To the great Comfort of all, that with due and holy attention will practice
this most godly and Christian duty.

Written for his own, and published for the Comfort of them that* long for
trv^ happiness.

By I. N.

LONDON Printed by A M. for John Marriott, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Saint D^nstons Churchyard in Fleetsheet. 1624.

TO THE HONORAble, Sir JAMES FVLLERTON, Knight, one of his Highness Council
of Revenues, etc.
I Know (Sir) that I shall be censured very rash, in attempting; more
unadvised, in publishing; and most improuident, in making your self the Patron
of so weak a Pamphlet; for the first, I may excuse me, in that I have bin long
unwillingly idle, and loath to lose the benefit of the enforced intermission of
mine accustomed former employments, I could conceive no fitter or better
passe-time, then in this interim, to seek some inward consolation, in my
outward discomforts: for the Second, I acknowledge, that imparting these weak
Meditations, unto some seeming well affected to the best things, I was
encouraged to lay them down to the pleasure of the Printer; who, not without
examination and allowance has brought the same to public view. And as
touching the Third and last, in making choice of your name among so many of
that Honorable Society, whom I most humbly and sincerely honor and
reverence; I cannot but acknowledge the reason, to be no other then that I have
been longest known unto your self; And you best know, how I have past many
years in Service and attendance, commanded by that Honorable Table. These, no
fained excuses may, in honorable favor, free me from the censure of rashness
in attempting it, of presumption in publishing it, and of neglect, or respect
of persons in patronizing it: So shall I think mine idle time not altogether
lost, though gaining little outward profit, whether happy or unhappy, in
gaining the one, or loosing by the other. I am so much the more doubtful to
judge, by how much I observe, that men are here censured happy and unhappy (not
in respect of inward or outward qualities, be they good or bad) but according
to their present prosperity or adversity, glory or baseness, riches or
poverty, which as a sea often ebbes and flows; As variable winds blow, and
waves tossed, are lifted up, and come low: wherein some sailing with a full
gale of glory, think themselves in highest felicity, who yet forgetting or
neglecting to steer aright the huge bulk of their conceived happiness, rush
many times upon the rock of Disgrace, more grievous then their former fortunes
were glorious. He that seeks and thinks to find true felicity in the
inconstant things of this life, is as happy a man as he that dreameth that he
has sound great store of gold, and seems to rejoice beyond measure in his
good fortune; and when he awakes, he finds it a dream: So may men dream of
happiness here; but it is only reserved for such as make least account of
this worlds glory, who have their conuersations in Heaven while they live in
the earth, where yet no man can judge of a truly happy man.

At yours, and to the rest of their Honorable Commands ever ready. JOHN
NORDEN.

To as many as long for true happiness.
IT is not to be doubted, but that every man that lives, desires to live a
happy life: but every man takes not the right course to be truly happy. For,
as there is in every man a double life, the one in this world, the other in
another; the one perishing, the other permanent: so are men carnally or
divinely qualified, and accordingly bend their endeavors, to visible, or
invisible things and are commonly most affected to things visibly seen, and
sencibly felt, tasted, or heard. But as for invisible things, few attain to
know them, much less to seek them, least of all to enjoy them. No, although
their bodies be overwhelmed with millions of maladies, and their minds, with
cares, griefs, and infinite passions; which nothing can cure, or relieve; but
some special inward spiritual working, yet seldom or never look they up
above these earthly things; but in whatsoever outward, or inward hard estate
they are, they seek help here below, if they find it, they ascribe it, to
the visible means and acknowledge them happy in finding it; in sickness to
find a Physician to heal them, in poverty to have a friend to enrich them,
is imputed happiness: how much more happiness were it then for a man never to
be sick, to be rich, to be glorious in the eyes of all men, to be reputed the
wisest man in the world, and to enjoy what his heart could think here? Would
not all men admire this man's happiness? And would not all men desire, and
covet to be in his like estate? And admit he attain unto it, is this the
happiness he aims at? No, he must have peace and long life to enjoy it, else
the very consideration of death, and to forgo this feigned happiness would be
unto him as if a sword hung over his head by the hair of a horse tail; every
minute ready to fall on his head. Alas, what shall a man then so much struggle
and strive for the happiness of this life, that consists only of such
things as the getting of them requires labor, sometimes lies; the having of of
them, envy; the keeping of them fear, and the loss of them sorrow? Which yet
is not all: there must be finally a red rationem, an account; a fearful
reckoning; which, if men would duly consider, in the time of their greatest
supposed happiness, it would make their hearts to tremble, and their knees to
knock one against another like Balteshars, for fear of the infelicitie to
come. If then the greatest happiness that man can attain unto in this life,
be thus accompanied, where is that true happiness, that absolute felicity
finally promised? Such a happiness there is, but what it is, no man can
declare it; for the eye has not seen it, the ear has not heard, neither can
it enter to man's heart, what God has prepared, for those that love him: But by
examination of the chief things wherein man in this life can repute himself
most happy, and comparing them with what things we shall futurely enjoy, it
will appear, that man's happiness does not only consist in the enjoying of
good things, but in the freedom from evil things. The happiest man in this
life has causes of mourning, grief and vexation of spirit, his life requires
labor, labor brings weariness; weariness couets rest, and rest presupposes
the bodies infirmity; and consequently decay and death: And death precedeth
eternal salvation, the happiness of the soul and body, or damnation of
both. This is the portion of all men mortal, how happy soever he seem to
live here, where they have hunger; thirst; heat and cold, want of things
desired: and a thousand discontents; from which we can never be freed, until
we come to our heavenly Country, where Christ is ready to receive us, where
the holy Angels and Saints are ever expecting the increase of that heavenly
company, whose joy and happiness increases by the increase of sanctified
souls, to accompany them; where the servitude, which in this life oppresses
us, shall be turned into joyful liberty, where we shall have no more cause
of mourning, of sorrow, or grief; God himself will wipe away our tears,
which the tribulations which we here endure have provoked, death shall have no
more power over us; we shall have there no night, nor darkness; we shall
need there neither sleep, nor corporal sustinance; we shall be free from
sickness; we shall fear there no envy, or malice of neighbors; we shall
neither buy nor sell; we shall need neither gold nor silver; we shall want no
garments, to adorn and cover our base bodies, as here we need; we shall not
be oppressed with the evils wherewith we are here infested; But be
replenished and made rich in every delightful thing; we shall be there
embraced of our God, as his dear Children; our happiness shall be so
unspeakable, as it cannot be manifested here, what and how glorious it shall
be there; but we shall have pleasure at Gods right hand for evermore: If men
therefore, that now delight themselves in the multitude of their riches; in
their silver and gold* and boast themselves of the greatness and largeness of
their possessions, of their magnificent Mansions, of their rare jewels, the
abundance of their plate, and sumptuous feasts, wherein they repose their
felicity and happiness, did duly consider the shortness and inconstancy of
these deceiving v^nities, and other inferiors that delight themselves in all
kinds of vices, would but call themselves to mind, what they lose by these
false baytes of Satan; they would cast their most precious things ouer-boord
into the sea of contempt, as disdayning this worlds accounted best things, and
their dearest sins, wherein they find a kind of counterfeit content, and
felicity, which shall be futurely requited, with future infelicitie and
horror. Happy then shall that man be even here, (seem he never so
unhappy) that for this pearl will sell all his carnal and corporal delights,
to buy such a precious purchase, and so permanent, which he shall hold to
himself for ever, freely without r^nt, without fear of forfeiture, and
without any other man's claim: for every man shall have so competent a portion,
as none shall covet another man's. The purchase in respect of the value is not
dear. And the Lord, of whom he shall hold it, will never expose his tennant,
nor exact any servile service at his hands, but such as shall be unto
himself, more glorious and sweet, then the most honorable attendance of the
greatest Potentate of the World. He that has a heart to conceive the least
portion of this inexpressible happiness; let him seek it while he has time;
let him ask Wisdom of him, that gives it freely; let him hear, and consider
what comfortable words, and serious promises are spoken of in the Scriptures,
touching this happiness by the Prophets, by CHRIST who is Truth it self, and
by his Apostles, who bear witness of the same Truth; that so being ass^^ed of
the certainty of this happiness to come; he may labor to attain it,
hungering and thirsting for it, with continual prayer to him that gives it.

Yours in Christian good will, I. N.

To the zealous Reader.
Think not the Prayers contained in this little Book too ted^o^s, by reason
of their length and pro^ixitie: for if thy heart be well prepared, thou will
think it no burden to thy tongue and lips to speak unto God* Short prayers in
de^d, are most pleasing to them that use prayers without ^eeling, more for
custom, then comfort. A truly (...) man is not only not weary in Prayer*
but the longer he prays, with the more fe^uency he prays; and the more
fervent, the more pleasing unto God. Pray therefore always in all manner
Prayer and Supplication in the (...), (as long as Gods holy Spirit (...)
Spirit) and watch thereunto with all perseverance (without wavering or
weariness:) And so shall thy Prayers be acceptable to God, and true comfort to
thy self.

This is the way, walk in it.
A HELP to Happiness.
A premeditation or consultation, what are the best things, men in this life
should principally aim at, to attain unto highest happiness; which are,
hearing the Word, and faithful prayer.
EVery man by nature has in himself a desire of the best things, and in heart
wishes, and endeavors to obtain them, wherein every man has his private
and peculiar affection, according to his inward qualification. But as Nature
and Grace, man's corruption and Gods holy Spirit do differ in evil and good so
do men's desires differ in choice of things, yet all seem to tend to the
attaining of the things they conceive to be best, and they are such as may give
them the content they aim at, which they account happiness. And the most of
men in stead of true happiness, desire and seek things not only, not best,
but merely hurtful: things subject ^o the outward senses, which are often
deceiving, taking that for best that is to be abandoned, and rejecting that
which is to be chiefly embraced as truest happiness.

The best things are such as the eye sees not, the mouth tastes not, the
hands h^ndle not, neither are they subject to natures understanding: For the
things we see, touch, or taste, have neither true goodness, such as to give a
man best content, nor continuance to tarry with them; and therefore are but
shadows of seeming happiness, which by experience are found fickle and
vanishing Beauty, Health of the body, Riches, Honor, high Office, Long life,
Delights and Carnal pleasures, Humane wisdom, and Natural Literature, are
things much esteemed. But what happiness is there in any of these? Beauty
decays, Health impayreth, Riches vanish, Honor is envied, Offices dangerous,
Long life a burden, humane wisdom foolishness, natural Learning, a puff of
vain glory. We may therefore conclude, that if a man have all the former
seeming contentments, yet may he not be happy for every of them draws with
it, as many disasters, as variable accidents, and as many peevish passions of
the mind, which draw him into as many calamities and miseries. And therefore
does no truly wise man think, that these are worthy the name of happiness,
for then had many Heathens attained unto that best. But true happiness
consists only in the enjoying of Gods graces, and Spiritual blessings,
which carnal men, who enjoy only the former, have not: But are possessed with
an erroneous opinion of those things which seem best, rather by an implicit
conceit, following* and allowing that for happiness which the most hold so;
and to attain the same, they use all means, labors, and endless travails
to get that, which indeed is not of the world to be had; no marvel then they
find it not, and yet persuade themselves, they have in some measure what they
desire, every man in his peculiar affection, and well may it be said in some
measure, for that in what measure soever they have, that they crave, yet they
want the fullness of what they desire: And therefore can there be no full
content, for where there is wanting some thing, the want of the thing desired,
is a kind of inevitable misery, and distraction of the mind.

These things duly considered, a kind of voluntary blindness, or rather
desperate madness seems to appear in the most, who contrary to the advice
of the Apostle (that wills to use this world as if we used it not) use only
this world and the vain pleasures of the same, as if they persuaded
themselves, that either they shall ever remain here, or that after this, there
will be no other being whereas the contrary is most apparent, For this world
passes away and the glory thereof, and therefore should we so live, as only
to pass through it, as the Jsralites through the Red Sea; that we may arrive in
Heavenly Canaan, the place of true Felicity, Happiness and absolute content
in deed: for the greatest pleasures and dearest delights that this world can
yield, are like the unsavory waters of Asphaltis, or the sea of Sodom,
whereof who so drinks, infatuateth or dies instantly: And yet we see, that
he is accounted the happiest man that is even drunk with this worlds
vanities. Therefore do the truly Wise pass by them, as it were disdayning to
stoop to such deceiving alurements stopping their ears with Ulysses, least
these forbidden vanities should inchant them and with their seeming sweet
infecting harmony, draw them to the gulf of perdition; for the vanities of
this world bewitch the minds of carnal men, who though they read and hear
their danger, it takes no impression in their obdurate hearts: they read
seldom, and hear, and understand not; they yet know too much of that whereof
the practice does show they are not wise to salvation, which indeed is, that
absolute happiness, that the truly Wise do only seek; knowing that it
avails them not, to gain the whole world, and to take all the pleasures and
delights of the same, and to lose their own souls.

The best thing then, that we are to seek to be happy, is to be assured in
this life of the Kingdom of God, and our salvation to come, and to labor for
the righteousness thereof; for if worldly men take so much pains for the
getting of the vanishing things of this world, counterfeit happiness, it may
well be imputed, not only as a shame unto us, but a judgment upon us, if we
neglect, the absolute best thing, the salvation of our souls. And therefore
Saint Paul exhorts us to the study of righteousness and hatred of sin, the
contrary ends of both being set before us; namely as touching sin, wherein
the best man has once defiled himself, how much more the wicked? What fruit
had they in it? Only shame, and grief, and in the end death eternal, without
repentance, therefore it behooves us now to cast off sin, The vanities of
the world, the lusts of the flesh, the pride of life, to which things whosoever
is, or has been servant, while he lives therein is free from righteousness:
but now let us seek to be freed from the servitude of sin. and to become
servants unto God, so shall we have our fruit in holiness, and in the end
everlasting life, which is the gift of GOD through Jesus Christ, which is the
greatest happiness that we can desire or attain unto, either in this life, or
that which is to come; for the obtaining whereof, every Christian is to be
careful to avoid the vanities of this world, and the service of sin in the
same, indeuoring to become the servant of God, which consists in an holy and
heavenly conversation here, to which is required, the due and diligent hearing
of God in his Word: and the true practice of the same, and faithful prayer to
him.

By these two rules rightly observed, a man becomes by acceptance perfect, and
by imputation just.

To attain unto this degree of perfection and happiness, it lies not in our
own power; we cannot hear without the Word preached, and none that hears
understands; but he whose ears the Lord opens. Carnal men may hear
indeed, but not profit by hearing, unless God open also their hearts, as he
did the heart of Lydia, for both the Word, hearing, understanding and practice
are all the gifts of God.

Prayer also is the gift of God, so is Gods Spirit, by whom we pray, and faith
in which we pray; and the assurance, to obtain that for which we pray. How
many men yet are there of conceit, that they can pray when they list, and how
they list? as if earnest and truly cordial prayer, were as familiar with
them, as to tell a tale: Liplabour babbling indeed, is as easy, as to speak
any thing else. But this kind of saying prayers, is not indeed prayer, but
prattle, a mocking of God, and he deceives himself, that so speaks
prayers. A great man would take scorn to have a tale told him, when he that
tells it speaks he knows not what, his mind being upon some other matter,
will God then accept of those prayers, which only are from the lips, when
the heart thinks of nothing less, then what the mouth speaks? Their words
may be the words of holy prayer indeed, but if the heart consent not, nay, if
the Mind, the Will and Affections, and the Understanding agree not with the
mouth, though the words be good, the prayer is counterfeit. True and fervent,
faithful and feeling prayer, will easily be diserned from cold and
counterfeit, for whereas a man may fluently without stop or stagger, power
forth many and good words, either by heart or book, thinking that God has
enough, if he have many and good words, he cannot but acknowledge that he does
but flatter God, and so commits sin, instead of a sacrifice; But the prayer
that pleases God, and profits a man's self, comes from the heart to the
lips, or the heart it self, sighs and groans unto God, in such vehemency
of spirit, as if not with outward tears, yet does the heart rent it self
within, through the feruencie of zeal, and power of a lively faith, which
kind of prayer is effectual, and pleasing to God

It behooves therefore every man to be wary how he prays, least he offer
the sacrifice of fools, and so instead of being heard, to his comfort, he be
rejected with shame. Prayer consists not in the motion of the tongue, only
which is proper as well to the wicked as to the godly: But prayer is a divine
exercise of a sanctified heart And therefore before we presume to approach into
the presence of God with our Petition, we must duly and reverently consider,
to whom we speak, what we speak, and how we speak; wherein we may not
consult with our own fantasies, and so vnsanctifiedly, to rush upon the holy
Throne of Jehovah, but with the Word of God, wherein is laid down the
persons, to whom, the manner, how, and the things for what we should pray.

These things being understood, it behooves us also to look into our selves,
whether this great work of divine prayer be within the compass of our own
understanding, what to pray for. Saint Paul was a man Divinely qualified, and
yet he accounts himself of the number of them that know not what to pray,
as he ought: what then? Should we not pray at all, because we know not how,
or what to pray as we ought? God forbid, we have a promise that the Spirit of
God shall help our infirmities, and shall make request for us unto God. How
then can our prayers but be heard and answered, seeing they proceed from Gods
own Spirit, that dwells in us?

The truly faithful in deed have a promise, that if they open their mouths,
God will hill them And what is it but to assist them in their prayers? And
therefore not every one that seems to pray, prays in the Spirit, yet this
promise may also appertain unto, and in time, be felt of them that yet want
him. Therefore, let every man endeavor to be assured, that the Spirit of God is
in him, which he shall find by the feruencie of his heart in prayer; although
he be not at all times a like powerful in us, but retires himself for a time,
to make us to acknowledge the want of him, and to thirst the more eagerly for
his presence again, which every faithful soul exercised in this divine
duty, apparently apprehends; for the Spirit by degrees, as it were, moves
our dull spirits, and at length shows himself strong and powerful in us,
for when we find a will, and an inclination to pray, though we be dull, not
able to open our mouths, if we continue in desire, lifting up our hearts to
God; we shall feel, and that sensibly the Spirit, to begin to work and to
touch our hearts, that at length, we shall, not only be able to speak with
our tongues, but the same Spirit will frame such an holy form of words, that
of our selves, we were-neuer able to utter: which I confess to the praise of
God, I have found by most comfortable experience, and therefore to my more
effectual motive, I have framed by the aid of the same Spirit, this
Meditation and Prayer following, which may be also unto others, that delight
in this holy exercise, some mean to suppress their dullness, and to stir up
their affections to an inexpressible zeal.

A motive to a prayer against the tentations of Satan, who always
endeavors the hinderance of prayer, and all other divine and holy exercises
in the children of God, whereby their happiness may be made certain.
IT is impossible that any man, be he never so devout and religious, that takes
any action in hand, tending either to Gods glory, or his own souls salvation,
that can p^rforme it; but that Satan, that malicious enemy of man's salvation,
will endeavor to pervert it, or altogether to hinder it. As when Iehoshua the
high Priest was standing before the Lord to pray, Satan stood at his right
hand to resist him, Zach 3.1. And therefore shall any man think that though he
be strong in faith, and fervent in zeal to pray unto God, for any holy and
heavenly gift, that he shall have no opposition by this ougly Dragon, and
subtle invisible Serpent? nay, the more faithful, the more zealous, and the
more strong a man seems, (or indeed is) in any holy and divine exercise; so
much the more mad and malicious is Satan to oppose him, especially when he
betaketh himself to holy prayer, whereof no true child of God is, or can be
ignorant: he cannot but find that Satan, though unseen, stands at his right
hand, at his elbow, laying before the eye of his mind, infinite idle and unholy
thoughts, not to be nu^bred or declared; either to pervert or utterly to hinder
his faith and zeal; and that sometimes with seeming (though counterfeit)
divine thoughts. As when, in the maid, he spoke (seeming commendably) crying of
Paul and other Apostles, saying, These men are the servants of the most high
God, which show unto you the way of salvation, Act 16.16 17. But what intended
he by this his flattery? only to hinder Paul and the rest from prayer, a work
that offends him most, and makes us most happy. Therefore when he flattereth a
man most, as persuading him that he has graces and holy gifts enough: he
needs seek no more of God, he may save his labor of praying; he may take his
case and betake himself to his wonted worldly affairs; he needs not be so
curious in reading the Word, or hearing Sermons, he has knowledge sufficient,
and in the right way to happiness, and may take more pleasure and delight in
many other things to his better content. And thus are too many overmuch lulled
asleep by these most dangerous enchantments of Satan, especially when he
coueteth to deceive by his crafty undermining men, under his counterfeit show of
being an Angel of light.

Having then such a dangerous enemy, more malicious then the red Dragon, more
wi^y and subtle then the crooked Serpent, and more strong then the roaring
Lion. We had need to crave wisdom, to prevent his subtilties, and strength to
withstand his forces: for being ignorant of his stratagems, and weak to
encounter his malice, we can neither speak unto God in our prayers, which are
the principal weapons to wound, and put back the force of this enemy, nor
with true desire, attentive ear, a feeling heart, constant resolution, and
firm faith, hear God spea^e unto us by his holy Messengers and Ministers, the
life of our souls, and truest happiness.

It behooves us therefore to labor, to have the eyes of our minds enlightened,
and to be filled with all spiritual prudence and wisdom, that we may be
able to discover his deceiving intisements, to avoid h^s forged ^la^teries, and
to withstand his deadly tentations: let us indeauor by continual prayer to
God, that in us may be created and confirmed a strong and lively faith, p^rfect
and constant zeal to serve the living God, and an holy jealousy over our
selves, lest Satan cir^umuent us with his secret and subtle intisements, in
stealing away our minds, and estranging our thoughts from heaven and heavenly
things, from God in Christ, in our holy Meditations and Prayers.

A Prayer for Gods holy assistance, against Satan, who indeauoureth to hinder
our most godly prayers, fit to be said in all tentations.
O Holy, merciful, loving, and most powerful Lord God, who sit in the
heavens, and extendest thy power over all the powers in heaven and earth, who
have the rule and absolute government of all thy creatures; and to whom all
Principalities, Powers, Angels, and spirits do obey: Consider, I humbly pray
thee, the malignity and malice of that reprobate infernal spirit, that falsely
pretends dominion in the earth, and in the air, and how he enuieth and
opposes, as much as in him is, every good duty and service which thy dearest
children owe and endeavor to perform unto thee; and above all other duties,
tending to thine own glory, and man's salvation, he seeks to hinder none,
with more bitter violence, with greater envy, and more wicked and subtle
wiles, then this of divine prayer, and endeauoreth to draw thine own dearest
children into manifold sins. But Lord, as thou have commanded us to call
upon thine holy Name, to pray unto thee for faith, repentance, obedience, and
other graces and blessings: So according to thine holy ordinance, I fall down
prostrate upon the knees of mine unfeigned heart, praying thee to prepare me to
this holy duty, thou say, Open thy mouth, and I will fill it. O Lord open
thou my mouth, and fill it with heavenly words, furnish and fill my heart with
a strong, powerful, and lively faith, constant and firm obedience, that
without wavering, and straying thoughts, I may at this time make my prayers and
supplications unto thee, through thy Spirit. And thou, O invincible Lion of the
Tribe of Judah stand up for me, against my most mortal and most malicious
enemy, satan, who among his own is strong and powerful, but where thou my
Captain Christ Jesus appearest, he is weak, he cannot enter the house where
thou dwell. O fortify therefore, O Lord, and bar up the door of my soul,
that he enter not, nor prevail against it with the fire of his tentations.
Lord thou know, he is enemy to thee, how much more unto me? He tempted
thee, but prevailed not, but his tentations flesh and blood cannot withstand.
Therefore arm thou me against him, with heavenly weapons, and he shall
neither stop nor hinder mine intended prayers, as he desires and labors
to do. Let my spirit, O Lord, be strongly assisted by thy Spirit, and my
prayers shall be faithful, my heart shall entertain no wandering, wavering,
unholy, or profane thoughts, evil cogitations, or wicked motions, though I
be an unholy lump of my self by nature, prompt and more ready to think, or
do evil then good: yet by thy Grace, Satan shall sly, sin shall die, and
thy Spirit shall be lively in me, and my prayers powerful and effectual to
thee in my mediator Christ Jesus.

O let thy heavenly help, Lord, in Jesus Christ descend into all the powers
and parts of my soul and body, that in speaking unto thee, I may feel the
work and operation of thy Grace so sufficient in my heart, that I may obtain
a victorious conquest over satan, sin and mine own corruptions, and be
assured, through Christ Jesus my Savior, to be either freed from his
preuayling tentations, or to be able to resist them; that all my prayers at
all times may be such, as thou may Fatherly accept them in thy beloved
Sons mediation for me, howsoever weak and imperfect they be in respect of
my self, who am full of imperfections, which I humbly pray thee to grant for
his sake, who has conquered him, that couets my final destruction. Amen.

Lord evermore strengthen and increase my faith in Jesus Christ.
A meditation or motive, when we are dull to pray, a most necessary
preparatiue, to prayer.
AS it is my grief, O Lord, to consider the hardness of my heart, my
faintness and dullness to pray: So can I not but comfort my self, in the
consideration of thy great mercy toward me, in often removing my dullness,
and in steed thereof, to give me thy holy Spirit, and by him power
effectually, to call upon thy holy Name, which effectual favor of thine, I
have oftentimes found and felt, when I have had an inward motion, tending to a
desire to pray, and yet no power or ableness to open my mouth, or aptness to
move my tongue, which has caused me many times to think that thou my God,
have been angry with me, and in that thou have withheld thy Grace so long,
that thou had forsaken me. So that I have bee^e info^ced oftentimes to keep
silence, when I would have prayed, and to close my lips, when I would have
spoken.

Thus good Father have I been many times, as I am presently troubled, and
inwardly grieved, even in my soul, at the hardness of my heart, and dullness
of my spirit. And yet at length I have felt as it were the fire of fervent
zeal so inflaming my heart, as I have suddenly spoken with my tongue, I have
prayed unto thee, and thou have heard me.

This holy and heavenly work of divine Prayer, I find to be far from mine,
or the best man's own power* it is the only work of thine own spirit, which
I have many times formerly discerned, for when I have been most dull, and most
unapt to pray, thou, even then, even in my silent musing, and meditation have
enabled me, to break forth into words, through faith, which have pierced the
very heaven of heavens, even unto the Throne of thy great Majesty, where Christ
my mediator stands at thy right hand, presenting in my behalf, my weak
Petitions even in his own name; and obtayneth mine humble desires, according
to thine own will which works better things for me, then I can wish or will.

I am not therefore discouraged, good Father, though I seem dull in spirit, and
as it were clean destitute of faith, for I know thy gifts are without
repentance, and though I feel not this heavenly work of thy holy Spirit, at
all times a like in me: yet do I assure me, he is in me, and will work
again, the same heavenly effects, for where thy blessed Spirit has once taken
habitation; and once sanctified the soul, that soul is so effectually
possessed by that spirit, and that Spirit so possesses that soul; that he may
be assured, never to be absolutely dispossessed of the same, howsoever he may
for a time seem absent. It is but to move me to seek him, finding the want
of him, to long for him.

Though therefore dear Father, my heart be hard by nature, and my spirit d^ll
to every holy and heavenly duty, so that I cannot outwardly utter, what I
inwardly conc^iue and desire, with such earnestness and feruencie of spirit,
as I would; but weakly and coldly: yet do I assure my self, that thou
considerest mine inward desires, and hear my most secret sighs, as
plainly, as if I cried vocally and aloud unto thee.

I cannot therefore but confide^tly assure my self, that according to thy
promise thou will hear and consider, that I hunger and thirst for thy Grace,
that my dullness being removed, I may conceive in my heart, and frame with my
lips mine humble Petitions, which thou have promised to hear, especially
such as thine own Spirit composeth in me.

Deny not therefore good Father, thy holy Spirit to me, that faithfully crave
him only to be enabled effectually to pray unto thee: for thou hear not the
best man, nor the best ma^s best prayers, for his, or his prayers sake; but for
thy best beloved Sons sake, and such only prayers as proceed from thine own
Spirit. Fulfill therefore good Father, all my godly desires, through Christ
Jesus. Amen.

Let us pray, that we may pray.
A Prayer to God for the help of his holy Spirit, and other blessings,
Spiritual and Corporal; comprehending the most needful blessings, fit at all
times for all men to be desired.
GRacious Lord God, and most loving in Jesus Christ, thou have of thine own
free favor, willed all men, in all their troubles, dangers, and wants of
Spiritual and corporal things to come unto thee, to ask in the Name of thy
Son, and they shall receive whatsoever they faithfully pray for, to seek
help of thee, and they shall find it, in due and convenient time, to knock
and they shall be admitted into thy holy presence.

But good Father, as thou have thus commanded me, work in me power, truly to
perform what thou command; to pray, I am of my self dull; to seek, I am
by nature blind; and to knock, I am weak; and therefore thou seem to
command things to me impossible to be effectually performed: say therefore
unto me, and perform it, namely that thy Spirit may be a sufficient help
unto me.

Thou well know mine insufficiency Lord, for I cannot of my self think a
good thought, how then can I of my self, pray and obtain, seek, and find
what I want, or knock, and be heard. This sacred virtue none by nature has,
it is of thine own free Grace, and they only to whom thou vouchsafest thine
own Spirit, to help their weakness, such in deed can faithfully ask, such
can dilligently seek, and constantly knock, they only obtain what they ask,
they find what they seek, and they are heard and admitted into thy presence
when they knock.

Oh! admit me Lord into the number of them, to whom thou have vouchsafed this
blessed privilege, for they belong only to the truly faithful, to such as
thou have chosen of thine own purpose, whom thou have made fit to ask, apt to
seek, and constant to knock.

Apt I am to ask many things, because I want many, and I know thou art able,
and willing to grant every good thing. But I am ignorant so to ask, as I may
obtain, for I know not what to ask as I ought, and therefore though I often
ask, I receive not, because I ask amiss; tending my prayers rather to the
obtaining of carnal, then Spiritual and heavenly riches, and find them not;
because thou see the granting of them, rather hurtful then profitable unto
me.

Send therefore dear Father, send down thine holy Spirit, who only knows
how, and for what to pray, though I be ignorant of, he knows thy will,
though I be weak, he is powerful; and though I be corrupt, He is holy, as
thou art holy: ^ee only knows my wants, and how they may be supplied.
Therefore none but he Lord can make my Petitions effectual, none but he can
speak for me, with me, and in me. Good Father deny him not unto me, leave me
not destitute of his help.

When he comes, he shall teach me all things, fit for me to learn, he
will prompt, and tell me what is fit for me to ask, he will prepare my heart,
he will rectify mine affections, he will abandon my darkness, deadness and
dullness, he will untie my faultring tongue, and open my closed lips, he
will enlarge my knowledge, and increase my faith.

If I pray without the help of this thy blessed Spirit, I do but utter a bare
voice, O Lord, which cannot come into thy presence, nor return any comfort to
mine own soul, but speaking in and by him, I shall assuredly be heard, for
when I pray sinceerely and effectually in deed, it proceeds not from me, but
from thine own Spirit that speaks in me, and bears the greatest burden of
my prayers, though the words pass through my lips, they are not mine, but his.

Holy Father, ever loving; loving in Jesus Christ, inkindle mine inward godly
desires, through the heavenly heat of that Sacred fire, touch my tongue, with
that celestial cole from thine Alter, then shall my heart be prepared; then
shall my lips be opened, then shall I speak with my tongue, according to the
meaning of thine own Spirit; then shall mine understanding be enlarged, then
shall I app^ehend thy mercy, and fully enjoy thy favor in Christ my Redeemer;
then shall I find and feel in my heart, an assured testimony, that my prayers
are come up into thy presence, then shall my guilty conscience, burdened with
sin be eased; and all my wants spiritual and corporal, outward and inward,
be fully and timely supplied, and all my fear be removed; and all things,
howsoever seeming contrary, shall work together, yea together, to my
perpetual peace and comfort in thee. Then shall I receive in this corrupt and
weak vessel of dust, the Image of my Redeemer; bring forth the fruits of his
Kingdom, and even here, feel and be assured, to be sealed up in the number
of thine Elect Saints; and enjoy the glory of that future Kingdom in full,
which here I partake and know but in part, according to that measure of
knowledge which it has pleased thee, through thy holy Spirit to reveal unto
me, in this mortality, where yet I find the merits of my Redeemer preuayling,
to the washing away of my sins. I hear his voice, and here desire to follow
him, and to obey thee in him, submitting my self to undergo whatsoever cross
for his sake, as he endured the death of the Cross for mine; evermore looking
for, and longing to be dissolved, freed from this worlds vanities, and to be
partaker of the glory, which by his death, he has purchased, for all that in
faith, and holy desire; Look for his second coming: for which all that are
guided by that thy Sacred Spirit, inwardly and daily cry, Come Lord Jesus, come
quickly, and end these days of sin.

In the mean time, thou know loving Father, that I am enforced to be
combred about many things of fa^re inferior condition, following the things
of my worldly calling, which much hinder me in the performance of better
things, and which often hinder the lively working of thy holy Spirit in me.

I am much and often oppressed with the strength of mine own inherent
corruption, often assailed by that my deadly enemy Satan; who seeks by all
means to stop the course of thy Spirit in me. But thy Grace is sufficient to
prevent him for me.

Thou know also dear Father, that I am much and often afflicted here, and
stand subject to many and several trials, as to Sickness of the body, danger
of the decay and loss of my Limbs, and the virtue and use of my Senses, unto
Poverty, Enemies, and Persecution for the constant profession of thy sincere
Religion, under the burden and fear of these inevitable miseries, I should
faint, but that I know thee and whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, and have the
assistance of thy blessed Spirit, testifying unto my spirit, that thou art the
whole and sole disposer of all these, and that all things work together for
the comfort of all that love thee, knowing and being assured of thy presence
and providence, I will not fear whatsoever befall me; for all troubles,
crosses and miseries, I find to be but wholesome medecines, tempered and
gently prepared by thine own hand for the cure and preservation of my sick
and sinful soul, from eternal death.

I humbly therefore, dear Father, pray thee, so to moderate my troubles and
afflictions, as by the help and aid of thy holy Spirit, I may with patience
and an heavenly kind of alacrity undergo them. And according to thy good
pleasure continue the health of my body, the use of my senses and limbs, peace
with thee my God and with all men as becomes me, still guided by thy Spirit,
that I abuse none of thy blessings, through (...) corruptions.

And while I live here in this earthly pilgrimage, as a stranger, vouchsafe me,
with thy heavenly Spirit to give me a competent portion to sustain me, and
those whom thou have committed unto my charge, both in spiritual and corporal
sustinance.

Let not too heavy tentations ouer-presse me, let too much want, and too heavy
crosses ouer-afflict me, but lay upon me what thou will, and never take from
me thy holy spirit, so shall I be able to bear what soever thou think fit to
be laid upon me; for by the strength of thy preuayling spirit, I shall undergo
what thou in love (as indeed it is) shall lay upon me.

By promise thou carest for me, and have willed me to cast my care upon thee,
which I have done ever since it pleased thee to reveal thy self unto me in
thy beloved Son: and thou have not deceived me; for I have ever found thee
true, in performing whatsoever thou have promised, even in sending that
Comforter, who has ever assisted me in revealing thy Son, in who^ thy
continual favor I have ever found most certain, secret, and sweet, so
enabling me to speak unto thee, as when I have offended thee by my sins, I
have felt the pardon of them in my conscience by the blood of that Lamb,
testified unto me by thy blessing and sanctifying Spirit. When I have been
sick, thou have healed me; I have been in mortal danger, and thou have
preserved me; I have had enemies, and thou have defended me; and often have I
been in distress and want, and thou have without my desire or desert
plentifully relieved me: yea Lord, thou have given when and what I have not
asked; thou came and soughtest me first, Lord, I sought not thee: thou above
all shewedst thy self most loving unto me, in sending me thy heavenly spirit,
without whose aid I could neither ask nor receive, I could neither seek nor
find comfort; neither could I knock, or deserve to enter into thy favor. By
his presence I have felt the fulness of joy and gladness: And therefore as thou
have graciously begun, Lord, so continue thy grace in me, and thy love toward
me always, in all places, among al men, in all my labors, iournies, and
lawful and godly endeavors, for thou have commanded me while I live ^eere,
not to rest idle, but to be doing that which is good.

Thou have given me a calling, wherein without thy blessing I may labor, and
yet lack; I may aim by good intent, and yet err, without the gracious
direction of thy Spirit: I am ignorant of, and dull to perform that which may
be either well pleasing unto thee, or truly profitable to my self. But by the
blessing of thy holy spirit, I shall please thee in Christ, who pleases thee
for me; and then whatsoever I think, speak, or do, shall prosper, and yield
me supply in all my wants both spiritual, and corporal, and that from day to
day, which by thine own promise shall be sufficient for the day.

O holy and heavenly Father, hold me ever in thine ^bedience, shelter me under
^he shadow of thy protecting wings, stop the whole course of sin in me, and
continue thine holy spirit evermore in me, that he being my guide in all mine
actions, I may finish the course of this my pilgrimage in all sincerity,
sanctity, and safety, and in the end obtain the glory which thy Son my
Savior has purchased for me by the shedding of his blood upon the Cross;
and that evermore while I live, I may hunger and thirst for righteousness,
until I become a perfect man in Christ Jesus, that leaving this mortal life,
I may joyfully enter into that everlasting rest, Amen, Amen in Christ my hope,
my strength, and my assured and faithful Redeemer.

Lord evermore increase and confirm my faith, and continue that holy spirit in
me.
A motive to begin the day with Prayer.
IT is a duty not so much required by God, for his own sake of us, as
necessary and profitable for our selves to begin the morning with Thanksgiving
and Prayer. The first, God requires of us, as due unto him, for preserving us,
and giving us rest, and sleep, and safety the night past. The second, namely
Prayer, most necessary for our selves: for without the help, favor, power,
protection, and providence of God, we can expect no comfort, or safety, or
good success the day following; wherein do lie hidden many dangers of our
bodies, many bayts, allurements, and tentations of Satan, the world, and our
own corruption, for our souls, much weakness and ignorance in our selves, to
perform the works of our own callings, besides ill success in our labors
without his blessing. And shall we think that God will give a blessing to our
labors, safety to our persons, or defense from these spiritual enemies,
unless we recommend our selves to him in the name of his son? No, no, we may
not flatter our selves, that because we are lusty and strong, our senses good,
and our wit and understanding quick, we may go from bed to business, and
walk in our own ways until the evening, either forgetting or neglecting
God, who withholding his help and hand, infinite are the dangers we are
subject unto, both spiritual and corporal. Therefore look up, power out thy
p^ayers as a sweet morning sacrifice to God in the name of Christ; and then go
on thy lawful occasions and prosper. And for want of thine own ability to
discover thine own necessities, and to crave Gods blessings, and to declare
thy thankfulness, use the help of the labors of such as have framed prayer
for this holy purpose. Or this, howsoever, weak prayer following, wherein thou
may find comfort, and so with inward joy thou may from day to day, the
more cheerfully follow thy vocation.

A Prayer fit to be used every morning.
O My God, my God, and my most loving Father, in thy best beloved Christ Jesus,
I yield thee unfeigned thanks, for thy wonderful mercies and undeserved
favors, vouchsafed unto me all my life, and especially for electing, creating,
and redeeming me, and for all other thine unspeakable favors from time to
time bestowed upon me, touching my corporal comfort, which I neither can
express with tongue, nor conceive with my heart. Accept I humbly beseech the
merrits of thy Son, and his obedience in stead of my thankfulness: for I am
corrupt, and sinful, not worthy to take thy glorious Name into my mouth, nor
to hear that sacred Word from thine, I am dull in hearing thee speak unto
me, and slower in practice of the good things thou command, but prone and
apt to do the contrary: Such is my wretched condition, that what I should do
in answer of thy will, I cannot do it. But what thou forbiddest, I cannot but
do it.

A wretched creature, dear Father, I am by nature; yet grieved in heart, that
I am thus yoked, that when I would serve thee, I find a law in my members
rebelling against thy Spiritual working in me, and am cast down in my
Spirit, finding so strong an enemy in mine own flesh, that still fights
against thy Grace working in me, striving to hinder every good and holy motion
arising of thy Spirit: So that when I would do good, evil is present with me:
when I would pray, dullness and drowsinesse, nay (to my shame O Lord mere
infidelity), seems so to possess my heart, that I cannot open my mouth unto
thee.

Thou give me many occasions, through the infinite tokens of thy love, to
move me to thankfulness, and yet I rest unthankful; I feel also in my
self as many occasions, through mine own corruption and wants, to humble my
self before thee in prayer; and yet I rest, oftentimes altogether mute* and
can neither pray, nor be sufficiently thankful.

The comforts, which thou daily and hourly vouchsafest me, I receive and
enjoy: yet do I not show my self, so forward to acknowledge these thy
mercies, as I am ready to receive them. They are infinite, my self not worthy
the least of them: And such is thy love, and Fatherly providence over me; that
every day and every night, and every minute in them, do testify unto me,
that thou art ever my mighty God in defending me from dangers, and my most
loving Father in continually supplying all my wants.

Thou may Lord justly withold from me my food in the day, and my rest in
the night, because in the day I neglect to serve thee, and in the night I
forget to call upon thee.

Thou can not but observe, that I have not so thought and meditated of thy
loving kindness, and mine own dangers this night, as to afford the least
breach of my sleep to thank thee. I laid me down, I have slept my sleep,
and by thy power risen again. O that mine vprising from my sleep, might
through thy Grace, work mine vprising from my sleep in sin.

Gracious God and full of love, grant me thy love, that I may render thee love,
which I confess deserves not the name of love in comparison of thine, though
for thy love I should give my body to be burned, yet such is thy mercy, that
thou acceptest the least mite of true obedience, as a great measure of my love,
so full of humane and spiritual infirmities, which have ouerspread as thou
know, all-offending Adams issue.

Holy Father, I know thee, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ, he it is
that has taken away that heavy burden of my corruption, by his most perfect
Righteousness, and the guilt and punishment of my transgressions, by his own
all-sufficient sufferings: Therefore, though I be slack in thankfulness, for
thy blessings and favors, formerly bestowed upon me. Let me even this
morning, as I newly enter into the light of the day; so by thy Grace, grant
Lord, that I may enter into the light of new and sincere knowledge and
obedience.

Humbly praying thee, to be unto me this day following, a God to preserve, a
Captain to defend me, a light to guide me, and a loving Father to relieve me.

Let thy blessings be plentifully powered upon me, let heavenly knowledge
abound in me, let faith more and more increase and be strengthened in me, and
the power of sin and Satan more and more be weakened in me. So shall mine
obedience toward thee my God, more and more appear in me, and then shall all
that I take in hand this day, and at all times prosper, which grant good Father
in Jesus Christ sake. Amen.

Lord increase my says this day and ever.
A motive to prayer before a man goes to bed.
IT is commonly observed, that he that forgets to give God thanks, when he
begins the day, for the rest and saftie in the night past, will not be well
disposed, to commend himself to God, when he goes to rest in the night: yet
is the night the most dangerous time, when darkness over shadows the house,
wherein we sleep, and when our eyes are shut up by the drowsinesse of our
spirits; what comfort can there then appear? Though we may lie down in some
artificial light, we are suddenly be cloud^d with natural darkness,
wherein all that intend wicked and secret mischiefs, are most apt to attempt
most dangerous plots upon such as are secure without God: And Satan himself
finds the darkness of the night the fittest time to present unto our
wandering thoughts some evil imaginations: our minds, being then at seeming
quiet, free from external objects. And what that malignant enemy suggesteth
in darkness, the man, not having faith and the fear of God, longs for the
light, to put that evil in practice, that Satan has in the dark moved him
unto.

Besides, we see by daily experience, that many have laid themselves down to
rest in the night, in seeming safty, that could not say with David, J rose
again in safety, for the Lord sustained me, for some have been preu^nted by
sudden death, some by sickness; So that if the Lord sustain us not, if he
defend us not, if he watch not over us, if his Angels guard us not, especially
in the night; we cannot but be subject, to many inevitable perils. And how
can we think to enjoy quiet and rest in safty, if we call not upon him, that
is our keeper and the giver of rest, sleep and health? For where God is not in
the mind, there are the thoughts wandering upon things offensive to God,
pleasing to Satan, hurtful to our souls, and distempering the body, which in
a moment, may separate the unprepared soul from the wretched body.

What and how diff^rs the man, that lies down to sleep not calling upon God,
from brute creatures, which covet and take there rest and sleep as man, and
rise up to feed?

Should reasonable man so nearly resemble unreasonable creatures? (who in
their kind praise God) and man to dishonor him by usurping the benefit of
rest and sleep, without acknowledging them his own gifts? And how can he
acknowledge them his gifts without thanksgiving unto him for them, and prayer
to him to enjoy them?

Let no man be so stupid, sottish, and brutish, as to go to his rest without
recommending himself to God, his body, his soul, and all that he poss^ss^th:
for it is he only that keeps Israel, namely, all that fear him; he is
ever watchful over his, for he never slumbreth nor sleeps. To his power,
providence, and protection then let us recommend our selves, confessing our
sins, and craving pardon ^n the m^rits of his Son: so shall we lay our selves
down in peace to rest, and rise again in safety, for the Lord himself will
sustain us.

A Prayer before a man go to his nightly rest.
O God, powerful and loving in Jesus Christ, I thank thee that thou have
safely brought me to the end of this day, wherein I thankfully confess I have
received at thy most bountiful hands, through Christ, many comfortable
blessings, not worthy of the least of them, but rather of punishment for this
days sins; though committed in the light, yet are they the works of darkness.
Good Father, disperse and dispell the darkness of my sinning mind* as a mist,
and send me the light of thy saving grace, to enlighten me now in the darkness
of the night, which with thee is as the noone day, but to me it is fearful
without thee: for that in it many dangers lie hidden, to me unknown; and if I
knew them, unable I am without thee, to prevent the least of them. But thou
that have made the black evening, have made also the bright morning, and in
both thou art a like watchful over those that are thine. I do therefore
humbly recommend my self, my soul, and my body into thy most powerful
protection. The darkness of the night does as well declare thy glory, as does
the clearest rest day. Though to me weak creature, the night is most
dangerous; but that thou art my light and my salvation, what, or whom,
therefore need I to fear? Thou art the strength of my life, of whom, or of
what, should I be afraid? Thou art to me a strong rock, a house of saftie in
the night; for weak is the strength of the strongest material house, unable
to prevent the dangers, which thou permittest to befall many. But Lord, I trust
not in houses of clay, I trust in thee, my strength, to thee I come for succor
and defense this night; withhold not thy help lest I perish in the darkness:
I trust in thee, let my darkness be turned into light, and let the light of
thy saving countenance cheer me in this nights darkness: for without thy
favor I live in darkness in the most clear day light; and having thee my
light, the darkness of the night shall be light unto me.

Lord abandon from my heart all unholy thoughts this night, and give me a
watchful heart, though my body sleep, mine eyes shut up, and all thy visible
creatures, all carnal objects be taken from my sight, let the eyes of mine
understanding be always open, to behold to my comfort, thy brightness and
glory. The Heavens declare thy glory, and the Firmament shows the work of
thine hands: these and all other thy creatures, show thy greatness, and the
preservation of them, shows thy goodness; and mine own continual
preservation, I cannot but to my shame and condemnation, confess, to thy
praise and glory. Give me therefore holy Father, a thankful heart, for thy
mercies this day past, and a fearful heart to offend thee sleeping, by evil
and corrupt dreams; or waking, by evil and ungodly thoughts, and unholy
imaginations: that sleeping and waking, I may feel the working of thy Spirit,
either in holy Meditations, or faithful Prayers; that even as the day
requires me not to be idle, in well performing my lawful labors, so I may
not spend my night-wakings in idle fantasies, but in holy thoughts. And let
me not be overcome as Samson, with sleep, who lost his strength, least Satan
finding me so sleeping, should deprive me of my faith in thee, which is my
strength, the strength of my life: but that I may so watch, as whether I wake,
I may wake to thee, or whether I sleep, I may sleep in thee. Lord, let me not
sleep in my sins* ^et me not carry the guil^ of my transgressions past unto
my bed, but through the merits of my Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, vouchsafe
me pardon for all my sins, and be thou pleased to be reconciled unto me,
through his Blood: So will I lay me down to take my rest, beseeching thee so
to watch over me, that I may rest in peace, and rise in peace: and let the
words of my mouth, that I shall utter this night, and the meditations of my
heart, be acceptable unto thee, O Lord my GOD, my Strength, and my Redeemer.
Amen.

Lord increase my Faith this night, and confirm it in me for evermore. Amen.
A most comfortable encouragement, to all poor and distressed men, to undergo
whatsoever trouble, with patience, by the example of most holy men, that have
been in greatest affliction: and may serve as a general motive, to sundry
several Prayers following.
TRouble comprehends all the miseries that man endures in this life,
adversity, enemies, sickness, poverty, persecution, and all kinds of
afflictions, and sufferings, infinite in number, grievous in quality, and
irksome to flesh and blood, and befalls on men diversely, either for the
punishment of sin past, or for the preventing of sin to come. God sends
affliction upon his own dearest children, to weine them from the love of the
vanities of the world, that they perish not with the world: But unto the
wicked, as the beginning of their sorrows; and to terrify his own from
committing like sins by example of their punishments.

Gods children are forewarned, that they must suffer: He that will live godly
in Christ, must suffer affliction; yet by promise, not above their strength:
for God puts to his hand, to make their burden light, with a promise also of
future comfort; and though their troubles seem great and grievous, faith in
God makes them more easy to them that suffer, then they conceive that behold
them with carnal eyes. Great indeed are the troubles of the righteous, but God
delivers them out of all. Sorrow and heaviness may endure for a night,
namely, during this life, but joy comes in the morning, after this death, and
at the resurrection of the dead, glory for evermore.

Troubles are but for a moment, and then comes comfort; therefore do the
children of God with joy and patience undergo them: But contrary, the comfort
of the wicked, is here short and momentany, but their future misery will be
perp^tuall.

The patient suffering of the children of God, is a manifest token of the
righteous judgment of God, as Saint Paul says to the Thessalonians, whose
patient suffering he commended, imputing it a glory unto them, that they were
accounted worthy of the kingdom of God, for which they suffered. Whereby it
appears, that every suffering, even of the godly, is not glorious such as
befall them for their transgressions. But if we live godly in Christ, and for
that suffer trouble, we may comfort our selves, and bear it with patience, by
whom, or howsoever we are afflicted: for we may be assured, that God in his
Justice, will recompense tribulation, to them that wrongfully trouble us; and
to us that are so wrongfully troubled, rest and peace in the end.

But affliction befalls Gods children oftentimes, for seeming other causes,
then for righteousness sake; as when the wicked mis-conceiue of their actions,
and judge of them as wicked doers, without just caus^, as did Jobs friends,
accusing him of hypocrisy; and as Shimei, railing upon David; the wicked
judges, falsely accusing Susanna: though it proceeded not from these wicked men,
as of malice against them for that they were godly, but instigated by the
malice of Satan, to abuse them, because he saw their integrity, and holy
conversation toward God, therefore made he them his instruments to afflict
them: which trouble of theirs, may be also said to be for Christ's sake,
forasmuch as Satan did what he could to shake their faith in God, and so to
fall from their holy conversation. And thus works he against the dearest
children of God at this day.

Satan cannot endure with patience, any that lives in the true fear of God,
to pass in so holy a conversation, but that he will endeavor to blemish them,
at least, seeking all possible means by afflicting them, to make them doubt,
whether, by Gods permitting the wicked to afflict them, they stand in the favor
of God, or no; that if it were possible, he might draw them from their
obedience to God, and their dependence upon his providence, and to seek some
sinister, or ungodly means to free themselves.

He saw that Job served God truly, and that God was his continual protector
and refuge: therefore did he malign Job, and tried his uttermost infernal
stratagems, to cause him to distrust God: he slew his dearest children, he
raised the Sabeans, and others to rob him of his goods, he brought upon his
person loathsome diseases, he drew upon him extreme poverty: when none of
these could withdraw him from his faith in God, he caused his own wife to be
an instrument of deepest malice against him. What greater affliction could
befall a mortal man? yet in all this was not Job unfaithful, but depended
still on God, knowing, that though God was pleased to permit Satan to punish
him in this so strange a manner, God had his end therein for Jobs good,
contrary to Satan's purpose: for where Satan's aim and end was, to have
confounded Job body and soul; God, notwithstanding Satan's malice, turned Jobs
miseries, into unspeakable comfort here, and future eternal salvation, and
caused his story to be written, for our imitation of Jobs constancy and
patience.

Here is matter of comfort for all Gods afflicted children, in what manner
soever they be afflicted, for this holy man Job suffered all kinds of trials,
loss of goods, sickness of body poverty, slander, vpbrayding, railing on of
his own wife; and what not? By which we may learn that Satan is skillful in
the art of afflicting, if one kind will not serve, he has a second, a third,
and infinite: yet can he do no more then God permits him, who according to
his promise, gives to the faithful a comfortable issue, in all their
tentations.

It is the cognizance of Gods Children, to seem most abject in the world, and
so they are to the world, tossed hither and thither, with the tempestuous waves
of diverse tribulations.

David a man chosen after Gods own heart, how was he vexed on all sides,
inward and outward? both before he came to the Crown by Saul and his malicious
and ungodly retinue; as also after, by foreign enemies, the Philistims, the
Moabites, the Edomites, the Amonites, the Amalekites, and others; by his own
subjects, by them of his own house: as by Achitophell, his own privy
Counselor, and by Absolon his natural, or rather, unnatural son. In all
which troubles, he fainted not, but rested still in hope, not seeking revenge
of his enemies; but only craved aid of God, who never failed him, nor
forsook him. God never forsakes his, though for a time he suffer them to
taste a little smart, that their delivery may be the more sweet.

None of the dearest Children of God, have lived and died free from one trial,
or trouble or another, only by Satan's malice, yet to their own good. He
began first with innocent Abell, causing cursed Kayne to kill him, for the
sincere worship of the living God. Faithful Abraham was not free from trials
and afflictions, from doubtings and fears. He was commanded of GOD to offer
his Son Isack in Sa^rifice, in whose seed the blessing was promised (a heavy
tentation,) being affraide of his life for his wives sake, was driven to fair
an untruth, both to Pharaoh in Egypt, and to Abimelech in ^^ran; he had
trouble by Lot his brother: he had grief for the destruction of Sodom, and
many other troubles befell that holy man.

Izaake for fear to be slain for Rebekah his wife, exposed her chastetie to
the will of a Heathen king: He was afflicted by the Philistimes, he was
crossed in his desire of preferring Esau before Iaakob; And thereat stricken
with great fear to observe the providence of God, so to prevent his will:
Iaakob was enforced to fly out of his own Country and from his friends, and
to be a servant in a strange Land, for fear of the wrath of Esau his brother;
he was deceived by Laban his uncle, and hated of his nearest kinsmen Labans
sons: he was inforc^d to fly from them, and was pursued, and threatened by
Laban, whose purpose was to do him violence, but GOD, the Protector of his,
prevented him. He was incountred by a man in the night (the Angel of God) who
wrestling with him all the night, shook him fearfully, and lamed him: he
marched on with pain of his thigh and in great fear and perplexity, with his
wives, his children, and his droues toward his offended brother Esau, Who came
against him with four hundred men. He was miserably tormented for the loss
of Joseph his dearest son, whom he thought to be murdered: He was much and
grievously perplexed, at his sons murdering his neighbor Sechemites.

Joseph was sold by his brethren, for a slave into a barbarous and profane
Nation; he was falsely accused, and wrongfully imprisoned. Yet God turned all to
work together for his good, as he does even at this day for his.

How many trials, crosses, troubles and afflictions, had that most meekest man
Moses? He was like to be slain by the Angel of God in the Inn, for not
circumcising his son, whom Zipporah his wife withstood, and at last
circumcised him her self, and cast the foreskinne of her son, at Moses feet;
saying, Thou art indeed a bloody husband unto me. A heavy tentation, that
she that lay in his bosom, should so vpbrayde him, especially for executing
the strict command of God: Besides this, how was he troubled by the peoples
Idolatry, murmuring, and rebellion? Being threatened, and in fear to be stoned
of the people: And many other crosses had he.

Not one of Christ's Apostles, or faithful Fathers of the Primitive Church, no
not Christ himself has escaped the troubles of this mortal life, and shall
we, (we^e we his dearest children) think, or desire to escape it, since it is
our honor to suffer with, and for Christ?

The Scriptures themselves, besides authentike Histories abound with witnesses,
that Gods Children have been ever most afflicted, and that God yet n^uer
fails them, nor finally forsakes them.

Whosoever therefore, is strayted with any troubles, or pressed with any
afflictions: Let them make use of the examples of Gods dealing with, and his
mercies showed toward, our former afflicted faithful Fathers. For he is the
same God still, he has the same power, the same providence, the same love,
and the same Fatherly care of the^ that trust in him, as our faithful
forefathers did; and were delivered. And the memorial of their faith and
patience, is recorded by former holy men of God, as by Moses, by David, by the
Prophets, by Christ and his Apostles, to teach us, to imitate them in holy
obedience, even us upon whom the ends of the world are come, that through our
like patience and faith, we might have hope to be likewise eased of our
afflictions and troubles, as th^se and other holy men hoped, and were
delivered, and relieved.

David that worthy King of ^srael, penned to the praise and glory of God, for
our instruction and comfort, sundry most sweet and comfortable Psalms, in the
midst of his greatest troubles, showing the force of his faith to be so
strong, and his hope so assured, depending upon Gods power, promises and
providence, as he deemed himself, even then delivered, when he was yet in
greatest peril.

Such was the firm and constant hope of holy David, that in all his troubles,
sickness of the body, danger of enemies, yea, when his Crown was like to be
taken from his head, by his own son; through patience and hope, not limiting
the holy one of Jsrael, he waited Gods leisure, and was delivered: teaching us
to attend Gods appointed time without grudging at our troubles.

There is no danger so great, no tentation so strong, out of which God is not
able to deliver his. For example, was not Daniel in a desperate danger, being
cast into the hungry Lions Den? Did he perish there? The three children in
the seuenfold hot Furnace, were they consumed? Did not the powerful and
preuayling hand of God, the Angel of his presence, miraculously preserve them
in his mercy? And did he not confound the ministers of their intended torments
in his Justice?

Why then shall faithful men fear or be affrayd at the ^alice, and furious
threats of whatsoever roaring Tyrant? God has power over their hearts and
hands. And therefore says David, full of faith, I will not fear what man can
do unto me, for it is the Lord that makes me to dwell in saftie.

What, if then I be sick with Hezekiah he can apply the sweet and salutary
figs of his favor to heal me, or will afford me the patience to bear it,
or which is best of all, a speedy dissolution, to rest with him.

If poverty assail me, should I grudge, and repine at the wealth and
prosperity of others, even as holy David himself once seemed to do, seeing
himself in necessity, and the wicked to prosper? This he did in his haste, but
upon more holy deliberation, and consultation with the Word of God, he did
acknowledge it good for him so to be humbled; knowing that God forgets not
the poor that call upon him, though he supply not our necessities in
abundance, yet he never will fail to provide for us, that we perish not.

He may suffer us to want some superfluous things of this world, that the
wealthy have: but instead thereof, he will give us better things that the
wealthy want. Though Lazarus was poor and naked, hungry and full of sores
here, loathsome to the eye of men; and the rich man gloriously robed, his belly
full, his body free from spott or wrinkle, which of these was the happiest? Man
could not judge, but their ends declared, which of them had the best portion,
the vilest of them in man's sight, was most glorious in Gods, and contrary.

Man often fails in judgment, of men's happiness, because he sees only
the case, and sees not the Jewel within it; he discerns only the outward
habit, but not the inward heart, and therefore knows not what end any man
shall make: for whatsoever the outward show be of a happy man, believe it not,
till thou see his end.

What a miserable man was Job on the dunghill? and what an unhappy man was
Joseph in prison? what ends the Lord made with them both, is manifest.

What a happy man was Nabuchadnezzar in his glorious palace? and what a
glorious Monarch was Balteshasher, who feasted one thousand of his Vassal
Princes at once? What a worthy, wise, and glorious King was Herod, the son of
Aristobulus, surnamed Agrippa, sitting in his royal robes, in his regal
throne, at whose Oration, the people showted, crying, The voice of God, and not
of a man? Look within a while upon the first, and thou shall see him grazing
with the wild beasts of the forest. Look upon the second, and thou shall
suddenly see him perish in his drunkenness: and behold the third, and thou
shall see him, immediately upon his Deified Oration, to be devoured with the
vermin of his own bowels.

The estates of these kinds of men, seen with the eyes of a carnal man, are
censured as they seem: but these, and infinite other examples, prove that the
mighty and the wise men of the world, are not all glorious within, though
gorgious with ^ut Judge not therefore the ends of men by their outward
appearance: for the most glorious beginnings of men not fearing God, come often
to fearful ends. To prove further by Histories we need not, we have seen
it with our eyes.

But as touching the children of God, they for the most part seem base; and
such as are seemly to the outward appearance, have yet humble spirits, seeming
not the wisest in the world, because they are inwardly so innocent and
harmless, as they can show no carnal policies, as do the wise of the world:
but the basest and seeming vilest of Gods children, that want plenty of food
for their bodies, or competent clothes to cover their nakedness, are yet,
through faith, the fear of God, and humbleness of heart, accepted of God. And
although it be observed, that at their deaths there be no pompous funeral
Obsequies, yet dying the Saints of God, they have the Angels of God attending
the^, who convey that part which the world sees not, into heavenly Paradise,
as they did the soul of Lazarus, and leave that seeming base part to the
world, in as mean a manner to be disposed to the earth.

If yet the ungodly poor should pretend interest in the love and promises of
God, and of his good creatures; because David says, There is a God that
cares for the poor, they deceive themselves: for there is no promise, but to
the poor fearing God, and that endeavor to live by their lawful labors: for
no wilfully idle poor man can expect any promised comfort from God, but the
godly who are made poor by Gods providence, to draw them to himself through
affliction.

God tries all his children, poor and rich, not after one and the same
manner, but some by enemies, as he did David; some by sickness, as he did
Hezekiah; some by imprisonment, as he did Joseph; some with poverty and
penury, as he did Lazarus; some by loss of children and goods, as he did
Job: yet he has his time again to release them, as he raised David to the
Crown of Jsrael, as he healed Hezekiah, and gave him longer life, from the
prison he made Joseph a Prince; he gave Job abundance of wealth, and took
Lazarus from his misery in^o Abraham's bosom.

When then that has any faith or feeling of these most worthy examples of Gods
humbling his Chrildren, and again raising them up, will faint or fear,
whatsoever befall them in this life? Were he persecuted, as Eliah by Jezebel,
who had no visible helps, but a silly boy attending him; did not God send an
host of heavenly Angels for his defense? God has his Angels ministering
Spirits, still ready to incampe about his: such is his care and watchfulness,
his power and his prou^dence, that no Saul shall prevail against his chosen
David, though he were a mighty King with his armies against that one single
man he could not hurt him: no Senacherib with his mighty Host, could not have
his will against faithful Hezekiah. And therefore says David full of
assurance, If an Host pitched against me, my heart should not be affrayd. So
Iaakob was not dismayde at Esaus coming against him with four hundred men,
because he knew that God was with him.

But admit that an Herod have power permitted him of God, to take away John
Baptists head, and to kill James with the sword, shall we deem it a hurt unto
them, in furthering and hastening their delivery, from misery, to their future
glory with Christ?

Whatsoever the enemies of God practice against the faithful Children of GOD,
by persecuting them, as they did by whipping Paul, by imprisoning Peter, by
stoning Steven: Do they not make these the more glorious in their patient
suffering for Christ, who has provided for them a City, a Kingdom, a Crown?
What lose then these seeming miserable men, when for their momentanie
sufferings, they shall receive a perpetual reward?

Gods faithful Children, the more they are persecuted and afflicted, the more
they flourish in well doing, and the more they suffer, the more faithful,
strong, and constant they grow; And the more miseries they endure, so much the
more take they hold of Gods power providence and promises, who has assured
them, that he will never fail them, nor forsake them: But whatsoever, by
whomsoever, and in what manner soever, they suffer, all shall work together
for their future eternal happiness.

A general Prayer, in whatsoever troubles and afflictions, with a confession,
that sin is the cause of them.
O Father, full of mercy, and abundant in loving kindness, in Jesus Christ
thy best beloved: thou have ever a most Fatherly care of thy Children, though
thou permit them often times to undergo heavy afflictions in this present
life; by reason of which their grievous troubles, they are commonly censured of
the world: to be evil doers, and to be cast out of thy favor, as was thy
dear servant Job. And such as ever prosper and fall into no misfortunes, nor
troubles like other men, to be most beloved of thee, which often causes thy
dearest Children to doubt of thy love. But Lord, I know thee to be a Father,
whose property is to correct those whom thou love best, to keep them under
thine obedience, who else by reason of their original corruption, the worlds
vanities, and Satan's malice might be easily drawn to rebel against thee.

I account it therefore gracious Father, an especial token of thy favor and
love toward me, that thou in so gentle a manner, do remember me, and so
favorably to correct me; for I cannot but acknowledge Lord, and confess
against my self, that my heart within me is so filthy, my mind so polluted,
and my will and affections so infected with sin, that if thou should seem
to wink at, and pass by mine infinite transgressions, and not in some measure
to afflict me, I could not but according to mine own corrupt condition, but
run into and commit more and more heinous sins, then hetherunto I have
done; which, already are more then sufficient, to cast me clean out of thy
favor; and consequently leave me to mine own unruly will, which evermore
hungreth and thirsts after things most offensive unto thee.

I do confess, O Lord, that pleasure and ease, and fullness of all carnal
delights, are most sweet unto to my carnal mind, but much offensive to thy
most holy will. The things that I should do I cannot do: but the things that
I should not do, they are my chief delight, I love what I should loathe, and
loathe that which is life unto my soul, whereby I heap upon me daily, a most
importable burden of thy wrath; And were it not that thou do visit me with
these thy Fatherly corrections, I could not but merely forget, that ever thou
createst me, that Jesus Christ came and suffered to save me, or that there
were a Holy Ghost sent to comfort me. And therefore, good Father lay upon me,
here what troubles or afflictions thou in thy wisdom think sit to reclaim
me from my evil ways: and yet as thou know to an obdu^ate heart,
afflictions, though they be sharp and grievous, yet they profit not without
thou with thy corrections, add the molifying plaster of thy Spirit, to make
my heart appliable to thy working hand. Thou saydest unto Paul, having carnal
motions, that thy Spirit was sufficient to sustain him. O let thy Spirit
possess me, then shall my stubborn heart relent, then shall my peruers will
in some measure frame it self to thy Will; then shall my corrupt mind now
wandering after unholy things be reclaymed, and only seek thee and the things
more pleasing unto thee.

The Fathers of our flesh have been careful of our corporal preservation,
and have in love corrected us, for our childish faults. And shall I think,
that it behooves me not to subject my self to thy loving care of the
preservation of my soul, who seeing, not only the faults of my weak youth,
but the gross sins of my ripest age, that I should repine, at thy loving
chastisements, which thou so favorably infl^ctest upon me, not to confound
me, but to conform me to thine obedience. And therefore, Father, as thou well
obseruest my sins, which either I neglect to call to mind, or which I cannot
but remember; so consider what correction is fit for my reformation, for I am
thine, and under thine own hand: do with me what it shall please thee, only
strengthen my faith, that whatsoever thou layest upon me, I may still trust in
thee.

Yet Lord let not thy corrections be ouersharpe, or over heavy, or ouerlong
for me to bear, for I am weak. And therefore as thou increasest thy
corrections, so increase my strength to bear them. And as my sins by thy
Grace shall diminish; so Lord, withdraw and withhold thy correcting hand: that
in what measure soever my troubles and trials be, my faith may be so
confirmed, as I may be able to bear whatsoever thou shall be pleased to lay
upon me.

Hetherunto good Father, as I have felt thy correcting rod, so also I have
found thy supporting hand: thou woundest, and thou healest, nay rather Lord,
thou curest the wounds which my self have made, for there is no sharper sword
to my soul, then mine own sin, and thy chastisements do abate the edge
thereof.

As thou know my sins Lord, so thou know my troubles. I am in danger,
deliver me; I am in want, relieve me; I have enemies, defend me. In thee I
trust; for there is none besides thee, whom I may trust.

Thou art that mighty Jehovah, that omnipotent God of Hosts, who have infinite
means to help, relieve, comfort, and defend those that are thine, though they
be beset with a thousand miseries, with sickness, with poverty, with enemies,
with slander, backbiting, envy, malice, strife of tongues, imprisonment, and
with what else soever misery that Satan can devise against them, thou have yet
more infinite means to deliver them out of all. And therefore Father, if all
troubles, crosses, trialls and callamities should meet and combine in one
against me, I shall not (assisted by thy grace) be overmuch moaned or dismayed.

Though trouble and affliction bring sorrow, and sorrow, heaviness for a time,
yet is my heart restored again at length, as it were to life again by thy
grace: nay, Lord, I often find joy in thy favor, even in the midst of misery:
for as thou Lord, continuest not long in thine anger; so is not my heart in
continual heaviness. But as by thine holy aid I increase in faith: even so
decreaseth my grief and sorrow* and in my greatest troubles, the apprehension
of thy blessed presence with me, causes my heart to leap for joy within me:
though by nature I am weak, and prone to stoop and droope under the least
affliction, yet I find thy grace evermore ready to support and strengthen me.
Therefore do I yield thee all honor, praise, and thanks* together with my Lord
and Savior Christ Jesus, and thy heavenly Spirit, that evermore does comfort
me, and confirm my faith in thee

Lord evermore increase my Faith.
A Prayer for a man hindered by sickness, or any kind of infirmity of his body
or limbs, whereby he is disabled to follow and perform his lawful calling:
fit especially for such as cannot maintain their poor estates, without
performance of their honest labors.
O Great, and most gracious Lord God, merciful and loving Father in Jesus
Christ; thou have created me, formed and framed me with all complete limbs and
lineaments in the beginning, with all my senses perfect; and above all, with a
measure of the knowledge of thee and thy Christ: wherein, for that I have not
so walked, as becomes a son of so gracious and great a father, but have too
much neglected my duty and thankfulness, erring, estraying, and ranging to
and fro from one vanity and sin unto another, abusing all the parts and powers
of my soul and body, contrary to that light which thou has^ given me, defiling
my self, and polluting those parts of my corrupt flesh, which thou first
createdst in me clean and free, from any of mine own actual pollutions. Thou
in great mercy have inflicted these infirmities upon my corporal parts, to
cure my diseased soul, my spiritual and best part, imprisoned and inthrall^d
in a most filthy and loathsome dungeon of dark and detestable impieties.

Lord, I do confess my else worthy of greater punishments for my grievous
sins. But thou art so merciful, and so commiserate a Father, that as thou
know the quality of my sins, so thou well know what quantity of
correction may be sufficient to reform me. And therefore, I do wholly, and in
all submission commit my self unto thy mercy, knowing that thou have power to
mitigate, or totally to remove the pain and misery, which my sins have justly
drawn down upon me.

Good Father, remember that thou have promised, that whatsoever we shall ask
of thee in the name of thy beloved Son Christ, and waver not, we shall
receive. Lord, I believe, that thou art able to cure me of whatsoever
infirmity; let not the weakness of my faith hinder thy good work upon me;
let not my former sins prevent thy mercy: for I constantly assure me, that
thou can help me, such is thy power; and that thou either wilt help me, or
so mitigate mine infirmities, as I shall not only be able to bear them with
patience, but in a measure sufficiently follow my vocation, such is thy mercy.

Father, I have a Mediator with thee, and such a mediator, as is not ignorant
of, though never tainted or touched with any humane infirmity, he has taken
upon him, and satisfied for my sins; and for my sins I do acknowledge this
mine infirmity is fallen upon me; Therefore Lord, my sins being once
sufficiently punished in him, punish not me ouer-heauily for them again.

I am unfeignedly sorry, for that I have offended thee, and do heartily repent
me of my sins; and thou have promised pardon to the penitent, and mercy unto
such as are truly sorry for their sins.

This being thine own promise, Lord, and thou knowing my faith (though weak)
and my repentance, what should hinder thy mercies in forgiving my sins? and my
sins being forgiven, what should hinder that thy sweet saying* Be thou whole,
and I shall be whole?

Lord, as thou can do all things by thy word, without means, so by blessing
whatsoever means, that which thou will shall be done: the very clay in the
street opens the eyes of the blind (thou giving a blessing unto it) which in
humane opinion should rather make blind them that see. But such is thy great
power, and virtue of thy word, as things most contrary to humane reason, obey
thee, and work the effect whereunto thou appointest them: as the cluster of
figgs, healed Hezekias, and the washing in Jordan cured Naaman the Syrian of
his leprosy.

Thou Lord art the great Phisician, curing Phisicians that cannot cure
themselus, how much less others, without thee. Therefore I know, that nothing
can hinder thy healing of me, but mine own unbelief and sin, which are the
chief diseases of my soul, that thus pollute my body: so that soul and body
being sick, I come an humble patient and petitioner, desirous only to touch
the hem of thy garment; for I believe Lord, that if my faith fail not, I shall
draw virtue from thee, and be either fully healed, or eased.

Wherefore most gracious Lord God in Jesus Christ, increase and confirm my
faith, and say unto me, Be it unto thee as thou beleeuest: then shall I be
whole; for I constantly believe, that thou can do it, but that thou know
what is best for me. In thy providence it befell, as a token of thy displeasure
for my sins, that I might be thereby continually put in mind, when I intend
any thing offensive unto thee, that by my further sinning I should fear
greater punishments: for thou know my corrupt nature, ever inclinable to
forbidden things, and therefore wilt continue thy gentle hand upon me, lest I
repenting of my repentance, should return again to new sins: which, good
Father, I humbly pray thee in favor to prevent. If thou tarry long, and delay
thy help, let not my faith falter, nor fail me, nor my heart be discouraged;
for thou know better what is best for me, then I my self: And therefore
will I wait when, what, and how thou will work for me; nothing doubting, but
that in thy fatherly providence, thou will provide for me, and that thou will
never fail me, nor forsake me. Amen.

Lord increase my faith.
A consideration or consultation, touching the estates and conditions of
several men, their vocations, manners, lives lawful and unlawful,
punishable, and to be cherished: serving also as a necessary motive to a
prayer, for the blessing of God upon the lawful callings of men, of whatsoever
condition: necessary for all men, that hope of any blessing upon their labors,
travels, professions, arts, trades, or employments.
IT is not enough for a man to have, or to desire a calling in the Church or
Commonwealth; but before he undertake it, he must consider, whether it be
lawful, agreeable to the word of God, honest, or necessary for the use and
society of men; and whether his apprehension and inclination be capable and
able to manage it aright.

It is not lawful, though it be privately profitable to himself, if a man find
himself not fit, neither is lawfully called thereunto, but assumes it to
himself, neither respecting Gods glory, ^or the good of others, and
consequently not honest; for that it proceeds only, respecting his own
corrupt ends: of which kind, may be observed, not a few who intrude into
functions and callings, such as they cannot with a good conscience, nor with
sufficient understanding perform, which must rest upon every man's conscience
for his choice.

Some have again lawful and laudable callings, of themselves sufficient, and
yet may, and often do err in the execution, either for private profit, or
forbidden ends.

Some live without any lawful profession, profitable to none, no not to
themselves, but are only Ladders, to bring most plentiful mulcture to the
Devils mill, their patrimonies to Tauernes, Alehouses, and worse places: mils
that grind only wickedness, feeding themselves and others therewith, fat in
impieties, for the shambles of Satan.

Of this, are some well descended Gentlemen, whose ancestors have borne
honorable and praise worthy Offices both in Church and Commonwealth, doing good
to many, and to none more hurt, the^ unto their dearest children, to whom they
have left great earthly portions, and patrimonies, and no good education or
profession, to live as men; no, not as men: for all men are borne to labor in
one commendable calling or another, for the Church or Commonwealth to neither
of which are many of these men profitable, but run on in their lascivious
lives, as the horse and mule, who yet in their kind have more understanding,
and are more profitable then many of these men seem yet to be.

All parents yet are not much blameworthy: for some are careful, as men to
provide for their children, worldly goods, to maintain them after their
deaths. Some as Religious men, desire more the good education of their children
in religious knowledge, then desirous to make them great, they rather endeavor
to make them good, which last is the work of God, without whose grace,
howsoever parents may instruct, and educate their children in Gods fear, and
by a primary apprehension of their towardness in virtue; yet it falls
oftentimes out, that even these, full of hoped towardness to prove good and
virtuous, and fit for laudable employments, when their parents full estates
befall them, they associate the company of such, as turn all the good they
formerly learned into evil for though the father plant, the Minister waters,
yet if the Spirit of God confirm it not in them, they will show themselves to
be but men, and such as fear not God, nor reverence man, but live as if there
were no law, spending, as boastingly they will say, but their own. It were
fault sufficient to consume it, had it bin their own, gotten by the sweat of
their own faces: but being left unto them by their careful fathers, or loving
friends, it is reputed by law theirs indeed, yet so as they should hold it as
the free gift of God, or rather lent of him, rather to do good with it, then
with the prodigal unthrift, to consume it as these men do upon their lusts.
And having spent all, as (in Gods just judgment) many of them do, as daily
experience shows, what becomes of them? does not like experience tell us?

Many idle drones there are also, that have not that, they by any color may
call their own, and yet they spend and labor not, but are as the froth and
scumme of a good Common wealth. As touching their conversation, it is not only
idle, in good things, but laborious in evil: they roaue and run about the
city and country, ^ilching, stealing, couzening, cheating, rioting in all
kinds of wickedness, and whose profession is only to deceive.

Can these men pray for a blessing upon their vocations and labors? Nay, can
they, or do they pray at all? They may have, and often have the name of God,
and his parts in their mouths, but for a curse, not for a blessing; for in
stead of praying unto God, they blaspheme his name.

It is manifestly observed, that God is abused, and the Common wealth pestered,
and privily endangered, by the idleness, wickedness, and mischiefs of these
men: And yet who takes it into consideration and endeavor to reform it? Some
are in places so eminent, as they cannot look so low; and some are in place of
Office so mean, that have a good will to put hand to help it, but their power
is weak, and their countenance and aid small: they dare not tax an offender
in this kind, especially a Gentleman-like Roarer, that can make a whole Street,
or a Hamlet to quake at his carriage, and execrable blasphemies.

Some have lawful callings, but use them not lawfully, for want of the grace
of God to guide them, and the blessing of God to profit the Church, or
Commonwealth by them, because they seldom or never pray for a blessing.

Some are often seen to prosper in outward show, by callings, or rather trades
unlawful, whereunto there can be no lawful calling, neither is the use
lawful, as common professed Gamesters, combined Cheaters, and the like.

But leaving such to their own wicked practices, whereby they often deceive the
innocent and simple, but most of all, themselves; I wish that other men that
have lawful callings, would consider the necessity of Prayer to God, for a
blessing upon their labors and endeavors, not only Mechanics, and such as
live by their handy-labours, but from the highest to the lowest, in Church or
Commonwealth.

It is by God that Kings govern; therefore in imitation of David and Solomon,
they pray for, and obtain wisdom, rightly to govern their people; and where
good, godly, wise and religious Kings reign, there the people in imitation of
them, pray for their peace and safety, and that God would furnish them with
wise and religious Counselors, and that no Achitophell lurk waiting for
mischief.

Counselors of State, have an high and weighty calling, so have Judges of the
Land, and other chief and eminent Magistrates, derived mediatly from God; for,
as the King is called of none, but immediately by God to take change of his
people: So he imparts the power of the sword, unto his sub-ordinate Magistrates,
for the execution of Justice, functions of greater weight and moment, then is
vulgarly esteemed. And therefore, though I neither presume, not need to move
them when or how to pray. I only may remember them, that as they have highest
functions, they and we in their behalfes for them, may pray for the due
execution of them; because their office and place is to correct the evil, and
to protect the good, and that they mistake not, as by sinister information they
may, and so err unwittingly.

Men in authority, and in eminent places are chosen for their Virtues,
Wisdom, Integrity and Justice, yet are they subject to censure, not only of
their Superiors, and equals, but often of most inferiors, wherein happy are
the innocent, for GOD preserves them, who sits in the Throne, that judges
right, to whom whosoever prays as David did, shall find that he will be a
buckler unto him; his glory, and the lifter up of his head the greatest honor
that man in this life can receive.

It may seem needless, to put such in mind of this holy duty of prayer, who
have the charge and oversight of the Lords flock; for their calling is so
divine, as they may not be, but divinely endued with heavenly gifts, abounding
always in the work of the Lord, whose labors are not in vain, blessed be
God, whom we ought to reverence, as the Ministers of God, laboring our
salvation, and to pray for them.

Yet may it not be superfluous, to intimate to such as enter rashly into this
holy function, that it is fit for them to examine their own inward hearts,
whether they came with a sincere Spiritual devotion to edify Gods Church; or
to make only a carnal living under the name of a workman in Gods harvest: If
he came in regard of the first, Let him pray that God will bless his labors,
if only of the second, Let him pray that God will enable him to discharge it,
and withal that GOD remit the evil thoughts of his heart, for he entered not
aright.

Such as live by their labors, be they never so ingenious, never so
labourious, never so cunning in their profession, art, or trade, they must know
and acknowledge, that what they know, or howsoever they may perform it, it is
but in part, and weak in comparison of the perfection. And that the knowledge
and skill they have is not theirs, but given them by God, as he gave to
Tubalkaine, the art of working in iron, and to Iubal, skill in music. Yet
some, and they not of best perfection, will attribute their knowledge to their
own natural wit and invention, making an idol, as it were, of their own
brain, never giving the praise to the true Giver; and that, and the want of
prayer is the cause that many Artists and others fail oftentimes of good
success of what they undertake to perform.

Nothing can truly prosper without Gods blessing, which cannot be obtained,
but by faithful prayer. Neither will God hear their prayers, that deal
unjustly in their callings, taking never so great pains, rising early, taking
rest late, sparing even their food to increase their store, it is all in vain;
Howsoever some may, and do, wax rich, by dealing unjustly, in weights,
measures, false and counterfeit wares, by swearing, forswearing, and lying; the
gains they get, are but froth and silth, scraped out of the devils dunghill*
that will quickly return from whence it came, and he that so gets without
repentance, shall have his portion with his like, the Rich man, not with
Lazarus.

Happy therefore is he, that labou^s in his calling diligently, deals truly,
craves Gods blessing faithfully, he, and only he, and his like have rest, and
peace, and plenty in their little truly gotten. Such are they that eat the
labors of their hands, and art blessed.

He therefore that will be happy, and prosper in his calling, let him often
and faithfully call upon the Name of the Lord, to which purpose he may use the
prayer following, or any other to the like purpose.

A Prayer that God will bless and prosper our labors and endeavors, in
whatsoever calling.
O Heavenly Father, great in Majesty, wise of Counsel, absolute in Power, and
unsearchable in Providence, who of nothing have made all things, and in thy
greatest Wisdom, have created man, whom thou guidest, gouernest and disposest
according to thine own Will, and to whom thou have appointed labor, and
travail, whereby to get their relief; yet not all, in one manner of calling.

Gracious Father, as I have received life, and being of thee, and in thy
providence, a calling therein, whereby to maintain my being: So give a
blessing unto me, that I may have true judgment, and an upright heart to
perform my duty therein, according to thy Will, that my calling may prosper
under my hands, as thou blessedst Iaakob under Laban, and Joseph in Potiphers
house: So bless me and my vocation, that whatsoever I do it may prosper.

I confess loving Father, that neither the most absolute art, greatest
natural knowledge, corporal or mental diligence, can avail any thing
without thy blessing.

By my natural understanding, I can neither apprehend in my mind, nor
perform with my hands, or wit, the things that properly belong unto my
calling: But it is thy only Wisdom, and of thine own Fatherly favor, that I
have been made in some measure, capeable of that reason and judgment, to
which I have attained, it is not in me, as of mine own power to perform the
least part of that, which necessarily belongs unto my vocation, It is thine
own work in me.

If thou should deal with me according to my deseruings, thou might
justly deprive me of that mean measure of knowledge, that by thy favor and
aid, I have attained unto, thou might weaken my senses, and the faculties
of my body and mind, all which I cannot but confess I have abused, and
without the use of them, thou know I cannot perform the works of my
calling.

I humbly therefore pray thee, good Father, rather to increase and continue in
me, that measure of knowledge, and that perfection of my body and mind, which
thou have already bestowed upon me, then either to deprive me of them, or to
weaken them in me.

I acknowledge, Gracious Lord, that there is no vocation or calling, high or
low, no labor, exercise or endeavor that can be useful or profitable to
himself or others, no man's life pleasing or commendable without thine
especial direction and blessing, and that in the Name, of that blessed of all
blessings, in whom as all blessedness does consist, So through his most
blessed mediation, and merrits, blessings upon blessings, are powered upon the
godly labors of all them, that in whatsoever calling ^n his Name, truly seek
to be blessed.

In him therefore Father of blessings, let thy blessing be upon me in all my
labors, enterprises and endeavors: for without thy blessing, aid, direction
and protection, I may labor, travail, be careful solicitous, diligent, and
most industrious, yet all in vain: my pains may be great, my rising up to my
labors early, yet without thy blessing little profit me: I may get much, but
I shall put it, as it were in a broken bag, my going forth without thy
blessing cannot be but dangerous, my travails subject to many perils, and in
euitable inconveniences.

Mine own carnal corruptions accompany me, whithersoeuer I go, ride, or
remain: the vanities of the world every where distract my wavering and
inconstant mind: And Satan with his millions of infernal ministers, provoking
me to sin, pursue me, ever plotting and practicing occasions to draw me
from thee; suggesting Idleness and Ease, to be sweet, and Labor and
Travail in lawful and honest callings, painful; deceit in my vocation,
gainefull; just dealing, foolish niceness; and negligent performance, a
sufficient discharge of my duty.

Thus being beset, good Father, within and without with sundry tentations, I
cannot without thy Grace, avoid the committing of many sins, not only in
abusing my calling, but in mine ordinary conversation and course of life: and
sin committed, draws on thy displeasure, and thy displeasure punishments,
such as in thy severity may justly disable me to perform my duty in my
calling, having no power in, or of my self to perform the least part of my
duty, either in my vocation or conversation.

Leave me not therefore, dear Father, unto mine own weakness, nor to the
will, and wiles of my Spiritual or corporal enemies, that hate me, and covet
to hinder, or slander every good work in me, rejoicing when any evil befalls
in my life or calling.

Prevent them, O Lord, and for thy best beloueds sake, teach me wisdom, and
give me understanding according to thy Word, that in all my ways, I may be
watchful; in my labors, painful; in my carriage and calling faithful and
just; and that my principal and chief care may ever be to please thee; And
furnish me so with true judgment, in all and every part of my duty, as
there may be nothing wanting in me, which may further thy Glory; which grant
for thy blessed Sons sake, JESUS CHRIST, to whom with thee and the Holy
Ghost, be praise for evermore. Amen.

Lord increase my faith.
He whose calling requires Iourneys by land or sea, may prepare himself by
adding this Prayer following, or to use it by it self.
MOst loving and most merciful Father in jesus Christ, I acknowledge my self
the weakest, and most ignorant of al humane creatures, having received in thy
providence, a calling requiring continual travails, iourneys, and much labor
of body and mind, having such and so great a troop of adversaries, and dangers
accompanying me in the execution thereof, as evermore seek to stop the way of
my good success therein, as well in my iourneying forth, in performing my
lawful labors abroad as also in my returning home.

I most humbly therefore pray thee, to have a fatherly care of me, and to take
charge of me in all my proceedings, in all places, among all men, and at all
times, that all my iourneis, from, and to mine own home, may be prosperous,
and all my labors and indeauors may succeed to thine own glory, to the
faithful discharge of my duty in all mine employments, to the competent
supply of whatsoever I need.

And forasmuch as these my iourneys, travails, and labors, are and may be
much hindered through sickness, and infirmities of my body, defects of my
limbs, bodily members and senses; the perfection of which being originally
thine own gif^s, continue my body in health, my limbs in strength, and all my
senses perfect, until the time when thou shall think fit to dissolve my whole
bodily frame, when I shall no more travail, no more labor, nor feel any
defect of body or mind. And grant, if it be thy good pleasure, that neither
sickness, death, or any other corporal infirmity, seize upon me in my
travels and iourneys, submitting my will yet unto thy will, knowing that thou
know what is most necessary for me; and that who so is thine, is thine, and
in thy favor, and protection, as well abroad, as in his own house; yea,
whenever, wheresoever, and in what manner soever thou art pleased to touch
him with thy correcting hand, or to call him out of this mortal life.

And forasmuch good Father, as there are many other impediments to hinder my
necessary iourneys, travels, and labors, as distemperature of the air,
immoderate weather, difficulties of ways, inundations of water, danger of
thieves, and euilly disposed persons, defects in the creatures, which thou
vouchsafest for my use in travel, and many other dangers, and hindrances,
infinite in number, all concealed from me until they fall, yet all known and
foreseen of thee, and all disposed and permitted by thee.

I most humbly therefore pray thee, to watch, and spread the wings of thy power
and providence over me, and stretch forth thy helping hand over me, that no
evil if it please thee, befall me. But if thy will be so, grant me wisdom
and patience, not to impute it to fained Fortune, but as indeed it is to mine
own sinful deseruings, and that I may be ever thankful unto thee, whatsoever
befall me.

Let the Angel of thy presence accompany me, let thy heavenly spirit ever
possess me, and let my heart evermore possess thee; let my thoughts be
evermore free from sin, and all the parts and powers of my body, my mind,
affections, and will, from every evil action, and ungodly desire.

Give me a holy fear, to walk, work, travail, and use mine occasions as in
thy presence, knowing that thou beholdest me, mine inward inclination, and
outward actions.

Thou know also, good Father, that besides mine own wandering and wavering
heart, Satan cease not to watch opportunity to snare me in some vain
object or other, in my silent and solitary travails, and iourneys, laying
before the eyes of my corrupt mind, infinite bayts to allure me to sin
against thee, that so I may offend thee; that by offending thee, thou in thy
displeasure may inflict some cross or hinderance unto my travels, and so to
prevent the good success of mine endeavors.

But grant good Father in Jesus Christ, that neither sin, Satan, nor mine own
corrupt desires, hinder thy blessings upon my travels, but that I may
constantly continue in thine obedience, and thy love toward me, not only in
these my travails, but unto my lives end. Amen.

Lord increase my faith, and prosper my Journey.
A motive to a Prayer for patience in godly Parents, that are afflicted in
mind for the disobedience, and ungodly lives of their children; whom if good
counsel cannot reform, prayer is to be made to God for them; if that will
not prevail, to leave them to God, and the Laws.
IT is not the least cross that can befall godly and religious parents, to see
and observe their own flesh and blood, their own dearest children, to be
disobedient and rebellious, and by their lewd lives, to become scandalous in
themselves, and a shame and slander unto their parents and friends. A grief it
is of all griefs, especially unto such parents as have had, not only, a
fatherly, but a religious care of their holy education: And their grief cannot
but be so much the more, by how much the world condemns the parents,
censuring them evil, by observing the ungodly lives of their children. A great
temptation to a careful father, that has done his uttermost godly endeavor to
educate his children in the fear of God; wherein the wise, indifferent, and
impartial obseruer, cannot but spare his condemnation, finding this corrupt
world so fraught with multitudes of wicked youth, whose examples abroad, do
work more evil in children, then the wisest and most godly father can work
good in them at home by their best counsel. It is no marvel then, that a good
man may have evil children, who though he propagate their bodies, cannot
infuse grace and goodness into their hearts; he can not frame their inclinations
to virtue, further the^ God by his divine Spirit, does second his good
endeavors. The Husbandman may soil his land with the best Marle, he may be
careful in plowing, circumspect in sowing, painful in harrowing, and as much
as in him lies, prevent the vermin that might devour the seed sown: Yet it
is not his labor, diligence, or best skill that can form the blade, nor infuse
the grain in the ear. A good and godly father may infuse his best counsel
into the ears of a refractory son, and harrowe him with sharp threats, to
prevent venomous vices, that devour best counsel: But he cannot imprint
grace in his heart, nor work the practice of godliness in him; he cannot drive
away Satan, and his wicked instruments, from devouring the good seed sown in
his son. Evil examples, and wicked counsel prevail more with corrupt
flesh, then most divine persuasions, or disswasions. It is a vain thing to
sow good corn upon a stony rock, it will take no root: so to give best
counsel to a stubburne, and an obdurate heart, can not fructify; yet must not
parents therefore give over, but again and again, early and late, endeavor to
encourage his children in ve^tue and goodness, and to reclaim them from sin,
according to the counsel of the Preacher in Ecclesiastes, Jn the morning sow
thy seed, and in the evening let not thine hand rest, for thou know not
whether shall prosper this or that, or whether both shall be a like good. So
should parents be alike instant, at all times to instruct their children with
holy counsel: for they know not, whether God have appointed this or that time,
or this or that advice, to convert them from evil to good: for as one drop
often falling, descends at last to moisten the root of the tree: So time, and
timely counsel, may mollify the hardest heart, and reform the peruersest
mind: for as the wind blows when and where it lists, and no man knows
from whence it comes; so may the Spirit of God come into the heart, when man
thinks least of it: therefore ought parents to pray earnestly, and often for
godly lives of their Children; in whom, then if God have any share, it will in
time prevail.

The reason why the world is so full of loose lascivious and unbridled youth,
is much in the evil examples of Parents, the want of the fear, and neglect of
the service of God; for the example of a father may something alter the nature
of a son in good, or evil. For there is a kind of inevitable imitation in the
son, of the fathers qualities; If they be good, nature rebelleth against them,
in the son, because it is corrupt; and if they be evil, nature it self
teaches the son, without further docume^t, how to resemble the father in
evil. And nothing can help the one, or bridle the other, but grace, which
cannot be obtained, but by prayer.

Another maine cause of Childrens lewdness, is too much lenity in Parents,
and too much liberty in Children, wherein idle doting and foolish mothers, are
commonly most guilty, who because they have given their Children suck of their
breasts, when they were young, they give them leave when they become able to
sin, to suck their pu^ses, to feed them fat in vices; in haunting Tauernes,
idle, and ungodly companies, drinking, gaming, and which is not the least,
pampering them in pride, the beginning of their fall; wherein many silly
fathers, are as guilty in winking at the mothers folly, or, not having the wit
or spirit to redress it, until their children, become so far plunged in
impieties; as when they would, they cannot not reclaim them, and so in fine,
are enforced, to see them, to their unspeakable grief, come either to public
shame and obloquie, or to untimely and fearful ends, which may befall the
ungodly Children of most godly Parents. What then? Shall the Parents bear the
shame of their Children that kick against all good counsel, and will
obstinately run to their own ruin? No. But if Parents be totally remiss in
wholesome counsel, and err in their example, in the eye of their Children, no
marvel if they taste of the shame, and grief, of, and for their Children.

But least good men, men fearing God, having ungodly Children, to whom they
have done their best duties in their youth to teach them, the way of
godliness, and they depart from it, should be too much dejected, and cast
down through grief conceived for the wickedness of their Children, let them
consider, that as they cannot make one hair black, that is white, no more can
they make him good, that is evil: neither can they keep them in awe that are
wilfully rebellious, nor prevent them of confusion, that voluntarily seek it.
Foolishly unadvised, then are they that will tax a good Father of an evil
Child (coming into shame, and deepest danger) with the error of his son,
when as good Children are the gifts God in mercy to the Parents, and wicked
ones a punishment, not so much to the Parents, as to themselves. Though every
man would willingly have good Children, yet the best men have had* and often have
wicked Children. Adam, the first man had wicked Caine. Abraham had an Ismael,
Izaake an Esau, David a rebellious Absalom, and an incestious Ammon, good Eli
had two wicked sons, Hophnie and Phineas. Infinite are the examples, yet no
doubt, these good men gave good instructions to these their erroneous issues,
whereby it appears, that it is not in good men to beget good Children,
neither does it follow, that wicked men always propagate wicked Children, God
frames both in the womb, gives them life and frames their hearts, wills and
affections.

It rests only then for Parents of ungodly Children, to pray for their
reformation, and to leave them to God, in whose counsel it is determined, what
shall be the ends of such as fear not him, nor reverence man.

A Prayer for the reformation of ungodly and disobedient Children, and for
patience in Parents, not overmuch to afflict themselves, for their
irreconciliable stubbornenesse and disobedience.
Hear the words of my mouth, O Lord, and consider the meditations, and
sorrows of my heart; for my spirit is full of heaviness, I am vexed and sore
grieved, for that they whom thou gave me for a blessing, are turned to my
grief, sorrow, and shame. I confess, that mine own sins have provoked thee
to anger against me; and thy displeasure appears, in that they, whom I
received as a comfort from thee, are become, not only disobedient to me, but
as it were rebellious against thee, and thy counsel.

Thou art a God that love not wickedness, and thou hate iniquity; and it
cannot be hid from thee, what I have done; my neglect in trayning my Children
in thy fear thou may lay unto my charge, yet thou know I have labored to
win them unto thee, if it have been in vain, thou have wisdom and power to
supply in them, what is defective in me, to give them.

I have endeavored, to make them to know thee, and to walk in thy ways, but
they have contemned mine instructions, and cast my counsels behind their
backs, they will not be reclaymed from their vanities. They forget thee, the
God of power to punish them, and the God of mercy, to receive and comfort such
as return from their sins to thee.

Lord it is only in thee to reclaim them, as thou did the prodigal son,
whom thou vouchsafest to receive unto mercy, after his long going astray; no
man erreth so far, whom thou can not recall. Oh recall these that err,
reduce them back to the sheepe-fold of thy Saints.

They are the work of thine own hands, though I wretched man begat them in
corruption, and their mother conceived them in sin, and bare them in misery,
these are no hindrance unto the work of thy Grace in them, for what is, or
has been the man that has not had the like beginning (thine own begotten
Son excepted) Enoch that walked uprightly before thee. Abraham the Father of
the faithful, Eliah and John Baptist, and all thine elect vessels, came by
nature of the same corrupt seed: yet thou were pleased to sanctify them;
had thou left them unto their own original nature, they had bin as one of
these that lift up their heels against (not me but) thee.

Lord give them Grace, Wisdom and Understanding, Faith and Obedience, they are
only thine to give: I may be as the hand to give them, as from thee, food for
their bodies whereby by thy blessing, they grow; and I may sow the seeds of my
best knowledge of thy work in their outward ears; but unless thou plow up
the fallow ground of their hearts, that it may take root, it cannot fructify.

Consider, gracious Father, that they are of the polluted seed of Adam, yet be
thou pleased, to accept them as thine, admit them into thy favor, and guide
them by thy Grace, in a religious conversation, that they may cease to do
evil, cleave unto that which is good, and walk before thee, and be upright.
The^ shall they serve thee, and I shall praise thee, for their reformation and
salvation Let neither their sins nor mine, any more provoke thee to anger,
lest thy severe judgments should fall upon them, and shame and grief upon us
their parents. But their repentance Lord shall be our comfort, and we shall
rejoice in their conversion, and not only we, but all the godly shall rejoice
at their return into the Spiritual society of thy Saints. Grant it gracious
Lord, for thy Christ's sake, whose righteousness, make theirs, and his merrits a
sufficient satisfaction for theirs, and for the sins of all that have erred as
they have done. Amen.

Lord increase in them, the holy fear of thy Name, Faith, and Obedience unto
thee, and give me grace, with patience, to wait their holy reformation.
A Christian encouragement, to all that fear God, not to be daunted at the
threats, power and policies, of whatsoever enemies, be they never so many in
multitude, or seeming strong in arms, fit upon occasion; to be taken into
consideration, to which is added a prayer, for Gods holy protection and defense
of his, in whatsoever danger.
THey that trust in the Lord, shall be as mount Sion, that can never be moved,
but remain fast for ever. And as the mountains are about Jerusalem, so is the
Lord about them, that trust in him, from generation to generation. Whereof holy
David, had good experience, who through the assurance of Gods presence, with
him, his love toward him, and power over him, could say with a bold and
undaunted spirit. If an Host pitched against me, my heart should not be
affrayd.

He always found the ready help, wherewith God ever assisted him, and the
true performance of Gods promises at all times, in all his dangers; and
therefore assured himself, that if ten thousand of the people, did rise
against him and bese^ him round about, he would not be affrayde. He was in many
dangers, and wonderful his deliverances were as appears by divine History.

God is not the God of David only, because he was a King, and a man chosen
after Gods own heart, but the God of all them, that fa^thfully trust in him,
of good kings and godly subjects, through all generations to the end of the
world, whereof no nation has had more manifest proof (though unworthy) then
we: And therefore be our dangers never so great, or many, God shows
himself to have ever as many means to deliver us. Salvation belongs to him
alone, and his blessings are upon them that call faithfully upon him.

Hezekiah sore terrified at the threats and blasphemies of Tartan Rabsaries,
and Rabsakeh, the servants of Senacherib, who by his blasphemous letters
reviled, not Hezekiah only, but high Jehovah himself. Hezekiah therefore
prayed unto the GOD of Hosts, who sent his Angel, and that night destroyed in
Senacheribs camp, one hundred fourscore and five thousand men.

Thus God can deal with the enemies of his faithful people, he can destroy
them without their help, as we our selves have found by memorable experience;
to show that it is not always the multitude of armed soldiers that are the
absolute means of victory, it is the mere hand of God to declare himself,
to be in deed the GOD of Hosts, against whom no power, policy, or humane
wisdom can prevail. And therefore admits not the arm of flesh (though a
necessary mean) to have the glory of the destruction of his enemies, he will
confound.

When Joshua, was to go against Jericho, a City whom God would destroy,
though he was accompanied with a multitude of armed soldiers: yet the Lord
would not have the overthrow ascribed unto battery, and engines of war,
violent instruments; But at Gods command they blew with Rams-hornes only about
the walls, with a shoute, and the walls fell down. God by weak means can do
wonderful things for his.

Five mighty kings combined their forces together against Joshua, and though
God permitted Joshua to have the victory and slaughter of some of them, yet God
himself had the praise, who slew more with hayl stones from heaven then Joshua
slew with the sword.

Thus, does God manifest his power, that all men may see, that they that have
God on their side, need not fear, though kings combine, and people rage, as
if they would devour Gods people at their pleasures, casting their accounts,
and disposing of their pray before the victory.

Benadab, that mighty Aramite king, threatened Ahab king of Israel, to deprive
him of all that he had, His silver and his gold, his women and his fair
children. But God gave Ahab the victory, both on the Mountains and the
Valleys; Because they objected against God, that he was God in the Mountains,
not in the Valleys, as if we should say he were God at Land, but not at Sea, or
to impute good or ill success, in these weighty occasions, to false and
contrary causes; as is commonly seen, and observed to ignorance, or negligence
of some Commanders, or to this or that omission, ouer-sight or rashness which
indeed may be blameworthy; yet for that we attribute not good success to
God, but to humane power, wisdom, or policy, and ill events and issues, to
our own sinful deseruings, and want of calling up on God for a blessing.
God many times permits his own children to suffer violence, when they forget
to serve him.

The Israelites committing wickedness in the sight of the Lord, God gave them
over into the hands of their enemies, the Midianites, for seven years; yet
upon their repentance and returning to God, he raised up Deborah and Barak to
deliver them.

Sin is the cause that God permits a mighty multitude to be ouer-throwne
by a few: four hundred thousand Israelites, for one sin were overcome, twice
by six and twenty thousand Beniamits.

If God for one sin, suffered his people to be thus slain by a few, what
will he not permit to be done unto a nation, that commits infinite sins?
For one seeming small sin of one man Achan, the children of Israel were chased
and put to flight by a few; to show, that where sin reigns, there is no
strength in the people to withstand their enemies.

God is a righteous God, perseruing and punishing, as he finds men faithful
or sinful, not sparing his dearest children, when they rebel against him,
but as long as they truly obey him, no enemy shall prevail against them. Let
Pharoh pursue Gods children, with purpose to consume them, let them but call
upon God, let them be faithful, and they shall see the salvation of God, the
confusion of their enemies, by the immediate hand of God, without the help or
hand of man.

An host of men cannot hurt one man, whom God will protect; and yet permits
sometimes one of his to prevail against many, as Samson, who slew one
thousand men with the iaw-bone of an ass: and Shamgar, with an Ox goad slew
six hundred men, to show that God is not tied to multitudes, to avenge him of
the enemies of his children; and that a multitude to him is but as one man, and
as easy to be overcome. And yet he many times permits the wicked to take
away the lives of the most righteous and innocent: as Kain to kill Abel, Herod
to kill John Baptist, James, etc. he permits bloody massacres, and suffers his
d^arest children to be martyred after many fearful means, not that he is not
able to deliver them, but that his own name by their patient sufferings may be
glorified.

On the other side, if it please him, and that it stand for the good of his,
he can and will defend them; he can send an host of Angels to defend the^,
and fire from h^auen, to consume the adu^^saries of them, that take him for
their strength. But not according to natural man's reuengefull desire; As when
his disciples willed him to call for fire from heaven, to consume their
enemies; he answered them, Ye know not of what spirit ye are. And therefore
although he in his justice in former times has, and yet is in his power to
execute his severe judgments with fearful fire, as upon Sodom, upon Nadab
and Abihu, and upon the fifties, which came to apprehend Eliah: yet ought we to
be far from desire, to have like judgments inflicted vp^on our most mortal
enemies, upon such as would even eat us up: but rather as we are instructed,
first to pray for their reformation, and serious reconciliation, and refer the
issue to God, though it may be we cannot as properly say of some malicious
adversaries, as Stephen sometimes said of his, Lord lay not this (his death)
unto their charge, for they know not what they do. No, our most malicious
enemies are not ignorant, that their malice toward us, is sin against God,
to whose judgment we are in charity to leave them: for to him, not to us,
belongs revenge, who being wise in his understanding, and just in his
judgments, is also merciful and patient in punishing, and in all things, both
to them and us, will do that which is equal and right; and will reward tyranous
oppressors, and malicious persecuters of his faithful children, in his time,
and according to his own will, and for his own, he will never leave, nor
forsake them.

Although our enemies may pretend Religion the cause of their malice, and cover
their inward hatred under a counterfeit pretense to work our reformation
therein; and with many seeming sweet insinuations, work themselves into our
thoughts, it behooves us to be wise, lest that in conceiving they seek our
good, they get not our goods, which are our obedience to God, faith in him, and
perseverance.

True it is, that Religion is the cause of many both private and public
controversies and quarrels; but that Religion that is increased, and maintained
by the sword, let my soul never embrace.

Though true Religion have it foundation from the Blood of Christ, it is no
true Religion that maintains it self by the shedding of the blood of Gods
Saints.

If therefore any shall pretend themselves religious, and seek in show to gain
us, and draw us to their society by blows, shall we think they come from God?
who wills his, to show their Faith and Religion, by meeknes and love.

But admit they should offer the sword of offense; it is lawful for Gods
children to use the sword of defense: and we have the same and no other God,
then David and Hezekiah had, who will assuredly defend us, and maintain his
own cause for us.

The experience of Gods protection and providence in former dangers, cannot but
encourage us against whatsoever like dangers, wherein he delivered us to the
wonder of the world, and nothing but our sins and unthankfulness can shorten
his hand, or weaken his power toward us, but that he will stretch forth his
hand still to defend us.

We are now, thanks be to God, seeming secure, there is no apparent dangers
threatened; but we must remember when we say and see peace, peace, who
knows, but that our sins may not call for troubles: if they come, not
looked for, they will be the more dangerous.

If therefore we would abandon our sins, if we would timely return unto God
with humble and repentant hearts, God would return unto us, and save us; he
would as he has hitherto done, deliver us, and ever sustain us; he will send
from heaven and deliver us from them that would oppress us.

Let us not forget that our souls are among lions, though we live among the
children of men: they are not all of one family, they are not all of one mind,
they are not all the children of God; some are as it were set on fire against
us; some have their teeth as spears some have their tongus as swords, yet oil
in their mouths: yet let us depend on him that sees their hearts and ours;
He^ knows who are his, and sees his and our adversaries afar off. He has
his time and the means to deliver his: The Lord of hosts is with us, let us
not fear what man can do unto us.

Though an host of men armed should assail us* we need not be afraid, for the
Lord is with us, who is of more might and power, then all the potentates of the
world can resist: Let us therefore evermore lift up the eyes of our faithful
hearts, unto him; he is the hill from whence comes our help and deliverance
in all our dangers: from the Lord of hosts comes our help, who has made
heaven and earth, who takes charge of his, and will never leave us, fail us,
or forsake us, in him let us trust.

A Prayer to God that he will defend us from our strongest enemies, and most
malicious, with thanks to God for his former deliverances.
O Lord our God, whose Habitation are the heavens, and whose footstool is the
earth, thou gouernest all things in heaven above, and in the earth beneath,
thou directest and protectest those that fear thy name; so as they need not
fear the power or malice, of whatsoever furious enemies: For salvation
belongs unto thee, and thy blessing is evermore upon thy people.

We, even we thy feeble and unworthy creatures, have had experience of thy
former favor and defense in our troubles, and of thy deliverance out of our
desperate dangers, when men have said, There was no help for us, no, not in
thee. But we have found them liars, deceitful, and wicked men; acknowledging
thee, most faithful, most loving; of greatest wisdom and power, showing thy
self our Buckler, our Castle, and our strong defense: even when our
Adversaries sought our confusion, thou shewedst thy self our God, and the
maintainer of our cause, when our enemies rose against us, in greatest
multitudes, malice and madness.

Thou gave us courage and boldness, even when our enemies seemed most to
insult and triumph over us: even then, Lord, did thou fight for us, and
turnedst their glory into shame their strength into weakness, and their
multitudes into a handful of men.

Shorten not, O Lord, thy helping hand toward us, in whatsoever time, or manner
of our danger; for thou know, what our enemies cannot perform with force,
they seek to effect by secret mischiefs, which thou have discovered, and
prouidently prevented: The S^are was broken and we delivered; not for any merit
or worthynesse of ours, but even of thy free and abundant mercies; for thine
own glory, and our safety: and without our shame we cannot but acknowledge
our unthankfulness, for thy manifold deliverances from them that hate us; who
yet wait opportunity to betray us, if thou prevent us not.

And therefore, gracious Father, lead and guide us, ever in thy
righteousness, because of our enemies, make thy way plain before us, lest we
in offending thee give our adversaries occasion, to say, thou have forsaken us.

It is in thy power, Lord, ^o reconcile them unto us in the band of Christian
love; by opening their eyes, that they may see, and now at last consider, their
own errors, wherein they have kicked against thy truth; so should we rejoice
in their perfect union. If they continue in the hardness of their hearts,
continue in us perfect knowledge; and howsoever they hate us, give us love unto
them: leaving them unto thy will, to deal with them as thou will.

Give us, gracious God, and loving Father, a lively apprehention of thy truth,
faith and obedience unto it; howsoever our enemies may hate us for the same, we
know that thou art God all-sufficient, able to deliver us from their greatest
tyranny, as thou have done: and we cannot but remember thy merueilous works,
which thy very enemies, cannot but acknowledge to proceed of thy mere love,
unto the continual practice and profession of thy sincere Word, which thou
have maintained hitherunto through all ages, by thine own power, and for thine
own names sake.

And therefore when our enemies rose up against us, or rather, against thee, in
us, thou causedst them to stumble and fall, still maintaining thine own cause;
Who sit in thy throne, and gouernest all things, and iudgest according to
equity.

They therefore, that know thy power, and thy love, and thy promises, and thy
righteous dealing, will trust in thee; for thou have never failed to be a sure
defense to them, in whatsoever perils.

Up therefore, Lord, disappoint al our irreconciliable enemies of their hope,
lest they say, We have prevailed, our own policies have brought our desired
enterprises and desires to pass.

Lord, stay our steps, guide us ever in thy paths, lest our feet slip, and our
enemies that watch opportunity to betray us, take aduan^tage by our sinful
lives, and so prevail.

They lay their heads together, and take counsel how they may circumuent us,
and to blow us up, never to recover our hope again in thee.

Keep us therefore as the apple of thine eye, Lord, hold us ever under the
shadow of thy wings, from them that seek to oppress us: For by thee alone.
Lord, shall we be able to break through an host of enemies: And though we
seem, by reason of the number of our adversaries, to walk, as it were, through
the valley of the shadow of death, yet will we not fear them: for thou art
with us, a strong rock, and a house of defense to save us.

Thou redeemest the souls of thy servants: for, when we were even ready to be
swallowed up with a merciless multitude, thou by the power of thy strength,
did deliver us. To thee be praise and glory for ever. Amen.

Lord increase our faith in thee for evermore.
A necessary motive to stir us up to a holy desire to resort to the Temple of
God, to pray unto him with the Congregation, and to hear his word the
knowledge and practice whereof, is truest happiness; and he that is ignorant or
negligent of this holy duty, be he never so carnally wise, or worldly
glorious; is a most unhappy man.
WHat difference does christian experience find between a carnal worldling,
and a man truly fearing God? It can hardly be answered to the understanding of
the mere natural man, that has as many desires, as are pleasing delights
offered to his senses* and every sense as many delights, as the heart has
fantasies, which are not to be numbered, and the fullness of every delight
esteemed a kind of happiness; yet if each sense had as many pleasures, as it
could entertain, the desire were not satisfied: And if all the senses had what
they couet^d, were it not a heavy burden to the heart, which ingrosseth them
all? And yet the more it apprehends, the more desire increases: for, the eye
is never satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing things of delight.
And thus with all the senses, and yet but one thing necessary.

This one thing, Mary the sister of Martha made choice of, the hearing Christ
preach; a thing most needful, approved by Christ; and that Mary ^n hearing
Christ, chose the best part, which never could be taken from her.

David desired this one thing, namely, That he might dwell in the house of the
Lord all the days of his life: only that he might pray to God with the
Congregation, and hear God speak unto him by the Prophets, and men of God,
whom whosoever hears attentively, and profitably, hears God himself, which
is a sure token that he is of God, For he that is of God, hears Gods word.

The hearing of God speak unto us in his familiar word, is the sweetest
Music that the ear of the heart of a spiritual man can hear, and
acceptable also to God himself, Jf ye will hear my voice indeed, says God,
and keep my Covenant, then shall ye be my chief treasure above all people.
Is not this chiefest happiness to be accepted of God as h^s only Treasure?

No marvel then that David d^sired only this one thing, a far better
request, then Bathsheba his wise, the mother of Solomon, desired of her son,
which he promised her to grant, but performed it not. But David the father of
Solomon, desired this one thing, the thing most needful, of a King greater
then Solomon, and a matter of far more moment, then was Bathshebaes, yet she
was rejected, and his request accepted. Both their desires seemed to proceed of
love: yet the one procured hatred and death, the other life and happiness.
She made her request to man, in whom to put confidence, is vain. The other
in God, the Holy one of Jsrael, who is truth it self, and never deceives.

But David's petition might seem strange, being a King, to desire to dwell
better then in a Kings palace, where he might sport at his pleasure, take what
delights he would, having a Kingdom to supply whatsoever he desired. But in
these delights he found not the happiness he sought for; it consisted in his
love to God, and Gods favor toward him: and therefore desired, rather to be
one day in his Courts, then a thousand in the Court of Saul, or in his own
Court, among his gallant Courtiers; nay, he would choose rather to be a
Doore-keeper in the House of God, then to command an earthly kingdom.

It is in d^ede a glorious thing to be a King, but that glory has no long
continuance, many discontents and distractions accompany worldly greatness.
But the glory that David desired, (though seeming base) was such as commonly
greatest men desire last and least; and yet desire as Balaam did, To dye the
death of the righteous, (seldom yet remembered) but practice not the life of
the righteous.

Yet few or none, doubtless, are so irreligious, or barbarous in show, but
they will loo^e into the House of God, peradventure once, it may be, twice in
a Sabbath, and peradventure think it long; they would be loath to spare their
pleasures, delights, and vanities, to live a whole day in hearing God speak
unto them, and praying unto God; nay, but one required hour: but to live all
the days of their lives, as Anna did, and as David desired, in the Temple of
God, they would thin^ it as hard as task, as the bondage of Egypt, or the
captivity of Babylon.

But th^re are no doubt diverse, and some as high in Office, as David, that have
both David's desire, and are comfortably conuer^a^t in the House of God, and do
find that in his presence is the fullness of joy and happiness.

This is that chief happiness and delight, that great men should desire and
aim at, to the end they might be examples unto their inferiors, going before
them in well doing, especially in Gods service: For it is commonly found by
experience, that example does more good or evil, then documents, or
dehortations.

The godly, and religious life of a great man, is as a tower seen a far off:
And many, especially his fol^owers, will endeavor to immitate his steps, at
least in show; and even that show of a godly life is a good motive to others,
to live godly in deed: and as a good lif^ gives comfort and encouragement to
othe^s to be good; So the president of evil, makes many evil.

If greatness and goodness go together, it is the sweetest harmony that man
can make in this life. And the contrary, as h^^sh and hellish.

This holy desire of David was not for a day, for he speaks of the time past.
J desired, which implies a continual inward petition. So, our desire of well
doing, should not be but for a moment, and then vanish like Ionahs Gourd, that
quickly grew up, and suddenly withered, and like the seed sown in stony
ground, we must be constant heirs, and humble petitioners, not wavering like
waves; but as we once desire to hear and practice, we must continue therein
with a godly and religious perseverance, still desirous, according to
opportunity, to visit Gods Church, not yet to think that there is no place to
serve God in, but the material Temple, but wheresoever we are, whatsoever we
do, we are to have our hearts exercised in godly meditation of the Word, and
inward prayer

Bethel the house of God, is every where, where the truly godly are; David
found it even in the wilderness of Ziph, in the holds of Engedi, in M^an, and
Gath. He found the Lord in these desolate places: though he were hated and
persecuted, driven from place to place through the malice of his enemies, he
was never out of the presence of God, in the Temple, or in the field; for where
God is present, there is his Temple; In the Lions Den, Daniel found him; In
the Furnace, the three Children; In the Dungion, Jeremy; In the Prison, Peter;
under the stones, Stephen; yea, even in sinful Sodom, Lot; and Noah, in the
Flood.

Every true Child of God, is always in Gods house, where David desired
Spiritually to dwell, finding it true that God was with him every wh^re, yet
had he an earnest desire to be conversant in that Temple, where the Children
of God did assemble, to hear GOD speak, and to speak unto God. He was their
king, yet did he think it the greatest part of his duty, nay, of his glory
and happiness, to accompany his subjects, in the holy exercises of religion,
to go before them, to encourage them to call upon, and to serve the living God
with them; whereof being prevented by the malice and fury of his enemies, he
complayneth, that he was left as a Pelican in the wilderness, and as an Owl
in the Desert, and thought the Sparrow more happy then he, because that silly
bird, could at all times resort unto that holy place, to which he could not
come.

It is our duty to frequent the material Temple, to accompany the
congregation, in p^aying unto, and praising of God, and attentively to hear
his Word: yet are not we to hold it a necessity, to pray only in the Temple,
as if God could, or would not hear our prayers, but in the Temple made with
hands; wherein God himself says he dwells not, his dwelling is in the
heavens, and his footstool is the earth; and as long as we are pilgrims in
the earth, we must seek, and we shall find God in the earth by his presence
and power.

Therefore as Moses put off his shoes, when he came into the presence of God,
because the place was holy whereon he stood. So must we put off all our
ungodly affections, and unholy desires, before we enter into his holy presence.

He teaches us by his Prophet Jeremy, what it is to come prepared into the
presence of God, whether into the material Temple with the congregation, to
hear him speak unto us by his Word, or to speak unto him in public, or in
any convenient place in our private prayers, We must amend and redress our
ways and our works, then he will admit us, and entertain us into his holy
presence. It is not enough, says h^, to cry and say, The Temple, the Temple
of God, this is the Temple of the Lord, (...) amend our ways and our works* to
execute judgment, between a man and this neighbor, not to oppress the
poor, nor the stranger, the fatherless, nor the widow, not to shed innocent
blood, nor to walk after other gods.

T^is is the condition which God makes with them that shall dwell in his house,
that shall see his beau^ie, and that are admitted into his presence, and truly
to visit his holy Temple: but bars all those that trust in lying miracles, and
vain words, and vanities that cannot profit: they that steal, murder, commit
adultery, idolatry, such as swear fasty; the coueteous oppressors, unjust,
envious, malicious, drunkards and the like; if these stand in this house, the
material Temple; God will have no respect unto their prayers, finding them
hypocrites, that work wickedness in secret, coveting to cover it with a
forged show of cunning with the congregation into the Temple of God, which by
their presence make it a den of thieves. For what are Hypocrites, but
thieves, showing themselves to be religious, and are not; obedient, and are
not; than^efull, and are not; faithful, and are not?

These are they that rather commit sacrilege, the^ offer acceptable Sacrifice,
they visit not the Temple, but rather defile it with their cou^terfeit
holiness, in show, seeming saints, in deed, enemies to Christ and Christians.
They can cry the Temple of God, the Temple of God, They can say Preach,
Preach, and seem never satisfied with Sermons. The desire is good, if the
heart be good, for a true and sincere desire of the heart, to hear the Word,
cannot but please God; for such are approved to be of the family and house of
God: Such shall dwell in his Tabernacle, and rest upon his Holy Hill* for they
are of the generation of the righteous.

But, there is a generation, says Solomon, that are pure in their own
conceits, and yet are not washed from their filthiness, They follow the
devices of their their own hearts: and assume unto themselves a peculiar
manner of serving of God, not according to the sincere truth: These men's
sacrifices God abhors; but he that has innocent hands, and a pure heart,
that has not lift up his hand unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully, he coming
into the house of God in private, or in public petitions, shall receive a
blessing from the Lord, understanding by hearing, God speak unto him, and be
heard speaking unto God: it is contrary with the hypocrites, they may hear and
not understand, they may pray, but GOD will not hear them. They cried, says
David, but there was none to ^aue them, eue^ unto the Lord; ^ut he answered
them not. God hears not hypocrites, though they come near him with their
lips, in a counterfeit zeal, when yet their hearts are profane.

To come into the marteriall Temple, is required of all to accompany the
congregation, in the divine service of the living God, Princes and greatest
persons: As David a King, who was glad and rejoiced, when the people said unto
him, Come, let us go into the house of the Lord, where in deed his own desire
wa^ to dwell.

To dwell, is not to come for a spirt and away, but hi^ desire was to make
there h^^ continual abode all the daie^ of his life.

It may be conceived by ^ natural man, and one th^^ builds his happiness
upon the pleasures of this life, th^^ it was not wisdom in Daui^ to desire to
dwell in the me^lancholy Temple continually: but it may be said unto that
carnallist, Thou deemest it to be a place of sadness and melancholy, which
administreth to the true Children of God the most absolute joy, mirth,
gladness, and consolation, and finally truest happiness.

Carnal men in deed delight in vain aspects, and shows, moving to sin in
Stages, Theaters and the like, and think them therewith much cheered, and in
short time therewith wearied: But the Temple of God, the heavenly Theater, that
is most glorious by the Divine presence, only seen by the sanctified mind,
never wearieth the souls of such as delight in the living God; whose beauty
David saw, as never satisfied with the contemplation of the glorious Majesty
o^ Jehovah, whose beauty the more the Spiritual mind beholds in his word,
his works, his favor, power and providence, the more is he moved with
desire, to see more and more. And thinks no happiness comparable, to the
happiness of a heavenly life.

Much were the Disciples moved at the sight of Christ's transfiguration, in so
much as they desired to have built there Tabernacles, to have enjoyed that
blessed sight. Still to desirous was David, still to behold the beauty of the
Lord, and to visit his holy Temple.

Where God is truly heard, and duly called upon by a holy congregation, nay,
by one particular faithful Christian, there appears the glory of God. There
is the Ark of the Lord the presence of the mighty God of Iaakob, whose glory
fills the Temple, which only the Spiritual man sees with a supernatural
eye. Though the carnal man bodily present, apprehends it not. Paul at his
conversion saw Gods glory but they that were with him, heard only a voice,
but saw it not.

Such beauty shines in the hearts of the dear Children of God, by the
operation, and illumination of the Holy Ghost, by whom Stephen saw the glory
of God, in the heavens, and Christ sitting at his right hand, which none (...)
can see, but such only a^are enlightened, who take such surpassing sweet
delight, in the beholding the face of God, not only in the Word, wherein he
is in part seen, but especially through faith, that their souls are even
ravished, and as it were transchanged, by the splender thereof, as it were into
the Image of the glory of the only begotten Son of the Father. ^od
commanding the light to shine out of darkness, shines in our hearts, to give
light of the knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

Let us therefore endeavor to exercise our selves in purity and sanctity,
clensing our consciences from all counterfeit sincerity, and labor to become
in deed, such as we would seem to be; And not to neglect the visiting of the
material Temple, to hear the Word of GOD, and to pray unto him, if we hope
to be happy; for there is none happy, but they whom GOD loves, and who love
GOD; if we love God, we will delight in him, to hear him often for our
instruction, and confirmation of our faith; and to seek him by our prayers,
for he is ready to be found of all them that are true of heart, who shall
here behold his beauty, and hereafter enjoy his glory.

A Prayer unto God, that he will prepare our hearts to the visiting of his holy
Temple, to hear his Word, to pray unto him, and to praise him.
GRant O most gracious Lord God, according to the riches of thy grace- that I
may be strengthened by thy Spirit, in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in
my heart by faith, and so my whole spirit, soul and body may be kept
blameless, to the coming of the Lord Jesus, for thou Lord know what I am
by nature, a man unworthy to take thine holy Name into my mouth, or to come
into thy presence, being inclynable to no good duty, but apt to every vanity.

I come therefore unto thee heavenly Father, in the Name of Jesus Christ thy
Son, in whom thou have promised to receive them, that sincerely seek thee,
hear the voice of my petitions, O Lord, when I cry unto thee, and when I lift
up my hands toward the mercies seat of thy holy Temple, reject me not; unto
thee O Lord, I lift up my soul, craving pardon for my sins, and that thou will admit me into the holy society of thy Saints, and that I may delight to
dwell in thy holy Temple, under the shadow of thy protecting wings for ever.

Let my heart be ever upright in thy Statutes, and faithful ever before thee,
for thou have pleasure in righteousness, and he is blessed in whose heart are
thy ways; knit my heart unto thee, that I may fear thy Name; give me a holy
desire to seek thee, and to walk ever uprightly as in thy presence.

Indue me with thy Spiritual knowledge, and lead me by thy right hand, to
thine holy Temple; show me thy glory, and thy beauty, that I may be comforted
through thy presence. Open mine ears, that I may hear thee, and thy Word by
thy holy Ministry; and prepare my heart to receive knowledge and
understanding, and open my mouth, and fill it with thy praises, and let my
prayers in thy Sons Name be acceptable unto thee.

Show me thy way, and give me understanding, that I may learn thy
Commandments, and walk in them.

My hearts desire, Lord is to dwell with thee, to have the full and free
fruition of thine house, and the place where thine honor dwells, that I may
serve thee with a pure affection, and give thee praise in the congregation of
thy Saints.

Turn thy face unto me, O Lord, that I may see the beauty of thy countenance,
and be changed into the same Image, by thy Spirit, and in the same Spirit, be
admitted to visit thine holy Temple, with faith and assurance of thy presence,
wherein I know is liberty and life, protection and plenty of all good things.

Make my heart stable and unblameable before thee in holiness, that I may
serve thee with a sincere and pure conscience, and undefiled, that I may not
come into thine house only to be seen, and to seem serviceable, or dutiful
unto thee; but may inwardly hunger and thirst for thy Word, the food of my
soul, the bread of life, and imprint the same so effectually in my soul, that
it may prove fruitful in ^ee, and that I may show it in my (...) holy
conversation to thy Glory, that being filled with the comforts proceeding from
the beauty of thy countenance; I may ever pos^sesse my soul in that peace
which passes all understanding, euer-more reuerencing thy glorious Mai^stie,
that euer-more fille^h both the heavens and the earth; fill my heart, O Lord,
with thy Spirit, that I may draw near unto thee, and to thy Holy place, my
strong Rock, to thee will I always resort.

Make me to hear joy and gladness, and that I may more abound in hope, and
be strengthened to every good work, through the power of the holy Ghost, by
Jesus Christ, my Lord and only Savior.

Lord increase my faith.

The Conclusion.
A Prayer for true happiness, which shall be consummate only in heaven.
O Lord, what am I, the son of dust and ashes, that I should presume to come
into thy presence, to seek and desire felicity and happiness, here in this
wilderness of so many vanities, miseries, and troubles, as are among the
children of men? As for me, Lord, thou know whereof I am made; thou
remembrest that I am but dust, what happiness therefore, Lord, can I look to
obtain here, where sin dwells in my mortal body; and by sin I offend,
and displease thee, and in thy displeasure is death?

O prevent me Lord, therefore, from sinful feeding my foolish mind with false
felicity, as to repose my happiness in the things of this life, in health,
riches, honor, beauty, carnal friends, worldly wisdom, pleasures, delights,
and ease, which are not worthy, in respect of true happiness in deed, to be
the least esteemed.

Give me therefore here, O Lord, even in this life, an entrance into true
happiness; send forth thy Spirit, and breath life into my dead soul;
transform me into thine own image, from glory to glory, by thy Spirit;
withdraw me from delight in the vanities of this life: for as long as I delight
in the pleasing things of this world, I am far from happiness; and it lies
not in my power to restrain my heart from that which naturally I affect: I
cannot subdue the corruption of mine own nature; but that which is impossible
to me, is possible with thee, declare therefore thy great power in mercy upon
me.

I am by nature wretched, and miserable, and poor, and naked, a most unhappy
man; yet such is my blindness, that I see it not: I feel not mine own
unhappiness, Lord remove that darkness from me, and grant, that seeing, I
may see mine own error; and in hearing I may understand, and take the right
way to felicity; work faith in my heart, that I may taste how gracious thou
art, in working in me a new heart, a new mind, and new affections, holy and
heavenly, the beginning here of happiness to come.

Make me to feel the peace of a good conscience; let my faith be seen through
obedience unto thee; let me feel in my soul through faith the merits of thy
Son, working the assurance of the remission of my sins, and assured hope of
the enjoying of my final felicity, and endless happiness in heaven.

None are truly happy or blessed, but such as thou do choose, and cause to
come unto thee; for none can come unto thee, but whom thou call, and they
only are justified; and whom thou iustifiest, them will thou glorify; and
whom thou glorifiest, are, and none else, truly happy.

Carry me therefore, gracious Lord, carry me by the wings of thy mercy, and by
the strength of thy favor in Christ my Savior, into that heavenly Canaan, the
inheritance of them that are in Christ Jesus, elected to salvation.

Let me, even here in this base outward form of an unhappy man, behold thee
through faith in thy word; let me behold thy face in righteousness: for in
the lively beholding of thee, is the fulness of joy, and highest happiness in
this life.

O that the time would therefore speedily come, wherein I being dissolved, may
see thee my Savior face to face, when this my mortal body shall be quickened,
and made like unto thy glorious body: for I know, thou will keep unto the end,
that which I have committed unto thee, both my soul and body to be glorified
and made happy, though I yet see not what I shall be: and therefore when thou will, I will willingly lay down my life, and commit my soul unto thee, my God,
through Jesus Christ, as unto my most faithful Creator, and loving Redeemer;
to whom with the holy Ghost be all glory for ever. Amen.

The consummation, and full perfection of our happiness, shall be
When we shall be made partakers of the divine Nature, 2. Pet. ^. v. 4. When
Christ shall tran^forme our base bodies, that they may be like the glorious
body of Christ, Phil. 3. v. 21. When she shall perfectly enjoy those things,
which eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, nor ever entered into the heart of
man to conceive, which God has prepared, for them that love him. 1. Cor. 2
11.9.
Who then, or what shall separate us from the love of Christ, in and by whom
we have firm hope to attain unto this so great happiness? neither
tribulation, nor anguish, nor persecution, nor famine, nor nakedness, nor
peril, nor the sword, Romans 8. verse. 35. Which God, for his Christ's sake
grant, to whom with the Holy Ghost be ascribed all glory for ever. Amen.

The principal things contained in this Book.
A Meditation, or Consultation, what are the best things that men in this life
should principally aim at, to attain unto highest happiness, etc. Fol. 1. A
motive to Prayer against the temptations of Satan, etc. 18 A Prayer for Gods
holy assistance against Satan. 23. A Meditation, to stir us up, when we are
unapt to pray. 29. A Prayer to God, for the help of his holy Spirit, and other
blessings spiritual, and corporal, etc. 35. A motive, to begin the day with
Prayer. 54. A Prayer fit to be used every morning. 57. A motive to Prayer,
before a man (...). 65. A Prayer for a man, before he goes to hi^ ^^ghtly
rest. 70. A most comfortable encouragement to all poor and distressed men to
undergo whatsoever trouble with patience, etc. and may serve as a motive to
some prayers that follow, viz. 77. A general Prayer, in whatsoever troubles
and affections, with a conf^ssion, that sin is the cause of them. 103 A
Prayer for a man hindered by (...) kind of (...) lawful takings, etc. 114 A
consideration, or consultation, touching the estates and conditions of several
men, etc. necessary for all men that hope of any blessing upon their labors,
Travels, Professions, Arts, Trades, or Jmployments. 124 A Prayer, that God
will bless and prosper our labors and endeavors in whatsoever calling. 139 A
Prayer for a man whose Calling requires Journeyes by land, or sea. 149 A
motive to a Prayer for patience in godly Parents, that are aff^icted in mind
for the disobedience* and ungodly lives of their children, etc. 150 A Prayer
for the reformation of ungodly and disobedient children, and for patience in
Parents, etc. 166 A Christian encouragement, to all that fear God, act to be
(...) at the threats, (...), and policies, of whatsoever enemies, etc. To which
is added a Prayer for Gods holy protection and defense of his, in whatsoever
danger. 173 A Prayer to God, that he will defend us from our strongest
enemies, with Thanksgiving to God for our former deliverances. 189 A necessary
motive to stir us up to a holy desire to resort to the Temple of God, to pray
unto him with the Congregation, and to hear his Word. etc. 198 A Prayer to
God, that he will prepare our hearts to the visiting of his holy Temple, to
hear his Word, to pray unto him, and to praise him. 219 A Prayer for true
happiness* which shall be consummate only in heaven. 226
FINIS.

