The practyse of Cyrurgyons of Mountpyller: and of other that never came there.



The causys why many a man does dye: that be woundyd or hurt on the heed, or
else where by sword Conquission of staff Faule / Stone, or other like wounds
or bruses.
IN primus the Syrurgy on does cut away the here of the heed / And he cutteth
a cross the skin, the musculus flesh / with the Pannycles and their
Co^myssuris with the Pelicraniu^. and he puts away all those parties from
the Cranium. (That is to say) the skulle of the heed with his instruments
called after some Cyrurgions a Spatter, Lever, Slyse, Chyssel or other like
Instruments. And then he puts and lays between those parties and the Skul
Ronlettes, stupes, or plagettes made of lynte, Cotton or other like stuped or
dypped in hot Oils / Mel Rosarum or oyntmentes and playsters thereupon. And at
the next dressynge he will make more rome with his instruments. And thens the
warden or certain other parsons of the craft or faculty of Cyrurgery must
be there at that dressynge. To say that the Cyrurgyon works like a cu^nynge
man if he please to keep the syke party long under his hands / and to make
him to spend his money, and that he may crepulat him to prove masterys with his
instruments called after some Cirurgyon, Trapanes, Graters, Rapes, Fyles,
Chyssels, and other like instruments, for to make the bone to scalifie and
fall, or to be taken away with their works / and to blind the people, and to
make them to believe that they have done a great cure where no cause nor need
was so to work. And so at the first or second or third dressyng many men
and women, and specially those that be full of gross humors they fall in to a
febre called Effymera, and so after that in to another febre called Febre
putrida, and so the pacyent does dye. Then the Cirurgion does say that the
pacye^t does dye of the wound or else ex visitacione diuina. And then he
brings other Syrurgions with him for his witness to exscuse him of his
noughty workema^shyp. And if any other Cyrurgion do fortune to dress the sick
man or woman / he shall lose a fine if he be one of their company. And if he be
a stranger then the Cirurgions will sue their statute on him of.v.li^. for
every month so occupyeng of syrurgery to drive him out of the country, or to
keep him in prison till he dye. Forsooth the Cyrurgyons workemanshyp is the
cause of the death of the man or woman. Therefore it is necessary for every
Cyrurgyon not to cut the flesh of the heed a cross, nor none other membre of
the body. Except there happen any Arrowe, Quarrel, Spereheade, Gonstone, or
other like to enter into craneu^ called the Scull, or in any other bone of the
body. But no skin nor flesh to be cut a cross but only the head and in
all other places rome must be made a length the members, and not ouerthwarte
for to take out the thing that stycketh fast in the bone. But in all such
causes take counsayl of some good expert Physycyon, or else study in Physyke
your self by some good book and noble auctours to know the febres, the
causes, and the dangers of them, so that the pacient may escape from death and
to live long. For if there be any bone or grystell hurt or bruised in any
part of the body / surely there is playsters and many other good and wholesome
medycynes that will cause the bones and grystels so hurt and bruised to
scalifie and fall out by their self, or to knyt again by nature within a short
space with a little pain or none. And without cause or danger of any febre or
death. Therefore let every man that will take upon him to be a Cirurgion and to
heal any man or woman wounded to follow this rule and Regemie. And study well
and seek for those good playsters and oyntementes, and other like medycynes /
that may be to the health and prosperity of the king our Soueraygne lords
Subjects and liege people.

And you shall have much more money for your labors and pains then you have
had in times past / and better name and fame. And at your ending the glory of
the kingdom of God for your reward, to the which I pray God send us there
to remain. But many Cyrurgyons does use to keep men and women long in their
hands that has any vlcere, vlcus, pustyl, postume, or any other morbos
gendred of humors, and falling into their leg or other members descended out
of the body into the skin musculous flesshes, veins, panyacles, or bones.

They do lay medycynes to them one while helyng, another while debatyng the
flesshes, so that it may not heal, saying that it is a proud or a dead
flesh. Then they lay corsyfe medycynes thereto / as vnguentum Ruptorum,
Mercuri sublime, Arsnike, sublimed, or such other malyng, and mortal
corrosyns, or else to caltrice the flesshes and bones with read hot caltrysyng
yrons, which is a mortal pain to the pacient to corrode, borne and mortyfye
the flesh and bones. And then the bone must scalifie and a piece fall away
after the core or after of the flesh is taken away. And thus they do to make
the pacyent to spend their money.

Many men has been thus used that Cyrurgions many have a living. And they make
the people to believe that they have done a great cure and that they may be
called great co^nynge men. Or else they do it upon ignorance that they know
not the cause of this humors aforesaid nor the right cure of them. Therefore, I
would that every Cyrurgyon would leye a part all those works / and seek for
some noble medicines / that will put away the causes of the humors that comes
out of the body. And those Empostumes or nodes that be engendered upon the
pany^les, over the bones and under the flesshes make your Insicio^ at length
the members into it, and then thrust out the Sania or corrupcion. For the
flesh and bone will heal alone by nature / and then you shall be the workman
of god to whom let us all pray evermore for his mercy. Amen.

Finis pro tempore.
Imprynted by me Richard Banckes. Cum priuilegio Regali. Ad imprimendum solum.




