Mohammedis Imposturae: THAT IS, A DISCOVERY OF THE MANIFOLD FORGERIES,
FALSEHOODS, and horrible impieties of the blasphemous seducer MOHAMMED:

With a demonstration of the insufficiency of his law, contained in the cursed
ALKORAN;

Delivered in a conference had between two Mohametans, in their return from
MECHA.

Written long since in Arabicke, and now done into English by WILLIAM BEDWELL.

Whereunto is annexed the ARABIAN TRVDGMAN, interpreting certain Arabicke
terms used by Historians:

Together with an INDEX of the Chapters of the Alkoran, for the understanding
of the confutations of that book.

LONDON, Imprinted by Richard Field dwelling in great Wood-streete. 1615.

To the Christian Reader.
THat which here I offer unto thy view, courteous Reader, is, as the title does
show, the translation of a book imprinted certain years since, and published
in the Arabicke tongue: Yet when, or where, or by whom, is not, as usually the
manner is, in the same any where expressed or declared. It was first written,
as the Author himself seems to intimate, about 600 years since. Who he was,
and what, I dare not for certain affirm; Many of the objections, demands,
answers, arguments, and speeches are too good to be thought to come from the
breast of an Heathen, Turk, or Saracen: although of them many scarce good
enough to be fathered upon a well grounded Christian. That consideration first
moved me to judge it framed by some Christian, in disgrace and confutation of
that fond and foolish religion. Yet when I called to mind, that I had heard
many Merchants, and especially M. W. G. a worshipful Gentleman, who did spend
the better part of his youth continually resident amongst them, That it was a
common thing to hear from themselves such like objections, and doubts made
against their law. Again when I considered, that whatsoever is here alleged
and laid down, though never so good and Christianlike; Or contrariwise absurd
and monstrous; is notwithstanding found and read in that their law: And lastly,
seeing that my self can testify that from their own mouths I have heard;
and can show in their books and tractates the like moral sayings, and zealous
exhortations unto virtue, and holiness of life; I then altered that mine
opinion, and did verily believe it to be written by some Saracen or Mohametane,
who did in truth make these doubts and demands, as being desirous of better
satisfaction. If any man shall object and say, as the consistory of Rome did
by the Talmud, That it were better that such foolish fables and blasphemies
were concealed and utterly suppressed, then made public and common to all: I
answer, I have done no more, nay not so much, as the ancient Fathers,
Tertullian, Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Augustine, and others, who have taken upon
them to confute the errors and opinions of Heretics, have done. Nullum enim est
dogma, insigniter impium and peruersum in Alcorano, quod non extet in libris
eorum quos antea indicaui, Irenaei, Tertulliani, scriptorum Ecclesiasticae
historiae, Epiphanij, Philastrij, Augustini; quorum libri saepius foetant prope
quam cuniculi: Et Typograghi quaestum inde non exiguum tolerant, and rem
studiosis bonae literaturae inprimis gratam faciunt. Quaedam etiam absurdiora
in veterum haeresium descriptionibus reperiuntur, qua Alcoran protulerit, etc.
For in the Alkoran, says a learned Divine, there is no one opinion so impious
and wicked, which may not be found in the books of those writers which I have
before spoken of; to wit, Irenaeus, Tertullian, the Ecclesiastical historians,
Epiphanius, Philastrius, and Augustine; whose books do breed wellnere as often
as conies: And the printers do thereby reap no small gains, and withal do
deserve very well of all good students. Some things also, in the discoueries of
old heresies, are met withal, more absurd and gross, then the Alkoran does
afford any. But the examples following, being of the same nature, and practiced
by grave judicious Divines, are more proper to our purpose. Peter, Abbot of
Cluniak, a man highly commended in his time, for learning, religion, and
Christian charity, did well nere 500 years since, cause Robert of Reading our
countryman, to translate the Alkoran or laws of Mohamed into the Latin
tongue; Which translation was by the said Peter dedicated unto S. Bernard, that
famous Abbot of Clareuall. At the end of which his translation you shall find
this which follows; Illustri gloriosoque viro Petro Cluniacensi Abbate
praecipiente, suus Angligena, Robertus Retinensis, librum istum transtulit,
anno Domini M.C.XLIII, anno Alexandri, M.CCCC.III, anno Alhigere D.XXXVII, anno
Persarum quingentesimo vndecimo. About this time did Euthymius a learned
Grecian translate, if not all, yet diverse and sundry pieces of the same. The
Council of Vienna, celebrated by Pope Clement the 5, in the year of our Lord
1311, has an act enioyning certain Universities to maintain Professors of
the Arabicke tongue, for the translating of books out of that language into
Latin. Now, as a learned man truly gathers, those holy Fathers had no care
of Physic and Astronomy, but of Divinity only: and therefore they meant of
the Alkoran and such others concerning religion. Not long after this, John
Bishop of Segouia, offered unto the Council of Constance, the Alkoran by him
translated and confuted. In the year of our Lord 1543, Theodorus Bibliander,
(animated thereunto and commended by Philip Melanthon) did publish and imprint
the aforesaid version of Retinensis the Englishman. Within four or five years
after this edition, Andreas Arriuabene turned the Alkoran, as he says, out of
Arabicke into Italian: The title by himself praefixed to that his edition is
thus; L'Alcorano di Macometto, nel qual si contiene la Dottrina, la Vita, i
Costumi, and le Leg sue, tradotto nouamente dall'Arabo, in lingua Italiana;
Con Gratie, e Priuilegij, M.D.XLV II. The Alkoran of Machomet, in which is
contained his Doctrine, Life, Customs and Laws, translated newly out of
Arabicke into the Italian tongue. When as in deed that translation of his is
nothing but Retinensis Italionated; neither do I think that he understood much
Arabicke. Thus you see what presidents I have, for that which is done: Such as
I doubt not, but will fully satisfy the learned and indifferent: the peevish
and froward, I weigh not: this pains was not taken for them. Nothing I know
may please them that is not of their own breeding. Neither do I see what
benefit the unlearned may reap by it. Now concerning the thing it self, I do
give the Reader to understand, (the lovers of these studies, and such as have
seen the book can testify that I speak the truth) That the copy that I
have followed, was so badly imprinted, that in very many places I was
constrained to divine and guess. And therefore if in any place I have failed,
it is not much to be marvelled. Notwithstanding, although I will not say, that
I have failed in any particular: yet I dare boldly affirm, that I have hit the
general scope and purpose of the Author, which for the thing it self might
have been sufficient. But beside this generality, for the benefit of
students, which I especially aimed at, I have so set it forth that they might
be bettered by it: And therefore I have tied my self, as near as the English
phrase would suffer me, unto the words of the Arabicke. Wherefore for their
sakes, which are desirous to understand that language, and for that purpose do
please to use this our labor, we have, in the margent of this our book, set
down the numbers answering to the pages of the Arabicke copy. Truth it is,
that in that book you shall find no such numbers expressed: but that want any
man with his pen may easily supply. If I have added any thing to help the
English, that we have caused to be imprinted in an Italica letter.

A SPIRITVALL Conference, between two Doctors: The name of the one is SHEICH
SINAN: The name of the other Doctor AHMED: Which conference had in their
return from the Alkaaba, is profitable for every Mussleman, man and woman, to
know and understand.
The first Dialogue.
AHMED. THe peace of God and his blessing be upon thee my Sheich, my worthy and
most reverend Father. The Lord bless this days work.


SHEICH. The Lord be with thee, and rejoice thy heart my son. How happened it
that we have both gone this journey these many days together, and have not met
till now?


AH. I did not see thee at all, all the time that we went to the Alkaaba (God
make us honorable by it) until we were gone up mount Kabis: At that time I
would feign have met thee: but by means of the great throng of pilgrims I
could not, and by reason of the great prease I lost thee. Yet this morning I
saw thee again, and making have, being far off, and the throng great, at
length I came unto thee. But both my self and my Camel are very weak and
faint.


SH. I am glad that I have light on thee in this journey: For I desire to go
with thee, that we may always or other.


AH. I also am glad of this, and it likes me very well: For by thee I shall
gain much good. For by conuersing with learned men there is always something
learned.


SH. Know thou therefore, my son, that as by this blessed journey we do
obtain f^ee remission from God, of all sins: So we ought to withdraw our
selves from iniquity, and to lay hold upon true Religion and an holy life.


AH. Good father, I know this very well, and I desire it may be done: But how
is it possible a man should be in this world, and not be polluted and defiled
with it?


SH. He that does delight in the holiness of the spiritual life, he will not
meddle with any schism in Religion.


Yet I do believe that the Fathers, which were of better understanding, that
they might avoid the pollutions of the wo^ld, did betake themselves unto
wildernesses: that so being sequestered from worldly businesses, they might the
better think upon the majesty of the most high God: Of the excellent frame of
the celestial spheres: The large compass of the Ocean: The strange variety
of the earthly Globe: Of all other things of natural Philosophy: Of the power
of the most high God, And especially of the excellency of Man, who, in respect
of the beauty of the reasonable soul, and the faculties thereof, is most like
unto the celestial Angels. But in respect of his bodily parts he is like unto
a brute beast.


SH. But I spoke of that man which was created by Almighty God, after the
^orme and similitude of himself.


AH. Where I pray you, father, is that image in man?


SH. In the faculties of the Soul and beauty thereof.


AH. What then are those faculties of the Soul?


SH. Understanding, Memory, and Will: For


AH. How do these three faculties make a man like unto God?


SH. As every reasonable soul, adorned and beautified with these three
faculties, is one man: So that same God is the powerful understanding
comprehending all, and commanding over all: He is also that word or soul which
created the heavens vaultwise most seemlily; with all other things else
whatsoever: Lastly he is that Will or Charity, whose bounty and goodness
preserves all things.


AH. These words are good, and such as all men ought to hear and regard.


SH. It is not sufficient for a man to hear, that there is this power and
property in God: And that a man do know also the excellency of his soul
united


AH. What is it therefore that he ought to do?


SH. This he ought to do: As the Angels, the Heavens, and the Elements all are
under the obedience of the Creator, and do always sing praises and do those
things, which he, whose name is always to be praised and exalted, has ordained
them to do: So man with the understanding ought to glorify God continually:
And with the excellency of Will, and faculty of Memory in all matters we
should walk uprightly and honestly, and shun all sin and iniquity.


AH. Blessed is he that does thus.


Truth it is; he is blessed indeed. For his soul begins to delight it
self, in this world, with that kind of delight and joy, that after this
mortal life ended, shall be perfect and in Paradise complete; which in this
world is not possible for man to conceive or apprehend: For our understanding
cannot conceive that, which was not first seen or, heard, or perceived by some
of the external senses.


AH. Why then it follows, That seeing the end of man is the blessedness of
the soul: And that the portion he looks for is spiritual, not animal, It
must needs be thought, that that good thing which is proposed to a man, is
something spiritual, not corporal, nor animal.


SH. This confession is sound, and this confession ought every Mussleman, that
is of discretion, to make.


In truth, these words of thine do much rejoice me: But I marvel greatly, why
this is not a custom amongst the wiser sort of Musslemans, to talk and
discourse at all times of these arguments, and such like matters as these.


SH. The reason is, for that the Musslemans for the most part, do exercise
themselves in feats of arms, and do give their mind to the study of the famous
acts of former kings; not unto studies of Divinity, and spiritual knowledge.


AH. And what profit, I pray you, is there in the knowledge of all story of
former kings of the whole world, if we be ignorant of the true way, whereby we
are showed how our ^oule does consent with the will of God, which is our end
and only felicity?


SH. Our Prophet, our Advocate, I mean, has ordained the Law in the famous
Alkoran, for the salvation of his people: The end and effect of the law of God.
For this is the property of the Law, that it draws and tends unto that end
that makes peace, and salvation of the soul, not of the


AH. But a true and certain obedience, together with an observation of the
divine Law is required.


SH. That is out of doubt true. The books of Moses.
For in the Law are contained the commandments of God, which were given first
unto Moses, to this end that he should keep and observe the said precepts. And
hereupon it is, that our Prophet in the title Jonas, Of the Prophets.
says, That the books of Moses and of the rest of the prophets are true;
Psalms of David.
as also that the Psalms of David are holy: For in those books are contained
the holy and pure commandments of God.


AH. Moreover in the same chapter also, if I be not deceived, our Prophet
says, And the Gospel approved by Mohamed.
That the Gospel is true, holy and perfect.


SH. Nay, which is more, he calls it a guide sent


AH. What mean you by that phrase sent as a guide from God?


SH. That is, a prophecy, a path, and a right way. For at the time of Christ's
coming, The Go^pell is the gift of God or guide sent from him.
the world was found fully replenished with sin and iniquity: And in all
corners of the world men did worship images, in whom devils did dwell; And
there were none that knew God, All people of the w^rld before Christ's coming
were idolaters, the Jews only excepted.
but the people of the Jews only: For they did celebrate the name of God the
Lord the Creator of all things. And men were drawn unto this error and
destruction by a little and little. And to be brief; small and great, all of
them were under this devilish and blind servitude.


AH. What thing fell out at the birth of Christ?


SH. There fell out this. That he, like the direct and Christ the true light of
the word, By the preaching and miracles wrought by himself and his Apostles
dispelled all darkness and idolatry.
those clouds of darkness; And he roused up mankind and the posterity of Adam
from those sins by a little and little, by preaching and miracles. And after
him, his Apostles, and Disciples, and those who followed him, exercised the
same things, until that men had contemned idols, and wholly abandoned them,
and did worship the true God, and loved the service of God sincerely.


AH. Therefore very worthily did our Prophet commend the Gospel, and call it,
a prophecy, and straight way of God. For in truth so it is.


SH. When therefore our Prophet Mohammed came, was there no idol at all in the
world?


AH. Our Prophet came after Christ about 600 years; and therefore I think
there were no idols, dwelt.


SH. What good thing did our Prophet add unto the Gospel, seeing that the
doctrines of it are holy and perfect, as he himself does affirm.


AH. He added no other thing at all, then that which he himself does testify
of himself in his Alkoran; to wit, That he himself also is a true Prophet;
And that he has talked oft-times with the Angel Gabriel. And that upon Barak
he went up into the heavens: Item he says, That God and his Angels do pray for
him: Lastly, he says, That Noe, Abraham, and his Apostles did follow his law
and commandments


SH. Here, I adjure thee by the most high God, that thou tell me, How these men
did follow his law, seeing that they were before him many hundreds and


AH. But his law was written also by another, in a time before that.


SH. This seems not to be true: For our Prophet himself says, That he wrote
them, and that by himself. Wherefore we do confess; That the books of Moses,
and of the Prophets, the Psalms of David, and the Gospel of the Christians,
were commended and received of our Prophet.


AH. Yet I am desirous to know whether all these books be but one, or not? And
whether all of them do agree in all languages, which are now found in the
world, or not?


SH. There is no question of that: For the disciples of Christ, and his
Apostles combined together with one consent, carried them, and by preaching
spread them into every corner of the world.


AH. But if at this time there should be any language found, wherein the text
and Scripture were different from that of other languages, what ought then to
be done?


It must be confessed that this did arise out of the ignorance of the Scribe:
And that it ought to be corrected, and that text be made to agree with all
other texts agreeing between themselves, especially with those texts, and most
ancient books which were the first, and best corrected, that is, with those
written in the languages of Abraham, the Syrians, Greeks, and Latins.


AH. Thine opinion is good and very probable, and for my part I embrace it; and
I do hear with great comfort, That there is such a consent of books written
in different languages.


SH. This was not the work of man; but the will of God: For so Christ says in
the glorious Gospel, It is possible that the heavenly orbs may perish or
fail, as also the earth: But it is not possible that there should fail or
perish one letter of the law of God the most high, and of my precepts.


Tell me, I pray you, whether were there any other, beside our Prophet, which
ever did speak with the angel Gabriell, or not?


SH. With the Devil he did as soon.
Yes verily. And not with Gabriel only, but with God himself. For we do read
that many of the ancient Prophets, and holy fathers did talk with them, and
one of them, for examples sake, was Abraham the prophet.


AH. Was that he which built the famous city Meccha, the Lord make us noble by
it?


SH. Mecha built by Abraham.
Yea, even he which believed in God, and was obedient unto his word. And Moses
also, he spoke with God upon mount Sina; when as for the complement of mankind
and of the world, that is of his people, God gave them the law, and the ten
commandments.


AH. But who else did ever speak with Angels?


SH. Abraham the prophet, and Lot the prophet, and Jacob, and many others: But
Abraham did not with them; but there were with him at his house three Angels,
which conuersed with him, and hosted there. It is also read, that Abraham saw
three Angels, but adored but one only; In the Godhead are three persons, even
the Musslemans do confess.
Now this one, was God the Father, with his eternal Word, together with his
eternal Spirit, that is, that one God, which created all the world, and does
preserve and command the same.


AH. When these talked with God, or with the Angels, did they fall down upon
the earth, as our prophet did, and did their color alter?


SH. No, A third kind of adoration, to be added to their Latria and Doulia.
but a certain spiritual and bodily virtue and power did possess them.


AH. Seeing thou have made mention of Abraham, Tell me wherefore he ordained
the covenant? And why do we now perform, and observe the same covenant?


SH. God said unto Abraham, That all the nations, of the earth should be
blessed in his seed. The end and use of Circumcision.
Moreover he said, That his seed should go in amongst idolaters: and therefore
lest the Jewish nation should communicate with the wicked people, he commanded
the law of the Covenant, that by it they might be distinguished from them.


AH. Therefore by that Covenant the Jews were distinguished from profane
people, and other idolaters.


SH. Yea verily, he commanded it for this cause, and therefore as concerning
the Jewish nation, so long as it remained in the wilderness, which was the
space of 40 years, this statute took no place amongst them; but they were free
from it: But so soon as they were gone out of the desert, this statute was
commanded new again.


AH. Wherefore then did our Prophet enjoin men of other nations, as it is
apparent to all men.


SH. In this place I do know no other answer, but that our Prophet has so
commanded.


AH. Ipse dixit.
Yet it were good that a reason were known of this command, that an answer
might be ready, for any that should make question of it.


SH. And in my understanding, silence is best in such a case.


AH. Therefore let us talk of some other matter. I suppose that I have read in
the Alkoran, in the chapter Ssad: And again in the Chapter Albakara, That
certain Angels were converted into the shape of Satan, because that out of
their pride, they opposed themselves against the commandment of God, when he
commanded them to worship Adam.


SH. Yea in deed, so it is written.


Why would God that the creature of greater dignity, to wit an Angel, should
worship one of baser condition then it self, to wit Adam: For he is made of
earth, and is mortal?


SH. I know no other answer, but thus it is written in that book. Risum
teneatis amici? ^^e Moon, dou^tlesse, in Mo^a^meds opinion is ma^e of a green
che^se. H^re the Mussleman ^aile^^ in his As^ronomie: For the Moon is lesser
then the earth; althoug^ I suppose it ^^ much too great for ha^fe of it to be
put into Mohammeds sleeue.



AH. It is also written in the Alkoran, That the Moon was divided equally into
two parts: And that one half went into Mohammeds sleeue; and the other half
fell down to the ground, and yet after this, these two halfes were united and
set together again miraculously by him.


SH. It is very true, so we do read, and this was a miraculous act of our
Prophet.


AH. How was that possible that the Moon should fall to the earth? And how
could it go into the sleeue of a man, seeing that the breadth of it is greater
then all the whole earth?


SH. So it is. Thy reasons and doubts are good, and they seem to proceed from
good understanding; but I know no other answer then that our prophet


AH. Moreover there are written by him 12,000 sayings; And one says, That in
the Alkoran are very many fables^
that the speeches that are true and good are but 3,000: Therefore all the
residue are false. And therefore how shall a man be able to distinguish the
truth from falsehood? If he were a Prophet, how came it to pass that he spoke
that which was not true? For in as much as he was a Prophet, he ought
continually to speak truth, as the books of the rest of the Prophets do.


SH. In this place also, in regard of the majesty and depth of the thing, I
hold it best to be silent.


AH. Next after this, let us question of some words and sayings of the Alkoran:
For it is full of such like as those former are. Thou said, That the world
was full of idols; How then did all nations entertain and receive so easily
tha^ law of his, I mean


SH. It was planted with much oppression.
They did not receive that with such facility; But with much ado, long labor,
and strong opposition; By the testimony of Martyrs, and effusion of blood, for
the space of 300 years: And persecution.
For with much oppression also even by the most principal power of the
Emperor of Rome were the Christians tormented and afflicted grievously.


AH. How were they at the length pacified?


SH. In few words, his Apostles, that is, the disciples of Christ, But at
length the truth prevailed.
did many miracles, great, and true; so that at length the truth it self
overcame all those that gainsaid and withstood it.


AH. Seeing then that the Gospel is holy and good: And that in it is nothing
but truth and perfection, Why, as our Prophet also says, ought we not to be
obedient unto the precepts thereof; And why rule our actions according to the
rules of it?


SH. Indeed we ought to follow it without doubt, there is no question of it.


AH. I would feign know out of the books of Moses, or out of the Gospels, or
ou^ of the books of the rest of the Prophets, and Psalms of David, which are
so much commended in the Alkoran, whether we may read there any thing of the
truth of God: Of his nature and essence; And of his will? And of what matter he
created the world and all things in it?


SH. I will answer unto the last only; and I do affirm, that Moses writes,
That our blessed God, by his blessed and holy word alone, did create the world.
Moreover also David writes, That Elohim, that is God the most high, had all
things with him for a pattern of the works of Christ to come, and of his
Apostles. And to be brief, the ancient writings and the Gospel do agree of
one truth, of those which concern Christ, which afterward were not by parables
and figures; but were clearly taught of Christ by demonstration, and
manifestation of the way of truth and practice, (according to the will and
pleasure of God) of the attaining of the glory of the kingdom of heaven, that
is, of Paradise.


AH. But I hear that his precepts are very hard and subtle.


SH. Yet Christ says, My burden, that is my precept, and my law is good and
sweet. For it is the law of love and mercy; And wheresoever there is love and
compassion, in very deed there is God; And therefore by his aid and assistance
whatsoever it be that does seem to us and our senses, heavy and difficult,
shall be made light and easy.


AH. These great perfections were by our Prophet attributed to the glorious
Gospel; and therefore


SH. It must needs be confessed, that he attributes to him a divine
perfection; and that his power it was, which was seen to be in him, by reason
of those many miracles which he did; As it is read, That he gave sight to the
blind, which was so borne by nature: Hearing to the deaf: Speech to the dumb:
And life unto the dead, after they had been laid in the grave.


AH. How was the law of Moses received of the Jews, which they did so much
withstand?


SH. The law of God was confirmed by miracles, blood of Martyrs, and
Demonstration:
It was given by God, unto Moses in mount Sina, with thunder, lightening, and
fire falling upon the multitude of men which stood under the mount: For the men
heard and saw all that was done to come toward him.


AH. But the Alkoran was not thus confirmed: Therefore it is not the law of God.
In like manner also, if the law of our Prophet and his Alkoran of so great
esteem be given of God, it is meet that it be confirmed by the testimony of
Martyrs: By the persuasion of miracles: And by some demonstration from God
almighty.


SH. The Alkoran of Mohammed established by Stafford law
In the Alkoran there is no mention at all made of miracles, done by our
Prophet, more the^ of a prophecy of the said Prophet, saying, That his law is
good and given of God: And that whosoever shall not follow it, or shall not
receive it, he ought to be slain with the sword: Or else he must pay a tribute
if he persist in his own religion.


AH. Seeing then that God almighty, for the confirmation of his law and of his
own word, did show his law, and yield that unto him, which is due to our God
and Creator.


SH. So it is written by our Prophet, and so he has commanded us. But I will
not forget to answer your second question which you proposed before, to wit out
of the Gospel, Whether there be in it any thing to be observed of God, or no?
And what thing the nature of God is? I say that thou have, in making these
questions, committed a great sin, in that thou durst for shame speak such a
thing. For man ought to know that God is constant and true: And that he is the
Creator of all things, visible and invisible. But what his essence and nature
is, that we cannot understand or know: For within the compass of our
understanding that his nature does not fall: But when our understanding does
diue into the i^uention of this thing, it is left wholly in base ignorance:
Even as our eye, being opposed against the beams of the Sun, does not only
not see it, and lose the light of it: but does wholly lose the faculty of
seeing, which before it had. Believe therefore, good son, in humility
whatsoever is to be believed concerning the things of God. And run not out at
any time into speeches to say, That God cannot do all things: For God is
omnipotent, and does much in many matters, whose causes we can by no means
know, neither ought we to search into them: For they remain laid up in the
treasury of his secrets, which cannot be comprehended.


AH. I have sinned, and I do acknowledge my sin: For it is true that thou
have said. But I would willingly know for what cause our Prophet does call That
Christ is the word of God;

And the breath and spirit of God, Mohammed shows by a similitude.


Yet I know not whether I may ask that question, or not.


SH. Yes, you may, and it is easy to answer it. Christ is the soul or word of
God, as the beams of the Sun are the very essence of the Sun, and nature
thereof.


AH. Therefore we may say, As the Sun is in heaven and in earth perfectly by
his beams: So is God in the height, and in the earth, by Christ his word.


SH. It is right. There can no comparison nor similitude be made of any thing
amongst all the works of God to r^present this unto the understanding but by
this example.


AH. I think so. But I see another thing beside the beams and the Sun, and
that also distinctly, to wit, heat, by whose cause and virtue, whatsoever is
seen upon the earth does grow and spring.


SH. So is there in God almighty and his word: furtherance of this spirit
increasing, there every thing is easy, and there is much joy.


AH. The Lord bless you. I am very glad of this sweet conference, and my soul
is much comforted in all thou have said.


SH. This fruit springs not from me. But it shows it self out of the
unfeigned works. God bestows upon us these good fruits, and fame thereof upon
all men: For they do rejoice and delight themselves, and rest quiet in the
understanding and in the spirit, as thou do at this time.


AH. O that all Musslemans were taught and instructed by thee. For then I hope
that every one of them would be as wise men are, ioying and contenting


SH. Our Prophet also does honor and magnify the mysteries of God the most
high; but does conceal them: And therefore he has adjudged it to be true and
without doubt, That Christ was borne of Mary the virgin: For so he does
absolutely confess, and he makes no doubt at all of it, but that this
nativity was one of the great works of the blessed God. And this ought to be
the faith and confession of every one, and to make no question of it. For that
were a mere denial of it.


AH. Why do we search into the profound secrets of the power of God, and of the
knowledge of him which is infinite; seeing we do not know the causes of
natural operations, which are wrought in our own bodies, and souls also; to
wit, How we men, and many other such like, which do appear manifestly to our
eyes, and yet we are ignorant of their causes?


SH. See therefore how excellent the word of God is, and how wonderful; which
although it be from the mouth of some weak servant, yet it works wonderful
matters; as we read of Elias the Prophet, who in the name of God caused fire
to come down from heaven. Now he does come near unto Elias, whatsoever he be
that does call upon the name of Christ. Amongst the idolaters, the idols did
fall down, and were broken in pieces, by the virtue of his glorious name.


AH. I also do read and have heard by many, That in the name of God almigh^ie
and Christ, the Christians have done the like miracles as these are,


SH. We ought to confess and believe in God with humbleness of mind; as
Abraham the Prophet did, who, out of the perfection of his belief, would have
sacrificed his son Ishak; notwithstanding God had promised unto Abraham, that
in his seed all Nations should be blessed. Now in the time of slaughter, the
Angel Gabriell came down from heaven, and caught him by the hand, that he
should not kill him; and came with a Lamb, or a Ram, which was to be
sacrificed: and so Ishak was not slain; although he were offered up by his
father, and laid upon the altar, and upon the wood; yet he was preserved alive.


AH. This was a great myst^rie, and must needs signify some great matter.


SH. It is indeed a g^e^t mystery; But this time,


SH. Neither have I any desire, at this time, to search into any secret
mystery: But hereafter I will, as far as it may stand with humility, and the
fear of God, doing good works unto my souls health.


SH. Every wise and understanding man ought to do and to think thus: For the
loss of those good things which God offers to us in Paradise, are a great
damage.


AH. I am desirous to hear what those good things are: therefore tell me them.
For in the recital of them we shall be incited to do good works.


SH. Our Prophet in his glorious Alkoran says, That God will give to those
that do good, all pleasant graces, fair houses, virgins, and damsels:
Moreover, that to every man severally he will give of every thing store,
together with goodly garments; Now all this shall be cause of very much joy.


AH. I marvel much at this: For our Prophet


SH. As I have said, this is thus read in our Prophet; but this is one of those
fictions, which himself says he did write in jest: For our state without
doubt, shall be like unto the blessed estate of the Angels, and other heavenly
spirits, enjoying the glory of God. For there must be in Paradise no
consideration of meat, drink, women, or such things. For all these things are
given to us of God, in this world, as convenient for our bodies, and fleshly
part of ours, that are imperfect of themselves, to preserve mankind; And are no
ways necessary ^or this purpose in Paradise.


AH. I also do verily think so: Of Adams creation:
For we all know generally, That God created Adam; And that out


SH. Of his fall:
Man after the fall of Adam, fell into a state that was not very perfect, but
disordered: And by this means one man is not content with one woman, but does
desire many and diverse, for the satisfying of his concupiscence, and lust that
he has unto their company. Moreover also we know that garments were at the
first given of God to Adam and Heua, to cover their nakedness withal, after
they had committed sin: But man has made himself goodly apparel, of new
and diverse fashions. Adam


AH. Hear, I pray you, that saying, That every man has need of a wife, an
house, and apparel another day in Paradise, What Paradise is?
seems to argue that there is no Paradise: For Paradise is a place wherein
there is all good things, without any manner of want: also life eternal,
without death.


SH. Thou say true; and we do know it to be so: But thus our Prophet has
written: And therefore we must say nothing.


AH. Where truth may be spoken, and that to the salvation of our souls, there
we ought not to hold our peace; but every man is bound to seek for his else;
and indeed thus he ought to do. For what profit do Noblemen, Princes and Kings
get, by their obtaining and enjoying of honor, or the whole world, and of
other Arab. Slaves, wherein a great part of the Musslemans riches does consist.
riches, by the sword and spear and by death, without the knowledge of his
law? seeing also that by this ignorance, their souls do remain, by the just
judgment of God, (for their pride, without faith,) accursed with the devils in
Gehenna for ever and ever.


SH. These conceits of yours do strike a terror into me. But that this sin
be not laid to the charge of my soul, I will satisfy thee; yet to morrow; not
now. For now the time is well spent, and the night grows on. I will, I say,
tell ^hee and declare unto thee matters of great moment and weight, which I
with us on our journey.


AH. The Lord increase your Honors health, and the Lord bless you. I am bound
always to love you especially above all men, for this your promise, and I hope
you will perform as much; and I shall always pray unto the Lord to reward you
for it abundantly. Well, let us go on our journey.


The end of the first Dialogue.
The second Dialogue.
AH. I Did so rejoice at our conference,


SH. In deed, this is the excellent property of the understanding, when it
learneth any spiritual thing, and is delighted with divine conceits; where
our soul rests, as in the worthiness and blessedness of them, it desires
always to go on forward.


AH. Therefore many men, being in some grievous sin, when they are by their
own will, deprived of this spiritual delight, they are delighted only with
worldly and bodily pleasures, like brute beasts, which have no understanding
nor capacity.


SH. And on the contrary, wisemen always of every and taught, That the true
joy and comfort of man is in living according unto reason. For in it is his
perfection; not in lustful sensuality: for in it is naught but vile shame, by
no means to be entertained, and for the most part unlawful.


AH. Moreover also, This joy that does arise out of knowledge, as thou have
said, I take to be another kind of joy; and man also himself delights and
ioyeth in it much more then in the other.


SH. What manner of thing is this?


AH. It is that when a man comes to honor, wealth, or command over other men.


SH. This is indeed a joy; but it is a worldly joy, and that which soon
decays: For it has an end at true end, that is, unto God our Creator.


AH. In truth there is a great difference between this joy, and that: And
seeing that this joy, which thou call worldly joy, is so small a joy, of
little continuance, and does so soon decay; I do marvel why all wise men do
not seek after this which is eternal and stable.


SH. This grows and arises out of the imperfection of wisdom in them. But
he is wise indeed, that does seek and labor to find himself every day thus
rejoicing more and more.


AH. Teach me therefore, I pray thee for Gods


SH. First of all, he must wind himself out of all desire of worldly
businesses, wealth, and worldly preferments, and that from the heart; as in
deed being things that are but additaments, hindering our course to run from
all lustful sensuality that is unlawful. For the earnest endeavor of the
Spirit, and fleshly concupiscence, contending one with another, do stay the
course of the Spirit, and meditation of godly matters.


AH. What thing then may help a man, to separate himself from these unlawful
things?


SH. This shall be done by the help of God; By the means of an upright life;
By obtaining of perfection; that is, by true religious service, and knowledge
of the precepts of God, and of his Law: By relying upon him; and being moved
according to pleasure.


AH. Teach me, for God almighties sake, out of the law of our Prophet, out of
every Assora of the same, some certain perfections, which I may follow: and
some other out of the commandments of God, which I may follow. For the law
which was given of God must needs contain all perfections and holy rules.


SH. This demand of thine does show, that thou have not read the Alkoran.


AH. Why do you say so, seeing that you know that I love to read it at
certain convenient times?


SH. This therefore thou must know, That our Prophet does say, that there is
not any one man that can understand the Alkoran: And that himself also did not
know the meaning and exposition of it: And that God alone does know the sense
of it.


AH. Moreover this is well known unto us all, That our Prophet did go up into
heaven: And therefore we must needs know what perfection he was worthy of, for
this favor.


SH. In deed himself does record in the Alkoran, That he ascended up into the
highest heaven: Fabula plusquam Talmudica. One of R. Lumleys tales.
but he speaks not one word of his worth, dignity, and perfection. But he
says, That Gabriel on a night did knock at his gate; and he arose out of his
bed, where he did sleep with his wife Aisha; and he opened the gate, and the
Angel saluted him; and said unto him, The peace of God be upon thee and thy
wife: thou must with me go up into heaven, that thou may see in this blessed
night the secrets of God. Now this vision and journey did never befall to any
son of Adam. Item, he reports in the Alkoran,


AH. I am amazed at this thine answer.


SH. Wherefore and for what cause?


AH. For that if we do yield to go to heaven, either by Barak, or by any other
going up, by the means of the Angel, and by ascent up by the means of
stairs, as our Prophet went up by Gods help, and special favor; then we
shall never come to heaven: to be known, it is impossible also to observe it.
And if we which do follow it, do not understand how to keep it and use it;
then how is it possible to do after the will of almighty God, that by the
means of this law, we may demand of him Paradise?


SH. I say unto thee, as our Prophet did say, speaking of his own religion.
But I will not declare this plainly: For God only knows the sense of the
Alkoran.


AH. I do not believe that there was ever any other religion in the world but
this, that was unknown to those that were bound to keep it, and to follow it.


SH. Without all doubt the law of Moses, the entitled Jonas, says; If there
be any doubt to thee in religion, I have told thee and enjoined thee, saying,
Seek the declaration and exposition thereof of them which did read it before
we did: to wit, of the Jews, and of the Christians, which did read the Law
and the Gospel before our time.


AH. I did never read the Gospel, neither did it ever seem good unto me to
take that labor in hand: For I do know that I shall not be able to attain unto
it; that is, to conceive how those Christians do worship one God only; and yet
they say that Christ is the Son of God; Now the Father and the Son are two
Gods; seeing also that God Almighty has a Son not having a wife.


SH. If there be no other greater difficulty then this, at length I was
satisfied and fully persuaded of it; for it is a thing plain enough, and it
cannot be denied.


AH. In mine opinion it is a very strange thing, that thou should say, It is
a matter manifest: But thou art a great learned man, and very old, and thou
said, I was satisfied. I entreat thee therefore, for God almighties cause,
to show me the exposition of it; that I may learn, and make profit by thee.


SH. Hearken with the ear of the spirit: for except thou do so, thou shall not
understand me. For this does turn it self unto almighty God.


AH. Say on, o SHEICH, I entreat thee for Gods cause.


SH. I say, That the Christians do confess that


AH. In this point therefore our confessions do agree.


SH. They do say, That the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, are but one
God: For all these three are only but one divine essence.


AH. This I do also well understand.


SH. Thou vnderstoodst yesterday, how that every rational soul of man had
three faculties, to wit, Understanding, Memory, and Will; Yet the man, in whom
this soul is, is no more but one man.


AH. This also is true, and it behooves every man to confess so much.


SH. I do also believe that the rays of the Sun do come out of it: And that
from the fire heat does issue; And that a word does arise out of the
understanding


AH. All this also is clear.


SH. Now we say, That he that begets is the Father: And that which is
begotten is the Son.


AH. In deed so they say.


SH. So in the same manner therefore the Christians do say, That Christ was the
Son of God: Because he is his word; and God is the Father: For he was
begotten of him; as the speech is begotten of Reason; and as of the Sun, the
beams. Now as reason and speech are of one and the same essence; And the
nature of the Sun, and of his rays are one and the same: So Christ the
Son, with the Father has one and the same nature; And the essence of them is
one and the same: And therefore they are but one God, and not two Gods. Now
because that our Prophet in the Assora entitled Annesa, says, That Christ is
the word of God; we must needs, in regard of the former demonstrations a little
before premised, of both being but one; also the divine nature is but one and
the same. And to say without any ground, That God almighty should not have a
Son without a Wife, were mere madness: For God is a very spirit: and in this
divine generation there needs no use of a woman. Whosoever denies this,
denies also and says, that God is not an essence. For in God there is no
dimension. He denies also and says, that God does not live. For he does not
eat. Now this is mere ignorance and a great madness.


AH. This is plain, that God does not eat to sustain life, as man does:
otherwise he should not be God.


SH. And therefore I say, seeing that our Prophet


AH. By these parables that thou have declared, it seems so in my judgment:
and that it may not be denied. For indeed thou have expounded the matter truly
and well: and I am glad of it, and in all things I am well satisfied.


SH. I told thee, That those divine and heavenly things which are not seen,
are not comprehended by the understanding, neither are they conceived of us,
but by the means of some other creatures of God.


AH. Well, but I have another doubt, and that also a great one. It seems that
we cannot read the Mosaicall books, for this purpose: And in like manner the
Gospel, can we not read for expositions and comments, although our Prophet do
command the same.


How is this question another doubt?


AH. The doubt is, That all those books were altered and corrupted by the
Christians, especially the name of our Prophet, as the Musslemans do affirm.


SH. Art thou then one of them which do think so?


AH. I do verily believe as all other of them do believe.


SH. But this is a foul error, for this reason only: If the Mosaicall books
and the Gospel had been altered; or if they should have been one opposite to
another, our Prophet would not have said, That his writings should be
corrected by those books. And in like manner it cannot be said, That they were
corrupted, for this one other reason also: For the Christians and the Jews are
contrary one to another, and there was always enmity between them: But the
text to them both is but one and the Hebrew text of the Jews, does agree with
the Greek and Latin texts word for word. Furthermore, after the days of our
Prophet, which was after Christ, somewhat more then 600 years, as I told thee
yesterday, there were always heretics, as Arians, Nestorians, Iacobites, and
others; seeing that they all have one Gospel agreeing in all points: And for
that because in diverse languages, in the which they are found written: And
that in all corners and kingdoms of the world, the text is found so to agree,
that not so much as in one jot or title they do disagree; seeing it is thus, I
say, it cannot be justly said, that the Jews and Christians have agreed,
throughout the whole world, of such diverse nations, to blot ought out of the
books aforesaid. Neither does it satisfy reason to say, That they have
blotted the name of the Jew, which was the cause of his death; or the name of
Pilate, who crucified Christ; not Mohammed, that commends him.


AH. If this be thus, it is confessed by thee, that these books were never
corrupted; and then, that they are books which had remained 600 years, to
wit, from Christ unto the coming of our Prophet.


SH. By the aforesaid demonstrations, thou must of necessity say so, willingly
believe it, and confess as much. For the contrary and adverse opinion is every
way without any show of probability, and has no ground.


Our Prophet, in the Chapter Albakara, says in the person of God himself: We
have sent down the prophecy of God, and we have kept it. Now it seems to
me, that the meaning of this word Prophecy, is nothing else but the glorious
Gospel.


SH. So indeed this place is understood.


AH. Therefore our Prophet says it, that he also does magnify the Gospel,
and does according to the precepts of the same.


SH. This is very apparent: For he does highly commend it, and says that it
was given by God, and is complete and perfect.


AH. I have read also in the Chapter Almaida this saying, To have many books
and to increase them does profit nothing, without a fulfilling of the Gospel
and the Law, that is, of that which our Prophet does ^each in it.


SH. By having of books, are ^ignified the Musslemans: and so it is understood
also in the Assora Annesa, and other places.


AH. We say, That God Almighty gave the


SH. We do also say, he is a general Prophet to all Prophets. But we know
that he knew not any language but the Arabicke tongue only; neither did he
speak any other language; neither had he learned any other tongue; And indeed
the Alkoran is not found written in any other language but in the Arabicke
tongue only.


AH. Therefore there remains yet another great difficulty, videl. How this
law should be universal, seeing that it is not found written but in the
Arabic tongue only; and for that this our Prophet could not speak any word
of any other language: and because that he and his law were not for all men,
and for all creatures or people.


SH. Wherefore do you think so?


AH. Because I do see that God Almighty would first that the Gospel should be
for a general law to be saved, but by his mediation or by his law, and not
otherwise.


I told thee, that our Prophet says, that himself does not understand his
own law; but God only does understand it: for he is most skillful. Who
therefore can teach it, or know how to preach it?


AH. Therefore we do follow that, which is unknown to us. Now how much, and
how grossly do they err, which do not understand, or have not heard the law?
But by your patience I understand that this reason is not received as current.


SH. Wherefore?


AH. Because that in the Alkoran there is in truth no sentence written, but it
may be understood of every one that understands the Arabicke tongue: Yea and
thou know it: for thou had read much.


SH. I know well, but in respect of the loftines of the phrases of our Prophet,
I spoke it.


But let us leave all other demonstrations, and let us consider this one
sentence only, to wit, that saying, (That God gave his law in the world, which
may not be understood, especially of those which follow i,t) it is beyond the
reach of reason, and compass of faith.


SH. Truth it is, that this is strange: yet it may not be spoken of God
Almighty. For an understanding and just man, does not command to another man,
any thing but that which he does understand, which is within his ability, and
is possible for him to do. And so if God be most wise and just, he will not
force the soul to any thing, but that which is within compass of it. This
confession is sound, and thus we ought to believe: For God is most wise and
just in very deed.


AH. Yet I cannot but marvel, how it comes to pass, that our Prophet, in
his Alkoran, which is the law of God, a serious matter, as wherein is declared
the means of the salvation of our souls, has inserted


SH. This the Astronomers do deny: yea all Philosophers do improve this
opinion. But therefore they are spoken parabolically.


AH. It is a foul shame that we should say so: that in our law I mean there
should be any such thing, that either of wise men, or of others, should be
taken as false and fabulous: For then every thing to take, to prove, that this
law only is true and neces^ary to salvation; seeing that we cannot prove
this, That it was demonstrated by apparent miracles from God. Now if it shall
be said, that this Law came from God^ as the Law of Moses did, which God gave
unto Moses in mount Sinai, in the day time, with fire, thundering, and great
lightning, for the satisfaction of his people, which saw and heard, and
certainly knew that God gave it. Thus also was the Gospel confirmed by
miracles, and great wonders, which Christ first did; then his Apostles, and
lastly his Disciples; As, the giving of life unto the dead in all sorts of men;
The giving of sight of the and that with thundering and lightning: of the fiery
tongues; and of the Disciples which did believe and fear, became blind and
fearelesse, and without any fear did assail all the wisemen, and learned men
of the whole world.


SH. I have heard as much, and all thou have said is true: But now I answer
saying, I do marvel at thee; thou would have all things that our Prophet
has written to be sound, and yet he himself says, I have


AH. I say once more, that the Law of God must be true; there must be no
contrariety in it. For God is most pure and true justice, he is most wise,
neither is it possible that he should be contrary to himself any ways.


SH. I do confess that your words are true, and that your objections are
discreet. I my self have studied very diligently these 40 years these
matters, yet I cannot answer thee. And moreover your words I cannot but
approve. Well, it is good that we leave these things thus at this time.


AH. If my speech be not burdensome unto thee, I pray thee let me bring one
other doubt, which I would feign understand, and which for the honor


SH. I have told thee, and promised thee, to answer thee faithfully and truly:
and therefore say what thou will and think good, I will hear thee willingly.


AH. Amongst all the good things that appertain to a man, virginity, and
purity of body is the chief, and greatest of all. For a man is borne a
virgin, and so continues, until by the suggestion of the devil and untamed
lust, he is made to fall into the bottomless pit of sin.


SH. This indeed is a special virtue, and Angelical perfection.


AH. It is also the perfection of mankind: yet indeed it is not for every one;
but for Saints. We do read in the law of Elias, that he was a virgin, and so
did always continue: Moreover in the Gospel we read, that John the son of
Zachary, and John one for truth; and is also of our Prophet received and
greatly commended, is, that Mary, the virgin, the mother of Christ, was
conceived by the holy Ghost; and that after the birth of Christ she also
remained a maid and virgin for ever as long as she lived. Now by this
perfection, that is, by virginity, it is known that he was of God accepted
for his perfection.


SH. And this every man does believe and confess: but of this what doubt do
thou make?


AH. Marry this; seeing that our Prophet was not a virgin, as other Prophets
were, which were pure, and beloved friends of God, it must needs be that he was
one of the company of the shameless and void of grace.


^H. Why do thou say so? what, was he shameless?


It is not sufficient to say it: but it shall be proved: for he that loves
perfection, he does not only not do any vile thing: but he does not so much as
speak any misbeseeming speech. Now seeing that our Prophet did not only write
that he had many wives: but he writes also that he loved his maid, and lay
with her; and thereupon when Aisha his wife was angry with it and rebuked him,
he promised with a great oath, that he would abstain from her bed: Yet
afterward in the Chapter Atta^rim he says, That God did pardon and dispense
with that oath for him, by the testimony of Gabriel and Rachael: and therefore
at another time also he lay with his maid, notwithstanding his promise
aforesaid, and then his wife said nothing to it: Item, in the Chapter speaking
it from God, that he does not fear any man: for God gave him the wife of Zeid.
Mohammed was a good familist.
Moreover it is read also, that God willed him to lie with the wives of the
faithful; that Prophets might be begotten by him; when as notwithstanding it
is clear, that there was no Prophet begotten by him: For he did not leave any
issue male behind him. Seeing then that our law and the Alkoran is the law of
God, which is just and holy, how could our Prophet be absolved from that oath,
which he did make concerning the lying with his maid, to save himself from the
breaking of the promise to his wife? And wherefore did God dispense with him,
that he might have the wife of Zeid; seeing that this is not matrimony, but
fornication, adultery, and iniquity? In the Chapter Bakara, it is written
also, That the wives of men are as it were the seed-fields of the men, and
every man does sow his wife best. Moreover he says, That he is lusty, and is
as strong for carnal copulation, as 40 men are. Item, that it is not lawful
for a woman after her separation and divorce, the third time to come unto her
husband again, except first she have lien with another man once. Now this is a
thing more vile then may be spoken: although we do observe it, like as other
precepts of our Prophet. Now these being filthy and shameful, how do they
beseem our law, which was given by God? Therefore I do demand an answer of
thee; tell me therefore thine opinion concerning these matters: for I will
hear thee very gladly.


SH. I do not love to speak of this matter: but seeing that I promised thee an
answer, I will answer thee according to my skill. I do think that the first
Musslemans did not preach our law to any other


AH. Nay I say, that for this cause they inhibited the translation of the
Alkoran into any other language, that it might not be understood of others: for
then every Christian or Jew would say, that our Prophet did forge this law, for
that he did lie with his maid, and with another man's wife. Now this does not
become a Prophet, and one beloved of God: for God does not love leachers, and
adulterous people.


SH. I told thee before, That the spiritual life is that which is agreeable to
the will of God: for that sensitive life is not perfect, which does hinder the
divine and spiritual contemplation.


Now seeing we have yet a long way to go: and that the time does serve well for
our conference, I would feign ask thee one other question, which does now come
to my mind, and is worth the understanding.


SH. Say on: for I see thee to be of a noble spirit, and one desirous to honor
our law, of which I am very glad.


AH. Our Prophet in his Alkoran, in the Chapter of Devils, does say, that the
devils shall be partakers of his law, and many of the devils shall be saved, by
means of his law. Now we do know that by reason of their frowardness and
malice, they are fallen into all sins. Moreover also we know, That God which
is good, is also the cause of all perfection, the fountain and true cause of
all perfection, and of all good things. How then can any part of the devils
agree


SH. Without doubt to the evil ones there agreeeth nothing but that which is
evil: and therefore no man can answer easily to this thy objection. For the
devils are wicked and perverse, and so will be always. Item, the difference
between a sinful man, and the devils is, that a man may repent and return
again unto Gods protection: but the devils, which ar^ spirits, do never alter
their mind, neither can they repent, and so be forgiven: Therefore they always
remain in their wickedness and perdition, and so for ever shall be accursed,
and estranged from the mercy of God, and shall for ever remain as ever they
have


AH. For this cause our Prophet commands, that every man before prayer, do
use the ceremony of washing and cleansing for remission of sins, and blotting
out of his iniquity, whether it be great or small. And where there is no water,
it may be done with the rubbing on of dust or ashes.


SH. O my good son, do not say that this thing is the cause of remission and
doing away of sin. For forgiveness of sins in very deed is this: May not
Christians be ashamed to be taught of a Turk?
The sinner must first of all see that in the heart there be an earnest
repentance for that sin that he has committed against the Lord. Then by good
works he must satisfy the judgment of God and his justice. videl^ from a
musleman; whether it be by stripes, or by robbery, or by rapine. And in deed
thy washings, and cleansings, and anointings do no whit at all profit him.


AH. But in mine opinion, our Prophet does not command in any place this
restitution of other men's goods taken away, as thou affirmest: But that we must
Fast, Give alms, Pray, Cloth the poor, and Defend the prisoners from the hand
of the wicked.


SH. In deed Alms deeds are good, when they are given out of our own goods
and our own stock: neither is that alms allowable which is given out of the
goods of another: for God and justice have thus decreed. Therefore how may we
do according to the sentence of the law which says, That we must give of all
whatsoever we do possess in goods, one fifth part for an alms to God
almighty, and to our Prophet.?


I say that God does not love any part of ill gotten goods, or those that are
accursed: Therefore it is not lawful for us to take the goods of another; and
he that shall do so hurts himself.


AH. Thou carest not much whether thou speak against, or for others: For
every one of the Musslemans does allow riches and goods gotten by rapine, or
any other way worse then this.


SH. For this cause I do doubt greatly how they may be saved from hell fire.


AH. Tell me for Gods sake, (seeing thou have spoken of the saving from hell
fire) because our Prophet says in the Chapter Amran, that it is not possible
to be saved, but by his law: and in the Chapter Albacara, he says, That the
Jews and the Christians shall be saved; how these do agree?


There is in truth a manifest opposition and repugnancy between these two
speeches.


AH. Seeing that the Christians and Jews shall be saved, wherefore does our
Prophet command, those that do not believe his law should be slain? or that
they should pay tribute and poll-money?


SH. This also is contrary to his own saying: For in the Chapter Albacara he
writes, that, In the law of God there is no oppression.


AH. And out of these sayings, in which there is such contradictions, there can
no answer be made to my demands.


SH. Where is there not some contradiction? As in that Assora, where he
writes, that the disciples of Christ did say to him, that they were Mohammeds
followers, he writes also, that God said to Moha^. that he was the first that
wrote the Alkoran. Now if this be true, then that cannot which follows;
videlicet, That the disciples of Christ did not follow Mohammed. For the
Disciples of Christ were before Mohammed 600 years. Therefore this allegation
is false. For they did not follow the Alkoran: because it was not written at
that time.


AH. And I also do affirm, that in this there is not only a contradiction,
but a mere falsehood, opposed to the truth it self, and all histories.


SH. Therefore it were very good and expedient that the Musslemans should read
all old writers; to wit, the Gospel, the Law, and the Psalms, for the
manifestation of the truth. For our Proph. does commend, as is said before, the
books of Moses, which are most methodically written from the creation of the
world: and the Gospel, which is named of our Pro. the rays of the spirits and
prophecy of Almighty God. Seeing that our Prophet does commend these books,
therefore he shows that he also did read these books.


AH. I do not confess so much. For he did not know any other, but the Arabicke
tongue only: yet by an interpretour he heard that which is contained in the
books of the Jews and Christians.


AH. If they were not learned and upright men, it is to be doubted whether they
have in those things, by reason of their ignorance, spoken the truth, or have
not altered the words, and so now they are not as they were: and therefore by
reason of their perverseness, they spoke contradictions.


SH. It may be that both the one and the other are false. But by reason of our
faith, we must be grounded in the truth, and give our selves to the reading of
those books: For this may be a means to expound our law; and we may learn by
these books how


AH. Now this on our part, is a foul shame: for we being forbidden to take
delight in any thing wherein there are found any fables, do become also ignorant
of those things which might turn to the salvation of our souls, which we
ought especially to know.


SH. And therefore every learned man ought to give his mind with all
earnestness to study, and to forsake vulgar opinions. For to morrow or
straight after to morrow we shall die: and then what gain have we made, if we
have not learned the truth, and to do according to the approbation of the will
of the almighty and blessed God?


AH. I am desirous to study, that I may learn to do as thou say: but mine
understanding does not no profit nor contentment. And indeed I love and desire
that knowledge that is profitable unto faith and religion, and depends upon
the mysteries of almighty God: And I desire to read that which is confirmed by
great miracles.


SH. Now in the law of our prophet it is not written that any thing was
confirmed by miracles: For he himself does confess, that God did not give him
the gift of miracles: but the knowledge and skill of war only.


AH. For miracles are indeed a manifest note of a Prophet, and of prophecy:
and of the preachers of the will of God almighty, which loves goodness, and
commands men to love one another. But war, by which the world is oppressed
and killed, and men are at great variance and strife, it is the instrument of
Satan


SH. And indeed our Prophet did not work any miracles: But the works of God
toward Mohammed were miraculous.


AH. What were they?


SH. The coming of the Angel unto his gate, was a great miracle: Item, the
conference also of Albarak with him; Item, that in one moment and the twinkling
of an eye he went that journey, to wit, from Mecha unto Jerusalem; where he
found all the Prophets which long since were at rest: where our Prophet did
call upon them, and pray for them. Item, his vision of the Stayres from the
earth unto heaven. Item, his going up with the Angel unto heaven, even to the
throne of God, and from thence to God himself, of who^ he received great
favors, as he says.


Seeing that thou call these things, miracles; answer me to this one other
question of mine, which may be demanded of any skillful and understanding man,
which is this; Our Prophet says, All that before is spoken of, was done in one
night, and yet neither his wife nor his maid did see Gabriel. Moreover he
says also, That the Prophets which came, were the dead Prophets: Neither does
he say, that some of them were living. Wherefore if one should now say, That
none of all these things were true; but were fained by him, that men might
believe him, and his prophecy; what shall be for an answer unto this? For we have
no witnesses nor confirmation from the living; but he only does speak, and
record, and also write so of him self.


He that believes not these things, does not likewise believe that he was
absolved by God, concerning his oath that he made unto his wife: because he
says, Gabriel and Rachael did only testify this; and it is also unknown.
For he says, This is solitary, and no man ever saw it; neither can we ask of
any of them, whether this be true or false.


AH. This also is necessary and worthy to be understood and considered of, how
he describes the orbs from the beginning of the sphere unto the end of the
same: where he says, The first sphere is made of pure silver: and the Stars
are hanged upon the first sphere by chains made of brass: The second sphere
of pure gold: The third of precious stones or The fourth, of a Smaragd: The
fifth, of pearls: The sixth, of Alahal. Now all this is confuted by the
Astronomers, and Philosophers: for Gold, Silver, and Gemmes, or precious
Stones, are thick bodies, and our eyes do not see through them, per modum
transparentiae: that is, it is not possible that our sight should pass through
them, from one to another. And this is apparent: For the body of the Sun is in
the fourth sphere, and yet it enlighteneth all the world: And Mercury is in
the second; Venus in the third: Mars, in the fifth: Jupiter, in the sixth:
Saturn in the seventh: The Stars in the eight; which by reason that they go
into certain clouds they are ofttimes not seen of us; as the Sun also, when
the Moon falls between it and us. Now if our Prophet were true in this saying
of his; that is, if the spheres were of Planets: and therefore, as we have
said, this is false, and he is not true in his word. And so may it be said of
his communication with the Angel: of his ascension into heaven, and other
falsehoods of his. For all this fell out in one night, and that without
testimony of any witness alive.


SH. He that will thus go on by way of solid demonstration, will deny also the
aides, the cogitations, and suggestio^s, which God gave to him in that night,
as he says.


AH. This also is solid in mine opinion. For it is denied of every man
generally, to wit, that God did touch him with his hand, and did make him cold,
as our Prophet does write.


SH. Why is this denied?


AH. Because that every one does know, that God is a simple essence, not having
any body: yet he says, That God did touch his hand; attributing to God an
hand, and other members, and affirming that God has a body, attributing to him
also coldness. Also, he says, That he has quality and quantity: and he
attributes to God quality which is annexed to quantity: which notwithstanding
God is free from, and it is absurd to say otherwise: For that were a great
scandal and heresy; nay it were Atheism.


SH. I do see that our conference goes beyond our ground, and therefore it
shall be better to make an end, and leave this argument for this time, and
confer of some other matter.


AH. Yet of this often times we ought to confer, for knowledge of the truth,
and to be able to distinguish


SH. I do desire by all means, that we leave this communication, speech,
conference, or arguments, until another time and place. For I do study the
Alkoran and other books seriously and diligently, and I find many absurd
things, without sense, and also such as are not confirmed by miracles: Yea
there are innumerable and infinite such things as these in the Alkoran and in
our law, which are repugnant and contrary one to another, and are opposite to
all Philosophers and Astronomers; and much also which has no ground, or proof
from demonstration; nor yet


AH. When we have a purpose to confer of things which are the fountain of
profit, and also necessary unto our salvation; I beseech thee, let us go
always together: but for this time let us rest, in the name of God, and to
morrow if God Almighty say, Amen^ we will meet, and confere together.


The end of the second Dialogue.
The third Dialogue.
BY our conference had on these two last days iourneyes I perceive
apparentlie, that our understanding is like unto a field or stony ground, which
when it is well tilled, does thrust out and bring forth fine flowers and
pleasant fruits: but when it lies waste, there grow^th in that land and field
naught but weeds, bushes, and evil plants, good for nothing.


SH. This similitude is good: but tell me what thou meanest by the Flowers, and
Frui^es of the understanding? And what thou meanest by Plants good for nothing?


AH. By Flowers I do give to understand, evil thoughts and cogitations: By
Fruits, good works, which ar^ perfect, and are done of good men, and such as
are true believers: By Bushes are understood of man, which is like unto a stony
field, that is untilled, and never comes near unto perfection.


SH. And I in truth do understand that our conference has been like a text
expounding out of our law, many subtle things; as also out of other books
commended and allowed by our Prophet.


AH. And by this means I do know my self, out of thy conference aforesaid:
for I have before this heard that our understandings are perfected by the
considerations of the subtleties of the law, which do drive out vain and evil
thoughts, which do not work any good work.


SH. Because I see thou take pleasure in these conferences; good books, and
the speculation of spiritual thing: I delight also above measure in thy
spiritual fruit, and thou contentest me well.


AH. I would to God I might hear thee continually, that I might remain in thy
service and presence always, for the increase of learning and knowledge. For it
does also appear that thou art good for all things, and love learning.


SH. That we should be always together, it is impossible, seeing that to
morrow we must part, for all our care: therefore if it please God, in these
special points we will rest content But it is against my will. For this thy
love to comprehend all briefly cannot be found in all men. For every man
forgets himself, and


AH. And first of all, which of us is there that does think any thing else, but
hurtful pleasures and worldly glory, which do pass away, as the clouds and
shadow do pass? For indeed there is not any man that does glory in spiritual
and heavenly pleasures; and as for life eternal, and the true life of the
soul, no man considers it any whit.


SH. For Almighty Gods sake let us call to every man of the world to do some
of these things, that he may enlighten their minds and hearts, that they may


AH. See: every good thought, true desire, and good fruit, does grow out of
the knowledge of the holy law.


SH. Without doubt, whosoever does not know the law, they are blind in the
light of understanding, as he that is blind in the bodily eye does always
stumble in the way, and of himself at all times does fall into perdition.


AH. It is manifest therefore in what danger all negligent


SH. Upon this I also do confess, that there is found in my heart always some
heaviness, deiection, and great melancholy: These are the errors of our times.
For in every place there are men clothed so proudly, and scornfully; also,
every man studieth only how to get riches and money: laboreth to get wives,
servants, slaves, and other worldly commodities which are transitory: and very
few are found, which do delight in reading the books of eternal life.


AH. I do confess, that many do excuse themselves, saying, That our law is
metaphorical; and therefore it ought not to be read.


SH. This indeed is very true; That in it there are metaphors and subtleties:
yet our Prophet does not say; That it is not to be read; neither does he forbid
us to know it. But ^e adds this, That it is without any profit. Yet in the
title Ionan, he says, If you have any doubt of them, I have given them unto
you; turn ye the solution therefore of your metaphors unto the doctors and
expositours, that is, to those which have read the books before you, and have
known the books of the Jews and Christians, which have been given to them
before us; as the books of Moses, and the Gospel. For these books are
commended by our Prophet in many places; and that his commendation is true: For
they are in very deed holy books.


AH. But our learned men do say, that these books were changed: and therefore
we, as I do understand, do not seek after those books.


SH. Yesterday also thou toldst me as much. This is a foul fault of our men,
the Musslemans I mean; nay I dare boldly affirm it to be a gross error,
seeing that all the sacred books have been found from the beginning in all
languages, and in all kingdoms, and seeing that every one of them do agree one
with another. Moreover, it is incredible. For our Prophet does say, that we
ought to receive the exposition and declaration of those ancient books; And,
that they were changed at that time, or at this time,


AH. What is it then that thou would say? and what is it that our Musslemans
should learn?


SH. I would say; Because these books are given of God, as it is manifest to
all the world: and that for more then 600 years before our Prophet was borne;
this our Musslemans ought to believe, That those books were true; and that they
do co^taine true things; and that they were as they are, agreeing in all
languages: For one and the same truth is in all their mouths always.


Thou say true, and I do verily believe so.


SH. And indeed this ought every man to believe, that is, we and all Musslemans
whatsoever. And without doubt we are bound to read all books which our
Prophet has given commendations of. For out of all doubt, when our Musslemans
do understand our law as they ought to understand it, they will order their
conversation and lives unto that end and purpose in which our souls may find
true and eternal rest.


AH. Truly it were a good thing, that all the world with one mouth would
believe and confess, That as God is one, so also the way whereby we come unto
him is one; not many, as men do say and determine.


SH. Men are not the cause and authors of this difference and error.


AH. Who was the cause of it then?


SH. The Devil, who is the author and cause of all lies: and he which
follows this diversity, does walk in the paths of the Devil, which as an
opposed adversary to God Almighty, does labor to seduce men from the true way,
that a man may not come unto the truth, from this destruction and terrible
misleading, which at last will cast our souls into Gehenna.


AH. Tell me, I adjure thee by God Almighty, The ancient Prophets, which were
from the beginning unto the time of our Prophet, what? did they agree between
themselves? For I have heard that they were not all of them in one time: but
that some of them were in one age, and some in another age. And some


SH. Herehence also it appears plainly, that they were in very deed the
Prophets of God, and were enlightened and taught of him. For all their speeches
tend unto one and the same end and purpose, that is, to remove men from the
service of idols, which had their service after the manner and form of the
very true God: And all of them with one consent preached and declared the
coming of Jesus, that is, of Christ, which was borne of Mary the Virgin; and
of the holy Ghost, as our Prophet does also plainly affirm.


AH. Yesterday also thou said, That from the birth of Jesus Christ, unto the
birth of our Prophet there passed 600 years.


So it is, and in that time the religion of Christ (by the misery and
affliction of the Martyrs giving testimony) passed into all the world: and the
glorious Gospel was also written in all languages.


AH. I would feign understand whether that in the interim of that six hundred
years between Christ and our Prophet, there were sent any other Prophet from
Almighty God unto the world?


SH. Know thou, that all the Prophets were sent from God at sundry times; and
have preached and taught the very true God; and have declared that Christ was
the end and the accomplishment of the old Law; and the beginning of the new
Law. And the last of these Prophets was John the son of Zachary, which did not
only foretell of Christ; but did preach of his birth, and did point him out
with his finger, when he says, This is the Lamb of God. And when all the
Paradise: and to the froward and sinners, grievous torments in Hell.


AH. This good consent amongst the Prophets, and this end also, which is the
argument handled by them all, to wit, of the coming of Christ, is a matter
worth the consideration, and I do confess that I never heard of it before, nor
understood it.


SH. He that is ignorant of these things does walk on in darkness.


AH. I never heard that John the son of Zacharias was the last of the
Prophets, and the seal of the^ all: and therefore I have wondered how he,
amongst us Musslemans, became so famous, and his name so honorable: and
wherefore the day of his nativity, in all parts of the world, is kept holy.


SH. What wonder is it, when thou hear of his excellency which he had above
all the Prophets? to wit, that he did behold and point out also to others who
it is, which of all the holy Fathers and Prophets was desired to be seen, to
wit, Isay, or Jesus Christ that was foretold of all the Proph. and was agreed
upon.


AH. Seeing then that he, to wit, John, was the sealer their sayings were
fulfilled by reason of the coming of Christ, there was no need that there
should be any thing spoken by any new Prophet: for there ^emaineth not any
thing that should be foretold by him.


SH. Thou art right, and thou art well instructed: and the books are plain,
and whosoever will read diligently, shall find it so, and he shall know the
truth, and there shall remain no other scruple to him.


AH. And these are those things which every one ought to know: and the books
which do speak of these things ought to be read of all men; This is that which
may not be spoken of those books in which there are jesting speeches, and
worldly vanities, altogether unprofitable.


SH. Truth it is, this is a great madness of this


AH. And it behooves every one of us to consider, seeing that our Prophet
says, That they are sacred and good books, and were given of God, whether he
say true or no. If he say true, then we ought to read them for profit sake.
If he do not speak truth, wherefore do we say, that our Prophet is true? But
without doubt the history is so. For the world from 600 years before our
Prophet, as we have said, did know it: and that before these books. And the
verity and truth of them, does testify that they are holy and good.


Also, I do affirm, that our Prophet in the Chapter Almaida does say these
words, That the study of this book is altogether vain, if withal the Gospel
and the law be not observed: Therefore the Musslemans must understand the
intention of this book.


AH. Thou spakest in our last conference yesterday of this place; which is
indeed worthy of consideration: for the words are clear and plain.


SH. And because I do see that it is a necessary place therefore if the words
be so perspicuous, I say to thee again the second time in sober sadness, that
thou and all such as thou art ought to observe it well, and that for good
reason: for our Prophet speaks these words, and yet we do not translate them.


AH. This was for our disobedience. And for our other sins, I do believe that
our Prophet spoke these words unto his sectaries, that is, You shall be
separated shall go to the fire.


SH. But I say to thee, that in the chapter Mary he says thus, That all the
Musslemans shall go into the fire: and of this I am afraid: For in as much as he
says, All, no one is excepted: and therefore it behooves us in this our life,
to consider our estates, and to labor with great endeavor, that we do not go
into Gehenna, and eternal perdition.


AH. We according to the saying of our Prophet are more abominable then the
Jews and Christians: for in the Chapter Baccara he says, That the Jews and
Christians shall go into Paradise.


SH. And in the Chapter Abraham he says, That not any one shall go into
Paradise, but by the means of our law. Now this is contrary to the former; and
brutish opinions. Now this does not fall out to those that read the glorious
Gospel, and do inform themselves after the precepts thereof. But it is
manifest, that good Christians, when they are found in any tentation and misery
of this world, at that instant their souls are replenished with the love of
God, and in the sense thereof they do exceedingly rejoice.


AH. This rejoicing and this power, which is in the souls of the Christians,
in the midst of misery and tentatio^ in this world, is demonstrated from that
glory and the blessedness, which God will give them for ever, that is,
Paradise.


SH. Our Prophet in the Chapter Almaida speaks now speak. For he in that
Chapter does show, that the Jews and Christians shall not be the sons of God,
nor any of his friends. And this is manifest by the misery and oppression in
this world which God does lay upon them for their sins.


AH. Now in mine opinion, from hence it cannot be argued, that they are not the
friends of God: But what is thine opinion of this matter?


SH. With me that is firm and good that is received amongst the learned in
general, and of the wisemen of the world; that is, That the Jews were
afflicted of God, and were dispersed, as it does appear plainly, 1000 years
ago and more; and that they are without a Temple, without sacrifice, and
without a Priest, for this sin of apostasy only, which they did do against
Christ, which was the Word of the everlasting


AH. What do thou say then of the afflictions of the Christians, which God
lays upon them?


SH. This is not like unto the misery of the Jews: for in all that religion,
the Christians have a Priest, and Churches: and they do sacrifice their
sacrifices, praise God, and his glorious name, not only in the place where
they have the sole command; but also in Constantinople, Egypt, Arabia, in Ada
the new, That is, the Islands.
in the Sea, and in all quarters of the world. Therefore we ought to say, that
their miseries do testify the love of God toward them, as Solomon the wise
does affirm, when he says, That a good father does chastise his son whom he
loves, very much: and David the Prophet says, The good through many miseries
and great tentations shall enter into the kingdom enjoy worldly matters,
without any cross at all, even at that instant I am afraid of him. For David
the Prophet also says, I have seen the wicked exalted and magnified; and I
went out, and he was gone; and I asked after him, and he was not to be found,
and there was no sign of his place in the which he had been. Therefore the
sayings which are in the Chapter Almaida, cannot signify, that the Christians,
by reason of the misery which at some time they do suffer, are not the sons
nor friends of God: but it does teach the contrary; and that by the testimony
of David's own words: neither to it.


AH. I have heard thee say, A Jewish fable.
that Solomon was exceeding wise: whether was that he that is mentioned in the
chapter Amemela, that had a great army of Angels, of men, and other living
creatures: and when Salomo^ found the Ants innumerable as the running waters,
he commanded one of them to go into their holes: and after that it spoke with
Solomon, and laughed also, as it is recorded in that Chapter.


SH. I do know that this is recited in that Chapter; but I do not know what I
may be able to say unto thine answer: for I do not understand the meaning of it.


AH. I do wonder greatly at thee, why thou can not understand this thing,
seeing that it is so plain.


He that will take this as a parable, to him it may be plain.


AH. How can it be understood as a parable, it not being in it own nature
true? For neither had Solomon any such army, neither did the Ant so
miraculously speak or laugh.


SH. I do marvel at thee: for thou do show thy self to have little
understanding; in that thou do not know that Solomon, which was the son of
David, did never leuy any armies, neither of Angels, nor of beasts: but he was
very learned, and of great wisdom, as it appears by his speeches and books.
and that it was he which built the Temple at Jerusalem. For he was so commanded
by God in the same glorious Jerusalem: but there is no record made by him of
any army, or of such an Ant, or of any such miracle with the Ant; or of the
beasts.


AH. Therefore it may also well be said, this history


SH. In it also, as I think, is recorded many things like that of the Ant: for
in it is recorded, that Solomon died, and yet remained leaning upon his staff:
A Talmudica^ fable.
and the Devils which did minister unto him, were ignorant of his death, until
one of the worms did eat in two his staff; which being broken Solomon fell
down: and at that very instant time they understood of the state of his death:
And they at that self same time did lift up their heads, and were adversaries
and opposite to mankind. Now all this is not true, neither likely to be true;
neither do I know for what reason our Prophet has written it. For this parable
is no way profitable to us.


AH. That book, where the law and the commandments are written, ought to
record nothing but such things as are high and divine, because of the
prerogative and excellency of our understanding, and apprehension in the
speculation of heavenly things, and understanding of the majesty of God. And
by reason of these frivolous things and parables which are read in this Azoara,
and in that other Azoara, in very deed they do not beseem, neither are they
worthy of that book, seeing that none of them are any way profitable unto us.


SH. I told thee, that our Prophet does prefer the understanding of his book
and his law unto the holy books of the old Testament, and of the glorious
Gospel, as the true co^mentary. For he also has taught, that the books of
Moses, and the books of the Prophets, and Gospel, do contain the high and
profitable senses convenient for all. Now I do not know why we


AH. I also do acknowledge that the reading of these books are profitable and
convenient: seeing that our Prophet does much commend them: but yet I am not
content, neither does it seem to me an equal thing, that we Musslemans, with
all our iniquities which do spring out of us, should believe that we shall
enter into Paradise, only for the confession of the unity of God; and that his
Prophet Mohammed is of God. For the confession of the unity is not denied of
the Jews, no nor of the Christians. Therefore this confession is without any
particular reward to us. The confession also, That Mohammed is his Prophet and
his friend, what profit have we by this confession?


SH. For the service of God and his praise, as is meet, we him most perfect,
and without sin: that therefore after the disobedience of the Man, and the
fault which he had committed, of necessity every man must work iniquity,
until he be restored unto his former justice and antecedent perfection; the
obtaining of which is impossible, but by the help of God, and knowledge of his
gloririous law, and by the doing of good works, according to the determination
of his glorious will and pleasure.


AH. This deep speculation is not like that miracle of the Ant. And I do
believe that our Prophet did not write that Chapter wherein is recorded so
lofty matters as those precedent things, and the Gospel are. And because he
says, Those books were given in the same.


SH. Yea, and I do confess, that from all eternity those books were holy: and
therefore I do know that all the Musslemans do offend: and I do pity the case
in which I do see they are: because I do see that we might find those books,
and read them, and yet we do not. As it is said, we do leave the white bread,
and that which is most pleasing: and we do eat brown bread which is no way so
pleasing in taste, nor so good for the body. And this difference there is
between words of verity and truth, and falsehood: For this is pleasant unto the
understanding, and profitable to the soul: and that is no way pleasing, but
hurtful: for it is a their tents. I pray God that this consideration may enter
into the heart of all and every Mussleman: that every one of us may consider
and direct his mind unto such matters as do appertain unto his soul, as unto
the true end, I mean the salvation of our souls: for all things of this world
are frail and unconstant. Now those things which according to their essence
are transitory, do not deserve but to be passed over, and not to be had in any
regard amongst men.


AH. The blessed God give the light of his aid to every one, that we may
cease from sin and iniquity, for it.


SH. This is as much as I desire.


Thus ends (by the help of God, the king of aid) the conference of the two
aforesaid Doctors, that is to say, of Sheich Sinon, and Doctor Ahmed.

FINIS.
THE ARABIAN TRVDGMAN, That is, CERTAIN ARABICKE TERMS, AS NAMES of places,
titles of honor, dignity, and office, etc. often used by writers and historians
of later times:

Interpreted and expounded according to their nature and true etymology:

And approved by the judgment of the best Authors. By W.B.

M.DCXV.

To the Reader.
IN the reading of the Oriental histories I find two things often times to
trouble even those that would seem to be great scholars; to wit, the Names
of honor, dignity, office, etc. and the Titles or inscriptions of the Chapters
of the Alkoran. For these both being for the most part called and cited as they
are termed by ^he Turks and Arabians, are not easily understood of any, but
such as are skillful of that language. How often, I pray you, in the histories
and writers of their affairs, and in what page almost shall you not meet with
some exoticke and strange term or other, as Mussleman, Alkade, Hakkim,
Alfaqui, Azoara, and others like? And what one amongst many hundreds is there
that does conceive what is meant by them? For the better understanding
therefore not only of this present Treatise of ours, but generally of all
histories of the Saracens, Persians, Indians, Turks, and Africans: as also of
all books and treatises written of their superstition and ceremonies, I have,
for thy good, gentle Reader, in the midst of my many and great troubles,
procured by the fraudulent practices of the wicked, according to my best
ability, and small help that I have, out of those kind of writings gathered
and composed these two Treatises ensuing; The one containing a Catalogue of all
such Arabicke terms and words used by historians: The other an Index of the
Chapters of the Alkoran. But some man may say, That in those histories there
are many other strange words found that here I have not mentioned; I answer, it
is true. But those being for the most part Turkish or Persian, that is,
barbarous and out of the compass of my skill, I leave them to be handled by
others. Again, if any man shall find that we have omitted diverse, even of
this nature here by us nominated, let him know, that we could not seriously
read over all books of that argument; only we did for this purpose but
lightly cast our eye over some of the principallest, and such as we could have
the use of at this time. Our studies at this time are employed otherwise. If
any thing be wanting I doubt not but ere long we shall supply it abundantly,
and I hope, to the satisfacton of all. Farewell.

The Arabian Trudgman.
A
ABA'LKIBLA, was an idol in the Alcaaba or temple of Mecha; which before
Mohammeds time the Arabians did all generally worship, and offer sacrifice
unto. See the book De generatione Mohammedis. ABASSINI, look Alhabassi.
ABELKIBLA, and Abel, the same that Aba'lkibla. ADMIRANS, see Amir. ADMIRALLIVS,
see Amirallius. AGBEL, or Agbal, signifies a mountain, as some do affirm,
and is the same with Gabel, Gebel, or Gibel. ALAMBELI, a sect of Saracens
professing Mohammeds superstitious laws. See Melici. ALCAABA, Alkaaba, or
Alkaba, is the name of that Church, Temple, or Mesgid in the city Mecha in
Arabia Felix, which the Mohammetanes do from all parts yearly visit. Of this
that forenamed book does thus write: Anno vicesimo quinto fundatum est Alkaba:
Anno vero quadragesimo Machumet Propheta datus est. In the 25 year, the
Alcaaba was begun to be built; and in the 40 year Mohammed our Prophet was
borne. And like as we read that Daniel, and other of the Saints of God, being
in exile or in foreign countries, did make their prayers and orisons toward
Jerusalem: so the Turks, in imitation of them, do usually pray with their faces
toward this temple. ALCABIR, elcabir, elguibir, signifies Great, as
Guada'lcabir, The great river, Casar elcabir, The great palace, Marsa'lcabir,
The great haven. ALCASAR, Alkazar, The palace, the kings house: There are
diverse places of this name in Africa. See Casar. ALCAIR, Alkair, Alchaira. The
city. The name of a great city of Egypt, so called, Cat'hexochen: although Leo
be of another opinion. Cairo, Cairus, oppidum AEgypti prope Memphis ruinas
aedificauit Muauias. Muauias, a Chalife of Egypt, says mine author, built the
city Cayro, near unto the place, where sometime Memphis did stand. ALCASAVA,
see Kasaua. ALEFRANGI, Alfrangi, Frangi, or Phrangi, are properly those people,
which now do inhabit that kingdom, which the Romans and all ancient
historians did call Gallia Celtica, which at this day are called Franci, The
Frenchmen: But in the histories of the Saracens and Turks it has a larger
acceptance. Fr^nci enim in recentiorum Graecorum historijs, quae res fefellit
plurimos, non Galli solum intelligendi sunt, sed Itali and Siculi: Eo quod
Siciliae regnum illis temporibus, and pars Italiae a Francis tenebatur. By the
Franci, says Iunius, in the histories of the latter Greek writers, which is a
matter that has deceived many, are not vnder^tood the Frenchmen only, but
the Italians and Sicilians: because that at that time the kingdom of Sicilia,
yea and a part of Italy too, was possessed by the French. Yea in the letters of
the king of Achem unto our king, it signifies the Spaniards: And I doubt not
but generally they include in it all the Christians of the West. ALESALEM, Lex
Dei salutaris, Thus they say the Saracens call the Alkoran. Ipsi autem Saraceni
vocant eam (suba. legem) denominatiue Elesalem, quod interpretatur Lex
salutaris Dei, (...): The Saracens themselves do call their law Elesalem, which
by interpretation is as much to say, as the law of salvation, or the law of
God. If he had said, the law of damnation, and of the devil, he had said well.
Cydon. 131. ALFAKIH, Alfaqui, Fakih, Faqui, or Faquinus, as the learned Viues
conceiueth it, is in the Mosquits or temples of the Mohametanes, one, that in
the manner of a Priest, does their divine Service, reads the Law, and does
interpret and expound the same. In the plural number they call them Elfocowah.
(...), h.e. Elphocaa, id est, magni doctores, and expositores, Cydon. 142.
Summi apud eos, says Cantacuzenus, perditissimorum dogmatum doctores, (...).
h.e. quos illi Helphocaa, id est, eximios nominant. Cantacu. orat. ij. Now what
manner of men these be, the historians shall tell thee: Turcici sacerdotes, a
laicis haud multum differunt: Satis enim illis est, si Alcoranum legere, and
Turcice ad verbum interpretari norint. The Turkish priests do not much differ
from their laymen: For it is enough for them, if they can read the Alkoran,
and also interpret it word for word into Turkish. Which also M. Syluaticus does
affirm: Alfachi, est qui docet matrimonium contrahere Arabes; and qualiter
debeant orare. Et est doctor legis, qui non probat quicqua^. Nam praeceptis
legis credere oportet sine argumentatione. Mutali vero est philosophus, qui
probat quod docet necessarijs argumentis. An Alfakih, says Matt. Syluaticus,
is he that amongst the Arabians does solemnise marriages, and teaches them how
they ought to pray. He is a doctor or teacher of their law, but he need not
prove or demonstrate ought that he teaches. For a man ought to believe the
grounds of the law without any proof. Now the Mutaali is a Philosopher or
scholar, which proves by necessary consequences that which he goes about to
teach. ALFA QVI, see Alfakih. ALFVRKAN, Alphorkan, Furkan, Forchan, the book
of the Law of Mohammed, that is the same that Alkoran is. Hear the Author of
the book entitled, De doctrina Mohammedis; Dic, inquit, si placet, quid misit
Deus scriptum? Respondit sic, Quod? dicit, Alfurkan. Cur dictum Alfurkan?
Dixit, quia discretae sunt sententiae, and figurae eius. Est liber legis Arabum
Alchoran, says Cardinal Cusa, ob praeceptorum collectionem: Atque Alfurkan,
ob discretam capitum separationem nominatus. page xxvi. These laws written by
Mohammed, as they say, in schedules and little scroles, were afterward by Omar
digested into one volume; which by Othoman was reuised, corrected, and reduced
into that order and ^orme, as now we see to this day: For thus ^aith mine
Author: Omar collegit schedas Muamedis: Othmenus vero in meliorem ordinem
redegit, in capita distribuit, ex iisque librum, qui Alkoran, sieve Alfurkan
vocatur, componi curauit, in quo omnia Muamedicae sectae dogmata and instituta
continentur. ALGARBII, or Garbij, are a people belonging to the kingdom of
Portugal, whose country or province where they dwell is called Regnum
Algarbiorum. The word signifies, the Westerne-men. And indeed they possess
the uttermost part of Spain toward the West. And for the same reason was the
whole country of Spain, of the Greeks, called Hesperia; because it lies not
only on the West of Italy; but is also of all the maine land or continent of
Europe, the most Westerly part: yea of the whole world, I mean of that which
was at that time known to the Romans or Greeks. This kingdom is bounded, as
we have said, upon the West and South by the Ocean sea, upon the East by the
river Guadiana: how far it extended Northward, he does not tell, neither dare
I determine. Sub Portugallia hoc tempore, ait doctissimus Ortelius, ALGABIAE
regnum, quae eius pars maritima est versus Meridiem, pertinet. Eius enim Rex se
Regem Portugalliae, Algarbiae, Guineae, AEthiopiae, Arabiae, Persiae and
Indiae, scribit. Hoc regnum primum circa annum 1100 initium habuit. Ad ea enim
vsque tempora sub Hispaniae nomine, vti and antiquitus, censebatur. Sic autem
de eo Marineus scribit^ Henricus quidam Lotharingiae Comes, vir in bello
fortissimus, e Gallia veniens, magnas aduersus Mauros res gessit. Pro quibus
Alfonsus VI, Castellae rex permotus, filiam suam notham, nomine Tiresiam, es
matrimonio collocauit: and Galleciae partem, quae in regno Portugalliae
continetur, nomine dotis assignauit. Ex eo postea matrimonio natus est
Alphonsus, qui primus Portugalliae Rex est appellatus: Primus qui Ulixbonam a
Mauris recepit. Quorum quinque simul regibus vno praelio superatis, quinque
scutorum insigne facti monumentum reliquit. To Portugal at this time, says the
learned Ortelius, does belong the kingdom of the Algarbij, which is the sea
coast of it toward the South. For that king does style himself, King of
Portugallia, Algarbia, Guinea, AEthiopia, Arabia, Persia and India. This
kingdom did first begin in the year of our Lord 1100. For even unto that
time, as anciently it has been, it was accounted as a part of Spain. For thus
does Marineus describe this history: One Henry Earl of Loraine, a valiant man,
well experienced in warlike affairs, coming thither out of France, did great
service against the Saracens. For the which Alphonsus the VI, king of Castile
gave him in marriage a bastard daughter of his, called Tiresia, and withal did
assign in lieu of a dowry, that part of Gallecia, which is contained within
the kingdom of Portugal. Of this marriage did afterward spring Alphonsus which
was the first king of Portugal, and was he that recovered Lisbone out of the
hands of the Moors. Who also ouercoming in one set battle five of their
kings in one day, left unto his successors for the arms of that kingdom five
scutcheons, for a memorial of that honorable atchieuement of his. ALHABASI, or
Alhabaes, are those people which the Geographers commonly call Abassini, that
is, the AEthiopians, which at this day are for the most part under the
government and command of Prester John, as they vulgarly call him. ALHACCAM,
see Haccam. ALHAGE, is a title of honor and dignity amongst the Turks, and
is given to all such as have visited the Alcaaba or sepulcher of Mohammed: And
therefore is answerable to that degree of knighthood amongst the Christians
which they call Sancti sepulchri. We may call them Knights of Mecha. ALHEGIRA,
Alhegire, and Taricha'lhegira, is the Epoch of the Mohammetists, or beginning
of time from whence they begin their account, as the Jews do from the
Creation, and the Christians from the birth of Christ. This era or epoch of
the Arabians begins, as many do think, from the time that Mohammed their
Prophet fled from Mecha, to Iethrab: (following herein, as seems, the nature
of the word, which signifies a flight, or running away:) or from the time of
the first publication of his cursed law, which the learned do rather applaud.
ALKABIS, see Kabis. ALKIBLA, see Aba'lkibla. ALKORAN, Alchoranus, Alchoranum,
and sine articulo Korranus, Chorranum, the book of the law of the false
Prophet Mohammed: (...), says Cantacuzenus, (...), h. e. Liber Arabice Korran
nominatur: Latin vero Lex Dei salutaris. Item alibi, (...), hoc est, Retinense
interpret, Collectionem praeceptorum: Cluniacense autem, Collectaneum
praeceptorum. All of them do thus interpret the word; although falsely, as the
learned can bear me witness. For grammar does teach us, That the thema is
not KARANA, coniunxit, collegit, as they would make us believe: but KARA, which
signifies, to read: So that Alkoran in Arabicke is just as much as Hammikra
is in Ebrew; that is, The text, corpus iuris, the authentical body of their
law. As the Psalms of David in our Church, are read over every month, that
is, every thirty days: and in the ancient Churches of the Greeks and Syrians,
every 20 days: So is the Alkoran, by the decree of Omar, in their Mosquits
read over once in a month; Doctr. Mohammedis. Omar primus legem tulit, vt in
omnibus templis (Mescitas, ipsi vocant) per totum Septembrem mensem
supplicationes fierent. Omar was the first that made a law, that in all their
synagogues ( Mesgids, they call them) prayers should be read every day
throughout the month of September. This month they call Ramadhan, which also
is their Lent: ^eiunium mensem totum seruari voluit, tantumque noctibus cibum
capi. They fast an whole month together, eating nothing all day long, but in
the night only. ALMEDEN, see Elmeden. ALMOHALLA, signifies the Camp, or an
army, that is, a company of soldiers led and conducted by one General, and
lodging within the same trenches. AMIR, Amira, Amiras, or Admirant, as some
have it, signifies a commander, lieutenant or president. Imperium obtinens, or
admirans regni, as others interpret it. Athemate AMARA praecepit. Quidam
Calyfa, creauit quatuor tribunos militum, vulgo Admirantes appellatos, quibus
singulis multos duces and Centuriones attribuit: Eosque quatuor duces Acutos
Dei gladios nuncupauit. One of the Chalifs created and made as the historians
do ^estifie, four lieutenants, (Amit's they call them,) which had the command
and leading of many Captains and Centurions. These he called The sharp swords
of God. Herehence is that title of the kings of Barbary, one of whose titles
is, Amira'lmowminin, or as Leo Africanus does conceive and write it,
Miralmuminus, that is, Praeses fidelium, The provost of the faithful. Of which
one thus speaks, Miralmuminus, quae vox Principem credentium significat:
Historici nostri corrupt vocant Miramulinum. Primus omnium qui se hoc titulo
insigniuit fuit Abedramon, qui Maroci vrbem maximam condidit. AMIRALIVS, the
Admiral. A title of honor, or name of an office having command and charge of
sea businesses, or of the Kings navy. And therefore is compounded, as
generally all the learned do affirm, of the Arabicke word Amir, aforesaid: and
of (...) a greek word, which signifies Marinus, of or belonging to the sea.
ANTIOCHIA Syriae, one of the four cities, which as this wicked impostor would
have the world believe, did come from hell into this world. See Elmeden.
ARABES, Alarbes, Larbes, are those people which from the confusion of tongues
inhabited that country of Asia, which is called Arabia. As the country is
large, so have these people spread themselves into many countries, made many
conquests, and planted ^undrie colonies, both in Asia and Africa. The Arabians,
as Leo testifies, are of three sorts: For either they are Arabi araha, or
Arabes arabici, that is, true and natural Arabians: or else they are Arabi
mostaaraba, Arabes inarabati, that is, Arabes per accidens: quia non sunt
Arabes natiui. Or lastly they are Arabi Mustehgeme, Arabes Barbari. Item,
Mozarabes, are Arabians mingled with other nations. Item Mozarabica, hocest, as
mine author does inform me, cum Arabico mixta. ASAFII, a sect of Saracens
subiecting themselves to Mohammeds laws. See Melici. AZZEKOM, or as it is
sometime ignorantly written, Alzekom, it is a tree whose fruit is exceeding
bitter; of which the blasphemer says, that the wicked shall feed on in hell.
Mansio little (intellige infidelium) puteus Abyssi: Potus omni fell amarior:
Cibus de arbore quae appellatur Azachum [ alias, Alzekon] and est omni pessimo
sapore deterior: Author libri de Haeres. Heraclij, etc. Item infra, Arbor
Azachum data est pro delectatione impijs. Ipsa est enim quae in profundo Abyssi
nascitur, cuius fructus quasi daemoniorum. De quo manducantes ventrem suum
implebunt. This is cited out of the 37 Chapter of the Alkoran, which is
entitled Assora Assaphet; The words there according to Retinensis are these,
Arbor Ezetius (tu scribe, Ezecus, vel rectius, Ezzecum) ob malos plantata
cyros, sicut diaboloru^ capita gestans, and ex sua radice Gehennae focum
emittens. Vnde cibandi increduli, ventres suos farciunt. page 139. Here you see
one rare plant, to be added as a supplement unto Clusius, or Monardus, which
have written of this argument. AZOARA, Azzoara, Assora, is as much as a Chapter
or section. See the Treatise following.
B
BABE'LMANDEB, (falsely written in all mappes, Babelmandel) is the mouth of the
Arabian gulf, (sinus Arabicus, or as the Arabians call it, Bahri'lkulzom) by
which it opens and falls into the Red sea. See Nubiensis Geography. The
word signifies, The flood-gate. BARAK, Borak, Albarak, or as the Greeks do
write it (...), Elmparac, was the beast which Mohammed rode upon when he
received his commission. Asserebat, says Ricoldus, quod a Deo ad eum missus
est Gabriel, ducens ad eum quoddam animal, maius quidem asino: minus autem
mulo. Nomen autem animali erat Elmaparac. Loquebatur autem animal, ambulabatque
in hora viam quinque millium annorum; and haec faciebat in nocte. cap. vij. See
more of this beastly fable, at the 14. Chapter of Ricold. Florent. Item see the
4 cration of Cantacuzenus. BAR, signifies a desert or solitary place. It is
the same that Sarra. BAZESTAN, is an hortyard, or garden, as Bellonius
testifies. BEBE'LBAHAR, that is, Porta marina. It is one of the suburbs of ^he
city Tunis in Africa. BEBE'LMANERA, is one of the suburbs of the city Tunis.
BEBE'LSVVAICA, is one of the suburbs of the city Tunis in Africa, which
stands near unto the place where sometimes Carthage stood. BELD, Belid,
Bled, or as the Spaniards do pronounce it, Velez, signifies, a country, shire
or province; and is preposed, as you see in the examples following, contrary to
the use of our English word shire. BELD huneb, hoc est, ciuitas vel regio
Zizyphorum, a city in Africa, so called, as Leo Africanus does testify, of
the abundance of Iuinbes which do grow thereabout. BELIDV'LGERID, vel
Bellidulgerida regio, hoc est, Locustarum regio; not as some would have it, and
which you shall find approved generally by all Cosmographers, Dactylifera
regio. For Gerid signifies, a Locust or Grasshopper. Truth it is, that here do
grow the best and greatest plenty of Da^es in the world, which the same Author
does auerre in these words: Secunda pars Africae, quae Latinis Numidia dicta
erat, Arabibus hodie Belidulgerid vocatur. Haec caregio est quae dactylos
producit. Yet it takes not the name or denomination from thence: For then it
should have been called Bleda'ttamar, or Bleda' nnachel. For as in Ebrew, so in
Arabicke, Tamar with tau, signifies a Date: so that the fruit that is called
a Tamarind, is nothing else but a Date of India. Ite^, the same fruit is in
Arabicke named Nachel, not Gerid, as they would have us believe. BEITHA'
LMIKDAS, Domus sanctuarij. Thus the Arabians do vulgarly call Jerusalem.
Neither do I remember it called by any other name, but by the Christians, who
do follow the steps of the writers of the books of the holy Scripture. BEITHE'
LMEL, Bitelmel, The exchequer, the treasury. BENI, or Bani, signifies sons,
or nephews, that is, grandchildren. It is a word often read preposed before
other words: which therefore do not properly signify any set place: but rather
some name of a family, nation, kindred, or cast as they call it. BVANIFI, is one
of the sects of Mohammetists. See Melici.
C
CAABA, see Alcaaba. CAFFILA, is the same almost that Karawan is: that is to
say, a conuoy, or company of men, with weapons hired to defend and guard others
from the violence of thieves and robbers. CAIRO, Cairus, see Alcair. CARTEIA, a
city in the South part of Spain, near to the promontory Calpe, now called
Tarifa. See Tarif. CARAVANNA, est frequens mulionum turma. A Carauan, is a
great company of such as do drive Mules and Camel^ laden with some merchandise
or other, says Bellonius. Item in another place he says, Turcae magno numero
per turm^s, quas ipsi Cara^ana as nominant, incedunt. The Turk^ do travel and
go together by great companies, which they call Carauans. CASAR, see Alcasar.
CASAR elcabir, that is, Palatium magnum or as Leo's interpreter has, Palatium
regium, a great large town, built as the same Author says, by Mansor the King
of Marocco. See Alcasar. CASAR ezzaghir, that is, Palaetium minus, a city in
Barbary built in the time of the above named Mansor, or Almansor, king of
Marocco. CHALIFA, Califa, Chalibas, is the title of honor attributed to the
successors of Mohammed; it is commonly interpreted by the Historiographers
Pontifex, that is, Bishop: The word signifies a successor. Moriens Muamedes
Alim generum, says the history, successorem suum declarauit, and Calyfam, hoc
est, Pontificem, sectae suae esse voluit. Item, Salinus (forte Saladimus)
AEgypti imperium adeptus, edixit vt Calyfae AEgypti vocarentur Sultani, quae
vox summum principem and regum regem significat. CHORAN, see Alkoran. CVDSI
mubarrak, that is, Sanctuarium benedictum, is one of the names of Jerusalem;
and is aequipollent to that which is more commonly used amongst them, Beith
almikdas, that is, Domus sanctuarij.
D
DHI' LHAGIA, Dilhaia, Dulhage, the name of the twelfth month of the Arabian
year, containing commonly but 29 days. DHI'LKAADA, Dilkada, Dulcaeda,
Dulkada, the name of the eleventh month of the Arabian year, containing
always 30 days. DHI' LKARNAIN, Duorum cornuum, thus the Arabians do call the
Era or Epoch of Alexander the Great, that is, the computation of years from
his time. See Caluisius, or Scalig. de Emend. tempor. DIWAR^ Dwar, a company of
ten^s orderly placed in form of a town, in which a nation, family, or stock
descended from the same father, do dwell.
E
EHBERAM, a city of Armenia, one of the four which came out of hell into this
world. See Elmeden. ELESALEM, see Alesalem. ELMEDEN Chaldaeae, one of the four
wicked cities, as the false Prophet Mohammed does auerre, which came from hell
into this world: Vastat, says he, ciuitas AEgypti, Antiochia Syriae, Ehberam
Armeniae, and Elmeden Chaldaeae, sunt quatuor civitates quae in hunc mundum
venerunt ex Inferno. Doctrine. Moham page 196. ELMVDEVVANA, est magnum quoddam
Saracenicae legis volumen, quod Legum farraginem interpretantur. Item infra,
Elmudeuuana totius iuris corpus est: Vide Leonem. ELMADINA, vel Elmedina, hoc
est ciuitas, as Leo interprets it. See Medina. ELPHOCAA, see Alfakih.
F
FRANGI^ see Alephrangi. FOKAA, see Alfakih. FVRKAN, see Alfurkan.
G
GABEL, is a mountain in Arabia. The word signifies as Curio testifies, an
hill, and so it is the same with Gibel. GARBII, see Algarby. GEZIRA, or
Giesera, signifies, as Leo testifies, an Island. Herehence do many and sundry
places take their denomination, as Gezirat Eldeheb, Insula aurea, in Egypt.
GESEIR, hoc est, Algira. Geseir autem Afris, atque nobis, says Leo, insulam
sonat, sic dicta quod insulis Maioricae, Minoricae and Genisae adiaceat. Item,
GEZIRA Taref, (not Gelzira, as there you shall find it falsely written) est
insula parua in sinu Culpae, quae a Tarife dicta est. See Taref. GIEBEL, or
Gibel, the name of diverse places in Europe, Africa, and Asia. The word
signifies a mountain. Herehence the name of the mouth of the narrow seas, (
Fretum Gaditanum, the Straights) is after the Arabicke name vulgarly, by the
seamen and others called Estrecho de Gibraltar, strictum Zibeltar, or
Zibeltara, as some call it. See Tarif. The famous hill in Sicilia, of the
ancients called AEtna, is now called Mon-gibello. etc. Item, Gabel elhadidus
(not Gebelehadichus, as it is there falsely written) that is, Mons ferreus, is
an hill in Arabia Felix, as I remember. GIVMAA, is in Arabicke the name of the
Turks sabbath, which always is our Friday. The word signifies Conuentum,
congregationem; quasi dicas, Diem conuentus. Diem veneris, says a learned man,
Arabes appellant Diem congregationis, quod ea die in templis suis ad sacra
peragenda, congregari soleant. Item, ANNVS Aliema, is a certain year, much
celebrated amongst the Mohammetanes or Turks, of which year their
Chronographers do thus speak, Hic Moauui pace firmata communi fauore
sublimatus, omnia redegit in melius. Ad quem omnes Orientales and Occidentales
confluxerunt, illi parents. Annum autem in quo contigit illud, annum Aliema,
id est, annum congregationis, appelarunt. GIVMADI ewel, the first Giumadi, that
is, the fifth month of the Arabian year, containing 30 days. GIVMADI achar,
The latter Giumadi, that is, the sixth month of the Arabian year, containing
but 29 days. ALGEZIRA d'alfrada, (or as it is written, Alzira Dalfrada) that
is, as I conceive it, Insula freti, is the Ila^d Gadiz on the cost of Spain.
Est insula quae olim Gad^s, in exteriore Oceano, prope fretum, sita. GWADI,
signifies a river: And hereof the river Baetis, which runs by Civil in
Spain, is to this day called Guadi'lkebir, that is to say, The great river.
Item, GWADI, and Gwadiana, The river Anas, that runs along by the East of
the Algarbij. GVADALAGIRA, a place near to Medina. GVADALGVIBIR, the same that
Guadalkebir is.
H
HACCAM, Alhaccam, a Judge; It answers to that office which we do call the
Mayor and Bayliffe of a town or corporation. It differs much from Kadi, or
Alkadi, which signifies also a Judge: For this is an honorable title, given
only unto the Nobility. The Haccams ofttimes are men of meaner degree. HALEB,
Heleb, Halep, is that famous city or marttowne, which we commonly call Hallepo,
or Allepo. Heleb vel Halep, says Bellonius, totius orientis maximum emporium,
est caput Comagenes. Ex neotericis nonnulli, veterum Hierapolim esse
existimant. At P. Gillius Berrhoeam esse censet. And in deed the Arabian
paraphrast of the new Testament, for Berrhaea, wheresoever he found it, did
translate it Haleb. HARAM, Haran, Elharam, Elaram, is a temple in Mecha, built
as they do verily believe, by Abraham the Patriarch. Of which the deceiuer
speaks in the Chapter Abraham, on this manner: Templum Haram aedificatum est
in terra Aman. Where Bookman in the margent has these words; Amonitidi
attribuit Mecham, Geographiae imperitus. But if I be not deceived, in the
Arabicke it is Ayaman, which is the name whereby Arabia Felix is known to
these people. Item, the author of the book entitled De Gener. Moham. of this
place writes thus; Fibeit Alharam (hoc est, in dom^^ Haram) idolum adorans,
repent resonante valido fragore perterritus est. That is, worshipping the idol
Abel in the temple Haram, he was aff^ighted at a great crack of thunder,
which suddeinly then happened. HELARAM, see Haram. HELPHOCAA, see Alfakih.
HIERVSALEM, was one of the three cities, which, as the impostour feigneth, came
from Paradise, into this world. De doctr. Moham. page 196.
I
IESRAB, or more truly Iethrab, Ietripum, and sometime Itraripum, Meccae vrbis
agri oppidum, as the historians do tell us, was one of the three cities, which
as Mohammed would have us believe, came out of Paradise into this world. De
doctrine. Moham. page 196. JERUSALEM, see Jerusalem, and Beita'lmikdas.
IETHRAB, see Iesrab.
K
KABIS, or Alkabis, is a mountain in Arabia Felix, not far from Mecha. KADI,
Cadi, Alkaedi, Alkad, The Lord chief Justice. A title of honor and high
esteem amongst the Arabians of Barbary. It is of greater honor then that of
the Alhaccam; which is like as is with us the Mayor of a city. All the
noblemen, as I take it, are thus styled. For all of them have this kind of
authority given unto them from the King. In the history of the wars of
Ba^bary, it is taken for the kings lieutenant, and commander of his forces by
land. KANTAR, Kintar, Cantarus, an hundred weight. The greatest weight amongst
the Arabians of Barbary, co^taining an hundred pound weight; so called as I
take it, of the latin word Centum. Vncia illis, says mine Author, est qualis
est Italis: verum libra octo and december capit vncias, vocaturque eorum lingua
Rethl. Centum vero Rethl Cantarum vnumefficiunt. KAPH, is a mountain I know
not where situate; but hear our fablers description of it. Proceed, inquit,
and expone, (hoc est, perge mentiri) cur coelum dictum est coelum? R. Ideo
quidem quia de fumo creatum: Fumus vero vaporis maris, etc. Quid ergo habet
quod viride est? R. Ex monte Kaf. Mons enim Kafex Smaragdis Paradisi, qui mons
orbem terrae cingens, coelum sustinet, etc. De doct. Moham. page 192. and
Cydon. 128. Is not this a strange kind of Philosophy? Moreover AEthicus, I am
sure, has not recorded this mountain amongst those famous hills of the world.
KARAWAN, Caraban, a company of merchants going together for trading, with a
great number of Horses, Camels, and Mules, laden with merchandise or other
commodities. See Carawan. KASAVA, Alcasaua, is the name of the kings house in
Marocco. KORRAN, see Alkoran.
M
MAMALVCHI, were the soldiers of the Souldan of Babylon. Sultani milites,
says Cardinal Cufa, Mamaluchi vocabantur. The word signifies servants or
slaves: that is, the kings vassals. MARSA, says mine Author, signifies an
haven, or port. Herehence Mersa'lcabir, id est, latissimus portus, is the name
of a large and capacious haven in Africa, quae tamen est male fida carinis, as
Leo testifies. Item, PORTVS Marsa, vel Burgi, that is, Turris portus, a port
in Alexandria. Item, MARSA essilsela, Portus catenae, The chain port: Another
port there. MECHA, a city of Arabia Felix ( Ayamen they call it) to which from
all places of Turkey, they make their yearly peregrinations, to visit the tomb
of Mohammed. In this city is the temple Haram, so often mentioned in the
Alkoran, and in the histories of the Turks and Saracens. See Haram. Here also
is the Alcaaba. It is one of the three cities which, as our fabler does
affirm, came out of Paradise into this world. Iethrab and Jerusalem were the
other two. De doctr. Moham. page 196. MEDINA Almeid^e, a city in Spain, so
called, as Leo affirms of a strange table which was kept there. Medina
Almeidae, vrbs a mensa quadam, quae ex vnica gemma viridi, instar smaragdi,
constabat, in eareperta, Arabum lingua nomen accepit. See Almedina, and
Assora'lmaida. MEDINATA' LNABY, or more truly Medinata'nnaby, that is, the city
of the Prophet, is a city of Arabia Felix. But whether it be Iethrab, or Mecha,
or a third city different from both, I dare not for certain affirm. MELICI,
are a sect or faction of Mohammetans, or Saracens professing Mohammeds
religion. Melici, says Curio, Asafij, Alambeli, and Buanifi sunt quatuor
sectae Saracenorum. Afri sunt, Melici: Arabes and Damasceni, Asafij: Armeni and
Persae, Alambeli: Alexandrini and Assyrij, Buanifi. In Cairo vero maxima
AEgypti vrbe omnes sectae, nemine repugnante, vigent. In this Cair is like unto
Amsterdam. MESGIED, Mesged, Mescita, Meskita, Mesquita, Mosquita, signifies a
Church, Temple, or Synagogue of the Mohammetanes, where they meet and perform
all their superstitious service unto their idol. Turcarum phanum sieve templum
Mesquita dicitur. In Arabia Felix there is a temple near unto Cufa, where Aly,
one of the succe^sors of Mohammed was buried; Which therefore is called
Masged-Aly, that is, templum Aly. The historians do falsely write it Massadale.
MESQVITA, Mosquita, see Mesgied. MOHAMMED, ( Mem being doubled by Teshdid)
Mohammed, Muhammedes, Muamedes, Mohammetus, Machomed, Moammetus, was the name
of that famous impostour and seducer of the Arabians or Saracens, the first
author I mean and inuentor of the Alkoran and laws of that superstitious
faction. He was borne in Arabia, as the Historiographers do report, on the 22
day of April ( x. Kal. Maij) in the year after the birth of Christ 596: He
died on the 13 of March (3. Id. Martij) in the year of our Lord 637, being of
the age of 41 yeare^, and having reigned 10. He was buried in Mecha, a city of
Arabia Felix. MOHARRAM, Muharam, and with the article, Almuharam, the name of
the first month of the Arabian Calendar, containing 30 days. Amir autem
filius Iezid illud percipiens, obuius illum deuicit, and in Alcuphae confinio
peremit, die decimo Almuharan. MOSQVITA, see Mesgied. MVLEY, Muleius, a title
of honor signifying as much as Lord, or Commander. I do not find it given or
attributed to any but those of the kings stock. MVSLIM, or Mussliman, (...),
Mussulmannus, is one that is instructed in the belief of the Mohammetanes.
Terrore perculsi multi mandato peruerunt, says Cantacuzenus, and salui facti a
sanguinis effusione, and rapina, and nominabantur Saluati, seu Musselmani; p.
64. Item alibi, Omnes hanc fidem tenentes, Mussilmannos, scilicet sanae fidei
homines nominantur. Yet I confess that the learned Bellonius, who had
conuersed long with this sect, tells us that this name is given to every one
that is circumcised, and that at the time of the performance of this ceremony:
But so, as none is to be admitted before he shall be able to answer unto
certain questions, which then are demanded of him: His words, to this purpose,
are these: Circumciduntur Tu^cae, non octauo die, quemadmodum Iudaei: Sed
octauo anno, duodecimo, vel decimoquinto aetatis anno, vel maturitus, vel
serius, pro rei opportunitate. Pueri enim non circumciduntur donec tam grandes
sint, vt circumcisori respondere queant. Fos in templo circumcidere non licet:
sed in parentum aedibus. Quoniam incircumcisi templu^ ingredi non possunt^ etc.
Caeteris ^^a circumcisione nomen pueri non immutatur: sed id retin^t quod illi
in natiuitate inditum fuerat, addita solum voce Mussulma, hoc est, Verus Turca
circumcisiss. Musslim, therefore, or Musliman, is used amongst them in the same
sense, as we use the word Christianus, vel Catholicus, whereby we do signify a
member of the Church, one ingrafted or incorporated into the mystical body of
Christ. MVSSLIMAN, Musslimannus, see Muslim. MVSHWART, or Mushward, is the king
of Maroccos hall, or Great chamber^ where the Lords, Gentlemen, and Guard do
attend the service and command of their Sovereign.
N
NADIR, Nathir, is that point in the heaven, which is opposite unto the Zenith,
or that point which is directly over our head. Zenith, says Christmannus, quem
Arabes scribunt Semith, vertex capitis est, seu polus horizontis: Punctu^
vertici oppositum appellant Nathir, quasi dicas, punctum simile: Est enum illud
quasi alter polus horizontis, nobis depressus. That is, Zenith, which the
Arabians do write Semith, is the point over our heads, or pole of the Horizon^.
The point that is opposite to this, they call Nathir (or Nadir) as one would
say, The like point. For that is as it were the other pole of the Horizont
under us.
O
OSMENVS, a proper name of a man amongst the Arabians; which is diversely
conceived of the historians, some writing it Vsmen; others Othman, or Othoman.
It was the name of the first Emperor of the Turks, which first wrung the
scepter out of the hands of the Saracens.
P
PHATIMI, one of the titles of the kings of Barbary. The word signifies
Ablactatus, wained, one newly taken from the mothers or nources breast. But in
this place I suppose it to be derived from Phatima, the name of a woman of the
posterity of Mohammed, from whom these kings do fetch their pedigree. I
determine nothing, let those which are more conversant in these stories be
judge. PHRANGI, see Alphrangi. PHVRKAN, see Alfurkan.
R
RAMADHAN, the ninth month of the Arabian Calendar, containing 30 days. This
month they fast, as we do in Lent. RABIE ewel, Rabie the first; The name of
the third month of the Calendar of the Arabians, containing 30 days. RABIE
achar, Rabie the latter. The name of the fourth month of the Arabian year,
containing 29 days. REGIAB, the seventh month of the Arabians, containing 30
days. RETHL, is a kind of weight which answers to our pound; it contains
18 ounces. Libra, says Curio, capit 18 vncias, Tethlam (male, pro Rethlam)
illi vocant. Vncia illis est, says Bellonius, qualis est Italis: Verum libra
octo and december capit Vncias, vocaturque eorum lingua Rethl. Centum vero Rethl
Cantarum vnum efficient. A pound weight which they call Rethel, contains 18
ounces. Their ounce, ^aith Bellonius, is the same with the Italian ounce. But
their pound contains 18 ounces. This they call in their language Rethel. Now
an hundred Rethels do make a Cantar, or Kintar as some do pronounce it, that
is, an hundred weight.
S
SAHARA, The stony country, the sands: the same almost that Sarra is: that
is, a wilderness or desert, untilled and uninhabited, by reason that it is
nothing but rocks, and ouerspread with sand. SALIBA, (...), claua militaris,
quia dentes vel cultri (...), scapo adhaerentes in omnes parts vulnerant.
Saliba is a kind of soldiers weapons, or holy water sprinkle, as we call it, a
kind of club, which having diverse spikes put cross wise into the staff,
wounds and hurts which way soever you strike. We might call the cross
staff by this name: For Salib in this language signifies a cross. SALIE, The
Orisons. The Turks in 24 hours, do go six times to prayers: The first time
is, as they write, about two hours before day, and is called Sallie: When as
the Mo^don from the top of the steeple cries with a loud voice Allah cabir, la
allah, illa ilellah, that is, God is almighty, there is no God, but the Lord.
The second they call Sabaha'lhhair: The third, Dahour: The fourth, Lashour: The
fifth, Mogrubey: The sixth, Lashahara. SARRA, Serra, or as the Spaniards do
pronounce it, Sierra, a desert place, a wilderness. Diverse places in Africa,
and elsewhere, are called by this name: but especially that which was formerly
called Lybia, is now named Sarra, as the Cosmographers with one consent do
teach us. Tertia pars Africae, says our Author, quae Lyb^a Latinis. Arabica
lingua non aliter quam Sarra appellatur, quae vox idem quod desertum
significat. The third part of Africa, which the Latins called Libya, in the
Arabicke tongue is called no otherwise then Sarra, which word in that language
signifies a desert or wilderness. SARRACENI, Sarazin^, Sarrasins, are those
people which otherwise of the Ancients were called Arabes^ Arabians. Neither
were they so named of Sara, Abraham's wife, as some men do think, but of
Saraka, which signifies Furari, to rob or steal. And indeed the Arabians have
been and are to this day accounted great sharkers and robbers. SCECVS, see
Sheich. SHARIF, see Scherif. SEEDI, a name or title of honor, yet attributed
unto mean persons. It signifies, My lord. The word is used in all respects as
Monsieur, the French word, or Sir, the English. SEEDA, a Lady, Madame. The same
that Seedi is, only differing in gender. SEMITH, see Zenith. SEPHAR, the
second month of the Arabian year, containing 29 days. SHAABEN, the eight
month of the Arabian Calendar, containing 29 days. SHEICH, Scechus, Scechus,
or after the Spanish manner of writing and pronuntiation, Xechus, and Xaichus:
a title of honor attributed to none but men of desert. Sceci, says Honiger,
sunt Reguli, qui regiones and vrbes insigniores, circa oram praesertim,
possident. Schech's are the kings lieutenants, which have the government of
count^^e^ and chief cities, especially those which are upon the sea coast.
Another says, that it is a title given always to the eldest of the kings
sons. This I dare not for truth affi^me: sit fides penes authors. This is
certain, that the first of this ^amily that now reigns in Barbary was
styled, Muley Mohammed Sheich. The word signifies as much as Senex, (...),
old, ancient. SHERIF, Sharif, Scharifius, or as the Spaniards do write it,
Xerif, Xerifius, Xarifius. It was the name of the great-grandfather, as I take
it, of Muley Seedan that now reigns in Fesse and Marocco, who by his wealth
and wisdom did advance his family unto the height and dignity of kings.
Hereupon, i^ I be not deceived, it has been ever since taken for an honorable
title, and, as far as I remember, attributed to none but such as are
descended from the kings stock. The word signifies Noble, honorable,
illustrissimus^ Seriphus, or Seriphes, says the hi^^orian, hoc est, Nobilis. A
noble man, or a Lord. Item, Leo Africanus does often style a great man, whose
company be did much frequent, Seriphus Princeps. Item, Summae dignitatis vir
Seriphes appellatur. Quae dignitas ea apud illos est, vt Califa mortuo,
Seriphes succedat. A man of great honor is called Seriphes: which honor
amongst them is that, that when the Calif is dead, the Seriph must succeed: so
that it should seem to be as much to them, as the Heir apparent: the Dolphin,
they call him in France: the Infanta, in Spain. Yet whether this ^e true or
not, I dare not avouch. SHEWAL, the tenth month of the Arabian Calendar,
containing but 29 days. SVLTAN, Soultan, Souldan, Sultanus, and with the
article Assultan, the name of supreme honor amongst the Arabians, and seems
to be as much as Imperator was amongst the Romans, or (...), omnium
augustissimus, was to the Greeks. For thus they now call the Great Turk,
Sultan de Stamboli, The Souldan of Stamboli. It is more the^ Melic, that is
King. The first, as I think, that did assume this title, was the General and
leader of the Saracens or Arabians which conquered Egypt, and the countries
near adjoining, whose successors afterward were called Soultans of Babylon.
Salinus (forte Sal^dinus) AEgypti imperium adeptus, edixit vt Calyfae AEgypti
vocarentur Sultani, quae vox summum Principem and regum regem significat. Item
infra, AEgypti pontifex Sultanus appellatur, hoc est, summus imperator, sieve
regum rex. Saladinus having obtained the Empire of Egypt, commanded by
Proclamation, That the Chalifs of Egypt should ever after that be called
Souldans: which word does signify, The chief Prince, or King of kings. Item,
The Bishop of Egypt is called the Souldan, that is, the great Emperor, or King
of kings. The word is the same in nature and signification, that the Hebrew
Shilton is, which in Daniel signifies (...), potestatem, a sovereign power or
command. A SVLTANEE is a piece of gold of the value of 7s.6.d. It has the
denomination of the former word Sultan, and signifies as much as Regalis, a
royal, the kings coin.
T
A TALBY, is amongst the Arabians of Barbary as much as a Scriuener or public
notary is with us; For these only are authorized to draw writings between man
and man, as bills of debt, contract, covenant, bargain and sale, and such like,
which they call bills of Shuhuds, that is, of witnesses. Of these kind of
writings I have seen very many, and yet have never seen any containing above
five or six very short lines. This breuity sauoureth of the ancient simplicity
of former ages, yea even of the Lawyers of this our nation, as may appear in
all the deeds and conueiances by them then drawn, and contrived, remaining to
be see^e at this day. Amongst those which I have seen, I have especially
observed two; The one was for a great house in Cheapside, abutting on the one
side upon Iremonger lane, purchased by the Earl of Lancaster of a Jew, in the
time, as I remember, of Richard the first, with diverse prouilos and
reseruations of rent, etc. signed with the hands of the Mayor, and diverse of
the Nobility and Aldermen: Besides the license and approbation of the Prince of
the Synagogue of the Jews, written in Ebrew in a strange exoticke character;
All contrived into a piece of parchment, not any whit bigger then an ordinary
single obligation. The other was all in Ebrew, between two Jews, for an house
in Col^chester, in the time of K. John, containing but six very short lines.
This I translated for the office of the Records in the Tower well near thirty
years since: There as I am informed it is still to be seen. TARICH, Terich,
is the same that Epoch is to the Greeks: or Era, to the Latins: The
Astronomers, following the interpretors of the Arabian writers, do call it
Radix, whereby they understand some set and certain time beginning at some
memorable action, (as the Creation, the Flood, the Birth of Christ) from which
they account and reckon backward or forward all other times and actions
whatsoever. TARIFA, signifies the end, outside, or outmost bound of any thing.
Hereupon many places in Arabia, and in places where the Arabian colonies have
been seated, do take their name. In Spain the city which was anciently called
Carteia, in the outmost skirts of Andalusia, is now called Tarifa. Carteia in
Hispania ad Calpe promontorium sita, post dicta est Tarifa. Carteia, a city in
Spain, situate upon the forela^d called Calpe, was afterward named Tarifa.
Item. GIBEL Tarif. Calpes promentorium, says mine Author, a Tarife duce dicta
est Gibel Tarif, hoc est, mons Tarifius est appellatus, and nunc Gibel terra
nuncupatur. There is also a fountain or spring near unto this place which is
called of the Geographers Fons Tarifius. The historian was deceived. For these
places were not so named of Tarif, a Captain: but of their position and
situation, as I have said. For so that foreland or promontory in Cornwall,
which we call The Lands end, the Arabian Geographer calls Tarfi'lgarbi mina'
lgezira, the West bound of the Island. TVRGMAN, Trudgman, (...), in the latter
Greek writers, signifies, an interpretor; derived from the Ebrew Thirgem,
which signifies to interpret or expound out of one language into another. From
whence also Thargum, or Targum, a translation, an interpretation, has the
denomination.
V
VASTAT, a city of Egypt, one of the four, which as Mohammed does feign did
come out of hell into this world. De Doctrine. Moham. page 196. See Elmeden.
VELEZ, see Beled. VELEZ Malaga, is a province in Spain, which I take to be the
city and territories of Malaca: see Monardus.
W
WADI, see Guadi.
X
XAICHVS, see Scheich, XARIFIVS^ see Sherif. X^CHVS^ see Sheich. XERIFIVS,
Xerif, see Sherif.
Z
ZIBELTAR, see Gibel. ZENITH, says Christmannus, etc.
INDEX ASSVRATARVM MVHAMMEDICI ALKORANI.

That is, A CATALOGVE OF THE Chapters of the ^urkish ALKORAN, as they are named
in the Arabicke, and known to the Musslemans:

Together with their several Interpretations, as they are done by the learned,
and often cited by the Christians:

Gathered and digested according to their natural order, for the benefit of
Divines, and such as favor these studies. By W.B.

M.DCXV,

To the Reader.
THE book of the famous impostour Mohammed the Arabian, called in that
language the Koran, or, with the article, the Alkoran, is, as the word does
signify, the Text, that is, the authentical body of their law, and ground of
that religion. For this word, both in signification and nature, is the same
that Mikra^, or Hammikra, is to the Jews. For that interpretation delivered by
Robert of Reading our countreyman, and received for good by Peter Abbot of
Cluniak, Ricoldus Florentinus, Demetrius Cydonius, Cantacuzenus the Grecian,
Cardinal Cusa, and others, who would have it to signify Collectionem
praeceptorum, (...), that is, A collection of holy precepts, does not express
the true original, or Etymology of the word. For the theme or root, as they
call it, from whence it is derived, is not Karan, to conioyne or knit together:
but Kara', to read, as all men skillful in the Grammars of these Eastern
tongues can bear me witness.

This book is divided into sundry sections or Chapters, which they call
Assurats, or Azoara's, after Retinensis expression. An Index or Catalogue, of
which I did some three or four years since, at the request of M.Th. Erpenius
of Gorchom in Holland, a zealous lover of these studies, gather and compose in
manner and form as here thou see. Of the names and number of these Chapters
all Authors do not agree between themselves. For our country man, who first
of all others, to my knowledge, did translate this book out of Arabicke into
Latin, (whom Ariuabene the Italian, does follow word for word) numbreth 124.
Euthymius Z^gabenus, the Grecian, mentions but 113. He in his Panoplia, thus
writes of Moamed: Hic Moameth licet esset rudis and agrestis homo, tamen
centum and tred^^m conscripsit fabellas, and vnicuique harum dignum quoddam
nomen hac sua insertia and stultitia indidit. This Mohamed, says he, although
he were a rude countreyman, yet he wrote an hundred and thirteen fables, and
gave unto each of them a seuera^l name, answerable to that his ignorance and
folly. All the Arabicke copies that I ever yet s^w, whether written in the
East, or West amongst the Moo^es in Barbary, do constantly with one consent
reckon 114. The reason of this difference is thus: Some interpretours do not
account the first for any Chapter, but make it a kind of Preface or preamble.
Retinensis of the second chapter, makes four: of the third, three: of the
fourth, four: of the fifth, two: and of the sixth, three: That is, the five
first Chapters he deuideth into 1^. and so makes the number of them, more by
10. then indeed they are.

The name of the Chapter they call Sura, and wi^h the article Assura, or
Suraton, Assurato. Retinensis, and such as follow him do write it Azoara; which
a learned man, that has written brief Annotations upon the Alkoran, does thus
interpret; Azoara Arabice, says he, vultus Latin dicitur. Vnde quod nos
Capitulum dicimus, illi vocant Azoaram. Sicut enim Vultus maxim quis vel
qualis sit homo docet: Sic capitulum, quid sequens litera dicere velit.
Secundum quosdam Azoara oraculum sonat. Illi namque soli iudicium tribuit. This
is, I confess, a witty conjecture; but far from the truth: For this
deriuation ^s drawn from the Hebrew word Zohar, written with zain, he, and
resh: Now this our word, is expressed by Sin, wa^, and resh; so that the
Arabicke Sura, should be none other then the Syrian^ Suriya, which sig^fieth,
Principtum^ initium. For in t^u^h^ as the Booke^ of Moses, and ^^ctions of the
Civil and Cannon Law, so these Chapters, for the most part, are denominated of
some notable word, in the beginn^ng of the same. Item Sur o^ Sura, in R.
Abra^am Hay hi^ book De sphaera, signifies a Section, Chapter, or Treatise
Postellus interprets it Cant^um, a song: I know not upon what ground, except
it be that he did rather respect the nature of the things then the etymology of
the word. For truth it is, that this book is a kind of rude Poem, or hobbling
kind of rythme. Now these Chapters are also diversely cited: for sometimes they
name them, as they are called by the Arabians sometime they are cited by the
interpretation of the same Arabicke word. As for example, the title of the
second Chapter is Albacara; which word in that language signifies, A cow.
Therefore of some writers, this second Chapter is cite^ by the name of Azoara
bacara, or Sorato' lbacara. By others, by the name of Azoara vaccae, or
Canticum bouis. Therefore that we might every way, to our uttermost, further
the Reader, we have here in this our Index, set down both the one and the
other; to wit, the Arabicke titles first in Roman capital letters: then the
interpretation of the same in Latin, as they are done by the before named
Authors. But it shall not be amiss to hear Postellus, (who learn^d that skill
of the Arabicke which he had amongst the Turks) what he says of this matter
and argument now in hand: Primum caput Alkorani vocatur, PHATEHET ELCHITABI. id
est, Ingressio libri: Ea est, inquit, oration communi^ Mussulmanorum.
principiumque Alcorani^ quae est septem miraculorum, id est, periodorum. In qua
volo ostendere lectori, quid sit Aiet, vt sequentia intelligat. Numeris pono
ipsa Aiet. In nomine Dei misericordis propit^: Hoc proloquum dicebat semper a
correptione morbi, ecstasique surgens. Vnde obtinuit, vt ante principia omnium
capitum Alcorani ponatur, and a religiosis Philosophis, in principio operum.
Sed attendite miraculis. Primo, Laus Deo domino seculorum, id est, miserecordi
propitio. Secundo, Regidie^ iudicij. Tertio, Heus seruiamus and heus
adiuuabimur. Quarto, Dirige nos in punctum rectum. Quinto, (magna pausa)
Punctum eorum, in quibus tibi been placitum est. Sexto, Sine ira aduersus eos,
and non errabunt. Septimo.

Habetis miracula; videtis sententias. Ita habet totum Alcoranum, vt sententia
completa, aut non completa, dicant miraculum: quo quid absurdius, non video.
Haec precatio illus est communis, vt nobis Dominica: and ita a quibusdam ad
battologiam vsque recitatur, vt centies idem, aut duo ant tria vocabula
repe^ant, dicendo, Alhamdu lillah, hamdu lillah, hamdu lillah, and caetera eius
vocabula eodem modo. Idque facit in publica oratione Taalima, id est,
sacrificulus, pro his qui negligenter orant, vt aiunt, vt ea repetitione
suppleat eorum erroribus. Quidam medio in campo tam assidue, vt defessi
concidant: Aly circumgirando corpus, vt omnino extrase fiant and demum
(Muhamedem imitando) aliquid nugarum and obscuritatis profundunt, vt
idololatria and fanatica responsa in illis videantur reuixisse. Ita nusquam
Satanas non se ingerit. Haec pro certis numeris solet repeti, quum quinquies in
die naturali orant. Sed de ea satis. Videtur nil habere contranos: sed quisquis
callet Arabica videbit, vbi punctum and punctum rectum vocat, Alcoranum
intelligi. Nam Tzirat elmuste quim, id est, punctum rectum, est apud eos
aequinocum cum Alcorano. Rogant itaque, dirigi in perniciem, quum in rectum
Alcorani punctum, cofertum mendacijs, dirigi voto exoptant. Postell. lib. 1.
cap. 13. de Orbis concordia. Also in another place, he speaks of this Author,
and that his book, thus: Lingua Arabica qua vsus est Muhamedes plane vulgaris
est, and sine vlla art grammatica qualis obseruatur a doctis scriptoribus, qui
disciplinas humanas tractant. Nam nullis canonibus, nec rationis nec
eloquentae, voluit astringi Muammedes. Quum tamen ideo asserant
eloquentissimu^, quod rhythmice pene scripserit, idque tamen etiam sine vllis
legibus: Nam periodum ducentarum syllabarum quadrare facit (...) cum
breuissimis; vt inconstantia in omnibus laborabat.

This name or title, as we have said, does sometimes vary according to the
variety of copies: some calling it by one name, others by another, as we shall
observe, God willing, in that which follows. These diuersties as we have
found them to vary in such copies as have come to our hands, we have also
noted and set down.

INDEX ASSVRATArum Muhammedici Alkorani.
1 SORATO'LPHATIHA, that is, Assura liberans vel speriens: or, as Postellus
teaches, `Phatehet elchitabi, id est, Ingressio libri. Symbolum Mohameticum,
and Matrem, Alcorani, etiam vocant. Sed audi doctum illum de quo supra; Primum
capitulum istud breue Matrem libri dicit ob hoc, quoniam ex eo tota lex
originem sortitur, and fundamentum: Sicut lex nostra ex Oratione Dominica. Et
est fundamentum and initium, and summa omnium orationum eorum. Hactenus ille. 2
SVRATO' LBAKARA, (...), Impacara, quod interpretatur iuuenca: Cydon. 104. and
Cantac. 84. vel (...), Capitulum Emparaca (tu scribe Elmpacara) quod
interpretatur Vacca, Cydon. 1^0 (...), Capitulum Vaccae^ 89. Sora baccara, id
est, Canticum bouis, Postello. Hic obserua, quod semel admonuisse satis est,
moderni Graeci qui (...). non vt b; sed vt v consonans pronunciare solent,
Latinorum B exprimere consueuerunt per (...). Secundum itaque Alchorani caput,
vocatur Surato'Ibacara, hoc est, Capitulum Bouis, Vaccae, vel Iuuencae. 3
SVRATO'LIMRAN, vel Soret-amram, Cusae, 40: Capu^ Amram, Cantac. 96 (...),
Cydon. 142. Sora Humran, id est, Canticum Ioachim, Postello vocatur. 4
SVRATO'NNISA, (...)^ Capitulum Elnasa (Alnesa, ^libi rectius) quod
interpretatur Mulieres, Cydo. 97, and Cant. 84. Sorat Elnesae, id est,
Mulieres, Postello. 5 SVRATO'LMAYIDA, (...); Capitulum Elmaida, quod
interpretatur Mensa, Cydo. 94. Cantac. 84. Alias apud Cydonium pro eodem habes
(...), Capitulum Elmin, 137: Alias (...), 157. Sora Elmeideh, id est, Caput
Mensae. Et alibi, Sora Elmcide, id est, Coenaeseu mensae, Post^llo. 6
SVRATO'LANAAM, Capitulum Gratiarum. Sora Alanham, id est, Bonorum, Postello. 7
SVRATO'LARAAF, Capitulum Scientiarum Sora El^hraph, Postello: At quid
significet, non dicit. 8 SVRATO'LANPHAL, (...), Capitulum Elemphaal, quod
interpretatur Lucra, Cydon. 137. Alibi (...), ^ro eod^m. At male, Sora
Elemphaal id est, Prouentuum, Postello. 9 SVRATO'TTAWBA (...), Capitulum
Telteumbe (scribe, (...) Elteumpe) quod interpretatur Poenitentia, Cydon, 121.
122. 10 SVRATON IVNIS, (...), Capitulum de Iona, Cydon. 94^ 120. Sora Ionus, id
est, Jonas, Postello. 11 SVRATON HVD, Capitulum de Hud, vel Sora Hud, Postello.
12 SVRATON IVSIPH, Capitulum de Iosepho. Sora Joseph, Postello. 13
SVRATO'RRAAD, Capitulum de Tonitru, seu fragore. Sora Raad, Postell. 14 SVRATON
IBRAHIM, Capitulum de Abrahamo^ Sora Abraham, Postello. 15 SVRATO'LHAGIAR,
(...); Capitulum Elagar, quod significat Lapis. Sora Elhageiar, Post. 16
SVRATO'NNACHLI, Azora, Elnael, quod interpretatur Palma; Cusa. 39. Sora Nachal,
Postello. 17 SVRATON BENI ISRAEL, Capitulu^ de Filijs Israelis. Sora Filij
Israel, Post. 18 SVRATO'LCAHAPH, Capitulum de Cauerna, seu de Praecipitio. Sora
Elchahaph, id est, Spelunca, Post. 19 SVRATON MARYAM, Capitulum de Maria. Sora
Mariem, id est, Maria, Postello. 20 SVRATON TA^ Capitulum Ta^ Sora Theh. Post.
21 SVTARO'LANBIYA, Capitulum de Prophetis: (...), Capitulum Elempij, quod
interpretatur ^Prophetae, Cyd. 98. (...), 108. 22 SVRATO'LHHAGGI^ Capitulum de
Alhagio hoc est, de Peregrino, seu Equite Mechiano. Sora Elhegh, id est,
Peregrinatio, Post. 2^ SVRATO'LMOWMININA, Capitulum de Credentibus si^e
fidelibus. Sora Muminine, id est, Fideles, Post. 24 SVRATO'NNOWR, Capitulum de
Luce, seu Lumine. Sora Elnor, id est Lux, Post. 25 SVRATO'LPHORKAN^ Capitulum
de Alphurkan, hoc est, Alkorano Sora Alphurcan, Post. 26 SVRATO'SHSHOARAI,
Capitulum de Carnifi^bus. Sora sigra, id est, Poesis, Post. 27 SVRATO'NNEMLI,
(...), Capitulum Em^le (scribe enemele) quod interpretatu^ Musca, Cydon. 99,
Cantac. 84 vel vt ego puto, Capitulum de Formica: and sic Post. 28
SVRATO'LKASAS, Capitulum de Narratione. 29 SVRATO'LAAN CABVT, Capitulum de
Aranea. 30 SVRATO'RRVMI, Capitulum de Graecis, sieve Romany Graeciae incolis.
In alijs exemplaribus, Sorato'lgaliba, Capitulum de Victoria. 31 SVRATON
LVKMAN, Capitulum de Lukman. 32 SVRATO'S SAGIDA, Capitulum de Oratione, seu
Adoratione. 33 SVRATO'L LACHRAB, Capitulum de Solitudinibus, seu Desertis. Sora
Elagzab, Fost. 34 SVRATO'SSABAI, Capitulum de Captiuis. 35 SVRATON PHATIR,
Capitul^m Apertor. In alijs ex^^pl^ribus, Surato'lmelaica, Capitulum de
Angelis. Sora Angeli aut Creator, Post. 36 SVRATON YASA, Capitulum Iase. 37
SVRATO'SSAPHAT, Capitu. de Ordinibus, vel Serie. 38 SVRATOSAD, Capitulum de
Litera Sad, (...) Cydon. 147, Cantacu. 84. 39 SVRATO'ZZOMAR, Capitulum de
Cantione. 40 SVRATO'LMOWMIN, Capi de Credente, seu Fideli. 41 SVRATO'LAWKAT
Capit. de Temporibus: I^ alijs, Surato'ssagida, De Adoratione: In alijs,
Surato'lphalsa, Capitulum de Distinctione. 42 SVRATO'SHSHORVR, Capit. de Malis.
Vel secundum alia exemplaria, Soraton Aa^aka, Capi^ulum Aas^ka: vel iu^ta alia.
Hamaaska, Capitolum Ham-aasaka. 43 SVRATO'ZZOCHROF, Capitulum de A^ro copioso.
44 SVRATO'DDOCHAN^ Capitulum de Fumo. 45 SVRATO'LGIATHIYA, Capitulum de
Morticinio. 46 SVRATO'LHHAKAF, Capitulum Al^a^^ph. 47 SVRATON MOHAMMED^ Cap. de
Mohamede. Vel vt alia exemplaria habent^ Surato'lkit^l Capitulum de Caede.
Vocant Affricani and Arabes, test Postello, hoc coput, Elcatel, id est,
Occisionem. Aly Muhamed, vt plane' sint synonyma isla, Occisio, Pestis,
Peruicies, and Muhamedes. 48 SVRATO'LPHATHHI Capitulum de Liberatione. 49
SORATO'LHHOGIORAT, Capitulum de S^x^sis, seu Petrosis. 50 SVRATON KAPH,
Capitulum de litera Kaf. (...) Cydon. 136. 51 SVRATO'DHDHARIYAT, Capitulum de
V^ntis. 52 SVRATO'TTVR, Capitu. de Monte. Sora Eltur, Post. 53 SVRATO'NNEGIMI,
Capitulum de Stella. 54 SVRATO'LKAMRI, Capitulum de Luna. (...), C. Elcanimar
(scribe, Elcammar, vel Elcammar) quod interpretatur Luna, Cydon. 128: alibi,
(...) Elcanimar, 123. (...) Cantacu. 88. Vtrobique mendose pro (...). 55
SVRATO'RRAHHMAN, Capitulum de Mi^eratore, (...), Capitulum Eltagman, quod
interpretatur Miserator^ Cydon. 115. 56 SVRATO'LWAKIAA, Capitulum de Casu, seu
Ruina. 57 SVRATO'LHADID, Capitulum de Ferro. Sora Elhedid, id est Ferrum, Post.
58 SVRATO'LMOGIADILA, Capitulum de Contradictione. 59 SVRATO'LHHASHRI,
Capitulum de Turba, vel Tumultu. 60 SVRATO'LMAWADA, Capitulum de Conf^ssione,
seu Charitate. Secundum alia exemplaria, Surato'lmothhana, Capitu. de
Examinatione^ 61 SVRATO'SSAPH, Capitu. de Serie. 62 SVRATO'LGIVMAA, Capitulum
Congregationis, vel de Die Veneris. 6^ SVRATO'LMONAFIKIN, C. de Impijs. 64
SVRATO'TTAGABON, C. de Amaritudine. 65 SVRATO'TTALLAK, C. de Diuortio. (...),
Capitulum de Repudio, Cyd 141. 66 SVRATO'TTAHHREIM, C. de Anathematismo, seu
Excomm^nicatione. 67 SVRATO'LMELIC, C. de Rege. 68 SVRATON NVN; Cap. de litera
Nu. In alijs, Sorato'lkalam, C. de Calamo. 69 SVRATO'LHHAKA, C. de Veracitate.
70 SVRATO'LMAARIGI, C. de Claudo, vel Graduatione, hoc est, Ascensu per gradus.
71 SVRATONNOHHA, Capitulum de Noe. 72 SVRATO' LGINNI, Capitulum de Daemonibus.
(...): Capitulum Elgemi (scribe, Elgenni) quod interpretatur Daemones. Cydon.
136. 73 SVRATO'LMOZAMMIL, Capitulum de Propheta. 74 SVRATO'LMODATHTHIR, Capi.
de Viro pannoso. 75 SVRATO'LKIMA, Capitulum de Resurectione. 76 SVRATO'DDAHRI,
Capitulum de Seculo. in alijs exemplaribus, Surato'linsan, Capitulum de Homine.
77 SVRATO'LMVRSALET, Capitulum de Legationibus. 78 SVRATO'NNABEY, Capitulum de
Propheta. 79 SVRATO'NNAZIAAT, Capitulum de Litigantibus. 80 SVRATO'LAAMY,
Capitulum de Coeco. Secundum alia exemplaria, Sura^on Aabasa, Capitulum de
Melancholia. 81 SVRATON COWWIRAT, Capitulum, Obscurata est. V^l vt alia
exemplaria habent, Surato'ttecawwa^i, Capitulum de Obscuratione. 82
SVRATO'NFATARAT, Capitulum Aperiet se. 83 SVRATO'LMOTAFIFIN, Capitulum de
Examinatis. 84 SVRATO'NSHAKAT, Capitulum Diuidetur. 85 SVRATO'LBORVGI,
Capitulum de Zodiaco, vel Signorum. 86 SVRATO'TTARIK, Capitulum Currens. 87
SVRATO'LAALEY, Capitulum Excelsus; significat etiam genus aliquod gemmarum. 88
SVRATO'LGASHIYA, Cupitulum Coopertae. 89 SVRATO'LPHAGIRI, Capitulum Aurora. 90
SVRATO'LBELEDI, Capitulum Orbis terrae. 91 SVRATO'SHSHEMSI, Capitulum Sol. 92
SVRATO'LLEIL^ Capitulum Nox 93 SVRATO'SSAHHEY, Capitulum Diluculum. 94
SVRATO'NSHARAHH, Capitulum Reatus, vel iuxta alios, Surat^n alam tashrahhu. 95
SVRATO'TTEIN, Capitulum Ficus, (...), Capitulum Eltim, quod interpretatur
Ficus, Cydon. 120. 96 SVRATO'LAARAK, Capitulum Sperma; vel Sanguisuga, hirudo.
97 SVRATO'LKADAR, Capitulum Alchidera, Retinensi: vel Potentia, alys. 98
SVRATO'LBIYANA, Capitulum Demonstratio. 99 SVRATO'ZZILZILA, Capitulum
Terraemotus. 100 SVRATO'LAADIYAT, Capitulum Nocumenta. 101 SVRATO'LKARIAA,
Capitulum Pulsans. 10^ SVRATO'TTACATHVR, Capitulum Multiplicatio. 103
SVRATO'LAATZRI^ Capitulum Expressio 104 SVRATO'LHAMZA, Captiulum Rerum
vilificatio. 105 SVRATO'LPHIL, Capitulum Elephas. 106 SVRATON KORAISH^
Capitulum Korais. 107 SVRATO'LMAAVN, Capitulum Mali. Iuxta alia, Surato'ddein^
Capitulum Religio, vel Iudicium. 108 SVRATO'LCAWTHAR Capitulum Pluralitas. 109
SVRATO'LCAPHIRVN, Capitulum Abnegantes, apostatae, (...), Capitulum Elcapherim,
Cydo. 163. 110 SVRATO'NNATZRI, Capitulum Auxilium. In alijs, Surato'lphathhi,
Capitulum Liberatio. 111 SVRATO'LHHATAB, Capitulum Lignum. In alio,
Surato'lhab: vel Suraton Thabat. 112 SVRATO'LAHHLATZ, Capitulum Pax, vel
Salutes. 113 SVRATO'LPHALAK, Capitulum Firmamentum. vel Euthymio, (...), hoc
est, Beurero, Phisomae: vel Zino, Parcam. 114 SVRATO'NNES', Capitulum Homines^
vel Euthymio Zigabeno, (...), hoc est, Beurero paraphraste, Phisomae: Zino
autem, Parcam.
FINIS.

