The debellacyon of Salem and Bizance.

THe Debella^yon of Salem and Bizans sometime two great towns, which being
under ye great turk, were by^wene Eas^er and Michelma^ last passed, this
present year of our lord, M.v.C. thyrty (...) with a meruelouse metamorphosy^,
enchaunted and turned into two english men, by the wonderful inuentyue wit
and wychecrafte o^ Sir John^ Some say the Pacifiar / and so by him co^uayed
hither in a Dialoge, to defend his dyuysyo^, against ye Apology of Sir Thomas
More knight. But now being thus between the said Mychelmas and Halowentyde
next ensu^^^e in this Debellacion va^^^^shed: they be fl^dde ^ense and
vanyshed, and are bycome two townys again / with those old names chau^ged^
Salem into Jerusalem and Bizanc^ into Constantinople / the tone in Greece, y^
the other in Syria / where they may se them that will, and win them that can.
And if the Pacifier conuaye them hither again, and ten such other townys
with them, embatayled in such dyaloges: ^yr Thomas More has undertaken, to
put him self in thaduenture alone against them all. But and y^ he let them
tarry still there ^he will not utterly forswere it / but he is not much minded
as yet, age now so coming on and warynge all vnwyeldy, to go thider and give
thassaulte, to such well walled townys, without some such lusty company as
shall be somewhat lykly to, lepe up a little more lightly.

The preface. Sir Thomas More to the christen readers.
IF any man marvel (as I wene some wise men will) that ever I would
vouchsaufe to bestow any time about making answer to the pacyfyers dyaloge,
considering his faint and his feeble reasonyng: I can not in good faith well
excuse my self therein. For as I suddenly went in hand therwyth, and made it
in a breyde: so wha^ I synnys considered how little need it was, I merueyled
mine own self and repented to, that I had not regarded the book as it was
wurthy, and without any one word let it even alone.

How be it good reders what one thing or twain specially moved me to make
answer to it, and how it happed me to fall in hand therwyth, and to spend and
lose a little time about it, to make the matter the more plain unto you: that
thing shall I show you.

As soon as mine apologye was ones come out abroad, anon herd I word that
some were very wroth therwyth. And yet in my mind had there no man cause,
neither precher, nor pacyfyer, no nor none heretyke neither. For I had but
spoken for my self, and for good folk, and for the catholyke faith / without
reproach or reprofe to any man's person, or wyllyng any man any harm yt were
wyllyng to mende. And who so were wyllyng to be naught still, had cause to be
wroth with him self you wot well and not with me.

But all this would not serve me / for very wroth were they with me. Howbeit
their causeless anger did not gretely grieve me. For I was not so far
unreasonable, as to look for reasonable minds in unreasonable men.

But than herd I shortly that thykke and threfolde the pennys went to wurke,
and answers were a making, diverse, by diverse very great cu^nyng me^. And of
this trayuayle of such great mountain hyllys, I herd myche speech made,
almost every weke: so ferforth that at last it was told me for troth, that
unto one little pyece, one great cunning man had made a long answer, of
twelve whole shetys of paper, written nere to gyther and with a small hand.

But in good faith I could but laugh at that. For as for that pyece, I was
very sure that the cu^nyngest man that could come thereto, neither in ten
shetys nor in ten querys neither, write as nere as he could, should never
answer it well.

For that pyece was the answer yt in mine apalogye I make, as you se there
unto certain sermons, wherein my dyaloge was towched for writing against
Tyndals false translacyon. And wherein was also defended against my confutacyon,
Tyndals wise chapyter, in which against my dyaloge he laboreth to prove that
the word was before the church / and in all his chapyter never towcheth ye
point / and the sermon that defended him, walks as wide as he.

It was told me as I say that answer was made to that place / and what shyfte
there was found to the remanaunt, that could I not here. But to the first
point I herd say that there was devised, 'that where as I rehearse that the
precher spoke of poisoned bread, I rehearsed him wrong. For he spoke but of
moulden bread. And this pyece it was told me that in yt new answer it was
reasoned at length, and set forth very luste^y

But come the book abroad onys, I shall sone abate that courage. For first sith
he takes record yt he said but moldy bread: if I bring witness also that
he said poisoned bred, than can his witness stand him in none other stead,
but for to prove for him that he said both.

Secundly shall I prove that he said poysened bread, by such means that men
shall se by reason, yt though the the other were possible: yet was it far
unlikely.

Finally shall I ferther prove, that though ye man had said not poysened bread
but only moulden bread: yet shall I prove I say, that as the case stood, that
same not poysened bread but moulden bread, was yet for all that a very poysened
word.

Heryng therefore that this gaye book was made of the.xii. shetys of paper, and
lacked but ouerloking, and that many mo were i^ hand ye shortly should come out:
like as an husband, whose wife were in her travail, herkeneth every hand
while, and feign would here good tidings: so sith I so myche herd of so sore
travail of so many, so cunning, about diverse answers, I longed of their
long labor to se some good speed, and some of those fair babes borne that
they trauayled on.

And when these great hyllys had thus travailed long, from the weke after
Ester till as myche before Myche^mas: the good hour came on as god would, ye one
was brought a bed, with sore labor at last delivered of a deed mouse. The
mother is yet but grene good soul, and has need of good keeping: women wot
what caudell serves against her after throws.

Now after that the book was out and came into mine hands / and that I saw
the manner and the fashyon thereof: two things only moved me to write and meddle
with yt.

One that I saw therein followed and pursewed, the self same shrewed malicyouse
intent that was purposed in his first book of diuysyon / that is to wit to make
thordynaryes with fere of slander and oloquye, seue their duties undone and
let heretyques alone / and over that with an evil new change of good old
laws, labor to put heretyques in courage, and thereby decay the faith.

This was in deed the very special point that made me write yet again. And
yet found I so little reason in his reasonynge, that me thought yt should not
need. For this wyste I very well, that who so ever had wit, and would confer
and compare to gether, the words of his answer with the words of mine
Apologye, should sone perceive that his answers were even very dull and deed.

But then was there a another thing that I considered in yt / which point
unprovided for, might soon deceive the reader. For all be yt the pacyfyer has
in some places put in mine own words where yt pleased him: yet has he for
the most part used a pretty craft, to mysse rehearse my matter and leave my
words out. Ye and besides this, the man has in some places left out some
of his own, and mysse rehearsed them / to make the reader wene, that in the
reprouynge them, I had written wrong.

Now had I supposed to remedy those things, and make him an answer in three or
four leaves, with only poyntynge the reader to the places, with writing in
what lefe he should find the matter. For the words ones read: the truth
should show yt self.

But while I was thus minded and went there about: his answer in his dialoge
had fou^den such a way with walking to and fro, keeping no manner order, and
therwyth making me seek so long for some one place, yt I saw well I should
sooner answer him all new, then find out for many things the place that I
should seek for.

I made therefore in few days^ this answer that you se. And some such places
yet as I had happed to find, I have remytted the reader unto in mine apologye
/ where for his redye findyng, I have no^bred him^the lefe. And yet have I for
some folk done somewhat more to. For I se well surely many men are now a days
so delycate in reading, and so loathe to labor, that they fare in other books
as women fare with their primer, which though they be content to say some time
ye fyftene psalmys, and over yt the psalmys of the passion to, if they find
them al fair let out in order at length: yet will they rather leave them all
un said, then turn back to seek them out in other parties of their prymer.

And therefore lest some readers might hap in this book to do the same: some
places of thapologye myche necessary and not long, that with myche seeking I
fortuned to find out, to ease the reders labor, and make all open unto him, I
have put in also, into mine answer here. Ye and yet over this in the things
of most weyghte, I have put into this book his own words to. And so shall
you good readers without any pain of seeking, have all the mate^ plain and
open before your yien, that ye shall well se that I love the light, no less
then this pacyfyer would feign walk in the dark. For as the dark is in
this matter all his advantage: even so is verily the light in like wise mine.

And where as there are some that commend his answer, for the compendyouse
breuite thereof and shortness: I nothing therein envy the man's praise. For
like as no man can make a shorter course then he that lacks both his legs:
so ca^ no man make a shorter book than he that lacks as well words as matter.
And yet when by the places conferred well to gether, the feblenesse of his
answer shall appear: then shall he lose the praise of shortness to. For when
yt shall well be seen, yt he says nothing to the purpose: then shall eu^ry wise
man think his book to long by all to gether. And that ye may well perceive
that so it is in deed, let us now leave of the preface and fall unto the matter.

The first chapyter.
IN his first chapyter he touches three things. One that I have deceived his
hope, in that I have not in mine apologye dyuysed some conuenyent ways to
reform and redress the dyuysyon between the temporaltye and the spyrytualty,
to which point I will answer after in the touching of his second chapyter.
The the other point is, that sith he never found any fault in any work of mine,
of which for other ^ettis he never read none: he merueleth much therefore that
I make such obieccyon against his / and namely in that work which I would
name an apologye, which name sygnyfyeth as he says an answer or a defense.

Now where this good man declares what thing an Apologye is, and says that
yt is an answer or a defense / for which cause he the more meruaileth, that I
would in that book write against any treatise of his, who never had any
thing written against any work of mine / as though that therefore my writing
against his work would in no wise agree with the name of my book: I might
answer him that the touching of his book, was but an incident as I show in
the.100. lefe of my said book, and not my pryncypall matter / and therefore of
many noughty things I touch there but a few, and such as were in no wise to
be dissembled.

But now marvel I myche more, wherefore he should so marvel, that I would in
ye work which I name an answer or a defense, write against his work which
nothing wrote against mine. For if the thing that I write against his words,
be an answer or a defense in deed: then though it be not a defense for my
self, yet is the cause of all his marvel gone. For in that book that is
called mine apologye, yt is not required by ye nature of ye name, that yt be
any answer or defense for mine own self at all: but if suffyceth that yt be
of mine own making an answer or defense for some other.

And as these titles Caluicium Sinccii, Moria Erasmi, be names conuenyent for
those books of theyres, though the matters in those books sygnifyed by those
names do not only pertein unto Sinecius and Erasmus, or peradventure to
neither of them both at al: so may my book well bear the name of an answer or
a defense, if it be an answer or a defense made by me, though yt were all made
for other folk, and not one pyece thereof made for me.

So is yt now that mine apology is an answer and a defense, not only for my
formare books, wherein the new brethern began to find certain fa^tes / but over
that in the self same part wherein I touch the book of dyuysyon, it is an
answer and a defense for many good worshyppefull folk, against the malycyouse
slander and obloquye so generally set forth, with so many salse some says,
in that sedycyouse book.

The self same pyece is also an answer and a defense, of the very good old
and long approved laws, both of this realm and of the whole corpse of
chrystendome / which laws this pacyfyer in his book of dyuysyon, to
thencoragynge of heretyques and parell of the catholyque faith, with warm
words and cold reasons oppugneth.

And finally for as myche as many good virtuous folk began upon that ill book
of dyuysyon to have a right evil opinyon of the maker him self `whom I for his
plain confession of the true faith, took and take yet for a man good and
catholic: therefore I in many places of mine apology, lay the fault fro the man
him self, unto some wyly shrewes that deceived him. And so was mine apologye an
answer also an a defense, for ye person of the pacyfyer him self.

andAnd where he goes about now for to confute yt: there is not in all the
remanaunt of his answer one pyece that any thing appeyreth any point of mine
Apologye. How be yt of truth in this point he goes most nere me. For this
answer has he made in such manner wise, that I shall have now myche more a
do then I than had, to make any wise man wene that ever him self meant well.

And yet will I not leave yt so / but still will put it from him to some false
wyly shrewes, though the man do as he does, say contrary thereto him self.

And the more the man denies that thing him self: the more he makes yt
lykely to be true. For when in the things that so plain appear so naught, he
rather takes the matter all whole upon him, then suffers any part to be
laid from him, but if the man have an importune pride, as by gods grace he
has not: else is yt a sure sign and a good token, that he is such a good
simple soul as soon may be deceived / while we se that his wit serves him no
better, but that he would rather appear malycyouse then unwise.

But now that I have proved him that the name of Apologye, may serve very well
for every pyece of my book: now will I somewhat se how the matters of his book
agree well with the name thereof. I mean not here his book of dyuysyon. For of
that book the name and the matter agree to gether well / but I mean of his new
book that we be now in hand with, which book as appears in the first
front of the first lefe is named Salem and Bizance. And therein of an hundred
and syx leaves (for so many be in the book) there are scante fully fyftene, that
any thing agree with the name.

Now if he will say that the communycacyon between Salem and Bizance, is but
a bye matter beside, and that all the remanaunt between their talkynges, is the
very book: thanne is yt worse / for then has his book never a name at all.

More over if yt so were: then should none of the three last chapyters bear
the names that they do / that is to wit the.xxii. the.xxiii. and the.xxiiii.
chapyter / but like wise as he calls the beginning of their communycacyon
before his matter, an introduccyon: so should he have called those three
chapyters after his matter, an extraduccyon.

And yet I wot not well what I may say thereof. For in the beginning of the
book, their first communycacyon is called an introduccyon / and so is it
intyteled upon the leuys. And yet in the very end of that introduccyon before
the first chapyter, the man says him self in the person of Bizance / that
he has made as yet none introduccyon at all. What he means by this can I
not tell / but if he mean to make men wene that Salem and Bizance were two
English men in deed, and spoke those words them self without any word of
his.

But now because he shows him self so conning in greek words, that upon
this word apologye, he fyndeth the before said fault with mine apology, as
though I were ouersene and observed not ye nature of an Apology: let us se
how well him self that in the beginning calls his book a dyaloge,
observes the nature and propertye of a dyaloge.

In ye third lefe when Sale^ shows him self desyrouse to se the pacifyers
answer: Bizance answers: I shall cause yt to be written here after in this
dyaloge word for word, as yt is come to my hands / and then thou shall with
good will have yt. And thou shall understand that his answer begins at the
next chapyter hereafter ensuynge, and contynueth to the place where I shall
show the that yt ends.

Consider good readers that this introduccyon he does not bring in, as a
rehearsal of a co^municacyon had before, but as a communycacyon present. And
then let him show me where ever he has herd in his life any two men in
their talking to gether, diuyde their present co^munycacyon into chapytres.
This is a point not only so far fro the nature of a dialoge, but also from
al reason, that a very child would not I wene have handeled the thing so
chyldyshely

Also that Biza^ce tells Salem that the pacyfyers answer shall be written
into their dyaloge, that is to wit to their communycacyon: who saw ever the
like? who saw ever any thing written into a communycacyon, and writing planted
in among words spoken.

And what reason has yt to tell him where about in their communycacyon, the
pacifyers words shall begin and where they shall ende^ as though Salem
talkyng with. Bizance, had not the wit to perceive when Bizance speaks him
self and when he redeth him the pacyfyers words written.

Also what a strange monstrose best makes Bizance to Salem the pacifiers
answer, while he makes as though Salem could neither perceive the head nor
the tail, but if him self poynted him to them both with a stycke

More over where as Bizance says he will write it in to their dialoge, yt is
to wit into their present^ talking as soon as it comes to his hands, so
that at that word he had it not yet / and than he writes it in, even by and
by, and neither goes any where to fette it, nor makes any man come thither to
him to bring it: is not this proprely devised?

Than stand they both still there as they first mete / and that is in the
street by lykelyhed (for there folk most comenly mete, that mete at adventure
as they do) and there is all the answer perused / the reading whereof stands
them at ye lest four or five hours I trow. How be it there I was a little
ouersene. For they stand not there still about the reading / but there
stand they still both twain all the while that Byzance is as you se into
their talking and co^municacyo^ writing it. And that is but if Bizance write
fast, I warraunt the wurke of a weke. Now than at the wekes end when all
the.xxi. chapyters are written: Bizance in the.xxii. chapyter gives Salem
warning, that there is the answer of the pacyfyer ended. And this was by ye
pacifier fool prudently devised. For else would Salem wene that their own
talking together in the the other three chapyters by mouth, had been still nothing
else but only Bizances writing / and else would also Salem have thought that
his own words of exhortacy o^ against the great turk, and his own rehersynge
of that exposycyon of the apocalypse, had been still the pacyfyers words
against mine apology.

And finally in the very end to show that he could write, not in only prose:
he ends all the whole book in this wise with a gloryouse ryme, And thus the
gloryonse trynite, have in his keeping both the and me / and makes Bizance
pray for no mo but for them two, after the manner of the good manne ^ryme, a
mustarde maker in Cambrydge, yt was wont to pray for him self and his wife and
his child, and grace to make good mustarde and no more.

And thus you se good readers yt where this man is so cunning in greek words,
yt he can shortly find ye fawt where I fail in ye nature of an apologye: him
self in his own dyaloge so well co^serueth the propertye of a dialoge, and
expresses it so naturally, yt it could never be done more naturally, not
though he that wrote it were even a very natural in deed.

But where he seems to have meruayled when he read mine apology, that I would
make obieccyons against his wurke, while he never wrote any thing against no
book of mine: in good faith if he had, I would never have been the more hasty,
but somewhat peradventure ye less, lest it might have seemed that some desire
of reuengynge mine own dyspleasure, had excyted me thereto / where as now no
worldely profit growing to me thereby, there is much less cause for any good
man to think, that I would take the labor to write against a wurke I wist not
whose, but if that it had at the least wise seemed to my self, that there were
such things therein as god would give me thank, to give me^ warning to be
well ware of them.

And where he says he will not touch every thing partycularly, but take an
other order all out of order in answering thereunto: I can not let him i^ his
own book to use what order that best may serve his purpose. But me thought
and yet think, that I my self took a very plain open way, when the chapyters
of his which I would answer to, I perused al way every thing in order.
Which order while he follows not with me: how you shall find it, your self
shall good reders judge upon ye end. But yet in the mean while at the first
face, it seems not that with lepynge out of order, he means to make you the
matter very plain.

Nor all, he says he will not answer neither / for avoiding of tedyousnes.
And of troth if he have (as he seems to signyfye) any other bysynesse: I
think it be somewhat tedyouse to him to answer all to gether.

Finally where he says that he supposes to make it appear as by his answers,
and by his consideracyons and his declaracyons, that mine obieccyons are little
to be pondered: first for his arguments made against the laws, whereby the
faith is preserved, and heresies kept under, those arguments all his answers
will never be able to maintain And as to ye remanaunt, in good faith the
better that he may make you his innocent mind appear, the gladder a great
deal will I be thereof / nor nothing purpose I therein by this present book to
do ferther, than to make you clearly perceive, that how well so ever him self
here declare his good menyng, my self was not causeles there moved to find
fawte in his writing.

The.ii. chapyter.
IN the.ii. chapyter beginning in the fyfth lefe, he brings forth ye first
consyderacyo^, which is that I in the 89. lefe of mine apology confess that
murmur and discensyon against the clergy was tha^ all ready far gone onwarde
in his unhappy journey / and that afterward in the.106. lefe of the same book,
I bring in a very dark sentence, whereby it appears that I mean that the
dyspleasure and grudge between them is in deed neither so great as he makes
it / and yet grown to so great as it is, but even now of late. But who so
look there in that place, shall I suppose find it nothing dark / but if it
be such a man as list not to understand it.

And where I say there, that this dyuysion such as it is, which is no thing
such as this man makes it, is not grown to so great as it is, but synnys
that Tyndalys books and Frythys, and friar Barons, bygan to go abroad: therein
he would seem to say the contrary, and byddeth me look better upon the matter,
and I shall find it otherwise. And in deed with better lokyng thereon, I find
it somewhat otherwise. For I find ye time of such encreace as I speak of, much
shorter than I there assygne, and that by a great deal. For it was growe^ the
greater by thoccasyon of the self same book of the diuysyon, though y^ maker
as him self says and as I trust to, intended it not of purpose. And therefore
where he says that since I confess that there was diuysyon at the time of the
making of mine apologye, it appears that I have no mind to have it ceaced,
because that I seek not out the causes and devise the remedies: verily good
readers I never took and accounted my self for a man mete and able to make a
reformacyon, of such two great parts as the spyrytualtye and the temporaltye
of this whole realm be. And verily if I knew some such great causes as this
man sets forth for true, which I know for false / and that I than knew
the ways to reform them to: I would use other ways toward it, than
sedycyouse slaunderouse books. For as I have expressly declared in mine
apologye, neither never did I, nor never entende to do, put out abroad in
prente under color of reformacyon, fawtes that were hateful and odyouse to
here, either of the tone part or of the the other / and specially so many at
onys, as if they were all true, were not all lykely to be remedyed at ones /
but the more part for the while remaining little remedyed, shold^ but make
either part to the other more odyouse, and both parts more infamouse, among
such other (if any such any where be) as would be glad and rejoice to here
much evil spoken of them both.

And this I say all though that all were true. And now would I much less use
that manner in making rehersall of those things, whereof many be false and
untrue, and many other also very tryfeles / and the very chyefe things that
this pacyfyer desires to have reformed, be laws all ready well made, which he
would have made wurse. For where they have been by wise men well devised for the
repressyng of heresies, some by perleament in this realm, some by the general
counsel of chrystendome: those deuyseth he so to be changed now, as the
change which he desires, though by gods grace he desires not that it so
should, yet out of dowte in deed should turn to thencoragynge of heretykes and
encreace of heresies, with the mynysshement and decay of the catholyke
christen faith. whereupon would not fail which almighty god keep from us, his
greuouse indygnacyon upon us. And therefore god keep us from such reformacyons.

Now to lay to me therefore as a great fawte, that I blame his book in those
untrue some says, that under color of ceacynge dyuysyon, excyte and set forth
dyuysyon, but if my self could ceace it. When such books make it: is myche
like as if he would say that there ought no man to blame him that would burn up
a another man's house, but he that would build it again.

And therefore with this good reason of his, be puts me in remembrance of an
answer, that a man of mine made ones myche after the same fashyon. I had
sometime one with me called Clyffe, a man as well known as master Henry
Patenson. This Clyffe had been many years mad / but age had taken from him
the rage, so that he was metely well waxen harmless among folk. In to Clyffes
head came there some time in his madness such imagynacyons against images, as
these heretykes have in their sadness. For like as some of them which after
fled and ran away, and some fell to theft and were caught, pulled down of
late upon London bridge thinmage of the blessed martyr saint Thomas: so Clyffe
upon the same bridge upon a time fill in talking unto an image of our blessed
lady / and after such blasphemies as ye devil put than in his mouth, and
now a days blows out by ye mouths of many heretykes, which seem they never
so sad, be yet more mad than he: he set hand upon the child in her arm
and there brake of ye neck. And afterward when honest men, dwellers upon the
bridge, came home to mine house and there blamed Clyffe before me, and asked
him wherefore he brake of the chyldys neck in our ladys arm: when Clyffe had
herd them, he began to look well and erenestly upon the^ / and like a man of
sadness and grauyte, he asked them, tell me ^hys among you there, have you
not yet set on his head again? No quod they we can not. No quod Clyffe by ye
mass it is the more shame for you. Why speak you to me of it than?

And even thus answers me now this good man / which where his sedycyouse
some says set forth diuysyo^, and break the chyldys neck rekeneth it a shame
for me to find any fawte with him for ye brekynge but if my self could glue
it together again.

And therefore where he says that I should have proved, that all the causes
that he lays as causes of dyuysyon, be no causes of dyuysyon, or else I
should have devised the remedies: albe it I have answered him therein all ready,
yet this I say therein ferther, that I have proved well and clearly, yt the very
chyef cause yt he says, is laid very untruely / that is to wit the mysse
handelyng the people to their destruccyon upon suspycyon of heresye. Which
cause if it were as true as yt is false, were so weyghty, that it were well
wurthy to be laid for a matter of dyuysyon. And while it is not true: yet by
such kookes being blown about in every part of the realm for true, may
well mysse hap to make a dyuysyon / while the dwellers in every quarter
about by credence given to the book, may at the first face wene, that though
it be not so there as they dwell them self, yet wene I say that it were so in all other places. Whereof though they shall by leysoure perceive the contrary
with search: yet they that ask no ferther questyon, shall believe it still. And
so a rumor onys begone and spredde abroad, is not after soon removed

Now as for his other causes of this dyuysyon: dyuerse^ I have towched and
showed suffycyentely that they be not suffycyent. But as for me to peruse his
whole book of dyuysyon through, was no part of my purpose. For if those
things that I did towche had seemed to me tolerable: I would in good faith
have been loathe to have towched them either.

In which while with his consideracyons and declaracyons he goes about now to
show that he than meant none harm: I will not therein much hinder him, but be
glad rather to forther him in thexcuse of his menynge and so did I as I have
said even in mine apologye to. But though I be glad to excuse his own mind in
the menyng: yet can I not excuse his unwise following of false wyly counsel
in the doing.

The.iii. chapyter.
THe.iii. chapyter co^teynyng his second consyderacyo^, read and consider it
who so list / for I can se nothing in it to be considered by me. For in
effect in conteyneth no thing else, but that he would the clergy should as
myche as they may avoid all accasyon of murmr and grudge / of the
temporaltye toward them, but if it be pharysaycal grudge ye and though the
deed that they should forbere were good / in which point because that one point
would wax a song work, I will fall in no dyspycyons. But in as farforth as
he gives any man good counsel and wysheth all thing well: so farforth shall
he and I not varye / but and he call me to him, I will sit and pray for yt with
him.

But yet where he says in the end of the chapter, that I endeavor my self
very myche, to oppress al them that will show such things of the
spyrytualtye: in deed some such as have made such lies, I have told yt
them. But as for any oppressyon let him prove one, and let him call that
one.xx. And if he can prove none, as I wot well he ca^ not: then good reders
let him be believed thereafter.

More over where he says that I in my mind prove yt an intolerable defaute
in the people for mysse judging the clergy, where as I think they have no
cause so to do / and that therein. I leave them, as though all the whole cause
and pryncypall defaute, were in the temporaltye, wherein he says that my
judgment is far deceived: in this point good reder he says somewhat to me if
he said true. And sure if he thought that he wrote herein true / then
wisdom would he should have written mine own words in. And if he fered that
yt would be founden false: then honestye would that he should have lest his
own words out. But verily good readers and he seek this seven year, he shall
in all mine apologye find you no such words of mine. But he shall find
far the contrary. For I do there I wot well, in such places as I show
that men were unreasonable that would take this thing or that thing (such as
I rehearse of his bringing forth) for any reasonable cause of dyuysyon: there
I say in those places that the pacyfyer mysse says the people, and that the
people be myche more reasonable that to take yt so. And therefore here he
belyeth me again.

And also let him show you forth any one place, in which I say that all the
whole fault or the pryncypal fault either, is in the te^poraltye / and than
believe him the better in a another matter. And in the mean while till he bring
it forth, or else that you find yt your self: ye may with reason, at the
lest wise in this matter believe me better then him / and I will never desire
you to believe me one day longer. For I have neither said the pryncypall fault
in the tone nor ye the other. And thus has he made you of me three lies in one
chapyter.

The.iiii. chapyter.
IN his.iiii. chapyter beginning in the.viii. lefe, he first shows a
diuersyte between the sample that I put in ye.94. lefe of mine appologye, of a
pacyfyer between a man and his wife, and the thing that I there resemble it
unto / that is to wit his own book, that makes a like pacifycacyon between
the temporaltye and spyrytualtye.

But surely the dyfference that he puts seems to my pore wit greatly to a
pair his part. For if it be as he says yt is, that where as the husband
would be loath to hear any evil spoken of his wife, and therefore will can such a
pacyfyer no thank, that will tell him such tales of her before his
neighbors: the temporaltye will be glad to hear harm spoken of the
spyrytualtye: then was yt so myche the worse done, to write openly to the
temporaltye such things of the spyrytualtye, to feed and nuryshe any such
evil delight: or openly to the spyritualtye, being as he said like wise
affectyonate, the fautes of the temporaltye either.

How be yt I can not in good faith say, but if I should belie him, that on
that side wyllyngely he greatly passed his bounds / but of ouersyght unware,
he has in some things slaundered ye temporalty to.

Then shows he farther wherefore he wrote those things in english, though
John^ Gerson wrote them but in laten / wherein to say the troth, he lays a
cause suffycyent wherefore that John^ Gerson wrote them in latyne. But whyther
he lay cause suffycyent wherefore him self should not rather have let them
alone then write them in english, against the counsel of John^ Gerson him
self as I touched in mine apology: that I leave your self good reads to
consider. For I will not myche strive against his excuse. For I greatly shall
not need I think, sith al his excuse amounts to no more, but that he meant
that some lay men redynge the prestes fautes in english, might put them in
remembrance to mende them / specially because he says even in the same
chapter a little before, that the temporaltye so myche delyteth to here of them.

The^ goth he farther in ye same chapter / and where as in his book of the
dyuisyon, he would have seemed between the te^poraltye and the spyrytualtie to
have spoken indifferently, and to have told them their fautes on both parti^
^gally: here in the second side of the x. lefe, he tells us the cause
wherefore he did not so, and says in this wise.

I have spoken of defautes and abuses in the spyrytualtye, more then of
defautes in the temporaltye / because the spyrytualte ought to be the gyders
and gyuers of light by their doctrine and good examples to the te^poralty:
and if their light be derkenes, where shall the temporaltie then fetch their
lyghter? trewly I wot not where. And I doubt that then they both shall walk
still in derkenes. And therefore yt is that John^ Chrysostom says upon Matthew
the xxi. chapyter. That if prestehode be holle and sound, all the church
florysheth: and if yt be corrupt, the faith and virtue of the people fades
also and vanyssheth away. Let thye therefore as to this point be the fynall
conclusyon for this time, that who so ever proves defautes to be in the
temporaltye, he proves also defautes to reygne in the spyritualty: and
therefore the defautes in the temporaltye will never be avoided, till the
defautes in the spyrytualtye be first reformed: and therefore have I first
spoken of some defautes that be in the spyrytualtye.

Surely good readers I like well these words. For they be very good and they
prove very well, and very true yt is / nor I ueuer said the contrary, but have
in mine apologye plainly said the same, yt every fault in a spyrituall man
(though ye thing were of it self al one, is yet by ye difference of ye person,
far worse and more ody^ouse both to god and man, then yt is in a te^porall
man. But yet the worse that every pryuate spyrytuall man's fault is, so myche
is yt ye more harm to dyffame the corpse of the spyritualtye openly in the face
of the temporaltye, in such manner as the book of dyuysyon does / of which I
have proved those that are weyghtye false, and could (if I would now lose time
about yt while that that I have touched is suffycyent) show the substance of
all the remanaunt to have little substance to.

And therefore the words of saint Chrysostom which he says for his book,
were in part the very cause that made me write against his book. For surely as
saint Chrysostom says, if the presthed be corrupt, the faith and virtue of
the people fades and vanishes away / which is without any questyon very
troth for though saint Chrystome had never said it, our savior says as
myche him self: ye be (says he to the clergy) the salt of the earth, and if
the salt wax ones fresh and we ryshe, wherein shall any thing be well seasoned?
And you be the light of the world. And therefore if the light that is in the
world, be dark: how dark shall then the darkness be yt self?

But now say I sith that ye prestehed being corrupted, yt must needs follow
that the faith and virtue of the people fades and vanysheth away / and upon
Christ's words yt must follow that if the spyritualtye be naught, the
temporaltye must needs then be worse than they: theruppon I conclude upon the
the other side against the pacyfyers book, that sith this realm has (as god be
thanked in deed yt has) as good and as faithful temporalty, and (though there
be a few false brethern in a great multitude of a true catholic me^) as has
for ye quantite any other country cristened, it must needs, I say follow yt the
clergy, though it have some such false noughtye brethern to, is not in such
sore manner corrupted, as the book of diuysyon goth about to make me^ wene / but
as good for their part as the temporaltie for theyrs.

A therefore in like wise I say, that upon the self same words of saint
Chrysostom and of our savior Christ: the said book of the dyuysyon in
dyffamynge the spyrytualtie, diffameth the temporaltye myche more / which is
the thing that as I said seems me neither honorable nor profitable, in open
prented books, for any english man to do / nor verily I think the maker would
not have done, if he then had thought so far.

But now goth he farther and says.

And though master More can not deny these fawtes. (I suppose you have herd
me deny such as were the chyefe and proved them I wene untrue) yet all the
ame^deme^tes that he aleyth in his Apologye is only in punyshement of
heresies, as is s^^^ before: whereunto he specially moves the ordynaryes not to
be slack nor the more remysse for fe^e ^f enyll words and sclaunder of the
people. And if they be therefore the more ^lacke in calling attachynge and
examynynge, and farther ordering of heretyques: he says god will not fail
to make fall in their necks the double slander of that, fro whens they fled.
And in a another place he moves the temporaltye to ioyn with the spyrytualtye
each with other lonyngly to repress and keep under those ungracious folk, by
whom he means heretykes Upon which mocyon I shall somewhat show my mind,
as hereafter follows in the next chapyter.

Here he complayneth again yt I deuyse no remedies, as though the whole
prouysyon for all thing lay upon mine hand. I do somewhat for my part, when
I pray god to give us all the grace spiritual and te^porall both, to keep well
and observe such prouysyons as god has given good men the grace to make all
redye. For if we keep them well: I wene there are me^ely many made. And if we
break the old: so will we by likelihed break these a^ well, yt he would have me
now dyuyse and study new. And somewhat I do better for my part, while I
labor to have the good old prouysyons kept, than this pacyfyer does for
his, while he laboreth to have them broken, and namely those laws that are of
ye very best, and made for the faith against heresies.

But then labors he as me thinks, to make the brethren angry with me /
and reherseth and inculketh into their ears, yt I exhort both the spyrytualty
and the te^poraltye to, those to whom the matter apperteyneth, not to be any
thing the more slack in repressynge of heresies, for any fere of infamye.

Surely good readers what so ever I wrote in that behalf: I will require every
man to have yt even here / for written and repeted again. For when we se yt the
words of his writing, which I have in mine Apologye rehearsed you, how well so
ever he meant therein (as I trust he me^t but well) have yet yt plain open
apparaunce in them, yt they were well lykely to put such as should se to the
repressyng of heresies, in doubt and fere of infamy, and to be had among ye
people as folk suspect of misseha^deling good folk and of crueltye: I reken yt
the part of every good man, that any zele has to the conseruacyon of the
catholyque faith, to encorage them on the the other side, to the doyeng of their
duty therein / and not to set the respect of their estymacyon among men
(which yet they shall also much the better conserve among all the people save
those few that are naught) before the saving of their souls, and keeping the
favor of god: namely sithe the keeping of people from heresies and putting
the scabbed heretyques out of the clean flock, is one of the special things
that thapostle gave the bishop warning of. Let him find out any word of
mine, where with I would any harm to any man that would amend, and then let
him lay yt to me. And who so ever entendeth never to be good: I am well content
that the pacyfyer make him not my friend.

The fyfth chapter.
IN the fyfth chapter he touches punyshement of heresies, and dyuydeth ye
matter into four sorts of people / wheri^ for as much as he nothing says
that touches me, I let them pass all four.

After those.iiii. sorts perused: he speaks of the fyfth, which he very
ernestly dysprayseth, that are those which take and hold contrary ways / to
the true faith in deed. But then in that part he myche miss lyketh in me,
both that I call them any evil name, as the noughty brethren or heretyque
brethren, and also that I call them good namys to, as the blessed brethren
and euan gelycall brethren.

And for the first in calling them any such evil names: he says I do not as
I would be done to / as appears he says in mine apologye. ^ Surely I suppose
he may therein find, that I force not what such as they be call me. And I can
write no worse word by them I wot well, then they write many by me.

And to as for to give evil names to such folk as are so evil in deed:
let him call yt raylynge at his pleasure / but how so ever yt be in me. I
wot well that some other have done so, yt yet were no raylours / except
saint Poule were a raylour, when he called his carleshe kepers dogs, and
when he called the chyef priest a whyted wall, which was a spyghtful word among
them / and except saint Policarpus rayled, when he calls ye heretic Ma^cyon
the deuyls eldeste son, and except our souyour rayled, when he called ye
scribes and the pharysyes hyprocytes.

But then yt I call the^ again good names: this thing lo this good man rekeneth
a very monstrouse manner, to make them both good and badde. But this is a
mo^stre lo of every ma^ny^ making. For so call not I them alone, but ye whole
people to, in such manner of speaking as every man uses, when he calls one
self noughty lad, both a shrewd boy and a good son / the tone in the proper
simple speech, the the other by the figure of ironye or antiphrasys. And by a like
manner figure saint Hierome against the old heretyke Vigilantius, calls him
sometime Vigilantius, and sometime again Dormitantius / and so he calls that
heretyke two contrary names, as well as I do these.

And where he can not te^ what I mean by the new broched bretherhed: that am I
content to tell him / I mean that they be a barell of poysen, that the devil
has late set abroche, and laboreth by them to poysen other me^.

And where he can not bear it, that they being such should be called by the
name of euangelycalles: I well allow the good mind of the good man, that he
therein shows him self so to bear to the faith, that it greueth him to here
heretykes called by such a good graciouse name. But he must consider that it is
now, and some years al ready passed has been, the name by which they have been
as commonly called in all the countries catholyke, as by their own very name of
heretyke. And thoccasyon thereof grew first of that that the^ self took y^ name
evangelical, arrogantly to them self both by theuangelycall lyberty that they
pretended, as folk that would live under the gospel and under no man's law
beside / and because they would also believe nothing ferther, than ye very
scripture, all which they take now under the name of the gospel. For ye new
law they take for nothing else, but for the declaracyon and perfeccyon of the
old.

Now when they had taken this name come^ly upon them self, the catholics
tellyng them, yt they neither lived nor byleued according to the gospel
let not yet to call them by the same name to / and that not to their praise,
but to their rebuke and shame. And some turned in writing yt name of theyrs in
scorn, and instead of eua^gelicos, wrote the^ pseudo eua^gelicos.

Now if this man can not bear it, that I call them as the old folk do: though
I would my self leave it for his pleasure, yt would make ye wot well but a
small change. For other folk will call the^ still yet by what name they list,
and neither I nor he can let them.

But to thentent he may be somewhat the less discontent with me, for calling
heretykes by a good name: he shall understand that upon such occasyon and such
manner, it is no new begone thing so to do. For a certain sort there were of
the heretics that were ye Manicheis, which were first among them self called
by ye name of Cathari, that is to wit pure and clean / and afterward the
catholics called the^ by ye same name. And so does saint Austayne also call
them in his writing. But yet he declares both their false heresies, and
their secret shameful living for such, that though he call them by the name
of pure and clean, as we call now these brethren euangelycall, yet he meant
that they were neither pure nor clean in deed, no more than these folk in
living or bylyefe, follow the very gospel in deed.

But than comes he forth upon me somewhat solempnly with a very folly and with
a solemn lie. For lo good readers these are his words I warraunt you wise
and true.

And now will I say somewhat ferther concerning this matter, and that is this. I
marvel much, how master More durst for offense of his conscience, and for
dread of the kings dyspleasure, and of the whole realm, bring up such a
slaunderouse name in this realm, and put it in prynt, that may lightly touch
not only many of the common people, but also of the greatest of the realm, as
well spyrytuall as temporal; if he and other of his affynyte ly^te to call any
of them one of the blessed brethren, or of the good brethern. And in this
point it seems, that he forgate the honor of the realm, which he seemed much
to regard, when he said: he could not think it to the honor of the realm,
that other realms should wene, that the whole clergy of this realm should be
so far fallen into the grudge and indygnacyon of the whole temporaltye, as he
says it is spoken to be in the said treatise, whyce he calls the book of
diuisyon: for certainly it is more dishonor to the realm, to have it noysed,
that the realm is full of heretykes, than that the temporaltye grudgeth
against the spyrytualty, and so he esheweth and flees the less scla^der,
though it were all true that he says and renneth heedlynge into the greater.

And now will I say somewhat ferther concerning this matter / and that is
this. I marvel much how this man durst for offense of his conscience and
dyspleasure of god, bring up such a slaunderouse lie upon me, and write it
in his book, that I should write in mine apologye, that the realm is full of
heretykes.

If the case were now no better upon my part, nor no wurse upon his, but
that in mine apologye there could no such saying be founden: what rebuke
were it yet unto him, if he were a man openly known by name? as now the shame
cleueth not on his chekes, but he soon shakes it of while his name is not at
his book. But now sith that in mine apologye I plainly write the contrary:
what words will there serve to say to this man the things, that he were in
this point weary well worthy to here.

R^de good christen readers the xlvii. chapyter of mine apology, beginning in
the.260. lefe and there shall you plainly se, that I say plain the contrary.
For where as this pacyfyer did in his book of dyuisyon under the name of some
other bylye of lykelyhed some of the spyrytualty than, surmyttynge that they as
of polycy noysed that the realm is full of heretykes more than it is in deed /
as he now bylyeth me here, surmysynge that I do say the same: ye shall there se
that I show it to be unlikely, yt any polytyke spyrytuall man would so say
for polycy / sith so to say were for them for the cause that I there show, very
far against good polycy. And there I ferther show, yt some heretykes have
^alsely made that noise, and there I tell for what cause. And afterward i^ for
268. I show yt for all their besy bragyng, they be yet in deed but a few.

Now good reads when I thus have written there in both the places so open and
so plain, that the realm is not full of heretykes, nor has there in but a few,
though y^ few be in deed over many / and grown mo also by negligence in some
part, than there has been in some late years passed: how may this man find
in his heart for shame, to write in this wise? and as it were with such
authoryte so solempnely chekke me falsely, for writing yt the realm is full,
and tha^ excuse his like fawte by mine / and yet in the comparison make mine
the greater to? But now is all the craft of ye comparyson dyscouered, and the
glory of that argument defaced, while you se yt his fawt is true, and that mine
he feyneth and fyndeth not in mine book, but plain and expressly the contrary /
and that he spynneth that fine lie without flex, fetchyng it out of his own
body as the spider spynneth her cobwebbe. And thus is my fawte fair wyped
away, and his lies still in his neck, and another now laid unto it.

Now as this was no little folly for him to lose his credence with that openly,
that might be so soon and so plainly controlled and reproved: so is his first
point also no less folly than that, wherein he merueyleth so much that I dare
for my conscience, and for dyspleasure of my prince, and of the whole realm,
bring up that slaunderouse name in the realm, to call these heretykes the
brethren / considering that it may lyghtely touch not only any man of ye
comen people, but also of the greatest of the realm, as well spyrytuall as
temporal, if either my self or any of mine affinite list to call them, one of
the blessed brethern or of ye good brethern

This is forsooth one the most simple sought out folly, that ever I yet saw set
out with high words so solempnely. For first as for to call the^ by the name
of the brethren, is nothing of my bringing up, but a word walking in
every man's mouth (which thing I can not believe but this man well knows him
self, as strange as he makes the matter) and bygonne by the good blessed
brethren them self, as well appears upon their own letters, enough to be
showed at sundry seaso^s sent between them.

Now touching the great fere and perel that he puts, lest I or some of
mine affynyte may slander any of the greatest of the realm, if we list to
call any such man one of the good brethren: the good man may take his rest I
warraunt him, and shall not need to break his sleep therefore. For first as for
mine affynyte is not very great. For I have none affinyte but as I think him
self has and every other man, that is to wit either by gossepred or by
marriage / except he mean to call all the true catholykes mine affynyte, and
all the the other his own. And than which way so ever he mean, a sewde
slaunderouse word were as lykely to happen in one of his affinite as in one of
mine. And as for my self the pacifyer him self is (as his some says show)
somewhat more set upon an appetyte of slawnderynge than am I, which bear a
little more reverence to the great men of the realm, spyrituall and temporal
both, and more honest mind unto the small all, than wrongfully to dyffame
either great or small, by calling either the tone or the the other, any of ye
blessed byched new broched brethe^hed / except only such as by their own open
wrytynges, or by their open words, be plainly proved heretykes.

But yet consider well good reders, what a wise reason this is yt he brings
forth. For what parell is there of such slander, more by this name of the good
brethren than by the the other name of heretykes? is not ye old name of
heretykes, as slaunderouse as this new name of the blessed brethern^ what name
can this good man deuyse us him self to call them by, in which name the same
parell of slander may not fall as well as in this? Men may by this wise reason
call the^ by no name at al, for fere lest I or mine affinite might if we lift,
call not only any of the people, but also ye grettest lordys both spyrituall
and temporal, by the same name, and so bring them in slander. For the
slawnder is all one what so ever the name be, when the thing is all one that
is meant and signified thereby.

And this man uses him self in this place therefore, very circu^spectely for
this point in this chapyter, where he speaks of heretykes after his.iiii.
sortys of folk before. For he calls them there by no name at all him self,
but says of ye fourth sort: These be the wurst sort of people before all
other, except only an other sort of people, which sire Thomas More in his
apologye calls sometime desperate wreches, sometime stark heretykes, and
sometime the blessed brethren, and sometime the noughty brethren etc. So that
this good man him self here, like a true faithful man, affirms them naught /
and such and so naught, as there be none wurse. But name (as it seems) for fere
of occasyo^ of slander, he durst here none call them him self but says they
be they, whom I call thus and thus.

Well I will make no vow thereof as yet / but I will peradventure at a leysour
here after upon better ad uisement, use the same cyrcu^speccyo^ and polycye
that I learn of his ensample here / and when I speak of such manner folk, give
the^ no name at all my self / but for a token that men may wit whom I
mean, I shall say those fellows I mean yt saint Poule perdy calls heretykes
so / andthat be all they that obstinately hold any self minded opinion,
contrary to the doctrine that the comen known catholyke church, techeth and
holds for necessary to salvation.

After all this in the.xiiii. and the xv. lefe, he asks me with a sole^pne
dreuen process, whyther I would not think it good and weldone / that all such
as have authoryte to punysh heretykes, should before they punysh them, amend
first their own fawtes. And I think yes in good faith, that it were very well
done / and I would that every man would so do in deed, that either should
correct heretyke or any malefactor else.

But than again I ask him, that though this were weldone, if every man would
wax as good as another good man would wyshe him, and as him self would wysshe
another man to be: yet if there were some yt were not so suddenly so well
dysposed, as to mende their own fawtes so soon as the dewty of their office
would require of necessyte, that they should do correccyon upon the fawtes of
some other folk: should they not yet do it for all that in the mean while,
and other folk to whom it apperteyned / be bounde^ to assyste them therein,
though their own fawtes were not all amended yet.

To this question so he has in the same place answered me yes, as I have him
to the toth^r. And thus good readers this good man and I, after our sore
conflycte in the the other matter, have yet in these two points stryken hands
again, and be god be thanked metely well agreed together, god hold it.

The, vi. chapyter.
HIs syxth chapyter begins in ye.xvi. lefe, wherein he showed that I in mine
apologye miss take the letter of his said treatyce / and he tells which
words. But he tells neither in what place of his book his words are, nor
in what place of my book you may find mine. Those two things he leueth out,
because he would as he said in the beginning, not follow thorder of my
chapyters, but take ye way that should be best to the plain opening of the
troth. But for as much as me seems that to the plain opening of treuth, the
redyer way is to read first both the places, and than this his answer
after: ye may therefore good readers find both his words and mine in my
apologye / his in the lefe. 123 / and mine against which he now reasons i^
his answer ye shall find fo. 127. And now good readers if you read and
consider those two places first, and than compare well the words of mine
apologye there, with the words of his answer here: it shall suffyce for this
matter. For there shall you se well that I mysse take not ye letter of his words.
For I say not nay, but that his words go only against spyrytuall men / but
his reason runs out against every kind of men spyrytuall and te^porall to.
And there I show also, the reason wherefore and why. And therefore I wene it will
appear plain, that I myssetake not the letter of his treatise at all / and that
his reason runs out in deed against every kind of men. For there is neither
spyrytuall man nor temporal, but he may take harm by habundaunce.

But so is there as I there say, neither, spyrytuall man nor temporal, but he
may with haboundaunce do good.

But now the declaracyon of his mind in this answer, mendeth all the matter.
For here he declares yt by these words of his in a manner stranglynge: he
means the mynyshynge of some fervor, as though a man would say that by
almost killyng with a clubbe, he meant the geuynge of a fylyppe in the forhed
with his little finger.

But sith that in this.vi. chapite^ of his, his great mortal stranglyng is
now strangeled away, and turned into venyall sin: we shall for this matter
trouble you no le^ger / but eueryman may take haly water and go home to dinner,
for service is all done here for to day.

The counsel of saint Bernarde that he there speaks of to the pope
Eugenius, is in good faith as me thinks very well brought in. And I would
advise every spiritual man to follow yt, and to take good temporal men to him,
and let them do all his temporal business for him. This think I good as for
mine own mind, but if there be in any part any laws made all ready to the
contrary, by such folk as yt can not bycome me to contrall. How be yt I
suppose that myche part of their temporal business is done by temporal men
in deed.

As for his act of parliament that he speaks of I suppose verily that the
clergy would not be against yt. And such acts are there all ready made mo
then one, good and suffycyent / but if he mean to set an addycyon thereto,
that ^he kings grace should expressly be bounden by the act, that if he gave
any license of mortysynge into the church, yt should be void / except such
cases as this good man list to lymyte and give him leave. Sith his hyghnes is
now moved by this good man here thereto: his grace may agree to it when yt
pleases him.

As for the great matter that he makes, of that I never in all the time that I
was conuersaunt in the court, could perceive any of the noble men above the
nombre of seven, and yet not now so many, that ever thought yt good that any
possessions of the church, should with out a lawful cause be taken away
there from: I marvel much what he means, and what subtle conceyte he
conceyueth in his wise breast, that he so mutereth, and mu^bleth upon that word
as though such communicacyon either on the tone side or the the other, were of
such high importance, that yt were either felonye or some heyghnouse
mysprisyo^, either in tellyng the tale again, or else in keeping yt counsel so
long.

For I wot nere in good faith in which of the twain this good man fyndeth
ye fault, or whether he find any or none. But if he find any: in which of the
twain so ever he find yt, he fyndeth but his own folly. For now shall you
good readers se, what little insyght the man has in any thing that he reads.
First he reherseth a part of my words written in mine Apologye fo. 130, where
I say that I never found in all the time whyse I was conuersaunt in the
court, of all the nobylyte of this land. above the nombre of seven, yt ever I
perceived to be of y^ mind, that yt were either right, or reasonable, or could
be to the realm profitable, without lawful cause to take any possessions
away from the clergy.

Now upon these words ye shall se what he gathers, by which ye shall se what
wit and what learning the man has. These are his words lo.

Sith master More says that he has not known above seven (whereof he says
three are deed) that were of the mind that yt were reasonable without cause to
take possessions fro the clergy / in which words yt is coucluded, that he
knew seven of that mind, whose opynyons yt lyketh him to rehearse and put in
writynge and in prynte also.

This man has a special insyght in inclusyues and exclusyues, when he weneth
that in my words it were included, that I knew.vii. of that mind, that yt
were reasonable to take away possessions fro the church without cause. My
words you wot well that I never knew above seven, that without lawful
cause to take away possessions fro the church, thought either right, or
reasonable, or that yt could be to the realm profitable. What include these
words now? Do they include as he says, y^ I say that I knew.vii. yt thought
yt reasonable? This man is so conning in his inclusyues and exclusyues, that
he dyscerneth nothing between compulatyues and dysiunctyuys. This man I se
well never learned the rule that almost every boy can, that to the veryte of a
dysiunctyue, yt suffyseth any one part to be true. Let him now learn yt
therefore / and then shall he perceive that my words include no farther, but
that I say that I knew seven which among them all thought some one of those
three things, that is to wit, either some of them some one, and some of them
some other or else al seven some one of those three things, that is to wit,
either right, or reasonable, or profitable, without any determynacyon which
of the three. And neither includes those words of mine that I say all seven
thought yt right, nor that all seven thought yt reasonable, no nor yet that
all seven thought yt profitable. But yt hangs not upon his determynacyon,
but upon mine own declaracyo^, which of these three things which of those same
seven thought or which one of the three they all thought / and never one of
those three things is determinately included to any one of the seven. For if I
would say that I never knew in all my life any man above the number of seven,
that had been either at Alkayre or at Salem, or at Bizance: do these words
include that I say that I have known seven that have been at Salem? That am I
sure they do not. But I may well stand by those words, if I said after,
that I have known seven persons that have b^n al seven at Bizance / but as for
Alkayre or Sale^ I never knew any one that had been at any one of them both.

And in like wise will I well stand by mine other words and veryfye them
with a good excludyng of this man's includyng. For I say and very truth yt
is, that I never found any noble man above the nombre of seven, that without
lawful cause to take away possessions fro the clergy, thought yt either
right or reasonable, or that yt could be for the realm profitable. I found
not I say above seven, that thought any one of all these three / is not this
true if I found seven, yt thought all three? yes forsooth true enough though I
never found any one, yt ever thought any two of the three. And now therefore
though I never found any noble man so vnryghtuouse, or so unreasonable, as to
think yt right or reasonable, without lawful cause to take away any
possessions from the clergy: yet have I found seven that have thought, if
right and reason would bear yt, they could tell how that as for worldely
polycye, some of the possesseons taken away might be to the realm profitable
And some one has thought that yt would be peradventure profitable to the
realm, that the lords had the lands whose ancestors had mortysed them.
And peradventure he that so thought, should not have lost a grote by yt. And
some other has thought that it would be more profitable to put yt into
hospytalles of some certain new fashyoned foundacyon, and thereof neither make
prestes the masters, nor no lay men neither, but some good sad honest
virtuous wydos, that would be tendable and tender to syke folk, and that
should yearly yield a compte unto thordynarye. And some other have thought yt
better to dyuyde and cant yt among good pore husband men, that should till the
ground their own hands, and take the land for their labor, with diverse other
dyuyses mo, every man after his own mind. And what harm was there now in any
of all their minds, yt this good wise man would have my words seem so
heygnouse, upon a sentence that him self includes in them / and which
sentence of his, reason excludes from them / and in which as you plainly se
proved, this man woteth nere what he means. And to thentent yt he should well
know that the matter is nothing ferefull: therefore wrote I that three were
deed, because he should well wit that there were yet the more part a live. And
therefore if the good man think any great heygnouse offense in the matter: let
him come to me him self, and I shall bring him to some of them, that shall
not make yt strange to say again the same to him self / and than he may use
it at his pleasure as his high wisdom shall think conuenyent.

Than says he farther in the second side of the.xviii. lefe, yt he can not
tell what cause I would think a cause reasonable, to take any possessions from ye
church. But yet sith yt is employed in my words, that some cause lawefull and
reasonable there may be: he thinks he says, y^ peradventure if I were asked
the question therein, by the^ yt have authoryte to do it, I would show what I
meant thereby. There shall in good faith need no great solemn examynacyon of me by
men of authoryte for that matter. For I will not stycke to tell yt unto him self
/ but have told yt al ready to him and every man else that list to read yt,
a good while a go in my book of the Supplycacyon of souls / and there may
this good man go seek yt if yt please him, and then use yt as yt like him.

But finally after his heart some what eased, he comes to him self again,
and ends the chapyter very well / wyshynge the clergy the grace that the
apostles had, and declarynge that he never desired them thapostles pouertye /
and exhortyng them that have abundance of possessions, to be well ware so to
use yt as yt be not a let of the devotion that they should have to god, and the
charity that they should show to their neighbor. In these three things he
says as me thinks very specially well. And I pray you heartily good readers
every man the^ rather at my pore request, what so ever he wrote before, think
now that he meant then but thus.

The.vii. chapeter.
HIs seventh chapter begins in the.xix. lefe and therein upon a sex leaves /
he argeweth against a little doubt that I moved upon the beginning of his
first chapyter of his dyuysyon / which words of his and mine theruppon
begin in mine apologye fo. 101. And the same point is touched again there
fo. 106. When you have there read what I ^^y: then may you read here his
answer, wherein he declares ye matter, and argues, it by cases of law, much
after the manner of a motable case, full well fauoredly in good faith / and with
long labor proves at last, that yt must be taken in such wise as he sees,
yt among other construccio^s I co^strued his mind my self, though I was loath
to do so, because yt way was the worste for him self. But now he remedyeth
that with a line or twayne^ wherein he declares yt he meant not to prefer
every seculare priest before those that are in relygyon. wherein I would have
trusted him as well upon his word, as upon the reason that he lays for it
now / which save for the trust that I have to his word, I would wene he never
thought on when he wrote the dyuysyon / but rather ended ye clause in such
wise as yt happed, without any respect peradventure to the^crease and growing
of the sentence in the end.

I was ones half in mind here to have kept scoles with him yet in this
point ones again, even all of pleasure / and to have brought yt yet again
in questyone, whether the cyrcu^staunces of his words were able to prove, that
he meant otherwise than he now argues yt it must needs be taken. And then if
the cyrcumstances so did, whether commen usage and acceptaunce of a word
should against the cyrcumstaunces of the matter, have like strength in all
other things, as yt has in matters of law / and whether the reason used in the
courts in matters of law, be of like strength in every other thing as they be
when they be made in mate^s of law / and of like vygour and force in every
place abroad, as they be in the courts in which they have been long receued
and accepted for sure and stable grounds.

And whyther in this point between him and me, being no matter of the law nor
perteynyng to the judgment of any court, but to be considered by the whole
people in every man's reason at large, the cases of the law of this realm
that he brings in, which be judged and sure, and should serve the tone part
in the law, though the matter were the weyghte of a thousand pound, should
hycause we be english men, and our matter written in England and in English
words, stand for a sure and an insoluble argument, though the laws both
ciuyle and canon that are called the comen laws of all chrystendome beside us,
were as peradventure they be in the self same cases, full and whole to the
contrary.

And yet would I beside this a little have assayed, so to shake his cases of
London and Mychelmasse, yt per adventure to many a man in London between this
and Michelmas, should they never have seemed like unto our matter, by that time
that I had ones declared them the dyfference.

These points and happily mo to, was I when I read his answer halse minded
as I say to have brought in, and dysputed with him upon this matter. For I was
waxen with ye readyng of his answer very merry, and waxen me thought a young man
again / and seemed set at a vacacyon mote with him in some Inn of the
chauncery, because of his comen entendement, and his proper casys of law.

But than I considered that as I was in the redynge of his answer merry: so was
him self I saw well in the writing weary / and other readers that were no
lawyers, would in the reading wax almost as weary. Than saw I also, that when
him self had all said, he lyked not his own all the best / but after all
his pain taken in the answeryng, seeing that his answer lyked him not, he was
feign to fall to another way, and tells me that there needs none answer to
that point at all, because that there is no fruit he says in that obieccyon.

Now therefore if thobieccyon be frutelesse, and therefore thanswere nedelesse,
and verily frutelesse to: now to reply thereto were labor half lost and
more. And therefore good readers for as myche as to the answer made by the
manner, no law puts us ferther to reply: ye matter is at a demurrour in this
point, and we at your judgment, wherein ye may use your wisdom and judge it
even as you find it. Wherein the best that he can ask, is but to be dysmyssed,
and judge that he meant not to prefer the state of chauntry prestes before the
state of relygyouse persons / but meant as he now declares his mind (which
very few folk could before as I suppose have gessed) that the varyaunce
bytwen prestes and prestes, that is to wit between seculare prestes and
seculare prestes, is more to be lamented than between prestes and relygyouse,
or between relygyouse and relygyouse, because ye varyau^ce between prestes and
prestes is more marked and more notable than any of the the other, because the
prestes go more abroad.

Now if this exposicyo^ of his mind may serve to quyte him now: (which I am
content it do) it is all I promise you that it may do. For it will never serve
him to recover damages. For he can never blame no man that perceived not that
before, that is skant credyble yet.

But yet because he so myche incusketh the lack of fruit in many of mine
obieccyons, and that they be no matters of no moral virtue: I will not answer
him with the like / and say that in many of his pretended causes of dyuisyon
is no fruit at all, nor no moral virtue neither / as in procuring the people
to believe untruely, that the prelates handle men vncherytably, and for heresies
vex them wrongfully, and give occasyo^ that some peryshe both in body and
soul / which if the ordynaryes had handeled them cherytably, had been in both
twain saved / and that it wylbe very hard to find so myche as any one
spyrytuall man such, as him self deuyseth and aduyseth, that none but such
should be suffered to be judge in heresye / and laboring also the good laws of
this realm and of all chrystendome to be changed, to the ease of heretykes,
yt have been made for the repressynge of heresies / with such other things
like that are in his book of dyuysyon mo than I ever wrote word of yet / in
which (as I have often said) for as much as I se^ yt he professes him self
to hate and abhor these heresies, yt these folk now hold, whom saint poule
calls heretics (I dare not now for him but when I forget my self call them
by none other name) I would with good will that men should think he meant none
hurt. But in the words of the writing, taken after the comen usage and
acceptaunce of speaking, as he will in this his.vii. chapyter have me take
them, there is neither moral virtue nor fruit, but full unfruitful vice.

But as I said, I will not in defense of myne^, answer him with ye fawtes of
his. For mine were never the better though his be naught to. But I say that
mine obieccyons in mine apologye be not frutelesse, because they defend the
truth, and make good folk perceive both what harm it were to believe such
evil lies, and what damage it were to put away such good laws / and how
unreasonable it were in other men's fawtes to take small things for very
heyghnouse and great / or for them that in a felesshyp are fawty, not to bear
dyspleasure only to their persons, but to be at dyuysyon in general with the
whole company. And this fruitis there also, that though that book say the
contrary, strangers such as are here and can read english, which are not ye
wot well a few, many yet perceive by plain proves in mine apologye, that not
only there is no such great general causes of dyuysyon as the book of
dyuysyon says that there is, but also that there is no such great generyll
dyuysyo^ through the realm in deed. These fruytes are there in many of mine
obieccyons against his book in mine apologye.

Now where as some of mine obieccyons peradventure, say but either lack of
learning in him, or lack of natural wit, sith his name is not at his book,
but he speaks him self unknown: this profit is there in such obieccyons,
that without his rebuke or shame, the readers may by those fawtes perceive,
that the writer was not of any such special qualytees, as the book wherein so
much evil was contained, should be much lened unto, for credence and authoryte
of the man.

Finally the very self obieccyon, whereof he speaks in yt seventh chapyter of
his in his new book, and says there is no profit in that obieccyon, and that
therefore it neded none answer / but he might grant me all that ever I say
therein, and yet none effectual matter were there for all that: thereto I say
that look who so list what I say therein, and he shall find that if this man
grant all yt, he shall grant in him self much more ouersyghte and much more
lack of lernyng to, than were requysyte in him that would put out books abroad
/ and therefore his writing the less to be regarded, while his person is
unknown / where as if his person were known, he might be peradventure
perceived for all that, for such a special man by side, that his approved
wisdom and lernyng well known otherwise, might for thestimacyon of his book,
more than countrepayse some such ouersyghtes as at a time might happily to
escape a right wise man, yt would write by candellyght while he were half a
sleep.

But than I say ferther yet / that in that obieccyon was a matter of no little
effect. For taking that he meant as him self says he did: his words seemed
plainly to show, that he rekened the state of chauntry prestes, to be a state
of more perfeccyon than the state of relygyouse folk. And therefore thobieccyon
contained matter of great effect, and which he much neded to answer and to
declare that he meant not so / but that he meant as he now declares, that
dyuysyon is between seculare prestes, more lamentable than between relygyouse,
because the seculare prestes be more abroad, and thereby their varyaunce more
known. Which exposycyon few men I wene would have thought upon before. But now
that he says he meant so: I am very well content therwyth, and would that all
folk should take it so to / and yet is it ye wot well but very winter ware,
and a scu^e as cold as a ^ay.

The.viii. chapyter.
HIs.viii. chapter begins in the secu^de side of his xxv. lefe, and
prete^deth to answer my words written against his, in the.xix. chapter of
mine apology, which begins folio. 116.

And now he says that I say there, that I wot not well what he meneth in that
he says that the spyrytualtye call the worldely honor of the church and of
spyritual persons, the honor of god. And therefore he says here, that he
will, and so does declare therein, what he there meant thereby.

But here is now ye craft. where as I did there show what I thought he meant
thereby, and therefore made answer to those things yt I thought he there meant:
now the matter being changed here, by his new declaracyon: he brings in mine
answers made there, and confuteth them for insuffycyent now, when his new
declaracyon has made a change in the matter / as though I had than men^ ^o
answer this, that I was not than ware that he would now say, nor I wene him
self neither.

But read first good readers the xix. chapyter of mine apologye beginning fo.
116. and there shall you se those words of his suffycyently answered, for the
thing that me thought he meant. And than after that done, consider his answer
here / in which for all his holy pyece of a sermon, what does he tell me. He
tells me that honor is only dew to virtue, and that no man may covet honor
without offense / except it be to the honor of god, and that inordyna^
appetyte of honor is dedely sin / and that if a spyrytuall man would accept
honor by reason of any spirytuall dygnyte, and that god were thereby
dishonored, thanne that honor were not to be called honor but dishonor /
and that yet some lay men say that spyrytuall men call it an honor to god.

All this whole tale for all this holy sermon is yet to the matter, in
mayntenaunce of his formar words which he would here seem to defend, utterly
told in vain. For first in all this tale he tells us not well what he
calls worldly honor, which he says the spirytualty calls the honor of
god, and which was the thing that I said I wyste nere what honor he meant.
For where he would seem to declare it: there is his declaracyon both very bare,
and yet against him to. For in the secunde side of the xxvi. lefe, he drybbeth
in a word of spyrytuall dygnite / and thus he says. Then I mean ferther, that
if any spyrytuall man would accept a worldly honor, by reason of any
spyrytuall dygnyte, and god were thereby dyshonored, as it may be by many
circumstances, as if for such worldly honor charity be in any manner broken or
denied, justice delayed, any of the.vii. sacraments not ^nely mynystred: or
the people not dylygentely and plainly instructed: that then it is not to be
called honor to god, but rather dishonor, and that yet some say men say,
they call it an honor to god. And surely the truth is, that many say men
say, that for the mayntenaunce of such worldly honor, spyrytuall men both
relygyouse and seculer, be neglyge^t sometime in such things, as be before
rehearsed, and that yet they call such worldly honor the honor of god.

Here he has told us that if any spyrytuall man would accept a worldly honor,
by reason of any spyritual dygnite, whereby god were dyshonored, that honor
were not honor. But yet he tells us not what manner of worldly honor it is
that he meneth to be accepted by reason of a spirytuall dignyte / nor yet what
manner thing such worldly honor is / nor touching that spyrytual dignite, he
tells not whyther he mean a desire in any man to attain any spyrytual
dignite, for some kind of worldly honor yt he thinks should follow thereon, or
else some worldly honor by reason of any spyrytuall dygnyte, that the man has
all ready.

I let pass his cold and unsavory told tale of cheryte denied, and justice
delayed, and some of the seven sacraments not duly mynystred, for mayntenaunce
of such worldely honor, as some spyrituall men both seculares and relygyouse
by reason of spyrytuall dygnytees accept, as some lay men say. A pore tale
and a cold by my faye, to be told for a cause of an heyghnouse universal
dyuysyon. For this were an endeles dyuysyon, if every such ^awte of some,
should upon every some say be laid for a cause of dyuysyon against the
general body.

And yet bysyde all this, I say that his first words are nothing mayntened
with all this matter. For his first words spoke of a consent and agreement,
wherein seculare prestes and relygyous, for all the varyau^ce between them self
for other things, yet agree together about the mayntenaunce of that worldely
honor that they call the honor of god. And here he speaks but of another
matter that is to wit yt for the mayntenaunce of wordely honour^ spyrytuall men
both relygyouse and secular be neglygent sometime, and in some manner break or
deny cheryte, delay justice, and do not dewly ministre some of the seven
sacraments, nor dylygently and plainly instruct the people.

All this tale as you se to wche^h ye pryuate fawtes of some such, as for the
mayntenau^ce of that worldly honor which they call gods honor, thus mysse
use them self. But this tale is nothing sybbe to his other tale, that he
told and I towched before. For that spoke of such agreement all in one, that is
to wit an holding together which sygnyfyeth a maynteynynge each of other
against other men, in mayntenau^ce of that worldly honor that they call the
honor of god, in like wise as for matters of their own, they be one against
an other among them self.

And thus you se plainly good reders, yt this manner of mayntenyng of his
formar words, is a clean going from them, and a seuyng of them vnmayntened /
and (because he comes upon me before in another place with casys of law) were
in the law a very plain departure, and should in any of the kings courts if
I demurred upon it, utterly mar all his matter.

And so it appears that some other some, have said this unto him sinnys to
gloss his first words wythall. And yet I marvel that he could think their
saying worth the rehe^synge again. For who can believe yt any spyritual man
would be so mad, as to call worldely honor used to gods dishonor, the
honor of god. I can scant believe that any lay man would so tell him / at the least wise not with that adieccyon, that he now puts new thereto.

But now if it so be that un the the other side, all spyrytuall men would with one
voice to gether, call the honor of god, that wordly honor that worldely folk
do to the church and unto spyrytuall persons, for the devotion that good lay
men bear to god and unto spyrituall persons for goddis sake, by reason of their
holy orders and honorable romes that they bear in Christ's church / though
some of them as this man says / sometime do not their duty therein, but leave
some part of their duties toward gods honor undone therefore: yet for the
devotion of the temporal persons that for goddis honor do i^, they may all
well call yt gods honor in deed. And therefore is this good man in that
point full answered, as solemn a matter as he made thereof.

But now concerning his formare words of the agreement of all spyrytuall
folk to gether, in ye mayntenaunce of their wordly honor, for all their
pryuate dyspleasures and dyssensyons in other things among them self / with
which he comes in after here again, and refers him to the commen opinyon
of much part of the people both spyrytuall and temporal, whether lay men so
say or not: I say that though al men so said, yet is no man at dyuysyon with
them therefore. For there is no cause wherefore any man should. For yt is none
unreasonable thing, that sith those things which this, man speaks of, that
is to wit those spyrytuall dygnytees to which he says such worldely honor
apperteyne^h, are lawefully their own, each of them should in all laweful
ways and such as are by no law prohybyted, help and ass^ste other to keep
them, though there be for pryuate matters of their own varyaunce and suyt
between them. And this may they with better co^scye^ce do each for other than
each of them for them self. For in this that they do for other, is there not
the sin of ambycyon that this man here speaks of. And this is the part not
only of spyrytuall men relygyouse and seculare both, but of every good
temporal man to / and not only to do so for them, but every man also for
other. And therefore what reason had those same some that so told this man,
if there were any some such in deed, to take this thing for any cause of
dyuysyon? or why did not he so rather tell them, than put their found tale
in his book?

But than one pretty pyece he has of two parts, by which he weneth that the
spyrytualtye can in no wise escape but that they must nedys be betrapped in
the tone. For when he has said that the people say that spyrytuall men be
sometime neglygent in keeping or granting charity, or in spedy doing of
justice or in duly mynystrynge some of the seven sacraments, or in plain and
dylygent instructynge of the people: then with a proper pyece of two parts
thus he concludes the matter.

And if yt be not so as the people say: then are the spyrytuall rulers bounden
to help the people out of that judgment, or else they be not without offense
them self. And on the the other side, if yt be as the people say ^ then are
spyrytuall men bounden to reform yt.

As for this two handed sword, some young lustye freee would boldly beat of
with a two handed staff, and tell this man again, that if the people as he
puts for the tone part said in such things not true: than sees he not
nor no man else neither, what the spyrytnal rulers could do to put them out
of that judgment, but tell them, nolite iudicare et non iudicabimini / and so
will that side of the sword do this man little service. And then on the the other
side, if the people in these things say true as yt is well lykely they do:
than true yt is that the spyrytull men be bounden to reform yt. But than is
yt as true again, that the thing being but such as this man reherseth, that
is to wit negligence but in some, in doyenge of some part of their duty, and
that also but sometime, is no cause of dyuysyon to set the whole temporaltye
agaynge them all, and that side of the sword ye friar would with this end of
his staff beat, hard unto this man's own head.

Now goes this man farther fo. 27. and shows that mine answer to his words
which you read in the.xix. chapyter of mine Apologye, be very dark, by the
reason that I use therein so often this word (Some say) which is he says done
after a raylyng fashion. But as you know well good reders, I have taken yt word
Some say, of his book, in which I read yt so often / that yt falls sometime
into my pen ere I be ware.

And as for the raylynge fashyon, if I durst be bold to tell so sad a man a
merry tale, I would tell him of the friar, that as he was prechyng in the
country, spyed a pore wife of the paryshe wysperynge with her pew fellow / and
he falling angrye thereto, cried out unto her alowd, hold thy babble I bid
the, thou wife in the read hode. Which when the houswyfe herd: she waxed as
angry again / and suddenly she starte up and cried out unto the friar again,
that all the church rang thereon: mary sir I beshrew his heart that bableth most
of us both. For I do but wysper a word with my neighbor here, and thou have
babled there all this hour. And surely good readers save for lettynge of the
word of god in this good mannys sermon: I durst well in the same word (Some
say) beshrowe him and beshrowe him again, that most has raised therwyth of
this good man or me. For read my words there when ye will, and you shall
find that I with that word do but in a manner play with him. But by saint
Mary he, how well so ever he meant, his words with his many (Some says) bring
good men in slander and obloquye of the people, and peradventure in parell to,
with untrue surmysed talys of mysse handelynge folk for heresye / and all
colored under some says to make the lies seem somewhat lykely. Such shrewd
(Some says) lo be no merry sporting, but be sad and erneste rude raylynges
in deed.

Then he touches mine answer made in the said chapyter of mine apology, and
double confuteth yt, yt I say that he has herd some lay men say the
contrary. For first he says he never herd lay man say to him the contrary /
but that al ye spyrytual men relygyouse and seculare, hold to gether in the
mayntenau^ce of the worldly honor, that they call the honor of god, and of the
riches of spyritual men.

Now you wot well I speak in the said.xix. chapter, that of the
spirytualtye such as are fallen from the faith unto heresye, hold not at al
with that honor that I thought he there had meant, that is to wit with
byeldynge and garnyshynge of chyrches / but be both against that, and tithes,
and offeringes, and obytes, and trentalles, and purgatory, and mass, and al.
And I had went in good faith that of so great a thing, and so much spoken of,
yt had happed him to hear some say me^ speak, but he says nay. Well we can no
farther tha^, but stand unto his word, and take an oath of his honesty therein,
and yet I wene as honest as he is, what so ever he be, his own honest friend
/ will be loath to swear with him therein.

But then says he farther, yt though yt were so: that would not yet answer
his saying. It would not to say the soth in very deed, taking his word as I
wene he meant yt. But taking his word to the worst (as he takes always mine)
and yet but even as he wrote yt (but if yt be prented false) yt is a
confutacyon to yt. For if those spyrytuall persons both relygyouse and
seculares, that are fallen from the faith to heresies hold not with the
remanaunt: then perdye though they were fewer then they be, yt is not all true
that he says, that in the mayntenaunce of such honor they hold the gether
all. And yet as I have all redye showed you, yt would not help his part of a
penny, though they did euery^hone seculares and relygyouse, catholyqnes and
heretyques to. And therefore can he not say but he is in this point answered,
even to the very full.

Than in the.xxviii. and.xxix. lefe he subtylly fyndeth a fault, that I say
that there are some such of the spyritualty so fallen unto heresies, that yt
is pytye that ever they were thereof, because he says we should not dyspayre of
them / but they may repent and amend. And also though they do never amend:
yet I should not say so. For men may not say by the devil, that yt is pytye
that ever he was created, because gods justice is shows on him. We will in
this matter keep no long schools. But this every man knows, that who so use a
commen word spoken among the people, is rekened so to mean therein, as the
commen people mean yt use yt. And therefore sith the people that so speaks,
means not to speak against amendment, but against the present wreched
state that the man stands in at the time: that word may by gods grace be
borne metely well enough. And as touching the devil, though men may not
grudge against gods just punyshement: yet peradventure a man might say
without parell of dampnacyom, that yt was pytye that he so mysse used him
self / as in them that are for their heyghnouse offenses put unto paynefull
death, though we say they were served as they well deserved, yet we let not
to say yt was pytye that they guyded them self no better. And saint
Chrysostom pytyeth also the devil.

And our sauyoure him self pytyed Jerusalem, and for the pytye wept also
thereon, for the punyshement that should fall thereon / and yet was yt the just
punyshement of god.

And though the parties afterward may mende and do good again: yet for the
time till they mende, ye and after to, we may pytye that they were in such
case, as to hurt them whom they have all ready remedelesse destroyed, by
their false doctrine deed in the damnable heresies that they learned of them,
and lie therefore beryed in hell. And therefore the thing that I may not
absolutely pytye: yet in some respects I may.

Finally he says that I should not call any heretyques desperate wrechys.
This is a sore point I assure you, to call a wreche, such as he shows him
self to be / to call him desperate, whose living shows no manner hope of
amendment. Saint Cypryane I se well was sore ouersene, which in the seventh
pystle of his first book, for less things than these are, calls some
folk desperate. And yet was saint Policarpus farther eu^^sene, which calls
Marcyon the first begotten son of the devil.

This man has here as he weneth found out proper fantsyes, wherein I had
lever leave him in the liking, thanne lose myche time in answering of such
blonte subtle tryfles.

But to the matter good readers concerning the formare words of his dyuysyon,
all be yt that I have here more thanne fully confuted this chapter of his, for
any defense that he has for his said formare words, where about is all our
matter: read yet the.xviii. chapyter of mine Apologye, wherein you shall se
diverse other like words of his / and apply me mine answer there, to those
other words of his which he defends here / and ye shall se that he shall
houe more work then enough, to defend them well, and to make them serve him
to purpose.

The.ix. chapyter.
HIs.ix. chapyter begins in the xxx. lefe. And his formare words which he
therwyth defends and mine answer also thereto, ye shall se in the xix.
chapyter of mine apologye fo. 119. Which when you have good readers there ones
read over / than forthwyth while yt is fresh in remembrance / return
again unto this, the.ix. chapyter of his dyaloge / and than judge whether it
any thing touch the point or not. For all this chapyter is spent in preaching
of restytucyon, full well and full trewly forsooth / and which in my pore mind I
very well allow / and would have allowed in like wise his first book very
well, if there had been no worse words in yt than such. But now the matter
stands all in this, that this man makes there as though the spyrytuallye
were very besye to procure men and to enduce the people, to give money to
trentalles, to found chaunteryes, and obytes, and to obtain pardons, and to
go upon pylgrymages, leuynge their dettes unpaid, and restytucyon unmade,
which things should be done first / and that this is the manner of the
multitude of the spyritualtie. In this stands the questyon. And therefore is
now the point, not whether dettes be first to be paid, and satisfaccyon of
wrongs first to be made, before al these other things, wherein this man
says here surely full well / but whyther (as he would have yt seem by his
book of diuisyon) yt ye multitude of the spyrytualtie, yt is to wit either al
save a few, or at the least wise far the most part, do solycyte and labor
lay people to the contrary manner / that is to wit, to do those other things,
rather than to pay their dettes or make restitucyo^ of their wro^gis. This is I
say ye point. And of this point wherein all the matter stands, this man in
this.ix. chapter of his speaks not one word. And therefore in this thing,
stands mine answer made in ye said.xx. chapter of mine apolpgye clean and
clear vntou^hed, as every man may perceive that reads yt.

And therefore where in ye second side of his.xxxii. lefe, this man says thus.

And to thentent I would have this matter the better looked vp^on: I would here
aduertyse sir Thomas More, not by way of argument, but for clerenesse of
conscience, to consydre whyther ye the more charytable way, first to make
restytucyon and pay dettes, and releue extreme pouerte, and then to do the
the other if he have to do both / or else to do the first and let the the other
pass.

For this his good aduertysement I very heartily thank him / and answer him as
him self would wysshe I should, that surely me thinks as he does, that the
more charytable way of the twain were that yt him self here moves.

But than lo by and by, he gives me another good lesson, wherewith he would I
should amend mine own fawte, that he would it should seem I had in mine
apologye made against him. For than lo thus goes he ferther forth.

And if he think that this way that I move be the more cherytable way, that
than he help it forward, rather than the other / and than not to blame any
man that makes that mocyon, as though he were against tre^tallys, obitis, and
such other. For he is not against them dyrectely / but only entendeth to have
them changed into a more cherytable orde^. For though prayours be right
expedyent and helthfull to the soul: yet they serve not in all ca^es as to
dyscharge dettes or restytucyons, where there is enough to pay them with / no
more than there can be founden any one salve, that can hele all manner of soores.

I neither have done that I wot of, nor wyllyngly inte^de to do, blame him for
any part of this cherytable mocyo^ / but think his mocyon right good, and that
the fruit thereof if it be followed, wyt^e more yet than him self says he
myndeth. For he says as you se, that he myndeth but to change obitys and
trentallys and those other things into a more cherytable order / that is to
wit in to payeng of dettes and recompensyng of wrongs in them that have not
of their own bysyde / and in them that have than to pay the dettes and
recompense wrongs first, and do the the other after. But me thinks there will
come yet a ferther profit of this order to. For where as here we speak but of
him that pays his det and reco^penseth his wrongs, of which folk many a
man is able well to do ye the other when both those twayn be done / there is to
the the other sort of men also bysyde, to whom those wrongs are done, and
those dettes owing, of which sort there be many, that if their wrongs were
ones recompensed them, and their dettes paid them, were able and would do
those other things also them self, which now for lack be not able / and so
should there of lykelyhed be the self things yt bring (as his first book
says) richesse into the church, by this good order encreaced. And therefore not
only have I no cause, to blame this good man for the mocyo^ of this good
cherytable order / but also no more have the multitude of the prestes, which
might of lykelyhed win as much by this way as by the the other, and more
except the multitude of prestes would for ye redynesse to take it where it is
all ready, move them that have it to do these other things first, and leave
their dettes unpaid and their wro^ges vnreco^pe^sed, which yt the multitude of
prestes do / I never herd yet a^y honest lay man, that would for very shame
say. For I think it were hard to mete with a pressed that were so wreched, but
that if he were asked in yt point his ad^^ce and counsel, he would in so plain
a point though it were but for very shame well and plainly counsel the
troth. And if percase there were some fou^den so shameless, that they would
give counsel contrary: yet am I very sure they shu^de be far the fewer
part / and not as this good mannys first book says, the more part and the
multitude.

And therefore sith this order that this good man here moves, is so good and so
cherytable: I never blamed him for the mocyo^. But though this mocio^ in this
book be good: I might well and so I did, blame his other book / not for this
mocyon, but for another matter, that is because it labored under pretexte of an
untrue report, to bring the spyrytualtye in slawnder and obloquy among the
temporaltye, by making men wene that of this cherytable order which he now
moves, the multitude of the spyritualty induced men to ye contrary.

This is lo the thing that I blamed. And therefore like as this good man
says, that one plaster can not hele all soores: so surely this same salve of
this good cherytable mocion can not serve this good cherytable man, to salve
and hele well, this vncherytable soore.

In this mocion, of this cherytable order, this good manne waxes so warm,
that of a good zele he falls in remembrance of the soul (which our lord
perdon) of the most noble prince of very famous memory king Henry the.vii.
father to the most excellent prince our sovereign lord the king that now is /
wherein after mencyon made of obitys and chauntrees, lettyng the dew examynacyon
requysyte for restytucion, suddenly thus he says. How be it the right noble
prince of blessed memory king Henry the.vii. father of our sovereign lord the
king that now is, wylled restytucyons to be made. But how his will was
performed I can not tell. How be it what so ever was done therein: I suppose his
good intent su^fyseth to him.

What if this good man can not tell? By lykelyhed there is nothing owing to
him thereof. For if there were: than were it lykely yt he could tell. For he
could tell than that all the will were not performed. I have herd I wot well
that the king our sovereign lord, delivered great substance into thexecutours
hands, to fulfill the will wythall. Which how they have bestowed, this good
man may (if he have thauthoryte) call them to the reckoning. And if he neither
have authorite to call for the account, nor have nothing owyng to him neither:
the matter than towcheth not him so nere, nor so specially perteyneth unto him
yt he should greatly need to give all the world warning thus, yt him self is
not made of counsel, how the kings will is performed.

But here will this good man say yt I do but mock him / wherein I will not
greatly stycke with him. But surely for my pore wit, me thinks it somewhat
more ciuilite, in some such points as this is, a little merely to mokke him,
tha^ with odyouse ernest arguments, seryousely to preace upon him. Which I
would also be very loath to do, for chargyng of mine own conscience. And
therefore in all things yt me think are of great weight, though I touch his
words, I accuse not his own mind and intent For in good faith I have of yt
man good trust, yt he meneth no wurse, but would all thing were well him self /
but ever more my mind gives me, yt some wyly shrewes abuse ye good man's
simplicyte.

The.x. chapyter.
HIs.x. chapyter begins in the xxxiii. lefe, wherein he towcheth certain
words of mine, written in the.xxvii. chapyter of mine apologye, that begins
fo. 162. wherein he varyeth not much with me, saving in that I say that if the
prelates of ye church would wythdrawe from their worldely co^tenaunce, as is
keeping of honestley men in their service, and keeping of a good wurshypfull
table, and would bestow their plate and the most part of all their mouables at
ones upon poor folk, and yearly after the most of their yearly reuenus to
(of which mind I said I durst warraunt well that some prelates be, if that
would as I say there, amend all these grudges) that I durst be bold to
warraunt as well also, that if the prelates so did, the self same folk that
now grudge and call them proud for their countenance, would than find as
great a grudge, and call them ypochrytes for their almoyse, and would say that
they spend upon noughty beggars the good that was wont to keep good yomen,
and that thereby they both enfeble and also dishonor the realm.

Upon these words of mine this good man makes me forsothe a full goodly
sermon, in the.xxxv. lefe of his book / where he begins it with these
words, I can not se. And verily if he had there left and gone no ferther: it
had been well enough. For as for the thing that he speaks of, it appears by
his words he can not se very well in deed.

Because christ commands in the gospel, yt we shall not judge / and that
saint Poule says also, who art thou that iudgest another man's servant / and
again byddeth us that we judge not before the time / al which places are
understand of iugyng certain and determinate persons to do evil, in the
things that we se them do, where the things be but indyfferent of them self,
and may be done not evil only but well also: this good man therefore lays
these textys to touch me, for iudgyng that some folk whom I neither assign
by name, nor as yet know not who they be, will do evil hereafter, by mysse
judging other men.

I wene verily that saint Poule him self, at the time when he forbode us to
^iudge before the time, did even than judge, that some would after that miss
judge and, judge before the time to.

And albe it that our savior says that who so call his brother fool: is gylty
to the fire ^ yet he meant not of him yt would say, that there were some folys
abroad in the world. For if he so meant: than would there not ten fyrys be
pain enough for him that wrote these words in the scripture: There are of
folys an infynyte number.

And because this good man uses sometime this figure of examynacyon, I would
wit of master More thi^ and that, I would now wit this one thing of this
good man. Such sawtes as he fyndeth with the spyrytualty written in his book of
dyuysyon: whyther did he than judge yt some of the spyrytualtye would fall in
them any more after or not? If he judged that all their fantasyes toward those
fawtes were all ready passed before, and that none of them would never do more
so: than had he little cause to write all that wurke upon them.

And un the the other side if he judged that some of them would afterward do some
such things again, either but if he gave them warning, or else though he
did, as I dare say, what so ever him self say, in some of those things he
did: than sith ye time in which he judged in his mind, and made him self
thereof sure, yt some of them would do some such evil things afterward, as
were at the time of the same judgment of his mind not comen, him self fell
as you se by his own argument, in the daynger of that prohybycyon yt him self
brings in, by which saint Poule forbedeth and says: Nolite ante tempus
iudicare. Judge you not before the time.

Now if he say that I tell whom I mean, though not by name: yet by a sign and
a token, in that I say even the same will than call them ypocrytes for their
almoyse, that now call them proud for their worldely countenance: he must
consider, that I neither tell nor can tell who be they / nor though I say the
same, I say not yet all the same. And therefore no more mysse judge any man
determynately and in certain, than he that would say thus, as many men say
in deed: Even they that go now full fresshe, in their guarded hosyn, and their
gaye golden reuen shyrtes, and in their sylken sleuys, that naught have to bear
it out but gaming, will ones I warrau^t you fall fro gaming to stelynge, and
start strayt out of sylke into hemp. Thus says and thus judges ye wot well
many a man / and yet meneth not that it shall so mysse hap them all, but that
some shall amend and do better / and that yet his word will be veryfyed in
many, and so does it prove in deed / and he that so says before, is far
enough fro the dayngeour of all those textes which this good man precheth to me.

But than he says ferther, that he trusts that those prelates whom I say I
durst warraunt to be of such mind, will not dyfferre their good purpose for
no such suspycyon that happily will never come, ne yet for no such
vncherytable words, though they were spoken in deed. And thervppon he
descends to the making of actys of perleament.

If those prelates that I mean of rekened them self very sure, yt all the wit
and the learning that is in the world, or within this realm either, were
either in their own hedys, or in this good man's and mine / which
peradventure for mine own mind cold agree well with this good man in this
point, and advise those prelates that I speak of, to follow their own mind
therein, and out of hand even so to do: tha^ have I little dowt but that they
would even so do in deed But some of them have ofter ben as I suppose than onys,
where they have herd both wise and good folk to, and peradventure yet should
here again if it were as this man would have it, spoken of in the plain open
perleament, that would not fail to dyssuade it, and lay no little causes why.

But I will not at this time with this good man enter in this matter, in to
seryouse ernest arguments. But I shall show him a good merry cause wherefore,
that though I be of his mind therein, yet I dare not advise them there to. The
cause is, that I se them have so great desire and fervent concupyscence
toward it, that I am aferde to counsel them follow it, because of the
scripture that says, Post concupiscentias tuas ne eas. After thy
concupyscences goo thou not.

I will make no longer tale upon this matter. For if you read my.xxvii.
chapyter, in which my words are that we now dyspute upon: I trust you shall
not think them so very far out of the way, but yt they may be written,
without offense of Christ's gospel well enough.

And also concerning this word, proud worldely countenance, whereof we speak
here: vouchesaufe good readers to read my.xxx. chapyter of mine apologye, which
begins in the lefe.174.

The.xi. chapyter.
HIs.xi. chapyter begins in the xxxvi. lefe / wherein first he shows yt I
rehearse right, and constre amysse this word of his. And therefore.

You shall find my words good readers upon these whole words that he
reherseth here, in the.xxxiiii. and.xxxv. chapyter of mine apologye / of which
to tone begyyneth fo. 183 / and the the other begins fo. 184.

Here this man declares that the word of his book, which here also he well
and trewly reherseth, do not importe that him self says ye thing which I by
those words, and among other by this word therefore / afferme there that he
says as of him self / But he says that the words prove plain, that he
says yt, but only of the report of much other folks thinking, and not as
of his own saying.

Surely neither now, nor in any place of mine apologye, I neither have done
nor intend to charge this man, that his mind and purpose was such in his
intent, as the great lykelyhed of his words, would give men occasyon to think.
But un the the other side, that the words have geuyn me good occasyon and
suffycyent, to say as I there have said: who so read the said two chapyters
of mine apologye, shall by the whole cyrcumstau^ce of the matter very well I
suppose perceive. And you shall over that, if after those two chapyters read,
you return to his own declaracyon here in his.xi. chapyter, well perceive
also that to kouer slyly that ouersyghte of his (for surely I think yt was
none other) he leueth out properly in one place this word therefore wheruppon
a good pyece of all the matter hangs. For in the end of the.xxvi. lefe so,
thus he handeleth wylyly the matter.

And in that he says, that I say plainly those worde^ my seflfe / he says
plainly against the ^etter of the said treatise / which ye that they have
punished many perso^^, which much people have judged them to do upon will / and
not that I said so my self.

Now good readers in this rehersall of his own word, he reherseth his own
words wrong. For here he leueth out as I told you the word that makes the
matter. Which he rehearsed him self in the whole context before. For his wordis
were not, that they have punished many persons, which much people have iuged
them to do upon will, but that therefore they have punyshed many persons / which
much people have judged them to do upon will etc. Now when he says him self
that they have punyshed many therefore, that is to wit for the same cause, and
has before also showed a cause of his own dyuynacyon to, and has used the
same word therefore in ye same fasshyon before / and this word therefore which
sygnifyeth for the same cause, has here in his last clause nonecessarye place
to the complement of the sentence following: it appears that he says therein
two things, both that they therefore, that is to say for ye same cause next
before spoken of, the cause yt him self there imagines, have punished many /
and also that (as he says yt so) myche people judged the same.

And this shall you the more clearly mark, if you turn these words. And
therefore they have punyshed many which myche people etc. in to these words
(whereof the sentence is allone) And for that cause they have punyshed many
which myche people etc.

And therefore, that is to say for that cause which I before told you, that is
to wit that you should not perceive this point, this man in his last
rehershall as you have herd, bringing the thing to the trial, left his
therefore out. But read my said two chapyters / and than as for the sentence
of his open words, I trust you shall believe me. As for the secret meaning of
his mind, I pray you believe him. For so that you believe not the shrewd words
of his book, I would to chose you should believe well of the good man him self.

Now where he says in ye.xxxvii. lefe, that he thinks I change his matter,
because I would be loathe to have yt reported, that myche people take yt so:
verily I change not his matter. But troth yt is yt I am loath to have that
thing so reported about. For trewly ye report abroad is naught all though yt
were not untrue.

And were as for the farther maintenance of his matter, he says that if I make
search therein to know the truth, I shall find that myche people take yt so,
that many which have been punyshed for heresye, the spyrytualtye have done yt
of no love but of will, for such evil mind as in the book is there ymagyned
of them: he has of lykelyhed him self made search to find yt so. For as for
me though I go not about to search that point of purpose: yet I have talked
with many one in this mean while, and yet I thank god it is not my fortune to
find out that same much people that take yt so. And if there were myche people
that so did, yt were their own fault / wherein I can not deuyse what the
spyrytualty might do to change them, but only pray god to mende them.

And as for me, if there were myche people that so took yt, as I trust in god
verily there is not: I would as my duty were be surely very sorye for them /
but in this cause of troth, trewely I would not flater them. For though that
sort of people were never so myche in deed: yet is the troth in that point so
clear against them, that if their minds were such, yt were both great
shame for them to say yt, and also great sin to think yt.

And surely that their saying is false and naught in his own secret
judgment: you may se good reders by this yt he labors so sore to put yt
from him self, and would be so loathe to have yt taken for his own. And
therefore while him self thought their saying so false, he should not have
told yt after them. Nor now should he not send me to search and seek them,
but to save his own honesty / lest men might think he feigned, he should seek
out and bring forth some of those shrewd sayers him self.

A another thing this man touches in the same chapyter, concerning that
second sort of people whom I say in some places of mine Apologye, that this
man calls polytyques. And here he declares that he does not so / and proves
yt by like words spoken of a good mannys mouth by an hypocryte, of whom a
man may say: This man uses him self as he were a virtuous man / and yet call
him not virtuous. And so might this man say yt they spoke heresies as of
polycye, and yet call them not polytyque.

But here must he now consider, yt who so speak such words in such fashyon by
an hyprycryte, says yt in his desprayse and in detestacyon of such hypocrysye
/ and therefore he that so says, shows y^ by such words he takes not ye
hypocrite for virtuous. And therefore read good readers this mannys whole
process of his three sorts of people to gether, which you shall find in
the.xxi. chapyter of mine apologye fo. 123 / and then if you find his words of
their spekyng^ such heresies as of polycye, in like manner spoken by him in
dysprayse of heretyques, as he puts here his sample of those words spoken
by a good man in dysprayse of hypocrites / and not spoken by a way of geuynge
them by that word as of polycye a colorable excuse for defense of sewynge
their heresye: than am I content, that every man take yt that I mysse report
him shamefully. And else I trust look in all the places in which I speak
thereof, and you shall soon judge, that vpppon his words used to such purpose
as he there uses them: I may well use the words of his polytykes in such
wyse^as I use yt.

And as for the tynkar and the tyler, that he speaks of in the end of the
chapyter / and says god forbede but that they^ were dysmyssed and went home
about their business, if they can by any reasonable and true allegeaunce, so
order them self, that yt may appear that they ought to be dysmyssed of
justice: therein hold I well with him and god forbede else to / for else might
they lose between them, the tone the price of his trewell, and the the other of
his clouted ketyll. But look good readers in mine Apology the.xlviii. chapyter,
which begins fo. 272 / and that done, I doubt not but you shall find for
the tylare and the tynkare / for heresy there called in of office, this good
word so spoken here, but a very vain word of office / and that the tynkare
would have tynked out of his pannes botome, a reason that would at the least
wise ring a little better then this.

The.xii. chapyter.
HIs.xii. chapter begins in the xxxviii. lefe / which because yt is a good
sweet sermon and a short, made unto my self, to put me in remembrance how
I should ^ere the like light fautes of other men, as I some time fall in my
self: I shall take his chapyter in here even hole. Lo good readers thus yt says.

Master More in the.217. lefe of his Apology, speking of defautes, that as he
thinks, should have been leyde for causes of this dyuysyon, concludes thus:
If there be such a dyuysyo^: whereby it appears that he doubts, whether there
be any diuysyon or not: for this coniunccion, if, purporteth always a doubt.
And after in the same Apologye, fo. 241. he confesses plainly, that there is
a dyuysyon / and makes no doubt at yt: and he calls yt there the late
spronge dyuysyon. And so in one place to make a doubt, whether there be such a
dyuysyon or not / and in a another place to agree, that there is such a dyuysyon
/ seems to be a varyaunce and contradyccyon in yt self: how be yt surely I
do not intend to lay that varyaunce to him as for any notable defaute: For a
like thing may soon happen in any man by a light ouersyght. But the cause why
I speak of yt is this, to put him in remembrance / that he hereafter ought the
rather to bear such light defaute^ of other the more charitably / sith he
him self has like wise ben oue^ seen. For we be all ^rayle ignorant and
unstable / though we be estymed and taken as angels in cure conuersacyon. And
therefore is yt said in the first book of the following of Christ the.xvi.
chapyter, that no man is in this world without defaute, no man wytho^te
burden, no man suffycyent to him self, no man wise enough of him self.
Wherefore yt beh^ueth each one of us to bear the burden of other, to comfort
other, to help other, to enform^ other, and to instruct and admonysh other in all charytie. And if we will note well the said words, we shall the sooner
learn this lesson / to do in all things as we would be done to: and to do
nothing that we would not have done to be. And that is as I tak^ yt one of the
most sovereign doctrynes that is / to instruct a man how he shall in every
thing conce^nynge his neighbor, keep him self in a clear conscience, learn
yt who so may^.

Lo good readers, first he brings forth mine ouersyght, in contradyccyon
used between mine own words / and after with good words and fair, excuses
my fault, by such ouersyght of frayltye as may soon happen in a man. And
then he putt^th me after in remembrance, that I must bear such things the
more charitably in other men, sith I am ouersene likewise my self. He fares
in all this tale, as though we sat to gether playeng at post. For first he
casts my contradiccion as a vye, to wit whyther I would give yt over with a
face. And because that will not be, falls after to treatye, and would fay^e
part the stacke, and divide all such ouersyghtes between us. But all this is
in vain / for I am as sure of this game and there lay.xx.li. upon yt, as he
that has three acys in his hand.

For look good readers in his own first chapyter of this book of his and
there shall you se the thing tha^ shall serve me, suffycyently shew^^ even by
his own words, that there is no such contradyccyon in mine. And than look
mine auswere to the same / and than shall you se yt yet more clearly. Or else
if any man be loathe to turn the leuys, and look bakke: ye shall need to take
no business in tournynge bakke at all. For he soyleth his argument him self
against him self, even in the making thereof, and all with one word unware.

For now read yt again / and you shall se that he says him self, in the
tone place I say, If there be any such dyuysyon. And so because this
coniunccyon If, he says inporteth all way a doubt: therefore he says that
fo.217. I doubt whyther there be any such dyuysyon or not. And after he says
that in the the other place I confess that there is a dyuysyon / and call yt
there the late sprongen dyuysyon. Lo now he forgets this little short
word, this monasyllable, Such, which he rehearsed first in bringing forth
my first place / and then by and by, either of forgetefulnes or else of
wylynesse, leueth out in his illacyon that he makes upon the same words of
mine.

Now good readers you se well that to say there is a dyuysyon, and to say
there is no such dyuysyon, be nothing contrary at all. For I did in deed not
deny but that some dyuysyon there was, that is to wit some little varyaunce in
some place begone, and by some few naughtye folk blown forth to far (For
a little way is to far in such a thing). But than mean I a dyuysyon such as
yt is, not such a dyuysyon as this man by his book makes yt. I may well
without contradyccyon say to him, There is a dyuysyon / and yet say that
there is no such dyuysyon as he speaks of. For yt is not all one to say
there is a dyuysyon, and ^o say there is such a dyuysyon.

Now if I would stycke with him upon tryflys: I could prove him that If,
does not always purporte a doubt, as he says that yt always does, but is
sometime used to conferme a certayntye. As if a man say he that dies in dedely
sin shall go to the devil, if gods word be true, douteth not of the
truth of gods word / but by the truth thereof, means to co^ferme the
damnacyon of them that dye in dedely sin.

But I say not this as though yt should be like in mine. For I do not in deed
take If there in such fashion. And therefore I will not do here by If, as this
man does by As, in his chapyter next before, in heresies spoken as of polycye
/ using ye sample of words spoken by a good man in reprochynge of hypocrysee,
to be like his own words spoken in the mynyshynge of their blame, that under
such pretexte of polycye / would speak and sow about plain and open heresye.
I need here no such ways for my words. For here have you seen your self by
his own words, that there is in my words, no contradyccyon at all.

The.xiii. chapyter.
HIs.xiii. chapter begins in the xxxix. lefe / and by ye rehersynge of
diverse words of his own in diverse other places of his book, here he
declares his mind that he intended not in his book of diuysyon, to bring in
among the people any hatered against the spyrytualtye.

Now in deed I do my self declare expressly, in many places of mine apologye,
that what so ever words I speak therein, yet I meant ever more thentent of his
book and not of his person. And all though that in some places I say the
pacyfyer here does this or that, to this evil purpose or that: yet I mean
ever, the deed his, the malice of the purpose some other wyly shrewys / which
not being fully of so good catholyke mind as I think all way this man is
him self (which openly dysprayseth these new broched heresies, and with
detestacyon of them reherseth them by name) have abused his plain simplycyte /
making him wene good soul, you while he did put in of his own good mind, these
good words which he reherseth here, and with them here and there in some
sundry places pretyly powder ye book, it could not be taken that there were
any hurt meant in the hole work together, how evil words and how malycyouse
so ever the sotle shrewys made him stuff up ye book with bysyde. Was not that
a synful wily way of the^, to begyle a good simple soul so? For I wysse it is
eth to se, that if the good man were not of him self very simple and plain,
those dowble wyly shrewes could never deceive him so, as to make him wene that
these words which he reherseth here in his.xiii. chapyter, were any manner
token that his book of diuisyon, meant not to bring the clergy in hatered
among the people.

For who were there that so intending, would yet for shame utterly say that
there were none good / and not rather to keep his credence in slawnderynge the
body, would cast in sometime an excepcyon of some? In such craft is no great
sleyght. It is but a comen plain point, and as easy to spy as a long nose
upon a little face / specially while as clearly as he says that there be many
good, yet as you may se folio.238. of mine apology, he says plainly that it
is hard to find any one, with out that point, that (if he say therein true)
the very best is very naught, and as badde as a very best.

And for ye ferther proof of this point, read mine answer to his.xvii.
chapyter in this book.

And where he speaks here of the fere that he would every man should have of
the least censures of the church, as though he therein meant myche the favor of
spyrytuall men: consider the place even here in his new book, where he speaks
of inquysycyons o^ heresies in his.xvii. chapyter, and you shall well perceive
that they that made him there put those words in, meant little good to ye
clergy. For it is there laid in a matter full chyldyshly to their charge / as
though they would have all the justices of the peace and all the iuryes of the
realm, accursed for enquiring of heresye.

But yet is it of all things a v^ry special pleasure to se how he uses here
for a plain apparent proof of his good mind toward the spyrytualty, that he
wishes well for them, and prays god to send them habu^dauntely zele of
sowles, pitye, good doctrine, and deuowt prayour. And says that than a new
light of grace should shortly shine etc. and that he says also, that it is
great pytye and much to be lamented, that the spyrytualtye do not fast and
pray and do other good deeds, to ceace the dyuysyon withal / but yt all that
ever they do therein most comenly, is that they take it that they that find
defawte at their abusyons and mysse order, love no prestes / but do all of
malice that they do, to destroy the church and to have their goods and
possessions them self / and that therefore the clergy think it a good deed to
se them punyshed / and therefore (that is to say for that same cause) have they
punyshed many persons, which much people judge to have been done of will etc.
And says also that they do continue still after their old course, prete^dyng by
co^federacyes, worldly polycye, and strayte correccyons, to rule the people /
where he uses these things which I have here rehearsed out of his.xiii.
chapter of this his new book, and somewhat made them more plain, with addyng
thereto his own other words written in his diuysyon / as you may read in mine
apologye fo. 158. in the.xxvi. chapyter, and answered there at length, in the
same chapyter and diverse other in order there ensuyng, of which this man has
answered to some very little, and to the most part and the chyefe part no
thing: now is he so simple, that he uses the same things / for a proof that
he bears the clergy very good will and minds not to bring them in ob^oquy
/ which he would we should take for a thing plainly proved, because he pytyeth
and lamenteth them therein, and so bytterly prays god to make them good and
amend them.

This good man many times takes record of his own conscience that he meneth
well, in such things as his words make many good men wene, that he meant very
naught.

And therefore will I now be bold in this point, to take record of his own
conscience, whyther him self, if one that knew his name, would write such a
work so to wchynge him, as his wurke of dyuysyon touches there the clergy /
and would therein under so many Some says, say that he were as evil as he says
there that they be (for worse could lyghtely no man say) would him self hold
him satysfyed, and think that ye writer meant him none harm, because he
powdered his shrewde slaunderouse some says, with lamenting and pityenge that
the man is no better.

And would he wene by his troth, that the writer meant not to call him
graceless, because he prayed god habundauntely to send him grace? nor to call
him witless, because he prays god send him wit? Surely if he can think so:
than shall he well show him self so simple a soul, as men may well se that
some wily shrewys begyle him. And on the the other side if he be wyser than to
think so: tha^ he well shows him self more wily in this same.xiii. chapyter
of his, than to mean so well in his wurcke of dyuysyon as he would here make
men wene.

Now where he says these words Also I say not in all the said treatise,
that the spyrytua^tye make confederacyes against the temporaltye / but I say
that they continue still after the old course, in not doing good deeds / but
pretending by confederacyes, worldely polycye, and straight correccyons, to
rule the people.

Who could write thus, but either he that were a man of very innocent
symplenesse, or he that entendeth to mock of a shrewd wily dowblenese For
(saving that his word pretending signifies not in deed the thing that he for
lack of language pretends here thereby) to go about not to do good to the
people, but by confederacyes with wylynesse and straight correccyons, to rule
the people: what thing calls he this but confederacyes against the people.

How be it sith this chapyter goth but to the dyschargynge of his own
personal intent, that he meant not him self malycyously what so ever his book
speak: I will not therefore wrestle against it much, but would he were well
byleued in that thing. But yet if you read the places of mine apologye, and
compare them with such parts of his book as I there speak of: ye shall well
and clearly se, that though the manne in his own mind meant it not him self,
yet the thing that I say was the menynge of his book.

The.xiiii. chapyter.
HIs.xiiii chapyter begins in the xiii. lefe. In the beginning thereof he
laboreth to prove that he did not (as I in mine apologye, say that he did) go
about in his book of diuysyon, to make men wene that the spyrytual judges in
this realm handeled men for heresye so cruelly, that all the world had cause
to wonder and grudge thereat / which thing that I should so say, this good man
myche meruayleth at.

For I said no more (says he) But that it were pity it should be so, and
that it should be true that is reported, that there should be such a desire in
spyrytuall men to have men ^biure, or to have men have extreme punyshement for
heresye / as it is sayde^ that there is.

Read good reders the.xlv. chapyter of mine apologye beginning fo. 243^ and
than shall you find this answer of his a very bare naked thing This man
answers here as though he trusted that all the world were woodcokkys save
him self / and that his fair figure of some say, were so wylyly found, that
men had not the wit to se thereby what his book meneth, and what wurke it
goth about. But this I dowte not, but that if either him self or such another
man, would devise me such another book, either against the nobylyte of the
realm, or against the judges of the same, or against the high court of
perleament it self, which were soon done if a man in like wise list to
slander and to bylye them / nor it could not I wot well what so ever he said
therein, be lyghty wurse or more false thanne that book of his dyuysyon,
concerning the point that we speak of, that is to wit this false slander of
the spyrytuall judges in mysse handelynge men for heresye, as it has ofter
than ones before the lords of the kings most honorable counsel upon like
false bylles and co^playntes of partyculare persons by good examynacion ben
proved / and than if he that would make I say of the nobylyte, the judges, or
the perleame^t, such another book would bring in all his false talys against
them under the self same fair figure of some say, and many say, and they say
/ and than say that him self would say no piece thereof, but only that it were
pytie that it should be true, that it were so as many folk reportei is so,
and than preche and pray god send them the grace that they do not so: I dare be
bold to say that there is no wise man, but he would both soon se and say,
that the man with such false lesynges went about to dyffame and slander them,
and make the people wene that it were so.

Than after this thing so fetely skused: he declares his words again,
which he spoke in his dyuysyon of speaking heresies of lyghtnesse, or of a
passion. And because I answered him in mine apolygye, yt if such things should
be excused by lyghtnesse and by passions, than might there pass by myche
lewdenesse and myche myschyef to / the beginning whereof grows of lewd
lyghtnesse and of evil passions: herin he shows that there is dyfference in
dedys, and yt some be more and some be less. And because I did put for
samples, manslaughter and aduowter, which he thought was to high to be lykened
to spekyng and talkyng heresye: he brings it somewhat again to bace, and
puts other sa^ples of one spekyng an angry word, and yet would not kill one
/ and one yt has a passion of aduowtry, and yet does not the deed / and says
yt his treatise meant not obstinate dedely passions, but passions of ignor^unce
and of frayltie, and done for lack or good aduisement.

As for his passion of ignorance, he may put up again. For what so ever he
say, he shall not find I dare warraunt him while he lives, but that the
things that heretykes are punyshed for, be such things as be well and openly
known for heresies, and to have been before condemned for heresies by the
comen known doctrine of the whole catholyke church.

Now as touching his passions for frayeltye and for lack of good aduisement:
does there no man kill a another even suddenly upon a passion of anger, for
lack of good aduiseme^t? does never none unthriftiness upon a passion of
lechery, suddenly fall together in aduowtry for lack of good aduisement?

Ye will this man say, but these fo^ke do ye deed. That is very troth in
deed. But yet they do the deed, but of a passion of frayltye, for lack of good
aduisement. In yt aduou^ry, the malice is the lack of goodness in ye will to
ye keeping of gods commandments And yet even in those passions to, though
the ferther deed be not done, no man neither killed nor stryken, nor none
aduowtry done in deed, though the laws of the world for lack of power to
look into y^ ^arte, can not punyshe the bare intent of such things: yet our
savior says him self very sore words therein, and says that him self
takes their wylles for their dedys.

But now in heresye the words be the work. For not only the spekyng, but
also the defendyng thereof, is in words to.

But a man says he, may speak heresye of lyghtnesse, and of a passyo^ of
frayltye, and yet not entend^ to fall fro the faith. So may a man speak very
lewd and rygh^e traytorouse words by his prince to, of a passion and of a
frayltye, without an inward intent and purpose to procure his destruccyon. But
than will this man peradventure say, that than be such words yet no treason,
without some manner of ouert and open actual deed therewith. Whyther they be
treason or not, yet in any english book that I would put in prente, I would as
thus advised, advise every man for fere of treason, beware of all such lewd
language / and not under color to teache the iudgys their part, go tell the
people without necessyte, yt though they talk traytorouse words, yet it is no
treason, as this good man in his book of diuysyon tells them, that to talk
heresies is none heresye

Now as I said before, concerning heresye which is the treason to god, the
outward act thereof by which men must judge whyther the manne fall fro the
faith or not, stands in the words. And therefore both wisdom and reason
will, that folk well be ware upon the parell of heresye, that they forbere all
talkyng of heresye, as may declare their mind that they believe such heresye.

That I will well agree will this good man say. But than I would they should be
ware, by mean of charytable warning given to their persons. I would verily
wene, yt in a matter so heyghnouse and of such weight, whereof so much harm
may grow by the sufferaunce, the spyrytuall law that gives him leave to
abjure at the first, and in so great a crime saves ones his life, gives him
a warning as charytable and as larg, as in a crime so perylous reason ca^ well
bear. And yt should we soon feel, if we would give the like ly bertye for ones
warning, to every less crime than that / and shall shortly feel it in
heresies, if besides tha^ we give them less fere and more lybertye in bold
talking and teaching without other parel than warning.

For as for the order of warning that this man here prouydeth, in this xiiii.
chapyter of his new book, taking a color and a pretexte of the gospel of
Christ, that speaks of an order of monycyons, requyrynge a tracte of time,
before any open denuncyacyon: I will not much stycke upon. For I purpose not to
make a long process vpppon every found pyece of his dyuyses, wherein thye
good man is content to lose time and spyl paper. But I will say this and say
troth, that thordinaryes, of this order that he speaks, do use in deed as
myche as may well be borne, and sometime I fere me more to.

For this must this good man vnd^rstande, that this good soft slow sober
order, that he descrybeth here, may not all, and always, be kept, neither in
heresye nor treason, nor some other great crimes neither, without great hurt
and damage to the comen weal, and utter loss and destruccyon of many a good
simple soul, that should by this order always kept, paryshe in the mean
while.

Nor our savior meant not in his words, that if I wist one that were walking
about myschyefe, that would go give such drink about as should poysen them
that drunk thereof, that thanne I should use all that tracte of time, rather
then cause him be taken up by time at the first soap that I se him give any man
to syppe upon. Nor that tract is not therefore to be used with them, that speak
and boldly talk heresies about, and thereby do plainly teache them, though they
bid not ye herers learn them. For (as saint Poule speaks of such heresies)
evil co^municacion corrupts good manners. which words though the greek poet
Mena^der meant by the communycacyo^ of other fleshely lewdness: yet the blessed
apostle used them and applied them specially, to the lewd communycacyon of
heresies, which with such bold noughty talking crepeth forth and corrupted
(as saint Poule also says) like a corrupt canker. And therefore as I say,
such a long sober tracte before their calling by the ordynarye course of ye
law, as not always to be used of necessyte with every such manner man, and let
them poysen other good simple souls in the mean season, which they may do
percase with such communycacyon, though they neither minded in their own
heart, to make any other men heretykes, nor to be he retyques them self.

And yet would there beside this, some such as well wyste their myscheuouse
dealyng to be such, and so well able to be plainly proved, as the ordinarye
could not without gods dyspleasure let them after pass unpunished / would
at the first word spoken by the ordynarye to him at large, flyt out of that
place / and as I have in mine Apologye said, and as we se yt often proved, go
keep like scoles in a another.

But yet because I have herd say even while I was writing this, that the myld
sober order which this good man has here in this chapyter dyuysed, is very well
lyked, and has been well praised with some such folk as my self have had some
co^munycacyon with ere this: I will therefore not hyde yt nor keep yt away from
you, but give you good reders here even his own words, fo. 45. he says.

And now will I say a little farther in this matter / concerning such words,
that is to say, that if any man now in this dangerous time, while this
dyuysyon contynueth, will show unto the ordynary that he herd any speak
words, that as he thought s^ode not with the catholyque faith / and the
ordynarye mysse lyketh the words also: I would than think / that if he upon
whom the informacyon is made, be such a man / that he that complayneth of him
may conveniently speak to him without danger / that than the ordynarye shall
advise him to keep the matter secret, if yt be yet secret / and not openly
known: and that he shall than charytable ask of him / what he meant by these
worde^. And than when the questyon is asked him, if he make so reasonable an
answer / that yt sounds ^o no heresye / than is the matter answered. And if
he auowe the words / and yet they be in deed against the catholyque faith:
than yt seems good / that he that accused him, follow the gospel / and take
witness with him / and efte charitably give him monycyon thereof. And if he
will yet stand still opynatynely in his opinion / and not accept the good
monycyon of the other: than I think it good that he again inform the
ordynarye thereof / and than yt seems to be conuenyent that the ordynarye send
for him / not as for a man yet notoryousely known or detected for an heretyque
/ but to know farther, whether yt be true as the other has reported or not:
and if he find yt true by suffycyent proof / or by his own confession and he
will not be reformed, than yt seems couenyent / that he upon the wytnes of
the other / be p^nyshed as he has des^^ued. And if he will be by the ordynary
secretly reformed: then yt seems good, yt he depart without any o^^n
penance: but what were convenient to be there b^ne in that matter, I will
committee yt to other.

Consider now good readers the co^modile of this order. You se that he speaks
of one that speaks such words, as to the herers seem heresye. For both he so
takes them that informs thordinary of them, and so does thordynarye to. Now
may you perceive by the progress of his deuyce, that though there were mo
tha^n one that herd him, or mo than twain, or ten either: yet would he not
that the ordinary should send for him / but first assay by some such as herd
him, what he will say there to when he is asked the questyon what thing him
self m^^t thereby. And then if he have the wit to say yt he meant in his words
but such a thing as that meaning sounds to none heresies (which wit
heretykes enough have) than is all the matter answered. For tha^ ye wot well a
wyly heretyque by this wise order, may be bold with gloses ready proved, so
say what he will and where he will. For the ordynarye may not send for him
to lay those ^eretycal words to his charge, and to consider upon the
cyrcumstaunce of his dealing in such talking, peradventure in diverse places
used whether he meant as him self declares yt, or meant to teach the thing
that he spoke, and to hepe his declaracyo^ in store for a scuse. This first
point alone of this good mannys order if yt were surely observed, were enough
to fyl an whole town shortly full of heresies.

Than goth he farther to a second point, that if he that spoke heresies, will
when he is asked the questyon auowe them: yet shall not he that herd him
resort unto thordynarye but go fetch witnesses first, before whom if the
fellow be so folysh to confess them, and so frantike as to auow them, than this
good man gives them leave to go tell thordynarye the tale and accuse him. But
now if he have the wit before the witnesses to lie and say that he never
said them, or to say that he will say so no more: then is all the mate^ yet
saufe enough again / it shall never need that ever the ordynary here any more
word of him / but let him go forth and use that fashyon still, in as many
companyes as he comes. For that ye wot well can do no hurt. But and if every
man to whom he speaks heresye secretly, and secretly would make mo
heretyques, should secretly inform the ordynarye / and that he should upon.xx.
such secret informacyons, afterward call him forth openly, and after upon
their open deposycyons, openly make him abjure, and bear a faggot or accurse
him for his obstynacye / and after an whole years sufferau^ce finally for his
immedicable malice, as a desperate wreche delyuere him to the seculare hands,
where a fagotte should bear him: this were a cruel delynge of the ordynarye,
and a mysse handelynge of a good honest man for heresye.

And yet goes he farther a little, that though he hold yt and auow his
heresies before the witnesses: thordynarye should not yet for all that proceed
against him openly, but speak with him secretly. And though he auow them
before him self to: yet should he not by this good mannys advise, proceed
agaynste^ him by ordynarye means openly, but let him depart without open
penance, if the fellow be so wise as at last (rather than he would come
thereto) say that he will amend and will say such things no more.

But than after all this, what were conuenyent to be farther done he will he
says ^emyt unto other men. And so were yt myche need in deed. How be yt if
this order that he deuyse^h here, were well observed for so far forth as he
goes: I wene all the world could not well deuyse farther, suffycyentely to
reform and remedy the myschyefe that his charytable deuyse would do.

How be it the best is therein, that he deuyseth not this order for a thing to
stand for ever / but for this time now he says which is he says a
daungerouse time, while this dyuyuysyon contynueth.

But now so is yt good readers that whether this time be so daungerouse as he
speaks of or no, or whether there be in this time such dyuysyon as he makes
or no: sure it is I say, that even in this same time heresies begin to grow a
great deal faster than they have been wont in some other times past / and
therefore is this time so much the worse to use ^uch order in, tha^ were a
another time, wherein there were many fewer.

For if this pacyfyer will now be so peasyble, as to devise such an order y^ al
myscheuous factyous folk should be suffered in peace: he shall with his
peasyble order (if yt were observed) bring the world in that case, that good
peasyble folk that feign would live in peace, should not for such inquiete and
vnrestful wreches without some rufle live in peace long.

Were it not a wise order wene you if he would in like wise deuyse for theuys
the same soft charytable fashyon that he deuiseth here for heretikis? that is
to wit that men should to him that had stolen an horse, or robbed an house, go
give him a monicyon first and then if he say that he did yt not or that he
would do so no more, take all the matter for saufe / and than say that he would
not have that order all way kept, but only in such dayngerouse times as
many folk would fall to theft. For than were yt good to spare them and speak
them fair, and suffer them till they would wax fewer of them self / and
than after that, use against them the lawis and the old order again. Would not
this wise way trow you do well in theft? For sothe yt were away as far
unwise and as far against reason in heresy, as either in theft or murder or
any other manner crime.

And surely me seems y^ where he calls this a dayngerouse time: he uses a
very dangerous word / and to fere the ordynaryes with all, would make the
world wene, that heretyques were here so many and so strong, that
thordynaryes might not now do their duties in subduynge heresies, without
great daungeour. Wherein there is as great daungeour yet, and shall I dout not
in the kings graces days that now is, and long mote be, as there is in the
paring of an apple. How be yt I will not deny him this inded, but that if
such daungerouse words of his dyuysyon, may make thordynaryes aferd of their
own shawdow a while: yt may grow to some danger at the last.

But than goes ^e farther with a another remedy, that I trust in god shall
never need. For I trust in god there never shall in this realm, any such
great personage fall into heresye, as thordynarye dare not proceed according
to the law against him. How be yt in case yt should happen^ than this good man
provides for the remedy (to say the troth) very well, that is to wit that
thordynary should have recourse unto the king, that his hyghnes upon petycyon
made unto him, and informacyon geuyn him, may (as no doubt were there but he
would) with his royal assystence, provide a mean suffycyent, yt the course of
the law might proceed.

This is well devised. And here in he plaieth the good kow, and gives v^ a good
galon of milk. But tha^ shall you se how he plays the shrewde know again,
and turns over the payle even by and by with his hele. For upon this good
devise, he forth with adds this shrewd saye^g to yt.

But as long as there is an opinion among the people / that the ordinaryes and
their officers will give lytght credence upon informacyons made to them of
heresye / and that they will noise them that be complained on a^ heretyques /
before dew examynacyon in that behalf; so long will the people grudge and
peradventure the king not give his assystence so redyly to have them attached
as he would do, if he herd that the ordynaryes noysed no man to be an
heretyque without dew examynacyon, as is before rehearsed.

If this good man had as myche wit as I se well he lacks: I would wax evil
content with him, that he should ones conceive any such opinion of the kings
graciouse hyghnes, as that his grace would any thing be the more remysse to
give royal assystence unto thordinaries, about ye attachi^g of such as are
suspect of heresy, as long as his grace herd that thordynaryes noysed that
any man were an heretyque without such dew examynacyon as this man before
rehearsed. For the kings high prudence very well perceives, that if he should
forbere till that time that he should here no such thing said by them: yt
were almost as myche to say, as he should give no asystence against heretykes,
till al heretykes were gone. For never shall there lack such a false
sedycyouse fame against the ordynaryes, as long as there are heretyques here
and there to sow it, and such sedycyouse books of dyuysyon, with such untrue
Some says to blow yt farther abroad.

The untruth of such false fame, has been before the kings honorable
counsel of late well and plainly proved all ready, upon sundry such false
complayntes by the kings gracious commandment examyned. And all be it that
this is a thing notoriousely known, and that I have also my self in mine
apologye spoken thereof, and that synnys that book gone abroad, it has been in
like wise before the lords well and plainly proved in mo matters a fresshe /
and all be it that this water wessheth away all his matter: yet goes ever this
water over this goosys back / and for any thing that any man can do, no man
can make it synke unto the skin that she may ones feel it / but ever she
shakes such plain proves of with her feathers of Some say and they say the
contrary. Is not this a pretty proper way? And therefore thus you se good reders,
that this man's deuicys in his order to be taken with such as speak heresies,
be very vicyouse and have they never so fair a fleryng at the first face: yet
wha^ they be co^sydered well, they be founden far worse tha^ naught. And yet
was I not minded as you may se, to have examyned them so far, saving that
even while I was in writynge of this chapyter, and about to leave of: word was
brought me that this deuyce of his order for heresye, was with some folk whom
my self have known, so specially well commended. But yet will this man say,
and in effect so he does, master More will not say for all this that every
thing that a man speaks which if he obstynately would hold he were an
heretyke, is enough to judge every such man an heretyke, as does in any manner
speak it.

I will not at this time varye with this good man for that, nor dyspute with
him upon the troth of ye tale, there be so many manner ways of speaking. For
a man may speak thereof in dysprayse thereof. But this will I say to him. That
tale and such other like, were they never so true, were yet as me seems much
better out of his english prented book than in it.

For if he think it necessary to write it, because of any folk whom he
thinks necessary to learn it: either he meneth that they need it, which are
the spyrytuall judges, or else the comen people. Now as for the judges, verily I
have known and do know many of them, and yet knew I never none so simple of
wit, nor so far unlearned, but for any wit or lernyng that I perceive in this
man, the wurste of them wyste a great dele better what perteyned un to their
part and their duty in such points as these are, than does this good man
here.

Than if he say he puts it in, because that though they know it they mysse
use it, and do the contrary and so do thereby miss handle the kings people,
and put them to cruel punyshement unjustly: than I ask him how he proves
that lie to be true? Thereto ye wot well he will bring forth for the plain
proof of his plain troth in the matter his old three wurshypfull witnesses
which stand yet all unsworn that is to wit Some say, and They say, and Folk
say. And than has he now brought forth other two, whom he makes as me seems
both as witnesses and judges to, that is the good sely soul Symkyn Salem, and
his right honest neighbor brother Byzance. Well I am content I, yt all his
five witnesses be swore^ and well examined, how they know the things that they
report / and than those spyrytuall judges of whom they shall so speak and
prove, set it be laid unto their charges. And if you find of such so many,
and their dealing so cruel or unjust, as this man makes it, or any thing
well toward it: than am I content that ye shall for them believe all the
remanau^t the wurse. And yet is yt I wysse somewhat with the most. And than am I
content that you believe also, that this man had for that cause / a necessary
occasion and a profitable, to put yt tale in his bate making book.

But in the mean while, I lay against him for yt point, and against all his
five wurshypfull witnesses to, the deed and the report of ye gretest and the
most honorable temporal lords of the kings most honorable counsel, and
other right wurshypfull temporal men of the same with them, which by the
gracious commandment of the kings highness, have examyned diverse such
complayntes, at the suit of ye parties the^ self and their friends, and have
theruppon founden the same complayntes false, and that thordynaryes have done
them but right, and that with great favor to.

And therefore as for this point, the treuthe being so substancyally proved
upon this side, by all his five forenamed witnesses, on the the other side set
I not five strawes. And therefore good reders as for this point, his putting of
that pyece in his book of diuisyon, had neither necessyte nor profit / except
it were either necessary or profitable to sow a evil sede against good folk,
of untrue reprouable slander in his own writing, under the color of some
other me^nes unproven words.

Than rests there as far as I can se but one cause byhynde, yt should excuse
him. And that is that it was a thing profitable for the people, to know that
though a man of a lyghtnesse or of a passion growing of ignorance or of
frayltye, speak and ^alke heresies at lybertye: yet but if he defend it
opinatyuely, he should not be taken for an heretyke thereby. Deryly good readers
if this tale were true: yet would I wene as I said, this tale unto the people
as good unwritten as written, and a great deal better to.

As for this good man or any man else, I can not let them to write what they
list, and say they think it good be it never so badde in deed. But I durst
in my conscience no more use this fashyon of writing concerning heresye, than
I would use it in writing any book, whereof I would speak of either treason or
any other felony / except some other necessary occasyon should happily drive
me thereto, as no good occasyon in his book of dyuysyon drove this good man
thereto.

If I were again to read in Lyncolns Ine and there were in hand with a
statute that touched treason and all other felonyes: I would not let to look,
seek out and rehearse whyther any heyghnouse words spoken against the prince,
were for the only speaking to be taken for treason or not.

Nor I would not let in like wise to declare, if I found out any casy^ in
which a man though he took an other man's horse against the law, should yet
not be judged for a felon thereby. And this would I not only be bold there to
tell them, but would also be bold in such french as is peculiare to the lawys
of this realm, to leave it with them in writing to. But yet would I reken my
self sor^ over seen, if all such things as I would in that scole speak in a
redyng, I would in englysh into every mannys hand put out abroad in prent. For
there is no such necessyte therein as is in the the other. For in ye places of
court these companies must needs be taught it / out of which companyes they
must after be taken that shall be made judges to judge it. But as for the common
people to be told that tale, shall as far as I se do many folk little good,
but rather very great harm. For by perceyuyng that in some things were no
thing the perell that they ferede, some may wax therein more neglygent / and
by less ferynge ye less dayngeour, may soon step into the more. And
therefore have I wyste ere this, the judges of a great wisdom in great open
audyence, where they have had occasyon to speak of high mysseprisyon or of
treason, forbere yet the saying of some such things, as they would not have
let to speak among them self.

If any man would happily think that it were well done that every man were
taught all / and wollde aledge therefore that if he know surely what thing
would make his behauour high treason or heresye, than though he would adventure
all that ever were under that, yet would he be peradventure the more ware to
keep him self well from that / as many a man though he believe that he shall
abide great pain in purgatory for his venyall sins, does for all that no
great dylygence in forberynge of them, and yet for ye fear of perpetual
pain in hell, takes very great head to keep him self from those sins,
that he surely knows for mortal.

As for such venyall sins as folk of fraylty so comenly do fall in, that no
man is almost any time without them, though the profit would be more if men
did wene they were mortal, so that the dread thereof could make men utterly
forbere them: yet sith it will not be, that men will utterly forbere them /
the knowledge of the troth is necessary for them / lest every time that they
do such a venial sin in deed, wenyng that it were mortal, the doing of the
deed with the conscience of a mortal sin, might make it mortal in deed.

But of any such kind of venial sins as be not so much in custume, and may
be more easyly forborne: I never found any wise man to my remembrance, that
would either write or teache the comune people so exactly, as to say though you do
thus far, yet is it no dedely sin / but will in such things sith the
venial sin it self is a drawyng toward ye dedely, rather leave the people in
dowt and in dread of dedely sin, and thereby cause them to keep them self
far of from it / than by telling them it is but a venyall sin, make them
the less aferde to do it / and so come so myche the ner^r to mortal sin,
and assaye how nere he can come to it, and not do it, till he come at last
so nere the brynke, that his foot slyppeth and down he falls in to it. For
as the s^rypture says, Quiamat periculum, peribit in illo. He that loves
perell shall perysshe in it.

Now as for heyghnouse words speaking against the prince, or talking of
heresye against the known catholyque faith: these are no things like these
commen venial sins / but be things both twain, which they that do them,
may myche more easily forbere them. And therefore were it more profit unto the
people, to think rather the more perell therein thanne the less.

The judges part is to se that the punysshement pass not the grauyte of the
offense. And therefore shall the common people take none harm, though them self
concerning treason or heresye, fall not by such books to the myncyng of such
matters, and dyspute how far they may go forward in them, without the
extreme daynger and perell of them / but shall the better keep them self from
the greater, if for fere of greater, they keep them self well from the less.

But surely such tales told un the people, and geuyn every man and woman at
adventure in prented english books abroad, as may give them such boldness
in talking, as this man here in this.xiiii. chapyter does, and to tell them
that there is not therein so much perell, as many man would wene: may be myche
harm both unto them self and unto other to. To them self, for with a little
less fear than they had before, they may soon fall ferther than they did
before, or ever would have done. And than should he in whom it so should
happen, find that it were (as holy saint Hierome says) better to leave some
things unknown, than with perell to learn them.

To other men also may a man do thereby myche harm. For some man with bold
talking heresies, whereby he makes other men first to take them for light,
and little and little after to believe them to (while they here him so boldly
speak them, and here him nothing reprove them) may do much more harm by
making many other fall from ye faith, though he were not fallen from it him
self, than he should do if he hylde his tongue, though secretly in his heart he
were a stark heretyke in deed.

And therefore surely good reader, what so ever the man meant in his own secret
mind, the fashyon of his doctrine is yet in my mind plainly a thing to the
people myche more perylouse than profitable / and in his book of dyuysyon very
evil put in, and here evil repeted again.

Now where as he refers the remanaunt of the matter concerning heresye, unto
them that can better skyl / of whom he desyieth me to ask what were to be
done, with such as speak heresies and are none heretykes in their heart:
surely if ever any such case should happen, as I should need to make search for
that point, I would with good will so do. But I look for no such necessyte.
For it is enough for me, if I should hap to here any talk heresies, than to
declare it unto their ordynaryes, to whom the ferther charge apperteyneth, to
make thereupon ferther search such as he may / and theruppon as he may ferther
find thereof, so ferther do therein. And as for this man him self, as he
canneth therein for any thing that I se very little skyll, so would I that he
had less medeled therewith, than to tell and teach the people first by his
book of dyuysyon, and afterward by this book again, that they may speak
and talk heresies well enough, without the daynger or perell to be for such
speaking lawfully taken for heretyques. With which tale though it were true,
he does them yet little good. For the vsyng of such spekyng of heresies, if it
fully prove not a man an heretyque, yet may it make him ye wot well of heresye
in his heart very right sore suspecte. For as our savior says him self,
Ex habundantia cordis os loquitur. The mouth speaks such things as in the
heart be plentuouse and haboundeth. And therefore I say, that though he neither
defend it obstynately, nor can be precysely proved an heretic in his secret
heart: yet may his open words be such (though they were spoken of I can not
tell you what manner passion) that for the sore suspycyon that his own words
has brought him self into, he may well and with good reason be compelled to
abjure. And therein were there I wysse no great honesty nor no very great
profit neither. And yet is it all the profit that I se can come of this good
man's doctrine.

And this is the thing so that this good man bosteth in this chapter, the
second side of his.xliiii, lef, that I do not deny / as though he had gotten
thereby a great over hand on me in ye matter. But yet would I good reders save
for the length, let him perceive this ouersyghte and ignorance, in another
manner touching the thing that he so bosteth that I deny him not / and would
make him look a little better even upon Summa Rosella, whom he so much
allegeth here him self.

And where as in the same lefe and side, he makes a certain certyfycate (as
though I were a bishop, and had sent him a commyssyon to inquire) that he
knows not one heretyke in all this realm in word nor deed: mary I would
marvel myche if he did. For yt must needs be very long ere he can know any,
while the man is so little suspycyouse in matters of heresye, that though he
should here them talk heresye by him, yet because though he hear what their
mouths speak, he can not yet perdyelo ^oke in unto their hearts there, and se
what they think, nor knows not also, whyther if they were asked where they
were well a ferde, they would hold yt opynatyuely / or elle^ (rather than be
burned or bear a fagotte) say that they said yt al but of a passion of
ignorance or frayltye: he can not therefore lyghtely know any one heretyque
(as he says he does not) neither in word nor deed in all this whole realm.

And then for hearing by report, therein goth he farther and says.

For how be yt that I have herd sometime reported, that there be many
heretykes / yet I never hard so far proof therein, that I might with
conscience ^uge or report / that this man or that man is an heretyque. And to
every light word a man may not give full crede^ce in that behalf / ne
report yt lightly / that any man is an heretyque by such light tales. And
surely this point is myche to be noted of all men / but most spycyally of
them that daily myny^tre the sacraments of the church, left happily thorough
such reports they mynystre them sometime in dedely sin, and yet would not
think so them self.

It would have done very well, that this good man had given as light a
credence, to such reports in mysse handelynge of heretyques as some have made
him of the spyrytualtye (if him self therein say true) as he seems to have
given to them that have reported unto him that there are many heretics. For
than, sith after his own preaching here, a man ought to be so well ware how
he lyghtely report again, any evil light reports that he has herd to
the slander of any one man: him self would not of lykelyhed so lyghtely have
made such evil report in that point, to the slander and obloquye of the
prelates of the spyrytualtye, thereby to bring them in grudge of the whole
temporalty, upon such light reports made unto him, by some light simple
persons / where as by the kings honorable counsel the truth has been so
plainly proved to be contrary.

But yet where as he confesses that he has herd yt sometime reported, that
there be many heretyques: I would feign wit of him, whether that such report
have been made unto him by any of the temporaltye. If he say nay, but that all
that so told him were spyrytuall men: than may they believe him that think his
answer lykely. For I would wene in my mind, that between him and spyrytnall
persons, were not so myche famylyare company, as to come to tell him that
tale. For he seems not very metely for spyrytuall men in that matter to make
their moan unto. And than if he hard yt either of temporal men beside, or of
temporal men only and no spyrytuall men at all: than did he not very well
when he wrote in his dyuysyon, that spyrytual men make that noise for a
polycye. And yet also would I farther wy^^ whether he have herd any speak
heresies in any place where him self was present in company. If he answer me
nay: than will I preace no farther upon him, but let every man as I said
before believe yt that thinks yt lykely. But on the the other side, if he answer
me ye: than would I feign farther wit, whyther ever him self went so far
with them, as to prove whether he should by his own rule in this chapyter,
have cause to show their ordynarye of them, that he might send for them /
or else that herynge folk so speak heresies by him, he took all to the best
always of his own special goodness / and lest he might with questyonynge
hap to find yt worse, followed ever in that matter, the good counsel that
saint Poule gave in a another matter, nolite interrogare, propter conscientiam,
ask no questyon, lest you bring a scruple into your conscience. If he used
any dylygence in questyonynge: than were yt well lykely that he found in all
this long while, some where at the least wise some one.

But now if he herd them speak heresye, and found no fault therwyth, nor no
questyon asked: then is yt as I said little marvel, though he never no where
in all England found one. And that is even one of the very things, while many
folk now fall to the same fashyon, to hear heresies talked and let the
talkers alone, which yet will (if they be brought into the court before the
judge) tell than the troth, and will not be so false as to be forsworen: this
is I say one of the very special things, for which in crime of heresye the
suyte ex officio (which in the next chapyter following he laboreth ^ore to
destroy) may what so ever this man say, in no wise be forborne, but if we
would have the ^iretes swarm full of heretyques, why the very lykely were to
follow, though he say nay.xl. times.

And that have I against his book of dyuysyon well declared in mine Apologye.
And he has again here in this book defended, in that point his book of
dyuysyon, as your self shall anon se god wot with myche work full febly.

The secu^d part.
The.xv. chapyter.
HIs.xv. chapter concerning the suit ex officio, begins in the xlviii.
lefe of his book, and holds on into ye.liiii.

And for as much good christian readers at it may well appear, that this point
is the special thing that he feign would bring about, that is to wit to sow
an opinyon in men's heddes, that it were good to change and put away that
suit, toward which purpose all his book of diuysyon bends / laboring first
with his so many some says, to bring the spyrytuall judges in suspycyon and
obloquy, and make the people wene yt they meruelousely did with much wrong and
cruelty mysse handle men for heresye: therefore I shall in this point here
confute his arguments so plain and in such wise, that who so list
indyfferently to read both the parts, shall find here causes good and
suffycyent why, by his unreasonable reasons never after to set a fly

And first because ye shall well se that I will not wrestle in the dark, but
bring the matter into light open and plain at your eyes / I will in this matter
leave you not out one word of this his.xv. chapyter, but bring forth his words
with mine. And tha^ while you read the tone first, and the the other even after
hand: there shall neither he nor I / by any sly sleyght deceive you.

But two things for this matter will I require you first / one that you
reiecte one wyly sleyght of his, with which he goth about even from the
beginning to corrupt our judgment that are temporal men, and in ye redyng
to blind us with affeccio^

For in all this matter he makes as there were two parts. The tone he makes
the spyrytualtye. And this cause he so makes theyrs, as though the co^modyte
of that suit to be kept, were a thing that perteyned only unto the^. The
the other party he makes us of the temporalty, whom he would have put ye same
suit away. For though that in the perleament be spyrytuall men also: yet all
were they al upon one side sure, he sees well they were to few

But it is necessary that we consider in this point, that though the judges be
spyrytuall, yet if that suit be necessary for preseruacyon of the catholyke
faith, than is the profit not the spirytuall men's only, but that profit
and advantage is our own to. And if by the change of that suit ex officio,
the decay of the catholyke faith shall follow in this realm: than is not the
loss and damage unto the spyrytualtye alone, but the harm is importable unto
the whole realm.

Therefore have this point in this matter ever before your eyes, that ye change
of that law if that law be good, but if he change it in to a better, or at
the least as good, is a comen harm to the whole realm. And that harm
happens in ye gretest thing that we could possible take harm in, if we be
(as I wot well we be and ever entende to be) faithful true christen people.

Look therefore good readers both to his reasons and mine, and if you find by
his reasons that the puttyng away of that law, be better for the keeping of the
catholyke faith in this land, ye or better other wise for this land without the
minisshement of the faith in the same, than am I well content that ye compte
this good man both for very wise and for very faithful to.

But now if you find by mine answer on ye the other side, yt al his reasons in
this point are not worth one rysshe toward the proof of any necessary cause of
change / but his reason and his arguments always such therein, yt either they
be byelded upon a fa^se ground / or else if he make any that happen to be
true, if ye find it yet but such as by the self same reason if men would
unwisely follow it, there might no law neither long last, nor yet no law be
made: if you find I say his reasons against this law but such, ye will than I
dowt not think it but good reason, for all his riall reasonyng to let ye law
stand.

But than if ye find ^erther yet, as I wot well ye shall, that the change
that he would make, under a nedeles pretense of preseruyng innocents out of
dayngeour and parell, and can not prove that this hundred year any one was
wronged with it, should cause heretykes to be bold, take courage, and encreace,
and for lack of this law the catholyke faith to dekaye: than will you not I
wot well let to tell this man, that he lacks in this matter, how gay so ever
he make it, either wit, or (which wurse were) love to the christen faith.

The the other thing yt I require, you shall your self se reasonable. For it
serves to the clear perceiuyng of us both, how both he and I bear our self
in this matter. And I shall not require therein parcyally for my part, but a
request indyfferent and egall for us both, sith ye shall the clerer thereby
perceive where about we both goo, and where any of us both swerve a side fro
the matter, and to hyde the troth out of syghte, slynke into lurkys lane.

My request is no more, but that it may like you to take the labor and pain
for perceiving of the trowth, from the beginning to peruse the whole matter,
as far as perteyneth to the change of this law.

Read first his own words in his own book of dyuysyon. And after read
mine answer in mine apologye, which you shall find in the fourtyth chapyter,
the.218. lefe, and his words to therwyth. And when those two things be
both fresshe in your mind, read thanne this his fyftenthe chapyter of this
book, with mine answers every where added thereunto / and than have I when
this is done little dowte of your judgment, ye shall se the matter prove
against this good man plain.

In his.xv. chapyter good readers he would make men wene, that he suffycyentely
proves three things. The tone is that it were none hurt to change now this
old law. The secunde thing is that it were great hurt to keep it. The
third, that such samples of the laws of this realm as I resembled unto the
suit ex officio, I resemble against reason, they be so far unlike.

Into these three points therefore will I deuyde this chapyter that the reader
may the better se in what part he is.

I shall rehearse you first here his whole words together, that he brings for
the first point. Lo good readers these they be.

THen to the conuentynge of men before spyrytuall judges ex officio, and
whereupon master More says in his apology, fo, 219. that if it were left, the
streets were lykely to swarm full of heretics: Heryly I m^ruayle right much
at his saying therein: and that for this cause: It is certain, that no man may
after the law be detected of heresye, but that there is some man that knows
the cause before why he ought so to be. For if it be secret in his own
breast, none can be his judge but god only, that is the sercher of man^ heart.
And if any will ^d^owe, that he knows the ca^se, and will denounce him as an
heretyke therefore: tha^ it is reason, yt he be taken as his accuser. And if he
will not aduow to be his accuser, if y^ to think that he does yt of some
malice or craft rather then for the troth of the matter. And if he say he
da^e not for fere of hi^ life auow yt, I have showed a mean in the.vii.
chapyter of the said treatise how the witness may be saved from danger, as
by showing the matter to the king and his counsel, and that then yt is not
to suppose nor so to think, but that they will pronyde suffycyently for the
indempnyte of the witness in that behalf. And this remedy master More
denies not to be conuenyent for this realm. And yet he will not assent, that
a law be made that yt shall be so. And then if the witness will not auow it,
but an other will give credence to him and auow yt: then yt seems reasonable,
that they yt will give credence thereto, a will report yt / be taken as
accusers: taking those witness for their warraunte, if yt be denied.

In these words lo good readers you se, how he proves his first point, that
of the change of this law by putting away this suyt ex officio, wherein
without any special accuser, offering him self as party, the suspecte may
be called in before the judge ex officio, that is to wit by reason of his
office: there could none harm grow at all.

And how does he now prove us this point? He proves yt as you se first by
certain reason put and presupposed for a ground / and then after that by a
certain order that him self shortly diuyseth and setted up upon the same.

Hy^ ground and his foundation is this, yt is certain he says that no man may
after the law be detected of heresye / but that there is some man that knows
the cause before / why he ought so to be.

Very troth yt is that no man can be detected, except a man detect him self,
but if some other se some thing in him wherefore he should seem naught, some one
thing or other that they which perceive it suspect him therefore them self.
And therefore as for this ground this good man and I will not greatly strive
Then follows his order that he dyuyseth and byesdeth up theruppon thus.

And if any will aduow that he knows the cause, and will denounce him an
heretyke therefore: then is yt reason that he be taken as his accuser.

This is a right good reason / and the spiritual law will not refuse so to
take him and accept him for an accuser if he will / and then will they not in
that case use the suit ex officio. For in that case it needs not. But now
what if he that knows it, and secretly detecteth it, peradventure four or
five and sometime mo to, and yet not one of them al, will openly be called an
accuser, but will be content to be taken and known for a witness, called in by
the court and sworen, and to tell the troth as of an necessyte, and not as
accusers of their neighbor of their own offer wyllyngly: what shall the
ordynary do then? Against this parel this good man gives us this remedy.

If they will not be his accusers, yt is to think that they do yt of some
malice or craft, rather then for the troth of the matter.

I wene good readers that there is no man but when he hereth this answer, he
would wene there were yet for the farther remedy some other more matter behynd.
For what mad man would think that this were a suffycient remedy, so fully
provided For this matter, that if there were any heretyques they could not fail
so fully to be detected by this way of accusacyon, that there should need no
suyte ex officio, because they that know yt may either hold their peace if
they list, or else if they will algates detecte any man, may be taken and
accepted for accusers / and if they will not openly be taken so, then be taken
for malycyouse and craftye, and therefore believe them not, but bydde them like
false harlottes hense and go get them home.

But how shall we do yet for one thing? For though that their refusing to
bycome open accusers, were a conjecture to lead us somewhat to believe them
false or malycyouse: yet were yt not so great a conjecture on that side, nor so
sure, but that we might be therein decey^ed and they both charytable and true,
and the man yt they detected a very perylouse heretyque in very deed. And then
for ought that this man deuyseth yet, we should need the suyte ex officio to
buste out this matter better / or else that man that they detected shall (if
he be such as they said he was) teach heresies still, and do myche harm a
great while.

Also good readers this good man has no such cause so sore to mysse trust
such a denouncer, only because that he refuses to be taken of his own offer
for a party and an open accuser, considering that he refuses not to be
brought in by process, and depose in ye parties own presence as a witness,
and will be content that his deposycyons him self standing by be publyshed,
and read openly before ye world. And therefore any wise man would wene, yt this
good man to prove that we should not need the suyte ex officio, if he would make
his suyte by way of accusacyon, suffycyent to serve in the stead, he had need
to have divised some ^arther thing the^ this. But this good host of ours,
prays you for this feste to be m^ry with such as you have, for here is al
your fare / saving that to make us like this meat the better, and fyl our
belyes somewhat the better there with, he gives us thereto one little mess of
sauce to it, in showing us a cause, wherefore it is good reason, that we should
give them no crede^ce that detecte a man of heresy, and yet will refuse to
become his open accusers. And ye cause that he gives us is this.

F^r vf he say (says this good man) that he dare not for ^ere of his life auow
yt, I have showed a mean in the seventh chapyter of the said treatise / how
the witness may be saved from danger, as by showing the matter to the king
and his counsel / and that the^ it is not to suppose nor to think, but that
they will provide suffycyently for the indempnyte of the witnesses in that
behalf.

Now good readers herd any man ever any reason made for suffycyent, by any
man that any reason had in his hedde / and handeled so insuffycyently. Be this
wise reason he makes as though no man detectynge any man of heresye, except
he surmysed the matter of falshed and malice, would refuse to be his open
accuser for any thing save for only fere / nor for no less fere neither then
only the fere of death. And then for that fere, he has as he says diuysed
suffycyent remedy.

Now that none other thing can set a man to make him self a party and an
open ac^user, but only fere^ I wene there will no man grant him / and that
no less fere then only fere of death, and add fere of all bodyly harm
thereto, that will I wene every wise man less graunt^ him.

But now let us consider whether the fere that him self grants to be
suffycyent, to let a detectour from taking upon him to be an accuser, be so
suffycyently provided for by this good man, that yt must needs be, that by his
prouysyon that fere shall be quyte gone. For if that yt may be, that all his
prouysyon not wythstandynge, the mannys fere may still remain in his heart /
then may yt also be perdy, that be his deteccyon never so true, yet he may for
that fere, refuse to make him self a party and become an open accuser.

Consider now therefore what is the remedy that he has dyuysed in his seventh
chapyter. He reherseth yt here again, that upon co^playnt made to the king
and his counsel it is not to suppose nor think, but yt they would provide
sufficiently for thindemnyte of the witness in that behalf.

I am content to grant him for the while, that they will suffycyently provide
for thindempnyte of the wytnessys. But first all this prouysyon is in our case
here very nedeles. And his prouysyon in the seuynth chapyter of his dyuysyon,
is brought in for another manner of matter / that is to wit against a prouisyon
made in the spyrytull law, by which yt is there devised, that in some case
for dread of perell that may fall to the witnesses, the ordynary shall not
suffer the pertie that is detected, to know who has wytnessed against him.
And now would this good man bygyle his readers in this chapyter, and make
them wene that that special prouysyon in that one special case, which
prouysyon I wene was yet in England never put in ure, were a comen order in
every mannys case. But consider good reader that our case is now, that the man
refuses not to be a witness / but is content both to be sworen when he is as
a witness called in, and to auowe then his deposycyon true, before the judge
in the parties own presence / and if he may so be used as a witness, will
neither be afraid nor a shamed, nor desire to put the kings counsel to
any business about the prouysyon of his indempnyte at all. And therefore in
our case this good mannys prouysyon devised for witnesses, shall not need for
our witnesses, if he let the suyt ex officio proceed, and receive them as
only witnesses.

But on the the other side, if this good man put a way that suyt, and will
receive no man first for a denouncer secretly, and after that for a witness
to, that will refuse at the beginning to make him self a party and bycome an
open accuser / but though they were such twenty will take them al for false
shrewes and put them to silence, except some one of them will take upon
him the name and person of an accuser: I say that his prouysyon does not
suffyse, not even in his own case of fere, to make every true man content to
accuse an heretyque / but that we must either let that heretyque alone and
let him go make mo, or else must we use the suyte ex officio still.

That is not so says this good man. For if he bycome an accuser I have
diuysed a remedy for his indempnyte. That is well and properly said. But we
speak not of his loss but of his fere. Why what should he need to fere when he
can take no loss? has this good man never herd in his life that some man
has been wurse aferde than hurt? a man may fere perdy though he fere
causeless. And if he so do still the^ will he not bycome thaccuser, and anger
him whom he fereth, though the man be bounden, and right good suertyes with
him, that he shall do his accuser no bodyly harm at all.

His fere is also for all the prouysyon that can be made by suffycyent suertye,
not all causeless yet. For he may well and with good reason fere, that he that
is bounden may by some secret shrewes of his acquayntau^s murdre him / and
that in such wise as when he does it, he may wene and have hope that it shall
never be known for his deed, nor he thereby lose forfaiture of his bound.

There can no man (ye wot well) also kill a another, but with the parel of his
own life. And yet is there daily many a man, that stands for all that in
dread, that a another man will for evil will and malice des^roye him. And the
comen laws of this realm so far forth allow and approve his dread, for all
that his enemy is upon loss of his own life bounde^ to the contrary, that
upon his own oath, they compel the party to be bounden with other suertyes
for him in certain sommes of money, that he shall not. And yet the man yt fered
before, may peradventure be fullferd still, that his enymye will as well
adventure the forfayture of his friends money, as he before fered that he would
adventure his own life. But yet because yt may be that his resspecte unto
fre^dshyppe, will temper his respect of malice, and make him loath, for hurtynge
of one whom he hates, to hurt twain whom he loves: the man is content
sith he can go no farther, to take that may be gotten, and so to sew for such
suertye, to live thereby, though not in full suerty, nor clean out of fere, yet
in suerty somewhat the more, and in fere somewhat the less.

But now this man y^ does detecte this heretyke, against who^ he fereth to make
him self an open adversary and accuser, is not in the case before he become his
accuser, but may sytte still you se well and hold his peace, and needs not to
make that heretyque his aduersarye by his wylfull accusacyon / which if he
should ones do, he will never after happily while he lives, reken him self so
sure from bodyly harm that he may after hap to have by him and by his means,
as he will reken to be in if he accuse him not / nor by such open accusacyon
give him an open occasion of displeasure / no not for all the prouysyon that
all the world can imagine for his suertie / except only such suertye as a
poor man devised ones for him self, when he came to a king and co^playned
howesore he fered that such a servant of his would kill him. And the king bode
him fere not fellow, for I promise ye if he kyllthe he shall be hanged within a
little while after. Nay my lyege lord quod the pore soul I beseech your grace
let him be hanged for it a great while before. For I shall never live in the
less fere till I se him hanged first. Now will this good man happily say,
that this manner of reasonynge should prove not only yt a man for fere would
refuse to be an accuser, but also to be a witness / and then were it against
my self to.

That is not so in every case. For come^ly no man is in such wise angry with
them that are in a matter witnesses against him, and may seem to witness
against their willys, for the necessyte of their oaths whereto they may be or
may seem to be compelled, as with him who^ he sees willyngly no man calling
him, come forth of his own offer to accuse him. And therefore ye cases be very
far unlike. But yet in some cases when the party yt is detected is known for
mighty, and for so maliciouse therewith, that he will of lykelyhed hate and
myschyefe any man by whom he takes any harm, though the the other man do yt
never so myche against his will: in such cases the fere may be such in deed,
that it may peradventure cause some that else would tell the truth if he
should never know them, for dread of his dyspleasure to be forsworen, rather
then abide thaduenture, what so ever prouysyon any man should deuyse for their
suertye.

And for such case if it happened was ye law made, which in his seventh
chapyter this man so sore complayneth of, that the party detected should in
such case be kept fro the knoweledge of ye witnesses / and as (with the
prouisyons that are in that law made farther) very good reason is that he
should / and therefore is even here that point of his seventh chapyter of his
deuisyon, and all that ever he can farther deuyse for the farther defense
thereof, full answered here by ye way.

But now says this good man thereto, that I deny not in mine apologye, that
remedy of his dyuyse to be conuenyent for this realm / and yet I will not he
says assent that a law be made that yt shall be so.

In this tale this good honest man says untrue. The words in mine apologye
wheruppon he takes hold to say, yt I deny not his deuyse to be conuenyent for
this realm be these.

His deuyse though peradventure yt would serve in some one land, would yet not
serve in some other. And they that made that law of the church, made yt as it
might serve most generally through chrystendome / where as this deuyse though it
might serve in England, might not have served in many places of Almayne that
are perverted synnys / not even while that matter was in a mamerynge before the
change was made. But surely that same law and other of old made against
heresies, if they had been in Almayne dewely followed in the beginning, the
matter had not there gone out at length to such an ungracious ending.

These be lo the words of mine apology the.xlii. chapyter folio. 232, whereof
this man takes hold to say, that I deny not in mine apology, yt his device
is convenient for this realm. For in these words in deed I do not deny it /
but than you se well I do not grant it neither.

But afterward in the self same chapyter, the very next lefe after against
the sufficiency of his device write I these words following.

And on the the other side, the remedy that he deuyseth for the suertye of the
witnesses, should not peradventure make the men so bold, as in a cause of
heresy to meddle in y^ matter against some manner of man^but that they rather
would for their own surety, keep their own tongys still, than with all the
surety that could be fou^den them bysyde, have their persons dysclosed unto
the party.

Lo good reders the thing that he says I deny not, because that in the first
words I neither said ye nor nay (for I said not yt it might serve in england
/ but that though it might serve in England, yet might it not serve in
Almayne / which words I might have said, though I had in ye next line before,
expressly said yt it might not serve in England) y^ thing do I (as you se)
forthwith in ye next lefe well and plainly deny. And yet you se yt he says
here again in this book, that I deny it not. This good man seems not very
shame fast lo, but if his logyke led him to think that this were a good
argument. In these words he denies it not: ergo he denies it not. which
argument is even as good as this. He denies it not in one place, ergo he
denies it not in no place.

Now where he says that though I deny not his deuyce to be conuenyent, yet I
will not assent that a law be made that it shall be so: surely as much of his
device as I think conuenyent for the realm, so myche thereof will I not be
against that a law be made that it shall be so. For where this good man
thinks it conuenye^t for this realm, that he which is detected or accused of
heresye, should be bounden and find suretyes, that he shall not hurt neither
accuser nor witness: I will not be against it that a law be made that it
shall be so But yet though that law were made (sith for all that law there would
remain a fear behind in ye men's hearts, for whose sa^fe guard such
surtyes should be fou^den, and perell and dayngeour to, suffycye^t to make them
draw back from making them self in heresye open accusours, and in some case
from berynge witness also, but if they thought their names should from the
person against whom they should witness, be surely kept close and unknown) I
would not assent for my part to put away the said law that he speaks of in
his seventh chapyter of his deuisyon, for chau^ces that might herafter happen.
And much less would I grant to put away the suyte against heretics ex
officio, into his device of only open accusers, for the harm yt would
undoubtedly daily grow, by the encreace of heretykes and hynderau^ce of the
catholyke faith / no more than though I blame not the law, by which he that is
aferde of kyllyng shall have his adversary bou^de^ to ye peace, I would yet
when the the other is so bounden by recognisaunce, have that law stand instead
of the the other, by which he shall if he kill that man, fall thereby ferther into
the daynger of hanging.

And yet this his gaye gloryouse device, that he devised in his formar book,
and here now repeteth again: no man needs to give him any great thank for.
For who knew not that all way, that who so ever be aferde, may desire and have
surety for the peace, if he fere him self of his life or bodyly harm, and may
ask it of course upon his oath as soon as he is aferd (and sooner perdye this
man deuiseth it not) of ye kings ordinary justices, without any other ferther
suit, to trouble the kings grace or his counsel withal.

But yet will all this surety f^ndyng as you se, never so take away ye fear of
harm from me^nes hearts, but yt they will rather forbere to be accusours, tha^
by the becoming of an open accusour run in ye dedely malice of that man, by
whom for all his bond and all his suretyes founden, they fere still always yt
they shall take hurt.

But here will happily this good man tell me now, that I am a man importune,
and one whom no reason can satisfye / and bid me therefore go deuyse some
ferther thing mine own self ^or^e^pe of the matter, and assay also what
ferther thing any other folk can f^nd therein. And if neither mine own wit nor
no man's else can find no ferther remedy, wherefore should I than blame him when
he deuiseth as full ^ r^medy as any man's reason can find. Forsooth I can with
any wit that I have, nor I wene no more can no man else / find no ferther remedy
than he fyndeth here him self. But yet sith the ferthest that he can find is
very far vnsufficie^t, with change of the suit ex officio to keep heresies
from great encreace, and preserve ye catholyke faith: I can therefore find at
hand a much nerer remedy than this that he fetches so far that is to wit to
let his new devices pass and let the old law stand styll^

And thus you se good readers y^ this pyece wherein he so bosteth the prouisyon
that he has devised so suffycyent to deliver the accusers frofere, leueth
them so in dread and fere still, that though there were no let but the fere
of bodily harm: yet of many true men that will detecte and bear witness, ye
should find but very few that would bycome accusers.

But now though there were fou^den prouysyon good and sure, to drive out of
thaccusers heart all fere of bodyly hurt: yet are there many that dare secrely
detecte, and by whom ye ordynarye shall know who can tell more, and will also
if they be called and sworen, and will not uncalled and vnsworen, tell no tale
at all / and they them self also will neither accuse nor yet bear witness
neither, nor so myche as have it known that ever they spoke word therein. And
that not for any fere of their life, for which this good man fy^deth as he
says a remedy / but for loss of their living, for which he fyndeth none,
nor never ones thought thereon. And yet is the living to some folk, as lyefe
almost as the life. And their living they fear utterly to lose (yt they get
peradventure by them who^ yet of cheryte for their amendment they detecte) if
they were ones perceived any thing to meddle in ye matter.

And yet as I said before every wise man well woteth there are many other
affeccyons bysyde all such fear, that let men to become accusers in
heresye, and yet lets them not to do otherwise truly and charitably their
duty, both in secret detectyng of them, and also in open berynge witness
against them, when they be called forth and commanded by ye court to depose,
that will never as I said of their own offer make them self a party, and
openly become their accuser.

Now what if there were but two wy^nesse of the matter, such as were well able
plainly to prove ye thing, if neither of both may be herd but if the tone
should become thaccusour: when the tone were made party, tha^ were the proof
lost. But we shall not need myche I warraunt you to care for this case. For of
the^ both, you shall have neither another that will.

How be it yet has this good man at last founden a good way for that. For lo
sir thus he says.

And than if the witness will not auow it, but an other will give credence to
him and auo^ it: than it seems reasonable that they that will give credence
thereto and will report it, be taken a^ accusers / taking those witnesses for
their warraunt if they be denied.

If he think it lykely that none of them will become accusours that were
present and herd it them self: than is it yet less lykely that he will
become the accusour, that hereth it but at a second hand.

And therefore me thinks that this device is not much wyser, than the device
that a good fellow devised ones for his neighbor, that had a great hylloke in
his close / which for planynge of y^ ground he cou^sayled him to have it away.
Mary quod his neighbor I must carye it than so far, that it were less
loss to me to give away ye close and all. Mary neighbor quod the the other, I
shall soon find a way for that. For I shall devise a pronisio^ yt it shall be
had away and yet never carried hense. For even there as it lies lo, dygge me a
great pytte, and carry it never ferther, but berye it even in that. Where shall
I tha^ lay that hepe quod his neighbor that comes out of the pytte? At that
the the other st^dyed a little. But when he had well bythought him: mary quod he
even dig another great pytte under that, and bery me that hepe there.

So this man will in any wise lo, have away this hyllocke, this suyte ex
officio, that he says does here myche hurt. how shall we have yt away say
we without yet much more hurt? Good remedy says this good man shortly shall
I deuyse. Put accusers in the stead of that suyt, and they shall do myche
better. who shall be thaccusers say we? Mary says he they that here them. They
will not say we bycome accusers in no manner case. No will they says he, then
be they but false shrewes. what remedy then say we to supply the said suyt. A
ready way says he, take some other that hears the the other that herd the
heretic speak.

He will myche less bycome accuser say we, then they that herd yt them
self. what has this good man farther to say then, bydde us take then a
another that will. And ever we follow still and say we shall never find him /
and that word he denies not, but always byddeth us go get one. And now if the
second man were content, or the fyftenth after: yet has this man marred all
this matter with one thing. For you wot well that if ye witness that says he
was present and herd it his own ears will refuse to bycome thaccusar him
self: this good man will that ye ordynary shall take him for malycyouse or
false. Now than if we get with long labor some other man to accuse: yet him
that herd it and would not be thaccuser him self, sith the bishop must take
him always for malycyouse or false in the matter, he may never accept him
therein for a witness. For if we take him for fraudule^t and maliciouse to the
party / this man's credence is ten times less in all reason, than his is
that afterward deposes to his harm, where he was first forswore^, while he
would feign have done him good / and that man would not this good man believe
after in no wise.

And thus both for the tone cause and the the other, for lack of an accusour and
credence of the wytnes, you se plainly good readers that by this man's
device, if we dygge up and bery this hylloke ex officio, we shall when we have
all done say he what he list, make and leave that never will than be voyded, as
great an hyllok^ of heretykes in the stead.

And this you se good readers that this good man shows us yet no le^ but that
for any thing that he says here, if the suit of officio were changed as he
would have it, and instead thereof trust all unto accusours, of which for any
thing that he deuiseth we were lykely to find few, and as I fear me verily
rather none at all: it were well lykely to come to pass as I said, that y^
streets should swarm full of heretykes, ere ever they were conue^ted and
repressed by his way. Of which saying of mine as much marvel as he says he
has: yet shows he nothing (as you se) wherefore he should marvel of it /
nor to the things that I preue it with / he no more answers, than though he
never herd them.

Which dealing of his you may clearly perceive, even by the very same lefe,
wherein I wrote those words of which he meruayleth so much and has so little
cause. For there lo my words be these.

For surely if the conuentynge of heretykes ex officio were left and changed
into another order, by which no man should be called, be he never so sore
suspected, nor by never so many men detected, but if some man make him self
party against him as his accusour: the streets were lykely to swarm full of
heretykes, before that right few were accused, or peradventure any one either.

These were lo my words in mine apology against which you have herd what he
says. Than because he should not need to marvel at the matter, I show by and
by what makes me so to say. For there it follows thus.

For what so ever the cause be, it is not unknown I am sure, that many will
give to a judge secret informacyon, of such things as though they be true,
yet gladly he will not or per^^uenture dare not, be openly known that the
matter came out by him.

Consider here good readers that as to bycome open accusars, I speak here of
two lettes. One y^ men will not, another that some men dare not. And yet that
they dare not / I put as the more rare and more seldom. Now comes this good
answerer, and for the more seldom, yt is to wit where they dare not, he
deuiseth a remedy, which seldom yet or never, suffycyentely shall serve the
matter. And the the other cause that I call most commune as in very deed it is:
that cause he neither denies nor any one word speaks of it, but softely
slynketh beside it, as though he had never read yt. what manner of answering
good readers call you this?

More over lest he might deny me that I said true therein: I laid there for
the proof the plain comen experyence, which this good man him self I am very
sure (but if he be a recluse and have been all his life) knows well to be true
/ and in deed he says not nay.

Then go I there farther yet, and I declare what profit there comes to the
commen weal, to give such folk herynge / such folk I say as this good man
would have rejected back, and taken for false or malycyouse, because they come
secretly and will not them self openly bycome accusers. Therein lo these are
my words.

^And yet shall he sometime give the namys of diverse other / which being
called by the judge, and examyned as witnesses against their wyllys, both know
and will also depose the truth, and he that first gave enformacyon also /
and yet will never one of them wyllyngly make him self an open accuser of the
party, nor dare peradventure for his earys.

This thing good readers every man every where fyndeth true that any order of
justice in his hand. And in these words you se well I told him there ones
again, not only that some dare not, but that though men dare they will not
(except the thing do pryuately touch them self) for the causes of the
commen weal become open accusers. And as I again there told yt him: so he
here again forgeth yt.

Then go I yet forth a little farther, and these are there my words.

And this find we not only in heresye, but in many temporal matters among
our self / whereof I have had experyence many a time and often, both in the
dysclosynge of felonyes, and sometime of myche other oppressyon used by some one
man or twayn in a shyre, whereby all their neighbors sore smarted / and yet not
one durst openly complain.

Lo thus I there declared good reders by common eyperyence, that if me^ should
do as this man here deuyseth, reiecte every man for malycyouse and crafty yt
will give secret informacio^, but if he be content to bycome an accuser openly:
there should myche harm grow thereof / not in heresies only, but beside yt in
myche other myschief to. To all this gere you se good readers that this good man
plays as though he ca^e in in a mu^mery, for any one word he says / which
should not so have escaped him ye may be very sure, but that he saw full surely
that he could never answer them. For though he would have denied all that I
speak of mine own experyence, yet in the like things so many men of worship
daily do prove the thing true that I tell yt for, that he could nothing win
in his cause by all that denyenge. And yet did I not mine own self my business
in such wise, but that I can if need require prove it plain enough. But of
this gere as I said he denies nothing, nor answers nothing neither
thereunto. And sure may you be yt if he had could, he would not have failed to
have done the tone.

And therefore good readers my words stand still so sure, that this good man
has not yet nor never shall while he lives, be able to void them with all the
craft he can, but that if men would be so far ouersene as in this matter to
follow his device, to put away this old law the suit ex officio, and trust
that all would be well helped by mean of open accusers: it would at length
come to pass the thing that I have said, that ye streets were well lykely to
swarm full of heretics, ere ever that right few should be thereof accused, or
peradventure any one heretyke either.

And now good christen readers sith you se so clearly, that by such chaungynge
of that law, ye catholyke faith should decay: I care not now greatly what he
say for his second part, sith he has so foul an over throw in the first,
upon which first part all the matter hangs. For though he could in his
second part make you now good proof, not only that there might, but also
that there did and has done, great harm grow by that suyte, which he shall
never prove you while he lives / but at sundry times and that of late where it
has been so surmysed, it has always be proved the contrary; yet sith you se
well that by this change that he deuyseth, while we would help these harms
that he speaks of, that is to wit that no man should be conuented of heresye
causeless. we should by the prouydyng for that harm, be the cause of far
more hurt and harm in the stead / that is to wit, that when that suyte were so
changed, the catholyque faith should dekaye, and heretyques so should
increase, that by such insurreccions as they have here before made, not in
other countries only, but in this realm of England have also attempted y^
same, put yt upon the parell and assey to rob spoil and kill also myche
innocent people openly, and turn folk from the faith by force, and work
other manner of maystryes many mo, such a^ mine heart abhorret so myche as to
rehearse or name. Sith every man may se I say, that such harm were in parel to
fall by this change of his^ there will I wene no wise man follow his fond
deuyse in puttyng this law away, all though he proved well in his second part,
that there were harm in the keeping / while he can not defend the co^^rorye,
but yt there were inco^parably much more harm in the leuyn^e.

But by what way he proves y^ there is great hurt in the keeping, that shall
we now consider. After which well examyned / I shall again return good
readers efte soon unto the first, that this suyt ex officio taken onys away,
the streets were lykely to swarm full of heretykes. And as clear as you se
that ponte al ready, and that this man has therein neither answered nor ones
touched such things as your self se that I said therein before: yet shall I
make yt you anon, with the farther folly of his deuyse double (ere we deperte)
so clear.

Concerning the second part, thus lo this man begins.

But ^o put the party that (...) complained on, (...) answer, and to
condemn him, if he say contrary to that the witness have said, not
knowing who ^e the witness, ne who be his accusere: yt s^meth not reasonable
to be accepted for a law. For as I have said in the said treatise, if he that
is accused knew their names that accused him, he might percase allege and
prove so great and so vehemen^ cause of rancour and malice in the^ that accuse
him, or bear witness against him, that their sayenge^ by no law ought to
stand against him: as if there were two men that had sworn the death of an
other^ and because they can not bring yt about, they ymagyne how they may
bring him to all the shame and dexacyon that they can, and theruppon they
apeche him of heresye: if he in this case knew^ their names, he might prove
their rancour and malice. And because he knows them not, he can not prove yt.
And also the wytnes may be such, as sha^ have his lands by eschete after his
death.

And if it be said, that these cases fall so seldome^ that yt ought little to
be pondred: so may yt be said like wise, that it falls but seldom, that the
wytness^^ in heresye stand in any fear of them, that they accuse. And then to
make a general law to prohybyte all men, that they should not have knoweledge
of the wytnes in no case, yt is not reasonable.

Now good readers one thing opened unto you which is troth, which this man
of wylynesse hydeth from you, and would make you wene the troth were contrary:
deuyde after that known all this myschyefe and vnreasonabylnes that he tells
us here into.xx. parts / and with the bare knowledge of ye one troth,
nynetene and a half of all his false feigned mychyefes are gone.

The troth is good christen readers, that except only one case, where of he
speaks in his seventh chapter of his deuysyon, where to let the party know
the witnesses were parell, to which I have answered him both in mine apologye
first, and synnys even in this same chapyter before: else in all other cases,
the witnesses, whose deposicio^s shall be taken and laid against him to prove
him an heretyque, and upon which deposycyon sentence of condemnynge him for
an heretyke shall be given against him, he shall se them and shall here
their deposycyons to. So that if there be any such great causes, as this good
man here ymagyneth that might happen, of enimyte, or hope of lucre, or any much
less either, the judge both may and will consider them before the sentence.

But why shall he not know them forth with, when he is fyrs^e conuented? For yt
were not well done he should, no more then the kings counsel that many times
call malefactors before them upon secret informacyon first, use always there
by and by to dysclose who told them the matter and what / which if they should
and by and by bring him forth, then though the suspecte would confess happily
some thing thereby the sooner: yet should it be but that thing which he
thought the the other knew. where as while ye thyefe knows not who has given
the informacyon, and yet thinks by his examynacyon that among his many
fellows though they be theuys all, yet some false shrewes there be, he mysse
gesseth among and weneth yt were one where in deed yt was a another / and so instead of one felonye, to light there comes twain.

But at a another time and in an other place, before he shall have any judgment
theruppon, he shall commonly se them sworen and here them speak to.

And here I ^^y commonly, because that sometime percase in point of judgment he
shall not have the^ brought forth and sworen in his presence, nor peradventure
never hear them speak in the matter. For they may happen to be some, y^ deposed
and died to before him self were taken / and some happily that were his
fellows confessed his felonyes at the galowes, when they were on the lather.
And some peradventure bycame approuers vhen they were cast, and called for a
coroner / and the law keeping no store of him but hangyng him up forthwith,
uses yet his informacyon and all these other to, which may happen to come so
many to gether and so likely to be true, that his life may go therefore, and he
well worthy to, and yet neither him self nor thenqueste never here any one
witness sworen, neither the first nor the second, neither at thendyghtynge nor
at his arreyghnynge neither.

Now may yt so fortune in like wise and sometime so does it to, that folk
some good and honest depose in cause of heresye against some one man that is
detected thereof. And happily there depose also some other of his own affynyte
/ and in deposynge against that one man detecte by their deposycyons, a noth^r
man of ye self same company yt is then walked far of, no man can tell where,
ye appears plainly upon al their oaths peradventure the very chyefe heretyke
of all. If he hap long after when these witnesses be deed, to come again in
to ye country and teach heresies a fresh, and one or twain detecte him /
they shall now be sworen and shall be brought forth face to face before him,
that he shall obiecte against them what he can before his judgment pass.
But yet those old deposycyons shall not serve for naught, but are admonicula
probationis, though the men be deed. And against all reason were it that it
were otherwise. How be yt what they said he shall here / and also who they
were.

Lo this is good christen readers the manner of that suyte, whereof this good man
would here make us wene the contrary, and that men were commonly condemned of
heresye by deposycyons of those men whom he should never know. And therefore
sith the troth is in deed, that all the wrong which he speaks of, he
grou^deth upon a plain untruth, though he make not this lie wyttyngly him
self, but hering some folk say so, weneth that yt were true: yet is as I
said before all his reason spylt / and as I told you the harm yt he says
in that point if he should dyuyde it into ^wenty parts, xix. parts and an
half were now clearly gone. For there remained but y^ one case which he would
have here seem comen, and yet in his seventh chapter of his first book he
declares him self that the case is but special, that is to wit, where the
witnesses are kept away for fere / else in all the remanaunt this mannys
harms that he lays here against the law be very clearly gone.

And therefore his two gay cases of swerynge a mannys death, and winning a
ma^nys land by eschete, have place but in the special point of that one
special law. And yet are his two cases such as well considered, are of no
great effect. For if we should regard those two cases: ye publyshynge of the
witnesses names would seldom remedy the matter. For yt might then as well hap,
that such folk might hyre other that should bear such false witness as do
the thing them self, and of lykelyhed so would they rather do.

But seeing that his cases for the far fetching and lykelyhed of so seldom
fortunynge, were lykely to be taken for fond: yet for the favor of his own
deuysynge he was loathe to scrape them out, but excuses the dyuysynge of them
thus.

And if yt be said that these cases fall so seldom that yt ought little to be
pondered: so may it be said like wise that yt falls but seldom that the
witnesses in heresye stand in any fere of them that they acc^se.

Now if this answer of his were good and true, yt it happeth as seldom that
the witnesses stand in any such fear: then he soyleth hi^ own reason him
self. For than has he no cause to complain for the law to keep the witness
close, made but for to serve in that specyal seldom case, where it happeth
such fear to fall.

And therefore is his last cause verily not very shamefaste, where he makes as
though the law were made general, to prohybyte all men that they should not
have knowledge of the witnesses in no case.

And as for in this point of his, wheruppon all his whole matter hangs, to
show you that he says plain untrue, and groundeth all this gere of always
keeping witnesses close, upon a plain open lie: I will for this time take
none other witnesses against him but his own plain open words. For in his
seventh chapyter of his dyuysyon, lo thus good readers he says.

And in the chapyter there, that begins Statuta quedam, it is decreed / that
if the bishop or other enquerours of heresye, se that any great danger
might come to the accusour^ or wytnes of heresye by the great power of them
that be accused: that then they may command, that the names of the accusours
or witness shall not be showed but to the bishop or enquerours / or such
other learned men as be called to them, and that shall suffyce / though they be
not showed to the party. And for the more indempnyte of the said accusours and
wytnes it is there decreed / that the bishop or enquerours may enjoin such
as they have showed the names of such wytnes unto / to keep them close upon
pain of excommunycacion, for dysclosynge that secret without their lycens.
And surely this is a sore law / that a man shall be condemned / and not know the
names of them that be causers thereof.

Now good christen readers here you se plainly by his own words, that the
cause of that law is special, and serves but where as there is fear that the
witnesses might stand in dayngeour, by reason that the person detected were a
man of great might and power, which happeth very seld and almost never till it
b^ well nygh paste remedy. And therefore now you se by these words of his own,
that those other words of his are to shamfull, where he now says here, that
ye law is general, and forbedeth all men that they should not have knowledge
of the witness in no case. upon my faith except this good man se better how to
salve this sore than I se: I would not have written such another point in my
book, for more than all the paper cost and the prentynge to.

But now as I say, sith you se that al these gre^es of his be gone save in
this one only case of so great probable fear, while he groundeth all the
remanaunt upon a great open vn^rewth: it is you se well a very seldom gryefe
that is left. For I never saw, nor to my remembraunce^ read, nor trust in
god never shall se the need, that ever any great man who^^ folk neded to fere,
was condemned in this realm for heresye, save only sir Hugh old castle ones
in the time of king Henry the.v. that was than lord Cobbam / nor yet he
neither, till that through his heresye he fell to treason to, and would have been the captain of heretykes in a sudden traytorouse insurreccyon.

And therefore as for this harm that this good man tells us here, that ryseth
by the suite ex officio in heresye, this point is as you se both reasonable if
it happed, and in law suffycyently provided fore / and yet beside y^ so selde
happeth here in this realm, yt it was folly for him to speak thereof / and yet no
more touches in deed the suite ex officio, thanne if the suit were bygon and
pursued by some great man, that would and fered not to profess him self for
accuser. And thus is this case utterly nothing to purpose / and all the
remanau^t is (as you se also by his own words proved) grounded upon great
untruth. And therefore all this yt he has said set aside for naught: let us
now se what other harm the good man fyndeth ferther. Lo good readers therein
thus he says.

Also sir Tho. More denies not, but that by reason of the law, ex de heretici^
ca. Ad abolendam, which is recyted in the.vii. chapyter of the said treatise ^
a man may be dreuen ^o a purgacyon without any offense in him, or be accursyd,
as if he be notably suspected, and yet not gylty, as it may well be: and yet he
will not condescende, that that law should be changed, but says in
fortyfyenge thereof, that verily he thinks, that he which can not be proved
gylty in heresy, and yet uses such manner of ways, that all his honest
neighbors wene he were one / and therefore in their conscience dare not swear
that he is any other / is well worthy to do some penance. Truly this is a
merueylous persuasion, that a man ^hulde be put to his purgacyon / because his
neighbors dare not swear that he is no heretyke.

Now good readers because this good man begins here to fortifye his word,
with that that I did not in my said.xl. chapyter of mine apologye deny, that a
man may be dreuen to a purgacyon without any offense in him or be accursed, as
if he be notably suspected and yet not gylty: I will first bring you forth
mine own words written in the said chapyter / and afterward than shall we se
whyther he can take such great hold upon my words, as he would it should
seem. Lo good readers these are my words. folio.220.

It may be sometime (albe it very seld it happeth) that in heresy upon other
vehement suspycyons without witnesses, a man may be put to his purgacyon, and
to penance also if he fail thereof / which thing why so many should now
think so hard a law as this pacyfyer says there do I can not se / nor those
wise men neither that made the law. And yet were they many wise men / and not
only as wise, but peradventure many mo also in number, than those that this
pacyfyer calls many now, that as he says now do find the fault. For though
it be alleged in the extra. de hereticis: yet was that law made in a general
counsel. And verily me thinks that he which can not be proved gylty in
heresye, and yet uses such manner of ways, that all his honest neighbors
wene he were one in deed, and therefore dare not swear that in their conscience
they think him any other: is well worthy to do some panau^ce for that manner of
byhauour, whereby he gives al other men occasion to take him for so noughty.

Now good readers where this man takes me that I say a man may be dreuen to
his purgacyon without offense: you se well I say not so / but I say that he
does a great offense, and well wurthy were to be dreue^ to his purgacyo^ and to
do penance to, if he be not able to purge him self / but have used him self
so like an heretyke in all good folks opinion, yt he can find no good folk yt
dare in their conscience swear that they think other wise. This say I is a
great offense and worthy to drive him to this point. And this good man says
that I deny not, but that he may by the law be dreuyn to it without offense.

And where as he says I deny not that he may be dreue^ thereto without
witness: wherefore not I pray you? For the suspycyons being proved by
witnesses, to be notable and vehement, will they not be cause sufficyent to
drive him to pourge him self of that infamy, or else to do penance for
bryngyng him self therein to, but if there be wytnessys of his express
heretycall words?

No says this good man, and meruayleth yt I could thynk this any reason. But
why he shold^ so marvel at y^ matter, or why I should be ashamed to think so,
thereof tells us this good man no tale at all, but only says, Truly this is
a marvelous persuasion, that a man should be put to his purgacyon because his
neighbors dare not swear that he is none heretyke.

Meruelouse god where was this mannys mind when he wrote these words? do I
say yt he shall be put to his purgacio^, because his neighbors will not swear
with him? nay I say y^ wha^ there be by witnesses sworen before his face,
suspicions of heresy proved upon him: tha^ may thordinary put him to such
purgacyon, to prove whyther they will swear with him or no. For when they will
not but refuse it / what mad man would say that he shall be put to that purgacyon
tha^, when he has failed thereof, and yt all ready paste. This man speaks here
as one that perceived no pyece of the matter.

For where as I declare that he is in great offense yt so uses him self, yt
none of his honest neighbors dare swear / that in their conscyences he is any
other than an heretyke: this man takes it as though they that should swear
with him in his purgacyon, should precysely swear that he were none heretyke /
where as their oath shall not be what he is in deed, but what them self think
of his oath / they shall not swear that he is none heretyke, but that they
believe that he has sworen true, in denyeng tharticles said unto his charge.
Like as in the wageour of a law, they shall not swear that the defendaunt
owes not the money, but that they believe that he swereth treuth.

I marvel in good faith yt this good man handeleth this matter in this manner,
and without any telling why, meruayleth so much yt I would think that law
reasonable.

But surely though he could make me a proper reason for his part, and my self
another for the same side also: yet would I think my self right unreasonable,
if I should upon his reason and mine, advise and counsel this realm in a matter
concerning the conseruacyo^ of the faith, to alter and change that law that
was made by so great advise, by an whole general counsel of all chrystendome
/ wherein there were (I dowte it not) men that had as good zele to keep
innoce^tes out of trouble, as any of us twain / and much more reason also than
we both have to. But that point that I showed him in my apologye, that the same
prouisyon that is made in ye saw ad abolenda^, was also made in a general
counsel: ye tale he lets go by, as though he herd it not.

But than he comes forth with a word or two of a ferther fawte in the law,
which either the man understands not what in meneth, or else is it herd for
any man to think yt he meneth well. These are his words so And verily the law
is that their oath in that case should not be accepted: for the said chapyter
Ad abolendam, is that if a man be notably suspected of heresye, that he shall
purge him self after the will of thordynarye or be accursed: and so the
purgacyon of hy^ neighbor will not serve: Let every man therefore consider,
whether the said law be indysferent or not. And if it be not, let them put to
their hand to have it broken. And and think verily, they shall deserve great
thank of god, if they turn it to a more indyfferent way, then it is at
now. For under this manner the most innocent man that is, may of malice be
reported to be suspected of heresye and be not so in deed, and so be dreuen to
his purgacyon or be accursed: and then there is another law, that if he in that
case of an indurate mind stand so accursed a year, he shall be punished as an
heretic and that is by the law, Extra de hereticis, ca. Exc^municamu^.

This prouysyon good readers yt he speaks, which is in the law ad abolendam,
recited in the.v. book of the decretalis in the title de hereticis yt such as
were suspecte should purge them self at the arbitrament and discrecion of
thordynary, was as I before have said afterward, looked upon and allowed in the
general counsel called consiliu^ latranense, as every man may soon perceive
that will well consider the paragraffe exco^municamus afterward in the same
title. For where as ye law there says, Qui inue^ti fuerit sola suspitione
notabiles, nisi statim innoce^tia^ sua^ congrua purgatione mo^strauerint: these
words congrua purgatione be referred unto the the other law ad abolenda^ thereof
made before, as both appears by such doctors as write upon ye laws / and
also to him yt will consider it well it well appears by y^ self text. For in ye
paragraf Exco^. be rehearsed part of the very words of the law^ ad abolendam,
whereby we may se yt the counsel there looked upon that law. And so was I say
that prouisyon which this man calls so unreasonable, not only made by pope
Lucius the.iii. but after also made again by ratificacyo^ by pope Innocent
ye.iii. in an hose general counsel. And read the stories who so will, and he
shall find both by Platiua and Cronica cronicaru^ to, that both this pope
Lucius and this pope Innocent were very virtuous men.

And here had it ben reason now therefore, yt this good man since he fyndeth in
this point so great a fawt in ye wits of both these good popes, and in all the^
y^ were members of that general counsel, and in all the wits of al
christen regyons that have used and allowed yt law for good ever synnys:
reason would I say / that he should at the least have laid some reason here,
wherefore ye law can not please him, that he which though he be not proved
gysty of the deed, is yet proved suspecte, should purge him self after
tharbitrement of thordynarye, that is to wit in such manner wise as
thordynary should think conuenyent, upon the qualytees of yt person and
cyrcu^stau^ces of ye cause co^sydered.

Suppose now yt there were none other manner of purgacion, but by his neighbors
swerynge with him, and that those words ad arbitriu^ epi were not written in
the law: were it yet reason to accept his oath in what so ever manner the man
would him self deuyse it? and with as few hands as him self list appoint?
and with what manner folk so ever him self would bring?

Nay sir. For it may so be, yt there shall be good cause why sometime and in some
place, that thordynary should not put some man to that kind of purgacion
which if he did, were he never so noughty, he should be sure of compurgatours,
peradventure mo than enough. For it has been seen in many cu^treys ere this and
sometime in england to, that some evil precher prechyng plain open heresies,
should yet (if he might have been put to such purgacyo^) have lacked none hands
to lay on the book with him, that he never spoke such words.

How be it where ye words are open and plain heresye, ye law has provided an
other way for ye remedy good enough

But tha^ have there ben some prechers such ere this, ye techyng plain
heresies to their familiars secretly, would prech in such wise abroad, that
their words should have two senses, and one bote serve for either leg like a
shypmans hose / and so should be tempered as the people should have occasyon always
to take them to the wurst / and him self if he were examined would say before
thordinary and swear to, that he never meant but the best.

Now when it should by good witnesses appear, yt his manner was such the people
took much harm thereby, and always took his words so that they thought he so
me^t the^, y^ he purposed by them to set forth and aduau^ce those things yt
were stark heresies in deed: if thordinary should tha^ appoint him with other
co^purgatours to purge this suspicio^, were these suspicio^s never so vehement,
he should lack no co^purgatours to purge him self every weke, and tha^ do as he
did before. And many good simple folk taking him eue^ as he meant, should fall
into his heresies y^ while / and wene while he preched so still, yt to believe
ye way were no perell. And therefore those wise men that made ye law, left ye
thing in thordinarys discrecio^ to assign him that is proved suspect of
heresy, such kind of purgacyon as the cyrcumstaunces of the person, and the
people and the time shall most require.

And therefore will thordynary to some man so suspecte, sometime assygne him (to
purge his suspycyon yt with his lewd manner of prechynge he is fallen in, to the
great hurt of his herers) that he shall openly confess yt those heresies
that the people took him to mean, be very salse here syes in deed / and openly
shall deteste them and swear that he so byleueth them to be / and swear that he
neither meant to teache them, nor never was minded yt any man should take him so,
nor never would afterward teache nor hold heresies, but abjure the^ for ever.

And yet for the ferther purgacyo^ of such suspicio^, the ordynary might also
enjoin him some certain things to do, such as may declare the more clereli,
yt he is not of such mind / as open prechyng against the self same heresies,
and the doing of some such things as those heresies did stand against.

And now by this purgacyon this good shall he do, that if he would after
preach the same things again though he used again such a another wyly
fashyon: yet would his audyence then think thus (as many as had any mind to
be good) either this man means now by his words to teach us that point
that him self has abiured, and then let us not learn the thing of him that
he would in no wise we should / or else he means to t^ache yt us still for all
his abiuracion. And then wherefore should we be so mad to believe a false
wreche, yt would make us believe now, that that thing were true / which him
self has openly confessed and sworen to be false.

But then will happily this good man say, that this abiuracyon is perylouse for
iubardye of the relapse. The parell of death by relapse is not upon every
abiuracyon. But of troth he that is abiured upon such things proved, as
makes him not sleyghtly but very vehemently suspected, if he fall after into
heresye, puts him self in parell to fall into the fire. And very good
reason yt is that yt be so. And a man may some time be so suspecte of felony by
reason of sore presumpcyons, yt though no man saw him do yt, nor him self
never confess yt, but say and swear to that he never had yt: yet may he be
founden gyltye of yt, and theruppon hanged for yt, and have no wrong at all.

And thus this prouysyon for purgacyon at the dyscrecyon of the ordynarye, is
not I trust so unreasonable, nor they so unreasonable that made yt, nor they
so unreasonable yt ratified it, nor al they so unreasonable yt this two or three
hundred year have accepted and allowed yt, but that yt may now stand by this
good ma^nys leave at this day as well as yt has standen all this while before.
But yet is there one thing yt he takes for a thing very sore. For tha^ is
there (says he) a another law that if he that is so proved suspect, refuse to
pourge him self at the discrecyon of thordynary, and be for his con^umacy
excommunycate: that in that case if he of an obdurate heart stand so accursed
an whole year, he shall be punyshed as an heretyke. And that is (as he says) by
the law Extra de hereticis, capitulo Excommunicamus.

This prouisyon was made as I told you in the said general counsel. And
where he brings it forth as though yt were a very sore thing and a cruel: yt
is in deed very favorable. For saving that I will not do as he does, go find
fautes in their doings, that were so many so much better, and had so myche
more wit then I: else could I lay a little better cause to prove that
prouysyon over favorable, then ever this good man shall find while he lives,
to prove that prouysyon to sore.

And surely he that being proved suspect, and refuses in such reasonable
manner to purge him self thereof, as his ordynarye shall by his dyscrecyon
assygne him, which must both by law and all reason be his judge and not him
self, shows him self little to force or care, though folk wene he were an
heretyque: which thing sore aggreueth the suspycyon that he verily is one in
deed. And then when he will rather be ones accursed, then of such suspycyon
yet to purge and clear him self: he yet increases ye suspycyon twyse so sore.
But finally when rather then to purge that suspycyon, he contynueth
excommunycated all the whole year, and never will be purged in the while, but
if he may have yt accepted in such a faynte fashyon as him self list to
offer: the suspycyon of his heresies from sore and vehement, turn by such
dealing into pleyne open and vyolent, so that he can in reason be none other
rekened but a plain heretyque in deed, whom to tolerate so long does sometime
little good. And then sith the law is, that such as the favor of the church
shall preserve from the temporal hands, should by the law be only those,
which upon their deteccyon, turn of their own offer mekely by and by, and
show good tokens of right hearty repentance: I will let no man from
thinclinacyon toward pytye, in preserving the life of any man / when so ever
he seem penytent. But yet surely when the church receives again that man,
that by his obstynate dealing, with abiding excomunicate and contempnyng the
great curse all the whole year, rather then he would purge the suspycyon of his
heresye, but if he may purge it after his own sweet will, proves him self at
last, to have been an heretyque so long, and all that while would not return
but ever more draw bakke: if thordynary for all that receive him to grace
again, and keep him still and preserve him from the seculare hands: I will
not say that he does wrong / but finding him yet repentaunte, feign would I
se him saved.

But yet without doubt as far as I can se, thordynarye to save the mannys
life of pytye, strecheth out with his teth the law and reason both, so far
that even scantely can any of the both hold.

And therefore these laws being such as they be, made and ratyfyed by whole
general counsel, accepted and used so long through al chrystendome: when
this good man comes now forth, and upon his own bare reason as bare as ever I
herd yet in all my life, because only that an innocente may sometime take
harm, which may happen upon any law that ever all the world can make,
whereby there shall be devised any punishment for the evil folk, he byddeth every
man consider now whyther the law be just or not, and if it be not, byddeth
every man put to their hands to have yt broken and make a better, and says
that he thinks they shall have great thank of god therefore: his request is
now no better, but in effect even this, that against every wise man's reason
well approved hitherto, every man should in this matter now, either trust unto
his, or else at the lest wise every man to his own / and instead of a better
old law, make a new much worse. For if his devise were followed: it appears
plainly so there should / and heresies should grow up on heyght, and the
catholyque faith decay. And then god save us from that thank of god that
shortly we should with such dealing deserve.

Thus have I good readers as you se clearly confuted this good ma^nys answer
in both the pryncypa^^ points, of which the tone was wherein he minded to
show that in heresye the suyte of office might be left, and that by the
leuyng there should none harm follow to the catholyque faith / because
heretyques might as well come to correccyon by the way of open accusers as by
that manner suyte.

But in this point you have seen clearly, that his deuyse would never so serve
the matter / but that yt were very lykely so to mynyshe in this realm the
catholyque faith with increase of heresies, that thindygnacyon of god were sore
to be fered thereby to follow thereon: and the realm to fall in trouble and
business, with insurreccion of the same rebellyous^ heretyques, that by the
change of that law had so been suffered to grow as other countries have been of
late, and this realm was ere this so nere like to have been / that for
thauoyding of the like parell to fall afterward, yt provided by parlyament of
great polycye / for the better repressyng of heresies, to fortyfye that law
and give thordynaryes yet greater power to maynteyne yt / and with temporal
assyste^ce to make yt more strong.

His secunde point was to show that of the keeping of that law, there should
grow great harm / because the law is so unreasonable he says, that
innocents may come to trouble thereby without offense.

This part how properly this good man has proved, that have you seen also /
and that he therein is so full and whole confuted, that when he reads yt
again, I suppose he will not now greatly like it.

Now these two thus handeled he comes to the third point, which though I
granted him all to gether, yet were he never the nere. For yt point is such
as if I win it, thanne it makes my part more plain: but on the the other side
if I lost it and he wanne it, yet were mine plain enough. And strong enough
were my part with the first point alone. For if by the leuynge of the suit of
office should follow thencreace of heretics, as every man I think that wit
has, may well se that there would / than though there would some other harm
happen sometime thereof, yet must that other harm in reason, rather be borne
than that.

But now to come good readers unto the third point, which if he wan all
together could very little serve him / ye shall se him yet by gods grace,
win him never a pyece.

The third point good readers in mine apology you se well your self entendeth
nothing else, but by en^emple of the comen laws of this realm, to show that
the same spyrytuall law, which this man would prove unreasonable, is not in
d^de proved unreasonable by this thing that he here puts for the proof /
that is to say, because that by that law sometime yt might hap that a man
might fall in parell of a crime which he committed not. For if yt so were
now, that in all the cases that I rehearsed of the commen law, there could
never no man that had not done the deed, take any harm so myche as a
phylyppe / yet though I had myssed in those ensa^ples, the th^nge might yet
be true. For there m^ghte be for all that, other ensa^ples enough, both in
other good la^es and in the same to, th^^ a law were not vnreasonab^^, nor to
be put a (...) might hap^e sometime some m^n take some harm that never did the
deed that were laid to his charge. And of troth this conclusyon is so clear
that yt needs no proof at all. And therefore though he wanne all that point /
yet had he lost the matter. But let us now a little se whether he win this
point or no.

And because the effect of all his answer lies all way in this, that he
says all way that the sample of the comen law that I lay, is not like the
thing that I resemble yt unto in the spyrytuall law: I shall first rehearse
you mine own words in mine apologye / and then shall I rehearse you his words
here, ^^at when you have herd both tw^yne, whether they be like or unlike ye
^aye the m^re surely judge. These were (...)aders m^ w^rdes.

And (...) thinks that he which can not be proved gylty^ ^n heresye, and yet
v^eth such man^r o^ ways that all his honest neighbors wene he were one,
and therefore dare not swear that in their conscience they think him any other
/ is well worthy me thinks to do some penance for that manner of byhauour,
whereby he gives all other folk occasyon to take him for so noughtye.

And by the come^ law of this realm, many times upon suspycyon the iuges a
ward write to inquire of what fame and behauour the man is in his country /
and him self lies sometime still in prison till the return / and if he be
returned good, that is to wit if he be in a manner purged, then is he delivered
/ and yet he pays his fees ere he go. And if he be returned naught / then
use the iuges to bind him for his good aberynge, and some time suertyes with
him to, such as their dyscrecyon will allow. And then to lie still till he
find them, is sometime as myche penance to the tone, as the spyrytuall judge
in^oyneth to the the other. For the tone comes to the bar as openly as the
the other to the consystorye / and sometime his feters way a good pyece of a
fagotte, bysydes that they lie longer on the tone mannys legs, then the
fagotte on the tothers sholdre. And yet is there no remedy but both these
must be done, both in the tone court and in the the other / or else instead of
one harm (which to him that deserves yt not happeth seldom, and as seldom I
am sure in heresye as in theft, and myche more seldom to) ye shall have ten
times more harm happen daily to folk as innocent as they / and of innocents
many made nocentes, to the destruccyon of them self and other to, both in
goods body and soul.

To this pyece lo good reader this is this good mannys answer.

Then he goes further for mayntenaunce of the said suyte Ex officio, and
resembles it to arestyng for suspecyon of felonye, and to the suertye of good
aberynge, and to indytementes: wheruppon men be put to answer at the commen
law. And how far these resemblances varye from the suyte Ex officio, he in
some place opens yt him self. But yet for a more plain declaracyon therein,
I shall say a little farther in that matter. First as to the arres^ynge for
suspycyon of felonye, yt is in deed an old law of this realm, that for
suspycyon of felonye, a man may be arrested, so that he that does arres^e him
upon a reasonable cause, does suspecte him: but yt is a general rule, that he
shall never be put to answer upon that arreste, but proclamacyon shall be made
that if any man will lay any thing against him, that is so suspected, that it
shall be herd: and if none such come he shall be delivered without fine or a^y
other punyshme^t, with a good exhortacio^ of the judges, that he shall take
good head how he orders him self in time to come. And then master More
lykeneth the penance of such a man that has been in prison upon suspycyon of
felonye, and so delivered by proclamacyon, to the bearing of a fagotte for
heresye. For he says, that the one of them shall come as openly to the bar as
the other to the consystory: And that sometime his fetters shall ^ey a good
piece of the faggot, besides that they lie longer on the one mannys legs, then
the fagotte on the other mannys shulder: but he reherseth not how they lie
many times longer in prison for heresye, then they do either for suspycyon of
felonye or for good aberynge. And over that I dare say, that there are but few,
but that they had well lever abide the pain to be thryse acquyted by
proclamacyon, and peradventure ofter, the^ ones bear a faggot for heresy.

How goes now good readers this answer of this good man unto the purpose,
to prove the trouble of him that is arrested upon suspycyon of felonye, to be
unlike to the trouble of him that is sued ex officio for heresye, touching the
point that I resemble them for?

The point ye wot well sor which I speak of tharrestyng for suspycyon of
felonye, is to show, that like wise as yt may happen a man for heresye to fall
in trouble sometime though he were none heretic i^ dede^: so may yt happen a
man sometime to be troubled upon suspycyon of fel^nye, though he be no felon in
deed: and yet both the tone law necessary and the the other to / and neither of
both may be forborne. Has this good man proved us the contrary of this?
that you se well he has not. And then has he not perdye proved them unlike.

He weneth he says somewhat, when he tells us that upon tharrestynge upon
suspycyon of felonye he shall not be put to answer till he be indighted. What
is his trouble the less for that? If he lie in prison till the sessyon as he
may hap to do were it not more his ease to be put to answer before and
acquytte, if he be not fawty (for of such folk we speak) than for lack of
putting to answer lie still in prison y^ longer?

As for that, that in conclusyon if no man lay naught to his charge at the
sessyons, he shall be delivered by proclamacions / so shall he that is
suspected of heresye to: For if there be nothing founden against him, he
shall neither be dreuen to abiuracyo^ nor purga^io^, but be delivered quyte,
how so ever that either thy^ man myssetake or would make other men myssetake
the matter to the contrary.

And as to that, that the tone shall pay no fine / no more shall the the other
neither.

If this man will peradventure say, sith that thordinary fyndeth the man not
suspect in the end, why did he take and arreste him for suspecte in the
beginning. Because that in the beginning the man seemed upon good
consyderacyons suspecte, and seemed lykely to fle, and upon his examynacyon the
matter full serched out, the causes of suspycyon so well avoided, that
thordynary declares him for dyscharged without any other purgacyon. But yet
has it myshapped him to have some harm the mean while / and so has it him
also that was arrested upon suspycyon of felony that never was after
indyghted, but delivered forth fre upon the proclamacyon.

I se no great dyfference between these two men in all this matter yet, save
that the tone lies at his own finding, the the other at the bysshoppes cost.

For where as this man says, that he which is delivered by proclamacyon,
has, always given him by the justices a good lesson at his departing: if the
bishop give not the the other a good lesson at his departing to, tha^ is he
somewhat to blame in deed / but in ^ood faith I here say that he does so to.
And therefore where is this dyfference yet? I look always for that. For as for
the shame of open brynging forth, is both one as I said / saving that the
sessyon has come^ly much more people present to gase upon the tone, than in
the consystory looks upon the the other.

And where this man says, that they lie longer in prison for heresye, than
they do either for suspycyon of felonye or for good aberynge / if he speak of
those which are in conclusyon founden in no more fawte concerning heresye,
than those are that are delivered by proclamacio^ be fou^de^ at the sessyon
concerning felony / I dare be bold to tell him nay. And I am very sure the
troth will prove so to. But now if he speak of those that appear upon the end
in such fawte that by the law they be bounde^ to abjure / than is it good
reason that they lie longer in deed. And so lie there as reason is sometime
some for felonye to, repryed upon causys from one sessyon to another, and
sometime kept you se well all the whole year and more. And that sometime such as
are in conclusyon never indyghted neither, but after all that delivered by
proclamacyon, and yet good causes in ye mean while why they were kept so. And
therefore where as this man says, that they be in worse case that bear a
fagotte, very troth it is somewhat and so is it reason they be. For they be
not fawtelesse but convicted of the fawte. And our dyspycyo^s is of innocents
that happen by the law, the tone law or the the other, to take harm without
their fawte. For if he would compare the fawty with the fawtye, than must he
compare the tone berynge the faggotte, with the the other at the very first time
borne up with the rope.

And therefore I did in that place, not only shew^ that he that is innocent,
may by arrestynge for felonye hap to have as myche harm, as he yt is
innocent and arrested for heresye: but that he may happen to have sometime
also as much harm, as he that for the first time is founden fawty in heresye
and plainly conuycted thereof. And surely save for the ferther perell upon his
ferther fawte, so may it hap in deed and yet as I said in my dyaloge the
law must needs be kept, but if you will by the change have five theuys for
one. And thus as for this pyece of arrestynge for suspycio^ of felony, the case
has he not proved unlike, towchynge the purpose that I put it for, but for
my part very strong. And so has this good man in this first pyece of the
third point a very great fall.

Than comes he next unto another case that I spoke of also, that is to wit
arrestynge upon good aberynge. And where as in mine apologye that pyece is the
third, ye pyece in his answer he makes the second / and I se why well
enough. For sith him self sees that he answers it so slenderly, he wrappeth
it up in the mids, because it should be the less marked, and would end with
another pyece wherein him self weneth tha^ he says somewhat better.

Now as for this good aberynge, to the end yt ye may se the better how gayly
this good man answers it, I shall first rehearse you the words of mine
apology that he makes this answer to.

After that I have she weth there, that ye judges of the spyrytuall court be
not so folysshe, but that they had lever not meddle with any man, save only
upon some such open inquisycyon as are indyghtementes of felonye for
avoiding of obloquy, saving that necessyte compels them to take this way,
for fear that with sufferaunce of heresies to go forth and grow, all might at
length through gods displeasure very far grow to naught / I say there
farther thus folio.225.

Necessyte sometime causes also both the temporal iuges and the kings
counsel, to put some folk to business or dyshonestye sometime, without
either jury or bringing of the accuser to the proof of the matter in the
parties presence.

For if the judge know by sure enformacyon, that some one man is of such evil
demeanure among his neighbors, that they may not ^ere it / and yet that the
man is bysyde so vyolent and so iuberdouse, that none of them dare be aknowen
to speak of it: will there no judges upon many secret co^playntes made unto
them, without making the party preuye who told him that tale, bind that busy
troubelouse man to good aberynge? I suppose yes, and have seen it so to / and
wrong would it be some time with good pore peasyble folk in the country, but
if it were so done among. And my self when I was chancellor, upon such
secret enformacyon have put some out of co^myssyon and office of justice of
the peace, which else for much money I would not have done, and yet if I were in
the tone rome still and they in the the other again, but if they be mended
(whereof I neither than saw nor ye^ here any lykelyhed) I would put them out
again, and never tell them who told me the tales yt made me so to do^

Lo good readers here you se, that in this pyece I mean nothing else, but that
where as this good man fyndeth a fawte that the spyrytual judge should meddle
with any man for heresye without an open accusour complaynyng to him, or an
open presenteme^t in ye beginning / I show there that necessyte is the cause,
and forth with afterward I prove it, which this good man dyssembleth here and
inuerteth here thordre for the nonys. And I show that necessite (lest much more
harm should grow thereon) causes the temporal judges and the kings honorable
counsel to, to put some man to business sometime and so to dishonesty both,
without either indyghteme^t, or open accusour, or suffryng him to make answer
either / and thus be they feign to do, but if they should suffer many great
harms to grow. Now mark well I require you how substancyally this good man
answers this. These are his wise words so.

And then as to the arrestynge for good abearynge, troth it is, that a man by
commandment of the justices may so be arrestyd, but he shall never be put to
answer upon that arrest, but only bound, and suretyes with him of his good
aberynge. And if he can no such surety find, and he have lain there long in
prison, then the^ iuges by their ^yscresyon may send a writ to enquere of
his fame, and of his behauour, which is called a wryt de gestu et fama^ whereof
sir Tho. More makes mencyon in his apologye: and if it be found for him upon
that writ, that he is of good fame and behauour, then he shall be delivered.
Whereby master More says, he is in a manner purged, and by that saying it
seems that his meaning is, that that desyuerye should be resembled to his
purgacyon upon the suspycyon of heresye, as is said before. But how far they
be unlike, it appears thus: when a man is delivered upon the said writ De
gestu et fama, he is delynered ^ as a man proved to be of good honestye and to
be clered by his neighbors, of that he was spspected of. And when he is purged
upon the suyte E^ officio, or for suspicion of heresye, he is put to penance
by thordynarye, as a man suspected, whereof he is not clered, and so shall he be
taken among his neighbors, as a man worthy to do that penance for his
offenses, wherefore it appears ^uydentely, that they be nothing lyke^

In this answer good reader one piece he answers with an untruth another
piece he leueth half unanswered, and to another pyece he makes none answer
at all.

For where as he says, that he that is purged of heresye in the suyte ex
officio, is put unto penance by the ordynary as a man suspecte, whereof he is
not clered: this man says untrue, and woteth not also what he meneth. For the
spyrytuall judge not only (as I have said) though he were sore suspected in
the beginning when he took him, yet if he find in the xamynacyon those
suspicyons clered: he puts him to no ferther business at all, but also if
it be not so fully clered, but that there remain some tokens of suspycyon, of
which he think it good to pourge him by ye oath of him self and some other
co^pour gatours with him, he puts him after yt purgacion unto no penance
neither. But now if it so be, yt there be well proved such suspicio^s as are so
vehement, that though they prove not precysely ye deed, yet make every man that
hereth the^, that he can none other wise think: there will the ordynary cause
him to abjure / and yt rather to purge him of the suspycyo^ that he were still
naught and afterward still would be naught, than yt he was such before. And
than for vsyng him self in such wise before: though he do penance he has but
right. But in all those other cases of suspicio^ purged, he says untrue / for
they do no penance at all.

Now concerning the good aberynge awarded by the justices: he answers yt it
is true / but it is he says unlike unto this matter, because the justices
(says he) wha^ he has long lain in prison, may by their dyscrecyon (if he
can find no suertyes) a ward a writ de gestu et fama.

This is but half an answer, nor scant so much neither. For first him self
says that this wryt they may send out after that ye man has long lain in
prison / so that than the man yet without presentement or open accusour has
had that long lyenge in prison in the mean while for his ^uyl demenure at
home among his neighbors, whereof they durst not openly make complaynt. And
this does as you se this good man deny, which is for my purpose enough.

But than says he ferther for me, in that he says they may award that writ
if they will. wherein he implies that if they will not, they may upon good
dyscrecyon let him yet lie still and let the writ alone. And so has he
therefore put in one point ferther for me.

But yet has this good man one stop gappe for me still, to prove always that
my sample is not like / and that is that where as in the suyte ex officio, men
be put to answer upon this arreste and imprysoment vppon^ good aberynge, the
man shall never be put to answer.

For answer of this euasyon I will ask this good man this, that he which is
in prison upon good aberyng shall never be put to answer, whyther is it his
profit or his loss? If his loss: than his not puttyng to answer, makes ye
matter of my resemblyng, much the more strong for me. And if this good man dare
answer me yt it is his profit: than will I no more but pray him to put the
fellow in choice / and than if him self chose it for the better, let him lie
still for me.

This you se good readers that this man says not nay, but that upon good
aberynge by dyscressyon of the justices, for all the writ de gestu and fama,
a man may lie long in prison and some peradventure ever, how be it of troth
I trow it happeth not so.

And yet can neither this good man say, nor I suppose no man else, but that it
may sometime hap by possybylyte, that all that informacyon were wrong. But
that is a thing not lykely to hap so often, but that if we should for such
may happys, put away yt order which order very necessyte brought up: there
would much myschyefe grow, and many great harms would there tha^ hap i^ deed.

Now as towchyng that I said, that the kings counsel used also sometime
upon great secret informacion to put some folk to busynes and to some
dishonesty to / and I let not to lay some sample in mine own deed while I
was chancellor my self, by puttyng some out of co^myssyo^ in their contreys /
which dishonesty save for such secret informacyon, I would not for an hundred
pound have done the^, and dare yet upon such se^ret informacio^ very well auow
the doing / and dowt not but yt if I should declare the cause openly, both
good men and wise me^ would allow my deed: to all this point lo this good man
says nothing at all, but lets it go by his ears as though he never herd
it.

And thus as I told you, concerning this pyece of good aberynge: this good
answerer has here borne him self so well, that some part he answers with
untruth, some part he answers a great deal less tha^ half, and some
part never a deal. If men be content to take this fashyo^ for answering: let
any man make than against me as many books as he will, and put in what matter
he list, and I shall never need to study much for an answer, but may make
answerys to them all shortly and short enough, and answer a long book in
space of one paper ^efe.

But now let us se how he handeleth this third piece of endyghtementes at
the sessyons. For that pyece he sets in the rere ward, to stay therwyth
all the field. But now that you may se what strength he has in that ward: I
shall first bring you forth that ward against which yt fyghteth. In mine
apologye fo.cc.xxii. these are mye words lo.

And because this pacyfyer takes yt for so sore a thing in the spyrytuall
law, that a man shall be called ex officio for heresy, where he shall not know
his accuser: if we should change the spyrytuall law for that cause, the^
had we need to change the temporal to, in some such points as change yt
when ye will, and ye shall change yt into the worse for aughte that I can se,
but if it be better to have mo theuys then fewer.

For now if a man be endyghted at a sessyons, and none euydens given openly at
the bar (as many be, and many may well be. For thendytours may have euyde^ce
given them a perte,^ or have herd of the matter ere they came there, and of
whom be they not bounden to tell, but be rather bounde^ to keep yt close, for
they be sworen to keep the kings counsel and their own) shall then the
party that is endyghted be put unto no business about his acquytayle? And
who shall tell him there the names of his accuser, to entytle him to his write
of co^spyracye? This pacyfyer will peradventure say, that the same twelve men
/ that are his endyghtours are his accusers, and therefore he may know them. But
what helps that his undeserved vexacyon if he were fauteless? For ame^des the
law gives him none against any of them, nor it were not well done he should /
but may when he is after by other.xii. acquyte, go get him home and be merry
that he has had so fair a day / as a man gets him to the fire and shakes
his hatte after a shoure of rain.

And now as yt often happeth, that a man comes into a shoure by his own
ouersyght, though sometime of chau^s and of adventure: so surely though sometime
yt hap that a man be accused or endyghted of malice, or o^ some lykelyhed
which happed him of chance and not his fault therein yet happeth yt in
comparyson very selde, but that the party by some demeanure of him self
gives occasyo^ that folk have him so suspected.

In this pyece my purpose is good reders as you se, to show that like wise as
a man shall in the suyt ex officio for heresye, not know his accuser: so may
yt also happen many times, that no more he shall neither, when he is at the
comen saw indyghted of felonye. And I show also therein as you se, that though
yt may tometyme hap either of malice or chance: yet yt seldom happeth for
all that, that the party so falls in trouble without some defaute of him
self, and that the commen general law may not for such seldom special
happes be forborne. To this pyece lo this good man answers me thus.

And then master More says yet farther, that upon indytementes at sessyons,
the indyters use not to show the names of them that gave them informacyon.
And he says farther, that they may not show their names. For they may not
dysclose the kings counsel nor their own. But as I take yt that prohybycyon
of opening of the counsel in this case is only to be understand of their
own co^^sayle among them self, after that they be sworn / but for opening
of the names of them, that gave them informacyon before they were sworn, I
know no prohibicyon. And if they will not show their names, they be not bounden
to do yt / for they be not bound to help the party to his wryt of
co^spyracy, but as they list to do in conscience

Now good readers all this pretended defense, is nothing else in effect,
but a fair confession, that yt is in deed true the thing yt I said my self,
that he which is endyghted of felony, may be (as for any adu^tage that he can
take thereby) as ignorant sometime who be his accusers, as he shall in the suyte
ex officio. And thereby may happen sometime, that he which is fautelesse shall
not be all saved harmless / and when he has had his harm, shall be
remedylesse. And yet for all that the law not unreasonable, nor for avoiding
of myche more harm may not be forborne. And therefore as for my purpose even at
that point might I have left, and neded to go no farther. And then as you se
this good man had been quyte answerelesse.

But yet went I farther where me neded not, and that this good man says that I
did of necessyte, whereof for this matter I had of troth no need. And yet
would I not now but I so had done in deed. For I have thereby the better
brought to light, what lack this good man has of any suffycyent answer.
For these are there lo good readers therein my farther words.

Now if this pacyfyer say, that yet here is at the least wise in a temporal
inge an open cause apperyng, whereupon men may se that the judge calls him
not, but upon a matter brought unto him / where as the spyrytuall judge may
call a man upon his own pleasure if he bear the party dyspleasure: this is
very well said as for the temporal judge. But what says he now for the
temporal.xii. men? For ye wot well they may do the same if they were so
dysposed / and then had I as leave the judge might do it as they. For in good
faith I never saw ye day yet, but that I durst as well trust the troth of one
judge as of two iuryes. But the judges be so wise men, that for the avoiding
of obloquye, they will not be put in the trust.

And I dare say the ordynaryes be not so folyshe neither, but that they would
as feign avoid yt to if they might / saving that very necessyte lest all
should fall to naught, compels them to take this way.

Here you se that I mean in this words, that though the pacyfyer would tell
me that the temporal judge has by such endyghtement at the least wise, an
open cause apperynge wheruppon a man may se that the judge calls him not of
his own mind, but upon a matter brought unto him: I would them grant him
that this is in deed a good ease to the temporal judge, to keep him out of
obloquye. And the spyrytuall iuges be not so unwise, but that they would be glad
of such a another pauyce saving that they be bounden to take the the other way,
and suffer them self evil peples obloquye, for auoydyng of the harm yt else
would follow, by the decay of Cristes catholyke faith. Which thing I there
prove well to, as you shall after se. This as I say would I have granted
allway this good man. But then I would allwaye therwythall have told him to,
that yet all that tale of his had nothyge touched the point / but that
always for all this tale, the man that was indyghted, if the matter were in deed
untrue, was never the nerer the knowledge who were his accusers, to get any
amends thereby, no more then he that is called of office for heresye before a
spyrytuall judge. And here now what he says to this, and whyther we be by his
answer for the point yt was me^t by me, any one ynch yet the nerer. Lo good
readers this is his proper answer.

And the^ because he ca^ none otherwise do, but confess a great dynersyte
betwyxte them that be put to answer ex officio, and them that be put to
answer before the kings justices upon indytementes at the common law: for
there the judges have suffycyent and apparent matter to put them to answer
upon, and in the other there is none, but that the spyrytuall judge upon a
dyspleasure may do yt ex officio, if he will. Therefore he goes yet farther and
says, that the.xii. men may yet do the same, and make a man to be called
that is not gyltye, if they were so dysposed. And troth yt is, they may indyte
a man, that is absent, and that is also not gyltye, and be untrue, if they
will: but yet in such case the.xii. men be known that do yt, and be also
compelled to be upon the inquyrye: for they may not be upon it, but they be
thereto assygned: and also the party upon their verdyte shall not be put to
answer before them, as yt is upon the suyte Ex officio, but before the kings
judges, before whom the indyteme^t is no atteynder to the party: but that he
may be found not gyltye, not wythstandynge that indytement. And though
master More say, that he never saw the day yet, but that he dursie as well
trust the treuth of one judge as of two iuryes: I think the judges will can
him but little thank f^r that preyse: for surely inryes must nedely be believed
and trusted. And therefore it is not the manner of the judges to lay untruth
upon a iurye, ne yet to commend them that do yt, but yt be proved afort them
o^ ^ecorde after the order of the law.

Here you se good readers yt touching the point that we spoke of, all this
tale helps nothing, but goes all about a another matter, to prove a another
dyfference between ye suyte of office and indyghtementes, as though I had said
there were no difference between the^ at all. But I was never yet so mad to
be of that mind. For the^ must I say they were both one. And then were every
endytement a suyte of office, and every suit of office an indyghtement, if
there were no dyuersytees between them at all.

And therefore if his dyuersyte shall serve aughte for the purpose: he must
make yt appear that the suyte of office because of that dyfference, and because
yt is not like indyghtementes in that point, is therefore in heresye either
very clearly naught, or else that at the lest wise yt were somewhat better,
that they should never put any man to answer in heresye, but either upon open
accusacyon or psentement had before. For else if he wene to win this point of
me with showing forth a dyfference: if his difference prove me no such thing
as I tell you, he may for the matter as well bring us forth any verse dyfference
at adventure, that he learned at grammar scole.

Now when he has laid al his dyuersyties on an hepe, and would theruppon
conclude, yt because of those diue^syties, ye suyte of officio were naught and
unreasonable: I say yt follows nothing: For it proves yet no farther at the
farthest, but yt the order of the comen law were better, and not yt the the other
were naught. For it might well be for all that, yt the common law might be good
enough, though they yt secretly or openly come now and inform the queste, came
either secretly or openly, and likewise informed the court.

And now saw I well, that to this point was there none answer for this good
man again / but to tell me yt in such things as they now trust the questes,
it were parell instead of ^uryes so myche to trust the court, by cause the
iuges might then fayn matter against men, and say they were secretly informed.
To this sith I saw what trust the realm must needs put in ye judges hands,
so far above the wheyghte of the first endyghtement, that serves for
nothing but for an informacyon and seeing also what manner of men they be that
be chosen to be judges, so that there is nothing of so great weight but that
yt well may be put in their hands: I rekened them of such troth, that save
for evil folks obloquye, to them self ward / else to the people there
should come none harm, though the trust that we put in the^dytours, were instead of them put in the judge him self. This I there said lo, and this I
think in deed. For as I said there, I neu^r saw yet the day, but yt I durst
as well trust the truth of one judge, as I durst trust the troth of two
iuryes. What has this good man answered me now to this? To all this gere here
is lo his worsyppefull answer. I think the judges will can him but little
thank^ for that praise. For surely iuryes must needs be believed and trusted.
And therefore yt is not the manner of the judges, to lay untruth to a iurye / ne
yet to commend them that do yt. But yt be proved before them of record after
the order of the law.

This answer of truth is not worth a straw. For as for yt he says the
judges will for that praise can me little thank: that word were somewhat, if I
had said it for their thank. But I said it in good says, not for their
thank at al, but because yt is very troth, yt I never saw the day yet in
deed, nor never I trust in god I shall, but that I may well and so will I do in
deed, ^rust the troth of one judge, as well as the troth of two iuryes. I
would here wit of this good man, what disprayse is this to any jury? what
vntrewth is there here laid unto them, or to any one man of them, I will use
one word now this ones, which this good man uses often. For now will I say a
little farther, and that is this (though this man may hap to think the
saying strange) I will not let to believe the troth of some one man, of whose
troth I make my self sure and doubt nothing at al, even as well as the truth
of a great many at ones, though they be all such as I believe every one of
them as well as I believe him self. And I also believe some one judge alone, not
in conning but in truth, as well as I will believe both him self and all his
fellows to. For some one man may be such, that if he should tell me a tale as of
his own perfyt knowledge: I would so little doubt yt to be true, yt I could believe
yt no better, though all the town told yt with him. Lo what a great untruth I
lay here to the iuryes.

And this I say for my self. And now will I with this good mannys leave, say
yet a little farther, and I wene I shall not say so alone. I suppose verily that
there be very few, but so that it might make a fynall end in their matter,
except happily some such as trust more in the favor of the country then in
the truth of their cause: they would rather be content to put yt whole into
the judges hands, then trouble the country with calling up of the iuryes,
whose troth yet many times deceyueth them, that in an evil cause have very
great trust unto them.

And yet in all this say not I that the commen order and long con^ytynued law
of this realm, to try the matters by iuryes, and in felony or treason never to
proceed but upon endyghtementes, is not good / nor that the contrary way were
better. Mary two things I say, that in treason and felonye this ordynarye
law of endyghteme^tes is many times fayn to be helped forth by a another mean,
myche like in many things to the suyte ex officio / and that is by dylygent
polytyque search and examynacyons bysyde, both by the kings honorable
counsel, and the iuges, and justices of peace, every man for their perte in
every perte of the realm / and else would there many such mischiefs pass by and
by indightem^t never would be fou^de^. And some great and clearly proved
felonyes before diverse and right worshypfull of the kings counsayl, have I
wyste ere this, that never could be gotten to be founden by endyghtement in
their countries, for all that. How be yt such examynacyons has caused yet
many myscheuouse people to be brought to their punyshement / and have put also
many such other unthriftiness in fere, and made them refrayn fro theuyng and
draw them self to thryfte / or elies not wytstandynge that there are yet
theuys enough, there would be without doubt many mo.

The the other thing that I will say is this, that all these dyfferences and
dyuersyties that this good man puts here, between indyghtementes and the
suyte ex officio, proves nothing that the suyte ex officio is not good / but
only at the very uttermost, that the order not to proceed without an open
presentement were better. For (...) said before, though this law by
endyghteme^tes be better in felony now: yet were not the the other way naught, if
the law were so that the judges might proceed and put felo^s to answer
without endyghtementes / as in treason is used in this realm by the law
marshall upon war rered, as we saw by experyence in captain Quintyn
captayn Genyn Corbet and ^elke. And yet is that law not evil, though that
our own comen law be better, and that though we trust the iuryes never so
well, yet might we trust the judges as well. And this may I say me thinks
without any dysprayse or fawte finding in the iuryes at all. For let him
assygne me two iuryes of very well known good men / and than if he will ask
me what fawte find you sir in these men: I will answer him, Mary sir no fawte
at all I. I take them all for good men and true, and think they will not say
but treuth / nor I never said nor thought other wise. But tha^ would I assygne
him by name one of our judges again / and say now sir that I trust the
troth of your two iuryes well, what fawte is that that you find in this
judges troth, that makes you to chekke me so because I will trust him no
wurse than I will trust them. For that is ye wot well all that ever I said,
that I would trust the judge as well, and not that I would trust him better.
And yet if I had said I would of the both trus^e the judge better: I had not
by that word neither, dyspraysed the troth of iuryes. For he that says he
will better bysene.xxiiii. than.xii, dysprayseth not the troth of the petit
iuries, but byleueth them well also, save such as be founden false. And thus
I have showed you that I may well say the words that I said, without any
finding of any fawte in any iuryes. And it app^reth also metely well, that him
self can not well say the contrary without some manner of dystrust in their
troth. And yet sith their wurshyppys be so well know that this good mannys
dystruste can not apayre it: they will I dare say forgive him. How be it since
the judges would (as this man says, and as I dare also say they would, be sore
dyscontent with me, if I dystrusted the ^routh of the iuryes: the iuryes may
now no less do again of courtesye, than for his wurse opinion of the judges
troth somewhat be angry wyt^ him.

Nor herin se I none other shyfte for this good man, but for the mayntenaunce
of his matter to say, that in the comen law, the law would be good enough in
felonye, though the trust were put in the judges, to put traitors and
felons to answer without indyghtement / but in heresye it could not be good
before an ordynarye / and would say for his cause a dyuersyte between the tone
judge and the the other, and say that our judges be good men and worshypful, and
ever (...) ben and ever shall / and that the ordynaryes be, and ever have been,
and shall be, very false and naught. Other shyfte has this man none that I se
than even to say thus. And verily his book of diuisyon, save that it says
nothing to the praise of temporal judges that I now remember: yet to the
dysprayse of the spyrytuall, for those algates that be now, says even in
effect as much, ye and rather yet wurse to, save that ye color of some say
saves him from saying it him self.

But now if he defend him self with that fasshyon again: what the iuryes will
say that can I not tell / for the panellys be not yet called. But as for our
judges, I know their wysedoms and their wurshyppys such, that I am very sure
in his so saying and his so lyenge upon the spyrituall judges, they would can
him no thank at all.

And verily that the spyrytual ordinaryes be not at these days lykely to be
such, ye temporal judges being so good as they be: there is among many other
one lykelyhed this, that he has chosen the tone that has chosen the the other,
the kings gracious highness him self / which having on both sides very
good to chose of, has I dare say ben as cyrcumspecte in choosing of
thordynaryes, as of ye judges. And yet lest in their absence the officers of
their own choice might hap to misseordre ye matters: his grace keeps not two
bysshoppes of all the realm out of their diocises, nor to say the troth not so
myche as one. For he whose attendaunce his grace uses most, is far the most
part of the year in his own dyocise every day.

And therefore as I said before, all these verse dyfferences, and all these
dyuersytees, which this good man says bytwen the suit ex ^fficio in heresye,
and the not procedynge with out indyghtem^tes upon treason or felony, proves
at the very fertheste not that the suit ex off^cio is naught, but that not to
proceed but upon a presenteme^t were the better away. And than I say that it
is a pore tale and a cold, if a man would come forth and labor us to break
every old law long used in this realm, which he could not prove but that
it were good enough / but yet would needs have it changed, because that if it
were now to make, him self could he says make it better.

But now will I come a little nerer unto this good man, with the ^o^he rpoynte
yt I towched before / yt is to wit that it is not in this mat^r enough for
this good man, to prove (...) that not to proceed without open o^^^sacion or
presentement is the better way, both upon treason and ^^^onye, but if he
prove us ferther, i^ a^ the same way were also better in heresye

But thanne have I showed before in mine apologye, that in heresye that way
will not serve. And that have I there proved by the playneste proof that in
such manner things any man can make, that is to wit by common open experyence
/ whereunto this good man of polycy would give none ear, but in his answer he
has left it quyte out.

And therein he fares lo like a geste, that makes his reckoning him self
without his host / which is therefore after feign to reken again / as I shall
now bring in here one penny more into this good man's reckoning, which I
perceive well him self would very feign forgete. Lo thus wrote I ferther good
readers to wchynge this point in that self same chapter of mine apology
folio. 226.

But yet will peradventure this pacyfyer say, that sometime in some very
special case, he could be content that the spyrytuall judge should upon hys^
dyscrecyon call one for suspycyo^ of heresye ex officio / but he would not have
men comenly called, but either by accusacyo^ or presenteme^t in their senys or
endyghteme^tes at the common law. I had as lyefe for any thing that I se, that
this pacyfyer should say thus: By this way that they be called I would not have
them called / but I would have them called after such an order as they might
be sure that than should they never be called. For as for accuse folk openly
for heresye, every man has experyence enough, that ye shall seldom find any
man that will / but if the judge should set an officer of the court thereto
without any perell of expensys / and than were this way and that way all of one
effect. And as for presenteme^tes and endyghteme^tes, what effect would come
of them concerning heresye, ye se the proof I trow metely well all ready.

For this is a thing well known unto every man, that in every seen, every
sessyon of peace, every sessyon of jail delyuery, every let thorough the
realm, the first thing that the jury have given them in charge is heresye.
And for all this, through the whole realm how many presenteme^tes be there made
in the whole year? I wene in some seven year not one. And I suppose no man
dowteth, but that in the mean time some there be. I will not be curiouse about
the serchyng out of ye cause, why it is either never or so very selde
presented, not five in fyftene year. But this I say that sith some will not,
some can not, and none does / if he should put away the process ex officio,
the thing should be left undone / and than should soon after with heretykes
encreaced and multyplied, the faith be undone / and after that thorough the
stroke of god reuengyng their malice and our negligence, should by sedycyon,
and trouble, and derth, and death, in this realm many men both good and badde
be undone. And therefore for conclusion of this pyece, my pore aduyce and
counsel shall be, that for heresye, and specially now this time, men shall
suffer the pro^esses ex officio stand / and for as many other synnys also as
are only reformable by the spyrytuall law, except there be any such synnys of
them as ye think were good to grow.

What has this good man good readers said unto this pyece? what shall we good
reders say now to this good man? yt in this goodly answer of his, which he
would were taken for so strong, unto this piece upon which great part of the
matter hangs, says not so much as mum / but lets it s^ippe even by, as
though he were one yt had as for this point ben born defe and thereby dumme.

And now concerning this point, I will yet say a little ferther, that in
places mo than one, good evidence have been given unto questes of plain and open
heresye, which yet would not find it / yt would upon much less euyde^ce, have
shortly presented felony.

And one of these matters with the pressed ye preched it wha^ I was chancellor,
was brought unto me by right wurshupfull folk, yt before me aduowed it in his
face. And yet could not all they cause the quest to present it, but some folk
byga^ to fall to favor him / and had he not ben taken by good wurshypfull
te^porall men, many would have flocked after him, and have followed him about for
pleasure of his new fasshyon prechynge. And yet for all that flockyng, though
they had made.ii. or.iii. hundred as they should hahpely within a while if a
few good men had not let it: they had been yet but an handful to their good
catholyke neighbors / and yet by such flockynge together, and following on a
plumpe, they should have seemed in folks eyes far the more part / and at
length peradventure if they went on and were not let, they might grow to it
in deed.

That priest I delivered unto his ordynary, and that with good and plain proof
of his heresye / which was in deed soon after that abiured But for this I
tell it you, that ye jury would not find it for all the good folk that gave
them open euydence. And that this is not in one case, nor a thing that happeth
seld, as I said in mine apology, plain experyence prou^th. whereby you may se,
that in heresy if the judge should not ex officio proceed, till the matter were
presented by ye iuryes: heretics might be bold to proceed on a pace and so
they would I warraunt you, and multyply full fast.

And thus you se good readers, yt concerning this pyece, this good man has in
every point a gr^t overthrow.

And therefore now the last clause of this.xv. chapyter of his, is clearly
wrested awry. For as though he had all proved, wh^re all is dysproued: he
fynysheth his chapyter thus.

And thus it appears, that mays^er More can neither prove the suyte Ex.
officio to be like to the arrestyn^e of men for suspycyon of felonye, for good
aberynge, to putting of men to answer upon indyteme^tes, ne yet to them that
may be accused by.xii. men, and know not of it, and tha^ for the causes before
remembered. Wherefore it seems, that though it were clearly put away, the
streets should not swarm full of heretykes never a whyt.

This good man says here I can not prove any of al these thyngees like. But
every man may well se, that list to look back and read it, that there is not
any one piece of all these that he speaks of, but I have very plainly proved
it very like, for ye purpose and intent that I resemble it for. And this shall
every man clearly se, that will advise pyece by pyece.

And therefore while upon dyfferences and dyuersytees that he puts bytwen
them, such as let them not to be like in the thing that I lyken the^ for, he
bosteth in conclusyon yt I can not prove them like: I shall show you what
thing now this bost of his is like.

If it had come in this good man's head, to divise a law and write a book
therefore, to kill up all the band dogs through out all ye realm^ (wherein his
time as unwisely as it were bestow^d, had not yet ben so ill spent as it has been in this) and than would lay for the cause, ye bandogges do spend vitayle,
and will sometime byte folk to: if I would than write agayns^e his wise book,
and say that he might by that reason kill up hounde^ and grayhou^des and all,
for they must eat to, and will sometime byte children to / but likewise yet as
they may not yet for all that be forborne, both for the pleasure that they
do, and also for that they help to take us some such bestes of venory as men
eat, and hunte and kill also such other bestes and vermyn, as else would
destroy much vytayle / so the banddogges may not be forborne neither, for they
both defend husband men's howses fro thieves, and help folk home with their
bestes to sometime, such as would not else come home: now might this good man
by this reason yt he uses here, write again and defend his polytike device
against bandogges / and therein answer me thus. First yt for defense of folks
houses there shall need no bandogges at all / for men may make their servants
watch, or make fast all their dorys / and when the^es would break in, defend
their howses them self. And as for such bestes as would not come home, if they
be not over heavy they may bear them home / and those that be to heavy to be
borne home, taye ropes to there taylys and draw them home. And than might he
say yet a little ferther / and that is this, that he merueiled much yt I could
for shame and fere of mine own conscience resemble and lyken together, gentle
hou^des or goodly greyhou^des, to such il favored mast^ffes. And tha^ to prove
them very far unlike put his dyfferences and his dyuersitees, and say a
mastyff^ has you wot well a great iolte head, and a great mosel and a thycke
boystuouse body / where as a greyhou^d has a properhed, with a goodly small
long snowt, and fair long sle^der sides / and the hou^des yet much less like

And theruppon might he there conclude (as he now concludes here) and say
thus.

And thus it appears that master More can neither prove ye mastyfes to be
like to ye greyhou^des, nor to the the other gentle hounds neither, and that for
the causes before remembered. wherefore yt seems that though all bandogges and
mastiffes were clearly put away: yet mennys houses should be defended well
enough, and their bestes brought home well enough to, so they should so.

Now if he ryally tryumphed upon this, and thought he had avoided me well: I
could no far^her go therein in good faith, but let him take that glory to him.
And surely with any wise man that reads over here in this chapyter, both his
words and mine, and one after a another consydereth wherefore I resemble them
together: shall find I dare boldly warraunt, that with his dyfferences and
his dyuersytees, he wynneth like worship in this.

But now to turn again as I promised to the first point, that is to wit his
devise of open accusers: consider well this good christen reader, that where as
this good man in his book of diuysyon, where he would have the suit ex officio
left of: he the^ reserved us yet both open accusacyons and presentementes, to
put heretyques to answer upon. But now in this.xv. chapter of his, in his
book of Salem and Bizance, for favor toward the catholyque faith, he dyuyseth
no more against heretyques but open accusers alone / and says that open
accusers shall suffycie^tly serve the matter. And unto yt here yt I say, and
that every man sees, that no man will in heresy make him self a pertye by way
of open accusyng: thereto says this good man nothing.

He sees perdy very well, that in many things forboden by sundry statutes for
the comen weal, as against the great excess of apparel and some such other
things: ye law does inuyte and hyre every man to thaccusynge of the brekers
of ye same by geuynge them the tone half of the forfaytoure. And yet for all
that as long and as many laws, and as sore as have been made against such
excess of apparayle, and as myche as some men might have won by the suyt:
yet how few folk have been founden that have taken those accyo^s and thereby
accused those offenders, the kings courts can declare, and the little
amendment may show.

Ryottes be open things and enquyrable, with pains also set upon ye
concelours, yet many great ryottes go by vnfounde and ye co^celours never
spoken of / and a statut was there fayn to be made, yt it might be pursued, and
punished by the kings counsel without presentement, and that even by suyte
in manner ex officio to. For though the parties that made the riot, and the
party upon whom yt was made, were so well agreed again, that neither another
would by their wylles have the matter moved or any more spoken of it: yet may
the kings counsel upon secret informacion, cause the kings attorney to
make a byll of the riot, and put the parties to answer, and send for what
witnesses they will.

Now this man will not be so mad I trow to lay me for a defference, that in
the suyte ex officio there is none accuser, and that here the kings attorney
is. For as I have said before if the spyrytuall court should assygne in like
wise an offycer of their own without either parell or cost; what would yt
avail the party?

If this good man had therefore dyuised rewards for accusers, and great pains
of forfaytours for them that would conceyle and hyde: yet would not all that
have helped well the matter in heresies. And weneth he the^ yt his bare divise
of open accusers alone, neither compelled nor hyr^d, will help yt? Nay not and
take endytementes and presentementes to them, with pains set upon the
conceylours to.

And this has all chrys^endome good christen reders perceived / and therefore
in every good christen country, do they use the same suyt of office (which
upon a light reason this man calls unreasonable) and have used many long
years. This law also which this good man thus impugneth upon his own
unreasonable reason, was thought a law right reasonable as I told you in a
general counsel at Rome there holden by pope Innocent the third and many
great wise and well learned virtuous men there at. There were thembassyatours of
all the realms and countries chrystened / and among the other thembassiatours of
England. There were the^bassiatours of both the emperors, yt is to wit Almayn
and Greece. There were also ye.iiii. great pa^riarches / yt is to wit ye
patriarche of Antiochia, and the patriarche of Alexandria by their deputies /
and the patriarche of Constantinople, and the patriarche of Jerusalem i^ their
own proper persons. In this great full and whole counsel of crystendome, was
this law agreed and approved. And from ye first making al christian countries
received yt / and have by the contynuall v^e ever syns allowed it. And this
realm has found it so necessary, yt by statutes yt has strengthed it. And al
true criste^ countries to this day still observe it / nor no country has
there any where left and forsaken it, except such places only as have left
and forsaken the faith of Christ / with all whose ensamples I trust this
realm is to faithful to follow, upon such good reason as this good man here
brings / whereof the very whole sum when it is gathered to gether, a
mou^teth to no more, but that yt may some time happen, that an innocent may
take harm thereby / a reason that ones received, may suffer no law to stand.
For what law can he give so made in all this world, whereby none innocent can
possibly take hurt? But here you se plainly proved against this good man, that
by the chaungynge, there would surely follow a another manner of perell, the
decay of the catholyque faith by thencoragyng of heretics / which would be
well content that we made laws to burn them twyse when they be proved
heretykes, so yt the good counsel of this good man be followed, that the suyte
ex officio may be changed into such open accusers, as in seven year shall
never one come forth, nor one heretyque of lykelyhed ones be put to answer /
with a another good counsel of this good mannys also dyuysed for their farther
saufegard against arrestyng of them, whereof we be to speak afterward in a
another chapyter. Say this good man what he will, if we break this law so long
approved through crystendome, and take his deuyse in the stead: his word will
neu^r so stay the thing, but that after his ways ones taken, and by his new
evil counsel the good old laws broken, men should shortly se without any
doubt great increase of heretykes / which, where as they were wont but to
crepe to gether in corners, and secretly scoulke to gether in lurkes lauys,
shall sone wax bold and put out their horns and flock and swarm to gether
so thycke in thopen s^retes, yt such myschyefe would finally follow thereon, as
woe will every good man be that should live to se yt. And yet would god of his
goodness turn at length the chief harm upon their heddes. But better folk
should first feel so much thereof, that it were better for both, that by these
good laws well kept which this good man would break, these heretyques be
well repressed, and kept under by times.

The.xvi. chapy^er.
HIs.xvi. chapyter begynn^th in ye.liiii. lefe, wherein he first recyteth
again his own words written in his book of diuisyon wherein he disputed against
the law in the chapyter Accusatus, perag. Licet, whereby yt is ordyned yt
though one being accused and sworn confess nothing, and yet afterward he
confesses both of him self and other, such things as it may well appear,
that if he were not forsworen in the secunde, he was forsworen in the first,
and yet that law there admytteth him for a witness in ye same court and in
that matter of heresye, if there appear manifest tokens that he does it not of
lightness of mind, nor of hatered, nor for other corrupcyon / which he says
is therefore a daungerouse law, and more like to cause untrue and unlawful men
to condemn innoce^tes, then to co^de^pne offenders.

And you shall understand good reders, yt in his book of diuisyon, he not only
did impugn the law that he speaks of here / but also a another chapyter In
fidei fauorem, because that thereby such as are accursed, and such as are
parties to the same offense, shall be witness in heresye.

This reason of his good reader, all be yt that me then thought and yet think
so unreasonable, that I r^kened yt little worth the answeryng, as a reason
reproved by ye comen law and by the course and usage of all realms chrystened,
and in other crimes bysyde heresye playnesy reproved, and y^ contrary well used
in this realm here also: yet in ye.xli. chapter of mine apo logi^ fo. cc.xxviii
in this manner wise I answered him.

This pyece concerning the testymonye of known evil persons to be received
and taken in heresye / I have somewhat touched in the third chapyter of the
third book of my dyaloge / where sith they may read yt that will, I will
make here no long tale again thereof. But well he woteth that heresye, whereby
a Christen man becomes a false traitor to god is in all laws spyrytuall and
temporal both, accounted as great a crime as is the treason committed against
any worldely man. And then why should we find so great a fault, that such
witness should be received in a cause of heresye, as are received not only in
a cause of treason, but of murder also, and of other more syngle felonye / not
only in favor of the prince, and detestacyon of such odyouse crimes, but also
for the necessyte which the nature of the matter wurketh in y^ proof. But sith
evil folk use not to make good folk of counsel in doing of their evil
deeds / those that are done, should pass unpunished, and mo like be committed a
fresh, but if they were received for records to their condempnynge, that
were of their counsel and perteners to the doing. which kind of folk
will not let to swear twyse nay, before they confess ones ye / and yet their
one ye more true upon their bare word, then their twyse nay upon a
solemn oath / and yet confess they not so symplye, but that it is commenly
helped with some such cyrcumstaunces as make the matter more clear.

Now as to those things that I wrote in my dialoge concerning great
crymynouse witnesses to be taken in great criminal causes, he answers with
no word at all. How be yt to say the troth he the less neded. For he gives
over here, all that fault that he found in the chapyter In fidei fauorem, as a
thynge^ wherein him self sees now that he was ouersene than and therefore he
sets that here pass by, as though he had never spoken thereof, and
stycketh only upon yt one case of him yt is ones forsworen.

But now let us se what he says here concerning this self same case. First
he says yt ye laws, though they must deuyse such waysas evil persons may
be punyshed: yet the makers of the laws must (as much as in them is) provide
that innocents shall be saved harmless. This is very true as myche as in them
is / the the other point being provided for to, that offenders may be punyshed.
But then say I yt yt is not in all the wits of the world, for punysheme^t of
myscheuouse wreches, to dyuyse a saw in such wise, that men may be sure that
none innocent can take harm thereby. And then if he grant me this (which
whyther he grant or no, yet very true yt is) then say I that his only reason
against the suit ex officio, and against this law to, that is to wit that
innocents may take harm thereby, if such a reason yt if it were followed i^
every law where by mysseguyded folk are punyssed, there should no law stand for
their punyshene^t at al, but lest it might miss hap that some innocent might
take harm, we should let all myscheuouse folk alone, and thereby suffer many
mo good innocent men take harm.

But then goes this good man ferther and says yt the punishment of an
offender must be by a dew and a reasonable order. And y^ is very true also /
and therefore we shall agree well in that. But than goth he ferther and says, I
ca^ not se what dew or reasonable order of trial it is that he y^ upon his oath
has first clered him self and h^s neighbor of heresies, sholbe after
contrary to his first oath, be received again as a witness, to condemn him
that he cler^d before, and that in the same court, and in the same matter.

Though this good man can not se yt: other men can se yt / and have seen it,
and daily do se it to well enough. I have seen such things as this is my self
proved, I can not tell how often, that in the excuse of a thief some have
taken an oath, that the felon was with him in his own house at such time as
the felonye should be done in a another place. And a man would have went he
had been credyble and said troth. And yet afterward has him self
confessed that the feson and him self also were at the robberye both twain /
and his bare word then more true, then before was his solemn oath. And
every man that has medeled myche with such examynacyons, has a sure
experyence, that this is a commen fashyon of murderers and theuys and such as
are theuys receyuours / of whom at the first face some seem honest men, and
are so some time reputed, and come forth for declaracyon of them that are
suspected and in trouble, and depose for them / and yet after upon some other
occasyon in examynynge of the matter, begin to be suspected them self, and
afterward confess yt to, both of them self and them whom they came to
clear by their perjury before. And I am very sure there be not a few that have
herd such euydence, given in causes of felony diverse times to the iurye.

But hereuppon because I spoke in mine apologye of such witnesses in felonye:
this good man makes here ad^ute / what manner witnesses I mean / whyther I mean
ye.xii. men that are the jury, or other wytnessys that are brought into the
court for to inform the^. And tha^ first if I mean the.xii. men, than he
answers me certain things, to show that he can skyll of the law. But verily
as for me, I shall put him out of that dowt, that I meant not them. For I never
took the.xii. men for wytnessys in my life. For why should I call them
witnesses, whose verdycte the judge takes for a sure sentence concerning the
fact, without any examynacyon of the cyrcumstaunces, whereby they know or be
led to believe their verdicte to be true?

And also wherefore should I mean to call them witnesses, whom I se desire
witnesses at the bar to inform them in the matter, as wytnessys inform a
judge? He might therefore have spared his labor in ye pyece well enough. For I
neither meant tht iurye, nor never took them for witness.

If he will ask me what they be than: I say they be the jury. And if he will
wit ferthermore what person they represent of those yt are v^suall in other
courts wherein there be no iuryes used: than can I metely well tell him to if
the tale were as necessary as it would be long.

But than comes he to the the other part and says, And if master More by that
term, witness, mean such witness, as be sometime brought into the kings
courts, to give euydencys to an ^nque^t, than to that witness no such
witness, as the witness been in the spyrytuall court, that shall acquy^e or
condemn the parties: for of those witness so brought into the kings court
to give euydence to an ^nqueste at the common law, no mencyon shall be made in
the records, ne the jury be not bound always to follow tho witness. For if the
jury of their own knowledge or otherwise know the troth agayns^e the saying
of such witness, they be bounden to find according to the troth, and let
tho wytnes go. And yet if it ha^ned, that such collateral wytnes first
testyfyed upon their oath, that the party were not gylty: and after it were
informed the judges, that they revoked their first saying, and would say that
the party were gylty: I can not think, that the judges would any more call
them to here their saying therein. And though they would, yet as I said before,
it were far unlike to this case. For their saying there, is but as an
euydence, which the jury should not be bound to believe, but as y^ truth is. I
can not se therefore, how master More can prove his saying, that such
witnesses, that is to say, such as be perjured in ^he same court, should be
afterward received as wytnes in any of the kings courts.

Now good readers ever more remember this, that it is not enough for him that
will avoid a resemblau^ce bytwen two things, it is not enough I say for him
to prove that in some points those two things are unlike / (for so must
every two things needs be, for else were they not two but one) but he must
prove that they be unlike in the self same point wherein, and to the self same
purpose wherefore, they were so resembled to gether.

And now I say that in that point for that purpose for which I resemble them,
I say that they be like. I did not say that they were like in the manner of the
examynacyon, and putting of their names and their deposycyons in the record,
in which things this man says and I confess that they be unlike / but I
said that they were like in this point, that like as he that has been sworn
and clered one as far forth as in him was of heresy, may yet be received
swo^e^ again and herd, and by his new contrary deposycyon may hurt the same
party whom he did clear, before the same spyrytuall judge, which lawfully may
give credence unto him upon certain cyrcu^staunces by his wisdom well wayed
/ so may in like wise he that has been sworn, and by his oath cl^red a man as
myche as in him was of felony, be yet received and sworn again and herd, and
by his new contrary deposycyon may hurt the same party whom he did before
clear in a temporal court, before the self same judges / by the reason that
the jury may lawfully believe him in the second oath, upon certain
consyderacyons by their wysedoms wisely wayed, notwithstanding his formar oath
in the same court to the contrary.

And all be it that here before I thought upon no ferther than upon such
witnesses taken before the kings counsel, or justices of ye peace men of
wurshyppe in the country, and afterward those deposycyous with such contrary
ohtes and all the cyrcu^staunces therewith given in euydence to the jury at the
bar, in the face of the kings ordinary court, sitting upon the
deliverance of the prisoner: yet sith this good man dissymuleth that point,
and draws me forth before the judges, I am well content to wait upon him
thither. And I nothing dowt but that even there he should, the case might so
fall, find it true that I tell him.

That is not so says this good man. For if it happened that such collateral
witnesses, first testyfyed upon their oath that the party were not gilty / and
after it were informed the judges that they revoked their first saying, and
would say that the party were gylty: I can not think that the judges would any
more call them to here their saying therein.

Here you se good reders that he proves this point by none other thing, than
only by his own thynkyng. Now albe it yt against his thinking that they
would not, it were enough for me to say that I think they would: yet will I
not leave it so bare, but I will show some cause wherefore in some case they
should / and I will also put you some such case, which if the case happed I
nothing dowt but they would.

First the cause wherefore a person ones perjured is repelled from beryng
witness again, is because the law presumes that he sets not so much by an
oath, but that his oath notwithstanding he were likely enough to lie.

Now sith this presumpcyo^ is the general let, and therefore the reason of the
general law: if the case happen that this presu^pcyo^ be more than
cou^trepaysed with a co^^r^ry presu^pcyon upon the the other s^de, there is yt
contrary presu^pcyo^ a reason sufficye^t, to make in yt case a contrary law, or
a law that shall be for that case an excepcyon out of that general rule.

Now sir as he yt on his oath cl^reth him self and his fellow to, either in
heresye or in felonye, does after confess and swear also the contrary: if we
would not believe him in ye secu^d oath, because we find him thereby perjured in
the first / than in that we judge him in ye first to have sworen false, it
implies that even thereby we judge him in the secunde to say true.

If he will refuse his secund oath, and not think him worthy to be byleued,
because that he swear the contrary before, and thereby presume him a false
shrewe when he should by the secunde oath prove him self ones perjured, and
than we could not tell in whyther oath of the twain: here I say the first
presumpcion is over borne with the secunde. For it is an other presumpcyon that
no man will cast away his soul for naught. And yet a greater presumpsyon that
no man will cast away his soul, to do hurt either to his own body or to his
friends.

Now look me than up this man's two oaths, his first oath and his secund. And
though there be a common presumpcyon therein also, whereupon the credence of all
oaths rests, that is to wit that a man reputed good and honest, will not for
his friends body nor for his own neither, cast his soul away by perjury:
yet when him self after shows upon his second oath, that he was perjured
in the first, the presumpcyon of his troth in his first oath, is taken away by
the secunde.

Now the secund if it be to thaccusynge of him self and his friend both, whom
his first oath excused, has these other two presumpcyons for to bear against
the first presumpcyon general of his untruth for his perjury. The tone, that
though it be presumed in the law, yt he would be false and forsworen for
somewhat: yet is it presumed that he will not be forsworen for right naught. And
yet as I said it is more strongely presumed that he will not be forsworen to
the hurt of him self and his friend. And therefore has his secunde oath enough
to bear it against the first, sith in the first he swear for his friends
advantage and his own, for which (sith he now appears false in the tone
oath or the the other) he was than lykely to be forsworen. And in the secunde if
he were forsworen, it were to their both harm. And therefore is that oath
presumed to be true, though the man him self be presumed false.

This is I trow to no man any dowt, but^ that though a man had been openly
perjured thryes: yet if the world might (as it may not) be sure that in
another matter he would for all that swear true, the world would receive his
oath. Now for as myche as of no mannys oath any man can be so sure, but that he
may be by possybylyte deceived: the law goth as far forth as it can, and
takes their oaths for a proof, which are in that case by presumpcyon lykely to
swear true. And sith that he therefore whom the respect of his friends
saufgarde and his own, gave occasyon to be forsworen in the first, in the
secund swereth contrary wise to their both parell and harm: therefore in y^
case reason bears ye law, yt in such heyghnous crimes his secu^d oath should be
received.

Here have I showed you a reason which seems me sufficient, that both in
heresye and felony, the judges should be content not withstandyng the first
oath, in some case to suffer him swear the contrary.

But now for the temporal courts, let us put some case for a sample, to se
whyther ye judges would if ye case happed so, here ye witness again or not

I will not put the case in treason, wherein th^re would I wene be no dowte / but
that if after his euydence given upon his oath in clerynge there the prisoner,
he happed even suddenly there at the bar to repent him self, and say that he
was hired to be forsworen, and that he was forsworen in deed, and than would
tell another tale far contrary to ye first, ere ever he went fro the bar:
would his tale not be herd trow you? yes and (the jury so desiring as
peradventure they would the judges would swear him to I suppose / and very good
reason would bear it that they should.

But as I say let treason go, and come but even unto felonye. If two or three
wytnessys would at the bar excuse upon their oaths some one man of felony /
and afterward when they were stepped fro the bar happed to be herd rowne and
rejoice to gether, that they had geuyn good evidence for acquytayle of their
fellow, with whom them self had been at the same robbery: if they were suddenly
brought again to the judges, the jury not yet departed fro the bar / and
being severally questyoned in that sudden abashement, seeing yt god had so
vttred their falshed, bygan to have remorce and came forth with ye troth, and
agreed in the cyrcumstau^ces and told all one tale, confessing both the
prisoner and them self gylty, and would be content to swear that this tale were
true contrary to the oath yt they swear there before: would not the judges
trow you give them the herynge? yes yes I dowte not, and the jury to.

And thus you se clearly good readers, yt in this point if this man had wisely
wrought, he should have given it over.

And now albe it yt here I might end this chapyter, and have no need at all to
go any ferther: yet to the ferther openyng, how little hold there is in the
causes that he lays of dyssymilitude and vnlykenes, between the wytnessys
brought into a spiritual court, and the witnesses brought in to ye temporal
for informacyo^ of the jury / I marvel much if him self know not that like as
the jury may if they se cause why, way the witnesses at light, and quyte the
prisoner for all the witnesses words, so may the ordynary do to. For in his
estymacyon the power lies, to way and consider the qualytees of the witnesses
/ and all such other cyrcu^stau^ces as may mynysshe or encreace their credence.

Ye and unto the the other side, the wytnessys are not in the temporal courts
wayed and esteemed so light, but that the jury shall if they believe them not, be
sometime dreuyn to yield a good reckoning why. For though the words of the
wytnestes be not entered in the record, yet in attaynt they shall again be
given in euydence against the petyt jury, and testyfye by the court and by the
oaths of them yt before herd them depose.

And thanne if it appear unto the graund jury in their conscience, that the
petyt jury wylfully of some corrupt mind regarded not the wytnessys, and
therefore in the geuyng of their verdycte passed against their own conscience:
every man well woteth that they shall be attaynted.

And necessyte has also dreuen the kings grace and his counsel for ye sure
punyshme^t of felons, to provide yt if the jury likewise regard the wytnessys
so sleyghtly, yt the judges think they quyte the felon against their own
conscience: they bind the^ sometime to appear before the kings counsel. And
there have there diverse iuryes been proved so to have myssevsed them self
therein, that they have been punysshed therefore.

Now will I good readers come unto that piece, which (as a thing all ready
confuted and of it self unworthy to be touched) I would have passed over and not
ones vowchsafed to write one word therein, saving yt I se him to have taken such
labor therabout, yt he seems to wene yt he has defended it well / which
whither he have well defended or not, your self shall good readers judge.

These were his words in his book of division.

This is a dangerous law, and more like to caus^ untrue and unlawful men to
condemn innocente^ then to condemn offenders. And it helps little, that
if there be tokens, that it is not done of hatered nor for corrupcyon of money:
that it should be taken: for sometime a wolf may show him self in the apparel
of a lamb. And if the judge be par^yall, such tokens may be sone^ accepted
then trewly showed.

To this pyece these were my words in mine apology folio. 229.

Sith evil folk use not to make good folk of their counsel in doing of
their evil deeds / those that are done, should pass unpunished, and mo like
be committed a fresshe, but if they were received for records to their
condempnynge, that were of their counsel and parteners to the doing. why^he
kind of folk will not let to swear twyse nay before they confess ones ye
/ and yet their one ye more true upon their bare word, than their twyse nay
upon a solemn oath / and yet confess they not so symply, but that it is
comenly helped with some such cyrcu^stau^ces as make the matter more clear.

Now se you well that as him self shows, the law prouydeth well against
all light receyuynge of such confession. And yet this pacyfyer says that all
that helps little, because the judge may be parcyall, and the witness may be
a wolf, showing him self apparelled in the apparel of a lamb, which
apperynge in apparel, pore men that can not apparel their speech with apparel
of retoryke, use comenly to call a woulfe in a lambs skin.

But what order may serve against such obieccyons? what place is there in this
world spyrituall or temporal, of which the judge may not have some say that
he is, or at the lest wise (as he says here) may be parcyall? And therefore
not only such witness should be by this reason of his rejected in heresye,
treason, murder, or felony / but also by his other reason of a woulf in a lambs
skin, all manner of wytnes in every matter. For i every matter may it happen, y^
he y^ seems a lamb, may be in deed a wolf / and be naught where he seems
good / and swear false where he seems to say true. And therefore this patche of
this pacifyer concerning witness / every wise man may bear witness that
there is little wit therein / and less good would grow thereof, if folk would
follow his inuencyon, and make of the laws a change.

Now that you have good reders h^rd what we say both before. Now shall you se
how substancially this man defends his first words again. These are so in
this xvi. chapyter of his new book his words.

Now by reason of this obieccyon I will speak somewhat father in this matter,
then I did in the said treatise. And first I will say thus, that if is to me
a great marvel, to se master More so fair ouerseen, or el^ys if he be not
o^^rseen therein, that then he would if he could, deceive other and make them
so far ouerseen, to believe that yt should be one like reason of a perjured
witness, that will look like a lamb, and say contrary to that he has
deposed before, and of a witness that comes to depose in a matter that he was
never yet sworn upon. For when a witness is brought in, that was never
sworen upon the matter before / the judge may not by the law refuse him, nor
judge any defaulte in him / oneles he know a suffycyent cause him self in
that behalf / or that the parties do allege yt: but he must believe / that he
is honest, good and indyff^rent / till the contrary be showed / as every man
is in charytye bound to do of his neighbor. But when a witness has deposed
in the court / and then will offer him self to depo^e to the contrary that
he said before: the judge may with good conscience mystruste and think, that
he does yt of lyghtnes of mind, hatered, or for cor^upcyon of money.

If I were in this point ouersene, I need not greatly to be ashamed of the
ouersyghte. For then has there been many such other men ouersene also, as I
would not wyshe to be wyser. And I no more entende to deceive other men in this
matter, thanne many other have intended, that used and allowed this thing that
I defend now before / such men as with the co^dycyon that I were never worse,
I would never wyshe to be better. This man makes as though it were great shame
for me, to liken to gether a person ones perjured, and a person that was never
yet ones sworen. I would in deed be a shamed to lyken them to gether in every
point, all though there were no more dyffere^ce between them, but that the
tone had a long nose and the the other a short. But I am not much ashamed to say
that for some purpose, where he speaks of the tone I may speak of the the other,
and lyken them well enough to gether. For I may say (as I said) that like wise
as he that has for sworen him self, may feign him self to say true, and
look like a lamb, and yet be a woulfe in deed: even so I say may he that
never was sworen before.

Ye says this man, but yet these two be not like. For he that was never
sworen, there is no cause to mystruste nor presume that he will play the woulfe
in a lambs skin. But he that has been forsworen, is of reason to be
mystrusted / and yt is to be presumed, yt he will play the woulfe in a lambs
skin.

Mark yet in the mean while, y^ if I could make no father answer: yet had
I won and he lost. For his first words were in his book of dyuysyon, that
he that confesses him self forsworen, should in no case be received to swear
again the contrary / because that though there seem a good cause to believe
him in his second oath, yet yt may be that he does but feign / and I said
so may he to feign and dyssemble, that never was sworen before. And then if the
only power and habylyte to feign, were a cause suffycient to put any oue man
from berynge witness upon his oath: every man were by reason repelled / for
every man is able to fayn. This was as you se ye thing that I then said.
Which thing neither this ma^nor any man else is able to confute, nor prove
the forsworen man and the man vnsworen unlike in the point that I lykened them
/ that is to wit in power and abylyte to feign. And farther then that, went not
I. For I had no farther cause in answering him there, while he went no
farther there, nor said none other, but that he that was forsworen may feign.
And now read your self his words, and look whyther I say true.

But now this being proved as yt is proved plain, that he has a fall in
those words which he spoke before: let us a little se whyther with this
leysour after his matter again considered a fresh, he have caughte any better
hold now. And surely me thinks not one whyt.

For where his new reason reste^h in this, that he which confesses him self
ones forsworen, is by reason mystrusted, as one not only to be able to swear
false, and wylyly cloak his falshed under a color of truth, but also
presumed that he so will do in deed: to this I say that he says truth, as
long as there is no greater presumpcyon on the the other side to serve for his
second oath. But when the case happeth that there is, as yt happeth in the
case of this law: than is the presumpcyon that he will swear false gone, as I
showed you before.

And then that presumpcion by a greater presumpcion being purged: this man
forworne and the man vnsworn are in the thing that I resembled them for, waxen
well like again. And that the said presumpcyon is purged: I showed you
before, in that it is now a greater presumpcyon for his second oath, that he
will not fo^swere him self, to the parell of his friend and him self to.

Then goes he farther, and enforces his reason with the reason of the law
before ye peragraph Licet was made. And therein thus he says.

In so much that before that parag. Licet was made the judge might none
otherwise have done of iu^^yce, but to have refused to have taken any farther
examynacyon of him. And if he had, and the other had said contrary to that
he had said before: hy^ saying had been void in the law.

And this thing wherwyth he thinks his reason made the s^renger, makes his
reason a great deal febler. For while the general rule of refusing such
witness in all cases, was made so long before: it appears plainly that
necessyte found the fault, and caused out of the general rule this case to be
made an excepcyon / and so the law made by better delyberacyon.

And in such other horible crimes, the same law is used in temporal courts,
and was also before that law made by the church.

But against all this yet, this man makes me this reason.

what the makers of the said peragragh meant, to put into the dyscrecyon of the
judge, that if he saw by euydent tokens that yt is not done of lyghtnesse of
mind, nor of hatered, nor for corrupcyon of money, that his saying shall
stand as well against him self as against other: I can not tell. For I can
not se how there can be any euydent token in any such case, but that there
might be in such a periu^ed witness sometime inward hatered or corrupcyon
that the judge can not know, so that he can not judge of certayntye that there
ye none.

Consider now good readers that all the strength of this reason hangs in
this, that the judge can not surely se sometime, whether the perjured witness do
it for the troth, or have an hatered in his breast so secret that the judge
can not se yt, and therefore he can not certainly judge that he has none.
Consider here now yt he says not yt yt is presumed, or must be presumed, that
the perjured witness has so / (for if he so said, he should say to no
purpose. For as I have showed you how that presumpcyou may be over wayed with
greater presumpcyons to the contrary) but he says that it may be in deed,
that the forsworen witness has so. And then say I yet again, if we go to
the possybylyte of the deed, and not unto the presumpcyon and lykelyked / he
that was never sworen before, may have a secret hatered which the judge can
not se, as well as he may that was twyse sworen before. And thereon I say also
yet again, that if the judge were charged to give no sentence but such as he
knew of certaynetye sure to be true: he could never upon any witnesses in
this world give any sentence at all. For no witness were there but he might
swear false and ye judge might wene he swear true.

Now if this man would say yt he means no farther certayntie, then only a
sure thinking in the judges own conscience, and that therefore he modered all
his other words (with this word conscience, saying that the judge could not
with co^scye^ce judge of certainty yt there were no hatered: this meaning were
a very marryng of al yt he goes about there to prove. For though the perjured
witness might have (and happily had in deed a secret hatered in his own
breast, as an other witness might have (and happily had in deed) that never was
swore before: yet might the judge being i^duced by certain tokens and
lykelyhedes have a sure and a certain persuasyo^ and bylyefe in his own
conscience, yt neither the tone nor ye the other had any hatered at ye time, but
only deposed ye troth. And therefore if he would say yt he me^t thus: he marred
all his matter.

But it appears plain yt he me^t in ye the other manner upon which there must
needs follow (if he were not in his saying deceived) that every judge in every
sentence yt he should give upon any witnesses, were they never so honest in
appare^ce, were in a danger ineuy table. And that he mea^eth i^ that manner,
that the bylyefe of his own conscience iuduced reasonablye thereto, could not
excuse the judge if he were deceived and the thing other wise in deed: he
declares farther by the words that next ensewe, where he goes farther thus.

And therefore me seems that the makers of the said peragraph laid over great a
danger to the judges, that they should have liberty to accept if they would
the saying of him that so offreth him self against his first oath / for so
myche as the judge can not be sure to save his conscience therein, but if he
clearly refuse to accept any thing that the witness would say contrary to
his first oath. For if the judge did otherwise, and thereupon the witnesses
testyfy against the party, and yet the party not gylty in deed: I suppose
verily yt the judge were party to the same offens.

And I suppose not the contrary, but am very sure of ye contrary. For I am
very sure, that where the judge sees such tokens as seem unto him manyfeste
and open tokens, to prove that his second oath is not offr^d of any corrupt
effeccion, but of remor^e of his periurye and of a mind to amend his fault
and say true: he falls in no daungeour of conscience, though the truth be
otherwise in deed. For if there never had law been made at all to refuse any
witness because he was ones perjured: ye judge had been clear at liberty upon
resons and lekelyhedes ledyng his conscience, to have received him again with
out any perell of his own conscience at al, where so ever him self had thought
greater lykelyhed that he would say troth at the second oath, then he did
before at the first. And then sith he was now let to receive him, and his
lybertye therein restrained but by a law made: what parell can he more fall in
when a second law has set him at large, then if the formare law had
never made the restraynte.

Also where the law there prouydeth, that the judge shall still reiecte that
witness, which offreth to tell the troth upon a second oath contrary to his
first, but if there appear manifest tokens that he do it not of any corrupt
effeccion: it means none other but that if the tokens seem such unto the
judge, that they induce him in his conscience so to believe and think and not
that he shall be certain and sure that ye thing is so in deed, by lokyng into
the secret corners of the man's heart / no more then the kings iuges at the
comen law, by what words so ever they give thenqueste an oath, nor by what
precyse words so ever they receive their verdycte, mean not to charge them
upon parell of their souls to say none other wise then the truth of the
thing shall be in deed / but as the truth shall seem to them to be, upon
such things as they shall perceive either by the euydence geuyn them at the
bar, or otherwise ere they came there. Nor the judges them self in the
judging of a matter of law, never mean precisely that the law is so. For
then if other judges after reuersed that judgment or judged the same case
otherwise in a another time between other men, the tone judges or the the other
had put their souls in parell, doing both twain their best to judge
as well as they could.

But sith no man can se farther then his eyes will serve him, no nor no man can
se farther the^ his own reason can upon the matter thoroughly debated perceive:
if either the.xii. men or the iuges, neither neglygent nor corrupt, judge as
they think true, their souls are saufe enough / as saufe as is the soul of
the carpenter, that puts in his frame no timber but such as is good and
sound as far as men can se / and yet some of yt secretly may be such in
very deed, as soon after shall fail and fall down all the rofe. His soul is
saufe enough, though his purse may hap to sweet, if he bound him self to
provide the timber at his own parell. But so byndeth him self neither judge
nor iurye for the witness on parell of their own souls, that the the other
shall swear true.

And thus you se good reders that the judge is out of parell, using dylygence
and troth, though the witness be false and have hatered in his heart / where
the judge weneth none upon tokens yt he thinks manifest, al though the
witness were forswore^ before. And thus is this good man in this matter all
gone quyte awry.

But yet being sore troubled with the wild woulfe, that may swear false and
seem true, nothing mystrusted bycase he comes lapped in a lambs skin: this
good man goes ferther yet and therein thus he says.

And where I said in the said treatise, as before appears, that sometime a
wolf may show him self in the apparel of a lamb, and that if the judge be
parcyall, such tokens may sooner be accepted then truly showed: If is euydent
enough, that by those words I note no judge to be parcyal, but I say that if
the judge be parcyall, such tokens may be ^o^ner accepted then truly showed.
As who says, the judge may accept such a token to be true, though there
appe^e some suspycyon of untruth in the wytnes. In which acceptaunce he shall
more lyberally and without offense of the law do wrong to the party that is
accused / then he could do by acceptyng of any other witness agayns^e the law,
that were never sworn before. For if he accept any such wytnes contrary to
the rules of the law, it appears to all them that know the law, that he
does against the law therein: and that will sound somewhat to his rebuke, and
that will make him the more loath to do it. But if the judge accept such a
perjured witness where there is no suffycyent token to prove that he does it
not for lyghtnesse of mind, hatered, corrupcyon, nor such other: yet he
breketh no law therein. For all is committed to his dyscrecyon. And that may
hapely give a boldness to some judge to accept such a perjured wytnes where he
ought not to accept him. And though the ^ayde Peragr. say that if there be
such tokens as before appears, that then in favor of the faith his wytnes
shall be taken: yet I can not se, if the party accused be gyltlesse in deed, as
he may be for all that witness, how it can be taken in favor of the faith,
to accept the witness. For it can not be said in favor of the faith to
condemn an innocent.

All this tale when it is all told, wayeth unto no more, but that if the judge
be parcyall, than he may abuse the law, and than that law in that case may do
harm in heresy.

Now beside that the quest herynge the same witness sworn first, and after
contrary, may if they be parcyall, do like harm in felonye: what law was
there ever made, wherein the judge could do none harm if he would be parcyall?
what laws may there serve, if the mynystres would be false? This man is
content that to a man's condempnacyon, the presumpcyon shall serve that the
witnesses will swear but true, such witnesses at the least wise as are not
proved false before / and yet may they mar all if they be false and
parcyall. And when he presumes such indyffere^cye in a witness: why fereth
he so sore parcyalyte in a judge? if he say he mystruste the judges, because
of some Some says: ^hanne must he mystruste witnesses, iuryes, and judges,
and all together. For such Some says there lack not that can say well by no
man.

This reason of his does but put a suspycyon in mennys heddes against the
judges, for every thing that is put in their dyscrecyon. But surely (^s I
have often hard that great wise and right wursshypefull manne sire John^
Fineu^ say, late chyefe justice of the kings benche) who so takes from a
justice the order of his dyscrecyon, takes surely from him more thanne half
his office. If this realm should mystruste justices: it must in the laws than
make many such chaunges, as I never saw need yet, nor trust I never shall.
What harm might any justice of the peace do, if he were dysposed to be false
and parcyall? And ever shall be able to do make what laws men will, but if men
would utterly put a way that office And than instead of one harm that may
hap, we shall have an hundred hap in very deed.

Consider also good readers, that by the laws before made, there was not only
forboden to bear witness, he that appeared to be ones forswore^, but also many
other manner of cryminouse persons, for the general presumpcyon that they were
unworthy credence / and yet have been by other laws after made, received to
bear witness against them self and their fellows in heresye and in ^reason
both, for the necessyte as I have said and upon presumpcions more probable
that they were in that case well likely to swear true.

Now if this good man for fere of such harm as may by possybylyte fall upon
an innocent, will put one of these from witnessynge: he must repel them all.
For as the latter laws have synnys received all: so the formar laws generally
did first refuse them all. For the general rule is naturally before his
partycular excepcyons.

And than if he would in likewise repel them all, than for one harm yt may
hap, and happily never shall: he should have many myschyeuouse people very
bold, while they might be sure they must needs pass unpunished, because their
privy myschief could never well be proved, but if they would when they went
about it, take honest men with them to bear record of it.

And thus you se good readers very clear and plain, that this good man has
hitherto brought you forth no reason. And I think he saw that him self / and
therefore he though he would say beter at last, and not leave it so. For thanne
goes he ferther and says.

And ferthermore it appears also, that the words of the said treatise e^tende
no fe^ther, but to such as be judges, where there is before them such a
perjured wytnes, and not to al judges. And in likewise those words, that a
w^^^e may show him se^^e in the apparel^ of a lamb, sitetche only to such a
perjured wytnes. For there is no other witness spoken of in the said treatise
in that place.

This man goes to his words and forg^tteth what I say / which is that
though his words go no ferther, yet the reason of his words (if it were
reason as I have proved it none) would stretche so far farther that it would
mar all. And this point have I proved you very clear and plain.

And thereby is meant, that such a perjured witness may happily show him self
to deny that he said before, of a compuncte heart and of a new knowledge of
the treuth, and of a very zele unto the ^ayth: and yet do it in deed of
couetyse, falshod, rancoure, and malice to the party. And so as the gospel
says, he may hap outward to appear in the apparel of a sheep, and within
forth be a raumpynge wolf. And such one may that perjured witness be, that
i^ spoken of in the said treatise. And of such a wytnes in heresye the said
treatise speaks only there and of none other witness, as to the readers will
appear. And therefore as me seems, master More fyndeth defaute in this
behalf, where he had no cause reasonable so to do.

Now good reders where as this man says, that he meant that such a forsworen
witness may happily play the woulfe in a lambs skin: I grant that he meant
so. But as I grant yt to him: so must he grant this again to me, that so
may he play to, that was never sworen before. And than while he goes no
ferther, but that the tone happily may, and can not him self say nay but
that the the other happily may so to: there follows upon that the thing that I
said before, which this man says he merueyleth much yt I would say, that is to
wit, that by that wise reason there should be received in such crimynall
causes, no manner witness at all.

Now if he leave his may happily and say that it is lykely, that the forsworen
witnesses will say false, and the the other true that never was swo / ren before /
and that the witness ones forsworen before, is in his secund oath contrary to
his first, more lykly to play the wyly woulfe in the lambs skin, than
such a plain simple man as was never sworen before: I will be so bold for
this ones as in some case to tell him boldly nay. For where he said a little
before, yt he could not se how there could be any such euydent token in any
such case, but that such a perjured wytnes might do it of a secret hatered,
and seem charytable, and so play ye wyly woulfe in the simple lambs skin: I
can se well enough, yt in some case there may be an euydent token, that some
such witness as was so first forsworen, were after in his secunde oath
swerynge the contrary, less lykely to lie and play the wyly woulfe in the
lambs skin, than were an other that never was in his life before neither
forswore^ nor sworen.

For if he that was before upon his o^h examyned both of him self and his
sone, or of him self and his father, or his other special known friend, and
on his oath clered them all, do at an other time upon a new oath confess them
all gyltye, and him self also / and where peradventure him self must to the
fire, because he was abiured before, and they may turn yet in time and be but
abiured: were not this an evident token that he does it not of any secret
hatered, nor plays not the wyly woulf in a lambs skin? For i wys to
confess him self gylty in such case, and puttyng him self in worse case than
his fellows, were but a pore point of a wyly woulfe And as I put this case
for ensample: so may there be many other. For the tokens might be plain enough
though they were less plain thanne thus. And therefore to conclude in this
matter, this man has no reason in this world to defend his first book
wythall.

And therefore where he spends a patche in the end, about his declaracyon,
that it may be lawful for him to find defaute at laws made by the church,
so that he find them upon a suffycyent reason, because all that point nothing
helps him here in this law, against which he shows no reason reasonable,
but a reason as unreasonable as ever reasonable man herd: I shall I say
therefore let that piece pass by, and here make an end of his.xvi. chapyter.

The.xvii. chapyter.
HIs.xvii. chapyter begins folio.lxii. In ye beginning whereof he merue^^e^h
that I speak so often in mine apology, of his vsyng this word Some say. And he
shows that in a ^ale told him by other folk, there is good reason that he
so should say / and that I use the same word my self to sometime, and tells
two places where, fo. 77. and fo. 100. I neither did nor will find fawt that
he use this word some say / nor I will not let (where the case requires) to
say my self, yt some say this or that. For I know well it is english. But
the fawte that I found and yet find, is that his book of diuysyon abuses the
figure of so many some says, to the sedicyo^s slawnder / of ye clergy / and
specially of thordinaryes in the punysshement of heresy, to bring the^ in
obloquy of the people thereby. And where as upon co^playntes made the matters
have late ben examined, and the treuth has been plainly proved contrary: yet
has he never one Some say thereof in all his book, neither in ye tone book nor
the the other / but all his Some says ever more say evil, and never a Some say
well. This is the fawte that I find. For if he made a book with five times as
many good Some says, as his Some says in that book be naught: I would find in
his Some says no defawt at all. For some say is (as I say) good english.
But when a book is full of shrewde Some says: there do some men say, that
Some say is as shrewd an englysh, as any dowch woman speaks.

But now to show that in all his Some says he meneth none harm, he goes
ferther, and for a sample he brings forth one, which is in very deed a very
malycyouse noughty pestylent Some say, whereof the pretense is the sauegarde of
innocents / theffecte is the dekaye of the faith by the boldyng of heretykes,
the instrument is a false imagyned slander against the ordynaryes. And as
wylyly as those shrewys that begyle him have help him to inuolue and in^ryke
the matter: I shall use so plain and open a way therein, that every man shall
well se the troth.

Lo these are this good man's words.

And one of the (some says) that he fyndeth defau^e at is this: I say in
the.viii. chapyter of the said treatise thus: And here some saye^ that because
there is so great a desire in spyrytuall men, to have men ab^iured or to be
noted with heresye: And that some as it were of a polycye do noise it, that
the realm is full of heretykes, more then it is in deed, that it is very
peryllous, that spyrytuall men should have auctoryte to arres^e a man for every
light sus^peccyon or complaynt of heresye, till that desire of punyshement in
spyrytuall men be ceased and gone but that they should make process again
them to bring them in upon pain of cursynge: and then y^ they t^^ye.vi.
days, the kings laws to bring them in^ by a writ of Excommunicato
capiendo, and so to be brought forth out of the kings gayo^e to an^were. And
it follows in the said.viii. chapter thu^: but surely as it is somewhat
touched before in the.vii. chapyter, it seems that the church in time (...)
have done what they could to bring about that they might punysh heresy of
them self, without cal^ynge for any help therein of the ^ecular power. And
therefore they have made laws that heretykes might be arrested, and put in
prison, and stocks y^ need were, as appe^eth in Clementinis de h^reticis, Cap.
Multorum querela. And after at the special cal^ynge on of the spyrytualty, it
was enacted by parlyament, that or^ynaryes might arest men^ that preche^ hold,
teache, or inform other in heresye, there pr^h^^^yte, or that thereof hold any
^onuentycles or ^ch^^ys. For ^^me men think that the said Clementine was not
of effect in the kyn^es laws to arrest any man for heresye. But if a man were
openly and notably sus^ected of heresye, and there were suffycyent record and
wytnes against him and there were also a d^u^te, that he would ^lee and not
appear, whereby he might infecte other it ^^meth co^uenyent^ that he be arrested
by the body, but not upon every light complaynt that full lightly may be
untrue. And that it will be ^yght expedyent that the kings hygh^es and his
consayle ^oke ^pecyally upon this matter, and not to cesse, till it be brought to
moore quietness then it is yet: and to se with great dylygence that pride,
couetyse, nor worldly love be not judges, nor innocents be punysshed ne yet
that wylfull o^fenders go not wyth^ut due correccyon.

And when mays^er More in his apologye has recyted the said words of the said
trea^y^e: then he endeuoyreth him self very much, to make it ^ppere that the
mocions that he made in the s^^^ treatise in the place before rehearsed be
unreasonable, and can not be brought about: or else that if they we^e brought
about they should do hurt and (...). And to make his sayenges the more
accept^^^^ / he la^eth sometime defa^te in my sayenges and says tha^ I thereby
defame the judges spyrytuall, where I defame them not / but say only that it
is ^^pedyent that the kynge^ hyghnes and his couns^yle se / that pride couetys^
nor worldly ^one be n^ judges. And whether thoo words amount to that effect /
that mays^er More says they do / that is ^^ say that I defame all spyrytuall
judges it appears e^^dentely they do not.

Now good readers to the intent that you may the more plainly perceive, both
the good mind of this good mannys first book of dyuysyo^ and also his secunde
book here in defense of ye same: take ye labor to read the.xlvi. chapyter of
mine apologye fo. 232. And than shall you think I suppose, yt all his defense
is so faint that I little need to reply.

For first where he says, that I say that in those words, he dyffameth the
judges spyrytuall: I would he had rehearsed my words with which I say so. For
I am sure enough my words be no larger than ye treuth. But that is his usual
craft to leave out for the more part, both my words and the place, because me^
might wene it were i^ some part of my book though they remember not where.

But now because he says, that it is euydent that those words of his do not
amounte unto the dyffamacio^ of the spyrytuall judges: I have showed and proved
in deed in one or two places of mine apologye, that a^l the great matter of his
complaynt, upon the crueltye of the spyrytuall judges, in handelyng men for
heresy, sith there has been very few troubled therefore in any dyocise in
England or Walys / by ye space of these xx. years or.xxx. last passed /
except only Lyncoln and London / and that therefore the false complaynt of
mysse handelynge, could have little color any farther then those two dyoceses /
and yet to say the ^routhe never complaynt brought forth by any such man but
in London dyocese, nor yet not but in London and some pyece of Essex alone /
and the complayntes upon examinacyon had by the kings honorable counsel,
always found causeless and false: sith this is I say so clear, that no man
can say the contrary, but that this is true, I declare and show in my said
appologye, that where with his false some says he defameth and laboreth to
bring in obloquye of the people, all the spyrytuall judges in the realm: of
wrong and cruel handelynge men for heresye, all the men yt his false some says
(if they were true) did touch, were yet in deed so few, that he might in a
manner as well speak of the^ by name. And in very deed so few they be. For they
be as few or fewer, then are the iuges either of the tone benche or the the other.

And therefore when he comes now forth under shadow of a shrewed some say,
and shows that the spyrytualle men have a great desire to put men to
abiuracyon, and to have me^ noted of heresy, and that therefore till they leave
that condycyon, it were well done they should have less authorytie / and that
yt will be right expedyent that the king and his counsel look specially
upon this matter, and to se with great dylygence, that pride, couetise, nor
worldly love be not judges, nor innocents punnyshed, nor yet that offenders go
not without dew correccyon: is not this a lewd colored slander and (without
any such thing proved) a shame less dyffamacyon?

If this good man would in like wise write and put in prent a another book, and
there in speak first of ius^yces in general, as it might some to touch all
the judges of every base court, and justices of the peace to / and then by some
certain cyrcu^staunces restrain it in such wise, that every man may se that he
means only the kings iuges at w^stmynster, ^ say, yt some say that
specially of la^e the matters of comen plees be evil ha^deled by the judges /
and yt in writtes o^ error and in ple^s of the crown the judges mysse handle
the people sore and do much wrong / and that some say that they have this evil
desire, and yt / and yt till they have left them, it were w^l done that they had
less authoryte. And the^ after such a false folyshe some say^, com forth with
his saying, and in approbacyon of his other sayng, conclude and say thus myche
farther, it will be right expedient therefore, that the kings highness and his
counsel look specally upon this matter, and to se with great dylyge^ce that
pride couetyce, nor worldely love be not iuges etc, were this wyly folyshe
handelynge no false dyffamacyon at all?

And now when he handeleth the spyrytuall ordynaryes with like words for
heresye, and his somesays false ymagyned lies / and though his book of dyuison
laboreth to draw that false suspicyon farther / yet him self sees by
experyence that while there has in long while but in two dyoceses very few
been punyshed for heresye, the slander that he sows touches some very few,
no less the^ though he wrote in their names. How ca^ he therefore for very
shame say that yt is no dyffamacyon? Weneth he the reders of his work were
all such folys, that he might avoid his plain open deed with his bare bold
word, where he says yt appears euydentely nay, where every wise man that
reads yt sees well him self that yt well appears euydently yes.

Now goes he farther with a another pyece and says.

Nor yet my words prove not that I would have al spyrytuall judges changed.
For the spyrytuall judges that be now, may be judges still, and have all the
propertyes before rehearsed, as well as other, for any thing that I have said.
And yet master More takes yt otherwy^e, and says / I would have such
judges, as have no spyce of any of the said points. And he says, that till
such judges may be found, heretykes may make merry for a little season / why^e
men walk about and seche for such judges / which he weneth will not be done
in a wekes work.

Here he leueth out again the place of mine that he touches. For when that
is ones read, all his gay tale is gone. For there shall you se that I consider
his words, and declare two ways that the good man might mean / of which
twanne he takes here the tone, and the the other he lette^h slype. And yet in
taking his words as he would now seem: my words which he dyssembleth here,
turn up a^l his tale / and that the man saw full well / and therefore wynked
of them. But I shall br^nge them in again here, and repe^e them for him. Lo
good readers in y^.xlvi. chapter fo. 253. after h^s w^rdes rehearsed at length,
thus I (...) mine own.

I^ this process lo good readers this pacyfyer declares, that he would have
the kings hyghnes and his counsel so specially look upon this matter, that
neither innocents should be punyshed, nor yet wylfull offenders go without
dew correccyon^ who could end and conclude all his matter more frutefully.

But now the special ways whereby he dyuyseth, that the kings highness and
his counsel should bring this thing about be twain.

The tone is, if they provide that neither men that be proud nor couetouse,
nor have any love to the world, be suffered to be judges in any cause of
h^resye.

The the other is, that the bishops shall arreste no man for heresye, till the
desire that spyrytuall men have to cause men abjure heresies, and to punyshe
them for heresyee, be ceased and gone.

And surely I think that his two dyuyses will serve suffycyently for the tone
part / that is to wit that none innocents shall be punyshed. But I fere me
very sore, that they will not serve half so suffycyently for the the other part,
that is to wit that wylfull offenders go not with out correccyon.

For now to begin with his first dyuyse, that none be suffered to be judges in
cause of heresye, yt are proud or couetouse, or have love to ye world if he
mean of such as have none of these affeccyons with notable enormyte, then
till he prove them that are all ready worse then he proves them yet / that
is to say till he prove yt otherwise by some of their outragyouse deeds in
the dealing and myshandelyuge of men for heresy, yt he here defameth them of,
the^ he has yet proved, and that he prove their cruel wrongful dealing,
otherwise then by somesayes, or by his own saying: the kings hyghnes and his
counsel can se for all his wholesome counsel, no cause to change those
judges that are all ready, but to leave them still / and them serves that dyuyse
of naught.

And on the other side, if he mean that the kings highness shall suffer none
to be judges in cause of heresye that has any spyce at all, either of pride,
or of couetyse, or any love at all unto this world: heretykes may sit still
and make merry for a little season, while men walk about and seek for such
iuges. For yt will not be less then one whole wekes work I wene both to find
such, and to be sure that they be such.

Here have you herd good reders a reasonable cause why that I should take him
that he would have the spyrytuall iuges, such as should have no spice of pride
couetouse nor worldly love. For either he must mean so / or else (as I said)
he must mean on the the other manner which I rehearse first, and which he would now
seem to mean. But then (as I have said) if he meant in the first fashyon as he
would now seem: all his tale is over turned. For then had he no cause of any
such complaynte. For he n^yther had him self when he wrote nor any man
else, preued by any of them the contrary. And then neded he not to spend
out his profounde wisdom, in making such exhortacyons to the kings
highness and his counsel, to se with so great dilygence (as though they had
be so long neglygent) to the thing that him self could not say nay, but yt it
was metely well enough all ready. And thus you se good reders that he left out
and dissembled that first part of my words, because he wys^e nere what to say
thereto. And therefore sith, except he me^t in the first manner (which he could
not do without the marryng of all his matter) you se well that him self drove me
to think, that he would have the kings grace and his counsel, se dylygently
that there should be no spyrituall judges, but they yt had no spice of pride,
couetise, or worldly love at all. And then might heretyques as I said (while
such judges were in seeking) make merry for a little while. And I kept my self
metely well within my bounds. For where I said yt would be a wekes work to
seek them: I wene yt would he fourtenyght full ere we found them.

But then gooth he farther somewhat about to show, that I have mysse handeled
his words, and with ioynynge mine own unto his, have made yt seem that he
says myche worse by the spyrytualtye then he either said or meant. But when
you have herd all his tale and mine to, you shall well se good readers that he
shall never while he lives convey this gere so clean. For these are first his
words here.

And he says / that yt will be the more hard to ^ynde such iuges. For he
says, that I have put that matter out of doubt / that where no men wol^e
have wend ^oneste to have found them, that there I say / yt will be
meruaylouse hard to ^ynde any one of them / either prelates, seculere prestes
or relygyouse persons. For he says that I say plainly / that have they
never so many virtues beside / that yet I say, yt will be hard to find any
one spyrytuall man / but that he is so infected with desire and affection to
have the worldely honor of prestes exalted / that he is thorough such pride
far fro such indyfferency and equytye, as ought and must be in such
judges / which as he says, I assygne to be such, that they must have no
spyce of pride couetyse nor love toward the world.

As to this last rehearsed sentence of master More this is ye troth therein / I
say in an other place of the said treatise, other then that / that master
More has rehearsed here / that is to say, in the.vii. chapyter of the said
treatise, that though many spyrytuall men may be found, that have many great
^ertues, and great gifts of god / as chastyte, lyberalytye, pa^yence,
^obernesse, temperaunce conning and such other: yet yt will be hard to find
any one spyrytuall man that ye not infecte with the said desire and affection
/ to have the worldely honor of pres^ye axalted. And there my sentence ends,
as to this purpose. But then as yt appears before, mays^er More in his said
Apologye adds immedyatly to those words of mine, words of his own putting
in / which be these: That he ye through such pride far fro such indiffere^ce
and equity / as ought and must be in the iuges, which he says I assygne. And
he combyneth tho words to mine / in such manner as though I spoke them my
self. So that they that shall read them, can none otherwise take them, but
as my words: whereby he perue^teh clearly my meaning and my sentence therein.
For my sentence, ne yet my meaning therein / is not but that judges spyrytuall
may have some spyce of pride couetyse and worldly love, and yet be meat
judges in heresye / as the frayltye of man suffers. For we be no angels but
sinners, that lyghtlye may fall and be deceived. Ne I mean not, ne yet my
worde^ amount not to yt, but that a man may have a desire and affeccion / to
have the worldly honor of prestes exalted / and yet be a mete judge in
heresye. For I suppose / that a man may have that desire in some degree, and to
some intent / and not offend therein / specially dedely. How be yt he may also
lightly offend therein, if he be not right well ware.

If this good man her say true in these aforesaid words of his And there my
sentence ends as to this purpose: then am I content to confess, that he
says well, and I wrong. But on the the other side now, if he say not true,
hut that in the defamynge and slaunderynge of the spyrytualty, his sentence
ended not there, but wen^e there myche farther forth, and so far forth also /
as amounted unto as myche as I say that he said, and unto myche more to: then
will every man bear me record, that I mysse report not him but he me.

Now shall you good reders sone se this tried between us. For his whole wordis
as they lie there to gether, I shall now rehearse you here. Lo these they be as
you shall find them both in his book of dyuysyon, and in mine Apologye fo.
237.

And though many spyrytuall men may be found, that have right many great
virtues and great gifts of god, as chastyte, lyberalytye, pacyence sobe^nesse,
temperaunce, conning, and such other / yet yt will be hard to find any one
spyrytuall man that is not infecte with the said desire and affection to have
the worldely honor of prestys exalted and prefe^red / and therefore if any lay
man report any evil of a pres^e / though yt be openly known that yt is as he
says / yet they will be more dylygent to cause the lay man to cease of that
saying / then to do that in them is to reform that is a mysse in the priest
that it is spoken of / taking as if were an occasyon to do the less in such
^eformacyons / because lay men speak so myche against them: But surely that
will be none excuse to spyrytual rulers before god / when he shall ask account
of his people / that were committed unto their keeping.

Now you se good reders, how untrue it is yt this man tells you. For here you
se yt his sentence leueth not where he says yt left as to that purpose: but
you se that yt goes forth farther about that purpose still, to show that it
will be hard to find any one spyrytuall man just and indyfferent, but that
the desire and affeccyo^ to have ye worldly honor of prestes exalted and
preferred, has so far infected them, that if a lay man report any evil of
a priest, though it be openly known yt it is as he says, yet they will not
only rather put the lay man to silence, then any thing amend the priest: but
that they will also do the less to the amendment of ye priest, because the lay
men speaks of yt. which affection can not be but a very proud dampnable
frowardness.

And therefore while this good pacifyer there says, that all the prestes be so
far infecte with such a proud damnable desire of their wordely exaltacyon,
that yt wylbe hard to find any one of them any other. And then a little before
those words (as you may se in his said chapyter in mine apologye fo. 235. he
says under the figure of a great rumor among the people / that spyrytuall me^
punyshe heresies rather to oppress them that speak any think against their
worldely honor and richesse etc: then for zele of the faith: these words of
his being there such, judge now good reader whether I might not well say yt
this good man saiyh it will be hard to find any one spyrytuall man, but that
he is so infected with the desire and affection to have the wordely honor of
prestes exalted, that he is thorough such pride far fro such indiffere^cye
and equity, as ought and mus^e be in such judges as him self assygneth to be
such as they must have no spyce of pride couetyse or love toward the world. I
am very sure yt his words maintain mine and more to.

Nay (says he) for I do not mean that they should have no spyce thereof. For
they may have some spice thereof: and yet may be judges in heresye well Enough.
For they may have that desire in some degree and some entente, and not offend
therein, specially dedely.

But I have against yt proved before that he must mean so: or else must
have left his tale untold. Fo if he meant to be content with folk of mean
condycyons without notable enormyties, such they were all ready, and then had
his great exhortacyon little place.

Also this pride with which his words say that they be all so sore infected,
that it wylbe very hard to find any one other / is a very pestylent pride /
and in an high degree, and such as he could not well deuyse a more dedely
dyffamacyon of the hole spyrytualtye / than those words be, which if they
were true (as they be false) plainly proved, that in all the hole clergy it
were hard to find any one good honest man, or me^e to be a judge, either in
heresye or in any thing else. And so would he by this deuyce of his, take
away as I said from examynacyon of heresye, all the spyrytuall judges, and
leave them none at all.

And yet good readers to the end that you may the better perceive, what those
words of this man amou^t unto / which he would make you wene here that I both
mysse rehearse and mysseco^s^re: wouch saufe to read my words that I write upon
them in mine apologye folio. 238.

But now this good pacyfyer perceiving, that it wylbe hard to bear it, but
that his words clearly take away fro the clergy, all such indyferency and
justice, as him self assygneth to be required of necessyte, in every man that
should be suffered to be judge in heresy / he falls to another shyfte to save
the matter vpryght. And therein thus he says.

And farthermore though it were ^^ master More takes it to be / that my
words should sound to that effect that the iu^es yt were the^ were, through
such pride far fro the indyfferencye and equytye that I assygne: yet that
proves not / but that they be now indyfferent and ryghtwyse. For they might
sith the ma^ynge of the said treatise, bycome through grace, indyfferent,
ryghtwyse, meke, lyberall, and loving to god and their neighbor / though they
were not so then. And if they be, so then heretyke^ shall not make merry for
lack of judges a weke ne yet a day. For the same judges may sit still without
chaungynge / to here and e^amyn them when need shall be. Thus as me seems, it
appears every way / yt the excepcyo^ that master More takes of ^hau^gyng of
spyrytuall iuges is but of small effect.

This reason has so some s^tylty: but it has no substance. For if they were
all so noughty so late, as this good man says they were, it will be but hardely
byleued, that so many of them, upon so short a sermon of this poor precher,
should be so well changed so soon, but that as I said, theretykes were well
like, yet one weke longer to make merry, before men might have so sure
experyence as to put them so sone in trust to be judges in heresye, whom this
pacyfyer had persuaded to be so far unmeet for the matter so late. And
therefore it appears every way that this good mannys inuencyon is toward
evil of very great / toward good of very small effect.

Than goth he forth on with the matter and thus he says.

Then says master More ferther that if some say ^e no suffycyent proof / then
is my tale all l^st. And to these words I will answer thus. I will agree that
my saying that some say this or this / is no proof / neither to prove that
some say so / ne yet to prove that it is so. For in every proof must be two
witness at the least. But if two will say it is so ^ then it is a proffe.

And surely if master More will inquere for the truth in this matter, he shall
find that there be many mo then two that say so. And verily if many m^n say
so^ though the tre^th be not so, yet the ta^e i^ not all lost to say that some
men say so. For then it shall put the byshoppe^ and rusers spyrytuall in mind,
that they are bound in conscience to help them that say so all that they
can^ fro the danger that they run in by that saying. And if it be true, then
may the spyrytuall rulers order the matter as they shall se cause, and reform
it in such chary^ab^e manner that none shall say so hereafter: but they will of
malice do it, and run into the slander of the Pharyseis: and that would
charitably be examyned, whether it be so or not.

This is a pretty pyece, and such as I have seldom seen ye like, come out of
any wise mannys mouth. For though that in judgment, men must presume a thing
is true, which two good honest persons swore^ and examyned depose and
testyfye, that themself have seen the deed, or herd the words spoken, by the
mouth of the person which for such deed or saying is accused: yet says no
man for all that / that because two men say it and swear it to, therefore it is
so. For as to the necessary consequence of the deed / this argument is very
faint that this man makes. Two men say it is so, ergo it is so.

Than upon this argument such as you se, he sends me to inquere and than I
shall he says find, that there be many mo than two that say so. That may
well hap now, by occasyon of his book of dyuysyon. But what if I enquered of
them. that I should hap to find not only many mo tha^ two, but also many mo
than two hundred, that would say that the spyrytuall men for such evil
affeccyons as this good pacyfyer surmyseth, have great desire to abjure men or
note them of heresye: yet whyse all they could among them all ley no proof
at all / but always the troth proved contrary, both by that, that in far the
most part of this realm, and take Walys thereto, there have not ben before
his book of diuysion, five men abiured in fiftene year. And in those that have
been / rigor has not ben used more tha^ necessary: but there has been used
more than necessary favor / and that this has been already proved ofter than
ones, before the kings honorable counsel, I would not esteem the bablyng of
two hundred, no not though they were two thousand, and yet many mo to, the
mou^tenau^ce of.ii. strawes / for any thing that I would regard any good man yt
wurse. But I would for their own parts be sore ashamed to here them, and
clearly perceiving yt they so lewdely lied: I would be sore ashamed to tell
the tale again after them. And this I say if I should with inquery thus hap
to find, as I verily trust I should not if I did enquere.

But now his Some say being so false as it is, it is a world yet to se what a
found shyfte he fyndeth, that he would not yet by his will have that lie
lost. For he says, that though the tre^th be not so, yet the tale is not
lost to say that some men say so. For (he says that) then it shall put the
bishops and spyrytuall rulers in mind, that they are bound in conscience to
help them that say so all that they can, fro the daungeour that they run
in by so saying.

What good I pray you can this false Some say do? For what can ye spyrytuall
men do for their help yt so bylye them? any other tha^ advise them to leave
such lyeing? And that had been a better part for this good pacyfyer to have
played him self, and so to have told them upon whose tale he wrote it: tha^ to
ye reproach and rebuke of so many good worshypfull men make a book of diuisyo^,
and therein write every lewd word, that any lewd folk, or any false shrewes
would tell him. Whose evil tongues the spyrytualtye can never appease: but if
to please the^ they should dysplease god / and without lettynge heresies grow
and go forth, should them self rather do evil than let lewd folk speak evil.

And now to thentent good reders that you may the more clearly se, to how
little purpose the pacifyer has in this point answered me / ye shall
understand that my words in mine apology which he would seem to answer well
here, were these. fo. 257.

But yet is this pacyfyer not so favorable toward folk suspected of heresye,
as to take away the power of the bishop for ever, of arrestynge them, and to
drive the ordynaryes for ever to sue cytacyons against heretykes and process
of excommunicacyon / but will have he says the bysshoppes power of arrestynge
no longer suspended, thanne as long as spyrytuall men have that great desire
to cause men abjure or to have them punysshed for heresye / as though he
had well proved that they have so, because he says that some men say so.

But now if Some say be no sufficyent proof / than is his tale lost. For than
he shows no cause why that power of theyrs should in any case be more
suspe^ded now, than in any time here before. And on the the other side, if some
say be a good proof / than the ^uspendynge will be as long as a depryuynge for
ever, sith there shall never be any time in which there shall lack one or
other some say to say more than troth.

Lo good readers here you se, that unto the secunde part of these words of
mine, he answers nothing at all. And than have you seen before that unto the
first, his answer is so feeble, that it had been better for him to have done
therwyth as he does with the the other, leave it unanswered to.

But now goes he ferther and says, Then says master More yet ferther, that
which is a light suspycyon and which is a heavy, and which wytnes be
suffycyent, and which not, must be weyed by the spyrytuall judges, and upon
their weyinge of the matter for light or heavy, to follow the arrest of the
party, or the leuynge of the arrest. Now verily in this point me thinks that
may^^er More makes a right good mocyon, that is to say, that the matter should
be examyned before the arreste. For it has been said in times paste, that in
such ca^e the arrest has many times gone before the examynacion.
Nevertheless under what manner the examynacyon and the arrest should be made in
such case, I will make no deuyse at this time: For happily master More would
anon find a defawt at it, and therefore I will lean it to them that have
auctoryte, to treat ferther of it, and to dyuyse how to avoid the mase that
master More speaks of in his said.xlvi. chapyter.

Now good readers this man makes here, as though I had given him in my
words, some great advantage to ground some great matter upon. And therefore
I shall rehearse you what my words were, that your self may se how sore I
ouersaw my self therein, and what he meneth by the mase that he names here
These are lo my words in mine apologye fo. 257.

yet is he content at the last, lest every man might spy the perell of his
deuyce, to temper his deuyce in such wise, that till the spyrytualty have
left their cruel desire of abiurynge and punysshynge folk for heresye, they
should not be suffered to arreste folk for every light suspycyon, or every
complaynt of heresye. How be it he grants that where one is openly and
notably suspected of heresye, and suffycye^t record and wytnes against him,
and bysydes all that, a dowte that he would fle whereby he might enfecte other:
than he grau^teth it conuenyent that he should be arrested by the body. And
therein he brings in the Clementine and the statute, by whcih the ordinaries
have power to arrest fol^e for suspycyon of heresye / and would as far as I
perceive, have the king reform them after his deuyce. But yet sith which is a
light suspycyo^, and which is an heavy / and which is a light co^playnt, and
which is an heavy / and which is an open suspycyon, and which but a preuy, and
which suspycyon is notable, and which is not notable, and which witnesses be
suffycyent, and which be not suffycyent, be things that must be wayed by the
spyrytuall judges / and upon their way^nge of the matter for light or heavy,
must follow the arrestynge of the party or the leuynge of the arreste: we be
come again as in a mase to the point where we began, that be the matter
great or small, lest all the while they be cruel they should judge light heavy
and small great, their arrestynge of any at all must be susspended fro them,
and send them to sue by cytacyon, till men se that same mind of theyrs of
desyryng men's abiuracyon and punysshement utterly changed and ceace / that
is to say till there be no man left that will so mysche as say, that some men
say that they have not left that mind yet, and make a lie again of them
than, as those some have done that have so said all ready to sir John^ some say
now. And long will it be I warraunt you ere ever all such folk fail.

And therefore sith in the mean season by this pacyfyers good deuyse, here^tykes
may go vnarrested / I can not believe that if his way were followed, it would be
any good mean to make that wylful offenders in heresy should not pass
unpunished, as fast as both in the end of this chapyter and the the other
before also, he calls upon the kings hyghnes and his counsel and his
parleament, to look upon this matter after his good aduertysement, and never
ceace till they bring it to effect.

Here you se good readers, because this man with his deuyces brings him self
into a mase, out of which he can not se how to get, he would now set other
folk to study there about. And would make them very careful, about a thing
little needful. For it has well appeared, and well ben proved to, that the
spyritual iuges have yet hitherto in arrestyng for heresy, right well examyned
and considered, first both the cause, and the necessyte, and have been rather
therein many times to slow / than any time over hasty. And therefore I may and
will say here again as I said there, that I little dowte but that if the kings
hyghnes do as I dowte not but his hyghnes will do, maynteyne and assyste the
spyrytualty in executyng of the laws, even those yt are all ready made against
heresies / and command every te^porall officer under him to do ye same for
his part: though there were never mo new laues made therefore, yet shall both
innocents be saved harmless well enough, and offenders punyshed to. To this
comes forth this good man in this wise.

Now verily to those words of master More I dare say thus, that master More
or he had spoken tho words, had occasyon by reasonable conjecture to have
doubted more at the matter then he has done, and to have thought it very
like, that if the same laws should s^onde as do now in every point
concerning heresye, that many innocents that be not gylty, might upon
suspeccyon of heresy be driven to pourge them self, after the will of the
ordynarye, and yet be not gylty^ ye and over that master More might have
reasonably doubted, and as I suppose in conscience he ought to have doubted
more then he has done, that sometime innocente^ might happen upon the suyte
Ex officio, or upon light complayntes by favor of officers, or ^ppon malice
or dyspleasure, be arrested before examinacyon, and yet master More him self
assenteth, that the examynacyon should be before the arreste. And he might
have doubted also, that some innocents might by such perjured persons, as be
above rehearsed in this chapyter be sometime condemned. And therefore the said
words of master More whereby he takes upon him to say, as it were in his
own auctoryte to perform it, that innocents by the same laws as be all ready
made for heresye, shall be saved harm less well enough, might happen to be of
small effect to help an innocent man or woman that should happen to be
wrongfully troubled in time to come against his words before rehearsed

Now verily to all these words of this good man, I dare say thus, that I wha^
I wrote the words had and yet have very good co^iecturs to put little dowt
therein. For though I might think yt this harm and this harm might hap:
yet sith I have well seen it proved, yt the spyritual judges have used the^
self i^ these matters, not only so truly, but over yt also so favorably / yt no
man can prove in this realm such harms to have happed yet / but where as such
things have been of late surmysed, the troth has been well proved contrary
before the kyng^s honorable counsel / I had and have very good cause to
think, that as they have done well hitherto, so shall they well do hereafter.

And sith all this good man's grownd is no more, to take away well approved
laws with, but ye harm may hap sometime, to some good man thereby, which
reason he may make against the best law that all the world can make: I dare
be bold to warraunt, that that cold reason so feruentely set forth in such
a weyghty matter, is not well worth a ryshe.

And if men would go about to change these old long proved laws: I would as
my duyte is, pray god give them ye grace to make the chau^ges good / but for
that little wit that I have, I verily believe and think that ^f any chaunges be
made rather more slack then streighter: then shall the chaunges be made rather
far worse then better. And thus end I good readers this good mannys xvii.
chapyter.

The.xviii. chapyter
HIs.xviii. chapyter begins, fo. lxix. Wherein he begi^neth first with the
ca. vt inquisitionis negocium and li. vi. whereby yt appears, that all lords
and rulers temporal, be prohyhyted that ^ey shall not in any manner take
know^edge or judge upon heresye. And vp^on this him self adds unto it in hi^
^oke of dyuysyon, that he y^ enquyret^ of heresy, takes knoweledge of her^^y,
and yt him self says not so alone, but that Summa Rosella says so to. And
hereuppon he concludes, that yt should seem, that all the justices of the
peace be excommunycate, and al stewardes in letys, and all enquestes to, as
many as meddle with all. For whether in letys they may or not, that he says he
dowteth, but he says yt I say they may, but he tells not where I say so, nor
as I verily think he never found yt in any book of mine. I say in mine
apologye, fo. 227. that in every let they do so, whyther they lawfully so may
do or not thereof speak I nothing / all be yt I think they may well enough,
both without offense of the kings law, or parell of c^rsynge either.

For I little doubt, but that ^here were of the clergy at the m^kynge of the
statute mo men then ^e, yt understood Summa Rosel^, as well as this good man
does, if Summa Rosella were then made and in mennys hands.

And I doubt not also as little, but yt there were at those days in the clergy
mo then one, that were of counsel in the making of the statute, that
understood the chapyter vt inquisitionis, as well as this mam does, and as well
as he that made Su^ma Rosella to. And that they well understood that the said
chapyter meant of such inquysytours, and such inquysycyons, as they make that
are in the corpse of the law called Inquisitores heretice prauitatis / of
which there are in some places special officers to inquire, proceed, and do
therein as thordynaryes do: and meant not of such inquyrours and such
inquysycyons, as do none other wise inquyre, but only by way of informacyon to
bring the matter to the ordynaryes knowledge.

For as for the minour of this good mannys argument, that he that enqnyreth of
heresye, takes knowledge of heresye, so does every denouncer, every accuser,
and in a manner every witness to, take upon them knowledge of heresye in some
manner wise: for they take upon them as they well may that this thing or
that thing is heresye. But this is not the knowledge that the law forbede^h:
but the knowledge that we call holding ple upon yt, which our inquysycyons do
not: but only serve to bring the matter to the ordynaryes hands, which else
should peradventure not have herd thereof.

And for this cause, to be sure that by these inquysycyons no man should fall in
danger of any examynacyon yt was substancially provided in the said statute,
yt thynquistcyo^ and the endyghteme^t of heresye, should serve the ordynarye
nothing to the procedynge in the matter: but that he should begin his process
against the party a fresh, without layenge that endyghtement unto his
charge.

And therefore where as this good man, by the high authorite of Su^ma Rosella
denounces here all the justices of peace accursed. I dare be bold by the high
authoryte of Summa Angelica to denounce them all assoyled again. And therefore
where as this good man wenynge that he had well won his spurrys in this
point tryumpheth upon me and say^th.

And to thy^ law master More an^wereth not, But passes yt ^uer, as a thing
that ^^ yt seems he lyt^e regards / but only that he says, that the laws
of this realm, and of holy church in heresies may well stand to gether, for
ought that he sees: And yet yt appears, that upon this law they do not
agree nor stand to gether. And therefore me thinks yt wol^e not be so lightly
passed ^ue^ as master More does pass yt over. For yt is a dangerous thing to
fall into the left censure of the church.

There were two causes for which I answered him not / one a general cause,
concerning all his matters of laws of the church, wherein he fyndeth fautes,
of which I shall speak afterward. A another special cause there was
concerning this exco^munycacyon. And that was that me thought and yet think,
that he spoke therein so chyldyshely that I was a shamed on his byhalfe to meddle
with yt / and to make open his chyldyshe handlynge thereof.

But now sith I se him compte for so great a conqueste, that he put me to
silence therein, what purpose can he dyuyse for which I should have answered
any thing to that point? had I made any professyon to prove every word wrong
that he said in all his hoke? he knows that I said not that I would meddle,
but with those certain things that I there speak of.

But now suppose that there were in that law such fault as he allegeth what
could mine answer amend the matter, or his book of diuisyon either? If men
were accursed as he mysse takes it, could my book or his book take away the
curse? No, but we may put the parlyament in mind to make a law. His book
alone is as able to put them in remembrance thereof as his and mine to gether.
And yet for that point neither needs mine nor his neither. For the parlyament
has made all ready a law for these inquysycyons. Which if thy might lawfully
make in such form as they have (as I am sure they might) the^ am I sure yt
they fall not in exco^munycacyon for it. Now if they might not laufully make
it, and thereby fell there in, what could the parlyame^t farther add unto it,
that might deliver them of yt? And therefore I can not in good faith se to what
purpose he wrote of that point him self.

No but this law is one great cause of dyuisyon between the spyrytualtye and
the temporaltye. That would I very feign wit how. For temporal men be not I
wot well so far ouersene, as to be angry with the spyrytual men here now,
for that law that a pope made at Rome ere they were borne. And the spyrytuall
men have also as little cause again of any grudge against the temporaltye for
the matter. And therefore why he should put yt in his book of dyuysyon, for a
cause of diuisyon I can dyuyse no reason. For As for that, that he would should
seem a cause here, is to unreasonable where he says.

As long a^ that law siddeth so vnrepelled / some prestes that se yt, will say
that they that do against yt / be accursed: and so may lightly fall the^by
into a wrongful and vntr^w judgment / which though yt be no great offense,
oneles yt be of pride / by dyspysynge of the temporal power in that behalf,
yet yt would be eschewed. And also if they that be so noysed to be accursed /
here of yt, they will be dysco^tented. And so grudges and varya^nces may rise
and increase by occasyon of yt.

This is a very cold tale, and as deed as ever was door nail. For before him
self brought in this babelynge of his own about that law / (which babelyng
is yet) as I have showed you) to no purpose at all) I never herd any man talk
any such word of that law in my days, nor in good fayeth no more I wene did
he neither.

Nor I dare say he hereth no where yet any prestes say, that the justices of
the peace be accursed for enquiring against heresies / none I dare say but
such prestes as be heretyques. And therefore this whole tale of his, save for
the malice that yt means / is even a very try^lynge.

For as for ye mocyo^ yt he makes so often to have that law repelled, because
yt is he says against the laws of the realm: except he mokke I wot nere
what he means. For if the realm here may repel yt: the^ by yt the law is
here made to the contrary (if yt were contrary as yt is not) yt is repelled
all ready. And if he think that the realm here can not re^ell yt / then
wereto writes he and prenteth that pyece in his book of dyuysyon, as a thing
for which the temporaltye and the spyrytualty of this realm should fall in
varyau^ce for, where neither the making nor the repellynge lies in neither
another of their hands.

But surely the repellyng though yt be the thing that is spoken of, is not yet
the thing yt is meant in this matter as yt aypereth in these words.

And therefore me thinks yt would not be so lightly pa^sed over as master
More does pass yt over. For yt is a daungero^s thing to fall into the left
censure of the church. And if yt be said, that the said law is void,
because the church had no authoryte to make yt: And that yt is therefore not
to be fered. And I will yet say thereto, that though yt were void / that yet as
long yt stands so not repelled, yt were good to eschew it, and not to fall
wylfully into the danger of yt: and therefore yt were better to repelle yt then
to let yt stand still, and rather do hurt then good.

Here you may se good readers, that where as otherwise to repel that law then
it is repelled, lies not in our hands if our law were against yt / and
where as of ^routhe yt needs no repellynge at all, but the law of the realm
stands there with well enough, he makes as though al ^he justices of pea^e
were accursed there by, as often as they give the iuryes in charge to inquire of
heresye: therefore lest they should wylfully fall into the censures of the
chyrhe, whereof as he says the least is a dau^gerouse thing, ye may plainly se
that these wyly shrewes which abuse his labor, mean in all this matter
nothing else, but that they would not have heresies inquired of. And yet they
need not so greatly to care therefore, for any great things yt by such
inquisycio^s are in heresies presented. But yet thus declare they their good
wylles these wyly shrewes yt thus deceive this good simple soul, and set him
so evil a work.

If he fere so myche ye ce^sures of ^h^ church as he makes for, and
vnd^rstande and believe Summa Rosella so surely as he pretendyth: yt had been
better for him to examyne well his book of dyuysyon, and this his second book
also by the tytles of Summa Rosella, and se well why there him self varye not
fro Su^ma Rosella, and be by ye sentence of Su^ma Rosella fallen in the
censures of the church him self, by some such manner of writing as his said
books have.

But now comes this good pacifi^r forth with a goodly pyece and to declare
him self indyfferent, and to show also a great ouersyght used upon my part:
thus the good man Some say says.

And therefore yt seems right expedyent that the said law be repelled. And in
like wise it were good to repelle all such laws spyrytuall, as be made
contrary to the kings laws and the custom of the realm. And if yt be
said, that yt were good also / that such statutes and laws / as be made and
used by the temporal power to the grefe of the people were also reformed / and
that if I were indyfferente / I would make some mocyon so to h^u^ yt: And so it
seems maysier More does parte^^ (...) that I ought to have done, and to have
found (...) defaute in the temporal law as in the spyry^^^ll law: How be yt
because be would bear n^ (...) of the temporal law in that mocyon, yt s^m^th
that he somewhat mytygateth his sentence (...) and says / that if I do so /
and that then I (...) them / that is say, the temporal laws and ^ynde
defautes at them / as trewly as I do at these^ that is to say at the
spyrytuall laws: that then I should make two lies for one / and yet as I
suppose, I have assigned some defautes in the spyrytuall law, which master
More can not tell how they shul^^ ^e excused.

As to his repellynge, I se as I have said no substance in his words. For we
repel them as far as I se we can, when we keep them not but make our own
laws to the contrary. And therefore as far as I se all that he speaks of
these repellynges, save only for setting forth of his dyuysyon, is else but
a very vain tale.

But now where he says that I would have him and seem to move him / to find
fautes in the temporal law to. I wot nere whether his word^ have herein more
falsed or more folly / but surely they have both twayn, and either the tone or
the the other double.

For first every man may se by his own words even here, that I move him not
to use as for indyffer^ncye, to find fautes in the temporal laws as he has
done with the spyrytuall laws, when him self here shows that I say that if
he so did, he should make double lies. This shows that he uses in this
saying plain and open untruth. And sith his own untruth appears upon
his own showing, this shows also, that he uses open folly.

And where he says that he has assygned some defautes in the spyrytuall
laws, which I can not tell how they should be excused: I answer him again,
that unto all laws, or all matters that he list to babble of, am I not bound
to meddle with / but of these spyrytuall ^ laws that were made for the
repressyng of heresies, with which our temporal laws are also conformable
and concurrau^t with which ^ this good wise man for the ease of heretyques,
has now founden such fautes as a wise man may be ashamed to speak of, I have
clearly declared that they need not to be excused / but that for the finding
of such fautes his folly to be myche accused. This have I proved so plain,
that he can find no great cause of glory when he lokath back upon yt.

But now to thentent you may good readers se, that either this man is not so
simple in him self as he seems, or else that some wyly shrewes shamefully do
deceive him: I beseech you consider a little either the folly or the craft that
the man uses here.

He has brought you forth words of mine which I speak he says of the laws,
where as of truth I speak them not of the laws at all, as your self shall
well se. For though he dyssemble the place because he would not have you read
yt: yet have I sought yt out for you, in the.99. lefe of mine Apologye / and
there lo these are my words.

And this pacyfyer aggreueth (as myche as in him lies) the clergy of
England, for use of the laws not made by them self, but be commen laws of
all chrystendome.

If he will say that he blames but their abuses thereof, the troth appears
in some place otherwise in his book. And yet sith he proves that point but by
a some say / he might with the same figure lay like fautes in the temporaltye
concerning the laws of this realm, and prove yt in like wise with a great
Sum say to. And therein he shows him self not indyfferent when he brings
in the tone and leueth the the other out. And on the the other side, if he bring in
the the other to / than shall he make two fawtes for one. For if he handle them as
truly as he handeleth these / than shall he make two lies for one

Lo good readers consider here I bysech you the manner of this good man. To the
first piece of these words of mine, in which case is also the law that we be
now in hand with all, vt inquisitio^is, wherewith he would in his book of dyuysyon
aggreue the clergy of this realm which never made the law: he answers not
in all his book one word. And yet in his such manner of aggreuynge he uses a
very sinful, and in his not answering, a very shamfull way.

Than in the remanaunt you se good readers your self, that I speak not of the
laws. For when I say thus, if he will say that he blames but their abuses
thereof: yet sith he proves that point but by a Somsay / he might by the same
figure lay like fawtes in the temporalty to, concerning the laws of this
realm: is it not here plain that I lay blame in him, for his bylying of the
mynistres of the spyrytuall laws under a figure of Somsay, as though they
abused the spyrytuall laws in myssehandelynge of heretykes whereof I speak more
aft^r. And I say that by a like figure of Some say, he might dyffame all the
temporal mynis^res to, and bring them in grudge and obloquy of the people
with like lies of abusyng the temporal laws to.

Now consider good readers, ey^ther how fa^sely this honest man has him self,
or else how folyshly he has suffered false shrewys, to make him turn and
change the sentence of my words fro the men to the laws, to bring in his
matters upon, and say that I move him to find fawtes in the temporal laws and
put them in pr^n^e abroad as he does in the the other, wh^re as you plainly se I
speak not of the laws but of the mynis^res / nor yet advise him to use such
fasshyon with the tempora^l mynystres neither, lest he make two lies for one.

Is not now this change of my sentence that he makes here a very shameless
dealing, either of him self, or of some shrewed counsel of his?

And now knytteth he to this handelynge the remanaunt of the said.xix.
chapyter, and shows that he speaks first of the spyrytua^tye, because the
causes of the dyuysyon specially be grown by them / and lays forth a sort
of gryefes, some part very tryfles, and some part remedyed before his book
of dyuisyon made, and some part very folyshe, and some part for all his some
says undoubtedly very false.

He has there two leuys in the end of that chapter which any wise man that
reads them, shall I suppose, judge a very dreamynge tale. And therein it
seems that as he has bygonne with the spyrytuall laws, so he will after
proceed in the temporal laws to. And feign would ye man make me so fond as to
be his fellow therein / and says if I know any such made, as the perleament had
none authoryte to make, or wheruppon the people have i^ste cause to complayn:
it w^r^ we^^ done that I should show them. And so he thinks verily that
cher^t^ should compel me to do, seeing that I am he says learned in ye laws of
the realm^.

Verily if I knew any such: yet would I not follow neither this good mannys
holy exhortacyon, nor his godly sample neither, to do in ye tone as he has
done in the the other, but if I lyked his doing a little better than I do.

And if I be learned in the temporal laws, the less will I follow his
counsel. For the better that I were learned in them the less would I wene it
would become me, to prent and put abroad among the people, a slawnderous book
of them to shame them.

And unto this point good readers I have answered and showed my mind in mine
apologye before, whereto this man gives a defe ear always. And here, upon a
sought occasyon with a fond wyly change of my words, exhorts me to the
thing to which I made answer all ready. And what I before said therein, that
he dyssembleth, and says not one word thereto. But in mine apologye good
readers, the.159. lefe these were in this point my words.

His other murmours and grudges that he says he can not now rehearse, he
reherseth after many of the^ in his other chapyters / which I will pass over
vntowched, both for that the more part of them be such as every wise man
will I suppose answer them him self in the redynge, and satysfye his own
mind without any need of mine help therein / and for that some things are
there also therein, that are very well said / and some also that be they good
or badde, I purpose not to meddle myche wythall, as are the things yt towche
any laws or statutes all ready made, be they of the church or of the realm,
defend them I am content to do, if I think them good. But on the the other side
if I think them naught / albe it that in place and time co^uenyent I would give
mine advice and counsel to the change, yet to put out books in writing
abroad among the people against them, that would I neither do my self, nor
in the so doing commend any man that does. For if the law were such as were
so far against the law of god, that it were not possible to stand with
man's salvation / than in that case the secret advise and counsel may
become every man / but the open reprofe and redargucyon thereof may not in my
mind well become those that are no more spyrytuall than I. And sure if the
laws may be kept and observed without perell of soul, though the change
might be to the better: yet out of time and place co^uenyent to put the
defawtes of the laws abroad among the people in writing, and without any
suretye of the change give the people occasyon to have the laws in derysyon,
under which they live, namely sith he yt so shall use to do, may sometime
missetake the matter and think the thing not good whereof ye change would be
worse: y^ way will I not as thus advised neither use my self nor advise no
friend of mine to do And therefore I will as I say leave some things of his book
untouched, whyther he say well or evil.

Here you se good readers mine answer to this point, concerning the finding
of fawtes and puttyng them abroad in prente: which answer he dyssembleth,
and again provoke me to the same, as though he had never herd it / which
answer I will therefore be had as repeted in every place where he provoke me
hereafter to the same point. And thus you se good reders, that where as he
has not in any one chapyter of his, brought forth any reason yet: yet has he
brought forth lest in this his.xviii. in which he bosteth most. For by this
has he plainly declared, that he neither understands the law vt
inquisitionis, that he alleges, nor so much as the pore sum called Summa
rosella neither. For that good man yt made it, undoubtedly never meant of such
inquisicions as ours are, of which manner he had happily never known none.
And as for the law, they very first words thereof to him that understands
them and consydereth them well, suffycyently do declare, that that law
forbedeth lay men to medyll with such manner knowledge of heresye, as should
be a let and impedement to the ordynaryes, or other the spyrytuall inquisitours
/ and not such knowledge as we take by our inquisicyo^s, that only serve to
help the toth^r forth and bring ye matter to their hands.

And ther^ore sith I se well, that this man in the laten laws and Su^mes, has
so little understanding: I shall be the more content in his laws and his
Su^mys, so much the less to dyspute or meddle with him.

The.xix. chapyter.
IN his.xix. chapite^ he declares what he means by confederacyes of the
spyrytualtye / and says he meneth co^federacyes whereby spyrytuall men pretend
to maintain some such laws of the church, and some such constytucyo^s
prouincyall, as are against the kings laws and the old customs of the
realm / and puts for a sample, the puttyng of ^restes to answer before
temporal judges, and the statute made de Silua cedua, and the statute of
Mortuaryes. As for co^ue^tyng of prestes before seculare judges, troth it is
ye one time thoccasyo^ of a sermon made the matter come in co^municatio^ before
the kings hyghnes. But neither any times synnys nor many yerys before, I never
herd yt there was any bysynes about it. And yet was ye matter ceaced long before
any word sprange of this great general dyuision, that his book makes as
though there were such, in a manner general through the whole realm.

And diverse statutes have there sinnys ben made, concerning ye same point.
And many prestes conuented as they were wont to be before / and no by synes
made by the spyrytualty therefore yt I here of, nor I trow him self neither. And
in like wise men cut down their woods every year, in one place and other of
the realm / and either is there not asked the tyt^e ag^ynst the statute / or
if some person would with good will get it, and therefore ask yt, he geteth yt
not yet in deed. For where he says that if I would remember my self well, how
often the co^stitucion prouincial, made against the statute de Silua cedua,
has been put in execucyon of late days, to the gryefe of many lay men: I would
not have said so generally that there is not any one constytucyon provincial
that he speaks of, to any man's gryefe or grudge put in execucyon in the time
of any of the prelates that are now living / and affermeth that the same
constytucyon has of late in the time of diverse of the same prelates that now
be, ben put in execucion, to the gryefe and grudge of many persons within this
realm. First as towchyng mine own rememberaunce: in good faith I can not
remember one. And as to his own remembrance, upon which he affermeth it to
have been done so lately, to the grudge and gryefe of so many: he shall perdon
me though I believe him not till he prove it, or at the least wise name them
that have had the wynnyng, and them also yt have borne the loss / so that I
may my self prove whyther it be true or not. For except he do the tone, else
have I good cause in ye mean while, in this point to give no great credence
to him.

For first I can scantely believe that upon the persons bare word, for
allegacion of the co^stytucyon prouyncyall, his paryshen would let him have it.
And if there happed any man that would: yet am I sure they were so few, that it
were so dowble folly to lay that for any cause of diuisyon, which were done
both but by a few, and also not without the parties will, and rather of his
own pryuate deuocio^, tha^ for any fere of co^pulsio^.

Now if the person would take it of his parishon byforce: I se the comen
experyence therein such: that I dare boldly say the whole paryshe would not
suffer him. And yet if it were taken in deed: neither should the person enjoy
ye profit, nor the paryshen bear the loss / but should at the kings comen
law recover a right large amends. For well ye wot his da^mages should be
tared him, not by.xii. prestes, but by.xii. temporal men, and his costs by
the kings judges that are no prestes neither.

Now if this man will say, that many of the personys have in ye time of the
prelates that now be living, or that were living at the time that him self
wrote those words, recovered in any of the spyrituall courts, the tithe of
such woods, against the statute, by force of that provincial co^stytucyo^: I
will se this man prove it ere I believe him in it. For the dayngeour of that
suit may be p^raduenture more, than I suppose the person will put in perell for
his tithes. And also the paryshen may soon stop the suit in the beginning
by ye kings prohybycyo^ / whereby ye kings judges shall se whyther the person
sewe for such tithes or not, and will not therein suffer him to proceed.

And therefore till this good man make me better proves of this matter than his
own bare saying: he gives me no cause against so many lettes to the
contrary, therein to believe his word. But I durst well warrau^t it, that if he
come ones to the namyng of the parties, so that the specialtyes of the matters
may be sought out and made appear: you shall surely find it untrue.

Now than to maintain withal his great word of confederacyes: he brings
forth that some prestes say still, that those tithes and mortuary^s also, for all the statutes be their dewtyes still, and that they which pay them not be
accursed. I have espied this good man is a man of sadness, and no great
gamener. For if he were he would never be angry for an angry word, spoken by a
man that is on the lesynge side. Hit is an old courtesye at the cardys perdye,
to let the leser have his words. And in good faith in this matter I here no
such talkyng at all. And verily this deuyce of his to put this for a cause of
diuisyon, is in my mind a very chyldyshe thing.

But thanne goes he ferther that prestes make partycular confederacyes, to
maintain obytys, and prestes wages, and to have more at byryalles than they
have been wont to have or else to show them self not content, that is to
say to ask more than they can get / and because they can not get it, show
them self not content / that is to wit lowre and look angerly, and say they
be not pleased. Be not these high matters and mete for that heyghnouse name of
confederacyes

And yet goes he ferther with an other heyghnouse confederacy, that if a
priest have a business to do in some countries: other prestes will as it is
said so confeder whyth hom at arbytr^nentes and other metynges / or else make
them such friends pryuyly, that the the other party though he be of right good
substance a have also good right / yet shall he sometime have much a do to
obtain if.

Is not here good readers a wonderful heyghnouse work, and well worthy ye
name of confederacies of the spyrytualte / that but in some countries, nor
there neither of any certayntye, but as some say, some prestes in the
business of a another priest, will, and yet but sometime neither at
arbytrementes confedere with their good word to help forth their fellow, or
else to make him friends? Ye and then what a myschyefe he shows that
enseweth thereupon? The the other party has he says myche a do to obteyn his
right and yet that but sometime neither. But as for lose his right by their
means, he says not that any man does. Be not these heyghnouse
confederacyes, and things mete for this man to make a book of diuysyon for?
And yet as though he had very well acquyte hm self: he knytteth yt up with
these words.

And these be some of the confederacyes of pres^es that I meant of / and not the
gatherynge to gether of the clergy at the conuocacyons.

In good faith I saw not how he should mean any other thing, nor that
neither well. For the name of confederacyes taken to an evil part as this man
takes yt, does sygnyfye a metynge and gatheryng to gether, and a
determynacyo^ of certain evil folk, conspyrynge to gether about an evil
thing to be done, with a covenant and promise by each of them made unto
other, each to stand with other therein. Now where as at conuocacyons good men
come to gether to do good, and therefore he could not call them confed^racyes
as he now says he meant not to do: yet I douted somewhat whyther he so meant
or not, because the conuocacions be at the least wise comen asse^blies to
gether, where of he might hap I thought to give a good thing an evil name. But
these matters yt he now speaks of, I could not ymagyne that ever he meant to call
them confederacyes, wherein he neither sees assemblies, nor can assygne and
prove any conspyracy and mutual promise, in assystyng each other about the
procurement of any thing at all good or bad. For where as he says yt these be
some of the confederacy^s that he meant: I am sure no man douteth but that these
be either all he co^federacyes that he fyndeth, or else at the least wise the
greatest. And then are those that he calls here partyculare confederacyes,
so chyldyshe that in good faith I myche marvel, that his heart could serve
him for very shame to speak of the^. And the^ the the other yt be takes for
general co^federacyes / he neither sees nor assygneth so much as any asse^bly
about them, or promise or abettement to procure and pursue them. And therefore
though some prestes would here or there speak of them as their own affection
sedeth them: this is far fro the nature and name of confederacye.

And yet when he has al to gether done, while he proves nothing at the
vttermoste (though all that he says were as true as yt is not) but that they
would feign have the tithe of timber still, and that they would feign have the
mortuaryes still, and that some would feign have greater wages, and some would
feign have more money at the beryalles, then for all their feign willing they
can get / when they would only fayn have yt, and yet in deed get naught of
yt, nor other folk nothing lose: to make now so great a matter of this and
call yt an hyghnouse name of confederacyes, is as me seems somewhat like to
him, that would needs have an accyon against his neighbor because his
neighbors horse stood and looked over his hedge. For he said that he saw by
his countenance that he would have eaten his grass if he could have gotten to
yt. For as for that, that the hedge let him, was little thank to him / for
his will was never the less. And thus his.xix. chapyter you se good readers
how little reason is in yt.

The.xx. chapyter.
HIs.xx. chapyter beginning in ye lxxvi. lefe, has so little effect and
substance in it, and so faintly defends his formare matter which yt
pretends to defend, that I puroose to make no long work about yt.

For if you read first his words as they lie in mine Apology fo. 159 in the
second side beginning at these words, And here me thinks I might say: ye
shall there good readers find, that I rehearse those words of his even whole,
with those words in them, which he would in the beginning of this his.xx.
chapyter, make men believe that I had wythdrawen / as though they were words of
such substancyall effect, that I would not have it appear in my book that he
had written so piththely.

Afterward in a another place where they be rehearsed again fo. 162 then pre^ter
of lykelyhed left them out of ouersyght and have. And surely they be not of so
great weight, but yt if the author had him self left them out in his book of
dyuysyon, yt had made little matter. And if he had over that left out the whole
clause: then had he left in his book one lie the less, and his book the
better by so myche. For whereby proves he that the spyrytuall rulers pretend
them self to be so clean and pure, that there is no defaute in them, but all
in the people alone, and in them self no manner fault at all? Where herd he
ever any spyrytuall man say this, by the whole spyrytualtye or by any one man
thereof?

They confess them self to be men and sinners. And they confess and
knowledge also, that the very cause of this chyefe myschyefe that now
begins to make dyuysyon, that is to wit the execrable heresies, which
myschyefes this good mannys evil dyuyses with change of good laws were
lykely to maintain, if men would follow them: did both begin, and is also
set forth and auaunced forward, by those ungracious folk that are such
among the spyrytualtye, as Judas was among thapostles / and this not in this
realm only, but in other countries to. As by friar Luther, and priest
Pomerane, Otho the monk, and friar Lambert, friar Huskyn, and Swynglius / and
here in England Tyndale, friar Barns George Joy, and some other such, as with
the sede of sedycyouse heresye, have so wen and set forth dyuysyon.

This thing the spyrytualtye both knows and knowledgeth. And therefore they
do not pretend as this pacifier says they do, that there has been no fault
among them, but all among the people. And therefore this good man where he
says that I left out three words in that clause of his (which yet I did put
in indede: him self had somewhat amended his matter with leuyng in of one lie
the less, if he had left out the whole clause all to gether.

As to that y^ he says I changed his words in ye end from these words the
syghte of grace that is spoken of before will not appear, into (...) words the
syghte of grace tha^ (...) spoken of before, be with you no^ and ever more
amen: therein he says very true. For sith ^e was fallen into preaching, I
not only in the first place rehearsed him as he spoke him self, but afterward
also in the second place I took the pain for him to mende his colla^yon in
that point, and make yt end some what more like a sermon with a good gracious
prayour.

Then goes he forth, and in the same lefe and the next following, he makes a
suspicyouse matter, and can not tell what mind I was of, in chaungynge his
word spyrytuall rulers, into this word prelates. But look good readers upon
the place, and you shall se that I did yt of good cause. For I do not there say
that he says prelates, but I say there that peradventure he will say so. And
also besides this that there y^ no very great dyfference between these words,
the prelates and the spirytuall rulers: the change from this word the
spyrytuall rulers into this word prelates, seemed me the more mete and more
proper for the matter that the pacifier speaks in that place, where he speaks
of au^horite yt they pretend, and obedyence that they claim.

How be it rather then I would give any cause of dyuysyon against me, to him
that uses to make great dyuysyons upon small grounds / I shall be content to
give him his own word again. And therefore I pray you good readers every of
you me^de your bokis / and in the stead of prelates in that place, put in
spyrytual rulers. And when you so have done, ye change shall for the matter not
be very great / and yet so myche as it shall be, shall more serve me then him.

But yet to make me sorry, yt ever I was so far ouersene, as to take a way his
gay golden word of spyrytuall rulers from him, he begins as it were with a
great thret ^ says.

What mays^er More means to change these words spyrytuall rulers into
prelates, I can not te^l. But now by occasyon of the words that master More
has spoken, I will say farthe^ in the matter then I had thought to have
done.

How happy was I so, yt I had not the grace to let his own word stand. For
now will he say farther in the matter then ever he had thought to have
done. And that is (says he) this.

That I think verily that if so great an ouersyght fell in to prelates and
spyrytuall rulers, that they would take upon them to preach herely, that they
would that the people should believe them therein / and to take yt to be
catholycall that they preached. For who would preach any thing but such as
they would have their audyence believe.

Believe me good readers, that this man weneth he says well fauoredly in this
poi^t / wherein he takes such pleasure, that afterward fo. lxxix. he falle^h
into the same again, and says thus.

Mays^er More go^th about only to prove, that all my tale is los^e, because
prelates pretend not to be byleued if they preach heresye as he takes yt
that I shol^e say they do. And yet I said not so in deed. And if I did say so
/ I said but trewly. For if they did preach heresye, yt is certain that they
would look to be byleued as I have said before / ye and if they would preach
and say that if they preched heresye, that they would the people should not
believe them: yet if they did after preach heresye in deed, they would look
that the people should believe them. For they would say that they were no
heresies that they preached. For who will confess that he preaches heresye.

Now good readers here have I joined you to gether this good ma^nis gaye
words in two places, wherein I perceive he pleases him self right well. But
to thentent that you may se whether he have so good cause as he weneth,
consider well his words and mine before, wheruppon he comes to this point.
For he makes as though, I without occasyon geuyn of his words, had written
that the prelates pretend not to be byleued if they would preach heresye.
Wherein whether he say true or not you shall se by his own words, which are
these.

The light of grace will not come, as long as the spirytuall rulers pretend
that their authoryte is so high and so immedyate of god, that the people are
bound to obey them and to accept all that they do and teach, without
arguments resys^ence or grudgynge.

Now good readers first consider well here in these words of his, what
wisdom the man has showed, in making such a mumblynge of chaungyng
spyrytuall rulers into prelates. For when he says here, that the spyrytuall
rulers pretend that their authoryte is so high: what doubt is there but
though he mean other rulers mo beside whom he calls no prelates: yet he
means prelates to / ye and prelates specially to. And then when he says that
the prelates and the other spyritual rul^rs pretend this or that: may I not
well say that he says ye prelates pretend this? yes verily that I may. And yet
in so chau^gyng his word: I change it to his advantage and not unto mine, in
yt I make his odyouse saying myche less, and nothing more. And thus first
you se good readers this mannys myche ouersyght in finding of that fault.

Now consider farther good readers yt he says in those words, not that the
spyrytual rulers, yt is to say both the prelates and all the remanaunt to,
pretend their authorite to be high and so immedyatly deryued fro god, that the
people are bound to obey them in this thing or that thing, one, or twain, or
ten, or twentye / but utterly to accept and obaye not only all their
teachynges, but also al their doings to / and neither argue resyst nor grudge
at any manner thing, that they would either teach or do.

This general thing he says. And therefore though I deal as you se so
favorably with him in my.xxvii chapyter of mine Apologye, as to dyuyde ye matter,
and ask whether he me^t yt by their whole authoryte or part: I might well upon
these words of his have taken it, yt he had very shamfully belyed them, and
had said yt they had pretended to have their whole authoryte i^mediatly of god
every whit. For if I would so have said / his general words would well have
warraunted mine. Also sith his saying is so general, and extends utterly not
only to all their techynges, but also to al their doings to / and says that
they pretend, yt by gods immediate ordinance the people should accept all to
gether, both al y^ ever they say, and all yt ever they do: by how many manner
things might I have confuted his saying, and have proved it false?

But yet his sainge being such, I took but one thing / and yt was such, as for
ye matter yt we both specially spoke of was next at hand. And therefore I said /
that they pretend not to have such an authory^e that men should obey th^ym in
all things / for they pte^de not to have authorite to bind m^n to believe and
obey them, if they would preach heresies. But they p^^ynly profess that if
they so would men should not believe them nor obey them therein.

Here you se that where he says that he meant not that the prelates wo^de
preach heresye: he speaks all beside the purpose. For I said not that he
either so said or so meant. But I said and yet say, that in those words he
said, that if they would preche heresies, they do now pretend, that by the
authorite which god has geuyn them, the people were then therein bounden
to believe and obey them.

And in his so saying I there said and yet say, that he says very far
untrue, and that they pretend yt not, but plainly prete^de the contrary. And
thus in this point that he makes a matter without grownd or cause, and that him
self with his own words gave me good occasyon to write the thing that I
wrote: this you se good readers proved very plain.

But now consider his other words, wherein he lyketh him self so well, and
weneth yt he proves yt the spyrytuall rulers of the realm pretend, that if
they would preche heresye, the people were by gods ordinance bounden to
believe and obey them therein, because they would than say yt it were none
heresye. In this point his reasonynge has I promise you a little more subtylte
than substance / and yet but simple subtylte neither.

First as for his case, that if all the spyrytuall rulers would preche
heresye: if he had meant of the spyrituall rulers of all chrystendome, I would
have admitted his case none other wise, but as men put and admit a case
impossyble, to se what might ensew thereon if it were possible / as saint Poule
puts the case that if an angel came from heuyn and preched a contrary
gospel, yet the same angel should not be byleued. But now sith he puts it
but by the spyrytuall rulers of one realm, I admytte the case as possible /
but yet as such a case, as I trust in god this good man shall se the sky
fall first and cache larkes ere it happen, though it may be lykely enough to
happen in some one or twain, or some fewe^ against whom the remanaunt shall
preche and teache the troth.

But now says this good man thus. If it so happened in them all: than would
they all pretend, that by their authoryte given them of god, the people were
bounden therein to believe and obaye them. For they would than say that their
heresies were none heresies.

I am content lo to grant him all this / and I ask him now what than? For
all this good readers proves (you se very well) no more, but that if that case
happened that they also preched, they would thanne al so pretend. But all this
proves never a whyt, that the spyrytuall rulers either now do, or at any time
have done, pretended their authoryte such. Now consider than for what purpose
he speaks of such pretending. He says (you wot well) their pretendynge of
their authoryte to be so great, that they people should obey them without
argument, grudge, or co^tradiccyon in all yt ever they either say or do. This
he layth I say for so sore a cause of this division, which he makes in his
book, yt he says the light of grace will not come to ceace it, till they ceace
so to pretend.

And therefore good readers sith this is the thing yt he says, and the purpose
that he says it for, making it a cause of dyuysyon present: how can he
maynteyne his saying with a case feigned, whereby it may be that they will so
pretend hereafter / where as ever hitherto him self says not nay, but yt
they both have pretended and yet pretend the contrary? Can he maintain yt
the temporalty is at dyuision with the spyrytualty now all ready, because it
may peradventure hap here after by a far fet possybylyte, that they may
than, no man woteth when, pretend peradventure a thing, whereof they
presentely pretend the contrary / and protest also that if the case should so
mysse hap hereafter, they desire now for than yt no man should therein than
believe them? Saw you ever good read^rs any man with such a simple subtyltye,
cast all his matter in the dust so shamfully?

Now where he says to mayn^ayne his matter here withal, that it is not to
suppose ye spyrytuall rulers will pretend that such authoryte as they have of
the grant of princes, is immedyately of god: I say that therein he says
troth, and yt I suppose that they will not. But yet let him self look well in
his own book of division, and he shall find that him self says y^ contrary
there, of that he now says here / and shows some things which he both
says that they have but by the mean of princes and the good mind of the
people, and yet says also that they pretend to have the same things
immedyately of god. As for ensample both their a^thoryte to have ye tenth part
for tithe, and the thynge^ which they enjoy by the name of ye lybertyes of ye
church, whereby their persons be in many things pryuyledged in this realm
before ye person of a say man. These things him self says yt they have but
by a mean and not immedyately of god. And yet he says in this same xx.
chapyter, that the things which they call the lybertyes of the church, they
pretend to have immedyately of god / and for all that he says now that it is
not to suppose yt they will pretend so. And thus you may se good readers,
that for the defense of this place, he is dreuyn to a shrewde narow streyte,
when to defend one fawte he is feign to make twain.

Now where as he says I might have satysfyed my self well enough, and yt the
letter of his words were plain: you se that in the rehersynge again of his
own words fo. lxxx, he is feign to suppress and stele away these his own
general words, all that they do or teache, to make his words seem plain. For
as you se, they standing still, his words are plain against him. For him
self now confesses yt they pretend not to do by authoryte immedyate fro god,
such things as they do by authoryte given them by princes.

But because I would feign fully satysfye him: I shall now show you yt with his
new declaringe yt his words were well enough, he has made his matter out of
all measure wurse.

For now read his words again fo. lxxx. and th^re you shall se yt he says yt
he meneth only of such authoryte as ye spiritual rulers pret^^de to have
imm^diately of god. And yet after he declares it ferther and better on ye
secunde side of the same lefe in ye.xiiii. line, yt he meneth only such
authoryte, not as they prete^de to have, but as they have in deed i^mediately
of god. And to thentent men might se yt he meneth not of authorite falsely
pretended, but truly had i^mediatly of god, he puts for ye sample their
authoryte in ministracyo^ of ye sacraments.

This is his own exposicyon of his own words, which he would have taken for
so plain, that he is angry with me that I could not spy it, and so satysfye
my self before.

Well go to now: let us rehearse his own words again as him self for his
own advantage folio.lxxx. reherseth them, and let us plant in his own
exposicio^ with the^, to make his sentence ye more clear / and tha^ shall we se
to what good conclusion he brings all in conclusyon. For than comes his
whole tale to this.

As long as the spyrytuall rulers will pretend, that their authoryte is so
high and so immedyately deryued of god, in such things as they have their
authoryte immedyately of god in deed, (as in the minystracyon of the
sacraments and such other things like) that the people are bounden to obey
them without argument or resystence: so long the light of grace will not appear.

Now good readers here be now his own words with his own exposycion therein.
And how like you them now? For now the sentence has he brought at last with
myche wurke to none other, but that the light of grace will not appear, as
long as the spyrytuall rulers pretend to be obayed and not resysted in the
mynystracyon of the sacraments and such other things like, because they have
their authoryte therein immedyately of god in deed. But than on the the other side,
when so ever they will not pretend their authoryte so high therein, nor so
immedyately deryued of god, as to be obayed therein, but will be content that
men grudge and argue and resyste them therein, and pull them from the awter, and
suffer them to mynyster no sacraments no^ any such other things like: than
shall by this good man's new declaracyon the light of grace appear by and by.
Has not this pacyfyer here good readers, with myche labor at last brought
this matter to a wise conclusyon^

If he will now go fro this again, and put in his other general words
again / which for his advantage he left out in that place: than is all gone
again that he goe^h about / and all mine answer made (as I have showed you)
good, and all his own words naught.

In the lefe also^ lxxxi. these are his words.

where I say that as long as the spyrytuall ruler^ will pretend that their
authoryte is so high and so immedyately deryued of god, that the people are
bound to obaye them without argument or resystence etc. By these words I
confess that they have authoryte immedyately deryued fro god. But as I said
before in the seventh chapyter, master More has a right great and a right
inuentyue wit, whereby he can lightly tnrne a sentence after hy^ appetyte. And
so he does here etc.

What high wit or inuentyue I have to turn a sentence, let ye reders judge.
But surely the heygth of my wit can not reche so high, as to perceive in those
words of his, the sentence that him self turns them to / nor I trow no
man's else / till these words, They have authoryte, and these words, They
pretend to have authoryte, be both one thing, which they were never yet.
And therefore before his confession that he now makes here new: I might tha^
well take that excepcio^ which I have brought there, to a little better effect,
than does his here, which with all his wrestelynge and al his new
declaracyons, brings all together ever the longer unto the wurse conclusyon.

For now to color this his ouersyght with all, he tells us which manner of
pretenses he meant in those words, which he would here so feign defend. And
than instead of pretendynge to be by gods ordinance byleued and obayed in
all things as well words as deeds, he brings forth here a few amountyng in
a some total to the infynyte number of four.

The first is, that the order and disposicyon of the things yt are to be
disposed of ye church, be to be disposed by the prestes: which point to put as
for a matter that has made dyuysyon between them and us, is a point of small
reason as far as my reason can give me. For I remember not of any varyaunce
that ever arose between them and us for that point.

The secunde is, that all christen princes must subdue their execucio^s to
bysshoppes, and not to prefer them above them. I can not tell you whyther
there be any such law made or not. But I can tell you well that though there
be, this point will not serve his purpose ye value of a blew point. For I am
sure he never saw in his days any bishop in this realm, use that pretense
against the king, or that ever there arose any diuisyon theruppon.

The third is, yt no charge should be set upon clerks by lay power. I never
herd yet any dyuision rise upon this point in my days / nor he neither in
his I dare say. For I never saw the day yet nor he neither, but that when any
need of the king and the realm required it, they have ever more ben ready to set
taxes upon them self, as lyberally and as largely as any man well might with
any good reason require.

The fourth is he says, that if a seculare judge be neglygent in doing of
justice, that thanne after monicion to amend it given to the judge, if he will
not, than ye spyrytuall judge may compel him to it, or else supply his ^ome
and here the cause.

If I should look now for th^se.iiii. laws, it might p^raduenture happen that I
should find, that this man had mysse taken some of the^, as well as he has
mysse vnderstonden some of the other that he has spoken of before. But sith
that I never knew grudge or diuisyon rise here upon any of them, me needs
never to look more for the matter. For since this man never saw that any
spyrituall judge has interprysed, in defawt of justice to give any such
monicion, or to supplye the rome: were that law never so unreasonable, yet to
say that upon that law the temporaltye has here conceived such grudge as it
has been a cause of diuisyon, this pacifier of diuisyon may be much ashamed yt
ever he devised it. For I dare say that as well this fourth cause, as many of
all his other be such, as the people never neither talked of nor thought
upon / nor before his own book, had neu^r read nor herd of. And therefore by
the putting in of such things: every child as I said in mine apologye may
sone perceive that his books labor and ente^de not to quench but rather to
kyndle diuisyon.

And therefore verily with his seyenge here even in the end and conclusyon
such causes of his dyuisyon, which causes but by him self the people never
herd of: I may well say onys again good readers, is not this gere by this
good pacyfyer brought unto a wise conclusyon?

To those words written in mine apology the.169. lefe, this good man answers
thus.

And now to this conclusyon of master More I will say thus, that I beseech
almighty god, that the end of all these matters may come to this conclusyon,
that the very groundely causes of these dyuisyons, that now be not only in
this realm, but also in manner through all christen realms, may come to
perfect knowledge. For surely I do not take it, that they began either by
heresies, or apostasyes as master More in his apology means that they ^^lde
do.

Here you may se good readers yt this good man would be loath yt it should appear,
that ye division, parel, and harm have any where spro^ge^ upon heresies begone
and set forth by false apostatase, wedded freres and monks, as clearly as it
is known yt by thoccasio^ thereof, there have been slain i^ Almain within these
very few years, above.lxxx. M. persons in one somer and yet synnys among the
Swychis when zuynglius was slain, many thousands killed to / and the war
bygonne by the heretykes, and the lashe by gods great goodness laid in their
own neckys / as falsely as Fryth bylyeth the catholykes, and against the plain
and open known troth, would with shame enough to him self make men wene yt
the catholics began ye war.

But than goth he ferther and says. And if master More will nedyly endeavor
him self to hyde the truth therein, a^ it seems he has done in this chapter,
and diverse other places of his apologye, by keeping secret such abusyons and
pretenses, as in my conscience have been most pryncypall causes of this
dyuysyon, whereof part be recyted in the said t^eatyce, and part in this
answer but not all.

Of these there had need in deed to be mo, and some more true, and some of a
little more substance to, than be the most part of these yt this good man
has laid forth yet.

Now here he says that I keep secret such abusyons and pretenses as be the
pryncypall causes of the dyuysyon, whereof him self has he says showed some:
either he means that those which I kept secret, be those that him self has
written, or other beside them. If he mean other: then either him self knows
them or not. If he know them not: how knows he that I know them, or that
there be any such at all? If him self know them and show them not: then he
hydeth them and keeps them secret him self as well as I. Now if he mean but
those that him self has written: how can I keep those secret that he has
written? Can I both gather up all his books and go hyde them, and also make
the^ yt have read them go vnreade them again, or forgete what they have read.

But now after this, like wise as he is wont when reason fails him to fall to
preaching: so here, because reason fails him, he falls to prayenge / and
therein thus he says.

I beseech almighty god that he have no power to do yt, but that the troth
may come to fight therein, though he resyste yt all that he can. For if yt
were known / and the fautes charitably reformed: all these dyuysyons would
shortly have an end.

Nay perdye, this man sees well ynought that though the fautes of the
spyrytualtye were never so fully reformed, yet could not all that suffyse to
bring all dyuysyons to an end, but if one thing be done / which will never be
done, whereof (which he forgeteth) I gave him warning in the.116. lefe of mine
Apologye in these words.

But now if this pacyfyer to cease and quench this dyuysyon, could find the
means to make all the whole clergy good: yet for all that, sith he lays for
causes of this dyuysyon that some men say this by the clergy, and some men
say by them that / were all the clergy never so good in deed, and served god
never so well, this diuisyon by his own tale, yet could not for all that cease /
except he could provide farther, that no pytuouse pacyfyer should in
lamenting of dyuysyon, put forth a book and say, that some lay men say
that some of the clergy be naught, and love their ease and their wealth / and
that some say that those that seem best and take most labor and pain, be
but hypocrytes for all that, and serve god but for vain glory to get them
self laud and praise among the people.

Also if defautes should be charyble reformed, as this man says he would have
them: yt would be need then to set a little more charytable folk about yt,
then those have been, that have begyled this good man with evil counsel in
his bookys / and have made him under pretexte of pacyfyenge dyuysyon, set
forth and increase dyuysyon, with dyuysynge and spredynge abroad causes of
murmr and grndge, making in some of them an elepha^t of a gnat, and for old
grudges bringing forth some such, as the people never had herd of till they
read his books and some of the very worst, which were most effectual causes
if they were true, bryngyng forth by hepes with a figure of some say, and very
plain lies in deed. Is this the way good readers for a pacifyer to make peace
with, and put away dyuysyons?

And now himself handelynge the matter thus / he takes of his charity great
thought, lest I go about to hinder his holy purpose. And therefore says.

I doubt me very sore, that master more goes obout rather to mar all, then
to endeuoyr him self to make all well.

Which be the lykelyheddes now good reders that led this good man, into this
great fere? Because I make open the shrewde mind of his demure countenance,
and the harmful intent and purpose of his holy wholesome words. Because I would
have the temporaltye and the spyrytualtye as the body and the soul of one
man, love well to gether and agree and neither of them be glad to here evil
of other, nor to give ear to false sedycyouse slander, but the good folk of
either part, draw both by one line, according to both the law is, to
repress and keep under the bad / and among other vices, special such
pestylent heresies, as else would oppress the catholyque faith, and provoke
the dyspleasure of god, and first sow deuysyon, and afterward rere rebellyon
in ye realm, as they have done before this time both here and in other places
/ and yt I to this intent give mine aduyce to keep still those good laws that
both this realm and all the corpse of chrystendome have long used and
approved. Because I thus do so: therefore this good man fereth that I go about
to mar all.

But while his books go about on the the other side, to make the world wene, that
heresies be no causes of dyuysyon / and to have heretyques live in the less
fere, with many malycyouse some says falsely slaundereth the ordynaryes, of
cruel wrong full handelyng of the people, to drive them by dread or by shame or
other tedyouse besynes, to set heretyques alone / and go about with balde
reasons the best not worth a ryshe, to put away the good laws yt have been
made against them / and under color of a fervor to the faith exhort men to
go win the holy land / and in the mean while yet with such wyly ways,
labor with heretyques, to fill up the ^tretes at home, and by the decay of the
christian catholyke faith, provoke ye wrath of god upon al our heddes, which our
lord rather turn upon theyrs that so would have it: his books besyly going
about this gere, him (...) goes about (ye se well pe^dye) to make all thing
evil.

But now will I first fynyshe up his.xx. chapter, wherein he goes forward
thus.

And in thye chapyter master More layth dyuer^ other obieccyons to prove the
said letter unreasonable, which were very tedyouse to rehearse at length. And
therefore I shall as shortly as I can / touch^ some of them.

Ye know well enough why they be tedyouse to rehearse. Surely because they be
very tedyouse to answer. But where he says he will rehearse some of the^: he
begins first to show yt I had no cause to doubt of his words wherein he
says that the spyrytuall rulers pretend their authorytye to be so high and so
immediately deryued from god etc. I had says he no cause to doubt of what
authoryte he meant. For he says that his words were plain enough, yt he
means only of such authoryties, as they pretend to have immedyately from
god.

To this I say plainly, that than are his words plain false.

For his words be, that they pretend that their authoryte is so high and so
immedyately deryued from god, that the people are bound to obey them and to
accept all that they do and teach, without argument resystence or grudge.

Now knows every man very well yt they do not pretend to have authoryte
immedyately from god, to do all thing that they now lawfully do and may do, in
which the people are now bound to accept and obey them. For as I said in
mine apologye, in many such things they pretend and claym their authoryte
deryued from princes. And therefore ye se that and he labor about yt this.vii.
years: he can never defend his words, but that I answered him trewly / and
with the necessary dystynccyon that I there made, answered every part. And
this him self sees well enough / and therefore in the.lxxx. lefe in the
beginning of the second side, where he reherseth his words again, he leueth
out these words of his own. and to accept all that they do and teach.

Upon which words the point of the matter hangs. And therefore here you se
now, that where as in the beginning of this chapyter, he would make yt seem
that I stele two or three words of his, which I neither did nor neded for any
strength that was in them: here was him self feign to stele away his own
words, to begyle the reader upon the readyng of the place, and make him pass
over his fault for the while unmarked.

And thus good reader you se, that to save his own words up right, and to
impugn mine: in those two seuys.lxxx. and.lxxxi. he bestowed his labor in
vain.

But then goes he farther and touches these words of mine Apololye, written
in my said.xxvii. chapyter fo. 165.

Surely in such things as the whole clergy of cristendome teaches and
orders in spyrytuall things, as be dyu^rse of those laws which this
pacyfyer in some places of this book touches, being made against heretyques
/ and all be yt that they be and long have been through the whole corpse of
crystendome both temporaltye and spyrytualtye, by long usage and custom
ratyfyed agreed and confyrmyd, yet he lays some lack in them calling them
very sore / in those things I say, that sith I nothing doubt in my mind /
but in that co^gregacyon to gods honor gracyousely gathered to gether, the
good assystence of the spyryte of god is according to Christ's promise as
verily present and assystente as it was with his blessed apostles, men ought
with reverence and without resystence, grudge, or arguments to receive them.
And if a prouyncyall counsel err / there are in Christ's church ordynarye
ways to reform yt. But in such things as any spyrytuall governors after a
lawful order and form, dyuyse for the spyrytual weal of their souls that
are in their charge, and which things are such as good folk may soon
perceive them for good / in these things at the least wise should the good not
give ear to the badde folk and froward, that against the best thing that
can be devised can never lack a fond froward argument.

To these words this good man answers me thus.

Then to show my mind in some things that master More has touched yet
farther in the said chapter: I will first agree with master More / y^ in
such things as the hole clergy of crystendome teaches and ordreth in
syrytuall things / and why the of long time have been by long usage and
custom thorough the hole corpse of crystendome spyrytualtye and temporaltye,
ratyfyed agreed and confyrmed, ought with reverence to be received: but yet if
the same things thorough long contynua^ce and thorough abusions that rise by
occasyon of the^, prove hurtefull and over grievous to the people to bear ^ they
may the people g^udge and complain lawfully to their superyours / and desire
that they may be reformed / as lawfully as they may do to have temporal^ laws
reformed when need requires.

As unto this, because he is so gentle to agree with me, I shall as gently agree
with him again / but yet he gets naught thereby. For since the laws against
which he writes, made for the correccyon of heretyques, as I have in
the.xv.xvi. and.xvii. chapyter plainly proved against him, and reproved his
obieccyons therein, be good and very reasonable / and that abusyons (by occasyon
whereof he would make yt now seem, that in long contynuaunce they become
hurtful) he proves not one in this world, but by false slaunderouse some
says surmysed against the ordynaryes, and diverse times found false before the
kings honorable counsel: this answer here of his, helps nothing his matter.

Then goes he ^arther and says un this wise.

I will also agree that in the congregacyon of the clergy, to gods honor
gracyously gathered to gether: the good assystence of the spyryte of god,
according to Chrys^es promise / will be as verily present and assystente with
them as yt was with his blessed apos^les / if they order them self in
meekness and charity and put all their trust in g^d, as the apostles did. But
if they will trust (...) their own wit and in worldly polycye: then may they
lightly lose the spyryte of god. And whether yt were so at the making of the
laws, which mays^er More speaks of concerning heresye or not, I can not tel^
but this will I say, that if they were not go^d and reasonable in them self at
the fyrs^e making, that they were never made by the assystence of the spyryt of
god. And surely I can not then se, how the usage and long contynuaunce of them
can ratyfye or confyrme them. For as yt is of an evil custom, that the longer
yt is used, the greater is the offense: so i^ yt of an evil law. And like as
an evil custom is to be put away, so yt is of an evil law.

Of what strength the general cou^sayles be, and whether we may in any of
thee^ by laufulorder gadered togeder, put any diffyde^ce or mystrust / and if
we may then in what manner things, and in what wise they bynd, and whom, and
how long: I shall not need for this matter to dyspute with this good man. And all
his doubt concerning the said laws, whyther they be reasonable or not, and
whether the contynuau^ce of them be good or not: in all these things have I so
confuted this good man all redye, yt these words of his can serve of naught.
But yet to make it seem that he sa^d some what / and that no law of the
church which he has here impugned, made against heretyques, was either
ratyfyed or approved in this realm: ye shall hear how properlyly he proves.
Lo good readers ^hese are his words.

And the lawee affermed by usage and agremente of the people be the laws of
^astynge and keeping of ^^lydayes, and such other as the people of their free
agremente accept and agree unto: but these laws made for punyshement of
heresies were never agreed by a comen assente of the people, but that some
partyculare persons / whereof some have been gyltye / and some peradventure not
gyltye / have been punyshed the^by right sore against their wylles. And that
can not be a confyrmacyo^ of them that so agree against their will. But as to
them y^ do the correccyon, yt y^ a confyrmacyo^: for they do it with their good
will. And though that correccyon were a ^uffycyent confyrmacyon, as against
them that be so punyshed: yet yt can not be a confyrmacyon to make the law
approved for all the resydue of the people.

I can not se therefore that any ratyfyeng, agreyng, or confyrmynge of the
people can be pr^u^d in tho laws, concerning the correccyon for heresye:

Did ever any man good readers here such a another reason as this is? He
denies not but that the suyle ex officio, and the order taken in the general
counsel, and the other farther procedynges agayns^e heretyques, according to
the comen received spyrytuall laws, have been usually long accustom^d in this
realm / and by the princes of ye same and generally by all the people by comen
usage accepted / and over that, by plain parlyament laws and orders made for
all temporal officers to assyste the ordynaryes therein, and to put the
offenders in execucyon there upon and knowing well all this, be dyssymuleth yt
every whytte, and says not one word thereto / but argues that yt was never
ratyfyed in this realm, because the heretykes yt are for h^resye punyshed, be
burned against their will, and agree not them self thereto. This reason will I
never labor to confute. For if any man be so mad to like yt, I were almost as
mad as he if I would reason with him.

After this he resorteth again to the unreasonableness of the laws / and
proves them unreasonable, by the sentence of his own conceyte. For these are
his words.

And then whether the laws in them self be good and indyfferent or not, I will
remytte the judgment in that behalf to them that have authoryte. But to show
my conceyte therein, I shall with good will even as my conscience meueth me to /
and that is, that I could never se, that yt was reasonable to be accepted as a
law / that a man should be accused and know not his acuser. And that yt is
yet more unreasonable that a man should be condemned / and know not the the
witness that condemned him. Also that a man upon suspeccyon should be driven to
make his purgacyon at the will of the ordinary, or be accursed: Or that a
perjured witness should co^dempne him, that he had clered before: That a great
offender and a le^se offender should have one like punysshement, if they
renunced: or be a like arrested and put in prison: I never saw no indysferencye
in it.

Now good readers as for the co^ceyte that the good conscience of this man has
conceived, is of very trowth but even a very pore conceyte / as in the said
chapyters the.xv. the.xvi. and the.xvii. every man may soon perceive.

How be it in the last point that he fyndeth so great a fawte, that a greater
offender and a less off^der, should have one like punysshement, this man looked
not well about him when he wrote that word. For wha^ the thing is well looked
on / ye weight of his reason will fall upon the wrong side, and all agayns^e
his mind. For where so ever a greater offender and a less offender be both
punysshed alyke: if the greater offender have no more pain than the less has
deserved, there is the order some what less sharp than it should be / but yet
not vnryghtuouse. For if it were, than were the laws of this realm unlawful,
that hang up him that does but rob a man, as well as him that robs him
and kylleth him to. Now so is it in the spyrituall law, that wha^ two do both
renounce their heresye, and abjure and bear faggottes both, if the tone
hylde.x. heresies and the the other but twain, the greater offender has no more
pain than the less deserves. And therefore if this man in that case
complain: this complaynt (as I said) turns un the the other side / and fyndeth
the fawte in that, that whe^^ the less offender bears one faggot, the greater
bears not five, if their bodies be like of strength.

How ^e it good readers all this ta^e of his is to no purpose at all. For in
the spyrytuall law, they way the offenses / and consider the cyrcu^staunces,
and enjoin the penance after the weygth or grauyte of the trespass / and for
emprysonynge use to put no man to it, but where good reason would not suffer
him walk abroad. And therefore I suppose / that when the man was writing this
/ his wytle was walking toward the holy land. For if he wold^ say that he
meneth by the less offender and the more offender, such twain as abjure
both, and bear fa^ottes both, wh^re the tone was worthy and the the other not
worthy at all: I say that neither his words will maintain any such menyng
(for he speaks generally of the less off^der and the more) nor also he
proves none such but by his slaunderouse some says, which have been plain
proved false.

Than goes he ferther and knytteth up all the chapyter with this goodly
conclusyon.

And if any man will say that these reasons will give a boldness t^
heretykes: trewly I will not ^ully make answer thereto. But this will I say,
that I think verily that they will give a boldness to truth and teew men.
And verily I have herd say, that it were better to suffer an offender g^
unpunished, than to punyshe him vnryghtuo^sely and against dew order of justice.

Mark good reders here for our lords sake, what manner of reason this is. The
thing that him self very well perceyueth to be the very weight and pyth of
all the matter, and therefore at last obiecteth it against him self, as a
thing that had need to be soyled, what answer does he make unto it? He says
he will not answer it fully. In faith that is spoken very dully: well, sith so
great weyghte hangs on it, if he would not answer it fully, he should have
answered at the least wise half. If not half, a fourth part yet, or a fyfth
part at the lest. For this yt he says, answers no part at all. For two
things he says / one that though he can not say nay, but that his reasons
if they be followed, shall give a boldness to heretics: yet he thinks they
shall also give boldness to trowth and true men. And by my trowth I think
weryly un the the other side, yt if heretykes have boldness given them, and (as
they thereby soon shall) take courage and myche encreace, they shall make the
trowth shrynke, and many true men aferde. And if the geuynge boldness to falsed,
shall give boldness to troth / assaye than and give boldness / and than
look whyther true men shall wax the bolder by it.

The secunde thing that he says is this, which yet he does not afferme but
says he has herd it said, that it were better to suffer an offender go
unpunished, than punyshe him vnrightuousely and against dew order of justice.

This were somewhat pretely said, if this good man had proved yt heretykes
might not be punyshed by those laws, but vnryghtuousely and against the order
of justice. But than how has he proved that? By no mean in this world but
twain. The tone, that it is not ryghtuouse nor indyfferente, that a greater
offender and a less offender should be punyshed, emprisoned, or arrested like
/ which unreasonable reason oppugneth plainly in all crimynall causes almost,
all the laws of this realm and yet helps not his matter, but impayreth it
much, as a little here before I have well and clearly proved.

His other reason is his general reason yt is his whole ground, where upon he
b^yldeth against all those laws all his whole matter / that is to wit, that
by those laws which are made for punysshement of heretykes, it may sometime
fortune that a man may be punysshed which is no heretyke in d^de.

Now is this reason so unreasonable to be laid for a reason to ^ake away a
law, that if it were admytted for reason, it could suffer neither in this
realm, nor in any realm else any law stand in this world, that all the wits
in this world could imagyne or deuyse, for any manner punysshement of
ungracious folk. And albe it that of such laws some may be reformed from
the wurse unto ye better / though never fully to such point, but that an
innocent may take harm: yet both by r^ason and experyence it appears
plainly, yt these laws which he would have changed and made more easy, can
never have any good change, but by making them more streygth.

And thus has this good man soreouersene him self, more I trow than.xx.
times in his.xx. chapyter.

The.xxi. chapyter.
IN his.xxi. chapyter beginning in the.lxxxiiii. lefe, because I said in mine
apologye yt there be few parts in his book of diuysyon, that shall if they be
well considered, appear so good at length, as they seem to some men at the
first sight and at superfycyall reading: he provoke me to show what other
fawtes I find therein. And than to prycke me forward, he brings forth two or
three things, which he says it seems most lykely that I should mean. But
wherefore it should be most lykely that I should mean those things / thereof
shows he no thing / but leueth folk occasyon to think, that his own mind
mysgea^th him in those things. For me has he never herd make any busynes of
them.

And afterward in the lefe.91. again he provoke me to the same. And there
he recyteth how many chapyters of his I meddle not withal / wherein he might
have made a shorter work if he would have let them stand that I towched not /
and have spoken of them only that I towched. For they were very few, as he
that was very vnwyllynge to have towched any one at all, save for the much
evil that couertely was cloked in them, And for the withdrawynge of that cloak
that men might the better se what it meant: I towched the first chapyter for a
show, and the.vii, and the.viii, for that they labored to the great decay of
the catholic faith, to put away or change in to wurse ye most special good
lawys, both of the whole church and of this realm, that have been made and
observed long for the preseruacyon thereof. And the first chapter was in
effect nothing else, but by false slaunderouse surmyses against the
ordynarys (as though they myshandeled men for heresye) a shrewde preparatiue to
it. And therefore leuynge his other tryfles alone: I answered in effect only
these, of which so much harm might grow. which things if they had been out of
his book, all ye remanaunt good and bad together, should have gone forth for me
/ and therefore yet so shall they: For I purpose not to embuse my self with
co^futynge of every fawte that I find in every man's book. I should have than
over much a do.

Nor I will not dysprayse or deprave any thing that I think good either in his
book or in any man's else. And therefore I have in mine apology said
expressly, that he says some things well. But for as much as there be many
things naught to: I give therefore the reader warnyng not to walk away with
them over hastily, but read them with judgment and advise them well / and not
believe every spyryt, but prove whyther it be of god or not / and that that is
good take / and that that is evil, let it go to the devil.

I well allow therefore and like not a little the great good mind of Salem
toward the vaynquysshyng of the great turk / and conquerynge of the holy
land, wherein he spe^deth the the other three chapiters of his book. But I mysse
like much again, that as he would dylate the faith, by force of sword in far
cuntres hense: so he laboreth to change and take away the good and wholesome
laws, whereby the faith is preserved here at home.

I like also meruelousely well, that such points of the catholyke faith as
heretykes now labor to destroy, as prayenge to saints, pilgrimage, and
purgatory, and the sacraments, and specially the blessed sacrament of the
awter, whereof in the lxxxvi. lefe he speaks so well, that as help me god it
did me good to read it: this I say lyketh me meruelousely well, that the
right faith of these points he confesses so well and so fully for his own
person. But the better opinion that I have of his own person therein, the more
sorry am I to se, yt his books are by some shrewde counsel handeled in such
wise, as if they were followed / would make the faith decay and peryshe in
many other folk. This is the great thing that in his books greueth me.

For as for the point that he speaks of in the lefe. 91, of that that the
prestes should eat no flesh fro quinquagesime to Easter: I take it for a
matter as small as he does I. But than he asks me wherefore in ye.xxxi.
chapter of mine apology beginning in the.175. lefe, I make so great a matter
of it. Who so lys^e to read the chapyter, shall se that I wrote it not all in
vain, nor show my self vnwyllynge that the prestes should do it neither,
though they be not bounden to it. But the less that the weyghte of the matter
was / the more cause this man gave me to speak thereof. For the more was he to
blame to put that and other such small matters as that is, for causes of so
great a diuisyon, as he surmyseth yt this is. This was lo ye cause that made me
to speak thereof. which cause this man gave him self / and therefore needs not
to marvel as he does, wherefore I spoke thereof.

And therefore thus have I good readers now replied to every chapyter of his
book by row, save only ye last three which go about a good viage into the holy
land, a great way far of fro me. And I have not leped to and fro, now
forward, now bakward, in such manner as he plays in his answer made unto me,
without either order kept or cause apperynge wherefore, save only the cause
that every man may spy, that he would not have it seen what places he left
vntowched. Which is in a manner the most part of all together, that in my book
towched the three chapyters of his. And I have on the the other side not left any
one pyece unproven, that my self spoke of before, or that any thing perteyned
unto me.

And therefore where as in the beginning of the.xxii. chapyter, Symkyn Salem
gives his sentence upon the said answer to the said apologye, and allows
the said answer well: me thinks that if he considered not only how myche he
has left unanswered, and how much of his own words undefended, which he
nothing has towched at all / but over that how febly he has defended those
things that he has towched here: Salem being indyfferent, had been like to
have allowed it but a little.

For setting aside for the while all the remanaunt, if he go but to the very
pryncypal point alone, wherein he laboreth to change and put away those good
laws / ye change whereof (such as he deuyseth) the decay of the catholyke
faith and the encreace of heresies would follow: in that point alone, I say we
lay against him, the comen consent of this realm. And he lays his own reason
against it. We lay against him the consent of ye general counsel. And
against this he lays his own reason. We lay against him the general
approbacio^ of all chryste^ realms. And against this he lays his own reason.
And what is his own irrefragable reason that he layth against all this? Surely
no more as you se, but that by those laws an innocent may sometime take wrong.
Against this reason we lay him, that if this reason should stand, than
against malefactors there could no law stand. We lay against it also that by
his deuyces if they were followed, by the encreace of heresies many innocents
must needs take much more wrong.

To this answers he, that he will not answer that. And now when Salem sees
that he can not answer that, and sees that all the weigth of the matter hangs
upon that: than Sym Salem gives sentence that he has answered very well. But
surely if such answeryng be well / I wot not which way a man might answer
ill

And therefore where as Symkyn Salem says, that if this good man will, he will
cause a friend of his answer all the remanaunt: he may do this good man a
myche more fre^dly turn, if he make his friend answer this better first,
that this good man has answered allredy. How be yt if they list thus to give
over this, and assaye what they can say better to any other pyece: let them a
gods name hardely go to for me. And if they say any thing metely to the
matter, I will put no friend to pain to make them answer / but at leisure
convenient shall answer them my self. And where they say well / I will not let
to say so. And where they say wrong / I will not let to tell them. But on
the the other side if they go no better to work, nor no nerer to the matter, then
this man has done: I shall peradventure let them even alone / and let them
like their writing them self, and no man else.

But now lettynge pass all special yt points: I shall answer ye generaltyes
yt this good man speaks of. Form in the lefe.xc. these are his words.

And now shall I say somewhat farther in a generalytye, as master More has
done / and that y^ t^is: that all that I speak in the said treatise, was to
appeace this diuysyon / and not to begin any, ne^^ co^tynue yt. And therefore
how they can save their conscience / that say I did rather intend a dyuysyon
then agreement, I can not tell / their one conscy^nce shall be judge. And I
intended also somewhat to m^^e that might be occasyon to put away abusy^^^,
evil examplys, and heresies: and not to ^^cr^ase them or maynteyne them I
dare boldly say.

To this I answ^re, that yt neither was nor is my mind, that men should think
yt he meant e^yl him self, as I have in many places of mine apology testified.
But verily I thought and yet think, yt by some wyly shrewis his book was so
mysse handeled, that yt meant naught, though he meant well. For where as he says
that with his book of dyuysyon, all his purpose was to appease dyuysyon: I will
not contend with him upon his own mind. But surely this will I say, that
if I had been of the mind to sow and set forth dyuysyon: I would have used
even the self same ways to kyndle yt, that he used (as he says) to quench yt.

Then goes he farther and says.

And farther as master More knows better then I, mentire est contra mentem
ire, that is to say to lie is when a man says against his own mind / and
in good faith in all that treatise, I speak nothing but that I thought was
true.

To this I answer, that in deed such a thing I have read, and as I remember
in Aulus Gellius. Which thing though I have now no leisure to look for: yet
two points I remember thereof. One that yt is there mentiri and not mentire /
which infynytyue mode in what book of grammar this good man has found, I can
not tell. I was aferd yt had been ouersene in the prentynge. But I have looked
the correccyons, and there find I no fault found therein.

The the other point I remember that there is a dyfference put between m^ntiri
and mendacium dicere, that is as we might say / between him that wyttyngly
lies, and him that tells a lie wenyng that it were true. And here yt is
said, wittyngly not to tell a lie, perteyneth to a good man. And not to tell a
lie unware, is the part of a wise man. And surely sith the scripture says
that he that shortly byleueth is over light: this good man to believe so many
lies so soon, and with so many some says to set them forth in prent, to the
rebuke and slander of the spyrytual judges, and make men wene they mysse
handeled men for heresies, though the mannys innocent mind made the sin the
less, yet was the thing at the lest no less, then a very great lyghtnesse, ye
and also a great proof toward the reprofe of his words that follow next, where
he goes farther thus.

And farther I will acertayne master More a^ far as in me is, that I neither
had any sotle shrewes counlayle, ne any evil counsel at the making of the
said treatise, which he calls the book of dyuysyon (as is said before)

To this I answer, that all be yt this good man and I be at myche varyaunce
here in diverse things: yet for the good and plain professyon of the
catholyque faith that I find in him, in good faith I much better love him
then in that point to believe him. For if he said therein true, then were all
the fautes only his own / in which as I have often said, I myche rather
think, that some sotle shrewes have deceived him.

And beside sundry other things that led me so to think, one very strong
thing is this, that every man may well se by his book, that all such as have
resorted to him to tell him any such things, as under some says he put out
again, have always told him evil / and never told him good. And of miss
handlynge for heresies have ever told him lies, and never told him true. For
where as the punyshement for heresies has been very little any where, save even
here at hand, and here but right done to them, and that with myche favor to:
they have made him good sely soul believe, that ordynaryes mysse handle men for
heresye in manner through out the realm.

Also where as such slaunderouse clamor has been sundry times of late in all
yt ever complained, plainly proved false before the kings most honorable
counsel, not one man came to tell him nothing thereof, nor not one some say
thereof written in all his book / and over this where as mine own self have
plainly told him ^he same things in mine apologye by writing: yet (which most
marvel were of all, save for such wyly shrewes) every man may well se that he
neu^r read yt. For he says not one word thereto. And therefore yt is eth to
perceive what so ever him self say which is loath of his goodness to put other
folk in fault, yt there be some wyly shrewes so myche about him, yt they
neither suffer him any thing to here but yt them self list to tell him, nor yet
any thing to read, but where them self list to turn him.

And now sith I have here answered these generalytyes of his: I will not long
encumbre you with any generaltyes of mine own, but generally I would yt al were
well. And so help me my savior and none other wise, but as I would wish none
heretic one halporth harm, yt had clearly left his heresye, and were well
tu^ned to god. But on the the other side, who so stick still therein: rather would I
wyshe him sorrow to his sin, whereby there are many folk many times amended,
then prosperousely to proceed in his myschyefe to the loss of his own soul
and other mennys to. And toward that point, against all male factours in the
spyrytualtye and the temporaltye to, would I wyshe all good folk of both
parts to agree, and each love other well, and stycke fast to the faith, which
were like sore to decay by the change of these good laws that this good man
goes about to destroy. For whose unreasonableness therein the better to be
perceived, with the dau^geour and parell that would ensewe thereon: I will
desire you good readers to resort to mine Apologye / and beginning at the
lefe. 270, read unto the lefe. 287. wherein you shall I trust be well and fully
satysfyed. And unto all that ever is in all that spoken: this man has nothing
said.

And where as in confutynge the fautes that this man fyndeth in the suyte ex
officio, and the laws made against heretyques, I have used some examples of
the comen law, which this man has labored to prove unlike / and I have
therein clearly confuted him a fresh: yt may peradventure happen that he will
now take a another way therein, and say that in such points those spyrytuall
laws may be reformed, and those temporal to.

How be yt if he so say, but if men forgette what has been said before: else
shall they se that his saying will not serve him.

For first as I have said ofter then ones all ready, the same things in the
comen law be not to be changed. For if they be: there shall come thereof more
harm thanne good. And if yt happen one innocent to take harm by the law:
there shall five for one take more harm by the change.

More over if we should for that cause change those te^porall laws, that is
to wit because some innocent may sometime take harm by them: we must change
by the same reason, all that old used law that a man may be arrested and
remain in prison till he find suertyes for the peace, upon the bare oath of
his enmye that says he is a ferde of him. For by that law may some time an
innocent take harm to. And yet must that law stand if we do well. For else
shall there by the change, mo innocents take more harm.

What trouble have there many men in Walys, by that they be compelled to be
bounden to the peace, both for them self and for their servants and other
friends to? And yet is the order there so necessary that in many lordshyppes yt
may not be forborne.

And surely if we fall to chaungynge laws upon ye simple ground: we must then
change so many that it would not be well.

Bysydes this if men should reform and change a law, because that an
innocent may sometime take harm thereby: then must they when they have changed
it, change yt yet again / and after that change, yet change yt again / and
so forth change after change and never cease chaungynge till the world be
all changed at the day of dome For never can all the wits that are in yt,
make any one penal law / such that none innocent may take harm thereby.

How be yt if a new law were drawn and put forth to be made against any
such myschiefe as would else do much harm: good reason yt were to take an
excepcyon to the byl, and show that innocent^s might be myche harmed by this
point or that / and therwyth provide the remedy and put it in the law, and
stop as many such gappes as then could be spyed. Ye and if after the law
made men foud notable harm, that good folk were myche wronged by it / and the
law such that it either might be forborne, or else the means found to be
changed to the better: good reason would it to make prouysyon for it.

But surely to come forth as this man comes here, against so good laws, so
well made, and by so great authoryte, so long approved through the whole corpse
of chrystendome, in this realm ratyfyed specially by parlyament, and that
upon a proof not without great ground and cause, ever synnys founden so
profitable for preseruacyon of the faith, and proved se necessary upon this
man's own deuyces, that without great encreace of heresies they can not be
forborne / nor never can be changed but either to the strayghter or else to
the wurse: to come now forth and for appeasynge of dyuysyon, so we first a
slander that may make dyuysyon, and than labor to change those laws, upon
none other ground but only that an innocent may hap to take harm by mean
of false judges, and than prove not any wrong done, but by false some says
only, against which false some says the troth is proved contrary, both by
just examynacyon before the kings counsel, and over that plainly by this
one point also, which no man can deny, that there is no law provided
against so great a crime, by which law less people have in this realm be
punyshed: therefore to come now thus as this good man does, and procure the
change of these laws, so old, so good, and so necessary, and to make them
more easy, wherwyth heretyques would war bold, which thing him self (as you
se) denies not in the end: what is this good christen readers, but to procure
that the catholyque christen faith, might fade and fall away?

And yet as for this man him self to tell you for conclusyon what I think /
all be yt there are as you se right evil and perylouse things in his books,
with deuyces that would make heresies increase: yet sith he professyth so
plainly the catholyque christen faith, and by his exhortacyon also toward
the conqueste of the holy land, declares his mind zelouse and ^eruent
toward yt, I rather believe though him self thereto say nay, that in those
things which he writes so perylouse and so naught, some wyly shrewes begyle
the good innocent man, than that him self in his own mind, mean all that
harm.

But yet for as myche as in this point, without sight of man's heart we can but
go by guess / and who so goth by guess, may be deceived (For (as him self
says) a wolf may look symply lapte in a shepes skin) I shall therefore
trust the best, and leave the troth to god. And concerning such evil
wrytynges, sith yt must needs be, that he wrote them either deceived by some
shrewys, or else but of him self / I can no more do for him, but heartily
pray for him thus. If shrewys deceive him: god send them shortly from him.
If he wrote them of his own mind: thanne sith the things be naught, he wrote
them either of evil will, or of ouersyght. If he wrote them of malice / god
give the evil man more grace. If he wrote them of folly: god give the good
man more wit.

And thus I beseech our lord send us euerychone, both the spyrytuall and the
temporal to, both wit and grace to agree to gether in goodness, and each to
love other, and each for other to pray / and for those y^ of both parts are
passed into purgatory, and there pray for us as we pray here for them, that
they and we both through the merytes of Christ's bitter passion, may both
with our own prayours, and the intercessyon of all holy saints in heuyn,
avoiding the eternal fire of hell, have pyty powered upon us in the very fire
of purgatory, which in those two places verily burns souls. And finally
for our faith and good works, which his grace (workynge with the wylles of
thoses ye wit have) gives each good man here: good give us in heaven to
gyther everlasting glory.

Prynted by w. Rastell in Fletestrete in saint Bridys church yard, the year
of our lord. 1533.

Cum priuilegio

The fautes escaped in the pryntynge of the first part of this book.
fo. pa. li. the fautes. the ame^deme^tes iii. ii. xxii. in ten shetes
in.xii. shetes nor nor in ten in.xii. v. ii. vi. oloquye obloquye viii. i.
ii. three two x. i. x. an a ano a xii. ii. xii. wit to wit into xiii. ii. xvi.
fool full xv. i^. i. appear ^^ by appear by xviii. i. vii. fail which fail
to fall which xx. ii. xxi. in conteyneth it conteyneth xxii i. x. that than xxv.
ii. ii. of a true of true xxv. ii. xi. A And xxxiii. ii. xix. all also xxxix.
i. xv. words worde^ were xl. ii. x. if but if xlii. ii. v. poverty / and
pouerte, nor would them no less then they have / and xliiii. ii. v. hycaus^
because xlv. ii. xvi judge judged xlv. ii. xviii. persons prestes xlvi. i. i.
between prestes between other preste^ xlvi. i. vi. the prestes the seculer
preste^ xlviii. ii. xx. folk prestes ^^. ii. ix. thereto therwyth lxi. ii.
xxii^ i^ to the is the lxvii. i. v^. no more I no more lxx. i. xiv. noneces no
neces lxxxiii. i. xvi. aduowter aduowtry lxxxv. i. iiii. all talking all such
talkyng lxxxv. ii. xiii found fond lxxxvi. ii. xii., as, is lxxxvii. i. iiii.
/would /they would lxxxvii. ii. xxxiii. there farther lxxxviii. i. xxii. proved
provided ci. i. xxii this hy^

The fautes escaped in the second part.
fo. pa. li. the fautes. the ame^deme^tes iiii. i. xix. plain so plain. v.
ii. i. certain a certain v. ii. iiii. setted sets v. ii. vi. his ground
and his foundacyon is this All this must be in the great letter vii. ^i. xi.
us thereto us viii. i. v. Be By xxi. ii. xiii. in his has in hy^ xxvii. i. vii.
admonicula adminicula xxviii. ii. iii., made, is made xxxvii. i. viii. means
means not xxxvii. ii. xii. had it did it xli. i. iii. it provided it was
provided xlvii. i. xxiii. dyaloge opologye xlviii. i. v. shows showed xlix.
i. xix. so to some to l. ii. ix. was was not lvi. ^. viii. them then lx. ii.
xxi. proves prove yet lxii j. v the contrary without some the contrary, that
is to wit that he will not trust a judge so well: this can he not say^ without
some lxvii. j. xviii. felony, for felony, or for lxxi. ij. vii. Almayne of
Almayne lxxii. j. ii. Christ / with all whose Christ with all / whose lxxii.
ii. xxi. la^ys lanys lxxiiii. ii. viii. But For lxxv ii. xiii. if y^ lxxvi^.
ii. viii. than that lxxx. i. xxii. If he If we lxxx ii. xiiii. up upon lxxxiii
ii. xv. and xvi. testyfye be testyfyed lxxxvii. ii. ii. reason that reason xcv.
ii. v. though thought xcviii. ii. xxiii an englysh english ciii. ii. xxiiii.
have any love have love ciiii. ii. xi. them then cxi. j. xi. that I and I cxi.
ii. xxii found fond cxviii. j. iii. doubt not also dout also cxvii^. ii
xviii. examynacyon exco^munycacyon cxxvi. j xviii. xix. xviii. cxxxi. j. x. so
double double cxxxv. j. xx. pur^ose purpose. cxxxix. ii. xii. be high be so
high cxlvi. j viii. than does than he does cl. j xv. ble tably clii. j. i^ii.
all thing evil all thing well clii. j. v. I first fynysh I fynyshe ^lix j.
xiii boldness / and boldness to theu^e / and clxi. ii. xiiii. embuse
embysye clxiii. ii. xii. touched the is touched of the clxv ii. j. and. ii. all
special the all the special clxvi. ii. x. And here And the^e

Sir Thomas More knight to the christen reader.
AFter these fautes of the prenter escaped in this book, I shall not let good
reders to give you like warning of one fault of mine own, escaped me in the
beginning of this book. In the.xiii. lefe whereof, and in the first side,
cancel and put out one of those ouersyghtes that I lay to the pacyfyer, in
those.ix. lines, of which the first is the.ix. line of the same side, and the
last is the.xviii. For of troth not ye pacifyer but my self was ouersene in
that place with a little haste, in mysse remembrynge one word of his. For where
as he says in the person of Byzance, in the third lefe of Salem and byzance.
I will cause yt to be written into this dyaloge word for word as yt is come to my
hands: I forgate when I answered yt that he said, as yt is come / and took it
as though he said as it comes to mine hands.

And therefore albe it that I have known many that have read it, of which I
never found any yt found it: yet sith it happed me lately ^o look thereon and
find mine ouersyght my self, I would in no wise leave it good reader
unreformed. Nor never purpose while I live, where so ever I may perceive,
either mine aduersarye to say well, or my self to have said otherwise, to let
for us both indyfferently to declare and say the truth.

And surely if they would use ye self same honest pl^^ne truth toward me: you
should sone se good readers all our contencyons ended. For than should you se,
that like as I have not let after mine apology, to declare that Tyndale had
somewhat amended and aswaged in one point, his formare evil assercyo^s
concerning satysfaccyon: so should he confess the troth that I had trewly
touched him / and that him self had sore erred, as well in the remanaunt
thereof as in all his other heresies. And tha^ also, like as I let not here for
the pacyfyers part to declare my self ouersene with haste in this one point:
so should he not let well and honestly to say ye troth on the the other side, and
confess him self very far onersene with long leysoure, in all ye remanau^t
by side. I say not in all that he says, but in all yt is debated between us.

I wot well the best horse were he which were so sure of foot that run he
never so fast would never in his life neither fall nor ^^^^ble. But sith we
can find no^e so sure: that horse is not much to be mysselyked, which that
with courage and pryckyng forth in haste, happynge for all his four fete
sometime to cache a fall, geteth up again lightly by him self, without touch
of spur or any check of the brydell. No nor yet that horse to be cast away
neither, that gets up a^ayne apace with the cheke of them both. Now like a^
with the best kind can I not compare: so of the third sort at the least wise
will I never fail to be, that is to wit rise and reform my self, wha^ any man
she^ me my faut. And as nere as I ca^ (...) I search the^ / and as soon as I
spy the^ before any man control them aryse^ and as I now do mine own self
reform them. which kind is you wot well next unto ye best. But yet on
the the other side, of all mine adversaries could I never hitherto fynd^ any one,
but when he catches on^^ a fall, a^ ^^he ^^theym has caugh^^ full man^^ there
lies he still tumbling and toltrynge in mire, and n^yther spur nor brydyll
can one ynche prevail / but as though they were not fallen in a puddle of
dyrt, but rubbed and laid in lytter under the manger at their ease, they
whyne and they byte, and they kycke, and they sp^^ne at him that would help
them vp^e: And that is yet a fourth kind, the wurste ye wo^e^^ell that can be.

Finis.

