CHAP. 5. A censure upon his fifth, sixth, and seventh chapters concerning
Election, Praedestination, and Reprobation.
IN the argument of his fifth Chapter, his words stand so as if he meant to
overthrow the Apostles doctrine concerning predestination. But his text
shows, that he means to dispute against Gods purpose in choosing some, and
rejecting others; and to declare, that God saw some cause in man why he did
both: holding part with Arminius, part with the Jesuits; who make either faith
or works foreseen, or man's freewill to be cause of man's election, and
salvation; and say, that man is not rejected, or not chosen, but for the defect
of his will and works. Which is misliked by all sound Divines, not because
such enter into Gods secrets, but because this is divine doctrine revealed in
the Apostles writings.

He praetendeth to consent with the Lutherans. But Zanchius declares that they
are a bastard brood of Lutherans that oppugn that doctrine, which is the
Apostles, and was lately taught, by Luther, Bucer, and other German Divines.

As the Pagans did attribute the causes of their calamities to Christian
Religion, so says the Mountebanke some have attributed the troubles of the Low
Countries falsely, to the dissension wrought by the Arminians. But this he
speaks out of his ignorance, not knowing the danger wherein the Low Countries
stood by the practices of Barneuelt, and other of that sect. And absurdly
compares the false doctrine of Arminius with the Catholic doctrine of the
Apostles, and Christians, that mislike the haeresies of Arminius, with Pagans
blaspheming our Christian faith.

Blessed be the peacemaker among men, says the Mountebanke. But he is not the
peacemaker, that troubles the peaceable state of the Church, with his
intempestiue doctrines of Popery: nor is it a fit means to make peace, to
betray the truth of Religion to the public enemies thereof. Many fall away to
the Pope, but their apostasy makes the division the greater, and makes up no
rents, but renteth the unity of the faith.

There is never a Bible-bearing hypocritical Puritan in the pack, says he, a
better Patriot then himself. As if Bible-bearing were a brand of an hypocrite.
By which argument, either you or your man will prove hypocrites, or Puritans
when you appear in the pulpit, which is very seldom. What do, or can,
professed Papists say more? Such parti-colored iacket-wearers, albeit they
seem to make a fair luster in the pack of cards, yet are they nothing but
Canarian pedants, praising and pleasing themselves, and no man else. As for
Bertius and Barneuelts followers, they are Apostates, and have forsaken the
faith, and so would he have once, if marriage, and hope of preferment had not
staid him. His heart is with the enemy, and if any occasion be offered, it is
justly to be suspected, his body will not be long from them.

John Calvin (says he) came after in time. So worthy Master John Calvin that
famous Divine, with this biting Canarian is but plain John Calvin: and he in
his lofty conceit will be called Master Mountebanke, and Rabbi, and that is
forsooth, because he teaches Pharisaicall justice, and such like haeresies.
But why notes he as a defect in Calvin, that he came after Luther? Does not he
come after Arminius, and betrayeth truth, as Judas betrayed Christ?

He professes, he will not be more tied to Calvin, then to Luther, or to
either of them, more then to Bellarmine: As if Bellarmine were aequally to be
prized with these two Doctors, that were great discouerers of the Popes
Antichristian haeresie and policy. We see indeed he stands rather with
Bellarmine, then with Calvin and Luther, or Causabon, if any way they follow
his squint-eyed positions. But in wars and state, if any false traitor be
found flying to the enemy, the Marshall, where laws are executed, ties him up
as a fugitive, and stops his flight. Page 40. he tells us he was brought up a
member of the Church of England. But why then did he once determine to
aband(...)urch of England? And why does he now in so many points follow rather
Bellarmine and Arminius, then the Doctors of our Church?

Explaining his adversaries doctrine, he says they hold, that God primarily,
absolutely, and irrespectiuely, did from all aeternity decree to make some
vessels of honor, and some of dishonor; to bring them unto life, or to cast
them off unto death; to crown them with glory, or to plunge them into
destruction and hell fire. But if he were not ashamed of his own absurd
opinion, he would first declare what himself holds, and then more truly
report his adversaries doctrine. That God did not respect somewhat in himself,
and somewhat in his ends, we deny not; neither can any doubt that all the elect
were praedestinated in Christ; only we say he respected not man's freewill, or
faith, or works, in choosing some, and rejecting others. Secondly; we
distinguish the decree of reprobation from the execution, and deny that God did
condemn and destroy any but for their evil deeds and deseruings. Albeit, he
loved Jacob, and hated (...) they had done either good or evil, as the Apostle
declares, Romans 9.

Chap. 9. He insinuates, that Calvin taught, that God is Author of sin, that
God made the most part of the world to perish everlastingly, that the reprobate
are incited and provoked to sin by God, that God was the Author of Iuda's
treason. Damnable calumniations against that faithful servant of God, and
borrowed from Papists, in whose steps this man does commonly and willingly
tread. I need not refute them, for that the Mountebanke durst not affirm them.
But he that will be resolved of Caluins sincere dealing, let him read the words
as he sets them down in his own books, and consider the malice of his
adversaries, distorting his words contrary to all sense and true meaning.

That Peter (being elected) could not perish, or that Judas (being a reprobate)
could not but perish, is a Catholic doctrine; unless it be an error to hold
God to be unchangeable in his decrees, and haeresie, to hold Gods decrees to
be mutable. If the Mountebanke does maintain the contrary, he will discover
himself to be who he is, and what the world supposes him to be.

Gods absolute decree in election and reprobation without respect to works in
man, the Lutherans, says the Mountebanke, do abhor. But Zanchius de Na^en.
Dei lib. 5. cap. 2. and in his Tract. de Praedest. Sanct. in Miscellan. does
show such to be Pseudolutherans, proving that Luther and Bucer taught as he
did. And that no such inference can be drawn out of it, as they calumniously
and blasphemously do make.

That the Church of England teaches, that election or reprobation was decreed
without respect of men's works, or freewill well used, this gaggler denies. But
the declaration (...)de at Lambeth, does manifestly (...) shameless denial.
The A(...)e also which this Church defends* refelleth his boldness. For Romans
9. he shows, that God loved Jacob and hated Esau, before they had done good
or evil, and that he has mercy me for works foreseen, but because God has
mercy on whom* he will have mercy, and hardens whom he will.

He adds, that God did not call, save* and glorify Peter, without
consideration of his faith, obedience, and repentance* nor condemn Judas
without respect to his sin: but this is the gaggling of a Goose to no
purpose. For the quaestio^^s of election and reprobation, and not of salvation
and damnation; of which, damnation is for evil works, and salvation follows
worckes, although not the merit of works. That our will and works go not
before election, the Apostle declares, Romans 9. It is not in him that wills,
(says the Apostle) nor in him that runs, but in God that shows mercy.
Ephesians. 1. He says we are praedestinated in good works; which is a plain
(...)* that good works are the eff(...)e causes of election.

Boldly also the Mountebanke avouches, that our Church teaches, that a man
truly justified and praedestinated may fall from grace, and prove not to be the
child of God. A most shameless slander against the whole Church of England,
that in the sixteenth Article by him pointed at, does neither speak of the
falling away of the truly justified, or of such as are praedestinated. Nay
contrary, in the seventeenth Article our Church determines, first, that the
decree of praedestination, was before the foundation of the world was laid: and
secondly, that the same was constantly decreed.

We enter not into search of Gods secrets, as he does charge us, but only
learn what God has revealed unto us in his word, and what the Apostle
teaches all of us. And this we may do without danger; but to contest with
God, and to deny what the Apostle teaches, as the Mountebanke does, is not
only dangerous, but also impious.

That the doctrine of Gods absolute decree concerning praedestination to life,
without respect to men's works, is desperate; no man that is pious and learned
will affirm: for it is the doctrine of the Apostle, of the Church, and most
learned Divines: only such desperate Papists and Arminians, as this desperate
Mountebanke declares himself to be, desperately avouch untruth. But shall we
hear the profundity of this Mountebankes learning concerning praedestination?
Listen then, first, he says whatsoever God wills, comes to pass. A
profound piece of work, which every natural man understands: and yet this
natural by consequence denies, that they are all saved, whom God wills and
decrees shall be saved. He does also contradict himself, promising before
that he would not meddle with the execution of Gods purpose.

2. He pitcheth upon creation, and says it goes necessarily before
praedestination; a doctrine most false and impious. The Apostle Ephesians. 1. says,
God has chosen us in Christ, ante mundi constitutionem, that is, before the
creation. The Church of England, likewise, Art. 17. speaking of
praedestination, says, it is Gods everlasting purpose before the foundations
of the world were laid. He should therefore, if he cast off all piety, yet
remember his subscription to the Articles of our Religion, of which he so often
talks.

Thirdly, he says, that all being in the mass of perdition, God stretched out
deliverance in a Mediator, the man Jesus Christ; and drew ehem out that took
hold of mercy, leaving them that would none of him. But first, the Mountebanke
forgets what he has in hand, that is, Gods aeternall decree before the
world, of saving the elect: and speaks of the execution of the decree, of
which formerly he made promise to say nothing. Next he makes man's will to go
before election, and to be the cause of our salvation; and not Gods election,
which is the prime cause of it. The foundation of God remains firm, and has
this seal says the Apostle 2 Timothy 2. God knows who are his. Thirdly, he
contradicts the Apostle Romans 9. who makes Gods will to be the cause of our
election, and not our will apprehending Gods mercy. 4. He says nothing of
faith, obedience and works foreseen, which notwithstanding, his consorts make
to be causes of election.

This is enough, says the Appellant, to free God from being the Author of
sin. As if God by the Apostle were not freed from this wicked imputation,
albeit he did choose men before the foundation of the world, and did elect or
reject according to the purpose of his will, or men did not sin willingly:
albeit, he did elect some and reject others. Further, if God did draw out such
as would lay hold of his mercy, and damned the rest; yet seeing he knew all
things before, and decreed how all things should be, God by the inference of
this Mountebanke should be the Author of sin and damnation for it. And if this
be fate, then is the Mountebanke a teacher not only of fate, but also of much
fatuity; making man to be the cause of his own salvation, and God the Author
of man's damnation, which he would impute to others.

Justine Martyr in his Apology, speaks against fate, as he says, and so do
we. But if election and reprobation infer fate, as he praetendeth, then is
this fatal Mountebanke a teacher of fate, not daring to deny Gods aeternal
decree of election and reprobation, according to his own purpose and will.
Fulgentius ad Monimu^ says, justice cannot be justice, if God be said not to
find men unjust, but to make them unjust. As if any of us held, that God made
man unjust, or as if this did follow of Gods decree of reprobation. He adds
that God does praedestinate none to sin. But the man has lost both shame and
wit, if he say, that Calvin taught that man is praedestinated to sin.

Going about to define fate, the Mountebanke says it is this; that they that
choose the better part, should receive worthy rewards, and that they that do
evil, should receive contrary rewards. But fate is not only in receiving
rewards, but in the disposition of things by a concatenation of inevitable
causes. But if it be fate that men should receive rewards according to works,
then is this talker of fate chained with the bonds of fate; teaching; as others
do, rewards to be given according to works. Tortullian de spectac. cap. 2,
denies that God created his works to their destruction, and says, that the
cause of damnation, is men's perverse administration: which we also confess.
And yet election and reprobation is not for works foreseen, as the Popish
Mountebanke would have it. With Clement also of Alexandria we deny, that God is
cause of evil: and reason taught heathen men so to say. And yet if this
Mountebanke should praesume to say, that God set him on to make this blind
Appeal, he should undoubtedly hold, that God is cause of evil. Ecclesiastes
chap. 7. says, God made man right, but he busied himself with many quastions,
as this Mountebanke does. Nazianzen orat. 42. says, we were made to be well
and happy: and Basil in a certain Homily proves, that God is not the Author
of evil: As if it were evil, that God chooses some, and not others. Against
us he praeuaileth no more then if he should cast feathers against the wind.
For man originally was made right and to live well and happily: But falling
wilfully from God, he incurred Gods wrath. Saint Paul 2 Timothy 2 says* if any
man cleanse himself, he shall be made a vessel of honor: but if the
Mountebanke say he can cleanse himself, and has it in his power to be made a
vessel of honor, he shall dishonor his Mountebankship, turning plain
Pelagian. Of any thing that we say it follows not, that man is of necessity
forced to be evil, as Basil says, for he sins willingly. Chrysostom
says, Judas ran wilfully into his treason: so oftentimes blind and ignorant
men run wilfully into Popery and other haeresies. To conclude, Prosper de
vocat. Gent. cap. 2. says God damneth no man unjustly. But what makes all
this long speaking against Calvin? Does he say, or can the Mountebanke conclude
out of his words, that God damneth any man unjustly, or is cause of evil?

Thus he wrestleth against Calvin in vain: But his own wicked doctrine is
quickly overthrown without any great wrestling. For if election and
reprobation of men be made for the good use of freewill, or works foreseen,
why does the Apostle Romans 9. say, that God did before they had done any works
love Jacob and hate Esau? And why did he deny he calls them for their
works? Why does he assign no cause of election, but Gods purpose? In the
same place he says, God will have mercy, on whom he will have mercy: and
Ephesians. 1. that God made choice of his children before the foundation of the
world. Saint Austine goes a little further lib. 15. de ciuit. Dei c. 1. when
dividing all mankind into two societies, he says, The one is praedestinated
to reign eternally with God, the other to sustain eternal punishment with
the devil. And epist. 105. ad Sixth. God made some vessels of wrath to
destruction, that he might therein show his power. This is also the doctrine
of Peter Lombard sent. lib. 1. did. 41. a. of Thomas 1. q. 23 art. 2. and many
Schoolmen.

Neither is this a foreign doctrine, as is his Foppery, Popery, and
Arminianisme: but the true tenet of the domesticals of faith yea, of the Church
of England, from which this runnegate does vvilfully dissent. Art. 17. The
Church says, predestination is Gods everlasting decree before the foundation
of the world was laid: The Mountebanke makes praedestination to follovv the
creation. The Church maintains that we are justified freely: This Factor for
Antichrist teaches justification by somewhat inhaerent in us. The Church
allows the doctrine of praedestination to be sweet, pleasant, and
comfortable: Desperate Dicke holds it to be a desperate doctrine.

He refuses to be tied to the conclusions at Dort: So does also Master Alder
and other Papists. But what has he to object against the conclusions of that
reverend Synod, wherein his Diocesan, and diverse learned Divines of England
did sit as judges? Is not such a blinking bayard ashamed to control such
authority? And if he can say somewhat against it, he will prove a profounder
Arminian, then his fellows. He praetendeth to follow the determinations of the
Synod at London: yet I have proved that he directly opposes them. Further,
like as Judas betraying Christ, kissed him, so this treacherous runnegate
praetending to praise our English Divines, that were actors in the Synod of
Dort, does secretly buffet them, as confirming desperate doctrine, and false
conclusions.

Railing against our brethren in the Low Countries, he says, our Churches
discipline in the Synod of Dort, and other Dutch Synodes is held unlawful: a
shameless untruth. For in the Synod of Dort, nothing was mentioned, that
condemned our discipline, and other Synodes established their own orders, and
spoke nothing of ours. But to him all are Puritans and enemies, that are not of
his Popish cut. This is certain, that neither our Church, nor any Orthodox
congregation does hold, that the reprobate and vessels of dishonor, may be
purged and made vessels of honor, as he does p. 67. This is to rake hell, and
make Gods heavenly decrees mutable.

That Deodatus a minister of Geneua dissented from the conclusions at Dort, as
he affirms, is not probable For why then did he subscribe to them? That the
Church of Geneua should dissent from Calvin and Beza her teachers, I shall then
believe when the Mountebanke shall show wherein. Let the Mountebanke show, if
he can, that the learned in Schools, or the Church in Synods maintained his
Arminianisme; or opposed, or sharply reproved the Articles established in a
Synod at Lambeth, as he boldly, blindly, and impudently affirms, or else he
has for ever lost his credit. And as for Doctor Whitaker of pious memory, he
was a man of that sincerity and learning, that none of his Arminian consorts,
if he were alive, durst encounter him in disputation or otherwise. As for this
Mountebanke he dares not declare all his opinions, but spuing forth his poison
here and there by fragments, hides himself in the confusion of his other
discourses. Returning back to talk of justification, he says, a justified
man may become like Saul and Judas. But the Church of England teaches not so,
nor does it hold that Saul and Judas were truly justified: nor if he were once
justified, should he be so like Saul and Judas.

He inueigheth against our brethren of France, and the Low Countries, as not
conformable to us in their discipline: Bu^ his hatred is more to their doctrine
of faith, then of discipline. This is only to make a division, and to stir up
men's hatred against them, that in the end they and we may have our throats cut
for our doctrine of faith.

Of saving by absolute necessity, without relation of repentance, he talks
idly. For albeit God save sinners, yet he saves none, but such as are
repentant. And albeit he conferreth grace upon men, yet he does not grace them,
but he changes their will, and makes them conformable to his laws. But this
is not the cause, either of man's election, or justification; but the effect
rather. Of the destruction of the reprobate, he disputes contrary to the
doctrine of Saint Austine lib. 15 de civit. Dei, and Epist. 105. ad Sixtum.
Yea, contrary to the doctrine of his own Fulgentius; who says, Gods aequity
makes some to perish in hell. Nay, he does not only resist the doctrine of the
Fathers, but of the Apostle also; who Rom 9 says God made some vessels to
honor, some to dishonor.

CHAP. 6. The censure passed upon the eighth, ninth, tenth, and eleventh
Chapters of the Mountehankes misshapen Appeal.
THe quaestion of freewill, says the Mountebank is full of perplexed
obscurity. And why so I pray you? Forsooth, because he finds not that in
praedestination and salvation God respects man's freewill, or that man has
power to resist Gods grace effectually moving him, and such like points of
Popery and Pelagianisme. But Saint Austine thought it no such matter of
difficulty. Neither does our Church so think, determining, that man after
Adams fall cannot by force of his will and works prepare himself to faith,
and to call upon God, or to do good works. But says he, to my capacity, that
is obscure, that is so much entangled with contradictory disputations. Wherein
he shows himself to be a man of shallow capacity. For Papists against
Scriptures, and plain points of faith, oppose and dispute: and yet will not
say all points of faith, which we hold against them, are obscure and perplexed.
He adds, that Bellarmine says that concurrence of grace and freewill is a
thing very difficill: the same he proves out of Benius, Occham, Sa, and
Caietan: Fit Authors to justify Popery, which indeed does so near touch
Pelagianisme, that it cannot be separated from it. If the Mountebanke had not a
mountain of Popish haeresie in his brain, he would neither hold such
conclusions, nor offer to justify them by such Authors; all the difficulty
consisting in this, how they might uphold their errors against the doctrine of
our Church grounded on Scriptures and Fathers.

Chap. 9. page 1. The Gagger (he says) had merited more at Gods hands, if he
would have been more sparing in multiplying controversies. And so he betraying
the cause of God, and yielding to his enemy, for fear of multiplying
controversies, thinks he meriteth much at Gods hands, as if honor were to be
obtained by dishonoring and betraying the truth. If he had lived in the time of
the Arrians, he would have reconciled Catholic Christians and Arrians, that
hops to reconcile true Christians, and Antichristian Papists.

Speaking to English in French, he neither speaks good English, nor French.
Nay, he speaks not like a true Christian, denying either Arminius to be a
Bontifeu, or incendiary, he should say Boutefeu, or that himself is a mouer of
contention; and therefore means, as he says, to have an action of the case
against the informers. But while he is fitting a case with a cockescombe for
his own crown, let him look to follow his Appeal more closely. The
informers fear him nothing, being always ready to justify their charge, and
auerring confidently, that the Mountebanke in this Church, and Arminius in the
Low Countries, with their intempestiue contentions, about grace, will,
predestination, and perseverance, and other points of refined popery have
kindled such a flame, as I fear will not easily be quenched. He comme^deth
himself much for his moderation, and dislike of multiplying controversies; So
do also other vaineglorious pedants: but his moderation is nothing but treason
to religion, and his dislike of controversies a liking of Popery. Howbeit no
man blames him for his temper, or for saying no more, but for saying too much,
and because he could not temper himself so, but that he showed great zeal in
fomenting seeds of Popery.

The controverted particulars (about freewill) as he believes, are of no such
great moment upon due examination. As if he could better examine the wicked
doctrine of popery, the^ the Church of England, which art: 10. resolves, that
man after his fall cannot prepare himself to faith by his own strength, or
do good works acceptable to God: both directly against Papists, whom he
seems to favor. The 2. Council of Orange c. 1. determines, that the
liberty of

(...)
