A dialoge of comfort against tribulacion, made by Sir Thomas More KNIGHT, and
set forth by the name of an Hu^garie^, not before this time imprinted.

Londini in aedibus Richardi Totteli.

Cum Priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.

A Table, wherein is expressed the sum and effect of every Chapter contained
in this book
A Declaracion of the first book.
That the devised comfortes by the old pa^nim philosophers, were insufficient,
and the cause wherefore. cap. i. That for a foundation men must needs begin
with faith. cap. ii. The first comfort in tribulacion may a man take in this,
when he feleth a desire and longing to be coumforted by god. ca. iii. That
tribulacion is a mean to draw a man to yt good mind to desire and long for
the comfort of god. ca. iiii. The special mean to geat this first comfort
in tribulacion. ca. v. It ^uffiseth not that a man have a desire to be
comforted by god, only by the taking away of ye tribulacion. ca. vi. A great
comfort it may be in tribulacio^, that every tribulacio^ is, if we our self
will, a thing either medicinable, or else more than medi^inable. ca. vii. The
declaracion larger concerning them that fall in tribulacion by their own
known fault and that yet such tribulacion is medicinable. cap. viii. The
second point, that is to wit, that tribulacion that is sent us by god without
any open certain deserving cause known to our self: and this kind of
tribulacion is medicinable, if men will so take it^ and therefore great occasion
of coumforte. cap. ix Of ye third kind of tribulacio^ which is not sent a man
for his sin, but for exercise of his patience and increase of his merit,
which is better then medicinable. cap. x. An other kind of comfort yet in the
base kind of tribulacion sent for our sin. cap. xi. A certain obieccion
against ye things aforesaid. ca. xii. That a man ought to be comfortable to
himself, and have good hope, and be joyful also in tribulacio^, appears well
by this, that a man has great cause of fear and heaviness that continues
always still in wealth, discontinued with no tribulacion. cap. xiii. A certain
obieccion and the answer thereto. cap. xiiii. Other obieccions. cap. xv. The
answer to the obieccion. cap. xvi. An answer to the second obiec^ion. cap.
xvii. Of the^ that in tribulacion seek not unto god: but some to the flesh, and
some to the world, and some to ye devil himself. cap. xviii. An other obieccion
with the answer thereunto. cap. xix. A Summary commendacion of tribulacion. cap.
xx.
A declaracion of the second Book.
Whether a man may not in tribulacio^ use some worldly re^reacion for his
comfort. cap. i. Of the short uncertain life in extreme age or sickness. cap.
ii. He deuideth tribulacion into three kinds, of which three, the last he
passes shortelye over. cap. iii. cap. iiii. An obieccion concerning them that
turn not to god till they come at the last cast. cap. v. An obieccion of them
ye say the tribulacion of penance needs not^ but is a supersticious folly.
cap. vi. What if a man cannot weep, nor in his heart be sorry for his sins?
cap. vii. Of that kind of trybulacion which though they not willingly take,
yet they willingly suffer. cap. viii. First of te^ptacio^ in general as it is
common to both. ca. ix. A special comfort in all temptacion. cap. x. Of four
kinds of temptacions, and therein both the parts of that kind of tribulacion
that men willinglye suffer, touched in two vearses of the psalter. cap. xi. The
first kind of the four temptacions cap. xii. Of pusillanimitie. cap. xiii. Of
the daughter of pusillanimi^ie, a scrupulous conscience. cap. xiiii. An other
kind of ye nights fear, an other daughter of pusillanimitie, yt is to wit, ye
horrible te^ptacion by which some folk are tempted to kill and destroy
themself. ca. xv. Of him that were moved to kill himself by illusion of ye devil
which he reckoned for a reuelacio^. ca. xvi. ca. xvii Of the devil named
Negorium, that is to wit, business walking about in the darknesses. cap. xviii.
cap. xix.
A declaracion of the third Book.
Whither a man should cast in his mind and appointe in his heart before, that
if he were taken with Turks he would rather dye, than forsake the faith. cap.
i. Of the fourth temptacion, which is persecucion for the faith, touched in
these words of the prophet. Ab incursu and demen^o meridia^o, cap. ii. cap.
iii. cap. iiii. Of the loss of the goods of fortune. cap. v. Of the vnsuretie
of lands and possessions. ca. vi. These outward goods or gifts of fortune
are two manner of ways to be considred. cap. vii. The little commodity of
riches, being set by but for this present life. cap. viii. The little
commodity of fame being desired but for ^orldlye pleasure. cap. ix. Of
flattrye. cap. x. The little commodity that men have of roumes, officis and
authority, if they desire them but for their worldly commodity. cap. xi. That
these outward goods, desired but for worldly wealth, be not only little good
for the body, but are also much harm for the soul. cap. xii. Whether me^
desire these outward goods for their only worldly wealth, or for any good
verteous purpose, this persecucio^ of ye Turk against ye faith will declare,
and ye comfort y^ both twain may take in ye lesing the^ thus. ca. xiii An other
cause, for which any man should be content to forgo his goods in ye Turks
said persecucio^. ca. xiiii This kind of tribulacion tries what mind me^
have to their goods, which they that are wise, will at the fame thereof, se well
and wisely laid up safe before. cap. xv. An other coumforte and courage
against^ the loss of substance. cap. xvi. Of bodily pain, and that a man has
no cause to take discomfort in persecucion, though he feel himself in an horror
at the thinking upon the bodily pain. cap. xvii. Of comfort against bodily
pain, and first against captivity. cap. xviii. Of imprisonment, and comfort
there against. cap. xix. ca. xx. The fear of shameful and painful death. ca.
xxi. Of death considred by himself alone, as a bare leaving of this life only.
cap. xxii. Of the shame that is joined with the death, in the persecucion for
the faith. cap. xxiii. Of painful death to be suffered in the Turks persecucion
for the faith. cap. xxiiii. The consideracion of the pains of hell (in which we
fall if we forsake our savior) may make us set all the paynful death of this
world at right naught. cap. xxv. The co^sideracio^ of ye joys of heaven,
should make us for Christ's sake abide and e^dure any painful death. ca. xxvi.
The consideracion of ye painful death of Christ, is sufficient to make ^s
content to suffer painful death for his sake. ca. xxvii.
FINIS.
A Dialogue of comfort against Tribulacion: Made by an Hung^rien in Latin, and
translated out of Latin into French, and out of French into English.
Anthonye^ and Uincent. Vincent. WHo would have went, oh my good uncle, before a
few years passed, yt such as in this country would visit their friends lying
in disease and sickness, should come (as I do now) to seek and fetch
comfort of them, or in geuyng comfort to them, use the way that I may well use
to you? For albeit that the priests and Friars be wont to call upon sick men
to remember death, yet we worldly friends for fear of discomfortyng them, have
ever had a guyse in Hungarye to lift up their hearts, and put them in good
hope of life^ But now my good uncle, the world is here waxen such, and so
great perils appear here to fall at hand, that me thinks the greatest
comfort that a man can have is, when he may see that he shall sone be gone, and
we that are likely long to live here in wretchedness, have need of some
comfortable council against tribulacion, to be given us by such as you be,
good uncle, that have so long lived virtuously, and are so learned in the law
of God, as very few be better in this country here, and have had of such
things as we do now fear, good experience and assaye in your self, as he
that has been taken priesoner in Turkey two times in your days, and now
likelye to depart hence ere long. But that may be your great comfort good
uncle sy^h you depart to God: but us here shall you leave of your kindred, a
sort of sorry coumfortles Orphans, to all whom your good help coumforte and
counsel^ has long been a great stay, not as an uncle unto some, and to some
as one farther of kynne^ but as though y^ unto us al, you had been a natural
father.


Anthony. Mine own good Cousin, I cannot much say nay, but that there is in
deed, not here in Hungarye only but almost also in all places of
Christendom, a customable manner of vnchrysten coumfortynge: which albeit that
in any sick manne it does more harm than good, with drawyng him in time of
syckenesse, with lookynge and longinge for life fro the meditacion of death,
iudgemente^ heaven and hell, whereof he should besette much part of his
time, even all his whole life in his best health: yet is that manner in my mind
more then mad where such kind of co^mforte is used to a man of mine age.
For as we well wotte that a young man may dye soon: so be we very sure that
an old manne can not live long. And yet since there is as Tullie says, no man for all that so old, but that he hops yet that he may live one year
more: and of a frail folly delyteth thereon to think, and comforting himself
therewith, other men's words of like manner coumforte^ adding no s^yckes to
that fire, shall in a manner burn up quyte the pleasant moisture that most
should refreshe him: the wholesome dew I mean of Gods grace, by which he
should wyshe with Gods will to be hence, and long to be with him in
heaven. Now where you take my departing from you, so heauelye, as of him of
whom you recognyse of your goodness to have had here before help and
coumforte, would God I had to you and other more half so much done, as
myself reckons had been my duetye to do: But whenever god take me
hence, to reckon your selves than comfortelesse, as though your chief comfort
stood in me: therein make you, me thinks, a reckonyng very much like, as
though you would cast away a strong staff, and lean upon a rotten reed.
For GOD is and must be your coumforte, and not I. And he is a sure
coumforter^ that (as he said unto his Dysciples) never leaves his servants
in case of coumfortlesse Orphans: not even when he departed from his Disciples
by death, but bothe^ as he promised, sent them a coumforter, the holy spirit
of his father and himself, and them also made sure, that to the worlds end
he would ever dwell with them himself: and therefore if you be part of his
flock, and believe his promise, how can you be coumfortlesse in any
tribulacion, when Christ and his holy spirit, and with them their
inseparable father, (if you put full trust and confidence in them,) be never
neither one finger breadth of space^ nor one minute of time from you?


Vincent. Oh my good uncle, even these same self words wherewith you well
prove that because of Gods own gracyous presence, we can not be lef^e
coumfortelesse, make me now feel and perceive what a mysse of much coumforte
we shall have when you be gone: for albeit good vncle^ that while you do tell
me this, I can not but grant it for true: Yet if I now had not heard it of
you, I had not remembered it, nor it had not fallen in my mind. And over that,
like as our tribulacions, shall in wayght and number increase: so shall we need,
not only such a good word or twain, but a great heap thereof, to stable
and strength the walls of our hearts against the great sourges of this
tempesteous sea.


Antony. Good cousin, trust well in God and he shall provide you teachers abroad
convenient in every time, or else shall himself sufficiently teach you
within.


Vincent. Uerye well good uncle: but yet if we would leave the seeking of
outewarde learning, where we may have it, and look to be inwardelye
taught, only by God, then should we thereby tempte God, and displease him:
and since that I now see likelyhod, that when you be gone we shall be sore
destitute of any such other like: therefore thinks me that God of duty
byndeth me to sewe to you now good uncle in this short time that we have you,
that it may like you, against these great storms of tribulacion, with
which, both I and al mine are sore beaten already, and now upon the coming
of this cruel Turk fear to fall in far more, I may learn of you such
plentye of good counsel and comfort, that I may, with the same laid up in
remembrance, govern and stay the ship of our kynrede, and keep it aflote
from perell of spiritual drownyng. You be not ignorant good uncle, what heaps
of heuines, has of late fallen among us already, with which some of our poor
family be fallen into such dumpes, that scantly can any such comfort as my
poor wit can give them, any thing assuage their sorrow. And now since these
tidi^ges have come hither so brimme of y^ great Turks e^terprise into these
parts here: we can almost neither talk nor think of any other thing else,
the^ of his might and our mischief. There falls so continually before ye eyes
of our heart, a fearful imagination of this terryble thing, his mighty strength
and power, his high malice and hatred, and his incomparable cruelty, with
robbyng, spoiling, burning, and laying waste al ye way that his army comes:
than killing or carrying away ye people far thence far from home, and there
sever ye couples and the ki^red asu^der, every one far from other: some kept
in thraldom, and some kept in prison, and some for a triumph tormented and
killed in his presence. Then send his people hither, and his false faith
therewith, so that such as here are and remain still, shall either both lose
al and be lost too, or forced to forsake the faith of our Savior Christ, and
fall to the sect of Machomette. And yet which we more fear then all ye remnant,
no small part of our own folk that dwell even here about us, are (as we
fear) falling to him, or already confedered with him: which if it so be,
shall happelye keep this quarter from the Turks incursion: but then shall they
that turn to his law leave all their neighbors nothing, but shall have
our good given them, and our bodies both: but if we turn as they do, and
forsake our Savior to, and then (for there is no borne Turk so cruel to
Christen folk, as is the false Christen that falls from the faith) we shall
stand in perell (if we parseuer in ye truth) to be more hardely handled,
and dye more cruel death by our own country men at home, then if we were
taken hence and carried into Turkye^ These fearful heaps of perell lie so
heavy at our hearts, while we wot not into which we shall fortune to fall, and
therefore fear al ye worst, yt as our Savior prophe^ied of ye people of
Jerusalem, many wish among us already before ye peril come, that the
mountains would ouerwhelme the^ or ye valeis open, and swalow them up and
cover the^. Therefore good uncle against these horrible fears of these terrible
tribulacions, of which ^ome ye wot well, out house already has, and the
re^nant stand in dread of, give us while god le^deth you us, such plenty of
your comfortable counsel, as I may write and keep with us, to stay us when god
shall call you hence.


Antony. Ah my good Cousin, this is an heavy hering, and likewise as we that
dwell here in this part, fear that thing sore now which few years passed,
feared it not at al: so doubt I that ere it long be, they shall fear it as
much that think themself now very sure, because they dwell farther of. Greece
feared not the Turk when that I was borne, and within a while after, y^ whole
Empire was his. The great Sowdo^ of Sirry thought himself more than his match,
and long since you were borne, has he yt Empire to. Than^ has he taken
Belgrade the fortres of this realm, and since has he des^royed our noble
young goodly king. And now strive there twain for us, our lord send ye grace,
yt the third dog carry not away ye bone from the^ both. What should I speak
of the noble strong city of the Rhodes, ye winning whereof he counted as a
victory against ye whole corpse of christendom, since al christendom was not
able to defend that strong town against him: howbeit if the princes of
christendom every where about, would where as need was, have set to their
hands in time: the Turk had never taken any one place of al those places,
but partly dissencions fallen among our self, partly yt no man cares what
harm other folk feel: but each part suffers other to shift for it self. The
Turk is in few years wonderfully e^creased, and christe^dom on ye other side
very sore decayed: and all this works our wickedness with which god is not
content. But now where as you desire of me, some ple^tie of comfortable
things, which ye may put in remembrance: and comfort therewith your company,
verily in ye rehersing and heaping of your manifold fears, my self began to
feel that there should much need against so many troubles^ many comfortable
counsels. For surely a little before your coming, as I devised with my self
upon ye Turks coming, it happened my mind to fall sodeinly from yt, into ye
devising upon my own departing: wherein albeit yt I fully put my trust and hope
to be a saved soul by the great mercy of god, yet since no man is here so sure,
that without reuelacion may clean stand out of dread, I bethought me also
upon the pain of hell. And after I bethought me then upon the Turk again. And
first me thought his terror nothing, when I compared with it the joyful hope
of heaven. Than compared I it on ye other side with ye fearful dread of hell,
and therm casting in my mind those terrible deue^ish tormentors with ye deep
co^sideracion of yt furious endless fyre^ me thought that if the Turk with his
whole host and al his trumpets and tymbrels to, were to kill me in my bed coming
to my chamber door, in respect of ye other reckening, I regard him not a
ryshe. And yet when I now heard your lamentable words, laying forth as it
were present before my face, yt heap of heavy sorrowful tribulacio^ yt beside
those that are already fallen, are in short space like to follow: I waxed
therewith miself suddenly somewhat aflighte. And therefore I well allow your request
in this behalf, y^ would have s^ore of comfort before hand ready by you to
resort too: and to lay up in your heart as a triacle against the poison of
al desperate dread, yt might rise of occasion of sore tribulacion. And herein
shall I be glad as my poor wit will serve me, to call to mind with you such
things, as I before have red, heard, or thought upon, that may conveniently
serve us to this purpose.


The first Chapter, That the comfortes devised by the old paynem Philosophers
were insufficient, and the cause wherefore.
FIrst shall you good Cousin understand this, yt the natural wise men of this
world, the old moral Philosophers, labored much in this matter, and many
natural reasons have they written, whereby they might encorage me^ to set little
by such goods or such hurtes either, the going or the coming whereof, are the
matter and the cause of tribulacio^, as are goods of fortune, riches, favor,
friends, fame, worldly worship, and such other things: or of the body, as
beawty, strength, agilite quicknes, and health. These things (ye wot well)
coming to us, are matter of worldly wealth: and taken from us by fortune, or by
force, or by fear of the losyng, be matter of aduersite and tribulacyon^ For
tribulacyon seems generallye, to signifye nothing else but some kind of grief,
either pain of the body, or heauynes of the mind. Now the body not to feel
that if feleth, all the wit in the world can not bring about, but yt the mind
should not be grieved neither with the pain that the body feleth, nor with
occasions of heaviness offered and given unto the soul it self. This thing
labored the Philosophers very much about, and many goodly sayings have they
toward the strength and cou^fort against tribulacion, excityng men to the full
contempt of all worldly loss, and dispising of sycknes, and al bodily
grief, paynefull death and all. How be it in very deed, for any thing that
ever I read in them, I never could yet find that ever those natural reasons
were able to give sufficient comfort of them self: for they never stretche so
far but that they leave untouched for lack of necessary knowledge, that
special point which is not only the chief comfort of al: but without which
also, al other comfortes are nothing, that is to wit, the referring the final
end of their comfort unto god, and to repute and take for the special cause
of cou^fort, that by the paciente sufferaunce of their tribulacion, they shall
attain his favor, and for their pain receive reward at his hand in
heaven. And for lack of knowlage of this end^ they did (as they needs must)
leave untouched also the very special mean, without which we can never
attain to this comfort, that is to wit, ye gracious aid and help of God to
move, stir, and guide us foreward, in the referring all our ghos^ly comfort,
yea and our worldly comfort too, al unto that heavenly end. And therefore as I
say, for the lack of these things, all their comfortable cou^sayles are very
far insufficient: how be it, though they be far unable to cure our disease
of them self, and therefore are not sufficient to be taken for our phisitio^s:
some good drugges have they yet in their shoppes for which they may be suffered
to dwell among our Apoticaryes, if their medicines be not made of their own
brains, but after the bills made by the great physician God, prescribing the
medicines him self, and correctyng ye faults of their erroneous receiptes: for
without this way taken with them, they shall not fail to do, as many bold
blind Apoticaries do: which either for lucre or of a foolish pride, give sick
folk medicines of their own deuisyng, and therewith kill up in corners many
such simple folk, as they find so folish to put their lives in such lewd and
unlearned blind bayardes hands. We shall therefore neither fully receive these
philosophers reasons in this matter, nor ye^ utterly refuse the^: but using
the^ in such order as shall be seem the^, the principal and theffectual medicines
against these diseases of tribulacio^, shall we fetch from yt high great and
excellent physician, without who^ we could never be healed of our very deadly
disease of damnacio^, for our necessity wherein the spirit of god spirituallye
speaks of himself to us, and bids us of al our health give him ye honor:
and therein thus says to us. Honora medicum propter necessitatem enim ordinauit
eum altissimus. Honor thou ye phisicio^, for him has ye high god ordened for
thy necessity. Therefore let us require ye high phisicio^, our blessed savior
Christ, whose holy manhed god ordened for our necessity, to cure our deadly
wounds, with ye medicine made of y^ most holesom blud of his own blessed bodi:
y^ likewise as he cured by yt incomparable medicine our mortal malady, it may
like him to send us and put in our mi^des such medicines at this time, as
against y^ sickness and sorrows of tribulacions, may so comfort and strength us
in his grace, as our deadly enemy ye devil, may never have ye power by his
poisoned dart of murmr, grudge and impacience, to turn our short sickness of
worldly tribulacio^, into ye endless everlasting death of infernal da^nacion.

The second Chapter. That for a foundation men must needs begin with ^hyth.
Sith al our principal comfort must come of god, we must first presuppose in
him to who^ we shall with any gostly counsel give any effectual comfort, one
ground to begin withal: whereupon al y^ we shall build must be supported and
stand, y^ is to wit, the ground and foundation of faith, without which had
ready before, all the spiritual comfort that any man may speak of can never
avail a fly. For likewise as it were utterly vain to lay natural reasons of
comfort, to him that has no wit, so were it vndoubtedli frustrate to lay
spiritual causes of comfort to him that has no faith. For except a man first
believe, that holy sc^ipture is the word of God, and that the word of GOD is
true, how can a man take any comfort of that that the scripture tells him
therein? Needs must the man take little fruit of ye scripture, if he either
believe not that it were the word of God, or else wene that though it were it
might yet be for all that untrue. This faith as it is more fainte or more
strong, so shall the comfortable words of holy scripture stand the man in
more stead or less. This virtue of faith, can nether any man give himself nor
yet any one man another: but though me^ may with preachi^g be ministers unto
god therein, and the man with his own frewyl obeying freely the inward
inspiracion of god, be a weak worker with almightye god therein: yet is the
faith in deed the gracious gift of god himself. For as Saint James says. Omne
datum optimum and omne donum perfectum desursum est descendens a patre luminum
Every good gift and every perfect gift, is given from above, desce^ding from
the father of lights. Therefore feling our faith by many tokens very faint, let
us pray to him that gives it, that it may please him to help and increase it.
And let us first say with the man in ye gospel. Credo domine, adi^ua
incredulitatem meam. I beeleue good Lord but help thou the lack of my
belyefe. And after let us pray with the Apostles. Domine adauge nobis fidem.
Lord increase our faith. And fynallye let us consider by Christ's saying unto
them, that if we would not suffer the strength and fervor of our faith to wax
luke warm, or rather kaye cold, and in manner lose his vigor by scatering our
minds abroad about so many triflyng things, that of the matters of our
faith, we very seldom think it that we would withdraw our thought fro the
respect and regard of al worldly fantasies, and so gather our faith together
into a little narrow rowme. And like the little grain of a musterd sede, which
is of nature hot, set it in the garden of our soul, al wedes pulled out for
the better fedyng of our faith, than shall it grow, and so spread up in
heighte, that the birds, that is to wit, the holy Angels of heaven shall
bread in our soul and bring forth virtues in the branches of our faith, and
then with the faithful trust, that through the true belief of gods word
we shall put in his promise, we shall be well able to command a great mountain
of tribulacion, to void from the place where he stood in our heart, where as
with a very feeble faith and a faint, we shall be sca^t hable to remove a little
hillocke. And therefore, as for ye first conclusion, as we must of necessity
before any spiritual cou^fort presuppose the foundation of faith: So since no
man can give us faith, but only god, let us never cease to call upon God
therefore.

Vincent. Forsooth my good uncle, me thinks yt this fou^dacio^ of faith, which
as you say must be laid first, is so necessarily requisite, yt without it, al
spiritual cou^fort were utterly given in vain. And therefore now shall we pray
god for a full and a fast faith. And I pray you good uncle, proceed you farther
in the process of your matter of spiritual comfort, against tribulacion.


Antony. That shall I Cousin with good will.


The third Chapter, The first comfort in tribulacion, may a man take in this:
When he feleth in himself a desire and longyng to be comforted by God.
I Will in my poor mind assign for the first comfort, the desire and longing
to be by God comforted, and not without some reason call I this the first
cause of comfort. For like as the cure of that person is in a manner desperate,
that has no will to be cured: so is the discomforte of that person desperate,
yt desires not his own comfort.

And here shall I note you two kinds of folk that are in tribulacion and
heaviness. One sort that will seek for no comfort, an other sort that will. And
yet of those that will not, are there also two sorts. For first one sort there
are, that are so drowned in sorrow, that they fall into a careless deadlye
dulnes.

Regarding nothing, thinking almost of nothing, no more than if they lay in a
letarge, with which it may so fall, that wit and remembrance will wear
away, and fall even fair from them. And this comfortles kind of heaviness in
tribulacion, is the highest kind of the deadlye sin of slothe. An other
sort are there, that will seek for no comfort, nor yet none receive, but are
in their tribulacion (be it loss or sickness) so testie, so fumishe, and so
far out of all patience, that it boteth no man to speak to them, and these
are in a manner with impacie^ce, as furious as though they were in half a
frenzy, and may with a custom of such facioned behavior, fall in thereto full
and whole. And this kind of heaviness in tribulacion, is even a mischievous
high branch of the mortal sin of ire.

Than is there as I told you, an other kind of folk, which feign would be
comforted, and yet are they of two sorts to. One sort are those, that in their
sorrow seek for worldly comfort: and of them shall we now speak the less for
the diverse occasions that we shall after have, to touch the^ in more places than
one. But this will I here say, that I learned of Saynct Barnard. He that in
tribulacio^ turns himself unto worldly vanities, to geat hel^e and comfort
by them: fares like a man that in peril of drowning catches whatsoever
comes next to hand, and that holds he fast be it never so simple a stick,
but than that helps him not: for ye stick he draws down under the water
with him, and there lie they drowned both together.

So surely if we custom our self to put our trust of coumfort in the delight
of these pieuishe worldelye things God shall for that foul fault suffer our
tribulacion to grow so great, that all the pleasures of this world shall
never bear us up, but all our pieuishe pleasure shall in ye depth of
tribulacio^ drown with us.

The other sort is I say, of those that long and desire to be coumforted of
GOD. And as I told you before, they have an undoubted great cause of
coumforte, even in that point alone, that they considre themself to desire
and long to be by almyghtye God coumforted: This mind of theyrs may well be
cause of great comfort unto them for two great consideracions. The one is, that
they see themself seek for their coumfort where they cannot fail to find
it. For God both can give them comfort, and will. He can for he is almighty: he
will, for he is al good^ and has himself promised, Petite et accipietis. Ask
and ye shall have. He that has faith (as he must needs have that shall take
comfort) cannot doubt but that God will surely keep his promise. And therefore
has he a great cause to be of good comfort, as I say, in that he cons^dereth
that he longs to be comforted by him, which his faith makes him sure, will
not fail to comfort him.

But here considre this that I speak here of him that in tribulacion longs
to be comforted by God: and it is he that refers the manner of his
co^fortyng to God, holding himself content, whether it be by the taking away
or the minyshment of the tribulacion it self, or by the giving him patience and
spiritual consolacion therein. For of him that only longs to have god take
his trouble from him, we cannot so well warrant that mind for a cause of so
great comfort. For both may he desire that, that never minds to be the
better, and may miss also the effect of his desire because his request is
happily not good for himself. And of this kind of longing and requiring, we
shall have occasion farther to speak herafter. But he which referring the manner
of his comfort unto God, desires of god to be comforted asks a thing so
lawful and so pleasant unto god, that he cannot fail to speed, and therefore
has he (as I say) great cause to take comfort in the very desire it self.

An other cause has he to take of that desire, a very great occasion of
comfort. For since his desire is good, and declares unto himself that he has
in god a good faith: it is a good token unto him y^ he is not an abject cast
out of gods gracious favor while he perceives y^ god has put such a verteous
well ordered appetite in his mind. For as every evil mind comes of ye world
and our self, and the Devil: so is every such good mind either immediately,
or by the mean of our good Angel or other gracious occasyon, inspyred into
man's heart by the goodness of God himself. And what a comfort than may this
be unto us, when we by that desire perceive a sure undoubted token, that toward
our final salvation our Savior is himself so graciously busy about us?

The fourth Chapter. That tribulacion is a mean to dravve men to that good
mind to desire and long for the comfort of God.
Vincent. FOrsoothe good uncle, this good mind of longyng for Gods comfort, is
a good cause of great comfort in deed: our lord in tribulacion send it us. But
by this I see well, yt woe may they be, which in tribulacion lack that mind and
that desire, not to be comforted by God, but are either of sloth or impacience
discomfortlesse, or of folly seek for their chief ease and comfort any where
else.


Anthony, That is, good cosyn, very true, as long as they stand in that
state. But than must you consider, that tribulacion is yet a mean to drive him
from that state. And that is one of the causes for which God sends it unto
man. For albeit that pain was ordained of God for the punyshmente of sins
(for which they that never can now but sin, can never be but ever punished
in hell) yet in this world, in which his high mercy gives men space to be
better, the punyshmente by tribulacion that he sendeth^ serves ordinarily for
a mean of amendment.

Saint Paul was himself sore against Christ, till Christ gave him a great
fall and threw him to the ground, and struck him stark blind: and with that
tribulacion he turned to him at the first word, and God was his physician,
and healed him soon after both in body and soul by his Minister Ananias, and
made him his blessed Apostle. Some are in the beginning of tribulacion very
stubborn and stiff against god, and yet at length tribulacion brings the^
home. The proud King Pharao did abide and endure two or three of the first
plages, and would not once s^oupe at the^. But then god laid on a sorer lashe
that made him cry to him for help, and then sent he for Moses and Aaron,
and confessed him self a sinner, and god for good and righteous, and praid
the^ to pray for him, and to withdraw that plage, and he would let the^ go.
But when his tribulacion was withdrawn, than was he naught again. So was his
tribulacion occasion of his profyt, and his help again cause of his harm.
For his tribulacion made him call to god, and his help made hard his heart
again. Many a man that in an easy tribulacion falls to seek his ease in ye
pastime of worldly fantasyes, fyndeth in a greater pain al those comfortes so
feeble, that he is feign to fall to the seking of gods help. And therefore is
I say, the very tribulacion it self many times, a mean to bring the man to
the taking of the before remembered comfort therein: that is to wit, to the
desyer of comfort given by god, which desire of gods comfort is as I have
proved you, great cause of comfort it self.


The fifthe Chapter. The special means to geat this first comfort in
Tribulacion.
How be it, though the tribulacion it self be a mean often times to geat man
this first comfort in it: yet it selfsome time alone brings not a man to it.
And therefore sith without this comfort first had, there can in tribulacion
none other good comfort come forth, we must labor the means yt this first
comfort may come. And thereunto seems one, that if the man of sloth or
impacience, or hope of worldly comfort have no mind to desire and seek for
comfort of god, those that are his friends that come to visit and comfort
him, must before al thing put that point in his mind, and not spend the time
(as they commenly do) in trifling and turning him to the fantasies of the
world. They must also move him to pray god put this desire in his mind,
which when he gets once, he than has the first comfort. And without doubt
(if it be well considered) a comfort marvelous great. His friends also that
thus counsel him must unto thatteyning thereof help to pray for him, them
self, and cause him to desyer good folk to help him to pray therefore. And
than if these ways be taken for the getting, I nothing doubt but the goodness
of god shall give it.

The.vi. Chapter. It suffiseth not that a man have a desire to be comforted by
god only by the taking a^aye of the tribulacion.
Vincent. Uerely me thinks good uncle that this counsel is very good. For
except the person have first a desire to be comforted by god, else ca^ I not se
what it can avail to give him any further counsel of any spiritual comfort:
how be it what if the man have this desire of gods comfort, that is to wit,
that it may please god to comfort him in his tribulacio^ by taking that
tribulacion from him, is not this a good desire of gods comfort and a desire
sufficient for him that is in tribulacion?


Anthony. No Cousin that is it not. I touched before a word of this point and
passed it over, because I thought it would fall in our way again, and so
wot I well it will ofter than once. And now am I glad that you move it me here
your self. A man may many times well and without sin desire of god the
tribulacion to be taken from him, but neither may we desire that in every
case, nor yet very well in no case (except very few) but under a certain
condition, either expressed or implied. For tribulacio^s are ye wot well of
many so^dry kinds: some by loss of goods or possessions some by y^ sickness
of our self, and some by the loss of friends or by some other pain put unto
our bodies: some by the dread of the losing those things that we feign would
save, under which fear fall all ye same things that we have spoken before.
For we may fear loss of goods or possessions, or the loss of our friends,
their grief and trouble or our own: by sickness, imprisonment or other bodily
pain: we may be troubled with ye dread of death, and many a good man is
troubled most of all with the fear of that thing which he that most need has
fears least of al, yt is to wit, the fear of losinge through deadlye sin
ye life of his seli soul. And this last kind of tribulacion as the sorest
tribulacion of all, though we touch here and there some pieces thereof before,
yet ye chief part and the principal point will I reserve to treat apart
effectually yt matter in ye last end. But now as I said where ye kinds of
tribulacio^ are so diverse some of this tribulacio^. A man may pray god take
from him and take some comfort in the trust ye god will so do, and therefore
against hungre, sycknes, and bodily hurt and against the loss of either body
or soul men may lawfully many times pray to ye goodness of God either for the^
self or their friend. And toward this purpose, are expressly prayed many devout
or^sons in ye come^ service of our mother holy church. And toward our help in
some of these things serve some of ye peticio^s in ye Pater noster, wherein we
pray daily for our daily food, and to be preserved from the fall in
temptacion, and to be delivered from evil. But yet may we not always pray
for the taking away from us of every kind of temptacio^. For if a man should
in every sycknes pray for his health again, when should he show him self
content to die, and to depart unto god? and yt mind must a man have ye wot
well, or else it will not be well. One tribulacio^ is it to good me^ to feel in
the^ self the conflicte of the flesh against the soul, the rebellion of
sensuality against the rule and gouerna^ce of reason, the relics that
remain in mankind of old original sin, of which Saint Paul so sore
co^playneth in his Epistle to the Romans. And yet may we not pray while we
stand in this life, to haue^ this kind of tribulacion utterly taken from us.
For it is left us by gods ordinance to strive against it, and fight wythal,
and by reason and grace to master it and use it for the matter of our merit.
For the salvation of our soul, may we boldly pray. For grace may we boldly
pray, for faith, for hope and for charity, and for every such virtue as shall
serve us to heaven w^rd. But as for all other things before remembered, in
which is contained the matter of every kind of tribulacion, we may never well
make prayers so presysely, but that we must express or employ a condition
therein: that is to wit, that if god see, ye contrary better for us, we
refer it whole to his will: and instead of our gr^efe taking away, pray
that god may send us of his goodness either spiritual comfort to take it
gladly, or strength at the least ways, to bear it patiently. For if we
determine with our self that we will take no comfort in nothing, but in the
taking of our tribulacion from us, tha^ either prescribe we to god that we will
he shall no better turn do us though he would, than we will our self appointe
him, or else do we declare, yt what thing is best for us, our self ca^ better
tell than he. And therefore I say, let us in tribulacion desyer his comfort
and help, and let us remitte the manner of that coumforte unto his own high
pleasure: which when we do, let us nothing doubt, but that like as his
high wisdom better sees what is best for us, than we can see our self: so
shall his souereygne goodness give us the thing that shall in deed be best. For
else if we will presume to stand to our own choice (except it so be) that god
offer us she choice him self, as he did to David in the choice of his own
punishment. after his high pride conceived in the nombrynge of his people, we
may folishely chose the wors^e: and by the prescribing unto god our self so
precyselye what we will that he shall do for us (except that of his gracyous
favor he reject our folly) he shall for indignacion grant us our own
request, and after shall we well find that it shall turn us to harm. How
many me^ attain health of body that were better for their souls health their
bodies were sick still? How many get out of prison yt hap on such harm
abroad, as ye prison should have kept the^ fro? How mani yt have been loathe to
lose their worldly goods, have in kepinge of their goods sone after lost
their life? So bli^d is our mortality and so unware what will fall, so unsure
also what manner mind we will have to morrow, yt god could not lightlye do man a
more vengeance, than in this world to grant him his own folishe wyshes. What
wit have we poor fools to wit what will serve us, wha^ ye blessed apostle him
self in his sore tribulacion, praying thryse unto god to take it away from him,
was answered again by god, ^n a manner yt he was but a fool in asking that
request, but yt the help of gods grace in yt tribulacion to strength him,
was far better for him tha^ to take ye tribulacion from him. And therefore by
experience perceiving well the truth of ye lesson, he gives us good warning not
to be to bold of our own minds, when we require ought of god not to be precyse
in our askinges, but refer the choice to god at his own pleasure. For his
own holy spryte so sore desires our weal, yt as men might say, he groneth
for us, in such wise as no tongue can tell. Nos autem (says Saint Paul) quid
o^em us vtoportet, nessimus, sed ipse spiritus postulat pro nobis gemitibus
inenarrabilibus. We what we may pray for yt were behouable for us, can not
our self tell: but the sprite him self desires for us with unspeakable
gronynges, and therefore I say for conclusion of this point, let us never ask
of god precisely our own ease by delivering us from our tribulacio^, but pray
for his aid and comfort by, which ways him self shall best like, and than
may we take comfort of our own such request. For both be we sure that this
mind comes of god, and also be we very sure yt as he begins to work with
us, so (but if our self flytte from him) he will not fail to tarry with us,
and tha^ he dwelling with us, what trouble can do us harm? Si deus nobiscum quis
contra nos? If god be with us says saint Paul, who can stand against us?


The.vii. Chapter. A great comfort may be in tribulacion, that every
tribul^cion is, if we our self will, a thing either medicinable, or else more
then medicinable.
Vincent. YOu have good uncle well opened and declared the question y^ I
demanded you, yt is to wit, what manner of comfort a man might pray for in
triblacio^, and now proceed forth good uncle, and show us yet farther some
other spiritual comfort in tribulacion.


Anthony. This may be, thinks me good cousin great comfort in tribulacion,
that every trybulacion which any time falls unto us, is either sent to be
medicinable if men will so take it, or may become medicinable if men will so
make it, or is better tha^ medicinable, but if we will forsake it.


Vincent. Surely this is very comfortable if we may well perceive it.


Antony. These three things that I tell you, we shall consider thus: every
tribulacio^ yt we fall in, comes either by our own known deserving deed,
bringyng us thereunto as ye sycknes yt follows our intemperate surfayte, or the
prisonment or other punishment put upon a man for his heinous crime, or else is
it sent us by god without any certain deserving cause open and known unto
our self, either for punishment of some sins passed. Certainly we know not
for which, or for preserving us from some sins in which we were else like to
fall, or finally for no respect of the man's sin at al, but for ye proof of
his patience and increase of his merit. In all the former cases tribulacion is
(if he will) medicinable: in this last case of al it is better than medicinable.


The.viii. Chapter. The declaracion larger concerning them that fall in
tribulacion by their own known fault, and that yet such tribulacion is
medicinable.
Vincent. THis seems me very good good, uncle, saving yt it seems somewhat
brief and short, and thereby me thinks somewhat obscure and da^ke.


Anthony. We shall therefore to give it light withal touch every member somewhat
more at large: One member is you wot^ well of the^ yt fall in tribulacio^ through
their own certain well deserving deed open and known unto the^ self, as where
we fall in a sickness, following upon our own glotonous feastyng, or a man that
is punyshed for his own open fault. These tribulacions lo, and such other
like, albeit that they may seem dyscomfortable in that a man may be sorye to
think him self the cause of his own harm: yet has he good cause of comfort
in the^, if he consydre that he may make them medicinable for him (if him
self will.) For where as there was dew to that sin (except it were pourged
here) a far greater punisheme^t after this world in an other place: This
wordly trybulacio^ of pain and punishment, by gods good provision for him
put upon him here in this world before, shall by the mean of Christ's passion
(if the man will in true faith and good hope, by meke and pacient sufferance of
his tribulacion so make it) serve him for a sure medicine to cure him and
clearly dyscharge him of all the sickness and disease of those pains, that else
he should suffer after. For such is the great goodness of almighty god, that
he punishes not one thing twyse. And albeit so that this punishment is put
unto ye man, not of his own eleccyon and fre choice, but so by force as he
would feign avoid it, and falls in it aginst his will, and therefore scantly
worthy no thank: yet so far passes the great goodness of god the poor
imperfect goodness of man, yt though me^ make their rekening one here with an
other: such, god yet of his high bou^tye in man's accoumpte toward him,
allows it for otherwise. For though a man fall in his pain by his own
fault, and also first against his will, yet as soon as he confesses his
fault, and applies his will to be content to suffer that pain and punishment
for the same, and waxes sorry, not for yt only that he shall sustayn such
punishment: but for yt also, that he has offended God, and thereby deserved
much more. Our lord from yt time counts it not for pain taken against his
will, but it shall be a merueilous good medicine, and work as a willingly taken
pain the purgacion and clensing of his soul with gracious remission of his
sin, and of the far greater pain, yt else had been prepared therefore
peradventure in hell for ever. For many there are undoubtedly that would else
drive forth and dye in their deadly sin, which yet in such tribulacio^ feling
their own fraylety so effectually, and the false flatte^ing world failing the^,
so fully turn goodly to god, and call for mercy, and by grace make virtue of
necessity, and make a medicine of their maladi, taking their trouble mekely,
and make a right godly end. Consider well the story of Acham that committed
sacrilege at ye great city of Hierico whereupon god took a great vengeance
upon the children of Israel, and after told the^ the cause, and bad the^ go
seek the fault and try it out by lottes, when the lot fell upon the very man
that did it, being tried by the falling first upon his trybe, and than upon his
house, and finally upon his person: he might well see that he was deprehended,
and taken against his will, but yet at ye good exhortacio^ of Iosue, saying unto
him. Fili mi, da gloriam deo Israel, and confitere and indica mihi quid feceris
and neabscondas. Mine own son, give glory to ye god of Israel, and confess
and show me what thou have done, and hide it not. He confessed humbly the
theft, and mekely took his death therefore, and had, I doubt not, both
strength and comfort in his pain, and died a very good man (which if he had
never come in tribulacio^ had been in perel never hapli to have had just
remorce thereof in all his whole life, but might have died wrechedly and gone to
ye devil eternally, and thus made this thief a good medicine of his well
deserved pain and tribulacio^. Consider y^ well converted thief y^ honge on
Christ's right hand, did not he (by his meke sufferau^ce and humble knowledge of
his fault asking forgeuenes of god and yet co^te^t to suffer for his si^) make
of his just punishment and well deserved trybulacio^, a very good special
medicine to cure him of all pain in the other world, and wyn him eternal
salvation: and thus I say, yt this kind of tribulacio^ though it seem ye most
base and the least comfortable, is yet (if ye man will so make it) a very
marvelous holesom medicine and may therefore be to ye man yt will so consider it,
a great cause of comfort and spiritual consolacion.


The.ix. Chapter. The second point, that is to vvitte, that tribulacion that is
sent us by God without any open certain deserving cause known to our
self, and this kind of tribulacion is medicinable if men will so take it^ and
therefore great occasion of comfort.
Vincent. UErely mine uncle, this first kind of tribulacion have you to my
mind opened sufficiently, and therefore I pray you resort now to the second.


Anthony. The second kind was you wot well of such tribulacio^ as is so sent
us by god, yt we know no certain cause deserving yt present trouble as we
certainly know yt upon such a surfit we fell in such a sickness, or as ye thief
knows y^ for such a certain theft he is fallen into such a certain
punisheme^t: but yet since we seldom lack faults against god, worthy and well
deserving great punishment: in deed we may well think, and wisdom it is so to
do, that with sin we have deserved it, and that god for some sin sende^h it
though we certainly know not our self for which, and therefore as yet thus
farforth is this kind of tribulacio^ somewhat in effect in comfort to be taken
like unto ye other: for this as you se if we thus will take it, well reckening it
to be sent for sin and suffering it mekely therefore, i^ medicinable against ye
pain in the other world to come, for our sins in this world passed: which
is as I showed you^ a cause of right great comfort. But yet may tha^ this kind
of tribulacio^ be to some me^ of more sober living, and thereby of y^ more clear
conscience so^what a little more comfortable: for though they may none otherwise
re^kin them self tha^ sinners (. For as Saint Paul says. Nulliu^ mihi consius
sum se^ non in hoc iustificatus sum. My conscience grudgeth me not of any
thing, but yet am I not thereby justified. And as Saint Iho^ says. Si dixerimus
quia pecc^tum non habemus, ipsi nos seducimus and veritas in nohis non est. If
we say yt we have no sin in us, we beguyle our self and troth is there not in
us) yet for as much as ye cause is to: the^ not so certain as it is to ye other
before remembered in ye first kind, and yt it is also certain yt god so^time
se^deth tribulacio^ for kepi^g and preserving a man from such sin, as he should
else fall in, and sometime also for exercise of their patience and increase of
merit: great cause of increase in comfort have those folk of the clearer
conscience in the feruoure of their tribulacion, in that they make the comfort
of a double medicine, and of that is the kind which we shall finally speak of
that I ^al better than medicinable, but as I have before spoken of this kind of
tribulacio^ how it is medicinable in yt it cures ye sin passed, and
purchases remission of ye pain dew therefore, so let us somewhat consider how
this tribulacion sent us by god is medicinable, in yt it preserves us from ye
sins into which w^ were else like to fall, if yt thing be a good medicine yt
restores us our health when we lose it: as good a medicine must this needs be
yt preserves our health while we have it, and suffers us not to fall into ye
painful siknes yt must after drive us to a painful plaster. Now sees god
so^time yt worldly wealth is with one (yt is yet good) coming upon him so fast
that for seeing how much weight of worldly wealth the man may beare^ and how
much will ouercharge him, and enhaunce his heart up so hie, ye grace should fall
from him. Lo, god of his goodness I say preue^teth his fall, and sends him
tribulacio^ betime while he is yet good to garre him ken his maker, and by
less liking y^ false flattering world, set a cross upon ye ship of his heart,
and bear a low sail thero^, yt ye boisterous blast of pr^de blow him not
under ye water. Some young lovely lady lo, yt is yet good enough, god sees a
storm come toward her, yt would (if her health and her fat feding should a
little longer last) strike her into some letcherous love, and i^ stead of her
old acquainted knight lay her a bed with a new acquaynted knave. But god loving
her more te^derly tha^ to suffer her fall into such shameful beastly sin,
sends her in season a goodly fair fervent fever, yt makes her bones to
rattel and wastes away her wanto^ flesh^ and bewtifieth her fair fell, with ye
color of a kightes claw, and makes her look so lovely, yt her lover would
have little lust upon her, and make her also so lusty^ yt if her lover lay in
her lap she should so sore long to break unto him ye very bottom of her
stomach, that she should not be able to refrain it from him, but sodeinly lay
it al in his neck. Did not as I before showed you ye blessed apostle himself
confess yt ye high reuelacio^s yt god had given him, might have enhau^ced hi^
into such high pride, yt he might have caught a foul fall, had not ye prouide^t
goodness of god provided for his remedi? And what was his remedy, but a painful
tribulacio^, so sore yt he was feign thrice to call to god to take ye tibulacio^
from him: and yet would not god grant his request, but let him lie so long
therin^ till him self yt saw more in Saint Paul the^ saint Paul saw in
himself wist well ye time was come in which he might well without his harm take
it from him: and^ thus you se good Cousin, that tribulacion is double medicine,
both a cure of the sin passed, and a preseruatiu^ fro the sin yt is to
come. And therefore in this kind of tribulacion is there good occasion of double
comfort: but that is (I say) diversely to sundry diverse folks, as their own
conscience is with syn combred or clear. Howbeit I will advise no man to be so
bold as to think yt their tribulacion is sent them to keep them fro the pride
of their holiness. Let men leave that kind of comfort hardly to Saint Paul,
till their living be like: but of the remnaunt may men well take great comfort
and good beside.


The.x. Chapter. Of the third kind of tribulacion which is not sent a man
for his sin, but for exercise of his patience and increase of his merit,
which is better than medicinable.
Vincent. THe third kind uncle that remains now behind, that is to wit,
which is sent to a man by god, and not for his sin, neither committed, nor
which would else come, and therefore is not medicinable, but sent for exercise
of our patience, and increase of our merit: and therefore better than
medicinable, though it be as you say, and as in deed it is better for the man
tha^ any of ye other two kinds in another world, where their reward shall be
receued: yet can I not se by what reason a man may in this world where the
tribulacio^ is suffered, take any more comfort therein, than in any of the other
twain that are sent a man for his sin: since he can not here know, whether it
be sent him for sin before committed, or sin that else should fall, or for
increase of meri^e and reward after to come. Namelye since every man has cause
enough to fear and think y^ his sin already passed has deserved it, and
that it is not without peril a man to think otherwise.


Anthon^. This yt you say Cousin, has place of truth, in far the most part of
me^, and therefore must they not e^^y nor disdain (since they may take in their
tribulacio^, consolacion for their part sufficient) yt some other that more be
worthy, take yet a great deal more. For as I told you Cousin, though ye best
man must co^f^sse himself a sinner, yet be there many me^ (though to the number
few) yt for ye kind of their living, and thereby y^ clerenes of their co^sci^nce
may well and without sin have a good hope y^ god se^deth the^ some great grief
for exercise of their patience, and for increase of their merit, as it
appears not only by. S. Paul, in ye place before remembered: but also by y^
holy man Job, which in sundry places of dispicio^s with his burdenous
co^forters, let not to sai, that y^ clerenes of his own conscience declared
and showed to himself yt he deserved not ye sore tribulacio^ yt he tha^ had:
howbeit as I told you before, I will not advise eueri man at au^^ture to be bold
upon this manner of comfort. But yet some me^ I know, such as I durst (for
their more ease and comfort in their great and grievous pains) put the^ in
right good hope, yt god se^deth it unto the^: not so much for their punishment,
as for exercise of their pacyence. And some tribulacions are there also yt grow
upon such causes, yt in those cases I would never let, but alwai would without
any doubt, give yt counsel and comfort to any man.


Vincent. What causes good uncle be those?


Anthony. Mary Cousin, whersoeuer a man falls in tribulacio^ for ye
maintenau^ce of justice, or for ye defense of gods cause. For if I should hap
to find a man yt had long lived a very verteous life, and had at y^ last happed
to fall into the Turks hands and there did abide by the truth of his faith,
and with the suff^ing of al kind of torments taken upon his body still did
teach and testify the truth if I should in his passion give him spiritual
comfort might I be bold to tell him no farther, but that he should take
patience in his pain, and that god sends it him for his sin, and that he is
well worthy to have it although it were yet much more: he might the^ well answer
me, and such other co^forters, as Job a^swered his. Onerosi consolatores estis
vos. Eurdenous and heavy co^forters be you. Nay I would not fail to bid hi^
boldly, while I should se him in his passion, cast sin and hell and purgatory
and al upon y^ devils pate, and dout not but like as if he gave over his hold,
al his merit were lost and he turned to misery: so if he s^and and persevere
still in the confession of his faith all his whole pain shall turn all into
glory. Ye more shall I yet say the^ this: y^ if there were a chris^en man, that
had among those infidels^ committed a very deadly crime, such as were worthy
death, not by their laws only, but by Chrstes to, as ma^slaughter, or adultry,
or such other thing like, if when he were taken, he were offered pardon of his
life, upon condition yt he^ should forsake ye faith of Christ: if this man
would now rather suffer death tha^ so do, should I comfort hi^ in his pain, but
as I would a malefactor: Nay this man though he should have dyed for his sin,
dies now for Christ's sake, while he might live still if he would forsake him.
The bare pacient taking of his death, should have served for ye satisfaccio^ of
his sin through ye merit of Christ's passion, I mean without help of which no
pain of our own could be satisfactory. But now shall Christ for his forsaki^g of
his own life, in ye honor of his faith, forgive ye pain of al his sins, of
his mere liberality, and accept all the pain of his death, for merit of
reward in heaven, and shall assign no part thereof to the paime^t of his debt in
purgatory, but shall take it al as an offering, and requite it al with glory:
and this man among Christen men, al had he been before a devil, nothing
after would I doubt to take him for a Marter.


Vincent. Uerely good uncle me thinks this is said meruelously well, and it
specially deliteth and comfort me to hear it, because of our principal
fear that I first spoke of the Turks cruel incursion into this country of
ours.


Anthony. Cousin, as for ye matter of that fear I purpose to touch last of al:
nor I meant not here to speak thereof, had it not been for the vehemency of
your obieccion brought it in my way. But rather would I else have put some
exaumple for this place, of such as suffer tribulacions for maintenau^ce of
right and justice, and that rather chose to take harm, than do wrong in any
manner of matter. For surely if a man may (as in deed he may) have great
comfort in the clerenes of his conscience, that has a false crime put upon
him, and by false witness proved upon him, and he falsely punished, and put to
worldly shame and pain therefore: an hundredth times more cou^fort may he have
in his heart, that where white is called black, and right is called wrong,
abides by the truth and is persecuted for justice.


Vincent. Than if a man sewe me wrongfully for my own land in which my self
have good right, it is a comfort yet to defend it well, sith god shall give
me thank therefore.


Antony. Nay nay Cousin nay, there walk you somewhat wide: for there you
defend your own right for your temporal avail: and sith S. Paul
counsayleth, Non vosmet defendentes charissimi. Defend not your self my most
dear friends. And our savior cou^sayleth. Si qui vult tecum iudicio
contendere and tunic^^^ tuam totlere, dimitte ei and pallium. If a man will
strive with the at the law and take away thy coat, leave him thy gown to. The
defense therefore of our own right asks no reward. Say you speed well if you
geat leave, look hardely for no thanke^ But on the other side if you do as S.
Paul bids, Querentes non que sua sunt sed que aliorum. Seek not for your
own profit but for other folks: but defend therefore of pity a poor widow
or a poor fatherles child, and rather suffer sorrow by some strong extorcyoner
than suffer them take wrong. Or if you be a Judge and will have such zeal to
Justice that you will rather abide tribulacion by the malice of some mighty
man than judge wrong for his favor: such tribulacions lo be those that are
better than only medicinable, and every man upon whom they fall may be bold
so to recke^ the^: and in his deep trouble may well say to himself ye words yt
Christ has taught him for his comforte^ Beati misericorde^ quoniam
misericordiam consequentu^. Blessed be ye merciful men for they shall have
mercy given them. Beati qui persecutionem patiuntur propter iusticiam quoniam
ipsorum est regnum celorum. Blessed be they that suffer persecucyon for
Justice, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Hear is an high comfort lo for
them that are in the case. And in this case their own conscience can show yt
them and so may fulfill their hearts with spiritual joy that the pleasure
may far surmount the heaviness and the grefe of al their temporal trouble.
But gods nearer cause of faith against the Turks have yet a far passing
comfort that by mani degrees far excels this which as I have ^^^d I
purpose to treat last: and for this time this ^u^fiseth concerning the
special comfort that me^ may take in this third kind of tribulacion.


The.xi. Chapter. An other kind of comfort yet in the base kind of
tribul^cion sent for our sin.
Vincent. OF troth good uncle, albeit yt every of these kinds of ^ribulacions
have cause of comfort in the^ as you have well declared, if me^ will so considre
them: yet has this third kind above all a special prerogative therein.


Anthony. That is undoubtedly true, but yet is there not good Cosyn the most
base kind of them all, but that it has more causes of comfort then I have
spoken of yet. For I have you wot well in that kind that is sent us for our
sin, spoken of none other comfort yet but twayn: that is to wit, one that
it refrayneth us from the sin that else we would fall in, and in that serves
us through the merit of Christ's passion as a mean by which God keeps us
from hell, and serves for the satisfaccion of such pain as else we should
endure in purgatory. Howbeit there is therein an other great cause of joy
besides this: For surely those pains here sent us for our sins in whatsoever
wise they happen unto us, be our sin never so sore, nor never so open and
euidente unto our self and all the world to, yet if we pray for grace to
take it mekely and patiently, and confessing to god that it is far over little
for our fault, beseech him yet nevertheless yt since we shall come hence so
void of al good works whereof we should have any reward in heaven to be, not
only so merciful to us as to take that our present tribulacion in relief
of our pains in purgatory: but also so gracious unto us as to take our
patience therein for a matter of merit and reward in heaven. I verily trust,
and nothing doubt it, but God shall of his high bounty grant us our boon.
For likewise as in hell pain serves only for punishmente without any manner
of purgeyng, because all possibility of purgeyng is passed: and in purgatory
punishmente serves for only purgeing, because the place of deseruyng is
passed. So while we be yet in this world in which is our place and our
time of merit and well deseruyng, the trybulacyon that is sent us for our
sin here, shall if we faythfullye so desire (beside the clensyng and purgeyng
of our pain,) serve us also for increase of reward. And so shall I suppose and
trust in Gods goodness al such penance and good works as a man
willinglye performs enjoined by his gostlye father in confession, or which
he willinglye farther does of his own devotion beside. For though man's
penance with all the good works that he can do, be not able to satisfy of
them self for the least sin that we do, yet the lyberall goodness of God
through the merit of Christ's byt^er passion, without which all our works
could neither satisfy, nor deserve, nor yet do not in deed neither merit
nor satisfye so much as a sponefull to a great vessel full in comparyson of
the merit and satisfaccion that Christ has meryted and satysfied for us
himself: this lyberall goodness of GOD I say, shall yet at our faythefull
instaunce and request, cause our penance and tribulacion patiently taken in
this world to serve us in the other world both for release and reward
tempored after such rate as his high goodness and wisdom shall see conveniently
for us: whereof our blind mortalite can not here ymagine nor devise the stynt.
And thus has yet even the first kind of tribulacion and the most basse,
though not fully so great as the second, and very far less than the third
far greater cause of comfort yet, tha^ I spoke of before^


The.xii. Chapter. A certain obieccyon against the things aforesaid.
Vincent. Verily good uncle this lyketh me very well, but yet is there ye wot
well some of these things now brought in question, for as for any pain dew
fro our sin to be minished in purgatory by the paciente sufferaunce of our
tribulacion here, there are ye wot well many that utterly deny that and
affirm for a sure truth that there is no purgatory at all. And than is if
they say true, the cause of that comfort gone, if the comfort that we should
take be in vain and need not. They say ye wot well also, that men merit
nothing at al, but God gives all for faith alone, and that it were sin and
sacriled^e to look for reward in heaven either for our patience and glad
sufferyng for Gods sake, or for any other good deed: and than is there gone if
this be thus, the other cause of cure farther comfort too.


Antony. Cousin, if some things were as they be not, tha^ should some things
be as they shall not. I can not in deed say nay but that some men have of late
brought up some such opinions, and many more than these besides, and have
spread them abroad: and albeit that it is a right heavy thing to see such
varyaunces in our belief rise and grow among our self to the great
encoragyng of the common enemies of us all, whereby they have our faith in
derision, and catch hope to ouerwhelme us all, yet do there three things not
a little coumforte my mind.

The first is, that in some communicacions had of late together, has appeared
good likelihode of some good agremente to grow together in one accord of our
faith.

The second, that in the mean while till this may come to pass,
contencyons, despicyons, with uncharitable behauioure, is prohybited and
forbidden, in effect upon all parts: all such parts I mean as fell before
to fight for it.

The third is, that all Germany for all their diverse opynions, yet as they
agree together in profession of Christ's name, so agree they now together in
preparacion of a common power, in defense of Christendom against our common
enemy the Turk, and I trust to GOD, that this shall not only help us here
to strength us in this war, but also that as GOD has caused them to agree
together in the defense of his name, so shall he graciouslye bring them to agree
together in the truth of his faith. Therefore will I let GOD work and leave
of conten^cion: and nothing shall I now say, but that with which they that
are themself of the contrary mind, shall in reason have no cause to be
discontented. For first, as for purgatory though they think there be none,
yet sith they deny not that all the corpse of Chrystendome by so many hundredth
years have believed the contrary: and among them all, the old interpretours
of Scripture from the Apostles days down to our own time, of whom they
deny^ not many for holy Saynctes, that I dare not believe these men against
all those. These men must of their curtesye hold my poor fear excused, and
I beeseche our Lord heartelye for them, that when they depart out of this
wretched world, they find no purgatory at all, so GOD keep them from hell.
And as for the merit of man in his good works, neither are they that deny
it full agreed among themself, nor any manne is there almost of them all
that since they began to write, has not somewhat changed and varied from
himself: and for the more part are thus far agreed with us that like as we
grant them that no good work is ought worth to heaven ward without
faith, and that no good work of man is rewardable in heaven of his own
nature, but through the mere goodness of god, that lust to set so high a price
upon so poor a thing: and that this price god sets through Christ's
passion, and for that also that they be his own ^orkes with us. For good works
to godwarde woorketh no man without god work with him: and as we grant them
also that no man may be proud of his works for his own imperfect
woorkyng, and for that in all that manne may do, he can do god no good, but
is a servant unprofitable, and does but his bare duetye: As we I say grant
unto them these things, so this one thing or twain do they grant us again,
that men are bound to work good works if they have time and power: and
that whosoever woorketh in true faith most, shall be most rewarded. But than set
they thereto, that al his rewards shall be given him for his faith alone, and
nothing for his works at all, because his faith is the thing (they say)
that forces him to work well. Strive will I not with them for this matter
now, but yet this I trust to the great goodness of God, that if the question
hang on that narowe point, while Christ says in the Scripture in so many
places^ that men shall in heaven be rewarded for their works, he shall
never suffer our souls that are but mean witted men, and can understand
his words, but as himself has set them and as old holy Saints has
construed them before, and as all christen people this thousand year have
believed, to be damned for lack of perceiving such a sharp subtyle thing:
specially sith some men that have right good wits and are beside that right
well learned too, can in no wise perceive for what cause or why these folk
that fro good works take away the reward, and give the reward all whole to
faith alone: give the reward to faith rather than to charity. For this
grant they themself, that faith serves of nothing, but if she be companyed
with her sister charity. And then says the Scripture too, Fides, spes,
charitas, tria he^, mayor autem horum, est charitas. Of these three virtues,
faith, hope, and Charytye, of all these three, the greateste is Charity, and
therefore as woorthye thank as faith. Howebeit as I said, I will not strive
therefore, nor in deed as our matter stands, I shall not greatelye need. For
if they say that he which suffers tribulacion or martyrdom for the faith,
shall have high reward, not for his work, but for his well working faith: yet
sith that they grant that have it he shall, the cause of high coumforte in
the third kind of trybulacion stands, and that is you wot well the effect
of all my purpose.


Vincent. Uerely good uncle this is truly drieuen and tried unto the
vttermoste as it seems me. And therefore I pray you proceed at your pleasure.


The xiii. Chapter. That a man ought to be comfo^table to himself and have
good hope and be joyful also in tribulacion, appears well by this, that a man
has great cause of fear and heaviness that continues alvvay still in wealth,
discontinued with no tribulacion^
Anthony. Cousin, it were a long work to peruse every comfort that a man may
well take of tribulacion. For as many comfortes you wot well may a man take
thereof, as there be good commodities therein: and that there be surely so
many, that it would be very long to rehearse and treat of them. But me
seems we cannot lightly better perceive what profit and commodity, and
thereby what comfort the^ may take of it that have it, than if we well consider
what harm the lack is, and thereby what discomfort the lack thereof should be
to them that never have it: So is it now that all holy men agree, and all
the Scripture is full, and our own experience proves at our iye, that we be
not come into this wretched world to dwell here, nor have not as Saint Paul
says, our dwelling City here: but we be sekyng for that City that is to
come, and therefore Saint Paul shows us that we do seek for it as they
that are good folk, and feign would come thither do. For surely whosoever
sets so little thereby that he lysteth not to seek therefore: it will I
fear me be long ere he come thereat, and merueylous great grace if he ever
come thither. Sic ^urrite, says Saint Paul Vt comprehendatis. Run so that
you may geat it: If it must than be gotten with runnyng, when shall he come at
it that list not step toward it? Now because that this world is as I tell
you, not our eternal dwelling, but our little while wanderyng, God would that
we should in such wise use it, as folk that were wearye of it, and that we
should in this veil of labor, toil tears and myserye, not look for rest
and ease, game, pleasure, wealth and felicytye. For they that so do, fare
like a fond fellow, that going toward his own house where he should be
wealthye, would for a tapsters pleasure beecome an hostler by the way, and
dye in a stable, and never come at home. And would GOD that those that drown
them self in the desire of this worlds wretched wealth, were not yet more
fools than so. But alas their folly as far passes the foolyshenesse of that
other fond fellow, as there is dystaunce beetwene the heyghte of heaven and
the veraye depth of hell. For our Sauyoure says. Ve vobis qui ridetis nunc,
quia lugebitis and flebitis. Woe may you be that laughe now, for you shall
wayle and weep. Est tempus flendi, (says the Scripture) and est tempus
ridendi. There is time of weeping and there is time of laughyng. But as you see,
he sets the weping time before, for that is the time of this wretched
world, and the laughing shall come after in heaven. There is also a time of
sowyng and a time of reapyng too. Now must we in this world sow, that we
may in the other world reap: and in this short sowyng time of this weeping
world, must we water our sede with the showers of our tears, and then
shall we have in heaven a merye laughyng harueste for ever. Euntes ibant and
flebant (says the Prophet,) mittentes semina sua. They went forth and sowed
their seeds weeping, but what says he shall follow thereof. Venie^tes autem
venient cum exultacione po^ta^tes manipulos suo^. They shall come again more
than laughing, with great joy and exultacion, with their hands full of corn
in their hands. Lo, they that in their going home toward heaven, sow their
sede with weeping, shall at the day of judgment come to their bodies again,
with everlasting plentye laughyng. And for to prove that this life is no
laughyng time, but rather the time of weeping: we find that our Savior
himself weped twyse or thryse, but never find we that he laughed so much as
once. I will not swear that he never did, but at ye least wise he left us no
ensample of it. But on the other side, he left us ensaumple of weping. Of
weeping have we matter enough. both for our own sins and for other folks
too: for surely so should we do, bewail their wretched sins, and not be
glad to detracte them nor envy them neither. Alas selye souls, what cause is
there to envy them that are ever wealthye in this world, and ever out of
tribulacyon? which as (Job says.) Du^unt in bo^is dies suos, and in puncto
ad inferna descendunt. Lead all their days in wealth, and in a momente of an
hour descend into their grave and be paynefullye buried in hell. Saint
Paul says unto the Hebrews that GOD (those that he loves) he chastyseth. Et
flagellat omnem filium quem recipit. And he scourges every son of his that
he receives. Sayncte Paul says also. Per multas tr^bulaciones oportet nos
introire in regnum dei. By many trybulacyons must we go into the kingdom of
GOD. And no marvel, for our Savior Christ said of him self unto his two
dysciples that were going into the castle of Emaus. An nesciebatis quia
oportebat Christum pati, and sic introire in regnum su^m? Know you not that
Christ must suffer and so go into his kingdom? and would we that are
servants look for more privilege in our Masters house, than our Master
him self? Would we ^eat into his kingdom with ease, when he himself got not
into his own but by pain? His kingdom has he ordained for his discyples, and
he says unto us all. Qui v^lt esse meus discipulus, tollat crucem suam and
sequatur me. Y^ any manne will be my disciple, let him learn at me to do
as I have done, take his cross of trybulacion upon his back and follow me. He
says not here lo, let him laughe and make merye. Now if heaven serve but
for Christ's dysciples, and they be those that take their cross of
trybulacyon: when shall these folk come there that never have tribulacyon? And
if it be true that Saint Paul says, that GOD chastyseth all them that he
loves, and scourges every child whom he receives, and to heaven shall
none come, but such as he loves and receives: when shall they come thither
whom he never chastyseth, nor never does vouchesafe to fyle his hands upon
them, and give them so much as one lashe? And if we can not (as Saint Paul
says we can not) come to heaven, but by many trybulacions: how shall they
come thither than, that never have none at all? Thus see we well by the very
Scripture it self, how true the words are of old holy Saints, that with
one voice in a manner say al one thing, that is to wit, that we shall not have
both contynuall wealth in this world, and in the other too. And therefore,
sith they that in this world without any trybulacion enjoy their long
continual course of never interrupted prosperity, have a great cause of fear
and of discoumforte lest they be far fallen out of gods favor, and stand
deep in his indignacion and displeasure, while he never sends them
trybulacion, which he is ever wont to send them whom he loves. They
therefore, I say that are in trybulacion, have on the other side a great
cause to take in their gryefe great inward coumforte and spyrytuall
consolacion.


The.xiiii. Chapter. A certain obieccion, and the answer thereto.
Vincent. VErelye good uncle, this seems so in deed? howbeit, yet me think
you say very sore in some things, concerning such persons as are in
contynuall prosperity, and they be you wot well not a few, and those are
they also that have the rule and aucthoritye of this world in their hand. And
I wot well, that when they talk with such great connyng men, as can I
trow tell the truth: and when they ask them whyther (while they make merye
here in earth all their life) they may not yet for all that have heaven after
to: they do tell them, yes yes well enough. For I have heard them tell them so
my self.


Antony. I suppose good Cosyn that no very wise man, and specially none that
very good is therewith will tell any man fully of that fashyon: but surely such
as so say to them, I fear me that they flatter them either for lucre or fear.
Some of them think peradventure thus. This man makes much of me now, and
gives me money also to fast and watch and pray for him: but so I fear me
would he do no more if I should go tell him now that all that I do for him
will not serve him but if he go fast and watch and pray for himself to.
For if I should set thereto and say farther that my diligente intercession
for him, should I trust (be ye mean) that god should the sooner give him grace
to amend, and fast, and watch, and pray, and take affliccion in his own
body for the bettering of his sinful soul, he would be wondrous wroth with
that. For he would be loath to have any such grace at all as should make him to
leave of any of his mirth and so sit and mourn for his sin. Such mind as
this lo, have there some of those that are not unlearned and have worldly wit at
will, which tell great men such tales as perilously beguile them rather then
the flatterer that so tells them would with a treue tale ieoperd to lose his
lucre.

Some are there also that such tales tell them for co^sideracion of an other
fear. For seeing the man set sore on his pleasure that they despair any
amendment of him whatsoever they should show him, and tha^ seeing also beside
that the man does no great harm, but of a gentle nature does some good me^
some good, they pray god the^ self to send him grace, and so they let him lie
lame still in his fleshly lusts, Ad probati^^m piscinam expectantes aque
motum^ At the poole yt the gospel speaks of beside the temple wherein they
washed the sheep for the sacrifice: and they tarry to see the water stired. And
when his good Aungel coming from God shall once begin to styre the water of
his heart, and move him to ye lowly mekenes of a simple sheep: than if he call
them to him, they will tell him an other tale, and help to bear him and
plounge him into the poole of penance over ye hard ears: but in ye mean
while, for fear lest when he would wax never the better, he would wax much
the worse: and from gentle, smooth, sweet and curtice, wax angrye, roughe,
froward and sower: and thereupo^ be troublous and tedyous to the world to make
fair weather withal: they give him fair words for the while, and put him in
good comfort, and let him for the remnaunte stand at his own adventure. And
in such wise deal they with him as the mother does some time with her child:
which when the little boy will not rise in time for her, but lie still a bed
and slugge, and when he is v^ wepeth because he has lain so long, fearing to
be beaten at scole for his late coming thither: she tells him then that it is
but early days, and he shall come time enough, and byddeth him go good son
I warraunte thee, I have sent to thy master my self, take thy bread and
butter with thee, thou shalt not be beaten at all. And thus, so she may
send him merry forth at ye door that he weep not in her sight at home, she
studieth not much upon the matter though he be taken tardye and beaten when he
comes to scoole. Surely thus I fear me fare there many friars and states
chaplaynes to, in ^omforte giving to great men when they be loath to ^isplease
the^. I cannot commend their thus doing, ^ut surely I fear me thus they do.


The.xv. Chapter. Other obieccions.
Vincent. BUt yet good uncle, though some do thus, this answers not full ye
matter: for we see that the whole church in ye common service use diverse
collectes, in which al me^ pray specially for the princes and the prelates, and
generally every m^ for other and for him self to, that god would vouchesafe to
send the^ all perpetual health and prosperity. And I cannot see no good man
pray god send an other sorrow, nor no such prayers are put in ye priests
ports, as far as I can hea^e. And yet if it were as you say good uncle,
that perpetual prosperity were to the soul so perilous, and tribulacion
thereto so fruitful, than were as me seems, every man bou^de^ of charity,
not only to pray god send their neyghbor sorrow, but also to help thereto
themself, And when folk are sick, not pray god send the^ health, but when
they come to comfort them, they should say I am glad good gossep yt you be so
sick, I pray god keep you long therein, and neither should any man give any
medicine to an other, nor take any med^^ine himself neither: for by the
minishing of the tribulacion he takes away part of the profit from his
soul which can with no bodily profit be sufficientlye reco^pensed. And also
this wot you well good uncle, yt we read in holy scripture of men yt were
welthy and rich, and yet were good withal. Salomo^ was you wot well ye richest
and the most welthy king yt any man could in his time tell of, and yet was he
well-beloved with God. Job was also no beggar perdye, nor no wretch otherwise,
nor lost his riches and his wealth, for yt God would not that his friend should
have wealth but for the show of his pacyence to thencrease of his merit and
confusion of the devil, and for proof that prosperity may stand with gods
favor, Reddidit deus Job omnia duplicia. God restored him double of all that
ever he lost, and gave him after long life to take his pleasure long.

Abraham was eke you wot well a man of great substance, and so continued all
his life in honor and in wealth: yea, and when he dyed to he went unto such
wealth that Lazarus which died in tribulacion and poverty, the best place that
he came to was that rich man's bosom. Finally good uncle this we find at our
iye, and every day we prove it by plain experience, that many a man is right
welthy and yet therewith right good: and many a miserable wretch as evil as
he is wretched. And therefore it seems hard good uncle that between
prosperity and tribulacion the matter should go thus, that tribulacion should
be given always by god to those that he loves for a sign of salvation, and
prosperity sent for displeasure and a token of eternal damnacion.


The.xvi. Chapter. The aunsvvere to the obieccion.
Anthony. Either I said not Cosyn, or else meant I not to say, that for an
undoubted rule worldly prosperity were always displeasaunt to god, or
tribulacion evermore wholesome to every man. For well wot I that our lord
gives in this world unto either sort of folk, either sort of fortune.
E^facit solemn suum ori^i super bonos et malos, et pluit super iustos et
iniustos. He makes his sun to shine both upon the good and the bad, and his
rain to rain both on the just and on ^he unjust. And on the other side,
Flagellat omnem filium quem recipit: he scourges every son that he
receives. And yet he beats not only good folk that he loves, but Multa
flagella peccatoris too. There are many scourges for sinners also: he gives
evil folk good fortune in this world, both to call them by kindenes, and if
they thereby come not, the more is their unkindness: and yet where wealth will not
bring the^, he gives the^ sometime sorrow. And some yt in prosperity can not
to God crepe foreward, in tribulacio^ toward him they run a pace.
Multiplicate sunt infirmitates little postea accelerauerunt. Their infirmities
were multyplyed (says the Prophet) and after that they made has^e. To some
that are good men god sends wealth here also, and they give him great thank
for his gift, and he rewards them for ye thank to. To some good folk he
se^deth sorrow, and they thank him thereof to. If god should give the goods of
this world only to evil folk, tha^ would men wene y^ god were not the lord
thereof. If god would give ye goods only to good me^, tha^ would folk take
occasion to serve him but for them. Some will in wealth fall into folly. Homo
qum in honor esset non intellexit, comparatus est iumentis insipientibus, and
similis factus est ills. Wha^ man was in honor, his understanding failed him,
than was he compared with beasts and made like unto them. Some man with
tribulacion will fall into sin, and therefore says the prophet: Non relinquet
dominus virgam peccatorum super sortem iustorum, vt non ex^endant iustiad
iniquitatem manus suas. GOD will not leave the rod of wicked men upon the
lotte of righteous men, lest the righteous peradventure hap to extend and
stretche out their hands to iniquity. So say I not nay, but that in either
state, wealth or tribulacion may be matter of virtue and matter of vice also:
but this is the point lo, that stands here in question betewene you and me:
not whither every prosperyte be a perylous token, but whither continual wealth
in this world without any triblacion be a fearful sign of Gods
indignacion. And therefore this marcke that we must shoot at, set up well in
our sight, we shall now mete for the shoot and consider how near toward, or
how far of, your arrows are from the prick.


Vincent. Some of my boltes uncle will I take up my self, and pretely put them
under your belte againe^ For some of them I see well be not worth the metynge,
and no great merueyle, though I shoot wide while I somewhat mystake the mark.


Antony. Those yt make toward ye mark and light far to short, when ye shote
is meatte, shall I take up for you.

1 To prove that perpetual wealth shouldbe no evil token, you say first, that
for princes and prelates and every man for other, we pray all for perpetual
prosperyte, and that in the comen prayers of the church too.

2 Tha^ say you secondly that if prosperity were so perylous, and tribulacion
so profitable, every man ought then to pray god to send other sorrow.

3 Thirdely you furnishe your objections with ensa^ples of Solomon, Job, and
Abraham.

4 And fourthly in the end of al, you prove by experience of our own time
daily before our face, that some welthy folk are good, and some nedye very
naught. That las^e bolte I think lo, that sith I say the same my self, you
be content to take up, it lies so far wide.


Vincent. That will I with a good will uncle.


Anthony. Well, do so good Cousin, and we shall mete for the remanante. First
must you Cosyn be sure that you look well to the mark, and that can you not
do, but if you know what thing tribulacion is. For sith that it is one of
the chief things that we pryncypally speak of but if you consydre well what
that is, you may mysse the mark again. I suppose now that you will agree
that tribulation is every such thing as troubles and greueth a man either in
body or mind: and is, as it were the prick of a thorn a bramble or a bryre
thrust into his flesh or into his mind: and su^rly Cousin the prick that very
sore pricketh the mind as far almost passes in pain the grief that
payneth the body, as does a thorn that styckyng in the heart, pass and
excede in pain, the thorn that is thruste in the hele.

Now Cousin if tribulacion be this that I call it, than shall you sone consider
this, that there be more kinds of tribulacion, than you peradventure thought on
before. And there upon it follows also, that sithe every kind of trybulacion
is an interrupcion of wealth and prosperity, (which is but of wel^h, an other
name) may be discontinewed by more ways than you would before have went: Than
say I this unto you Cousin, that sith tribulacion is not only such panges as
pain the body, but every trouble also that greueth the mind, many good men
have many tribulacyons that every man markethe not, and consequently their
welthe interrupted therewythe when other me^ are not ware. For trow you Cousin
that the temptacyons of the devil the world and the flesh solicyting the
mind of a good man unto sin, is not a great inward trouble and secret
grief to his heart. To such wretches as care not for their conscience, but
like unreasonable beasts follow their foul affeccions, many of these
temptacio^s be no trouble at all, but matter of their bodily pleasure. But unto
him Cousin that stands in dread of god, tribulacion of temptacio^ is so
paynefull, that to be rydde therof^ or sure of the victory therein (be his
substance never so great) he would gladly give more then half. Now if he that
cares not for god think this trouble but a trifle, and with such tribulacion
prosperity not interrupted: let him cast in his mind if him self hap upon
a fervent longing for the thing which geat he cannot (as a good man will not)
as percase his pleasure of some certain good woman that will not be naught, and
than let him tell me whether the ruffle of his desire shall so torment his mind,
as all the pleasures that he can take beside, shall for lack of yt one, not
please him of a pynne. And I dare be bold to warraunte him that the pain in
resisting, and ye great fear of falling y^ many a good man has in his
temtacio^, is an anguishe and a grief every deal as great as his.

Now say I farther Cousin, that if this be true, as in very deed true it is,
that such trouble is tribulacio^, and thereby consequently an interrupcio^ of
prosperous wealth: no man precysely means to pray for other to keep him in
continual prosperity without any manner of disco^tinua^ce or change in this
world, so y^ prayer without other co^dicio^ added or employed, were inordinate
and were very childishe. For it were to pray yt either they should never have
te^ptacio^, or else if yt they had they might follow it and fulfill their
affeccio^. Who dare good Cousin for shame or for sin for him self, or for
any man else make this manner kind of prayer? Besides this Cousin ye church you
wot well advises every man to fast and watch, and prai, both for tami^g of
his fleshly lusts, and also to mourn and lament for his sin before
committed and to bewail his offenses done against god, and as they did at the
city of Niniue, and as the prophet David did for their sin put affliccion
to their flesh, and when a man so does Cousin, is this no tribulacion to
him because he does it himself? For I wot well you would agree that it
were, if an other man did it against his will. Than is tribulacion, you wot
well tribulacion still, though it be taken well in worth: yea and though it
be taken to with very righ^ good will, yet is pain you wot well pain, and
therefore s^ is it though a man do it himself. Than since the chur^he
advises every manne to take tribulacion for his sin, whatsoever words you
find in any prayer, they never mean (you may be fast and sure) to pray
god keep every good manne nor every badde man nether, from every manner kind
of tribulacio^. Now he that is not in some kind of tribulacion, as
peradventure in sicknes^ or in loss of goods, is not yet out of tribulacion,
if he have his ease of body or of mind unquieted and thereby his welthe
interrupted with an other kind of tribulacion^ as is either temptacion to a
good man, or voluntarye affliccion: either of body by penance, or of mind by
contricion and heaviness for his syn and offense against god. And thus I say, yt
for precise perpetual welthe and prosperity in this world, yt is to say, for
the perpetual lack of all trouble and al tribulacion, there is no wise man
that either prays for himself or for any man else, and thus answer I your
first obieccio^. Now before I meddle with your second your third will I join to
this. For upon this answer, will ye solucio^ of your ensa^ples co^uenie^tly
depend. As for Salomo^ was as you sai al his days a merueilous welthy king,
and much was he beloved with god, I wot well in yt beginning of his reign: but
yt the favor of god perseuered him, as his prosperity did yt cannot I tell. And
therefore will I not warrant it, but surely we se yt his continual wel^h^ made
him fall first into such wanto^ foli, in multiplying wives to an horrible
noumber, contrary to the commandment of god, given in the law of Moses:
and secondly taking to wife among other, such as were infidels contrary to an
other commandment of gods written law also, that finallye by the mean of his
miscreant wife, he fell into maintenau^ce of Idolatry himself: and of this find
we no amendment or repentance, as we find of his father. And therefore though he
were buried where his father was, yet whether he went to the rest that his
father did^ through some secret sorrow for his sin at last, yt is to say, by
some kind of tribulacion, I cannot tell: and am content therefore to trust well,
and pray god he did so, but surely we be not sure and therefore then sample of
Salomo^ can very little serve you, for you might as well lay it for a proof, yt
god favors Idolatry, as yt he favors prosperitye: for Salomo^ was you
wot well in both. As for Job, since our question ha^geth upon prosperity
perpetual, y^ welthe of Job yt was with so great adversity so sore interrupted,
can as your self sees serve you for no ensample. And yt god gave him here in
this world al thing double that he lost, little touches my matter, which deny
not prosperity to be gods gift, and given to sum good me^ too: namely such as
have tribulacio^ too. But in Abraham Cosi^ I suppose is al your chief hold,
because yt you not only show riches and prosperity perpetual in hi^ throw ye
course of al his whole life in this world, but yt after his death also. La^are
yt poor man yt lived in tribulacio^, and died for pure hunger and thirst, had
after his death his place of comfort and rest in Abraham ye welthy rich man's
bosom. But here must you consider yt Abraham had not such continual
prosperity, but yt it was disco^tinued with diverse tribulacio^s.

1 Was it not^i^g to him trow you, to leave his own country, and at gods
sending to go into a strange land, which god promised him and his sede for
ever? but in all his whole life he gave himself never a foot.

2 Was it no trouble. y^ his Cousin Loath and himself were fain to part company,
because their servants could not agree together?

3 Though he recovered Loath again from ye.iii. kings, was his taking no
trouble to him trow you in the mean while?

4 Was the destruccio^ of the five cities no heaviness to his heart? A man would
wene yes that redeth in ye story what labor he made to save them.

5 His heart was I dare say in no little sorrow, when he was feign to let
Abimelech ye king have his wife, who^ (though god provided to keep undefiled
and turned al to wealth) yet was it no little woe to him in the mean time.

6 What continual grief was it to his heart many a long day that he had no
child of his own bodi begotten? he that doubts thereof shall find it in
Genesis of his own moon made to god.

7 No man doubts but Ismael was great comfort unto him at his birth, and
was it no grief than, when he must cast out the mother and the child both?

8 Isaac that was the child of Promyssyon: although god kept his life, that
was unlooked for, yet while the loving father bound him and went about to
behead him, and offer him up in sacrifice, who but himself can conceive what
heaviness his heart had tha^? I would wene in my mind (because you speak of
lazare) that lazars own death panged him not so sore. Tha^ as laza^us pain
was patiently borne, so was Abraham's taken not only pacientely^ (but which is
a thing much more meritorious) of obedience willingly. And therefore, though
Abraham had not as he did in deed far excel lazare in merit of reward, for
many other things beside, and specially for that he was a special Patriarche
of the faith, yet had he far passed him, even by the merit of tribulacion
well taken here for gods sake to. And so serves for your purpose no man less
then Abraham. But now good Cousin, let us look a little longer here upon the
rich Abraham and lazare the poor, and as we shall see lazare set in wealth
some what under the rich Abraham: so shall we se another rich man lie full
low beneath lazare crying and calling out of his fyrie couche, that lazare
might with a drop of water falling from his fingers end, a little cool and
refresh the tippe of his burning tongue. Consider well now what Abraham
answered to the rich wretch. Fili recordare quia recepisti bona in vita tua
and lazarus similiter mala, nune autem hic consolatur, tu vero cruciaris.
Son, remember that thou have in thy life received welthe, and lazare in like
wise pain, but now receives he comfort, and thou sorrow, pain and torment.
Christ describes his wealth and his prosperity, gaye and soft apparel
with royal delicate fare, continuallye day by day. Epulabatur (says our
Savior)^ quotidie splendide. He did fare royally eueri day, his wealth was
continual, lo no time of tribulacion between. And Abraham tells him the same
tale that he had taken his wealth in this world, and Lazarus likewise his pain:
and that they had now changed each to ye clean contrary: poor Lazar from
tribulacion into wealth, and the rich man from his continual prosperity into
perpetual pain. Here was laid expresselye to Lazare no very great virtue by
name nor to this rich glotton no great heinous crime, but the taking of his
continual ease and pleasure without any tribulacio^ or grief, whereof grew
sloth and negligence to think upon the poor man's pain. For that ever him
self saw Lazarus and wist him dye for hunger at his door yt laid neither
Christ nor Abraham to his charge. And therefore Cousin this story lo of which by
occasion of Abraham and Lazare you put me in remembrance, well declares
what perell is in continual worldly wealth, and contrarywyse what comfort
comes of tribulacion. And thus as your other ensamples of Solomon and Job
nothing for the matter further you: So your ensample of rich Abraham and poor
Lazarus have not a little hindered you.


The.xvii. Chapter. An answer to the second obieccion.
Vincent. SUrely uncle you have shaken mine ensamples sore, and have in your
meting of your shoot removed me these arrows: me thinks farther of fro the
prycke then me thought they stacke when I shot them. And I shall therefore now
be content to take them up again. But yet me seems surely that my second
shalt may stand. For of truth if every kind of tribulacion be so
profitable that it be good to have it as you say it is, I cannot see wherefore
any man should either wyshe, or pray, or any manner of thing do, to have any
kind of tribulacion wythdrawen either from himself, or any friend of his.


Anthony. I think in very dead tribulacion so good, and profitable, that I
should happily doubt as you do: wherefore, a man might labor or pray to
be delivered of it, saving that God, which teaches us ^he one, teaches us
also the other. And as he bidde^h us take our pain patiently, and exhort
our neighbors to do also the same: so byddeth he us also not let to do
our devour to remove the pain from us both. And then when it is god that
teaches both, I shall not need to break my brain, in devising wherefore he
would bydde us to do both, the tone seming to resist the other. If he send
the scourge of scarcity and of great famine, he will we shall bear it
patiently: but yet will he that we shall eat our meat when we can hap to
geat it. If he send us the plage of pestilence, he will we shall patiently
take it, but yet will he that we let us blud, and lay plai^ters to draw it,
and ripe it, and lance it, and geat it away. Both these points teaches God
in Scripture, in more than many places. Fasting is better than eating, and more
thank has of God, and yet will God that we shall eat. Praying is better than
drinkyng, and mu^he more pleasant to god, And yet will God that we shall
drink. Waking in good busynes is much more acceptable to God the^ sleping,
and yet will god that we shall sleep. God has given us our bodies here to
keep, and will that we may^tayne them to do him service with, till he send
for us hence. Now can we not tell surely how much tribulacyon may mar it^
or peradventure hurt the soul also: wherefore the Apostle, after that he had
commanded the Corinthians to deliver to the devil the abominable fornicator,
that forbear not the bed of his own fathers wife: yet after that he had been
a while accursed and punished for his sin, the Apostle commanded them
charitablye to receive him again, and give him consolacion. Vt non a
magnitudine doloris absorbeatur that the greatness of his sorrow should not
swalowe him up. And therefore when God sends the tempeste, he will that the
ship men shall geat them to their tackelyng, and do the best they can for
them self, that the seas eat them not up: for help our selfs as well as we
can, he can make his plage as sore and as long lastyng as hymselfe^lu^te. And
as he will that we do for our self, so will he that we do for our
neighbor too. And that we shall be in this world each to other petious, for
Sine affeccione which the Apostle rebukes them that lack tender affeccyons
here^ so that of charity sorye should we be for their pain too: upon whom,
for cause necessary, we be driven our self to put it. And whosoever says that
for piety of his neighbors soul he will have none of his body, let him be
sure, that as Saint John says: He that loves not his neighbor whom he
sees, loves God but a little whom he sees not, So he that has no pity of
the pain that he sees hys^ neighbor feel before him, pytyeth little
(whatsoever he say) the pain of his soul that he sees not: yet God sends
us also such tribulacion some time, because his pleasure is, to have us pray
unto him for help. And therefore, when Sayncte Peter was in prieson, the
Scripture shows, that the whole church without intermyssyon prayed
in^essauntlye for him: and at their fervent prayer god by miracle delivered
him. Wha^ the disciples in ye tempest stood in fear of drowning, they prayed
unto Christ and said: Salua nos Domin^ perimus. Save us Lord we perish. And
than at their prayer he shortly ceased the tempest. And now see we proved
often that in sore weather or sickness by general processions god gives
gracious help. And many a man in his great pain and sickness by calling upon
god is meruelousli made whole. This is gods goodness that because in wealth we
remember him not, but forgeat to pray to him, sends us sorrow, and syckenes,
to force us draw toward him, and compels us to call upon him and pray for
release of our pain: whereby when we learn to know him and seek to him we take
a good occasion to fall after into farther grace.


The.xviii. Chapter. Of them that in tribulacion ^eke not unto god, but some to
the flesh, and some to the world, and some to the devil himself.
Vincent. UErely good uncle with this good answer I am well content.


Antony. Ye Cosyn but many me^ are there with whom god is not content, which
abuse this great goodness of his, whom neither fair treating nor hard ha^dlyng
can cause to remember their maker, but in wealth they be wanto^ and forgeat
god, and follow their lust: and when god with tribulacion draws them toward
him, than wax they wood and draw back all that ever they may, and rather
run and seek help at any other hand than to go feke it at his. Some for
comfort seek to the flesh, some to the world, and some to the devil
himself. Some man that in worldly prosperity is very dull of wealth, and has
deep stepped into many a sore sin: which sins when he did them, he counted
for part of his pleasure: god willing of his goodness to call the man to grace,
casts a remorse into his mind among after his first sleep, and makes him
lie a little while and bethink him^ Than begins he to remember his life,
and from that he falls to think upon his death, and how he must leave all
this worldly welthe within a while behind here in this world, and walk hence
alone, he woteth not whither, nor how sone he shall take his journey thither,
nor can tell what company he shall mete there. And than begins he to think
that it were good to make sure and be merry so, that we be wise therewyth, lest
there hap to be such black bugges in deed as folk call deuilles^ whose
torments he was wo^t to take for Poets tales. These thoughts if they sink
deep, are a sore tribulacion. And surely if he take hold of the grace that god
therein offers him, his tribulacion is wholesome, and shall be full comfortable
to remember, that god by tribulacion calls him and byddeth him come home out
of the country of sin that he was bred and brought up so long in, and come
into the land of beheste that flows milk and honey. And then if he follow
this calling (as many one full well does) joyful shall his sorrow be, and glad
shall he be to change his life, leave his wanton lusts, and do penance for his
sins, bestowing his time upon better business.

But some men now when this calling of GOD causes them to be sad, they be
loath to leave their sinful lusts that hang in their heartes^ and specyallye
if they have any such kind of living as they must needs leave of or fall
deper in sin: or if they have such great wrongs done that they have many
minds to make, that must (if they follow god) mynyshe much of their money,
than are these folks (alas) woefully bewrapped, for God prycketh upon them of
his great goodness still and the grief of this great pain pyn^heth them at
the heart and of wyckednes they wrye away and for this tribulation they turn
to their flesh for help and labor to shake of this thought, and then they
mend their pyllowe and leye their head softer, and assaye to sleep, and then
that will not be: than they find a talk a while with them that lie by them.
If that cannot be neither, than they lie and long for day, and then get
them forth about their worldely wretchedness the matter of their prosperyte, the
selfsame sinful things with which they displease God most, and at length with
many times using this manner, god utterly casts them of. And the^ they set
naught another by GOD nor devil. Peccator cum in profundum venerit, contemnit.
When the sinner comes even into the depth, than he contemns and sets
naught by nothing, saving worldly fear that may fall by chance, or that
needs must (they wot well) fall once by death?

But alas when death comes tha^ comes again their sorrow, than will no soft
bed serve nor no company make him merye than he must leave his outward
worship and comfort of his glory and lie panting in his bed as it were on a
pyne bank, tha^ comes his fear of his evil life, and of his dreadeful
death. Tha^ comme^h the torment of his co^bred conscience and fear of his
heavy judgment. Than the devil drawyth him to dyspayer with imagination of
hell, and suffers him not than to take it for a fable. Ah, woe worth the while
that folk think not of this in time.

God sends to some man great trouble i^ his mind, and great tribulacio^
about his worldly goods, because he would of his goodness take his detite and
his confidence from them. And yet ye man wythdrawith no part of his fond
fantacies, but falle^h more fervently to them then before, and sets his
whole heart like a fool, more upon them: and he takes him all to the devil
of his worldly counsaylers and without any counsel of god or any tru^t put
in him makes many wise ways as he weneth^ and al turn at length unto folly,
and one subtle drifte dryueth an other to naught. Some have I seen even i^
their last sycknes sytte up in their death bed vnderproppted with pillous take
there play fel^o^es to the^ and comfort them self with cards and this they
said did ease them well to put fantasies out of their heads, and what
fantasies trow you, such as I told you right now of their own lewd life
and peril of there soul, of heaven and of hell that i^cked them to think of,
and therefore cast it out with card play as long as ever they might till the
pure panges of death pulled their heart fro their play and put them in the case
they could not reckon their game. And then left them there gamners and slily
slong away. And long was it not ere they galpeb up the ghost: And what game
they came than to, yt god knows and not I. I pray god it were good, but I
fear it very sore. Some men are there also y^ do (as did king Saul) in
tribulacio^ go seek unto the devil. This king had commanded al such to be
destroyed as use the false abhomynable supersticion of this ungracious
wichecraft and Necromancye and yet fell he to such folly afterwade him self yt
ere he went to battle he sought unto a wytch and besought her to raise up a
dead man to tell him how he should speed. Now had god showed him before by
Samuel that he should come to naught, and he went about none amendment, but
waxed worse and worse, so that god lust not to look to him: and when he
sought by the Prophets to have answer of god, there came none a^swere to
him, which thing he thought strange: and because he was not with god heard at
his pleasure, he made suite to ye devil, desiring a woman by witchecrafte to
raise up dead Samuel: but speed had he such thereof, as co^me^ly they have al yt
in their business meddle with such matters. For an evil answer had he, and an
evil speed thereafter, his army discomfited and him self slain. And as it is
rehearsed in Paralipomenon the.x. Chapter of the first book. One cause of his
fall was for lack of trust in god, for which he left to take counsel of god,
and fell to seek counsel of the witch against gods prohibicion in the law,
and against his own good deed: by which he punished and put out all witches so
late before. Such speed let them look for that play the same part as I see
many do that in a great loss send to seek a coniurer to geat their gear
again: and merueilous things there they see sometime, but never grote of
their good again. And many fond fools there are, that when they lie sick,
will meddle with no physic in no manner wise, nor send his water to no
cunning man, but send his cappe or his hose to a wise woman, otherwise called a
wytche. Then sends she word again yt she has spyed in his hose, where when
he took no head, he was taken with a sprite between two doors as he went in the
twylight, but the spirit would not let him feel it in.v. days after: and it
has all the while festred in his body, and that is the grief tha^ payneth
him so sore: but let him go to no leache craft, nor any manner of physic,
other then good meat or strong drink, for sirroppes should sowce him up. But
he shall have.v. leaves of valerian that she enchau^ted with a charm, and
gathered with her left hand: let him lay those.v. leaves to his right
thombe, not bind it fast to, but let it hang lose thereat by a green threde:
he shall never need to change it, look it fall not away. but let it hang till
he be whole, and he shall need no more. In such wise wytches, and in such mad
medicines have there in many fools more faith a great deal tha^ in god. And
thus Cousin as I tell you, al these kind of folk that in their tribulacion call
not upon God, but seek for their help and for their ease otherwhere, to the
flesh and the world, and some to the flinging fiende him self: The
tribulacion that gods goodness sends them for good, themself by their folly
^^r^e unto their harm. And the^ that on the other side seek unto God therein,
both comfort and profit they greatly take thereby.


The.xix. Chapter. An other obieccion with the answer thereunto.
Vincent. I Like well good uncle al your aunswers herin: but one doubt yet
remains there in mind, which rises upon this answer that you make, and
that doubt soyled, I will as for this time mine own good uncle, encombre you no
farther. For me think I do you very much wrong to give you occasion to labor
your self so much in matter of ^ome study, with long talkyng at once. I will
therefore at this time move you but one thing, and seek other time at your more
ease for the remnaunte. My doubt good uncle is this, I perceive well by your
answers gathered and considered together, that you will well agree that a man
may both have worldly wealth, and yet well go to god. And that on the other
side, a man may be miserable and live in tribulacion, and yet go to the
devil. And as a man may please God by patience in adversity, so may he
please God by thanks given in prosperity. Now since you grant these things
to be such that either of them both may be matter of v^rtue, or else matter of
sin, matter of damnacion or matter of salvation: they seem another good nor
badde of their own nature, but things of themself equal and indifferent,
turning to god, or ye contrary after as they be taken. And than if this be
thus, I can perceive no cause why you should give the preeminence unto
tribulacio^, or wherefore you should reckon more cause of comfort therein then
you should recke^ to stand in prosperity, but rather a great deal less, by
in manner half, sith in prosperity the man is well at ease and may also by
giving thank to god, geat good unto his soul, whereas in tribulacion, though
he may merit by patience as in abou^dau^ce of worldly wealth, the other may by
thank. Yet lacks he much comfort yt the welthy man has, in that he sore is
grieved with heaviness and pain: besides this also, that a welthy man well at
ease may pray to god quietly and merely with alacrity and great quietness of
mind, whereas he that lies groaning in his grief can not endure to pray nor
think almost upon nothing, but upon his pain.


Antony. To begin Cousin where you leave, the prayers of him that is in wealth
and him yt is in woe, if the me^ be both naught, their prayers be both like.
For neither has the one lust to pray, nor the other neither. And as the one is
let with his pain, so is the other with his pleasure, saving that the pain
s^yreth him some time to call upon God in his grief, though the man be right
badde, where the pleasure pulls his mind another way, though the man be
me^ely good. And this point I think there are very few that can (if they
say true) say that they find it otherwise. For in tribulacion, which comes
you wot well in many sundry kinds, any man that is not a dull beast or a
desperate wretch, calls upon God, not houerly, but right hartelye: and
se^^eth his heart full whole upon his request, so sore he longs for ease and
help of his heaviness. But when men are welthy and well at their ease, while
our tongue pattereth upon our prayers a pace, good God how many mad ways
our mind wandereth the while. Yet wot I well, that in some tribulacion such
sore sickness there is, or other grievous bodily pain, that hard it were for a man to say a long payer of ma^tens, and yet some that lie a dying say full
devoutly the.vii. Psalms and other prayers with the priest at their aneiling
but those that for the grief of their pain cannot endure to do it, or that
be more tender and lack that strong heart and stomach that some other have,
God requires no such long prayers of them. But the listing up their heart
alone without any word at all, is more acceptable to him of one in such
case, than long service so said as folk use to say it in health. The martirs
in their agonye, made no long prayers aloude, but one ynche of such a prayer
so prayed in that pain, was worth a whole ^alne and more, even of their own
prayers prayed at some other tyme^ Great learned men say that Christ, albeit
he was very God, and as god was in eternal equal bliss with his father, yet
as man merited not for us only, but for him self to: for proof whereof they
lay in these words the auctorite of S Paul. Christus humiliauit semet ipsum
factus obedience vsque ad mortem, mortem autem crucis^ propter quod and deus
exaltauit illum and donauit^lli nomen quod est super omne nomen, vt in nomine
Jesus omne genuflectatur celesi^m terrestrium and infernorum and omnis lingua
confiteatur quia dominus Jesus Christus in glori^ est dei patris. Christ has
humbled himself, and became obedyente unto the death, and that unto the death
of the cross, for which thing god has also exalted hym^ and given him a name
which is above all names: that in the name of Jesus every knee be bowed, both
of the cel^stial creatures and the terrestrial, and the infernal to: and that
every tongue shall confess that our Lord Jesus Christ is into the glory of
God his father. Now if it so be as these great learned men upon such
auctorities of holy Scripture say, that our savior so merited as man, and as
man deserved reward, not for us only, but for himself also: than were there
in his deeds as it seems, sundry degrees and differences of deserving, and
not his maundy like merit as his passion, nor his sleep like merit as his
watch and his prayer, no nor his prayers peradventure all of like merit
neither. But though there none was, nor none could be in his most blessed
parson but excellent, and incomparably passing the prayer of any pure creature:
yet his own not al alike, but some one far above other some. And tha^ if it
thus be, of all his holy prayers, the chief seems me those that he made in
his great agonye and pain of his bitter passion. The first, when he fell
thrice prostrate in his agony, when the heaviness of his heart with fear of
death at hand, so payneful and so cruel as he well beheld it, made such a
fervent commocion in his blessed body, that the bloody sweat of his holy flesh
dropped down on the ground. The other were the painful prayers that he made
upon the cross, where for all the tormente that he hanged in, of beating,
naylyng, and stretching out all his lymmes, with the wresting of his sinews,
and breaking of his tender veins, and ye sharp crown of thorn so pri^king
him into ye head, yt his blessed blud stremed down al his face. In all these
hideous pains, in all their cruel despites, yet two very devout and seruent
prayers he made. The one for their pardon yt so dispiteously put him to his
pain, and the other about his own deliuerau^ce, co^me^ding his own soul unto
his holy father in heaven. These prayers of his, among all yt ever he made,
made in his most pain, reckon I for ye chief. And these prayers of our savior
at his bitter passion and of his holy martirs, in the fervor of their torment,
shall serve us to se yt there is no prayer made at pleasure so strong and
effectual, as in tribulacion: now come I to the touching of the reason that you
make, where you tell me that I grant you, that both in wealth and in woe
some men may be naught and offend God, the one by impacience, the other by
fleshly lust. And on the other side, both in tribulacion and prosperity too,
some manne may also do very well, and deserve thank of god by thanks given
to god, as well of his gift of riches, woorship and wealth, as of need and
penurye priesonmente, sickness and pain, and that therefore you cannot see,
for what cause I should give any pre-eminence in coumforte unto tribulacion,
but rather allow prosperity for the thing more coumfortable, and that not a
little, but in manner by double, sith therein has the soul coumforte and the
body both: the soul by thank (for his gift) given unto god, And then the
body by being well at ease, where the parson payned in tribulacion, takes no
coumforte but in his soul alone. First as for your double coumforte Cosyn,
you may cut of the one. For a man in prosperity, though he be bounden to
thank God of his gift, wherein he feels ease, and may be glad also that
he gives thank to GOD: yet for that he takes his ease here, has he little
cause of coumforte, except that the sensual feeling of bodily pleasure, you
lust to call by the name of coumforte. Nor I say not nay, but that some time
men use so to take it, when they say, this good drink coumforteth well my
heart.

But coumforte Cosyn, is properlye taken, by them that take it right, rather
for the consolacion of good hope that men take in their heart, of some good
growing toward the^, then for a present pleasure, with which the body is
delyted and tickeled for the while.

Now though a man without patience can have no reward for his pain, yet when
his pain is patiently taken for gods sake, and his will co^formed to gods
pleasure therein, god rewards the sufferer after the rate of his pain, and
this thing appears by many a place in scripture, of which some have I
showed you, and yet shall I show you more. But never found I any place in
scripture that I remember, in which though this welthy man thanked god for his
gift, our lord promised any reward in heaven, because the man took his ease
and pleasure here. And therefore, since I speak but of such coumforte as is very
coumfort in deed, by which a man has hope of Gods favor, and remission of
his sins, with minishyng of his pains in purgatory, or reward else in heaven.
And such comfort comes of tribulacion, and for tribulacion well taken, but not
for pleasure though it be well taken: therefore of your cou^fort that you
double by prosperity, you may as I told you cut very well away the half. Now
why I give prerogative in cou^fort unto tribulacion far above prosperity,
though a man may do well in both: Of this thing will I show you causes two or
three. First as I before have at length showed you out of all question,
continual wealth interrupted with no tribulacio^, is a very discomfortable
token of everlasting damnacio^, whe^upon it follows that tribulacio^ is one
cause of coumfort unto a man's heart, in that it discharges him of the
discomfort that he might of reason take of ouerlong lasting wealth. Another is,
that the scripture much commends tribulacion as occasion of more profit then
wealth and prosperity, not to them only that are therein, but to the^ too that
resort unto them, and therefore says Ecclesiastes: Melius est ire ad domum
luctus, quam ad domum conuiuii^ En, illa enim finis cunctorum admonetur
hominum, and viuens cogitat quid futurum sit. Better it is to go to the house
of weping and wayling for some man's death, than to y^ house of a feast. For in
that house of heaviness is a man put in remembrance of the end of every
manne, and while he yet lives, he thinks what shall come after. And after
yet he farther says: Cor sapientum vbi tristicia^est, et Cor stultorum vbi
leticia. The heart of wise men is there as heaviness is. And the heart of
fools, is there as is myrthe and gladness. And verelye, there as you shall
hear worldelye mirth seem to be commended: in Scripture it is either
commonly spoken, as in the parsone of some worldly dysposed people, or
understanden of reioysyng spiritual or meant of some small moderate refreshing
of the mind, against an heavy discomfortable dulnes. Now whereas prosperity
was to the children of Israel promised in the old law: as a special gift of
god, that was for their imperfeccion at that time to draw them to god, with
gaye things and pleasant, as me^ to make children learn, give them cake
bread and butter. For as the scripture makes mention, that people were much
after the manner of children in lack of wit, and in waiwardnes. And therefore
was their master Moses called Pedagogus, that is, a teacher of children, (or as
they call such one in the grammar schools) an usher, or a master of the
petites. For as Saint Paul says. Nihil ad perfectum duxit lex. The old law
brought nothing to perfeccion. And god also threatens folk with trybulacion
in this world for sin, not for that worldly tribulacion is evil, but for
that we should be well ware of the sickness of sin, for fear of that thing
to follow, which though it be in deed a very good wholesome thing if we will
take it, is yet because it is paynefull, the thing that we be loathe to have.

But this I say yet again and again, that as for far the better thing in
this world toward the geattyng of the very good that God gives in the world
to come: the Scripture undoubtedly so commends trybulacyon, that in respect
and comparyson thereof, it discommendeth this worldly wretched welthe and
discomfortable coumforte utterly. For to what other thing sounds the words
of Ecclesiastes that I rehearsed you now? that it is better to be in the house
of heaviness, than to be at a feast: whereto sounds this comparyson of his,
that the wise man's heart draws thither as folk are in sadness: and the
heart of a fool, is there as he may find mirth? Whereto draws this threat of
the wise man, that he that delyteth in wealth shall fall into woe? Risus
(says he) dolor miscebitur, and extrema gaud^i luctus occ^p^t Laughter
shall be mingled with sorrow, and thend of mirth is taken up with heaviness. And
our savior says himself. Ve vobis qui ridetis, quia lugebitis et flebitls. Woe
be to you yt laugh, for you shall weep and wail. But he says on the other
side: Beati qui lugent, quoniam illi consolabuntur. Blessed are they yt weep
and wayle, for they shall be comforted. And he says unto his disciples: Mundus
gaudebit; vos autem dolebitis. Sed tristitia vestra vertetur in gaudium. The
world shall joy, and you shall be sorry: but your sorrow shall be turned into joy.
And so is i^ you wot well now. And the mirth of many that the^ were in joy, is
now turned al to sorrow. And thus you see by the scripture plain, that in
matter of very comfort, tribulacion is as far above prosperity, as ye day is
above the night. An other preemine^ce of tribulacio^ over wealth in occasion of
merit and reward, shall well appear upon certain consideracions well marked in
them both.

Tribulacion meriteth in patience, and in thobediente conforming of man's will
unto god, and in thanks given to god for his visitacio^: if you reckon me now
against ^hese, many other good deeds that a wealthye man may do: as by riches
give almose, by authority, labor in doing many men justice, or if you find
farther any such other thing like.

First I say that the pacient parson in tribulacion, has in all these virtues
of the wealthy man, an occasion of merit to, which the wealthye man has not,
agaynwarde, in the forerehearsed virtues of his. For it is easy for the parson
that is in tribulacion, to be well wyllyng to do the self same if he
could, and than shall his good will, where the power lacks, go very near
to the merit of the deed. But now is not the wealthy in a like case with the
will of patience and conformity and thanks given to GOD for tribulacion, sith
it is not so ready for the wealthy man to be content to be in the tribulacion,
that is occasion of the pacientes deserte, as for the troubled person to be
content to be in prosperity, to do the good deeds that the wealthy man
does. Besides this, all that the wealthy man does, though he could not do
them without those things that are accoumpted for wealth, and called by that
name, as not do great almose without great richesse, nor do these many
men right by his labor, without the authority: yet may he do these
things being not in wealth in deed, as where he takes his wealth for no
wealth, nor his riches for no riches, nor in heart sets by neither another,
but secretly lives in a contrite heart and a life penitenciall, as many times
did the Prophet David being a great King, so that worldely wealth was no
wealth to him, and therefore is not of necessity worldly wealth called the
cause of those good deeds, sith he may do them, and does them best in deed, to
whom the thing that worldly folk call wealth, is yet for his godly set
mind, drawn from the delight thereof, no pleasure in manner nor no wealth at
all. Finallye^ whansoeuer the wealthye man does those good verteous deeds, if
we considre the nature of them right, we shall perceive that in doing of them,
he does ever for the rate and portion of those deeds minish the matter of his
worldly wealth, as in giving great almose he departs with so much of his
worldelye goods, which are in that part, the matter of his wealth.

In labouryng about the dooyng of many good deeds, his labor minisheth his
quiet and his rest. And for the rate of so much, it minisheth his wealth, if
pain and wealth be each to other contrary, as I wene you will agree they be.

Now whosoever than will well consider the thing, he shall I doubt not
perceive and see therein, that in these good deeds that the wealthy manne
does, though he do them by that, that his wealth makes him hable, yet in
dooyng of them, he departs (for the portion) from the nature of wealth,
toward the nature of some part of tribulacyon: and therefore, even in those
good deeds themself that prosperity does: does in goodness the prerogative
of tribulacion above wealth appear.

Now if it hap that some manne cannot perceive this point because the
wealthy man for all his almose abides rich still, and for all his good labor
abides still in his authority, let him considre that I speak but after the
portion. And because the portion of all that he gives of his goods, is very
little in respect of that he leaves: therefore is the reason happily with some
folk li^le perceived.

But if it so were that he went forth with geuynge till he had given out
all and left himself nothing, than would a very blind manne see it. For
as he were from richesse come to poverty, so were he from wealth, willingly
fallen into tribulacion: and between labor and rest, the reason goes all
alyke: which whosoever can consider, shall see that for the portion in every
godd deed done by ye welthy man, the matter is al one. Than since we have
somewhat wayed ye virtues of prosperity, let us consider on ye other side the
before named things yt are the matter of merit and reward in tribulacion, that
is to wit, patience conformity and thanks. Patience the welthy man has not,
in that he is welthy. For if he be pinched in any point wherein he takes
patience, in yt part he suffers some tribulacion, and so not by his
prosperity, but by his tribulacion has the manne that merit. Like is it if
we would say, that the welthye man has a another virtue in ye stead of
patience, that is to wit, the keeping of him self from pride, and from such
other sins as wealth would bring him too. For the resisting such mocions, is
as I before told you without any doubt, a minishing of fleshly wealth, and is a
very true kind, and one of the most profitable kinds of tribulacion, so that
al yt good merit grows to the welthy man, not by his wealth, but by the
minishyng of his wealth with wholesome tribulacion. The most couloure of
comparison is in the other twain: that is to wit, in the conformity of man's
will unto god, and in thanks given unto god. For like as the good man in
tribulacion sent him by god, conformeth his will in that behalf, and gives
god thank therefore, so does ye welthy man in his wealth which god gives him,
conform his will to gods will in that point: since he is well content to
take it of his gift, and gives god again also right heartye thank
therefore. And thus as I said, in these two things may you catch mo^^e
color to compare the welthye man's merit with the merit of tribulacion. But
yet that they be not matches, you may soon see by this. For in trybulacion
can there none conform his will unto gods, and give him thank therefore,
but such a man as has in that point a very special good mind. But he that is
very naught, or has in his heart but very little good, may well be content to
take wealth at gods hand, and say, mary I thank you sir for this with all my
heart, and will not fail to love you well while you let me fare no worse.
Confitebitur tibi, quum benefeceris ei. Now if the welthy man be very good,
yet in conformity of his will and thanks given to god for his wealth, his
virtue is not like yet to his that does the same in tribulacion: for as the
philosophers said in that thing very well of old, virtue stands in things of
hardenes and difficulty. And than as I told you, much less hardness and less
difficulty there is by a great deal to be content and conform our will to
gods will, and to give him thank too for our ease, than for our pain: for
our wealth, tha^ for our woe. And therefore is the conforming of our will
into gods, and the thanks that we give him for our tribulacion, more worthy
thank again, and more reward meryteth in the very fast wealth and felicity
of heaven, than our co^formitie with our thanks given for and in, our worldly
wealth here. And this thing saw the devil when he said to our Lord of Job,
that it was no marueyle though Job had a reverent fear unto god, god had done
so much for him, and kept him in prosperity, but the devil wiste well it was
an hard thing for Job to be so louing^ and so to give thanks to god in
tribulacio^ and adversity, and therefore was he glad to geat leave of god to
put him in tribulacio^, and thereby trusted to cause him murmr and grudge
against God with impacyence. But the devil had there a fall in his own
turn. For the patience of Job in the short time of his adversity, gate him
much more fau^ure and thank of God, and more is renoumed in Scripture, and
commended there for that, than for all the goodness of his long prosperous life.
Our Savior says himself also, that if we say well by them, or yield them
thank that do us good, we do no great thing therein, and therefore can we
with reason look for no great thank agayne^ and thus have I showed you lo,
no little preeminence that tribulacion has in merit, and therefore no little
preeminence of comfort in hope of heavenly reward above the virtues (the
merit and cause of good hope and comfort) that comes of wealth and
prosperity.


The.xx. Chapter. A Summary commendacion of tribulacion^
ANd therefore good Cousin, to finyshe our talking for this time, lest I
should be to long a let unto your other business if we lay first for a sure
ground a very fast faith, whereby we believe to be true all that the
Scripture says understood truly, as the old holy doctors declare it, and
as the Scripture of god instructs his catholic church: than shall we
consider tribulacion as a gracious gift of god, a gift that he gave specially
his special friends. The thing that in Scripture is highly commended and
praised, a thing whereof the contrary long continued is perilous, a thing which
but if God send, it men have need by penance put upon themself and seek it, a
thing that helps to pourge our sins passed, a thing that preserves us
from sins that else would come, a thing that causes us to set less by ye
world, a thing that excite^h us to draw more toward God, a thing that much
minisheth our pains in purgatory, a thing that much increases our final
reward in heaven, the thing by which our Savior entered his own kingdom,
the thing with which all his Apostles followed him thither, the thing which
our Savior exhorts all men to, the thing without which he says we be
not his Disciples, the thing without which no man can geat to heaven. Whosoever
these things thinks on, and remembers well, shall in his trybulacyon
neither murmr nor grudge, but first by patience take his pain in worth, and
than shall he grow in goodness and think himself well worthy, than shall ^e
consider that God sends it for his weal, and thereby shall he be moved to
give God thank therefore^ therewith shall his grace increase, and God shall
give him such comfort by consydering that God is in his trouble ever more
nere unto hym^ Quia deus iuxta est iis qui tribulato sunt cord. God is near
says the Prophet to them that have their heart in trouble, that his joy
thereof shall minishe much of his pain, and he shall not seek for vain
comfort else where, but specially trust in God, and seek for help of him,
submytting his own will wholly to Gods pleasure, and pray to God in his
heart, and pray his friends pray for him, and specially the Priests, as
Sayncte James byddeth, and begin first with confession, and make us clean
to God, and ready to depart, and be glad to go to God, puttyng purgatory to
his pleasure: if we thus do, this dare I boldly say, we shall never live here
the less of half an hour, but shall with his comfort find our hearts
lighted, and thereby the grief of our tribulacio^ lessed and the more likelyhod
to recover and to live the longer. Now if god will we shall hence, than does
he much more for us. For he that this way takes, cannot go but well. For of
him that is loath to leave this wretched world, my heart is much in fear lest
he die not well: hard it is for him to be welcome that comes against his will,
that says to god when he comes to fetch him, welcome my maker magrye my
teeth: but he that so loves him, that he longs to go to him, my heart
cannot give me but he shall be welcome, all were it so that he should come ere he
were well pourged. For charity covers a multitude of sins, and he that
trusts in god cannot be confounded. And Christ sayeth^ he that comes to me
I will not cast him out. And therefore let us never make our reconing of long
life, keep it while we may because God has so commanded: but if God give
thoccasion, that with his good will we may go, let us be glad thereof, and
long to go to him. And than shall hope of heaven comfort our heauines^ and
out of our transitory tribulacion shall we go to everlasting glory, to which
my good Cousin I pray god bring us both

Vincent. Mine own good uncle I pray God reward you, and at this time will I
no longer trouble you. I trow I have this day done you much tribulacion with
my importune obieccions of very little substance. And you have eue^ showed me
an ensample of sufferau^ce, in bearing my folly so long and so patiently. And
yet shall I be so boulde upon you farther, as to seek some time to talk forth
of the remnaunte the most profitable point of tribulacion, which you said
you reserved to treat of last of all.


Anthony. Let that be very shortelye Cousin hardely^ while this is fresh in
mind.


Vincent. I trust good Uncle so to put this in remembrance, that it shall
never be forgotten with me. Our lord send you such coumforte as he knows to
be best.


Anthony. That is well said good Cousin, and I pray the same for you and for
all our other friends that have need of comfort, for whom I think more tha^
for your self, you neded of some counsel.


Vincent. I shall wy^h this good counsel that I have heard of you, do them
some coumforte I trust in GOD, to whose keeping I commit you.


Antony. And I you also: Far well my own good Cousin.


The second book
Vincent. IT is to me good uncle, no little comfort^ that as I came in here, I
heard of your folk, that you have had since my last being here (GOD be
thanked) metely good rest, and your stomach somewhat more come to you. For
verily, albeit I had heard before that in respect of ye great grief that for a
month space had holde^ you, you were a little before my last cu^ming to you,
somewhat eased and releued, for else would not I for no good, have put you to
the pain to talk so much as you than did: yet after my departing from you,
remembering how long we tarried together, and that we were all that while in
talkinge, all the labor was yours, in talking so long together without
enterpausing between, and that of matter studiouse and displeasante, al of
disease and sickness, and other pain and tribulacion: I was in good faith very
sorye, and not a little wroth with my self for mine own oversight, that I had
so little considered your pain, and very feared I was, till I heard other word,
lest you should have wexed weaker, and more sick hereafter. But now I thank
god, that has sent the contrary, for else a little casting back, were in this
great age of yours, no little danger and perell.


Antony. Nay nay good Cousin, to talk much (except some other pain let me) is
to me little grief. A fond old man, is as often full of words as a woman. It
is, you wot well, as some Poets paynt us, al ye lust of an old fools life, to
sit well and warm with a cup and a roasted crabbe, and driuel, and drink and
talk. But in earnest Cosyn, our talking was to me great coumforte, and nothing
dysplesaunt at al. For though we co^moned of sorrow and heaviness, yet was ye
thing yt we chiefly thought upon, not the tribulacion it self, but the
coumforte that may grow thereon. And therefore am I now very glad, that you
be come to finishe up the remnante.


Vincent. Of truth my good uncle, it was comfortable to me, and has been since
to some other of your friends, to whom as my poor wit and remembrance
would serve me, I did, and not nedeles, report and rehearse your most
comfortable counsel. And now come I for the remnante, and am very joyful
that I find you so well refresshed, and so ready thereto. But this one thing
good uncle, I bese^he you heartily, that if for delight to here you speak in ye
matter, I forgeat my self and you both, and put you to to much pain, remember
you your own ease, and then if you lust to leave, command me to go my way,
and to seek some other time.


Antony. Forsouth Cousin, many words, if a man were weak spoken, as you said
right now without enterp^using, would paraduenture at length somewhat weerye
him. And therefore wyshed I ye last time after you were gone, when I left my
self (to say the truth) even a little weery, that I had not so told you
still a long tale alone, but yt we had more often enterchau^ged words, and
parted ye talking between us, with ofter enterpausing upon your part in such
manner, as learned me^ use, between ye persons who^ they devise, disputing in
there fained dialogues. But yet in yt point, I sone excused you, and laid ye
lack even where I found it, and that was even upon mine own neck. For I
remembered that between you and me it fared, as it did once between a Nun and
her brother: very verteous was this Lady, and of a very verteous place in a
close religion^ and therein had been long, in all which time she had never seen
her brother, which was in like wise very verteous, and had been far of at
an university. and had there taken the degree of doctor in divinity, When he
was come home, he went to see his sister, as he that highlye reioysed in her
virtue. So came she to the grate that they call (I trow) the locutorye, and
after their holy watch word spoken on both sides, after ye manner used in that
place, one took ye other by ye typ of ye finger, for hand would there be none
wrongen throw ye grate, and forthwyth began my Lady to give her brother a
sermon, of the wretchedness of this world, and the frayletie of the flesh, and
the subtle sleightes of the wicked fiend, and gave him suerly good counsel,
saving somewhat long, how he should be well ware in his living, and master
well his body for saving of his soul: and yet ere her own tale came al at an
end, she began to find a little fault with him (and said) in good faith
brother, I do somewhat marvel that you yt have been at learning so long, and
are doctor, and so learned in the law of god, do not now at our meeting
(seeing we mete so seldom, to me that am your sister and a simple unlearned
soul) give of your charity some fruiteful exhortacio^. For I doubt not but
you ca^ say some good thing yourself. By my troth good sister quod her
brother, I can not for you, for your tongue has never ceased, but said enough
for us both. And so Cousin I remember, yt when I was once fallen in, I left you
little space to say ought between. But now will I therefore take an other way
with you: for I shall of our talking, drive you to the one half.


Vincent. Now forsooth uncle this was a merry tale. But now if you make me talk
the one half, tha^ shall you be contented far otherwise, than there was of
la^e a kynswoma^ of your own, but which will I not tell you, guess her and you
can: her husband had much pleasure in the manner and behaueour of an other
honest man, and kept him therefore much company, by the reason whereof, he was
at his meal time more often from home. So happened it on a time, that his wife
and he together, dyned or supped with that neighbor of theirs, and tha^ she
made a merry quarrel to him, for making her husband so good chere out a door, yt
she could not have him at home. Forso^h maistres quoth he (as he was a dry
merry man) in my company nothing keeps him but one, serve you him with the same,
and he will never be from you. What gaye thing may yt be quoth our Cousin tha^?
Forsooth maistres quod he, your husband loves well to talk, and wha^ he sits
with me, I let him have all the words. All the words quoth she? mary yt am I
content, he shall have all the words with a good will, as he has ever had.
For I speak the^ not al my self, but give them al to him, and for ought that
I care for them, he shall have them still: but yet to say that he shall have
them all, you shall then rather keep him still, tha^ he shall geat ye one half at
my hands.


Anthony. Forso^h Cousin I can soon guess which of our kin she was: but yet
the fewer of that kind, the quieter is the many (for all her merry words) that
thus would let her husband to talk.


Vincent. Forsothe she is not so merye, but she is as good. But where you find
fault uncle, that I speak not enough, I was in good faith ashamed, that I
spoke so much, and moved you such questyons, which I found upon your answer,
might better have been spared, they were so little worth. But now since I see you
be so well content that I shall not forbear boldly to show my folly, I will be
no more so shamefaste, but ask you what me lust.


The first Chapter. VVhither a man may not in tribulacion use some vvorldly
recreacion for his comfort.
ANd first good uncle ere we proceed farther, I will be bold to move you one
thing more of yt we talked when I was here. When I reuolued in my mind again
the things that were concluded here by you, me thought ye would in no wise
that in any tribulacion men should seek for comfort either in worldly thing
or fleshly, which mind uncle of yours, seems somewhat hard, for a merry tale
with a friend ref^esheth a man much, and without any harm lyghteth his mind,
and amendeth courage and his stomach, so that it seems, but well done to take
such recreacion. And Solomon says I trow, that men should in heaviness give
ye sorry man wine to make him forgeat his sorrow. And. S. Thomas says, ye
propre pleasant talking which is called (...) is a good virtue serving to
refreshe the mind, and make it quick and lusty to labor and study again,
where continual fatigacion, would make it dull and deadly.

Anthony. Cousin, I forgot not y^ point, but I long not much to touch it, for
neither might I well utterly forbid it where the cause might hap to fall
that it should not hurt, and on the other side if the case so should fall, me
thought yet I should little need to give any counsel to it: folk are prove
enough to such fantasies of their own mind, you may see this by our self,
which coming now together, to talk of as earnest sad matters as men can
devise, were fallen yet eue^ at the first into wanto^ idle tales and of tru^th
Cousin, as you know very well, my self am of nature even half a gigglot and
more, I would I could as easily mende my fault as I can well know it, but
scant can I refrain it as old a fool as I am: howbeit so parcial will I not
be to my fault as to praise it, but for that you requier my mind in the
matter, whether men in tribulacion may not lawfully seek recreacion and comfort
themself with some honest mirth first agreed that out chief comfort must be
in god, and that with him we must begin, and wi^h him continue, and w^^h him
end also. A man to take now and ^han some honest worldly mirth, I dare not be
so sore as vtterli to forbid it, since good men and well learned, have in some
case allowed it, specially for the diversity of diu^rs men's minds: for else if
we were al such, as would god we were, and such as natural wisdom would we
should be, and is not al clean excusable that we be not in deed: I would than
put no doubt, but y^ unto any man the most comfortable talking that could be,
were to hear of heaven, whereas now, god help us our wretchedness is such yt
in talking a while thereof, me^ wax almost wea^y, and as though to hear o^
heaven were an heavy burdaine, they must refreshe the^ self after with a
foolish tale, our affeccion toward heavenly joys waxes wonderful cold. If
dread of hell were as far^e gone, very few would fear God, but that yet a
little sticks in ou^e stomakes mark me Cousin at the sermon, and commenlye
toward the end, somewhat the preacher speaks of hell and heaven: now
while he preache^h of the pains in hell^ still they stand yet and give him
the hearing, but as soon as he comes to the joys of heaven, they be busking
them ba^kewarde and flock meal fall away: it is in the soul somewhat as it is
in the body. Some are there of nature or of evil custom come to that point,
that a worse thing some time stedeth them more then a better. Some man if he be
sick, can away with no wholesome meat, nor no medicine can go down with
him, but if it be tempered with some such thing for his fantasy as makes ye
matter or ye medicine less wholesome tha^ it should be. And yet while it will be
no better, we must let him have it so. Cassianus that very verteous man
rehearses in a certain collacion of his, that a certain holy father in
making of a sermon, spoke of heaven and heavenly things, so celestially, that
much of his audience with the sweet sound thereof, began to forgeat all the
world and fall a sleep: which when the father beheld^ he dissembled their
sleping, and sodeinly said unto them: I shall tell you a merry tale. At which
word, they lift up their heads and harkened unto that. And after the sleep
therewith broken, heard him tell on of heaven again, In what wise that good
father r^buked than their untoward minds so dull unto the thing that all our
life we labor for, and so quick and lus^y toward other tryf^es, I neither
bear in mind, nor shall here need to rehearse. But thus much of the matter
suffiseth for our purpose, that whereas you demand me whither in tribula^ion
men may not some time re^^eshe them self with worldly mirth and recreacion. I
can no more say, but he that can not long end^re to hold up his head and hear
talking of heaven except he be now and tha^ between (as though to hear of
heaven were heaviness) refreshed with a merry folishe tale, there is none other
remedy but you must let him have it: better would I wish it, but I cannot
help it. Howbeit, let us by mine advise at the least wise make those kinds of
recreacio^ as short and as selde as we can: let them serve us but for sauce,
and make the^ not our meat, and let us pray unto god, and al our good friends
^or us, that we may feel such a savor in the delight of heaven, that in
respect of the talkinge of the joys thereof, all worldly recreacio^ be but a
grief to think on. And be sure Cousin, that if we might once purchase ye grace
to come to that point, we never found of worldly recreacion so much comfort in
a year, as we should find in the bethinkyng us of heaven in less tha^ half an
hour.


Vincent. In faith uncle I can well agree to this: and I pray God bring us
once to take such a savor in it: and surely as you began the other day, by
faith must we come to it, and to faith by prayer. But now I pray you good
uncle vouchesafe to proceed in our principal matter.


The.ii. Chapter. Of the short uncertain life in extreme age or sickness.
Anthony. Cousin I have bethought me somewhat upon this matter since we were
last together. And I find it, if we should go some way to work, a thing
that would require many mo days to treat thereof, than we should happily
find mete thereto in so few as my self wene that I have now to live, while
euerytime is not like with me, and among many paynfull, in which I look every
day to depart: my mendyng days come very seld, and are very shortly gone.
For surely Cousin I cannot lycken my life more metely now than to the snuff of
a candle that burns within ye candelstyckes nose. For as the snuff some time
burns down so low, that whosoever looks on it, would wene it were quite out,
and yet suddenly lifts a flame half an inche above the nose, and gives a
preaty short light again, and thus plaieth diverse times, til at last ere it
be looked for, out it goes altogether: so have I Cousin diverse such days
together, as eueryday of them I look even for to dye: and yet have I than after
that some such few days again as you see me now to have your self, in
which a man would wene that I might well continue, but I know my lingering not
likely to la^t long, but our will my snuff suddenly some day within a while,
and therefore will I with gods help, seem I never so well amended nevertheless
recke^ every day for my last: for though that to the repressing of the bold
courage of blind youth there is a very true proverb, yt as soon comes a
young shepes skin to the market as an old, yet this difference there is at the
least between them: that as the young man may hap sometime to die soon, so
ye old man can never live long. And therefor Cousin, ^n our matter here
leaui^g out mani things yt I would else treat of, I shall for this time speak
but of very few, howbeit if god hereafter send me more such days, tha^ will we
when you lust farther talk of more.


The.iii. Chapter. He deuideth tribulacion into three kinds, of which three
the last he passes shor^ly over.
ALl manner of tribulacion Cousin that any man can have, as fa^re as for this
time comes to my mind, falls under some one at ye least of these th^ee
kinds: ^ither it is such as himself willingly takes, or secondly, such as
him self willingly suffers, or finally, such as he cannot put from him. This
third kind I purpose not much more to speak of now^ for thereof shall as for
this time, suffice those things that we treated between us this other day:
what kind of tribulacion this is I am sure your self perceive, for sickness,
imprisonment, loss of goods, loss of fre^des or such bodily harm as a man
has already caught, and can in no wise avoid, these things and such like,
are ye third kind of tribulacio^ that I speak of^ which a man neither
willingly takes in the beginning, nor can though he would put afterward
away. Now think I, that as to the man yt lacks wit and faith, no comfort
can serve whatsoever counsel be given, so to them that have both, I have as
for this kind said in manner enough already, and considering that suffer it
needs he must while he can by no manner of mean put it from him, the very
necessity is half counsel enough to take it in good worth, and bear it
patiently, and rather of his patience to take both ease and thank, then by
fretting and fuming to increase his present pain, and by murmr and grudge
fall in farther danger after by displeasi^g of god with his froward behaueour,
and yet albeit that I think that yt which is said suffiseth, yet here and
there shall I in ye second kind, show some such comfort as shall well serve
unto this last kind to.

The.iiii^ Chapter.
THe first kind also will I shortly pass over to, for the tribulacion that a
man willingly takes himself which no man puts upon him against his own will,
is you wot well as I somewhat touched the last day, such affliccion of the
flesh or expense of his goods as a man takes himself, or willingly
bestows in punishment of his own sin, and for devotion to God. Now in this
tribulacion needs he no man to comfort him, for while no man troubles him but
him self which feleth how farreforth he may conveniently bear, and of reason
and good discrecion shall not pass that, wherein if any doubt arise, counsel
needs and not comfort. The courage that for gods sake and his soul health
kindles his heart and enflameth it thereto, shall by the same grace that put
it in his mind, give him such comfort and joy therein, that the pleasure of
his soul shall pass the pain of his body: yea and while he has in heart
also some great heaviness for his sin, yet then he considers the joy that
shall come of it, his soul shall not fail to feel than that strange case
which my body felt once in a great fever.

Vincent. What strange case was that uncle?


Anthony. Forsooth Cousin, in this same bed it is now more than.xv. year a go,
I lay in a tercian and had passed I trow.iii. or.iiii. fittes: but after fell
there one fit on me out of course, so strange and so maruelouse, that I
would in good faith have thought it impossible. For I so^einly felt myself
verily both hot and cold thorowout al my body, not in some part y^ one, and in
some part the other, for that had been you wot well no very strange thing, to
feel the head hot while the hands were a cold: but the self same parts I
say so god my soul save, I sensibly felt and right painfully to, al in one
instaunt both hot and cold at once.


Vincent. By my troth uncle this was a wonderful thing, and such as I never
heard happen any man else in my days: and few me^ are there of whose mouths I
could have believed it.


Antony. Courtesi Cousin paradue^ture lets you to say yt you believe it not
yet of my mouth nether, and surely for fear of y^ you should have heard it of
me nether, had there not an other thing happed me sone after.


Vincent. I pray you what was that uncle?


Anthony. Forsooth Cousin this I asked a phisicyon or twain, that than looked
unto me how this should should be possible, and they twain told me both
that it could not be, but that I was fallen into some slombre, and dreamed
that I felt it so.


Vincent. This hap hold I, little cause you to tell the tale the more boldelye.


Anthony. No Cousin that is true lo, but than happed there another, that a
young Gyrle here in this town whom a kinsma^ of hers had begone to teach
plysicke, told me that there was such a kind of fever in deed.


Vincent. By our Lady uncle, save for the credence of you, the tale would I
not yet tell again upon that hap of the maid. For though I know her now
for such, as I durst well believe her, it might hap her very well at that time
to lie, because she would you should take her for cunning.


Antony. Ye, but tha^ happed there yet an other hap thereon Cousin, that a work
of Galien de diff^renciis febrium, is ready to besolde in ye book sellers
shoppes: In which works she showed me than y^ Chapter where Galien says the
same.


Vincent. Mary uncle as you say, that hap happed well, and that maid had
(as hap was) in that point more cunning than had both our physicio^s
besides: and has I wene at this day in many points more.


Antony. In faith so wene I to: and that is well wared on her, for she is very
wise and well learned, and very verteous too. But see now what age is, lo, I
have been so long in my tale, that I have almost forgotten for what purpose
I told it. Oh, now I remember me lo, likewise I say, as my self felt my body
than both hoate and cold at once: so he that is contrite and heavy for his
sin, shall have cause for to be, and shall in deed be both merye and sad,
and both twain at once, and shall do as I remember holy Saint Hiero^ bids:
and doleas, and de dolor gaudeas. both be thou sorye says he, and be thou of
thy sorrow joyful also.

And thus as I began to say of comfort to be given unto him that is in this
trybulacion, that is to wit, in fruitful heaviness and penance for his sin,
shall we none need to give other, than only to remember and consider the
goodness of gods excellent mercy well that infinytely passes the malice of al
men's sin, by which he is ready to receive every man, and did spread his
arms abroad upon the cross, louinglye to enbrace all them that will come, and
even there accepted the thief at his last end that turned not to god till he
might steal no longer, and yet makes more feasle in heaven at one that from
sin turns, than of.xcix. good men that sinned not at all. And therefore of
that first kind will I make no longer tale.


The.v. Chapter. An obieccion concerning them that turn ^ot to GOD till they
come at the last cast.
Vincent. Forsooth Uncle, this is unto that kind coumforte very great, and so
great also, that it may make many a man bold to abide in his sin, even unto
his last end, trusting to be tha^ saved as that thief was.


Anthony. Uerye sooth you say Cousin, that some wretches are there such, that
in such wse abuse the great goodness of god, that the better that he is, the
worse again they be. But Cousin, though there be more joy made of his turning
yt from the point of perdicion comes to salvation, for pity that god and his
saints al of the peril of perishing that the man stood in, yet he is not set
in like state in heaven as he should have been if he had lived better before,
except it so fall that he live so well after, and do so much good that he
therein outrun in the shorter time, those good folk that yet did not so much in
much longer, as it proved in ye blessed apostle. Saint Paul, which of a
persecutor became an Apos^le, and last of al came in unto that office, and yet
in the labor of sowynge that sede of Christ's faith, outranne all the
remnaunte, so far forth that he let not to say of him self. Ego plus
omnibus cucurri, I have run more than all the remnaunte have. But yet my
Cousin, though GOD I doubt not be so mercyefull unto them, that at any time
in their life turn and ask his mercy and trust therein, though it be at the
la^te end of a man's life and hireth him as well for heaven that cummeth to
work in his Uineyarde toward night, at such time as men leave work, if the
time would serve as he hyreth him that cummeth in the morning: yet may there
no man upon the trust of this parable be boulde all his life to lie still in
sin. For let him remember that in Gods vineyarde there goethe no man but
he that is called thither. Now he that in hope to be called toward night,
will sleep out the morning, and drink out ^he day, is full likelye to
pass as night unspoken to, and than shall he with shrewde rest go
supperlesse to bed. They tell of one that was wont always to say that all
the while he lived he would do what he lust: for three words when he dyed
should make all safe inoughe: but than so happed it, that long ere he were
oulde, his horse once stombled upon a broken bridge, and as he labored to
recover him, when he saw it would not be, but down into the flood headlong
needs he should: in a sudden flight he cried out in the falling, have all to
the ^euyl: and there was he drowned with his three words ere he died, whereon
his hope hong al his wretched life. And therefore let no man sin in hope of
grace, for grace comes but at gods will, and that mind may be the let that
grace of a fruitful repenting shall never after be offered him, but that he
either graceless go linger on careless, or with a care fruitelesse, fall into
despair.


The.vi. Chapter. An ^bieccion of them that say that tribulacion of penaunc^
needs not, but is a supersticious folly.
Vincent. Forsooth uncle in this point me thinks you say very well. But than
are there some again that say on the other side, that heaviness of our sins
we shall need none at al, but only change our purpose and intent to do
better, and for that which is passed take no thought at al. And as for fasting
or other afflyccion of the body, they say we should not do it, but only to
tame the flesh when we feel it wax wan^on, and begin to rebel: for fasting
they say, serves to keep the body in a temperau^ce, but for to fast for
penance, or to do any other good work, almose deed and other, toward
satisfaccio^ of our own sin, this thing they call plain iniurye to the
passion of Christ, by which only are our sins forgeuen freely without any
recompense of our own. And they that would do penance for their own
sins, look to be their own Christ's, and pay their own raunsomes, and save
their souls them self. And with these reasons in Saxoni, many cast fasting
of, and al other bodilye afflyccion, save only where need requires to bring
the body to temperance. For other good they say can it none do to our self,
and then to our neighbor can it do none at all, and therefore they condemn
it for supersticious folly: now heaviness of heart and wepi^g for our sins,
this they reckon shame almost and womanyshe peuishnes, howebeit, thanked be
God, their women wax there now so mannyshe, that they be not so peuishe nor
so pore of sprite, but that they can sin on as men do, and be neither
afraid nor ashamed, nor weep for their sins at al. And suerlye mine uncle, I
have merueled much the less ever since that I heard the manner of their
preachers ^here. For as you remember when I was in Saxoni, these matters were
in a manner but in a ma^mering^ nor Luther was not than wedde yet, nor religious
men out of their habyte, but suffered where those that would be of the sect
freely to preach what they would unto the people. And forsooth I heard a
religious man there my self, one that had been reputed and taken for very good,
and which, as far as ye folk perceived, was of his own living somewhat
auster and sharp, but his preaching was wonderful, me think I hear him yet:
his voice was loud and shryll, his learning less tha^ mean: but where as his
matter was much part against fasting and al afflyccion for any penance which
he called men's inuencions, he cried ever out upon them to keep well the laws
of Christ, let go their pieuishe penance, and purpose the^ to mend and seek
nothing to salvation but the death of Christ, for he is our justice, and he is
our savior and our whole satisfaccion for all our deadlye sins, he did full
penance for us all upon his paynefull cross, he washed us there all clean
with the water of his sweet side, and boughte us out of the devils danger with
his dear precious blood. Leave therefore, leave I beseech you these inue^cions
of men, your foolish lenton fastes and your peuishe penance, minyshe never
Christ's thank, nor look ^o save your self, it is Christ's death I tell you
that must save us al: Christ's death I tell you ye^ again and not our own
deeds: leave your own fasting therefore, and lean to Christ alone good
christian people for Christ's dear bitter passion. Now so loud and so shryll
he cried Christ in their ears, and so thick he came forth with Christ's
bitter Passion, and that so bytterly spoken with the sweat dropping down his
chekes, that I merueiled not though I saw the poor women weep, for he made my
own here to stand up upon my headde, and with such preaching were the people
so brought in, that some fell to break their fastes on ye fasling days, not of
frailetie or of malice first, but almost of devotion, lest they should take
from Christ the thank of his bitter passion. But when they were a while
noseled in that point first, they could abide and endure after many things
more, with which had he than begone, they would have pulled him down.


Antony. Cosyn, GOD amend that man what soeeuer he be, and god keep all good
folk from such manner of preachers: such one preacher much more abuses the
name of Christ and his bitter Passion, than v. hundredth hasardars that in
their idle business swear and forswear them self by his holy bitter passion
at dice. They carye the minds of the people from the perceiving of their
^rafte, by the continual namynge of the name of Christ and crying his passion
so shryll into their ears, they forgeat yt the church has ever taught them
that all our penance without Christ's Passion were not worth a pea^e, and they
make the people wene yt we would be saved by our own deeds without Christ's
death, where we confess that his only passion meriteth incomparably more for
us, than al our own deeds do: but his pleasure is, that we shall also take
pain our own self with him, and therefore he byddeth all that will be his
dyscyples take their crosses upon their backs as he did, and with their
crosses follow him: and where they say that fasting serves but for
temperaunce to tame the flesh, and keep it from wantonness, I would in good
faith have went that Moses had not been so wild, that for the taminge of his
flesh he should have need to fast whole.xl. days together.

No nor Hely neither, nor yet our savior him self which began, and the
Apostles followed, and all chrystendome have kept the lenton.xl. days fast,
that these folk call now so foolish. King Achas was not dysposed to be wa^ton
in his flesh, when he fasted and went clothed in sack cloth and all besprent
with ashes. Nor no more was in Niniue the king and al ye City, but they wayled
and did payneful penance for their sin to procure god to pity the^ and
withdraw his indignacio^. Anna that in her wydowhed abode so many years with
fasting and praying in the temple till ^he birth of Christ^ was not I wene, in
her old age so sore disposed to ye wantones of her flesh yt she fasted al
therefore. Nor. S. Paul ye fasted so much, fasted not all therefore neither. The
scripture is full of places that prouethe fasting not to be ye inuencion of man
but ye institucio^ of god, and that it has many more profytes than one.

And that the fasting of one man may do good to an other, our savior says
him self where he shows that some kind of diuelles can not be by one man
cast out of an other Nisiin oratione and ieiunio, without prayer and fasting.
And therefore I marvel that they take this way against fasting and other
bodilye penance, and yet much more I marvel yt they mislike the sorrow and
he auines and displeasure of mind yt a man should take in forethinking of his
sin. The Prophet says. Sindite corda vestra and non vestimenta. Tear your
hearts (he says) and not your clothes. And the Prophet Dauyd says. Cor
contritum and hu^iliatum deus non despicies. A contrite heart and an humbled,
that is to say, a heart broken, torn, and with tribulacion of heaviness for his
sins laid a low under foot, shalt thou not good Lord despise. He says
also of his own contricion. Laboraui in gemitu meo lauabo per singulas noctes
lecrum meum lacrimis meis stratum meum rigabo. I have labored in my wailing, I
shall every night wash my bed with my tears, my couche will I water. But what
should I need in this matter to lay forth one place or twain. The scripture
is full of those places, by which it plainly appears that god looks of
duty, not only that we should amend and be better in the time to come, but
also be sorye, and weep, and bewail our sins committed before, and all the
old holy Doctors be full and whole of that mind that men must have for their
sins, contricion and sorrow in heart.


The.vii. Chapter. What if a man can not vvepe, nor in his heart be sorye for
his sins?
Vincent. FOrsothe uncle yet seems me this thing somewhat a sore sentence, not
for yt I think other wise, but that there is good cause and great, wherefore a
man so should, but for y^ of truth some man can not be sorry and heavy for his
sin yt he has done, though he never so fayn would: but though he can be
content for gods sake to forbear it from thenceforth, yet for every sin that
is passed, can he not only not weep, but some were happily so wanton, that
when he happeth to remember them, he can scantly forbear to laughe. Now if
contrycion and sorrow of heart, be so requisyte of necessity to remission.
many a man should stand as it seems, in a very perylous case.


Anthony. Many so should in dede^ Cosyn, and in deed many so do. And ye old
saynctes write very sore in this point: how be it, Misericordia domini super
omnia opera eius The mercy of God is above all his works, and he stands
bound to no common rule, Et ipse cognouit figmentum suum and propitiatur
infirmitatibus nostris. and he knows the frayeltye of this earthen vessel
that is of his own making, and is merciful, and has pitye and compassyon upon
our feeble infyrmyties, and shall not exact of us above ye thing that we may
do. But yet Cosyn, he that fyndeth him self in that case, in that he is
minded to do well hereafter, let him give GOD thanks that he is no worse: but
in that he can not be sorry for his sin passed, let him be sorry hardly that he
is no better. And as. S. Iherom byddeth him that for his sin soroweth in his
heart, be glad and rejoice in his sorrow: so would I counsel him that can not
be sad for his sin, to be sorry yet at ye least that he can not be sorry.
Besides this, though I would in no wise any man should dyspayer, yet would I
counsel such a man while that affeccio^ laste^h, not to be to bold of
courage, but live in double fear. First, for it is a token, either of faint
faith or of a dull dyligence, for suerly if we well believe in God, and therewith
depely consider his high maies^ye with the perell of our sin, and the great
goodness of God also, either should dread make us tremble and break our stony
heart, or love should for sorrow relent it into tears? Besides this, sith I
can scante believe, but sith so little myslykynge of our old sin is an
affeccion not very pure and clean, and none unclean thing shall enter into
heaven, clens^d shall it be, and purifyed before that we come thither. And
therefore would I farther advise one in yt case, the counsel which master
Gerson gives every man, that sith the body and the soul together make the
whole man the less affliccio^ that he feleth in his soul, ye more pain in
recompense: let him put upon his body, and purge the spyrite by the affliccion
of the flesh, and he that so does, I dare lay my life, shall have his hard
heart after relent into tears, and his soul in an wholesome heaviness and
heavenly gladness to, specially if (which must be joined with every good
thing) he join faithful prayer therewith. But Cousin, as I told you ye other
day before: in these matters with these new men will I not dispute, but suerli
for mine own part I can not well hold with the^: for as mine own poor
wits ca^ perceive, ye holy scripture of GOD is very plain against them, and
the whole corpse of chrystendom in every chryste^ region^ and ye very places in
which they dwell the^ self, have ever unto their own days clearly believed
against them, and all the old holy doctors have evermore taught against them,
and al ye old holy enterpretors have construed the scripture against them. And
therefore if these men have now perceived so late, that ye scripture has been
miss vnderstande^ all this while, and yt of all those old holy doctors no man
could understand it, than am I to old at this age to begin to study it
now, and trust these men's cunning Cosyn, that dare I not in no wise, sith I
can not see nor perceive no cause wherefore I should think that th^se men
might not now in the understanding of scrypture^ as well be deceived them
self, as they bear us in hand yt al those other have been all this while
before: how^beit Cosyn, if it so be that their way be not wrong, but that
they have found out so easy a way to heaven as to take no thought, but make
merry, nor take no penance at all, but sit them down and drink well for our
saviors sake, set cock a hope and fill in all the cups at once^ and tha^ let
Christ's passion pay for all the shot, I am not he yt will envy their good
hap, ^ut suerly counsel dare I give no man to adventure that way with
them. But such as fear lest ye way be not suer, and take upon them willingly
tribulacio^ of penance, what comfort they do take, and well may take therein,
yt have I somewhat told you alreadi. And since these other folk sit so merry
without such tribulacion, we need to talk to the^ you wotte well of no such
manner comfort, and therefore of this kind of trybulacion will I make an end.


The.viii. Chapter. Of that kind of tribulacion which though they not
willingly take, yet they willingly suffer.
Vincent. Verily good Uncle so may you well do, for you have brought it unto
very good pass. And now I requier you to come to that other kind, of which
you purposed always to treat last.


Anthony. That shall I Cousin very gladli do. The other kind is this which I
rehearsed second, and sortyng cut the other twain, have kept it for ye last.

This kind of trybulacion is you wot well, of them that wyllingly suffer
tribulacion, though that of their own choice they took it not at the first.

This kind Cosyn divide we shall in to twain. The first might we call
temptacio^, the second persecution. But here must you consider that I mean
not every kind of persecution, but ye kind only, which though the sufferer
would be loathe to fall in, yet will he rather abide it and suffer it, than by
the flitting from it, fall in ye dyspleasure of God, or leave gods pleasure
vnprocured. Howebeit, if we consider these two things well, temptacio^ and
persecucyon, we may find yt either of them is incydent to ye other. For both
by temptation the Devil persecuteth us, and by persecucion the Devil also
tempts us: and as persecution is trybulacion to every man, so is temptacion
tribulacio^ to a good man.

Now though the Devil our spyrituall enemy fight against man in both, yet
this difference has the common temptacyon from the persecucion, that
temptacio^ plain is as it were the fiendes trayn, and persecucio^ his open
fight. And therefore will I now call all this kind of trybulation here, by the
name of temptacion, and that shall I divide into two parts. The first shall I
call the Deuilles traynes, the other his open fight.


The.ix. Chapter. First of temptacion in general as it is common to both.
TO speak of every kind if temptation particularly by it self, this were you
wot well in manner an infinite thing: for under that as I told you, fall
persecutions and all. And this Devil has of his open fight as many sundry
poisoned darts, he tempts us by the world, he tempts us by our own
flesh, he tempts us by pleasure, he tempts us by pain he tempts us by
our foes, he tempts us by our own friends, and under color of kynrede, he
makes many times our next friends our most foes: for as our savior says,
Inimici hominis domestici eius. But in all manner of so diverse temptacions one
ma^uelous comfort is this, y^ with the more we be tempted, ye gladder have we
cause to be^ffor. S. James says, Omne gaudium existimate fratres quum in
t^mptaciones varias incideritis. Esteem it and take it, says he, my brethren
for a thing of all joy, when you fall into diverse and sundri manner of
temptacions: and no marvel, for there is in this world set up as it were a
game of wrestling, wherein the people of God come in on the one side, and on the
other side come mighty strong wres^lers and wily, that is to wete, the
Deuylles, the cursed proud damned sprites: for it is not our flesh alone that
we must wrestle with, but with the devil too, Non eft nobis colluctacio
aduersus carnem and sanguinem, sed aduersus principes and potestates tenebrarum
harum aduersus spiritalia nequitie in celestibus. Our wrestling is not here
says. S. Paul against flesh and blud, but against the Princes and Potestates
of these dark regyons, against the spyrituall wicked ghostes of the air.

But as God (unto them that on his part give his adversary the fall) has
prepared a croune, so he that will not wrestle shall none have: for as. S. Paul
says, Nemo coronabitur nisi quilegittime certauerit. there shall no man have
^he crown but he that does his deuor therefore, according to the law of the
game. And than as holy. S. Barnard says: how could thou fight or wrestle,
therefore, if there were no chalenger against thee, yt would provoke the
thereto. And therefore may it be a great comfort as. S. James says to every
man that feleth himself challenged and provoked by te^pta^ion, for thereby
perceyueth he that it comes to his course to wrestle, which shall be (but if
he willingly will play ye coward or the fool) ye matter of his eternal
reward in heaven.

The.x. Chapter. A special comfort in all temptacion.
BUt now must this needs be to man an inestimable comfort in all temptacion,
if his faith fail him not, yt is to wit, yt he may be sure that God is always
ready to give him strength against ye deuylles might, and wysdo^ against y^
deuilles traynes: for as the Prophet says: Fortitudo m^^et laus mea dominus
factus est mihi in salutem. My strength and my praise is our Lord, he has
been my safegarder. And the scripture says. Pete a deo sapientiam et dabit
tibi. Ask wisdom of God and he shall give it thee: Vt possitis (as. S. Paul
says: deprehendere omnes arts, that you may spy and perceive all ye
crafts. A great comfort may this be in all kinds of temptacio^, ye god
has so his hand upon him that is willing to stand and will trust in him,
and call upon him yt he has made him sure by many faithful promyses in holy
scripture, that either he shall not fall, or if he some time through fayntnes
of faith stagger and hap to fall, yet if he call upon God betymes, his fall
shall be no sore bruisinge to him, but as the scripture says: Iustus si
ceciderit non^ collidetur quia dominus supponit manu^. The just man though he
fall shall not be bruised, for our lord holds under his hand. The Prophet
expresses a plain comfortable promise of God against all temptacion, where he
says: Qui habitat in adiutorio altissimi, in proteccit one dei ^eli
commorabitur. who so dwells in the help of the highest God, he shall abide
in ye proteccio^ or defense of y^ God of heaven. Who dwells now good Cosyn
in the help of the high God? suerly he ye through a good ^aythe abides in y^
trust and confydence of Gods help and neither for lack of that faith and
trust in his help. falls desperate of all help, nor departs from the
hope of his help to seek him self help as I toulde you the other day, of
the flesh, the world or the devil. Now he than yt by fast faith and suer
hope dwells in Gods help and hangs always thereupon, never fallinge from
that hope, he shall, says the Prophet ever abide and dwell in Gods defense
and prot^ccyon, that is to say, that while he fails not to believe well and
hope well, GOD will never fail in all temptacion to defend him. For unto
such a faithful well hoping man the Prophet in the same psalm says farther:
Scapulis suis obumbrabit tibi and sub pennis eius sperabis: with his shoulders
shall he shadow thee, and under his feathers shall thou trust.

Lo, here has every faithful man a sure promise, that in y^ fervent heat of
temptacion or tribulacio^ (for as I have said diverse times before) they be in
such wise coincydent, that every trybulacion the Devil uses for temptacion
to bring us to impacience, and thereby murmr, grudge and blasphemy, and
every kind of temptacion is to a good man that fights against it, and will
not follow it, a very paynfull tribulacion. In the fervent heat, I say
therefore, of every temptacion, GOD gives the faithful man that hops in him
the shadow of his holy shoulders which are broad and large suffycient to
refrygerate and refreshe the man in that heat, and in every trybulacion he
puts his shoulders for a defense between.

And than what weapon of the Devil may give us any deadly wound, while that
impenetrable pauyce of the shoulder of GOD s^andeth always between? Than goes
the vearse farther and says unto such a faithful man, et sub pennis eius
sperabis. Thy hope shall be under his feathers, y^ is to wete, for the good
hope thou haste in his help. he will take the so nere him into his proteccyon,
that as the hen, to keep her young chyckyns from the kyght, nestleth them
togather under her own wings, so fro the deuilles claws, ye rauenouse kyght
of this dark air, ye God of heaven will gather his faithful trustinge folk,
nere unto his own sides, and set them in surety very well and warm under the
covering of his own heavenly wings. And of this defense and protection our
sauyor spoke him self unto the Jews, as mention is made in the.xxiii. Chapter
of. S. Math. to whom he said in this wise, Jerusalem Jerusalem que occidis
Prophetas and lapidas eos qui ad te missisunt, quotics volui congregare te
sicut gallina congregat Pullos suos and noluist^? that is to say, Jerusalem
Jerusalem, that kyllest ye Prophets and stonest unto death them that are
sent unto the, how often would I have gathered the together as ye hen
gathers her chyckens, and thou would not?

Here are words Cosyn Uincent, words of no little comfort unto every christen
man, by which we may see, with how tender affection GOD of his great goodness
longs to gather under the proteccion of his wings, and how often like a
loving hen he clocketh home unto him, even those chicke^s of his, that
wylfully walk abroad in the kyghtes danger, and will not come at his
clockynge, but ever the more he clockethe for them, the farther they go from
him. And therefore can we not doubt if we will follow him and with faithful
hope come run unto him, but that he shall in all matter of temptacion take us
nere unto him and set us even under his wings, and than are we safe, if we
will tarry there. For against our will can there no power pull us thence, nor hurt
our souls there. Pone me (says ye Prophet) iuxta te, and cui^suis manus
pugnet contra me. Set me nere unto the, and fight against me whose hand that
will: and to show the great safegarde and suerty that we shall have while we
sit under his heavenly feathers. The Prophet says yet a great deal farther.
Sub vmbra alarm tuarum exultabo. That is to wete, that we shall not only
(when we sit by his sweet side under his heavenly wing) sytte in safeguard,
but that we shall also under the covering of his heavenly wings, with great
exultacion rejoice.

The.xi. chapter. Of.iiii. kinds of temptacions, and therein both the parts
of that kind of tribulacion that men willingly suffer, touched in two
vearsis of the Psalter.
Now in the next vearses following, ye Prophet briefly comprehends four
kinds of temptacion, and therein all the tribulacio^ that we shall now speak
of, and also some part of that which we have spoken of before, and therefore I
shall peradventure, except any farther thing fall in our way, with the treating of
those.ii. vearses finishe and end al our matter. The Prophet says in ye
psalm S^uto circumdabit te veritas eius, non timebis a timore nocturno. A
sagitta volante in die a negotio perambulante in tenebris ab incursu et demonio
meridiano. The truth of God shall compass the about with a pauice, thou
shall not be afraid of the nights fear, nor of the arrowe flying in the day,
nor of the business walking about in darkenesses, nor of the incursion or
invasion of the devil in the mydde day.

First Cousin in these words: The truth of GOD shall coumpasse the about
with a pauice: The Prophet for the cumforte of every good man in all temptacion
and in all tribulacion beside those other things that he said before, that
the shoulders of god shall shadow them, and that also they should sytte under
his wynge, here says he farther. The troth of GOD shall compass thee with a
pauice, that is to wit, that as god has faithfully promised to protecte and
defend those that fai^hfully will dwell in the tru^t of his help, so will he
truly perform it, and thou y^ such one art, will ye ^routh of his promise
defend not with a little round buckler that scant can cover ye head, but with a
long large pauice that covers all alonge the body, made as Saint Barnard
says, broad above with the godhead, and narowe beneath with the manhead, so
yt this pauice is our savior Christ him self: and yet is this pauice not
like other pauices of this world, which are not made but in such wise as while
they defend one part, the man may be wounded upon another: but this pauice is
such, that as the Prophet says. it shall round about enclose and compass
the, so that thine enemy shall hurt thy soul on no side. For, Scuto (says
he) circundabit te veritas eius: with a pauice shall his truethe enuirone and
compass the round about, and than continently following, to the intent yt we
should see yt it is not without necessite that the pauice of god should
cu^passe us about upon every side. He shows in what wise we be by the devil
with traynes and assaults by iiii. kinds of te^ptacions and tribulacions
enuyroned on upon every side: against al which cumpasse of te^ptacions and
tribulacio^s, that round cumpassing pauice of Gods truth, shall in such
wise defend us and keep us safe, that we shall need to dread none of them all.

The.xii. Chapter. The first kind of the four temptacions.
First he says: Non timebis a timore noc^urno. Thou shall not be afraid of
the fear of ye night. By the night is there in scripture sometime understand
trybulacion as appears in the.xxxiiii. Chapter of Job. Nouit ^nim deus opera
^orum, id^irco induce^ nocrem. God has known the works of them, and
therefore shall he bring night upon them, that is to wit tribulacion for
their wyckednes: and well you wot, that the night is of the nature of it self
very discumfortable and full of fear. And therefore by the nights fear,
here I understand the tribulacion by which the devil through the sufferaunce
of god, either by him self or other that are his instruments, tempts good
folk to impacience as he did Job. But he that as the prophet says, dwells
and continues faithfully in the hope of gods help, shall so be becleped in
on every side with the shield or pauice of god, that he shall have no need to
be afraid of such tribulacion that is here called the nights fear. And it
may be also conuenientlye called the nights fear for two causes. The one^
for that many times ye cause of his trybulacyo^ is unto him that suffers it,
dark and unknown, and therein varyeth it, and dyffereth from that trybulacion
by which the devil tempts a man with open fight and assault for a known
good thing from which he would withdraw him or for some known evil thing
into which he would drive him by force of such persecucio^. An other cause for
which it is called ye nights fear, may be for yt ye night is so far out of
courage, and naturallye so casts folk in fear, yt of every thing whereof
they perceive any manner dread, their fantasy doubleth their fear, and makes
them often wene that it were much worse then in deed it is. The Phrophet says
in the psalter. Posuisti tenebras and facta est no^, in illa pertransibunt
omnes besti^ siluarum. Catuli leonum rugientes querentes a deo escam sibi Thou
haste good lord set the darkness, and made was the night, and in the night
walk all the beasts of the wood. The whelps of the Lions roaring and calling
unto GDO for their meat.

Now though that the Lions whelps walk about roaring in ye night and seek
for their pray, yet can they not geat such meat as they would always, but
must hold them self content with such as God suffers to fall in their
way. And though they be not ware thereof, yet of god they ask it, and of him
they have it. And this may be coumforte to al good men in their night fear,
in their dark tribulacion: that though they fall into the claws or the
tee^he of those Lions whelps, yet shall all that they can do not pass
beyond the body, which is but as the garmente of the soul. For the soul it
self which is the substance of the man, is so suerly fensed in round about
with the shield or pauice of God, that as long as he will abide faithfully in
adiutorio altissimi, in the hope of Gods help, the Lions whelps shall not be
able to hurt it. For the great Lion him self could never be suffered to go
farther in the trybulacion of Job, than God from time to time gave him leave.
And therefore the deep darkness of the midnight makes men y^ stand out of
faith and out of good hope in God, to be in their tribulacion far in the
greater fear for lack of the light of faith whereby they might perceive that
the vttermoste of their peril is a far less thing than they take it for, but
we be so wont to set so much by our body which we see and feel, and in the
feding and fos^ring whereof we set our whole delight and our wealth, and so
little, alas, and so seld we think upon our soul because we cannot see that,
but by spiritual understanding, and most specially by the iye of our faith
(in the meditacio^ whereof, we bestow, god wot, little time) that the loss of
our body we take for a sorer thing and a greater tribulacion a great deal,
than we do the loss of our soul. And whereas our savior bids us that we
should not fear these lions whelps that can but kill our bodies, and when
that is done have no far^her thing in their power wherewith they can do us
harm, but bids us stand in dread of him, which when he has s^aine the
body, is able tha^ beside to cast the soul into everlasting fire: we be so
blind in the dark night of tribulacion, for the lack of full and fast
belief of gods word, that whereas in the day of prosperity we very little
fear god for our soul, our nyghtes fear of adversity makes us very sore
to fear the Lion and his whelps for dread of loss of our body. And whereas.
S. Paul in sundry places shows us that our body is but as the garment of the
soul, yet the faintnes of our faith to the Scripture of god makes us with the
nights fear of tribulacion more to dread, not only the loss of our body^
tha^ of our soul: that is to wit, of the clothing tha^ of the substance
that is clothed therewith, but also of the very outward goods that serve for
the clothing of the body, and much more foolish are we in that dark nights
fear, than were he that could forgeat the saving of his body, for fear of
losing his old rain beaten cloak that is but the covering of his gown or his
coat. Now consider farther yet, that the Prophet in the forecemembred
vearses, says not that in the night walk^ only the Lions whelps, but also,
Omnes besties siluarum all the beasts of the wood. Now wot you well, that if
a man walk through the wood in the night, many things may make him afraid,
of which in the day he would not be afraid of a whit: for in the night
every bushe (to him that waxes once afraid) seems a thief. I remember that
when I was a young man, I was once in the war^e with the king: than my master
(God assoile his soul) and we were camped within the Turks ground, many a
mile beyond Belgrade, which would God were ours now as well as it was
than: but so happed it, that in our camp about midnighte, there sodaynlye
rose a rumoure and a skrye that the Turks whole army was secretly stealing
upon us, wherewith our whole host was warned to arm them in haste, and set
themself in array to fight, and than were scurars of ours that brought these
sudden tidinges, examyned more laisorly by the counsel, what suretye or what
likelyhode they had perceived therein: of whom one showed that by the glimuring
of the moon he had espied and perceived and seen them himself, coming on
softely and soberly in a long raunge all in a good order, not one farther
forth than the other in the forefrunte, but as even as the threde, and in
breadth farther than he could see in length. His fellows being examined, said
that he was somewhat pricked forth before them, and came so fast back to tell
it the^, yt they thought it rather time to make haste and give warning to the
camp, than to go nerer unto them, for they were not so far of, but that
they had yet themself somewhat an imperfect syghte of them too: thus stood
we wat^hyng all the remnaunte of the night, evermore harkenyng when we should
hear them come with hushte, stand still, me think I hear a tramplyng, so
that at last many of us thought we heard them our self also. But when the
day was sprongen, and that we saw no man, out was our scurer sent
again, and some of our capitaines with him to show them where about the
place was, in which he perceived them: and when they came thither, they found
that great fearful army of the Turks so soberlye coming on, turned (God
bethanked) into a fair long hedge, standing even stone still. And thus fares
it in the nyghtes fear of trybulacyon, in which, the devil to bear down and
ouerwhelme with dread the faithful hope that we should have in GOD, casts
in our imaginacion much more fear than cause. For while there walk in the
night, not only the Lions whelps, but over that, all the beasts of the
wood, beside the beasts that we hear roari^g in the dark night of
tribulacion, and fear it for a Lion, we sometime find well afterward in the
day, that it was no Lion at al, but a sely rude roaring ass: and the thing yt
on the sea seems sumtime a rock, is in deed nothing else but a mist: howbeit,
as ye Prophet says: He that faithfully dwells in the hope of gods help, the
pauice of his troth shall so fence him in round about, that be it an ass
colte, or a Lions whelpe, a rock of stone or a mist. Non tim^^it a timore
nocturno, the nights fear thereof shall he nothing need to dread at all.

The.xiii. Chapter. Of pusillanimitie.
THerefore find I that in this nights fear, one great part thereof is the
fault of pusillanimitie, yt is to wit, feeble, and faynte stomach, by which a
man for fainte heart, is afraid where he needs not: by reason whereof he
f^yeth often times for fear of that thing, of which if he fled not, he
should take no harm: and some man does some time by his fleing make his
enemy bold on him, which would if he fled not but durst abide thereby, give
over and ^^ee from him. This fault of pusillanimitie makes a man in his
tribulacion for fieble heart, first impacient, and afterward often times
drives him by impacience into a contrary affeccion, making frowardlye,
stubburne and angry against God, and thereby to fall into blasphemye, as do
the damned souls in hell: this fault of pusillanimitie and timerouse mind,
lets a man also many times from ye doing of many good things, which (if he
took a good s^omake to him in the trust of Gods help) he were well able to
do, but the devil casts him in a cowardice, and makes him take it for
humility to think him self unmeet and unable thereto, and therefore to leave
the good thing undone, whereof GOD offers him occasyon and had made him mete
and conueniente thereto. But such folk have need to lift up their hearts
and call upon God, and by the counsel of other good ghostly folk, cast
away the cowardice of their own conceit, which the nights feare^ by the
devil has framed in their fantasy, and look in ye gospel upon him which laid
up his talente, and left it unoccupied, and therefore utterly lost it, with a
great reproach of his pusillanymitie by which he had went he should have
excused him self in that he was afraid to put it forth in ure and occupye it,
and all this fear comes by the deuilles dryfte, wherein he takes occasion
of the fayntnes of our good and sure trust in god, and therefore let us
faithfully dwell in ye good hope of his help, and than shall the pauice of his
truth so compass us about, that of this nyghtes fear we shall have no fear
at all.

The.xiiii. Chapter. Of the daughter of pusillanimitie a scrupulous conscience.
This Pusillanimytie brings forth by the nyghtes fear, a very tymerous
daughter, a sely wretched Gyrle and ever puling, that is called scrupulosytie
or a scrupulous conscience. This gyrle is a metely good pussell in a house,
never idle, but ever occupied and busy, but albeit she have a very gentle
maystres yt loves her well, and is well content with that she does, or if it
be not all well (as all can not be always well) content to pardon her as she
does other of her fellows, and so lets her know that she will: yet can
this peuishe Gyrle never cease whining and puling for fear lest her maystres
be always angry with her, and yt she shall shrewdly be shent. Were her maistres
wene you like to be content with this condition? Nay verily, I knew such one
my self whose maystres was a very wise woman, and (which thing is in women,
rare) very mylde and also meek, and liked very well such service as she did
her in her house, but this continual dyscomfortable fashion of hers she so
much misliked, y^ she would sometime say. Eygh, what ayleth this gyrle. The
eluishe vrchyn weneth I were a devil I trow: suerly if she did me.x. times
better service the^ she does, yet with this fantastical fear of hers, I
would be loath to have her in my house.

Thus fares lo, the scrupulous person, which frames him self many times
double the fear that he has cause, and many times a great fear where there
is no cause at al, and of that which is in deed no sin, makes a venial,
and that y^ is no venial, imagines to be deadlye: and yet for all that falls
in them, being namely such of their own nature, as no man long lives without,
and tha^ he fears that he be never full confessed nor never full co^tryte, and
than that his sins be never full forgeuen him, and than he confesses and
confesses again, and cumbreth him self and his confessor both, and than
every prayer that he says, though he say it as well as the frail infyrmitie
of ye man will suffer, yet is he not satisfied, but if he say it again, and
yet after that again: and when he has said one thing thryse, as little is he
satysfied with the la^te as with the first, and than is his heart evermore in
heaviness, unquiet, and in fear, full of doubt and dulnes, without comfort or
spyrytuall consolacion.

With this nyghtes fear, the devil sore troubles the mind of many a right
good man, and that does he to bring him to some great inconvenience, for he
will if he can, drive him so much to the fearful mindinge of gods rigorous
Justice, yt he will keep him from the cumfortable remembrance of gods great
mercy, and so make him do all his good works wearilye, and without
consolacion and quicknes.

Moreover, he makes him take for sin, some thing that is none, and for
deadly, some such as are but venial, to the intent that when he shall fall in
them, he shall by reason of his scruple sin, where else he should not, or
sin deadly (while his conscience in the deed doing so gave him) where else in
deed he had but offended venyally. Yea and farther the devil lo^geth to make
all his good works and spiritual exercise so painful and and so tedious
unto him, that with some other subtle suggestion or false wyly doctrine of a
false spiritual liberty, he should for the false ease and pleasure that he
should sodeinly find therein, be easily conveyed from that evil fault into a
much worse, and have his conscience as wide and as large after, as ever it was
narrow and strayte before. For better is yet of truth, a conscience a little
to strayte, then a great deal to large. My mother had, when I was a little
boy, a good old woman yt took head to her children, they called her mother
Maude^ I trow you have heard of her.

Vincent. Yea, yea, very much.


Antony She was wont when she sat by the fire with us, to tell us yt were
children many chyldyshe tales. But as Plinius says, yt there is no book
lightly so badde, but that some good thing a man may pyke out thereof: so think
I there is no tale so foolish, but yt yet in one matter or other, to some
purpose it may hap to serve. For I remember me^ yt among other of her fond
chyldyshe tales, she told us one that the Ass and the woulfe came on a time
to confession to the fox. The poor Ass came to shryft in ye shroftide, a
day or two before Ashewednesdaye, but ye woulfe would not come to confession
until he saw first Palm Sunday pas^, and tha^ foded yet forth farther until
good Frydaye came. The Fox asked the Ass before he began Benedicite.
wherefore he came to confession so soon before lent began. The poor beast
answered hm again: for fear of deadly sin, and for fear he should lose
his part of any of those prayers that the priest in the cleansing days
prays, for them that are confessed already. Than in his shryfte he had a
marvelous great grudge in his inward conscience, that he had one day given
his master a cause of anger, in that, yt with his rude roaring before his
master arose, he had awaked him out of his sleep, and bereued him of his
rest. The fox for ye fault^ like a good dyscrete co^fessor, charged him to
do so no more, but lie still and sleep like a good son him self till his
master were up, and ready to go to work, and so should he be sure that he
should not wake him no more.

To tell you all the poor Asses confession, it were a long work: for every
thing that he did was deadly sin with him, the poor soul was so scrupulous.

But his wise wyly co^fessor accoumpted the^ for trifles, as they were in deed,
and swear afterward unto the bageard that he was so weary to sit so long and
hear him, that saving for the manner sake, he had lever have sytten all the
while at breakefaste with a good fat goose. But when it came to the penance
giving, the fox found that the most weighty sin in all his shrift, was
glotonye, and therefore he discretly gave him in penance, that he should
never for gredines of his own meat do any other beast any harm or
hinderaunce, and then eat his meat, and study for no more.

Now, as good mother Maude told us, when the Woulfe came to confession to
father Raynarde (for that was, she said, the foxes name) upon good frydaye, his
confessor shook his great payer of beads upon him, almost as big as
bowls, and asked him wherefore he came so late? Forsooth father Raynarde quod
the woulfe, I must needs tell you the truth, I come you wot well therefore, I
durst come no sooner for fear lest you would for my glotonye have given me in
penance to fast some part of this lent. Nay nay, quod father fox, I am not
so unreasonable, for I fast none of it my self. For I may say to the son
between us twain here in confession, it is no commandment of god this
fasting, but an inuencion of man. The priests make folk fast and put them to
pain about the moon shine in the water, and do but make folk fools, but
they shall make me no such fool I warraunte thee son. For I eat flesh all
this lent my self I: howebeit, because I will not be in deed occasion of
slander, I therefore eat it secretlye in my chamber out of sight of al such
foolish brethren, as for their weak scrupulous conscience would wax offended
wythall, and so would I counsel you to do. Forsooth father Fox quod the
woulfe, and so I thank god I do as nere as I can, for when I go to my meat,
I take none other company with me, but such sure brethren as are of my own
nature, whose consciences are not weak I warraunt you, but their stomach as
strong as mine. Well tha^, no force quod father fox. But when he heard after by
his confession yt he was so great a rauenor yt he devoured and spent sometime so
much vytaile at one meal, as the price thereof would find some poor man
with his wife and his children almost al ye wieke, than he prudently reproved
yt point in him, and preached hm a process of his own temperaunce, which
never used as he said to pass upon him self the valor of.vi. d. at a meal,
no nor yet so much neither. For when I bring home a Gose, quod he, not out of
ye poulters shop where folk find them out of their feathers ready plucked,
and se which is the fattest, and yet for.vi. d. by and chose the best: but out
of the houswifes house at the first hand, which may somewhat better cheap
aforde them you wot well than the poulter may, nor yet can not be suffered to
se them plucked and stand and chose the^ by day, but am feign by night to
take adventure, and when I come home, am feign to do the labor my self and
pluck her. Yet for all this, though it be but lean, and I wene not well worth
a grote, serves it me sometime for all that both dinner and supper to. And
therefore, as for that you live of raven, therein can I find no fault: you have
used it so long, that I think you can do none, other, and therefore were it
folly to forbydde it you, and to say the truth against good consience to, For
live you must I wot well, and other craft can you none, and therefore as reason
is, must you live by that. But yet you wot well, to much is to much, and
measure is a merye mean, which I perceive by your shrifte you have never used
to keep, and therefore suerly this shall be your penance: that you shall all this
year never pass upon your self the price of.vi. d. at a meal, as nere as
your conscience can guess the price.

Their shrifte have I showed you as mother Maude showed it us. But now serves
for our matter the conscience of them both, in the true perfourminge of their
penance. The poor Ass after his shrifte, when he waxed an hungered, saw a
sow lie with her pigges well lapped in new straw, and near he drew and
thought to have eaten of the straw, but anon his scrupulous conscience began
therein to g^udge him, for while his penance was for gredines of his meat, he
should do none other body no harm, he thought he might not eat one strawe^
lest for lack of that straw, some of those pigges might hap to dye for
cold: so held he still his hungre till one brought him meat. But when he
should fall thereto, then fell he yet in a far farther scruple, for then it came
in his mind that he should yet break his penance if he should eat any of ye
either, sith he was commanded by his ghostly father that he should not for
his own meat hyndre any other bea^te, for he thought that if he eat not
that meat, some other beast might hap to have it, and so should he by the
eating of it, paraduenture hyndre some other, and thus stood he still fasting,
till when he ^olde the cause, his ghostly father came and informed him better,
and then he cast of that scruple, and fell manerly to his meat, and was a
right honest Ass many a fair day after.

The woulfe now coming from shrift, clean soyled from his sins, went about
to do, as a shreude wife once told her husband that she would do when she
came from shrifte. Be merry man, quod she now, for this day I thank God was I
well shryuen, and I purpose now therefore to leave of al mine old shrewdnes
and begin even afreshe.


Vincent. Ah, well uncle, can you report her so: that word hard I her
speak, but she said it in sport to make her good man laughe.


Antony. In deed it seemed she spoke it half in sport, for that she said she
would cast away all her old shrewdnes, therein I trow she sported: but in
that she said she would begin it all afreshe, her husband found that good
earnest.


Vincent Well, I shall show her I warrant you what you say.


Antony. Than will you make me make my word good: but what soever she did, at
leastwise so fared now this woulfe, which had cast out all his old raven in
confession, and than hungre pricked him forward, that (as the shrewde wife
said) he did in deed begin al afreshe. But yet the prycke of conscience
wythdrewe and held him back because he would not for breaking of his
penance, take any pray for his meal tide that should pass ye price of.vi.
d. It happed him tha^ as he walked prolling for his gear about, he came where
a man had in few days before, cast of two old, lean, and lame horses, so
sick, that no flesh was there almost leaft on them, and the one when the
woulfe came by, could scant stand upon his legs, and the other already
dead, and his skin rypped of and carried away. And as he looked upon the^,
sodeinly he was first about to feed upon them, and whette his teethe on their
bones, but as he looked aside, he spied a fair cow in a close walking with
her young calfe by her side: and as soon as he saw them, his consceince
began to grudge him against both those two horses, and than he syghed and
said unto him self. Alas wicked wretch that I am, I had almost broken my
penance ere I was ware, for yonder dead horse, because I never saw no dead
horse sold in the market, and I should even dye therefore by the way that my
sinful soul shall to, I can not devise what price I should set upon him, but
in my conscience I set him far above vi. d. and therefore I dare not meddle with
him. Now tha^ is yo^der quick horse of likelihode worth a great deal of
money, for horse be dear in this country, specially such soft aumblers, for
I see by his pace he trotteth not, nor can sca^t shift a foot, and therefore I
may not meddle with him, for he very far passes my vi. d. but kine, this
country here has inough^ but noney have they very little: and therefore
considering the plenty of ye kyne, and the scarcity of the money, as for
yonder peuishe ^owe seems unto me in my conscience worth, not past a grote,
and she be worth so much. Now than as for her calfe, is not so much as she by
half, and therefore, while the cow is in my conscience worth but four pence,
my conscience cannot se^ue me for sin of my soul to praise her calfe above
two pence, and so pass they not.vi. d, between them both, and therefore them
twain may I well eat at this one meal, and break not my penance at all, and
so thereupon he did without any scruple of conscience. If such beasts could
speak now, as mother Maude said they could than^ some of them would, I wene,
tell a tale almost as wise as this: wherein save for the minishing of old mother
Maudes tale, else would a shorter ^rocesse have served: but yet as peuishe as
the parable is, in this it serves for our purpose, that the nights fear of
a conscience somewhat scrupulouse, though it be painful and tro^blous to him
that has it, like as this poor ass had here, is les^e harm yet, than a
conscience ^uerlarge, or such as for his own fantasy the man lust to frame
himself, now drawing it narrow now stretching it in breadth, after the manner
of a cheuerel point, to serve on every side for his own commodity, as did
here the wylye ^oulfe: but such folk are out of ^ribulacion, and comfort
need they none, and therefore are they out of our matter: but those that are in
the nights fear of their own scrupulous conscience, let them be well ware
as I said, that the devil, for wearines of the one, draw them not into the
other: and while he would flee from Scylla, drive him into Charibdis. He must
do as doth^ a ship that should come into a haven, in y^ mouth whereof lie
secret rocks under ye water on both sides, if he be by missehappe entered in
among the^ that are on the one side, and cannot tell how to geat out, he must
geat a substaunciall cunning pilote that so can conduce him from the rocks on
that side that yet he bring him not into those that are on the other side, but
can guide him in the midde way: let them I say that are therefore in the
troublouse fear of their own scrupulous conscience, submit the rule of their
own conscience, to the counsel of some other good man, which after the
variety and the nature of the scrupulous, may temper his advise: yea although
a man be very well learned him self, yet let him in this case learn the
custom used among phisicions: for be one of them never so cunning, yet in his
own disease and sickness, he never uses to trust al to himself, but sends
for such of his fellows, as he knows mete, and puts himself in their
hands for many consideracions, whereof they assign the causes, and one of the
causes is fear, whereof upon some tokens he may co^ceyue in his own passion, a
great deal more then needs: and that were good for his health, that for the
time he knew no such thing at all. I knew once in this town, one of the
most cunning men in that faculty, and the best expert, and therewith the
most famous to^ and he that the greatest cures did upon other men, and yet
when he was him self once very sore sick, I heard his fellows that than
looked unto him, of all which, every one would in their own disease, have
used his help before any other men, wish yet that for the time of his own
sickness, being so sore as it was, he had known no physic at all, he took so
great head unto every suspicious token, and feared so far the worste, that
his fear did him some time much more harm tha^ the syckenes gave him cause.
And therefore as I say, whosoever has such a trouble of his scrupulouse conscience,
let him for a while forbear the judgment of himself, and follow the
counsel of some other whom he knows for well learned and verteous^ and
specially in the place of confession, for there is god specially present with
his grace, assisting his holy Sacrament, and let him not doubt to acquiet
his mind and follow that he there is biddden, and think for a while less of
the fear of Gods justice, and be more merry in the remembrance of his
mercy, and persevere in prayer for grace, and abide and dwell faithfully in the
sure hope of his help, and than shall he find without any doubt, that the
pauyce of Gods troth shall, as the Prophet says, so compass him about,
that he shall not need to dread this nights fear of scrupulositie, but shall
have afterward his conscience stablysshed in good quiet and rest.


The.xv. Chpter. An other kind of the nights fear, an other daughter of
pusillanimitie, that is to vvete, that horrible temptacion by which some
folk are tempted to kill and destroy themself.
Vincent. VErelye good Uncle, you have in my mind, well declared these kinds
of the nights fear.


Antony. Sureli Cousin, but yet are there many more than I can either remember or
find: howbeit, one yet comes to my mind now, of which I before no thing
thought^ and which is yet in mine opinion, of all the other fears the most
horrible: that is to wit Cousin, where the devil tempts a man to kill and
destroy himself.


Vincent. Undoubtedly this kind of tribulacion is meruelouse and st^aunge, and
the temptacio^ is of such a sort, that some men have opinion that such as
fall once in that fantasye, can never after full cast it of.


Anthony. Yes, yes Cousin, many a hundredth, and else god forbid: but the thing
that makes men so say, is because that of those which finally do destroy
themself, there is much speech and much wondering, as it is well worthy, but
many a good man, and many a good woman has sometime, yea diverse years each
after other, continually be tempted thereto, and yet have by grace and good
counsel, well and verteously withstand it, and been in conclusion clearly
delivered of it, and their tribulacion nothing known abroad, and therefore
nothing talked of: but surely Cousin, an horrible sore trouble it is to any man
or woman that the devil tempts therewith: many have I heard of, and with
some have I talked my self, that have been sore encombred with that
temptacion, and marked have I not a little the manner of them.


Vincent. I require you good uncle, show me somewhat of such things as you
perceive therein, for first where you call this kind of temptacion the daughter
of pusillanimitie, and thereby so nere of sibbe unto the nights fear, me
thinks on the other side, that it is rather a thing that comes of a great
courage and boldness, when they dare their own hands put them self to death,
from which we see almost every man shrynke and flee, as that many such as we
know by good proof and plain experyence for men of great heart and of an
excedyng hardy courage.


Anthony. I said Cosyn Uyncent, of that pusillanymytie comes this temptacion,
and very truth it is. y^ in deed it so does, but yet I meynt it not that of
only faint heart and fear it comes and grows always, for the devil
tempts sundry folks by sundry ways: but the cause wherefore I spoke of none
other kind of temptacion, than of only that which is the daughter that the
devil begets upon pusyllanimitie, was for that, that those other kinds of
that temptacio^ fall not under the nature of tribulacio^ and fear, and
therefore fall they far out of our matter here, and are such te^ptacio^s as
only need counsel, and not coumforte or consolacion, for that the persons
therewith tempted, be with that kind of temptacion not troubled in their mind,
but verily well content, both in tempting and folowinge: for some has there
been Cousin such, that they have be tempted thereto by mean of a folishe pride,
and some by ye mean of anger, without any dread at al, and very glad thereto,
to this I say not nay. But where as you wene that none fall thereto by fear,
but that they have all a strong mighty stomach, that shall you see the
contrary, and that peraduen^ure in those of whom you would wene the stomach
most strong, and their heart and courage most hardye.


Vincent. Yet is it maruayle Uncle to me y^ it should be as you say it is,
that this temptacion is unto them that do it for pride or for anger, no
trybulacion, nor yt they should need in so great a dyst^esse and peril both
of body and soul to be lost, no manner of good ghostly comfort at al,


Anthony. Let us therefore Cousin, consider a sample or two, for thereby shall we
the better perceive it. There was here in Buda in king Ladislaus days, a good
pore honest man's wife: this woman was so fiendyshe, that the Devil
perceyuinge her nature, put her in the mind that she should anger her
husband so sore, that she might give him an occasion to kill her, and than he
should be hanged for her.


Vincent. This was a s^range temptacion in deed: what the Devil should she be
the better than?


Anthony. Nothing, but that it eased her shrewde stomach before, to think
that her husband should be hanged after. And peradventure if you look about
the world and considre it well, you shall find more such stomakes tha^ a
few. Have you never heard no furious body say plainly, that to see some
such man have a myschy^fe, he would with good will be content to lie as long
in hell as God lives in heaven?


Vincent. Forsothe and some such have I heard?


Anthony. This mind of his was not much less mad then hers, but rather
happily ye more mad of ye twayn, for the woman peradventure did not cast so
far pe^ell therein. But to tell you now to what good pass her charytable
purpose came: as her husband (the man was a carpenter) stood hewynge with his
chyppe axe upon a piece of timbre, she began after her old guise, so to
revile him, that the man waxed wroth at last, and ^ade her get her in or he
would lay ye helue of his axe about her back, and said also, that it were
little sin even with that axe head to choppe of that unhappy head of hers,
that carried such an ungracious tongue therein. At that word the Devil took
his time, and whetted her tongue against her teeth, and when it was well
sharped, she swear unto him in very fierce anger. By ye mass horeso^ husband
I would thou would, here lies my head lo, (and therewith down she laid
her head upon the same tymbre logge) if thou smite it not of, I beshrewe thy
horesons heart. With yt, likewise as the Devil stood at her elbowe, so stood
(as I heard say) his good angel at his, and gave him ghostly courage, and
bade him be bold and do it. And so the good man up with his chyppe axe, and
at a choppe chopped of her head in deed. There were standing other folk by,
which had a good sport to hear her chide, but little they looked for this
chance till it was done ere they could let it: they said they heard her
tongue babble in her head, and call horeson^ horeson^ twyse after the head was
from the body. At leastewyse, afterward unto the king, thus they reported
all, except only one, and that was a woman, and she said that she heard it
not.


Vincent. Forsothe this was a wonderful work, what became uncle of the man?


Anthony. The king gave him his pardon.


Vincent. Uerely he might in concience do no less.


Anthony. But than was i^ farther at another point, yt there should have been
a statute made, yt in such case, there should never after pardon be granted,
but ye truth being able to be proved, no husband should need any pardon, but
should have leave by the law to follow the sample of the carpenter and do
the same.


Vincent. How happed it uncle, yt y^ good law was left unmade?


Antony. How happed it? as it happeth Cousin, yt many mo be left unmade as well
as it, and within a little as good as it to, both here and in other countries,
and some time some worse made in their stead. But as they say, ye let of yt
law was ye Queen's grace, god forgive her soul: it was y^ greatest thing I
wene good Lady that she had to answer for when she dyed, for surely save for
ye one thing, she was a full blessed woman. But letting now that law pass,
this temptacio^ in procuringe her own death was unto this carpenters wife no
tribulacio^ at all, as far as ever men could perceive: for it lyked her well
to think thereon, and she even longed therefore. And therefore, if she had before
told you or me her mind, and that she would bring it so feign to pass, we
could have had no occacion to comfort her as one that were in tribulacion,
but mary counsel her (as I told you before) we well might, to refrain and
amend that deuelyshe mind of hyrs.


Vincent. Uerely that is truth, but such as are well wylling to do any
purpose that is so shameful, will never tell their mind to no body for very
shame.


Antony. Some will not in deed, and yet are their some again, that, be their
intent never so shameful, find some yet, whom their heart serves them to
make of their counsel therein. Some of my folk here can tell you, that no
longer ago than even yesterdaye, one that came out of Uienna showed us among
other talking, that a rich widow (but I forgot to ask him where it happed)
having all her life an high proud mind and a fell, as those two verteues are
wont always to keep company together, was at debate with an other neighbor of
hers in the town, and on a time she made of her counsel a poor neighbor of
hers, who^ she thought for money, she might enduce to follow her mind: with
him secretly she brake, and offered him.x. Duccattes for his labor to do so
much for her, as come in a morninge early to her house, and with an axe,
unknown, pryuelye to stryke of her head: and when he had so done, than conuaye
the blody axe, into the house of him with whom she was at debate, in some such
manner of wise, as it might be thought that he had murdered her of malice, and
than she thought she should be taken for a martyr. And yet had she farther
devised, yt an other su^me of money should after be sent to Rome, and that
there should be means made to ye Pope, that she might in all have be
canonyzed. This poor man promised, but intended not to perform it, howebeit,
when he deferred it, she provided ye axe her self, and he appointed with her
the morning when he should come. But tha^ set he such other folk, as he
would should know her frantique fantasy, in such place appointed as they
might well hear her and him talk together. And after that he had talked with
her thereof what he would, so much as he thought was enough, he made her lie
down, and took up the axe in his one hand, and with the other hand he felt
the edge, and found a fault that it was not sharp, and that therefore he
would in no wise do it, till that he had ground it sharper, he could not else
he said for pietye, it would put her to so much pain, and so full sore
against her will, for that time she kept her head still: But because she would
not suffer any more to deceive her so and fode her forth with delays, ere it
was very long after, she hanged her self with her own hands.


Vincent. Forsoothe here was a tragycall story, whereof I never heard the like.


Antony. Forsoothe the party that told it me, swear that he knew it for a
truth. And him self is I promise you such, as I reckon for right honest, and
of substancyall truth. Now here she le^ted not as shameful a mind as she had,
to make one of her counsel yet, and yet as I remember an other to, whom she
trusted with the money that should procure her canonyzacyo^. And here I wot
well that her temptacion came not of fear, but of high malice and pride. But
than was she so glad in the pleasant devise thereof, yt as I showed you, she
took it for no tribulacion, but for a marvelous merry mortal temptacion. And
therefore, comfortinge of her could have no place: but if men should any thing
give ^er tow^rd her help, it must have been (as I told you) good counsel:
and therefore as I said, this kind of temptacion to a man's own destruccio^
which reqireth counsel, and is out of trybulacion, was out of our matter,
that is to wete of comfort in trybulacion.


The.xvi. Chapter. Of him that were moved to kill him self by illusion of the
Devil, which he reckoned for a reuel^cion.
BUt lest you might reiecte both those samples, weninge they were but feigned
tales, I shall but put you in remembrance of one, which I recko^ your self
have read in ye collacions of Cassianus: and if you have not, there may you
soon find it, for my self have half forgotten the thing, it is so long
since I read it: but thus much I remember, yt he tells of one there yt was
all his days a very holy man in his living, and among ye other verteous
monks and Anckres yt lived in wyldernes, was maruelouslye much esteemed,
saving that some were not all out of fear of him, lest his reuelacions, whereof
he told many by him self, would prove illusions of the devil, and so proved
it after in deed: for the man was by the deuylles subtle suggestions brought
into such an high spiry^uall pride that in conclusion ye devil brought him to
that horrible point that he made him to kill him self, and as far as my
mind gives me now, without new sight of y^ book, be brought him to it hy
this persuasion, that he made him believe it was gods will he should so do,
and yt thereby should he go straight to heaven. And than if it were by that
persuasion with which he took very great comfort in his own mind him
self, was it then as I said out of our case here, and neded not comfort, but
counsel against giving credence to ye deuelles perswasyon. But mary if he
made him first perceive how he had been deluded, and tha^ tempted him to his
own death by shame and dyspayre, than was it in our matter lo, for tha^ was
his temptacion fallen down from pride to pusyllanimitie, and was waxen that
kind of the nights fear yt I spoke of, wherein a good part of the counsel
yt were to be given him, should have need to stand in good comfortyng, for
than was he brought to right sore tribulacion: but as I was about to tell you,
strength of heart and courage is there none therein, not only for yt very
strength as it has ye name of virtue in a reasonable creature can never be
without prudence, but also for that as I said even in them that some men of
most hardynes it shall well appear to them that well waygh ye matter, yt the
mind whereby they be led to destroy them self, grows of pusyllanymytie
and very folyshe fear. Take for the sample, Cato vticensis, which in Affrycke
killed him self, after the great victory of Iulyus Ceasa^ had. S. Austyn well
declares in his work, De ciuitate dei, that there was no strength nor
magnanimity therein but plain pusyllanimitie, and impotencye of stomach,
whereby he was forsed to the destruccyon of him self, because his heart was
to feeble to bear the beholdynge of an other man's glory, or the sufferynge
of other calamyties, that he feared should fall on him self. So that. S.
Austen well proves that horrible deed is no act of strength, but an act of
the mind, either drawn from the consyderacion of it self, with some deuelyshe
fantasye, wherein the man has need to be called home with good counsel, or
else oppressed by faint heart and fear, wherein a good part of the counsel
must stand in lifting up his courage, with good consolacio^ and comfort: and
therefore if we found any such religyouse person as was that father which
Cassyon writes of, that were of such austerytie and apparent ghostly lyuinge,
that he were with such as knew him reputed for a man of syngular virtue,
and that it were perceived that he had many visions appearing unto him, if it
should now be perceived after ye that ye^ man went about secretlye to
destroy him self, who so should hap to come to the knowledge thereof, and
intended to do his deuor in the let: First must he find the means to
search and find out, whether the man be in his manner and in his
countenance, light^ome, glad and joyful, or dumpishe heavy or sad: and
whither he go there about as one that were full of the glad hope of heaven, or
as one that had his breast farsed full of tedyousnes and wearynes of the
world: if he were founden of the first fashion, it were a token that the devil
has by his fantastical apparicions puffed him up in such a pieuyshe pride, yt
he has finally persuaded him by some illusyon showed him for the proof, that
gods pleasure is that he shall for his sake with his own hands kill him self.

Vincent. What if a man so found it uncle, what counsel should a man give him
than?


Anthony. That were somewhat out of our purpose Cousin, sith as I told you
before, the man were not tha^ in sorrow and tribulacion, whereof our matter
speaks, but in a perylous me^ye mortal temptacion: so that if we should
beside our own matter that we have taken in hand enter into that to, we might
hap to make a longer work between both, than we could well fynyshe this
day. Howebeit to be short, it is soon seen, that therein the counsel and
the effect thereof, must in manner rest in giving him warning of the deuilles
sleyghtes, and that must be done under such pleasante sweet manner, as the man
should not abhor to hear it: for while it could lightly be none other but
yt the man were rocked and songen a sleep by the deuylles craft, and thereby
his mind occupied as it were in a delectable dream, he should never have
good audyence of him that would rudely and boysteously shugge him and wake him
and so shake him out therof^ Therefore must you fayer and easily touch him, and
with some pleasant spe^he awake him so, that he wax not wayward as children
do that are waked ere they lust to rise. But when a man has first begone with
his praise (for if he be proud, ye shall much beter please him with a
commendacion than with a dyrige) tha^ after favor won therwithall, a man may
little and little insinuate the doubt of such reuelacions, not at the first as
it were, that it were for any doubt of his, but of some other men that in some
other places talk of. And peradventure it shall not miscontent him self to
show great perils that may fall therein in an other man's case than his own,
and shall begin to preach upon it.

Or if you were a man that had not a scrupulouse conscience of an harmeles
lie, devised to do good with all, which kind. S. Iusten (though he take always
for sin, yet he takes it but for venyal) and. S. Hierome) as by diverse
places of his books appears) takes not fully for so much, than may you
feign some secret friend of yours to be in such case, and y^ your self
somewhat fear his perell, and have made of charytye this vyage for his sake to
ask this good fathers counsel. And in ye co^munycacio^ may you bring in
these words of. S. John. Nolite omni spiritui credere, sed probate spiritus si
ex deo sunt Give not credence unto every spirit, but prove whither they be of
god. And these words of. S. Paul, Angelus Sathane transfigurat se in angelum
lucis. The Angel of Satan transfygureth him self into the Angel of light,
you shall take occasion ye better if they hap to come in on his own side,
but yet not lack occasion neither if those textes for lack of his offer come
in upon your own occasion I say, shall you not lack to enquyer, by what sure
and undeceivable tokens, a man may decerne ye true reuelacions from ye false
illusions, whereof a man shall find many both here and there, in diverse other
authors, and whole together diverse goodly treatises of that good godly doctor
M. Io. Gerso^, ent^tuled^ De probatione spirituu^. As if ye pa^ti be natural
wise or any thing seem fantastical, or whither ye party be poor spirited or
poude, which will somewhat appear by his delight in his own praise, or if of
wylynes, or of an other pride for to be praised of humility, he re^use to
hear thereof, yet any little fault found in him self or diffidence declared
and mistrust of his own reuelacions and doutfull tokens told, whereof him self
should fear lest they be ye deuelles illusions. Such things (as M. Gerson
says) will make him to spette out somewhat of his spiteful spirit, if the
devil lie in his breast. Or if the devil be yet so subtle that he keep him
self close in his warm den, and blow out never a hot word, yet is it to
be considered what end his reuelacions draw to, whither to any spiritual
profit to him self or other folk, or only to vain maruayles and wonders.
Also, whither they withdraw him from such other good verteous business, as by
the common rules of Christendom, or any rules of his profession he was wont to
use, or were bound to be occupied in. Or whither he fall into any singularity
of opinions against the scripture of God, or against ye common faith of
Christ's catholic church, many other tokens are there in that work of M.
Gerson spoken of to considre by, whyther the parso^ neither having reuelacions
of GOD, nor illusions from the Devil, do either for winning of moneye^ or
wordely favor, feign his reuelacions him self to delude the people withal.

But now for our purpose, if among any of ye marks by which the true
reuelacion may be known from the false illusions, that may him self bring
forth for one mark, the doing or teaching of any thing against the
scripture of GOD, or the common faith of the church, than have you an entrye
made you, by which when you lust you may enter into ye special matter wherein
he can never well flitte from you. Or else may you if you lus^e, ^ayne yt
your secret friend, for whose sake you come to him for counsel, is brought
into yt mind by a certain apparicion showed unto him as him self ^ayth by an
Angel as you fear by ye Devil, that he can be by you none other ways
persuaded as yet, but that the pleasure of God is that he shall kill him self,
and that if he so do, than shall he be thereby so special partycypant of
Christ's passion, y^ he shall forthwith be carried up with Angels into heaven,
for which he is so joyful, y^ he fyrmelye purposes upon it, no less glad to
do it, than another man would be glad to void it. And therefore may you
desyer his good counsel, to instruct you with some good substancyall advise,
wherewith you may turn him from this error, that he be not under hope of gods
true reuelacion in body and soul destroyed by ye deuylles false delusion: if
he will in this thing study and labor to instruct you, the things that him
self shall find out of his own inuencion, though they be less effectual,
shall peradventure more work with him self toward his own amendemet, sith he
shall of lykelyhod better like them, than shall the double substanciall things
told by another man if he be loathe to think upon y^ side and therefore shrynke
from the matter: tha^ is there none other way, but adventure after the plain
fashion, to fall into the matter, and show what you hear, and to give him
counsel and exhortacion to ye contrary: but if you lust to say yt thus and
thus has ye matter been reasoned already between your friend and you, and
therein may you rehearse such things, yt should prove that ye vision which
moves him, is no true reuelacion but a false illusion.


Vincent. Uerely uncle I well allow this, that a man should as well in this
thing as every other, wherein he longs to do an other man good, seek such a
pleasant way as the party should be lykelye to like, or at the least wise
well to take in worth his communicacion, and not so to enter in thereunto, as
he whom he would help should abhor him, and be loathe to hear him, and
therefore to take no profitte by him.

But now Uncle, if it come by the one way or the other to ye point to hear
me he will or shall: what be ye reasons effectual with which I should by
counsel convert him?


Anthony. All those by which you may make him perceive that him self is
deceived, and that his visions be no godly reuelacions, but very deuelyshe
illusions. And those reasons must you gather of the man, of the matter, and of
the law of God, or of some one of these. Of the man, if you can peradventure
show him that in such a point or such, he is waxen worse since such
reuelacions have haunted him, than he was before, as in those y^ are deluded,
whosoever be well acquynated with them, shall well mark and perceive, for they
wax more proud, more wayward, more envious, suspicious, mysseiudging, and
deprauing other men, with they delight of their own praise, and such other
spiritual vices of the soul.

Of ye matter may you gather if you have proved his reuelacion before false,
or that they be things rather strange then profitable, for that is a good
mark between Gods miracles and the deuylles wonders, for Christ and his
saints have their miracles always tendyng to fruit and profit, the Devil and
his witches and Necromancer, all their wonderful works draw to no fruteful
end, but to a fruitless ostentacio^, and show as it were a Iuggler that
would for a show before the people, play maystryes at a feast.

Of the law of God you must draw your reasons in showing by the scripture
that the thing which he weneth God by his Angel byddeth, God has his own
mouth forbidden, and that is you wot well in the case that we speak of, so
easy to find, that I need not to rehearse it unto you, sith there is plain
among the.x commandments forbidden the unlawful killing of any man, and
therefore of himself as. S. Austen says, and all the church teaches,
except himself be no man.


Vincent. This is very true good uncle, nor I will not dispute upon any glosing
of that prohibicion, but sith we find not the contrary but that god may
dyspence with that commandment himself, and both license and command also
if him lust, any man to go kill either an other man or himself either: this
man yt is now by such a maruelouse vision induced to believe yt God so byddeth
him, and therefore thinks himself in that case of that prohibicion
discharged, and charged with the contrary commandment: with what reason may
we make him perceive that this vision is but an illusion, and not a true
reuelacion?


Anthony. Nay Cousin Uincent, you shall not need in this case to requier those
reasons of me: but taking the Scripture of God for a ground in this matter,
you know very well your self, you shall go somewhat a shorter way to work
if you ask this question of him, that since god has forbidden the thing once
himself, though he may dispense therewith if he will, yet s^th the devil
may feign himself god, and with a meruelouse vision delude one, and make as
though god did it, and sith the devil also is more lykely to speak against
gods commandment than god against his own: you shall have good cause I say,
to demand of the man himself whereby he knows that his vision^ is gods true
reuelacion, and not the devils false delusio^.


Vincent. In deed uncle I think that would be an hard question for him: may
a man have uncle in such a thing, even a very sure knowledge in his own mind?


Anthony. Yea Cosyn, God may cast in the mind of a man I suppose, such an
inward light and understanding, that he cannot ^ayle but be sure thereof. And
yet h^ yt is deluded by ye devil, may think him self as sure and yet be
deceived in dede^ And such a dyfference is there in a manner between them, as
is between the sight of a thing while we be waking and look thereon, and the
sight with which we see a thing in our sleep, while we dream ^herof.


Vincent. This is a preaty similitude uncle in this thing, and than is it easy
for ye monk yt we spoke of, to declare how he knows his vision for a true
reuelacion, and not a false desusyon, if there be so great dyfference between
them.


Anthony. Not so easy Cousin yet as you wene it were, for how can you prove unto
me that you be awake?


Vincent. Mary lo: do I not wagge my hand, shake my head, and stampewith my
feet here in the ^^ore?


Anthony. Have you never dreamed ere this, that you have done the same.


Vincent. Yes yt I have, and more to than yt, for I have ere this in my sleep,
dreamed that I doubted whyther I were awake or aslepe, and have in good faith
thought that I did thereupon even ye same things that I do now in deed, and
thereby determined yt I was not a sleep. And yet have I dreamed in good faith
farther, that I have been afterward at dinner, and there making merye with
company, have told ye same dream at ye table and laughed well thereat, yt while
I was aslepe, I had by such means of moving ye parts of my body, and
co^sideri^g thereof, so verily thought my self waking.


Anthony. And will you not now sone trow you when you wake and rise, laugh as
well at your self wha^ you see yt you lie now in your warm bed aslepe again
and dream all this time, while you wene so verily, that you be wakyng and
talkyng of these matters with me.


Vincent. Gods lord uncle, you go now merely to work with me in deed,
when you look and speak so sadly, and would make me wene I were aslepe.


Anthony. It may be that you be so, for any thing that you can say or do,
whereby you may with any reason that you can make, drive me to confess that
your self be sure of the contrary, sith you can do nor say nothing now,
whereby you be sure to be waking, but that you have ere this, or hereafter may
think your self as surely to do the self same things in deed, while you
be all the while a sleep, and nothing do but lie dreaming.


Vincent. Well well uncle, though I have ere this thought my self awake,
while I was in deed aslepe, yet for all this I know well enough that I am awake
now, and so do you to, though I cannot find the words by which I may
with reason enforse you to confess it, but that always you may drive me of by
the sample of my dream.


Antony. This is Cousin as me seems very true. and likewise seems me the
matter and difference between some kind of true reuelacions, and some kind of
false illusions, as it stands between the things that are done waking, and
the things that in our dreams seem to be done while we be slepyng: that is to
wete, that he which has that kind of reuelacion from god, is as sure of the
truth as we be of our own deed while we be waking. And he yt is illuded by
the Devil, is in such wise deceived, and worse to, than be they by their
dream, and yet reckons him self as sure for the time as the other, sauinge
that the one falsely weneth, and the other truly knowe^h: but I say not Cousin
yt this kind of sure knowledge, comes in every kind of reuelacion, for there
are many kinds whereof were to long to talk now, but I say that God does, or
may do to man in some thing, certainly send some such.


Vincent. Yet than may this religious man of whom we spoke, when I show him
the Scripture against his reuelacion, (and therefore call it an illusyon,) bid
me with reason go care for my self, for he knows well and surely himself
that his reuelacion is good and true, and not any false illusion, since for all
the general commandment of god in the Scripture God may dispense where he
will, and when he will, and may command him to do the contrary, as he
commanded Abraham to kill his own son, and as Sampson had by inspiracion of
God commandment to kill himself with pulling down the house on his own head
at the feast of ye Philistines, now if I would do than, as you bade me right
now, go tell him that such apparycions were illusions, and since that gods
word is in the Scripture against him plain for the prohibicion: he must prove
me the truth of his reuelacion, whereby I may know that it is not a false
illusio^. Than shall he ask me again whereby that I can prove my self to be
awake and talk with him, and not to be aslepe and dream so, sith in my dream
I may as surely wene so, as I know that I do so, and thus shall he drive me
to the same baye, to which I would bring him.


Anthony. This is well said Cousin, but yet could he not escape you so, for the
dispensacion of Gods common precept, which dispensacion (he must say that
he has by his reuelacio^) is a thing of such sort as shows it self naught
and false: for it never has had any sample like since the world began till
now, that any man has read or heard of among faithful people commended.
First in Abraham as touching the death of his son, god intended it not^ but
only tempted the towardnes of the fathers obedience. In Sampson all men make
not the matter very sure, whether he be saved or not, but yet therein some
matter and cause appears, for ye Philistines being enemies to god, and using
Sampson for their mocking stock, in scorn of God, it is well likely that God
gave him the mind to bes^owe his own life upon the revenging of the
displeasure that those blasphemous Philistines did unto god, and that appears
metely clearly by this, that though his strength failed him when he wanted his
here, yet had he not, as it seems, that strength evermore at hand while he
had his here but at such times as it pleased god to give it hym^ which thing
appears by these words that the Scripture in some place of that matter
says. Ir^uit virtus dominni in Sampsonem. The power or might of god russhed
into Sampson, and so therefore while this thing that he did in the pullyng down
of the house, was done by the special gift of strength, tha^ at that point
given him by god it well declares that the strength of god, and therewith the
spirit of god entered into him. Therefore. S. Aus^e^ also rehearses that
certain holy verteous virgins in time of persecucion, being by gods enemies
infidels pursued upon to be de^^oured by force, ran into a water and drouned
themself rather than they would be bereued of their virginity: and albeit yt
he thinks that it is not lawful for any other maid to follow their sample,
but rather suffer other to do her any manner violence by force, and commit
sin of his own upon her against her will, than willingly, and thereby synfully
herself become an homicide of her self, yet he thinks y^ in the^ it happed
by the special instincte of the spirit of god, that for causes seen unto
himself, would rather yt they should avoid it with their own temporal death,
than abide the defyling and violacion of their chastity. But now this good man
neither ha^h any of gods enemies to be by his own death revenged on, nor any
woman that violentli pursue him by force to bereue him of his virginity: nor
never find we that god proved any man's obedient mind by the commandment of
his own slaughter of himself, therefore is his case both plain against gods
open precept, and the dispensacio^ strange, and without sample no cause
appearyng nor well imaginable: but if he would think that he could no longer
live without him nor take him ^o him in such wise as he does other men, but
command him to come by a forbydde^ way, by which without other cause we never
heard yt he had any man before: now where you think that you should after
this, bid him tell you by what way he knows that his entente rises upon a
true reuelation^ and not upon a false illusion^ he would bid you than again tell
him by what means you know that you be talkyng with him well wakyng, and not
dream it slepyng. You may tell him again, that men thus talk together as you
do, and in such manner of wise they may prove and perceive that they so do
by the moving of themself, and with putting the question thereof unto themself
for their pleasure, and the markynge and consyderyng thereof, is in waking a
daily common thing that every man does or may do when he will: and when they
do it, they do it but of pleasure, but in sleep it happeth very seld that men
dream that they so do, nor in their dream never put they question but for
doubt, and therefore it is more reason, that while his reuelacio^ is such also
that happeth so seld, and ofter happeth that me^ dream of such, than have such
in deed: therefore it is more reason you may tell him, that he show you in
such a rare thing, and a thing more like a dream, that himself is not aslepe,
than you in such a common thing among folk that are waking, and so seldom
happyng in a dream, should need to show him whereby you know that you be not
a sleep. Besides this, himself to who^ you should show it, sees and
perceives the thing that he would bid you prove, but the thing that he would
make you believe the truth of, his reuelacion which you bid him prove, you see
not he wotteth well himself: and therefore ere you believe it against the
Scripture, it were well consonante unto reason that he should show you whereby
he knows it for a true waking reuelacio^, and not for a false dreamyng
delusion.


Vincent. Than shall he peradventure say to me again, that whether I believe
him or no^, makes him no matter: the thing touches himself and not me, and
himself is in himself as sure that it is a true reuelacio^, as that he can
tell that he dreameth not, but talks with me waking.


Antony. Without doubt Cousin, if he abide at that point, and can be by no
reason brought to do so much as doubt, and can by no means be shugged out of
his dead sleep, but will needs take his dream for a very truth, and as some
by night rise and walk about their chaumber in their sleep, will so rise and
hang himself: I can than no other ways see, but either bind him fast in his
bed, or else assaye whether that might hap to help him, with which the
common tale goes that a caruers wife in such a frantyque fantasy, help her
husband, to whom when he told he would upon a good friday needs have killed
him self for Christ's sake, as Christ was killed for him, she would not in
vayn^ plead against his mind, but well and wyselye put him in remembrance,
that if he would dye for Christ as Christ dyed for him, it were then
convenient for him to dye even after the same fashion, and yt might not be by
his own hands, but by the hand of some other: for Christ pardye killed not
him self, and because her husband should need to make no more ofcounsayle (for
that he would not in no wise) she offered him that for gods sake she would
secretly her self crucifye him on a great cross, that he had made to nail a
great crucifixe upon, whereof when he was very glad, yet she bethoughte her
that Christ was bound to a pyller and beaten first, and after crowned with
thorn, whereupon when she had by his own assente bound him fast to a post,
she left not beatyng with holy exhortacion to suffer so much and so long,
that or ever she left work and unbound him, praying him nevertheless yt she
might put on his head, and drive it well down, a crown of thorn that she had
wrythe^ for him, and brought him: he said he thought that was enough for that
year, he would pray GOD to forbear him of the remnaunt ^yl good friday come
again. But when it came again the next ye^e, than was his lus^e paste, he
longed to follow Christ no far^her.


Vincent. In deed uncle if this help him not, than will nothing help him I
trow.


Antony. And yet Cousin, paraduenture the devil might make him toward such a
purpose first gladly first suffer other pain, and minishe his feeling to
therein, that he may thereby ye less fear his death, and yet are peradventure
sometime such things and many more to be assaide. For as ye devil may hap to
make him suffer, so may he hap to miss, namely if his fre^des fall to prayer
against his te^ptacio^, for yt can him self never do, while he takes it for
none. But for conclusion, if ye man be surely proved, and so inflexibly set
upon the purpose to destroy him self, as commanded thereto by god, that no
good counsel that me^ can give him, nor any other thing that men may do to
him, can refrain him, but that he would shortly kyl him self, tha^ except
only good prayer made by his friends for him, I can find no farther shifte^
but ever have him in sight, or bind him fast in his bed. And so mu^^e he
needs of reason be content so to be ordered, for though him self take his
fa^tasye for a true reuelacio^, yet sith he can not make us perceive it for
such, like wise as he thinks him self by his secret commandment bounden
to follow it, so must he needs agree, that since it is against the plain
prohibicion of god, we be by the plain open precept bound to keep him from it.


Vincent. In this point uncle I can go no farther: but now if he were on ye
other side perceived to mind his distruccio^, and to go there about with
heaviness of heart, thought and dulnes, what way were there to be used with him
the^?


Anthony. Then were his te^ptacion as I told you before, properly pertaynyng
to our matter, for than were he in a sore tribulacion, and a very peryllous,
for than were it a toke^ yt the devil had either by bringing him into some
great sin, brought him into despair, or peradventure his reuelacio^s
founde^ false and reproved, or by some secret sin of his diuulged and
deprehended cast him both in despair of heaven through fear, and in a
wearines of this life for shame, since he sees his estimacio^ lost among other
folk, of whose praise he was wont to be proud: and therefore Cousin, in such
case as this is, the man is to be fair handled and swetely, and with dowce and
tender loving words to be put in good courage, and comforted in all that me^
godly may. And here must they put him in mind, that if he dyspayre not, but
pull up his courage, and trust in gods great mercy, he shall have in
conclusion great cause to be glad of this fall, for before he stood in greater
peril then he was ware of, while he took him self for better tha^ he was,
and god for ^auour that he bare him has suffered him to fall deep into the
Devils ^aunger, to make him thereby know what he was, while he took him self
for so sure, and therefore as he suffered him than to fall for a remedy against
over boulde pride, so will god now (if the man meken him selfe^ not with
unfruitful dyspayre, but with fruitful penance) so set him up again upon his
fete, and so strengthen him with his grace, yt for this one fall yt the devil
has given him, he shall give the devil an hundredth. And here must he be put in
remembrance of Marye Magdalene, of the prophet David, and specially of Saint
Peter, whose high bold courage took a foul fall, and yet because he
dispayred not of gods mercy. but wept and called upon it, how highly God
took him into his favor again, in his holy scripture is well testified and well
through christendom known: and now shall it be charitably done, if some good
verteous folk such as him self somewhat estemeth, and has before longed to
stand in estimacion with, do resort some time unto him, not only to give
him counsel, But also to ask advise and counsel of him, in some cases of
their own conscience^ to let him thereby perceive that they no less esteem
him now, but rather more than they did before, since they think him now by
this fall better expert of the deuilles craft, and thereby not only better
instructed him self but also better able to give good counsel and advise to
other. This thing will in my mind, well amend and lift up his courage from
the perel of that desperate shame.


Vincent. Me thinks uncle that this were a perilous thing. For it may
peradventure make him set the less by his fall, and thereby cast him into his
first pride, or into his other sin again: the falling whereunto drove him
into this despair.


Antony. I do not mean Cousin, that every fool should at adventure fall in
hand with him, for so lo might it hap for to do harm in deed. But Cousin,
if a cunning Physician have a man in hand, he can well disserne when and how
long some medicine is necessary, which at an other time mynistred or at that
time ouerlonge continued might put the pacyent in peril, for if he have his
pacient in an agewe, to ye cure whereof he needs his medicines in their
worki^g, cold: yet if he hap ere that fever be full cured to fall into some
such other disease, as except it were helped with hot medicines, were lykely
to kill the body before the fever could be cured, he would for the while
have his most care to the cure of yt thing wherein were most present peril, and
when yt were once out of ieopardye, do than ye more except diligence after,
about ye farther cure of the fever. And likewise, if ye ship were in peril to
fall into Scilla, ye fear of falling into Charibdys, on the other side, shall
never let any wise master thereof, to draw him from Scilla toward Charibdys
first of al, in all yt ever he may. But when he has him once so far from
Scylla, yt he sees him self out of yt danger, the^ will he begin to take heed
to keep him well from ye other: and likewise when this man is falling down to
dyspayre and to ye final distruccio^ of him self, a good wise spiritual leache
will first look unto yt, and by good comfort lift up his courage, and when he
sees yt peril well past, care for ye cure of his other faults after: howbeit,
even in ye giving of his comfort, he may find ways enough in such wise to
te^pre his words, yt the man may take occasion of good courage, and yet far
from occasion giving, of more recidiuacio^ into his former sin, since ye great
part of his counsel shall be to courage him to ame^dme^t, and that is pardy
far from falling to sin again.


Vincent. I think Uncle that folk fall into this ungracious mind throw the
deuilles temptacio^ by many more means than one.


Antony. That is Cousin very true, for the devil takes his occasions as he
sees them fall meet for him. Some he stirs to it through werynes of them
self after some great loss, some for fear of bodily harm, and some as I
said, for fear of worldly shame. One wist I my self which had been long
reputed for an honest man, which was fallen in such a fantasye, that he was
welnere worn away therewith: but what he was tempted to do, yt would he tell
no man, but he told unto me yt he was sore combred, and that it always ran in
his mind yt folks fa^tasies were fallen from him, and yt they esteemed not his
wit as they were wont to do, but ever his mind gave him that the people began
to take him for a fool, and folk of troth did no thing so at all, but
reputed him both for wise and honest. Two other knew I that were marueilouslye
afraid that they should kill them self, and could tell me no cause wherefore
they so feared it, but only that their own mind so gave them, neither loss
had they anye^ nor no such thing toward them, nor none occasion of any worldely
shame, the one in body very well liking and lussy, and wondrous wearye were
they both twain of that mind, and always they thought yt do it they would
not for no thing, but nevertheless they ever feared they should, and
wherefore they so both feared, neither of them both could tell, and the one
le^t he should do it, desired is friends to bind him.


Vincent. This is uncle a meruelouse strange manner.


Antony. Forsooth Cousin I suppose that many of the^ are in this case the devil
as I said before seeks his occasions. For as. S. Peter says, Diabolus
tanquam leo rugens circuit querens quem deuoret. The devil as a roaring Lion
goes about seking whom he may deu^ure. He marketh well the state and the
condition that every man s^andeth in, not only concerning these outward
things, as lands, possessions, goods, authority, fame, favor or hatred of
the world, but also men's complexcions within them, as health, or sickness,
good humors or badde, by which they be light hearted or lumpyshe, strong hearted
or faint, or fieble of spirit, bold, hardye or tymerouse, and fearful of
courage, and after as these things minister him matter of te^tacio^, so uses
he him self in the manner of his temptacion.

Now likewise as in such folk that are full of young warm lusty blood, and
other humors exciting the flesh to filthy voluptuouse living, the devil uses
to make those things his instruments in tempting them and in provoking the^
theru^to: and where he finds some folk full of hot blood and coler, he
makes those humors his instruments to set their hearts on fire, in wrath and
very fierce furious anger, so where he finds some folk which through some dull
melancoliouse humors are naturally disposed to fear, he casts sometime such
a fearful imaginacion in their mind, yt without helps of god they can never
cast it out of their hearts. Some at the sudden fall of some horrible thought
into there mind, have not only had a great abhominacio^ thereat (which
abhominacion they we^l and verteously had thereat) but the devil using their
melancolious humor (and thereby their natural inclinacio^ to fear) for his
instrumente, has caused the^ to conceive there with such a deep dread beside, yt
they wene the^self with that abominable thought, to be fallen into such an
outrageous sin, yt they be ready to fall into despair of grace, wening yt god
has given them over for ever, whereas that thought (were it never so horrible
and so abominable) is yet unto them yt never like it, but ever still abhor
it and strive still there against, matter of conflict and me^ite, and not any
sine at al. Some have with holding a knyfe in their hand^s, thought sodeynlye
upon the killing of themself, and forthwt in devising what an horrible thing
it were if they should mishap so to do, have fallen into a fear yt they should
so do in deed, and have with often thinking thereon, imprinted yt fear so sore in
their imagin^cio^ yt some of them have not ca^^e it of without great difficulty,
and some could never in their life be (...) rid thereof but have after in
co^clusio^ miserably done it in deed: but likewise as where the devil vse^h
the blood of a man's body toward his purpose in provoking to leacherye, the
man must and does with gra^e and wisdom resyste it, so must that man do
whose melancolyous humors y^ devil abuses toward y^ casting of such a
desperate dread into his heart.


Vincent. But I pray you uncle, what advice were to be given him in such case?


Anthony. Surely me thinks his help stands in two things, counsel and
prayer. First as concerning counsel, likewise as it may be yt he has two
things yt hold him in his te^ptacion, yt is to wete, some evil humors of his
own body, and the cursed devil yt abuses the^ to his pernicious purpose, so
must he need against the^ twain, ye counsel of two manner of folk: yt is to
wete, phisicio^s for ye body, and phisicio^s for ye soul: ye bodyly phisicio^
shall consider what abou^dance y^ man has of those evil humors yt the devil
makes his instruments of, in moving ye man toward ye fearful affeccion, and
as well by diet conuene^t, and medicines mete therefore, to resyst them, as by
purgacions to disburdaine the body of the^, nor let no man think strange yt
I would advise a man to take counsel of a phisicio^ for the body in such a
spiritual passion. For sith ye soul and the body be so knytte and joined
together, that they both make between them one person, the distemperaunce of
either other engenders sumtime the distemperaunce of both twain. And
therefore, like as I would advise every man in every sickness of ye body to be
shriuen and seek a good sprituall phisicio^ ye sure health of his soul, which
shall not only serve against perel yt may peradventure farther grow by yt
sickness, tha^ in ye beginning me^ would wene were likely: but ye comfort thereof
and gods favor increasing there with, shall also do ye body good for which
cause ye blessed Apo^^le exorteth me^ yt they should in their bodilye sickness,
induce ye priests, and says yt it should do the^ good both in body and
soul, so would I sumtime advise some me^ in some sickness of ye soul, beside
their spiritual leach, take also some counsel of the phisicio^ for the body.
Some that are wretchedly disposed, and yet long to be more viciouse than they
be, go to phisicions and poticaries, and enquire what things may serve to
make them more lusty to their foul ^^eshely delight: and were it tha^ any folly
upon the other side, if he that feleth himself against his will much moved
unto such uncleanness, should enquire of the physician what things without
minishing of his health, were meet for ye minishme^t of such foul fleshely
mocion? Of spiritual counsel, the first is to be shriuen, that by reason of
his other sins the devil have not the more power upon him.


Vincent. I have heard some say uncle, that when such folk have been at
shryft, their temptacion has been more brymme upon them than it was before.


Antony. That think I very well, but that is a special token that shrifte is
wholesome for them, while the devil is with that most wroth. You find in some
places of the gospel, that the devil (the parson whom he possessed) did most
trouble when he saw that Christ would cast him out, we must else let the devil
do what he will, if we fear his anger, for with every good deed he will wax
angry: than is it in his shryft to be showed him, that he not only fears
more than he needs, but also fears where he needs not, and over that is
sorye of that thing whereof (but if he will wyllyngly turn his good into his
harm) he has more cause to be glad. First if he have cause to fear, yet
fears he more than he needs, for there is no devil so diligent to destroy
him. as god is to preserve him, nor no devil so nere him to do him harm, as
god is to do him good: nor all the devils in hell so strong to invade him and
assault him, as god is to defend him, if he distrust him not, but faithfully
put his trust in him. He fears also where he needs not: for where he dredeth
that he were out of gods favor, because such horrible thoughts fall into
his mind, let him consider, that sith they fall into his mind against his will,
they be therefore not imputed unto him. He is finally sad of yt he may be
glad: for since he takes such though^es displeasauntly, and strives and
fights against the^, he has thereby a good token yt he is in gods favor,
and that god assisteth him and helps him, and may make himself sure, that
so will god never cease to do, but if himself fail and fall from him first:
and over that, this conflict yt he has against his temptacio^, shall (if he
will not fall where he needs not) be an occasion of his merit, and a right
great reward in heaven: and the pain that he takes therein, shall for so much
(as Master Gerson well shows) stand him in stead of his purgatory. The
manner of the fight against this temptacio^, must stand in three things: that
is to wete, in resisting, and in contemning, and in the inuocacion of help:
resist must a man for his own part by reason, consyderyng what a folly it were
to fall where he needs not, while he is not driven to it in aduoidyng of any
other pain, or in hope of winning any manner o^ pleasure: but contrariwise
should by that pain, lose everlasting bliss, and fall into everlasting pain,
and if it were in avoiding of other great pain, yet could he void none so
great thereby, as he should thereby fall into. He must also consider, that a
great part of this temptacion is in effect, but the fear of his own
fantasy, the dread that he has lest he shall once be driven to it, which
thing he may be sure yt, but if himself will of his own folly, all the devils in
hell can never drive him to^ but his own folishe imaginacion may: For like as
some man going over an high bridge, waxes so fraide through his own fantasy,
that he falls down in deed which were else able enough to pass over without
any danger: and as some men shall upon such a bridge, if folk call upon him,
you fall, you fall fall with ye fantasy that he takes thereof, which bridge if
folk looked merely upon him, and said, there is no danger therein, he would
pass over well enough, and would not let to run thero^ though it were but a
foot broad. Thus fare^h it in this temptacion, the devil finds the man of his
own fond fantasy afraid, and than cries he in the ear of his heart, thou
fallest thou fallest, and makes the ^onde man afraid that he should at every
foot fall in deed, and the devil so wearieth him with that continual fear (if
he give the care of his heart unto him) that at the last he draws his mind
from the due remembrance of god, and than drives him to that deadli mischief
in deed. Therefore, like as against the vice of the flesh, ye victory stands
not al whole in the fight, but also some time in the flight, saving that it is
in deed the part of a wise warriors fight, to fly from his enemies traynes,
so must a man in this temptacion to, not only resist it always with reasoning
there against, but some time set it clean at right naught, and cast it of when
it comes, and not once regard it, so much as vouchesafe to think thereon.
Some folk have been clearly rydde of such pestilent fantasyes with very full
contempt thereof, making a cross upon their hearts bydding y^ devil auaunte,
and some time laugh him to scorn to, and than turn their mind unto some other
matter, and when the devil has seen yt they have set so little by him, after
many assayes made in such times as he thought most mete, he has given that
temptacio^ quite over, both for that ye proud spirit cannot endure to be
mocked, and also lest with much tempting the man to the same, whereunto he
could not in conclusion bring him, he should much thereby increase his merit:
the final fight is by inuocacion of god, both by praying for himself, and
desiring other also to pray for him, both poor folk for his almose, and
other for their charity, specially good priests in that holy sacred service
of the mass, and not only them, but also his own good angels, and other
holy saints, such as his devotion stands specially unto. And if he be
learned, let him use the Letanie with the holy suffrages that follow, which is
a prayer in the church of maruelouse old antiquity, not made first as some
wene it were by that holy man. S. Gregory, which opinion rose of that, that in
the time of a great pes^ilence in Rome, he caused the whole city to go in
solemn prosessio^ therewith, but it was in use in the church many years
before. S. Gregoryes days, as well appears by the books of other old holy
doctors and saints that were dead hundrethes of years before. S. Gregory was
borne. And holy. S. Barnard gives counsel that every man should make suit
to angels and saynctes to pray for him to god in the things that he would
have sped at his holy hand, if any man will stick at that, and say it needs
not, because god can hear us himself, and will also say, that it is perilous
so to do, because they say we be not so counsayled by no Scripture, I will
not dispute the matter here, he that will not do it, I let him not to leave
it undone: but yet for mine own part I will as well trust to the counsel of.
S. Barnarde, and recke^ him for as good and as well learned in ye holy
Scripture, as any man that I hear say the contrary, and better dare I ieopard
my soul with the soul of Saint Barnarde, than with his that finds that
fault in his doctrine: unto god himself every man counsayleth to have recourse
above all, and in this temptacion to have special remembrance of Christ's
passion, and pray him for the honor of his death, the ground of man's
salvation, to keep the parson thus tempted from that damnable death: special
vearsis may there be drawn out of the Psalter against the devils wicked
temptacions, as for example. Exurgat deus and dissipentur inimici eius. and
fugiant qui oderunt eum a facie eius: and many other which are in such
hor^ible temptacion to god most pleasant, and to the devil very terrible, but
none more terrible, nor none more odious to the devil, than the words with
which our savior drove him away himself. Vade Sathana, nor no prayer more
acceptable unto god, nor more effectual for y^ matter, than those words which
our savior has taught himself. Ne nos inducas in temptationem, sed libera
nos a malo. And I doubt not by gods grace, but he that in such a temptacion
will use good counsel and prayer, and keep himself in good verteous business
and good vert^ous company, and abide in y^ faithful hope of gods help, shall
have ye truth of god (as the Prophet says in ye vearse before rehearsed) so
compass him about with a pauice, that he shall not need to dread this
nights fear of this wicked temptacio^: and thus will I finishe this piece of
ye nights fear, and glad am I that we be passed it, and come once unto the
day to those other words of the Prophet, A sagitta volante in die, for me
thinks I have made it a long night.


The.xvii. Chapter.
Vincent. Forsooth uncle so have you, but we have not slept in it, but been very
well occupied. But now I fear except you make here a pause til you have
dined, you shall keep your self from your diner ouerlong.


Antony. Nay nay Cousin, for both brake I my fast eue^ as you came in, and also
you shall fi^d this night and this day like a winter day and a winter night.
For as the winter has short days, and long nights, so shall you find yt I
made not this fearful night so long but I shall make you this light courageous
day as short, and so shall ye matter require well of it self in deed: for in
these words of ye prophet. Scuto circundabit te veritas eius, a sagitta
volante in die. ye truth of god shall compass thee about with a pauice, from ye
arrow flying in y^ day, I understand the arrowe of pride, with which the devil
tem^teth a man not in ye night in all tribulacion and adversity, for yt time
is to disco^fortable and to fearful for pride, but in the day yt is to wete,
in prosperity, for yt time is lightsome, lus^y, and full of courage: but
surely this worldly prosperity wherein a man ^^ioiseth, and whereof the devil
makes him so proud, is but even a very short wi^ter day, for we begin many
full poor and cold, and up we fly like an arrowe that were shotie up into ye
air: and yet when we be sodeinli shot up unto the highest, ere we be well
warm there, down we come unto the cold ground again, and then eue^ there
s^icke we still, and yet for the short while yt we be upward and a loft, lord
how lusty and how proud we be, buzzing above busily like as a bumble be
flies about in summer, never ware yt he shall dye in winter: and so fare many
of us God help us, for in the short winter day of worldly wealth and
prosperity, this flying arrowe of the devil, this high spirit of pride shot
out of ye devils ^owe, and pearsing through our heart, bears us up in our
affeccion aloft into ye clouds where we wene we sit upon y^ rain bow, and
ouerloke al ye world under us, accompting in ye regard of our own glory, such
other poor souls as were peradventure wont to be our fellows, for sely poor
pismyres and antes: but this arrowe of pride fly it never so high into ye
clouds and be the man that it carries up so high, never so joyful thereof, yet
let him remember, yt be this arrowe never so light, it has yet an heavy iron
head, and therefore fly it never so high, down must it needs come at last, and
on the ground must it light, and falls sometime not in a very cleanly
place, and ^he^ ye pride turns into rebuke and shame, so that there is tha^
al ye glory gone. Of this arrow speaks ye wise man in the.v. Chapter of
Sapi^^ce, where he says in the parso^ of them that in pride and vanity passed
the time of this present life, and after yt so spente, passed hence into hel^
Quid prosuit nobis superbia aut diuitiarum iactantia? quid con^ulit nobis?
Transieri nt omnia illa tanquam v^bra etc. Aut taquam sagitta emissa in locum
d^stinatum diuisus aer contin^o in se recl^su^ est, vt ignoretur tran^^ens
illius, sic and nos nati conunuo desiuimus es^e, and virtutis quidem null^m
s^gnum valuimus ostendere, in mal gu. tate au^em nostra cosumpti sumus Talia
dixerun^in inferno hi qui peccauerurt. what has pride profyted us, or that
good has the glory of our riches done vs^ passed are al these things like a
shadow, etc, or like an arrow shot cute into the place appointed, the aier yt
was divided, is by and by returned into the place, and in such wise closed
together again that the way is not perceived, in which ye arrow went: and in
lik^wise we, as soon as we be borne, be by and by vanished away, and have left
no toke^ of any good virtue behind vs^ but are consumed and wasted and come to
naught in our own malignitie: they lo yt have li^ed here in sin, such words
have they spoken when they lay in hell. Here shall you good Cosi^ consider, yt
where as the scripture here speaks of ye arrowe shot in his place appointed
or ente^ded in the sho^^^g of his arrow o^ pride, thereby diverse purpo^i^ges
and appointmentes^ For the proud man himself, has no certain purpose or
appointmente at any mark, butte or prick, upon the hearts whereat he
determines to shoot, and there to stick and tarry, but ever he shoots as
children do that love to shoot up a cop hie to see how hie their a^rowe can
fly up, but now does the devil entende and appoint a certain prick surely
set in a place, into which he purposes (fly this arrow never so hie, and ye
proud heart thereon) to have them light both at last, and that place is even in
ye very pit of hell, there is set the devils well acquainted prick and his very
just mark down, upon which prycke with his prickyng shafte of pride, he has
by himself a plain proof and experience, that (but if it be stopped by some
grace of god in the way) the soul that flies up therewith, can never fail to
fall. For when himself was in heaven and began to fly up a cop hie, with that
lusty light flight of pride, saying: Ascendam super astra and ponam solium meum
ad latera aquilonis, and similis ero altissimo. I will fly up above ye stars,
and set my throne on the sides of the north, and will be like unto the highest,
long ere he could fly half so hye as in his heart he said he would, he was
turned from a glorious bright Angel, into a black defourmed devil: and from
flying any farther upward, down was he thrown into the deep dark doungeo^
of hell. Now may it paraduenture Cousin seem, that since this kind of temptacion
of p^ide, is no tribulacion or pain, all this yt we speak of this arrowe of
pride, flying forth in the day of prosperity, were beside our matter.


Vincent. Uerely mine uncle, and so seemed it unto me, and somewhat was I mi^ded
so to say to you to, saving yt were it properli pertaini^ng to the present
matter, or somewhat disgressing therfro: good matter me thought it was, and
such as I had no lust to let.


Antony. But now must you Cousin, consydre, that though prosperity be
contrary to tribulacion, yet unto many a good man, the devils temptacio^ unto
pride in prosperity, is a greater more tribulacio^, and need has of good
counsel and good comfort both, tha^ he that never felt it would wene, and
that is ye thing Cousin that makes me speak thereof, as of a thing propre to
this matter. For Cousin, as it is a thing right hard to touch pytche and never
fyle the fingers, to put flex unto fire, and yet keep if from burning, to keep
a serpent in thy bosom, and yet be safe from stinging, to put young men with
young women, without danger of foul fleshlye desire: so is it hard for any
parso^, either man or woman, in great worldly wealth and much prosperity, so
to withstand the suggestions of the devil, and the occasions given by ye
world, that they should keep them self from the deadly desire of ambicious
glory, whereupon there follows, if a man fall thereto, an whole flood of all
unhappy mischief, arrogant manner, high solaine solemn port ouerloking ye poor
in word and countenance, displeasaunt and disdainouse behauour, raven,
extorcio^, oppression, hatred, and cruelty: now many a good man Cousin come^
into great authority, casting in his mind the peril of such occasions of
pride as ye devil takes of prosperity to make his instruments of, wherewith
to move me^ to such high point of presumpcion, as engenders so many great
inconveniences, and feling ye devil therewith offering to the^self suggestions
thereunto, they be sore troubled therewith, and some fall so fraide thereof, yt
eue^ in ye day of prosperity they fall into ye nights fear of pusillanimitie,
and doubts over much lest they should miss use themself, leave ye things
undone, wherein the night use the^self well, and mistrusting the aid of god in
holding them vprighte in their temptacions, give place to the devil in the
contrary temptacions, whereby for faynte heart, they leave of good business
wherein they were well occupied, and under pretext (as it seems to themself) of
humble heart and mekenes, and serving god in contemplacion and silence they
seek their own ease and earthly rest unware wherewith, (if it so be) god is not
well content: howbeit, if it so be that a man feel himself such in deed as by
experience that he has of himself, he perceyueth that in wealth and
authority he does his own soul harm, and cannot do therein, the good that to
his part appertains, but sees ye things that he should set his hand to
sustain, decay through his default, and fall to ruin under him, and that to
the amendment thereof, he leaves his own duty undone: than would I in any wise
advise him to leave of that thing, be it spiritual benefise that he have,
personage or bishoprike, or temporal room and authority, and rather give it
over quite, and draw himself aside and serve god, than take the worldli
worship and commodity for himself, with the incommoditie of them whom his
duty were to profit. But on the other side, i^ he see not ye contrary, but
that he may do his duty conveniently w^ll, and fears nothing but that the
temptacyon of ambicion and pride, may turn peradventure his good purpose, and
make him decline unto sin, I say not nay, but that well done it is to
stand in modera^e fear always, wherefore the Scripture saieth^ Beatus homo qui
semper est pauidus. Blessed is the man that is alwaie fearful. And. S. Paul
says: Qui stat, v^deat ne cadat, he that stands let him look that he fall
not. Yet is over much fear perilouse, and draws toward the mistruste of
Gods gracyous help with immoderate fear and faynte heart: and holy
Scripture forbids saying: Noli esse pus^llanimis, be not fieble hearted or
timerouse. Let such a man therefore temper his fear with good hope, and think
that sith god has s^t him in that place (if he think that god has set him
therein) god will assist him with his grace to y^ well using thereof: howbeit, if
he come thereto by simoni, or by some such other evil mean, tha^ were that
thing one good reason wherefore he should ye rather leave it of, but else let him
continue in his good busynes, and against the devils prouocacio^ unto evil,
bless himself and call unto god, and pray: and look what thing the devil
tempts him to leave, the more toward the contrary, let him be pitiouse and
comfortable to those that are in distress and af^^iccion, I mean not let
every malefactor pass forth unpunished and freli run out and rob at
rou^rs, but in his heart be sorry to see that of necessity for fear of
decaying the common wealth, men are driven to put malefactors to pain. And
yet where he fyndeth good tokens and likelyhode of amendment, therein all that
he may help that mercy may be had, there shall never lack desperately disposed
wretches enough beside, upon whom for ensaumple justice may proceed, let him
think in his own heart every poor beggar his fellow.


Vincent. That will be very hard uncle for an honorable man to do, wha^ he
beholds himself richely appareled and the beggar rygged in his rags.


Antony. If here were Cousin two men that were beggars both, and afterward a
great rich manne would take the one unto him, and tell him that for a little
time, he would have him in his house, and thereupon arrayed him in silk, and
give him a great bag by his side filled even full of gold, but geuyng him
this knotte therewyth, that within a little while, out he should in his old
rags again, and bear never a penny with him. If this beggar met his fellow
now while his gaye gown were on, might he not for all his gaye gear take him
for his fellow still? and were he not a very fool, if for a wealth of a few
wekes, he would wene himself far his better?


Vincent. Yes by my troth uncle, if the difference of their state were none
other.


Antony. Surely Cousin, me thinks y^ in this world between the richest and the
most poor, ye difference is scant so much: for let ye highest look on ye most
bace, and consider how poor they came both into this world, and than consider
farther therewith, how rich soever he be now, he shall yet within a while,
peradventure less tha^ one wieke, walk out again as poor as y^ beggar shall,
and tha^ by my troth me thinks this rich man much more than madde^ if for
ye wealth of a little while, happily less than one wieke, he recke^ himself in
earnest, any better than the beggars fellow: and less than this can no man
think that has any natural wit, and will use it. But now a Christian man
Cosyn that has ye light of faith, he cannot fail to think in this thing much
farther, for he will think not only upon his bare coming hither, and his bare
going hence again, but also upon the dreadful judgment of god, and upon ye
fearful pains of hell, and of the inestimable joys of heaven. And in the
considering of those things, he will call to remembrance that paraduenture when
this beggar and he be both departed hence, ye beggar may be suddenly set up in
such roialtie, y^ well were himself yt ever was he borne if he might be made
his fellow: and he that well be thinks him Cousin upon these things, I verily
think that the arrowe of pride flying forth in y^ day of worldly wealth, shall
never so wound his heart that ever it shall bear him up one foot. But now to
the intent he may think on such things ye better, let him use often to resort
to confession, and there open his heart, and by ye mouth of some good verteous
gostly father have such things often renewed in his remembrance, let him also
choose him self some secret solitary place in his own house as far from
noise and compani as he conveniently can, and thither let him some time
secretly resort alone, imagining himself as one going out of ye world, eue^
straight unto the giving up of his reckoning unto god, of his sinful liui^g:
tha^ let him there before an altar^, ^r some pitiful Image of Christ's bitter
passion, the beholding whereof may put him in remembrance of the thing, and
move him to devout co^passyon^ and there knele down or fall prostrate, as at the
feet of almyghtie god, verily beleuyng him to be there inuisibly present, as
without any doubt he is: there let him open his heart to god and confess his
faults such as he can call to mind, and pray god of forgeuenes. Let him also
call to remembrance the benefits ye god has given him, either ingeneral among
other men, or privately to himself, and give him humble hearty thanks therefore:
there let him declare unto god the temptacions of the devil, the suggestio^s of
the flesh, thoccasions of y^ world and of his worldli frendes^ much worse many
times in drawyng a man from god, than are his most mortal enemies, which thing
our Savior witnesses himself where he sayth^ Inimici hominnis domes^iei
eius, the enemies of a man are they that are his own familiers, there let him
lament and bewail unto god his own frailty, negligence, and sloth in
resisting and withstanding of temptacion, his readiness and pronitie to fall
thereunto, there let him beseech god of his gracious aid and help to
strength his infirmity wtal^ both in keeping him from falling: and wha^ he by
his own faults misfortuneth to fall, than with ye helping hand of his merciful
grace to lift him up and set him on his fete in ye state of his grace again,
and let this man not doubt, but that god hears him and grau^teth him gladly
this boon, and so dwel^ng in the faithful trust of gods help, he shall well
use his prosperity, and persevere in his good profitable busynes, and shall have
therein ye truth of god so compass him about with a pauice of his heavenly
defense, that of ye d^uils arrow ^^ying in y^ day of worldly wealth, he shall
not need to dread.


Vincent. Forsooth uncle I like this good counsel well, and I would wene y^
such as are in prosperity, and take such order therein, may do both to the^
self and other folk about much good.


Antony. I beseech our lord Cousin, put this and better in ye mind of eueri man
that needs it: and now will I touch one word or twain of the third te^ptacio^
whereof ye prophet speaks in these words. A nego^io per ambulante
intenebris, from the business walking in ye darkness, and the^ will we call for our
dinner: leaui^g ye last te^ptacio^ yt is to wete, Ab in cursu and demonio
meridiano. From the incursio^, and y^ devil of y^ mid day^ til after none, and
tha^ shall we therewith god willing make an end of all this matter.


Vincent. Our lord reward you good uncle for your good labor with me, but for
our lords sake take good head uncle y^ you forbear not your dinner over long.


Anthony. Fear not y^ Cousin, I warrant you, for this piece will I make you but
short.


The.xviii. Chapter. Of the devil named Negotiu^ that is toyvit, business
vvalking about in the darkne^
THe prophet says in y^ said psalm. Qui habitat in adiutorio altissimi, in
protectione dei c^li commorabitur Scuto ^ircundabit te veritas eiu^, no^
timebis. etc. A negotio per ambulante intenebris. He that dwells in ye
faithful hope of gods help, he shall abide in ye proteccio^ or safeguard of ye
god of heaven, and thou y^ art such one, shall ye truth of him so compass about
with a pauice yt thou shall not be afraid of ye business walking about in ye
darknesses. Negotium is here Cousin, the name of a devil yt is ever full of
business, in temptynge folk to much evil business: his time of tempting is in ye
darknesses, for you wot well, yt beside the very full night which is ye deep
dark, there are two times of darknesses. The one ere ye morning wax light.
The other wha^ ye eueni^g waxes dark. Two times of like manner darkness, are
there also in ye soul of man: ye one ere ye light of grace be well in ye heart
spro^gen up. The other wha^ ye light of grace out of ye soul begins to
walk fast away. In these two darknesses this devil yt is called business,
busely walks about, and such fond folk as will follow him, he carries about
with him, and sets the^ a work with many manner bu^bling business ^he sets I
say some to seek ye pleasures of ye flesh, in eati^g, drinki^g and other filthi
delight, and some he sets about ye incessa^t s^king for these worldly
gooddes, and of such busye folk who^ this devil called business, our savior
says in the gospel: Qui ambulat in ten^bris, neslit quo vadit. he that walks
in darkness wotteth not whither he goes. And surely in such case are they, for
they neither wot which way they go, nor whither. For verily they walk round
about, as it were in a rou^d^mase, ^he^ they wene the^self at an end of their
business, they be but at ye beginning: again, go they never so full fed to bed,
yet evermore on ye morrow as new be they to be fed again as they were the day
before. Thus fares it by the belly, thus fares it with those parts yt are
beneth ye belli, and as for couetice, fares like the fire, ye more wood yt
comes thereto, ye more fervent and ye more gredy it is^ but now has this mase
a centry or middle place, i^to which su^time they be co^uaied sodai^l^ wha^
they wene they were not yet far from ye brinke ye country or middle place of
this mase is hell, and into ye place be these busy folk that with this devil of
business walk about in this busye mase, in the darkenesses, suddenly sometime
conuayed, no thing ware whither they be going, and even while they wene that
they were not far walked from the beginning, and that they had yet a great
way to walk about before they should come to ye end: but of these steshely
folk walking in this pleasant busi mase, the Scripture declares ye end.
Ducunt in bondies suos and in puneto ad inferna descendunt. They lead their
life in pleasure, and at a poppe down they descend into hell. Of the couetouse
man says. S. Paul. Qui volunt diuites fieri in^idunt in temptacionem and in
laqueum diaboli, and desideria multa in v^ilia and nociu^ que merg^nt homines
in nteritum and perdicionem. They y^ long to be rich do fall into temptacio^
and into y^ grinne of ye devil, and into mani desires unprofitable and
harmeful, which drou^de me^ into death and into destruccio^. Lo, here is the
middle place of this busy mase, ye grinne of ye devil, the place of perdicion
and destruccio^, y^ they fall and be caught and drounde in ere they be ware.
The couetouse rich man also that our savior speaks of in ye gospel, that
had so great plenty of corn yt his barnes would not receive it^ but intended
to make his barnes larger, and said unto himself that he would make merye
many days, had went you wot well that he had had a great way yet to walk,
but god said unto him: Stulte, hac noc^e tollent a te anim^m ^uam, que autem
parasti c^ius erunt? fool, this night shall they take thy soul from thee, and
than all this good that thou haste gathered, whose shall it be? here you see yt
he fell suddenly into ye deep centry of this busy mase, so yt he was fallen full
and whole therein long ere ever he had went he should have come nere thereto.
Now this wot I very well, y^ those y^ are walking about in this busi mase,
take not their busynes for any tribulacion, and yet are there many of ^^em
forweried as sore, and as fore panged and payned therein, their pleasures being
so short, so litl^ and so few, and their disple^sures and their griefs so
great, so continual, and so many, that it makes me think upon a good
worshipful man, which when he diverse times beheld his wife, what pain she
took in strayghte binding up her here, to make her a fair large forehead,
and with straight bracing in her body to make her middle small, both twain to
her great pain, for the pride of a litel foolish praise: he said unto her.
Forsooth Madame if god give you not hell, he shall do you great wrong, for it
must needs be your own of very right: for you bye it very dear, and take very
great pain therefore. They that now ^ye ^n hell for their wretched living
here. do now perceive their follye in their more pain that they took here
for the less pleasure. There confess they now their folly, and cry out.
Lassati sumus in via iniqui^ ^atis: we have been wearied in the way of
wyckednes. And yet while they were walking therein, they would not rest the^
self, but run on still in their wearines, and put them self still unto more
pain and more, for that little pieuishe pleasure, short and sone gone, that
they took all that labor and pain for, beside the everlasting pain that
followed it for their farther advantage after. So help me god and none other
wise, but as I verily think yt many a man byeth hell here with so much pain,
yt he might have bought heaven with less tha^ the one half. But yet as^ I
say, while these fleshly and worldly busy folk are walking about in this
round busy mase of the devil yt is called business, yt walks about in these
two times of darkenesses, their wits are so by ye secret enchau^temente of ye
devil bewitched, y^ they mark not ye great long miserable wearines and pain
yt the devil makes them to take and endure about naught, and therefore they
take it for no tribulacio^, so that they need no cumfort: and therefore is it
not for their sakes that I speak all this, saving that it may serve them for
counsel, toward the perceiving of their own foolish miserye, through the
good help of gods grace beginning to shine upon them again. But there are
very good folk and verteouse that are in the day light of grace, and yet
because the devil te^pteth the^ busily to such fleshely delighte, and since they
see plenty of worldly substance fall unto them, and feel the devil in likewise
busily about to tempt them to set their heart thervpo^, they be sore troubled
therewith, and begin to fear thereby that they be not with god in the light,
but with the devil that ye Prophet calls N^gotiu^, that is to say, busynes,
walking about in the two times of darkenesses: howebeit, as I said before of
those good folk and gracious, that are in the worldly wealth of great power
and authority, and thereby fear the deuilles arrowe of pride: so say I now
here again of these y^ stand in dread of fleshly foul sin and couetice,
since they be but tempted therewt and follow it not albeit yt they do well to
stand ever in moderate fear, lest with waxing over bold, and setting ye thing
over light, they might peradventure missehap to fall in thereto, yet sore to
vex and trouble them self with ye fear of loss of gods favor therefore, is
without necessity and not al way without peril. For as I said before, it
wtdraweth ye mind of a man far from spiritual co^solacion of the good hope yt
he should have in gods help. And as for these temptacio^s, while he yt is
tempted follows the^ not, the fight against the^ serves a man for matter of
merit and reward in heaven, if he not only fly ye dede^ ye co^sente and the
delectacio^, but also in yt he conveniently may fly from al y^ ocacions
thereof, and this point is in those fleshly te^ptacio^s a thingeth to perceive,
and metely plain enough. But in these worldly businesses pertaining unto
couetise, therein is ye thing somewhat more dark, and in ye perceiving more
difficulty, and very great troublouse fear does there oftentimes arise thereof
in ye hearts of very good folk, wha^ the world falls fast unto the^,
because of ye sore words and terryble threats ye god in holy scripture
speaks against those yt are ^iche: as where. S. Paul says. Qui ^olu^t
diuites fieri, incidunt in temptacione^ and in laqueu^ Diaboli. They yt will be
rich, fall into temptacio^, and into the grin of ye devil, and where our
savior says him self. Facilius est camelum per forame^ acus qua^ diui^e^
intrare in regnu^ dei. It is more easy for a camel, or as some say (for so
Camelus signifies in ye Greek to^g) for a great cable rope to go through a
nedles eye, tha^ for a rich man to enter into ye kingdom of god. No marvel
now though good folk that fear god take occasion of great dread at so
dredeful words when they see ye worldly goods fall unto the^, and some stand
in doubt whither it be lawful for the^ to keep any goods or no. But evermore
in all those places of scripture, y^ having of ye worldly goods is not ye
thing yt is rebuked and threatened, but ye a^feccio^ yt the hauer unlawfully
bears thereto. For where. S. Paul says. Qui volunt diuites fieri. etc. They
yt will be made rich he speaks not of ye having, but of the will and ye
desire and affeccio^, and the lo^ging for it^ for yt can not be lightly without
sin: for ye thing y^ folk sore long for, they will make many shift^s to
g^at, and ieopard the^ self therefore, and to declare yt the having of riches is
not forbydde^^ but ye inordinate affeccio^ of ye mind sore set thereupon: The
prophet says: Diuitie si affl^a^t nolite cor apponere. If riches flow unto
you set not your hearts thereupon. And albeit yt our lord by ye said ensample of
ye camel or ye cable rope, to come throw ye nedles eye, said y^ it is not
only hard, but also impossible for a rich man to enter into ye kingdom of
heaven, yet he declared that though the rich man can not geat into heaven of
him self, yet god he said can geat him in well enough, for unto me^ he said it
was ^mpossible, but not unto god: for unto god he said, al things are
possible. And yet over that he told of which manner rich men he meynt yt could
not geat into ye kingdom of heaven, saying: Filioli, qua^ difficile est
confidentes in pecuniis in regnum dei introire My babes, how hard is it for
them that put their trust and confidence in their money, to enter into the
kingdom of god?

Vincent. This is I suppose uncle very true, and else god forbid. For else
were the world in a full hard case if every rich man were in such danger
and peril.


Anthony. That were it Cousin in deed, and so I wene is it yet. For I fear me
to ye multitude, there be very few, but that they long sore to be rich, and
of those yt long so to be, very few reserved also, but that they set their
hearts very sore thereon.


Vincent. That is Uncle I fear me very true, but yet not the thing that I was
about to speak of, but the thing yt I would have said was this, that I can
not well perceive (the world being such as it is, and so many poor people
therein) how any man may be rich, and keep him rich without danger of
damnacion therefore. For all the while that he sees poor people so many that
lack, while him self has to give them, and whose necessity (while he has
wherewith) he is bound in such case of duetye to releue, so farforth that holy
Saint Ambrose says: that who so that dye for defaulte, where we might help
them, we kyl them our self. I can not see but that every rich man has great
cause to stand in great fear of damnacio^, nor I can not perceive as I say,
how he can be delivered of that fear as long as he keeps his riches, and
therefore though he might keep his riches, if there lacked poor men, and yet
stand in gods favor therewith, as Abraham did, and many an other holy rich
man since: yet it such abundance of poor me^ as there be now in every
country any man that keeps any riches, it must needs be, that he has an
inordynate affeccion thereunto, while he gives it not out unto the poor nedy
persons, yt the duty of charity binds and straineth him to. And thus Uncle
in this world at this day, me seems your comfort unto good men that are
rich, and troubled with ^eare of damnacion for the keeping can very scantly
serve.


Antony. Hard is it Cousin in many manner things, to bydde or forbydde, affirm
or deny, reprove or allow, a matter nakedly proponed and put forth, or
precisely to say, this thing is good or this thing is naught, without
consideracio^ of the circumstaunces. Holy Saint Austen tells of a phisicio^
that gave a man a medicine in a certain disease, that help him: the self
same man at an other time in the self same disease, ^ooke the self same
medicine him self, and had thereof more harm than good: which thing when he
showed unto the physician, and asked him whereof that harm should hap, that
medicine, quod he, did the no good but harm, because thou tookest it when I
gave it the not. This answer. S. Austen very well allows, for ye though ye
medicine were one, yet might there be peradventure in the sickness, some such
dyffere^ce, as ye pacient perceived not, yea or in the man him self, or in the
place, or in ye time of ye year: many things might make the let, for which
the physician would not than ha^^ given him the self same medicine that he
gave him before, to peruse every circumstance yt might Cousin in this matter be
touched, and were to be considered and waighed, would in deed make this part
of thi^ devil of business a very busy piece of work, and a long: but I shall a
little open the point that you speak of, and shall show you what I think
therein, with as few words as I conveniently can, and than will we go to
dinner. First Cousin, he that is a rich man and keeps all his good, he has I
think very good cause to be very frayd in deed. And yet I fear me yt such
folk fear it least, for they be very far from the state of good me^, since
if they keep still al, tha^ are they very far from charity, and do, you wo^e
well, almose, either li^^le or none at al^ But now is our question Cousin, not
in what case yt rich man stands yt keeps al, but whither we should suffer
men to stand in a perilous dread and fear, for the keeping of any great
part. For if that by the keeping still of so much, as makes a rich man still,
they stand in ye state of damnacio^: tha^ a^e ye curates bounde^ plainly to tell
the^ so according to the commandment of god given unto the^ al in ye person
of Ezechyel. Si dicente me ad impium morte morieris non annunciaueris ei. etc.
If when I say to the wicked man. Thou shalt dye, y^ do not show it unto him,
nor speak it unto him, that he may be turned from his wicked way and may
live, he shall soothly dye in his wyckednes, and his blood shall I verilye
require of thine hands. But Cousin, though god invited men unto ye following of
him self in wyful poverty, by the leaving of altogether at once for his sake,
as the thing whereby with being out of the solicitude of worldly business, and
far from the desire of earthly commodities, they may the more spedely geat
and attain the state of spiritual perfeccio^ and the hungry desire, and
longing for celestial things, ye^ does he not commau^d every in a^ so to do
upon ye peril of da^nacio^. For where he says: Qui no^ renu^ciauerit omnibus
que pos^idet, no^ potest esse meus discipulus. He yt forsakes not al yt ever
he has, can not be my disciple. He declares well by other words of his own
in ye self same place a little before, what he means. For there says he
more. Si quis venit ad me and non odit patrem su^m and matrem, and vxorem, and
filios, and fratres, and sorores, ad huc autem and animam suam, no^ potest es^e
n^eus dicipulus. He that comes to me and hates not his father and his mother,
and his children, and his bre^hren and his sisters, yea and his own life too,
can not be my dysciple. Here means our savior Christ yt none can be his
disciple, but if he love him so far above al his kin, and above his own
life to, y^ ^or the love of him rather than to forsake him, he shall forsake
them al: and so means he by those other words, that whosoever do not so
renounce and forsake all that ever h^ h^th in his own heart and affeccion, that
he will rather leese it al and let it go every whitte, tha^ deadlye displease
god with the reserving of any one part thereof, he can not be Christ's dysciple
sy^h Christ teache^h us to love God above all thing: and he loves not God
above all thing, that contrary to gods pleasure keeps any thing that he has.
For y^ thing he shows him self to set more by than by god, while he is
better content to lose god, than it. But as I said to give away al or that no
man should be rich or have any substance, yt find I no commandment of. There
are as our savior says, in the house of his father many mansions, and happy
shall he be, that shall have the grace to dwell even in the lowest. It seems
verily by ye gospel, yt those which for gods sake suffer penury, shall not only
dwell above those in heaven, yt live here in plenty in earth but also ye heaven
in some manner of wise more properly belongs unto the^, and is more specially
prepared for the^, tha^ it is for the rich, by yt, that god in the gospel
cou^sayleth the rich folk to bye in a manner heaven of the^, where he says
unto ye rich me^. Facite vobis amicos de Mammona iniquitatis, vt cum
defeceritis, recipiant vos in eterna tabernacula. Make you friends of the
wicked riches, yt when you fail here, they may receive you into everlasting
tabernacles. But now although this be thus, in respect of the riches and the
poverty compared together, yet they being good me^ both, there may be some
other virtue beside, wherein the rich man may so peradventure excel, yt he may
be in heaven far above yt poor man yt was here in earth in other virtues
far under him, as ye proof appears clearly in Lazarus and Abraham.


The.xix. Chapter.
NOr I say not this to the intent to comfort rich men in heaping up of
riches, for a little comfort is bente enough thereto for them. They be not so
proud hearted and obstinate, but that they would I wene, to that counsel be
with right little exhortacion very conformable. But I say this for those good
me^ to whom god gives substance, and the mind to dispose it well, and yet not
the mind to give it all away at once, but for good causes to keep some
substance still, should not despair of gods favor for the not doing of the
thing, which god has given them no commandment of, nor drawn by any
special calling thereunto. acheus lo, that clymed up into the tree for desire
yt he had to behold our savior, at such time as Christ called aloude unto him
and said: zacheus, make have and come down, for this day must I dwell in thy
house. Zacheus was so glad thereof, and so touched inwardly with special grace to
the profit of his soul, that whereas al ye people murmured much that Christ
would call him and be so familiar with him, as of his own offer to come unto
his house, considering that they knew him for the chief of the Publicanes,
that were customers or toll gatherers of themperours duties: all which whole
company were among ye people sore infamed of rauine, extorcio^ and bribery, and
than zacheus, not only the chief of that fellowship, but also grown greatly
rich, whereby the people accoumpted him in their own opinion^ for a man very
sinful and naught: he forthwith by the instinct of ye spirit of god, in
reproach of al such ^emerarious bold and blind judgment given upon a man,
whose inward mind and sodayn change they cannot see, shortly proved them all
deceived and that our lord had at those few words outwardly spoken to him,
so touched him, that his grace so wrought in his heart within, yt whatsoever he
was before, he was than, unawares unto them all suddenly waxen good: for he made
haste and came down, and gladly received Christ, and said: Lo lord, the one
half of my goods here I give unto poor people: and yet over that, if I have
in any thing deceued any man, here am I ready to recompense him four fold
as much.

Vincent. This was uncle, a gracious hearing, but yet I marvel me su^what
wherefore zacheus used his words in that manner of order. For me thinks he
should first have spoken of making restitucion unto those whom he had begyled,
and than speak of giving his almose after. For restitucion is, you wot well,
duetye, and a thing of such necessity, that in respect of restitucion, almose
deed is but voluntarye. Therefore it might seem, that to put men in mind of
their duty in making restitucion first, and doing their almose after^ zacheus
should have said more conveniently if he had said first that he would make
every man restitucion whom he had wronged, and than give half in almose of
that ye remained after, for only that might he call clearly his own.


Anthony This is true Cousin, where a man has not enough to su^fise for both:
but he that has is not bound to leave his almose vngeuen to the poor man that
is at his hand, and peradventure calls upon him til he go seek up al his
creditors, and al those that he has wronged, so far peradventure asundre,
that leaving the one good deed undone ye while, he may before they come
together change that good mind again, and do neither the one nor the other.
It is good always therefore to be doing some good out of hand, while we think
thereon: grace shall the better stand with us, and increase also to go the
farther into the other after: and this I answer, if the man had there done
the one out of hand, ye giving I mean^ half in almose, and not so much as
speak of restitucion till after, where as now though he spoke the one in
order before the other, and yet all at one time, the thing remained still in
his liberty to put them both in execucion after such order as he should than
think expedient. But now Cousin did the spiri^e of god tempre the tongue of
zacheus in the vtterau^ce of these words, in such wise as it may well a^peare
the saying of the wise man to be verifyed in them, where he says: Domini est
gubernare linguam. To god it belongs to govern the tongue.

For here when he said he would give half of his whole good unto poor
people, and yet beside that, not only recomp^ce any man whom he had wronged,
but more than recompense him by three times as much again: He double reproved
the false suspicion of the people that accounted him for evil, y^ than reckoned
in their mind al his good gotten in e^fect with wrong, because he was grown to
substance in that office, which was commonly misused extorciously. But his
words declared that he was r^p^ enough in his reckoning, yt if half his goods
were given away, yet were he well able to yield every man his dueti^ with ye other
half and yet leave himself no beggar neither: for he said not he would give al
away. Would god Cousin y^ every rich christen man that is reputed right
worshipful (yea and which yet in my mind, more is r^ckoned for right honest
too) would and were able, to do the thing tha^ little zacheus yesame great
Publican^ (were he Jew or were he Painim) said: yt is to we^e, with less the^
half his goods recompense every man whom he had wronged.iiii. times as much:
ye, ye Cousin, as much for as much hardly, and than they that shall receive it,
shall be content (I dare promise for the^) to let the other thrice as much go,
and forgive it, because it was one of the hard points of the old law, whereas
christen men must be full of forgeuing, and not use to require and exact their
amends to ye uttermost. But now for our purpose here, notwithstanding that he
promised not, neither to give away al, nor to become a beggar nether, no nor
yet to leave of his office nether, which albeit yt he had not used before
peradventure in every point, so pure as. S. John baptist had taught the^ the
lesson. Nihil amplius quam constitut^ e^^vobis faciatis. Do no more the^ is
appointed unto you. Yet forasmuch as he might both lawfully use his substance
yt he minded to reserve, and lawfully might use his office to, in receiving the
Princes duty according to Christ's express commandment. Reddite que sunt
Se^ar^s, ^efari. Give the emperor those things that are his, refusing al
extorcion and bribery beside: our lord well allowing his good purpose, and
exacting no far^her forth of him concerning his worldly b^haueour^ auns^ered
and said: Ho^^e salus facta ^st hui^ d^mui eo quod ipse ^ilius sit Abrahe. This
day is heal^h comen to this house, for that he too, is the son of Abraham.
But now forgeat I no^ Cosyn, yt in effect thus far you condiscende unto me^
that a man may be rich, and yet not out of the state of grace, nor out of
gods favor: howbeit you think that though it may be so in some time, or in
some place, yet at this time, and in this place, or any such other like,
wherein be so many poor people upon whom they be, you think, bounden to
bestow their good, they can therefore keep no riches with good conscience:
Uerely Cousin if y^ reason would hold, I wene the world was never such any
where, in which any man might have kept any substance without the danger of
damnacion, as for since Christ's days to the worlds end, we have the witness
of his own word, that there has never lacked poor me^, nor never shall: for he
said himself. Pauperes semper habebitis vobi^cum, quibus quum vultis,
bene^acere po^estis. Poor men shall you always have with you, whom when you will
you may do good unto: so that as I tell you, if your rule should hold, then
were there, I wene, no place in no time since Christ's days hitherto, nor as I
think in as long before that neither, nor never shall there hereafter, in which
there could any man abide rich without the danger of eternal da^nacion, even
for his riches alone, though he demeaned it never so well. But Cousin, men of
substance must there needs be, for else shall you have more beggars pardie, the^
there be, and no man left able to relieve another. For this think I in my mind
a very sure conclusion, that if all the money that is in this cu^trey, were to
morrow next brought together out of every man's hand, and laid al upon one
heap, and than divided out unto every man alike, it would be on the morrow
after worse than it was the day before. For I suppose when it were all egally
thus divided among al, the best should be left little better, than a beggar
almost is now: and yet he that was a beggar before, all that he shall be the
richer for y^ he should thereby receive, shall not make him much above a beggar
still: but many one of ye rich me if their riches stood but in moveable
substaunc^, shall be safe enough from riches happily for all their life after. Men
can not you wot well live here in this world, but if that some one man
provide a mean of living for some other many, every man cannot have a ship of
his own, nor every man be a merchant without a stock, and these things you
wot well must needs be had: nor every man cannot have a plowe by himself. And
who might live by the tailors craft, if no man were able to put a gown to make?
who by masonrye? or who could live a carpenter, if no man were able to build
neither church nor house? Who should be makers of any manner of cloth, if
there lacked men of substance to set sundry sorts a work? Some man that has
but two duccates in his house, we^e better forbear them both and leave
himself not a farthing, but utterly lose all his own, than that some rich
man by whom he is w^ekely set a work, should of his money lose the one
half, for than were himself like to lack work. For surely the rich man's
substance is the weispring of the poor man's living. And therefore here would
it fare by ye poor man as it fared by ye woman in one of Esopes fables, which
had an hen that laid every day a golden egg, till on a day she ^hought she
would have a great mayny of eggs at once, and therefore she killed her hen,
and fo^nd but one or twain in her belly, so that for couetise of those sewe
she lost many. But now Cousin, to come to your dout how it may be that a man
may with conscience keep riches with him, when he sees so many poor men upon
whom he may bestow it: Uerely that might he not with conscience do, if he mu^t
bestow it upon as many as he may. And so must of truth every ^iche man do,
if all the poor folk that he sees, be so specially by Gods commandment
committed unto his charge alone, that because our savior says: Omni
peten^ite, d^. Give every man that asks the, therefore should he be bound to
give out still to eueri beggar that will ask him, as long as any penny lasts
in his purse. But verily Cousin, yt saying has, as S. Paul saith^ and other
places in Scripture, need of interpretacion. For as holy. S. Austen says:
Though Christ say, give every man that asks the: he says not yet, give them
all that they will ask thee. But surely al were one, if he meint to bind me by
commandment to give every man without excepcion somewhat, ^or so should I
leave my self nothing. Our savior in that place of ye.vi. Chap of S. Luke,
speaks both of ye contempt yt we should in heart have of these worldly
things, and also of ye manner yt men should use toward their enemies. For there
he bids us love our enemies give good words for evil, and not only su^fer
injuries patiently both by taking away our goods and harm done unto our
bodies, but also be ready to suffer the double, and over that, to do the^ good
again, that do us the harm. And among these things he bids us give
every manne that asks, meaning that in the thing that we may conveniently do
a man good, we should not refuse it, what manner of man soever he be, though he
were our mortal^ enemy, namely where we see, yt but if we help him our self,
ye person of ye man should stand in peril of perishing, and there says: Si
esurierit inimicus tuus, da illi cibu^. If thine enemy be in hunger, give him
meat. But now though I be bound to give every manner of man in some manner of
his necessity, were he my friend or my foe, christen man or heath^, yet am I not
unto al men bound alike, nor unto any man in every case alike. But as I began
to tell you, ye difference of ye circumstances make great change in the matter.
S. Paul saith^ Qui non prouidet suis, est infideli deterior. He yt provides
not for those yt are his, is worse tha^ an infidele. Those are ours that are
belonging to our charge, either by nature or law, or any commandment of god,
by nature as our children, by law as our servants in our household: so yt
albeit these two sorts be not ours al alike, yet would I think that ye least
to be ours of ye twayn: that is to wete, our servants, if they need and lack,
we be b^unde^ to look to them, and provide for their need, and see so farforth
as we may, that they lack not ye things yt should serve for their necessity,
while they dwell in our service. Me seems also yt if they fall sick in our
service, so yt they cannot do ye service yt we retain the^ for: yet may we not
in any wise turn them then out of doors, and cast the^ up co^fortles while
they be no^ able to labor and help themself, for this were a thing against al
humanity. And surely if he were but a waifaring man yt I receued into mi house
as a geast, if he fall sick therein, and his money gone, I reckon my self
bounden to keep him still, and rather to beg about for his relief than cast
him out in that case to the peril of his life, what loss soever I should
take thereby in keeping of him. For when God has by such chance sent him to
me, and there once matched me with him, I reckon my self surely charged with
him, till I may without perell of his life, be well and conveniently
discharged of him.

By Gods commandment are in our charge, our pare^tes, for by nature we be
in theyrs^ since as. S. Paul says, it is not ye childrens part to provide for
ye pare^tes, but the parents to provide for the children, provide I mean
conveniently good learning or good occupacions to geat their living by with
truth and the favor of god, but not to make provision for the^ of such manner
of living as to godward they should live ye worse for: but rather if they see
by their manner, yt to much would make them naught, the father should then give
them a great deal the less. But although ye nature put not ye parents in the
charge of the children: yet not only god co^maundeth^ but the order of nature
also compels, yt the children should both in reverent behaueour, honor their
father and mother, and also in all their necessity maintain the^, and yet
as much as god and nature both binds us to the sustenance of our own father,
his need may be so little, though it be sumwhat, and a fre^d man's so great, yt
both god and nature also would I should in such unequal need, relieve that
urgent necessity of a stranger, yea my foe, and gods enemy to, the very Turk
or Sarazin before a little need, and unlikely to do great harm in my father and
in my mother to, for so ought they both twain them self to be well content I
should. But now Cosyn out of the case of such extreme need well perceived
and known unto my self, I am not bounde^ to give every beggar that will ask,
nor to believe every faytor that I mete in the street, that will say him self
that he is very sick, nor to reckon all the poor folk committed by God only,
so to my charge alone, ye none other man should give them nothing of his,
till I have first given out al mine, nor am not bounde^ neither to have so
evil opinion of all other folk save my self as to think, yt but if I help,
the pore folk shall al fail at once, for god has left in all this quarter no
mo good folk now but me: I may think better by my neighbor, and worse by my
self than so, and yet come to heaven by gods grace well enough.


Vincent. Marye Uncle but some man will peradventure he right well content in
such cases, to think his neighbors very charitable, to the intent yt he may
think him self at liberty to give nothing at al.


Anthony. That is Cousin very true, so will there some be content either to
think, or make as though they thought, but those are they yt are content to
give naught, because they b^ naught. But our question is Cousin not of the^,
but of good folk, yt by the keeping of worldely goods, stand in great fear
to offend god. For ye acquieting of their conscience speak we ^ow, to the
intent y^ they may perceive what manner of having of worldly goods and keeping
thereof, may stand with the state of grace. Now think I Cousin yt if a man keep
riches about him for ^ glory and royalty of ye world, in co^sideracio^
whereof h^ takes a great delight, and likes him self therefore ye bette^ taking
ye poor for ye lack thereof as one far wors^ tha^ him self, such a mind is
very vain, foolish, prou^ and such a man is very naught in deed. But o^
the other side, if there be a man such as would god the^^ were many, yt has
unto riches no love, but having ^ fall abundantly unto him, takes to his own
par^^ no great pleasure thereof, but as though he had it n^^ keeps him self in
like abstinence and penance prieu^^ as he would do in case he had it not,
and in su^^ things as he does openly bestow somewhat n^^^ liberally upon him
self in his house after some manner of the world, lest he should give other
folk occasion to marvel and muse, and talk of his manner, and missereport
him for an ipocrite, there in between god and him does truly proteste and
testify as did the good Queen Hesther, that he does it not for any desire
thereof in the satisfying of his own pleasure, but would with as good will or
better, forbear the possession of riches, saving for the commodytie that other
men have by his dysposing ^hereof. as percase in keeping of a good household in
good christian order and fashion, and in se^ting other folk a work with such
thing as they gain their living ye better by his means. This man's having of
riches I might me thinks in merit, ma^ch in a manner with an other man's
forsaking of al if there were none other circumstaunces more pleasant unto god
farther added unto the forsaking beside as percase for the more fervent
contemplacion, by reason of the solicitude of al worldly business l^ft of, which
was the thing that made Mary Magdalenes part the better. For else would C^ris^e
have canned her much more thank to go about and be busy in helping her
sister Martha to dress his dinner, than to take her stool and sytte down at
her ease and do naught. Now if he that have this good and riches by him, have
not happily fully so perfect mind, but somewhat loves to keep him self from
lack, and not so fully as a pure christen fashion requires, determined to
abando^ his pleasure: well, what will you more, the man is so much ye less
perfect, than I would he were, and happily than him self would wish, if it
were as easy to be it as to wish it, but yet not by and by in the state of
damnacion, no more tha^ he ye forsaking al, and entering into religion. is not
yet always so clear depured f^o^ al worldly affeccions as him self would very
feign he were and much bewa^le^h yt he is not: of who^ some man yt has in the
world willi^^ly forsaken y^ likelihode of right worshipf^l roumes, has
afterward had much ado, to keep him self from the desire of ye office of
cele^ar or sextayn, to bear yet at ye leastwyse some rule and auctorite,
though it were but among ye belles. But god is more merciful to man's
imperfeccio^, if ye man know it, and knowle^ge it, and mislike it, and little
and little labor to amend it, tha^ to reject and cast of him y^ after as his
frailetie can bear and suffer, has a general intent and purpose to please him
and to prefer or set by nothing in all this world before him. And therefore
Cousin, to make an end of this piece wtal A negotio perambulante in tenebris.
Of this devil I mean yt the prophet calls business walking in the darkness if
a man have a mind to se^ue god and please him, and rather lose all the good he
has than wittingly do deadly si^ne^ and would without murmr or grudge, give
it eu^ri whitte away in case that god should so commau^de him and intend to
take it patiently if god would take it from him, and glad would be to use it
unto gods pleasure, and do his diligence to know and to be taught what manner
using thereof god would be pleased with: and therein from time to time be glad to
follow the counsel of good verteous men, thouge he neither give away all at
once, nor give every man that asks him, neither (let every man fear and
think in this world, yt all the good that he does or can do, is a great deal
to little) but yet for all that fear, let him dwell therewith in the faithful
hope of Gods help. And than shall the truth of god so compass him about
(as the proph^^ says) with a pauice, that he shall not so need to dread y^
trains and the temptacions of this devil yt the prophet calls business,
walking about in the darkensses, but that he shall for all the having of riches
and worldly substance, so avoid his trains and his temptacions, that he shall
in conclusion by the great and almighty mercy of god, geat into heaven well
inoughe. And now was I Cousin about lo, after this piece thus ended, to bid
them to bring in our dinner, but now shall I not need lo, for here they come
with it already.


Vincent. Forsooth good Uncle god disposes and temeth your matter and your
dinner both I trust. For the end of your good tale (for which our lord reward
you) and the beginning here of your good dinner too, (from which it were more
than piety that you should any longer have tarried) mete eue^ at the close
together.


Anthony. Well Cousin, now will we say grace, and than for a while^ will we
leave talking, and assaye how our dinner shall like us, and how fair we can
fall to feding, which done you know my customable guise (for manner I may not
call it) because ye gyse is unmannerly to bydde you not fare well, but steal
away from you to sleep: but you wot well I am not wont at after noone to
sleep long, but even a little to forgeatte the world. And when I wake, I will
again come to you, and than is (god willing) all this long day ours,
wherein we shall have time enough to talk more than shall su^fice for the
finishing of this one part of our matter, which only now remains.


Vincent. I pray you good uncle keep your customable manner, for manner may you
call it well enough: for as it were against good manner to look that a man
should kneel down for courtesy when his knee is sore, so is it very good
manner that a man of your age agrieued with such sundry syckenesses beside,
tha^ suffer you not always to s^epe when you should. Let his sleep not slyppe
away, but take it when he may: And I will uncle in the mean while steal
from you too, and speed a little earrande, and return to you again.


Antony. Tarry while you will, and when you have dyned, go at your pleasure,
but I pray you ^arye not long.


Vincent. You shall not need uncle to put me in mind of that, I would so
feign have up the remnaunte of our matter.


The third Book and the last^ of consolacion and comfort in tribulacion.
Vincent. SOmewhat have I tarried the longer uncle, partlye for that I was loath
to come ouersone, lest my sone coming might have happed to have made you wake
to sone: but specially by the reason I was let with one that showed me a
letter dated at Constantinople, by which letter it appears, yt the great
Turk prepares a merueilous mighty army, and yet whether he will therewith, that
can there yet no man tell. But I fear in good faith vncle^ that his vyage
shall be hither. Howbeit; he that wrote the letter, says that it is secretly
said in Constantinople, that great part of his army shall be shipped and sent
either into Naples or into Cicile.


Anthony. It may fortune Cousin, that the letter of the ^enecian dated at
Constantinople, was devised at Uenice. From thence come there some among, and
sometime from Rome to, and sometime al^o from other places, letters al farced
f^l of such tydinges yt the Turk is ready to do some great exploitie^ which
tydinges they blow about for ye farthera^ce of some such affairs, as they
tha^ have themself in hand. The Turk has also so many men of arms in his
retinew, at his continual charge, that lest they should lie still and do
nothing, but peradventure fall in devising of some novelties among the^self, he
is fayn yearly to make some assemblies and some changeing of the^ from one
place unto another, and pa^te some sort asundre, that they wax not over well
acquaynted by dwelling over long together. By these ways also he makes those
that he minds suddenly to invade in deed, the less to look therefore, and
thereby ye less preparacion to make before, while they see him so many times
make a great visage of war, when he minds it not: but then at one time or
other, they sodeinly feel it when they fear it not. Howbeit, full likely
Cousin it is of very truth, ye into this realm of Hungarye he will not fail
to come. For neither is there any country through christendom, that lies for
him so mete, nor never was there any time till now, in which he might so well
and surely win it. For now call we him in our self (God save us) as Esope
tells, that the sheep took in the woulfe unto them, to keep them from the
dogs.


Vincent. Than are there very like good uncle al these tribulacions to fall upon
us here, y^ I spoke of in the beginning of our first communicacion here the
other day.


Anthony. Uerye truth it is Cousin, yt so there will of likelihod in a while,
but not forthwith all at the first. For while he comes under yt color of aid
for ye one against the other, he will sumwhat se the proof before he fully show
himself. But in conclusion, if he be able to geat it for him, you shall see him
so handle it yt he shall not fail to geat it from him, and that furthwith out
of hand or ever he suffer him settle himself over sure therein.


Vincent. Yet say they uncle, yt he uses not to force any man to forsake his
faith.


Anthony. Not any man Cousin? They say more than they can make good that tell
you so: he makes a solemn oath among the Ceremonies of that feast in which
he first takes upon him his authority, that he shall, in all that he
possible may, mynyshe the faith of Christ, and dilate the faith of Machomet.
But yet has he not used to force every whole country at once to forsake their
faith. For of some cou^treyes has he been content, only to take a tribute
yerelye, and let them live than as they lust. Out of some he takes the whole
people away, dispersyng them for slaves among many sundry countries of his,
very far from their own, without any sufferance of regresse. Some country so
great and populous, that they cannot well be carried and conuayed thence: he
destroys the gentlemen and gives their lands part to such as he brings,
and part to such as willingly will reuye their faith, and keeps the other in
such misery, that they were in manner as good to be dead at once. In rest he
suffers else no christian man almost, but those that resort as marcha^tes, or
those that offer themself to serve him in his war. But as for those christen
countries, that he uses not for only tributories as he does Thio, Ciprys or
Candy, but reckons for clear conquest, and utterly takes for his own, as
Morea, Greece and Macedony, and such other like. And as I verelye think, he will
Hungary, if he geat it. In all those uses he christian people after sundry
fashions. He lets the^ dwell there in deed because they were to many to carry
al away, and to many to kill them all to. But if he should either leave the land
dispeopled and desolate, or else some other countries of his own, from whence
he should (which would not well be done) convey the people thither, to people
that land withal. There lo, those that will not be turned from their faith, of
which god keeps (lauded be his holy name) very many he suffers to dwell
still in peace. But yet is their peace for all that not very peacible: For
lands he suffers them to have none of their own: office or honest rowme
they bear none: with occasyons of his wars he pylleth them with taxis and
tallagis unto the bare bones, their children he choseth where he lust in their
youth, and take^h them from their parents conueying the^ whither he lust,
where their friends never see the^ after, and abuses the^ as he lust. Some
young maidens makes harlots: some young me^ he brings up in war, and some
young children, he causes to be geldyd, not their stones cut out, as the
custom was of old, but cutteth of their whole members by the body: how few
escape and live, he little forces, for he will have in oughe. And all that he so
takes young, to any use of his own, are betaken unto such Turks or false
renagates to keep, that they be turned from the faith of Christ every chone, or
else so handled, that as for this world they come to an evil cheuing. For beside
many other co^tumelyes, and dispightes that the Turks and the false renagate
christians, many times do to good christen people, that still persevere and
abide by the faith, they find the mean sometime to make some false shrewes say,
that they heard such a christian man speak opprobrious words against Machomet,
and upon that point falsely testified, will they take occasion to compel him
forsake the faith of Christ, and turn unto the profession of their shameful
supersticious sect, or else will they put him to death with cruel intolerable
torments.


Vincent. Our lord uncle for his myghtie mercy keep those wretches hence. For
by mi troth, if they hap to come hither, me think I see many more tokens
than one that we shall have of our own folk hear ready to fall in unto
them. For like as before a great storm the sea begins some time to work
and roar in it self ere ever the wind wax boysteous: so me think I hear
at mine ear, some of our own here among us, which within these few years,
could no more have borne the name of a Turk, than the name of a devil, begin
now to find little fault therein, yea and some to praise them to, little and little
as they may, more glad to find faults at every state of chrystendome,
priests, princes, rites, ceremonies, sacraments, laws and customs,
spiritual and temporal, and all.


Anthony. In good faith Cousin, so begin we to fare here in deed, and that but
even now of late. For since the title of the crown has come in question, the
good rule of this realm has very sore decayed, as little while as it is: and
vndoubtedli Hungary shall never do well, as long as it stands in this case,
that men's minds harken after novelties, and have their hearts hanging upon a
change: and much the worse I like it, when their words walk so large toward
ye favor of y^ Turks s^^te, which they were ever wont to have in so great
abhominacion, as every true minded christen man and christen woman to must
have. I am of such age as you see, and verily from as^ far as I can remember,
it ha^h been marked and often proved true, that when children have in Bowda
fallen in a fantasy by the^ self to draw together, and in their playing make
as it were corsys carried to church, and sing after their childishe fashion the
time of ye dirige, there has great death there shortly followed after. And
twice or thrice I may remember in my days, when children in diverse parts of
this realm, have gathered themself in sundry companies, and made as it were
parties and battles, and after their battles in sport, wherein some children
have yet tagreat hurt, there has fallen very battle and very deadly war in
deed. These tokens were somewhat like your ensample of the sea, since they be of
things yt after follow, tokens foregoing through some secret mocio^ or instinct,
whereof y^ cause is unknown. But by. S. Mary Cousin, these tokens like I much
worse, these tokens I say not of childrens plays, nor of childrens songs, but
old shrewes large open words, so boldly spoken in y^ favor of Machomettes
sect, in this realm of Hu^garye, that has been ever hitherto a very sure
kaye of christendom: and out of doubt, if hungary be lost, and that the Turk
have it once fast in his possession, he shall ere it be long after, have an open
ready way, into almost the remnaunt of al christendom, though he win it not al
in a weke, ye great part will be won after I fear me wtin very few years.


Vincent. But yet evermore I trust in Christ good uncle, that he shall not
suffer that abominable sect of his mortal enemies, in such wise to prevail
against his Christian countries.


Anthony. That is very well said Cousin, let us have our sure hope in him, and
tha^ shall we be very sure yt we shall not be deceived: for either shall we have
ye thing yt we hope for, or a better thing in y^ stead: for as for ye thing it
self yt we pray for, and hope to have, god will not always se^d us, and therefore
as I said in our first co^municacio^, in all thing save only for heaven, our
prayer nor our hope, may never be to precise although y^ thing be lawful to
require. Uerely if we people of ye christian nations were such as would god we
were, I would little fear al ye preparacio^s yt the great Turk could make, no
nor yet being as bad as we be, I nothing doubt at al but yt in conclusio^^ how
bace soever christendom be brought, it shall spring up again, til the time be
come very nere to y^ day of dome, whereof some tokens as me thinks are not
come yet, but somewhat before y^ time shall christe^dom be straited sore, and
brought into so narrow a compass, y^ according unto Christ's words, ^ilius
hominis quum venerit, putas inuenie^ fidem in terra? when ye son of man shall
come again, yt is to wit, to the day of general judgment, wenest thou that
he shall find faith in the earth, as who say but a little? For as appears in
the Apocalyppes, and other places of scripture, he says shall be at that time so
far faded, that he shall for the love of his electes, lest they should fall
and perish to, abredge those days and accelerate his coming. But as I say,
me think I mysse yet in my mind, some of those tokens that shall by the
scripture come a good while before that. And among other the coming in of ye
Jews, and the dilating of christendom again before the world come unto that
straight. So that I say, for my own mind I little doubt, but that this
ungracious sect of Machomet shall have a foul fall, and christendom spryng and
spread flower, and increase again: howbeit, the pleasure and comfort shall they
se yt shall be borne, after that we be buried, I fear me both twain. For god
gives us great likelihode, yt for our sinful wretched living, he goes
about to make these infidels, y^ are his open professed enemies, the sorrowful
scourge of correccion, over evil christen people, that should be faithful, and
of truth are his falsely professed fre^des. And surely Cousin, albeit yt me
thinks I see diverse evil tokens of this misery coming to us, yet can there
not in my mind be a worse prognosticacion thereof, tha^ this ungracious toke^ yt
you note here your self. For vndoudtedly Cousin, this new manner here of men's
favorable fashion in their language toward these ungracious Turks, declares
plainly that not only their minds gives the^ yt hither in shall he come, but
also yt they can be content, both to live under him, and over yt fro the true
faith of Christ to fall into Machomethes false abominable sect.


Vincent. Uerely my uncle, as I go more about tha^ you, so must I more hear
needs (which is an heavy hearing in my ear) ye manner of me^ in this matter
which increases about us here, I trust in other places of this realm by
gods grace it is otherwise. But in this quarter here about us, many of these
fellows yt a^e mete for the war, first were wont, as it were in sport, and
in a while after half between game and earnest, and by our lady now, not
far from fayer flat earnest in deed, talk as though they looked for a day
when with a turn unto ye Turk his faith, they should be made masters here of
true christian men's bodies and owners of al their goods.


Antony. Though I go little abroad Cousin, yet hear I sometime when I say little,
as much as yt almost, but while there is no man to complain to for the
redress, what remedy but patience? and feign to sit still and hold my peace.
For of these two yt strive whither of the^ both shall reign upon us, and each
of the^ calls him self king, and both twain put ye people to pain: The one
is you wot well, to far from our quarter here to help us in this behalf.
And the other while he looks for the Turks aid, either will not or well dare
not I wene, find any fault with the^ yt favor the Turk and his sect. For of
Turks natural this cou^treye lacks none now which are here conuersaunte
under diverse pretextes: and of every thing advertise the great Turk full
surely. And therefore Cousin, albeit yt I would advise every man, pray still
and call unto god to hold his gracious hand over us, and keep away this
wretchedness if his pleasure be: yet would I farther advise every good christian
body, to remember and consider, yt it is very likelye to come, and therefore
make his reckoninge and cast his penny worthes before, and every man and every
woman appoint with gods help in their own mind before hand, what thing they
entende to do if the very worst fall.


The first Chapter. VVhither a man should cast in his mind and appoint in his
heart before, that if he were taken with Turks, he would rather dye, than
forsake the faith.
Vincent. Well fare your heart good uncle for this good counsel of yours, for
surely me thinks that this is maruelouse good: but yet heard I once a right
co^ning and a very good man say, yt it were great folly, and very perylous to,
that a man should think upon any such thing, or imagine any such case in his
mind for fear of double peril yt may follow thereupon: for either shall he be
lykely to answer himself to ye case put by himself, yt he will rather suffer
any paineful death tha^ forsake his faith, and by that bold appointment,
should he fall in the fault of. S. Peter, y^ of ouersighte made a proud
promise, and soon had a foul fall, or else were he likely to think yt rather
tha^ abide ye pain, he would forsake god in deed, and by that mind should he
sin deadly through his own folly, whereas he needs not as he y^ shall
peradventure never come in y^ perel, to be put thereunto, and yt therefore it
were most wisedo^ never to think upon any such manner case


Antony. I believe well Cousin yt you have heard some man y^ would so say: for I
can show almost as much as that, left of a good man and a great solemn
doctor in writing: but yet Cousin, although I should hap to find one or two
more, as good men, and as well learned too, that would both twain say and write
ye same, yet would I not fear for my part to counsel my friend to ye
contrary. For Cousin, if his mind answer him, as. S. Peter answered Christ,
that he will rather die, tha^ forsake him, though he say therein more unto
himself, than he should be paraduenture able to make good, if it came to ye
poi^t, yet perceive I not yt he does in yt thought, any deadly displeasure unto
god nor. S. Peter, though he said more tha^ he could perform, yet in his so
saying offended not god greatly neither: but his o^fence was, when he did not
after so well as he said before. But now may this man be lykely never to fall in
ye per^l of breaki^g that appointment, si^h of some.x. M. yt so shall examyn
the^self, never one shall fall in ye perel, and yet to have that good purpose al
their life, seems me no more harm ye while, tha^ a poor beggar yt has never
a pe^ny, to think yt if he had great substance, he would give great almose
for gods sake. But now is al ye perel, if the man answer himself yt he would
in such case rather forsake the faith of Christ with his mouth, and keep it still
in his heart, tha^ for ye confessing of it, to endure a paynful death: for by
this mind falls he in deadly sin, which while he never comes in ye case in
deed if he never had put him self ye case he never had fall in: but in good
faith me thinks yt he which upon ye case put unto himself by himself, will
make himself yt answer, has ye habit of faith so faint and so cold yt to ye
better knowledge of himself, and of his necessity, to pray for more strength
of grace, he had need to have the question put him, either by himself, or some
other man. Besides this, to counsel a man never to think on ye case, is in
my mind as much reason, as ye medicine yt I have heard taught one for ye tooth
ache to go thrice about a church yard, and never think upon a fox tail:
for if ye counsel be not given the^, it cannot serve the^, and if it be given
the^, it must put y^ point of ye matter in their mind, which by and by to
reject, and think therein neither one thing or other, is a thing yt may be
sooner bidden then obeyed. I wene also that very few men can escape it but
that though they would never think thereon by them self, but that yet in
one place or other where they shall hap to come in company, they shall have
the question by adventure so proponed and put forth, that like as while he
hears one talkyng to him, he may well wink if he will, but he cannot make
himself sleep: so shall he whether he will or no think one thing or other
therein. Finally, when Christ spoke so often and so plain of the matter that
every man should upon pain of damnacion, openly confess his faith if men
took him, and by dread of death would drive him to the contrary, it seems me
in a manner implied therein that we be bound co^dicionally, to have evermore
that mind actually, sometime and evermore habitually: that if the case so
should fall, than with gods help, so we would, and thus much thinks me
necessary for every man and woman, to be always of this mind, and often to
think thereupon: and where they find in the thynkyng thereon, their hearts
agryce, and shrink in the remembrance of the pain that their imaginacio^
represents to the mind, than must they call to mind and remember the great
pain and torment that Christ suffered for them, and heartily pray for grace,
that if the case should so fall, god should give them strength to stand: and
thus with exercise of such medytacion, though men should never stand full
out of fear of falling, yet must they persevere in good hope, and in full
purpose of standing, and this seems me Cousin so farforth the mind, that every
christen man and woman must needs have that, me thinks that every Curate
should often counsel al his parishions, and every man and woman, their
servants, and their children even beeginning in their tender youth, to know
this point, and to think thereon, and little and little fro their very childhode
to accustom them dulcely and pleasau^tly in the meditacion thereof, whereby the
goodness of GOD, shall not fail so to aspyre the grace of his holy spirit into
their hearts in reward of that ve^teous diligence, that through such actual
meditacion, he shall confirm them in such a sur^ habit of spiritual faithful
strength, that all the deuilles in hell with all the wrestlyng that they can
make, shall never be able to wrest it out of their heart.


Vincent. By my troth uncle, me thinks you say very well.


Antony. I say surely Cousin as I think, and yet all this have I said
concerning them that dwell in such places as they be never like in their lives
to come in the danger to be put to the proof: howbeit many a man may wene
himself farther fro, that yet may fortune by some one chance or other to fall
in the case, that either for the troth of faith, or for the troth of justice,
which go almost alike, he may fall in the case. But now be you and I Cousin, and
all our friends here, far in an other point. For we be so likely to fall in
the experience thereof so sone, that it had been more time for us (al other
things set aside) to have devised upon this matter, and formely to have settled
our self upon a stedfas^ point long ago, than to begin to common and counsel
upon it now.


Vincent. In God faith uncle, you say therein very troth, and would God it
had come sooner in my mind, but better is yet late, then never. And I trust God
shall yet give us respyte and time, whereof uncle that we lose no part, I pray
you proceed now with your good counsel therein.


Anthony. Uery gladly Cousin, shall I now go forth in the fourth temptacion,
which only remains to be ^reated of, and properlye pertayneth whole unto
this present purpose.


The second Chapter. Of the fourth temptacion, which is persecucion for the
faith touched in these words of the Prophet. Ab incursu et demonio
meridiano.
THe fourth temptacion Cousin, that the Prophet speaks of in the fore
remembered Psalm. Qu^ habitat in a diutorio altissimi. etc. is plain open
persecucion which is touched in these words. Ab incursu et demonio
meridiano. And of all his temptacions, this is the most perilous, the most
bitter, sharp, and the most rigorous. For whereas in other temptacions, he uses
either pleasant allectiues unto sin, or other secret sleyghtes and trains,
and comes in the night and steals on in the dark unware, or in some other
part of the day, ^tyeth and passes by like an arrowe, so shaping himself some
time in one fashion, sumtime in an other: and so dissim^^ling himself and his
high mortal malice, that a man i^ thereby so blinded and begyled, that he may
not sometime perceue well what he is. In this te^ptacio^. this plain open
persecucion for the faith, he comes even in the very midde day, that is to
wete, even upon them that have an high light of faith shining in their heart,
and openly suffers himself so plainly be perceived, by his fierce furious
malicious persecucion against ye faithful christen, for hatred of Christ's true
catholic faith, that no man having faith, can doubt what he is. For in this
temptacion he shows himself, such as the prophet names him, demonium
meridianum, the mid day devil. He may be so light^omly seen with the eye of a
faithful soul, by his fierce f^rious assaut and incursion. For therefore says
ye prophet, yt the truth of god shall compass ye man round about, yt dwells
in ye faithful hope of his help with a pauice. Ab incursu and demonio
meridiano, from the incursion and ye devil of the mid day, because this kind of
persecucio^ is not a wylye temptacyon, but a furious force, and a terrible
incursion. In other of his temptacions he steale^h on like a Fox: but in this
Turks persecucion for the faith he runs on roaryng with assault like a
rampyng Lion. This temptacion is of all temptacions also the most perilous:
for whereas in temptacions of prosperity, he uses only delectable
allectiues, to move a man to sin, and in other kinds of tribulacions and
adversity he uses only grief and pain to pull a man into murmr,
impacience and blasphemy, in this kind of persecucion for ye faith of Christ,
he uses b^th twain, yt is to wit, both his allectiues of quiet and rest by
deliverance from death and pain, with other pleasures also of this present
life: and beside that the terror and infliccion of intolerable pain and
tormente in other tribulacion, as l^sse of sickness, or death of our fre^des,
though the pain be peradventure as great and some time greater to: yet is not
the perel no where nigh half so much. For in other tribulacions as I said
before, the necessity that the manne must of fine force abide and endure the
pain, wax he never so wroth and impacient therewith, is a great occasion to
move him to keep his patience therein, and be content therewith, and thank God
thereof and of necessity to make a virtue, that he may be rewarded for. But
in this temptacion, this pe^secucion for the faith, I mean not by fight in
the ^ielde, by which the faythefull manne stands at his defense, and puts
the faythlesse in half the fear, and half the harm too. But where he is
taken and in hold, and may for the foreswearing or the denying of his faith,
be delivered and su^fered to live in rest, and some in great worldly wealth
also.

In this case I say this thing, that he needs not to suffer this trouble and
pain but he will, is a marvelous great occasion for him to fall into the sin
that the devil would drive him to, that is to wete, the forsaking of his faith:
and therefore as I say, of all the devils temptacions is this temptacion, this
persecucyon for the faith, the most perilous.

Vincent. The more perilous uncle that this temptation is (as in deed of al
temptacions the most perilous it is) the more need have they that stand in
peril thereof, to be before with substaunciall advise and good counsel, well
armed against it, that we may with the coumfort and consolacion thereof the
better bear that tribulacion when it comes, and the better withstand the
temptacion.


Anthony^ You say Cousin Uincent therein very truth, and I am content to fall
therefore in hand therewith: but forasmuch Cousin as me thinks that of this
tribulacion somewhat you be more frayde than I (and of truth somewhat more
excusable it is in you, tha^ it were in me^ my age considered, and the sorrow
that I have suffered already, with some other consideracions on my part
beside) rehearse you therefore ye griefs and pains that you think in this
tribulacion possible to fall unto you: and I shall against each of them give
you counsel, and rehearse you such occasion of coumfort and consolacion, as
my poor wit and learning can call to my mind.


Vincent, In good faith uncle I am not al thing afraid in this case only for
my self, but well you wot I have cause to care also for many more, and that
folk of sundry sortes^ men and weomen both, and that not all of one age.


Antony. All that you have cause to fear for Cousin, for all them have I cause
to fear with you to, sith all your kinsfolks and alyes^ whithin a little be
likewise unto me: howbeit, to say ye truth, every man has cause in this case,
to fear both for himself, and also for every other. For sith as the Scripture
says: Vnicuique deus dedit curam de proximo suo, god has given every man cure
and charge of his neighbor. There is no man yt has any spark of christen
love and charity in his breast, but that in a matter of such perel as this is,
wherein the soul of man stands in so great danger to be lost, he must
needs care and take thought, not for his fre^des only, but also for his very
foes. We shall therefore Cousin, not rehearse your harms or mine that may befall
in this persecucion, but all the great harms ingeneral, as nere as we can call
to mind that may hap unto any man.


The.iii. Chapter.
Sith a man is made of the body and the soul, all the harm that any man may
take, it must needs be in one of these two, either immediatli, or by the mean^
of some such thing as serves for the pleasure, weal, or commodity of the
one of these two: as for the soul first we shall need no rehearsal of any
harm, that by this kind of tribulacion, may attain thereto: but if that by
some inordinate love, and affeccion that the soul bear to the body, she
consent to slide fro the faith, and thereby do her harm her self. Now remayn
there ye body, and these outward things of fortune, which serve for the
mayntenaunce of the body, and minister matter of pleasure to the soul also.
through ye delighte that she has in the body, for ye while that she is matched
therewith. Considre tha^ first ye loss of those outward things, as somewhat
the less in weight than is the body it self, in them what may a man lose, and
thereby what pain may he suffer?

Vincent. He may lose uncle. of which I should somewhat lose my self, money,
plate, and other mouable substance: tha^ offices, authority, and finally all the lands of his inheritance for ever, that himself and his heirs
perpetually might else enjoy. And of al these things uncle you wot well that
my self have some, little in respect of that ye some other have here, but
somewhat more yet tha^ he y^ has most here, would be well content to lose. Upon
the loss of these things follow nedines and poverty, the pain of lackyng,
the shame of begging: of which twain I wot not well, which is the most
wretched necessity, beside the grief and heauynes of heart in beholding good
me^ and faithful, and his dear friends, be wrapped in like mysery and
ungracious wretches and infydeles, and his most mortal enemies enioie the
commodities that himself and his friends have lost. Now for the body, very
few words shall serve us, for therein I see none other harm, but loss of
liberty, labor, imprisonment, paynful and shameful death.


Anthony. There need not much more Cosyn, as the world is now: for I fear me
yt less than a fowerth part of this, will make many a man sore stagger in his
faith, and some man fall quite therfro, that yet at this day before he come to
ye proof, weneth himself yt he would stand very fast: and I bese^he our lord
yt al they that so think and would yet when they were brought unto the point,
fall therefro for fear or for pain, may geat of god the grace to wene still as
they do, and not to be brought to thassay, where pain or fear should show
the^ then. And (as it ^hewed. S. Peter) how far they be deceived now. But
now Cousin, against these terrible things, what way shall we take in giving me^
counsel or comfort, if ye faith were in our days as fervent as it has been
ere this in times past, little counsel and little comfort would suffice, we
should not much need with words and reasonyng to extenuate and minishe the
vigoure and asperitie of the pains, but the greater the more bitter that the
passion were, the more ready was of old time, y^ feru^ur of faith to suffer it:
and surely Cousin, I doubt it little in my mind, but yt if a man had in his heart
so deep a desire and love, lo^gyng to be with god in heaven to have the fruicio^
of his glorious face, as had those holy me^ that were martyrs in y^ old time,
he would no more now stick at ye pain yt he must pass between, than at yt
time those old holy martirs did. But alas, our faint and feeble faith with our
love to god, less tha^ leuke warm, by the fyry affeccio^ that we bear to our
own fil^hy f^eshe, makes us so dull in the desire of heaven, that the sodayn
dread of euerybodely pain wounds us to the heart and strike^h our devotion
stark dead, and therefore has there every man Cousin (as I said before) much
she more need to think upon this thing many a time and often, before hand ere
any such pe^el fall: and by much devising thereupon before they see ye cause to
fear it, while the thing shall not appear so terrible unto the^^ reason shall
better enter: and through grace workyng with their diligence, engendre and set
sure, not a sudden sleyght affeccion of sufferau^ce for god his sake, but by a
long co^tinuau^ce a strong deep roted habit, not like a reed ready to wave
with every wind, nor like a rootelesse tree, scant set up an end, in a loose
heap of light sand, ye will with a blast or two be blown down.


The.iiii. Chapter.
FOr if we now consider Cousin, these causes of terroure and dread that you
have recited, which in his persequcyon for the faith, this midde day devil,
may by these Turks rear against us, to make his incursion with, we shall well
perceive, waying them well with reason, that al be it somewhat they be in deed,
yet every part of the matter pondered, they shall well appear in conclusyon,
things nothing so much to be dread, and ^^ed fro, as to folk at the first
sight, they do suddenly seem.

The.v. Chapter. Of the loss of the goods of fortune.
FOr first to begin at these outward goods that neither are the proper
goods of ye soul nor of the body, but are called the goods of fortune, that
serve for the sustenau^ce and commodity of man for the short season of this
present life, as worldly substance offices honor and auctoritie^ What great
good is there in these things of themself, for which they were worthy so
much as to bear the name, by which ye world of a worldly favor, customably
calls them? For if the having of strength, make a man strong, and the having
of heat make a man hot, and the having of virtue make a man verteous: how can
these things be verily and truly good, which he that has them, may by the
having of them, as well be the worse as the better, and as experience proves,
more often is the worse than the better. What should a good man greatly rejoice
in that that he daily sees most abound in ye hands of many that be naught?
Do not now this great Turk and his ba^^awes in all these auauncementes of
fortune, surmount v^^y far above any christen e^tate and any lords living
under him? And was there not yet hence upon a.x^. year a go the great Soudan
of Siri, which many a year together bare as great a port as the great Turk,
and after in one somer unto ye great Turk, that whole Empier was lost, and so
may al his Empire now, and shall hereafter by God his grace be lost into
christen men's hands lykewi^e, when christen people shall be mended and grow
into god his favor again. But when that whole kingdoms and mighty great
Empiers are of so little surety to stand, but so soon stra^slated from one man
unto an other: what great thing can you or I, yea or any Lord the greatest in
this land, reckon him self to have by the possession of an heap of silver or
gold, white and yelowe met^al not so profitable of their own nature (save for
a little glistering) as the ^ude rusty met^all of iron.

The.vi. Chapter. Of the vnsuertie of lands and possessions.
Lands and possessions many men yet much more esteem then money, because the
lands seem not so casual as money is or plate, for that though their other
substance may be s^olne and taken away, yet evermore they think that their
land will lie still where it laye^ but what are we the better that our land can
not be styrred but will lie s^yll where it lay, while our self may be removed
and not suffered to come near it? what great difference is there to us,
whither our substance be mouable or immovable, sith we be so mouable our
self, yt we may be removed from them both, and lose the^ both twaine^ saving
y^ some time ^n ye money is the suertie somewhat more. For when we ^e feign our
self to ^^ee, we may make shifte to carry some of our money with us, where of our
land we can not carry one inche. If our la^d be a thing of more suertie than
our^ money, how happeth it than that in this persecucion, we be more frayde to
lefe it. For if it be athing of more surety, than can it not so soon be lost.
In the translacion of these two great Empi^rs, Greece first, since my self was
borne. And after Siry, since you were borne to, the land was lost before the
money was found.

Oh Cousin Uincent, if the whole world were anymated with a reasonable soul,
as Plato had went it were, and that it had wit and understanding to mark and
perceive all thing, Lord God how the ground on which a Prince builds his
palace, would loud laugh his lord to s^orne, when he saw him proud of his
possession, and heard him boaste him self that he and his blood are for ever
the very Lord and oweners of that land. For than would the ground think
that while in him self. Ah thou sely poor soul, that weneste thou were half
a God, and art amidde thy glory, but a man in a ^aye gown. I that am the
ground here, over whom thou art so proud, have had an hundredth such owners
of me, as thou call thy self, m^e than ever thou have heard the names of.
And some of them that proudly went over my headde^ lie now low in my belly,
and my ^yde lies over them and many one shall as thou do now, call him
self mine owner after the^, that neither shall be sybbe to thy blood, or any
word hear of thy name, who ought your castle Cousin three thousand year a go.

Vincent. Three thousand U^e^e? Nay nay, in any King christen or heathen you
may strike ^f a third part of that well inoughe, and as far as I ween,
half of the remnau^te ^oo. In far fe^er years than three thousand, it may
well fortune, yt a poor plough man's blood may come up to a kingdom: and a
kings right royal kynne on the other side fall d^une to ^he plough and carte^
and neither that king know that ever he came fro the carte, nor that carter
know yt ever he came from the crown.


Antony. We find Cousin Uincent in full Antentique stories, many s^raunge
chances as marvelous as that, come about in the compass of very f^we years
in effect. And be such things than in reason so greatly to be set by, that
we should esteem the loss at so great, when we see that in the keeping our
surety is so little.


Vi^cent. Marrye Uncle but the less suretye that we have to keep it^ sith it
is a great commodity to have it, the fearder by so much, and the more loathe
we be to forgo it.


Anthony. That reason shall I Cousin turn against your self. For if it be so
as you say, that sith the things be commodious, the less suerty that you see
you have of the keeping, the more cause you have to be afraid of the losing.

Than on the other side, the more that a thing is of his nature such, that the
commoditye thereof brings a man little suerty and much fear, that thing of
reason, the less have we cause to love. And than the less cause that we have
to love a thing, the less cause have we to care the^ fore, or fear the loss
thereof, or be loath to go therefrom.


The.vii. Chapter These outvvarde goods or gifts of fortune are two manner
wise to be considered.
WE shall yet Cousin considre in these outward goods of fortune, as riches,
good name^ honest estimacion, honorable fame and authority. In all these
things we shall I say consydre, that either we love them and set by them, as
by things commodious unto us for the state and condition of this present life,
or else as things that we purpose by the good use thereof to make the^ matter of
our merit with god his help in ye life after to come. Let us than first
consider the^ as things set by and beloved for the pleasure and commodity of
them for this present life.

The.viii. Chapter. The (...) of riches being ^^t by, ^ut for this ^^^^^nt life
Now riches loved and set by for such if we consider it well, the commodit^e
that we take thereof is not so great as our own fond affeccion and fa^tasy
makes us imagine it. It makes us I say not naye^ go much more gaye and
glorious in sight garnished with silk, but cloth is within a little as warm.
It makes us have great ple^^y of many kind of delicate and delicious victual,
and thereby to make more exce^se, but le^se exquis^te, and less superfluous
fare, with fe^er su^^aytes and fewer feu^rs growyng thereon to, were within a
little as wholesome than the labor in the getting, the fear in the ke^yng, the
pain in the partyng fro, do more th^n ^ounte^payse a great part of all the
pleasure and commodity that they bring. Besides this, yt riches is the thing
yt takes many times from ^is master, al his pleasure, and his life too. For
many a man is for his riches slain, and some yt keep their riches as things
pleasant and commodious for their life, take none other pleasure in a manner
thereof in all their life, than as though they bare the kaye of an other man's
Cofer, and rather are content to live in nedynes miserably al their days,
than they could find in their heart to minishe their horde, they have such
fantasy to look thereon: yea and some men for fear lest thieves should steal
it from them, be their own thieves and steal it from them self, while they
dare not so much as let it lie where them self may look thereon, but put it
in a pot, and hide it in the ground, and there let it lie safe till they
dye, and ^ometyme.vii. year after. From which place if the pot had been stolen
away.v. year before his death, all the same.v. year that he lived after,
wening always that his pot lay safe still, what had he been the poorer
while he never occupied it after?

Vincent. By my troth Uncle not one pennye for ought that I perceive.


The.ix. Chapter. The little comoditie of fame being desired but for vvorldly
pleasure.
Antony. LEt us now consider good name, honest estimacio^, and honorable fame.
For these three things are of their own nature, one, and take ^heyr difference
in effect, but of the manner of the come^ speech in diversity of degrees. For
a good name may a man have be he never so poor, honest estymacyon in the
common taking of the people belongs not unto any man, but him that is taken
^or one of some countenance and behauour, and among his neighbors had in
some reputacion. In the word of honorable fame, folk conceive the renown of
great estates, much and far spoken of by reason of their laudable ac^es.
Now all this gear used as a thing pleasant and commodious for this present
life, pleasant it may seem to him that fasteneth his fantasy therein, but of
the nature of the thing it self, I perceive no great commodity that it
has: I say of the nature of the thing it self, because it may be by chance
some occasion of commodity, as if it hap yt for the good name ye poor man
has, or for ye honest estimacio^ that a man of some have our and substance
stands in among his neighbors, or for the honorable fame wherewith the
great estate is r^nowmed, if it hap I say that any man beatinge them
better, will do them therefore any good.

And yet as for that, like as it may sometime so hap, (and sometime so happeth
in deed:) so may it hap sometime on the other side (and on ye other side so it
sometime happeth in deed) that such folk are of some other enuyed and hated,
and as readely by them that envy them and hate them take harm, as they take by
them that love them, good. But now to speak of the thing it self in his own
proper nature, what is it but a blast of another man's mouth, as sone passed
as spoken, whereupon he that sets his delight, fedeth him self but with wind
whereof be he never so full, he has little substance therein.

And many times shall he much deceive him self. For he shall ween that many
praise him, that never speak word of him, and they that do say yet much
less than he weeneth, and far more syldome too. For they spend not all the
day he may be sure in talkyng of him alone, and whosoever commend him mostewyll
yet I ween in every, xxiiii. hours, wynke and forgeatte him once. Besides
this, that while one talks well of him in one place, an other sytteth and
says as shrewdelye of him in an other. And finally, some that praise him in
his presence, behind his back, mock him as fast, and loud laughe him to
scorn, and sometime slylye to his own face too: and yet are there some fools
so fed with this fond fantasye of fame, that they rejoice and gorye, to
think how they be contynuallye praised all about, as though all the world
did nothing else day nor night, but ever sytte and singe, Sanctus, Sanctu^,
Sanctus. upon them.


The.x. Chapter. Of ^latterye.
ANd into this pleasant frenesye of much foolyshe vain glory, be there some
men brought sometime by such as the^ selves do in in a manet hyre to f^^tter
the^, and would not be content if a man sho^lde do otherwise, but would be
^yghte angrye, not only if a man told them truth when they do ^ought in
deed, but also if they praise it but slenderly.

Vincent. Forsooth Uncle this is very truth, I have been ere this and not very
long ago where I saw so proper experience of this point, that I must stop
your tale for so long while I tell you mine.


Anthony. I pray you Cousin tell on.


Vincent. When I was first in Almayne Uncle, it happed me to be somewhat
favored with a great man of the Church, and a great state, one of the
greatest in all that country there, and in deed whosoever might spend as much
as he might in one thing and other, were a right great state in any country
of christendom. But glorious was he very far above al measure, and that was
great peitye, for it did harm, and made him abuse many great gifts that god
had given him, never was he sac^a^e of hearing his own praise. So happed it
one day, that he had in a great audience, made an Oracion in a certain
manner, wherein he liked him self so well, that at his dinner he satte him
thought on thorns, till he might hear how they that satte with him at his
boarde would commend it: and when he had sytte musing a while, devising (as I
thought after) on some prettye proper way, to bring it in wythal: At last,
for lack of a better (lest he should have let the matter to long) he
brought it even bloontly forth, and asked us all that satte at his bordes end
(for at his own mess in the myddest, there satte but him self alone) how
well we lyked his Oracion yt he made that day. But in faith Uncle, when that
problem was once proponed, till it was full answered, no man I wene eat one
morsel of meat more, every man was fallen in so deep ^ studdy, for the
fynding of some exquisite praise. For he that should have brought out but a
vulgar, and a commen commendacion, would have thought him self, shamed for
ever.

Than said we ou^ sentences by (...) as we satte. from the lowest unto the
highest in good order, as it had been a great matter of the co^me^ wayle in a
right solemn counsel, when it came to my part (I will not safe it for no
boste Uncle) me thought by our lady for my part I quitte my self very well.
And I liked my self the better because me thought my words (being but a
stranger) went yet with some grace in the Almayne tongue, wherein letting my
latin alone, me lusted to show my cunning, and I hoped to be liked ye better
because I saw yt he yt satte next me and should say his sentence after me, was
an unlearned priest, for he could speak no latin at al: but when he came
forth for his part, with my Lords commendacion, the wylye Fox had been so
well accustomed in the court, with the craft of flatterye, that he went
beyond me to to far. And than might I see by him, what excellency a right
mean wit may come to in one craft, that in all his whole life studieth and
busieth his wit about no more, but that one. But I made after a solemn vow
to my self, yt if ever he and I were matched together at that board again,
when we should fall to our flattery. I would flatter in latin, that he
should not contend ^yth me no more. For though I could be content, to be
out run of a horse, yet would I no more abide it to be out^unne of an Ass.
But Uncle, here began now the game: he that sat highest and was to speak
last, was a great benyf^zed man and not a doctor only, but also somewhat
learned in deed in the laws of the Church, a world it was to see how he
ma^ked every man's word, that spoke before him, and it seemed that every
word, the more proper that it was, the worse he liked it, for the com^raunce
that he had to study out a better to pass it. The man even sweatte with the
labor, so that he was feign in the while now and than, to wype his face:
howbeit in conclusion, when it came to his course, we that had spoken before
him had so taken all up among us before, that we had not left him one wise
word to speak.


Antony. Alas good manne, among so many of you some good fellow should have
lent him one.


Vincent. It neded not as hap was uncle. For he found out such a shift, that
in his slattering, he passed us all the mayny.


Antony. Why, what said he Cousin?


Vincent. By our lady uncle, not one word. But like as I trow. Plinius
tells, that when Appelles the painter (in the table that he painted of the
sacrifice, and the death of Iphigenia) had (in the making of the sorowefull
countenaunces of the noble men of Greece that beheld it) spente out so much
of his craft and his connyng, that when he came to make the countenance of
king Agamemnon, her father which ye reserved for the last, lest if he had
made his visage before, he must in some of the other after, either have made
the visage less dolorous than he could, and thereby have forborne some part
of his praise, or doing the vttermoste of his craft, might have happed to
make some other look more heauely, for the pity of her pain, than her own
father, which had been yet a far greater fault in his payntyng, when he came
I say to the making of his face therefore last of all, he could deuyse no
manner of new heavy cheer and countenance for her father, but that he had
made there already in some of the other, much more heavy before, and
therefore to thentent that no man should see what manner countenance it was
that her father had, the paynter was feign to paint him, holding his face in
his hand kercher, the like pagiaunt in a manner played us there this good
ancient honorable flatterer: for when he saw that he could find no word
of praise that would pass all that had been spoken before already, the
wylye fox would speak never a word, but as he were ravished unto heaven
ward, with the wonder of the wisdom and eloquence that my Lords grace had
uttered in that Oracion, he fette a long sighe with an Oh from ye bottom of
his breast, and held up both his hands, and lyfted up his head, and cast both
his yien up into the welkin and wept.


Anthony. Forsooth Cousin he played his part very properlye, but was that great
prelates Oracyon any thing praise worthy? for you can tell I see well, for you
would not I wene play as Iuuenal merely describes the blind Senatoure one of
the flatterers of Tyberyus themperoure, that among the remnaunte ^o magnified
the great fyshe that themperoure had sent for them to show them, which
this blind Senatoure, Montanus I trow they called him, marueled of as much
as any that marueled most: and many things he spoke thereof, with some of his
words directed thereunto, lookyng himself toward the lift side, while the
fyshe lay on his right side, you would not I trow Cousin have taken upon you
to praise it so, but if you had heard it.


Vincent. I heard it uncle in deed, and to say the troth it was not to
dispraise: howbeit surely somewhat less praise might have served it, by more
a great deal than the half: but this am I sure, had it been the worst that
ever was made, the praise had not been the less of one here. For they that
used to praise him to his face, never considered, how much the thing
deserved, but how great a laud and praise themself could give his good grace.


Anthony. Surely Cousin as Terence says, such folks make men of fools even
stark mad, and much cause have their lords to be right angry with them.


Vincent. God has in deed, and is I wene, but as for their lords uncle, if
they would after wax angrye with them therefore, they should in my mind do
them very great wrong, when it is one of the things that they specially keep
them for. For those that are of such vaynglorious mind (be they lords or be
they meaner men) can be much better content to have their devises commended
then amended: and requier they their servant and their friend never so
specially to tell them the very truth, yet shall he better please them if he
speak them fair, then if he tell them truth. For they be in the case yt
Martial is speaks of, in an Epigrame unto a friend of his that requires his
judgment, how he liked his vea^sis, but he prayed him in any wise to tell him
even the very truth: to who^ Marcial made answer in this wise. The very
truth of me thou do require, ye very truth is this my friend dear, yt the
very truth thou would not gladly hear: and in good faith uncle ye self
same prelate yt I told you my ^ale of^ I dare be bold to swear it, (I know it
so surely) had on a time made of his own drawyng, a certain treatise, that
should serve for a leage between the countreye and a great Prince. In which
treatise, himself thought that he had devised his articles so wisely, and
indicted the^ so well, that all the world would allow them: whereupon longing sore
to be praised, he called unto him a friend of his, a man well learned, and of
good woorship, and very well expert in those matters, as he that had been
diverse times ambassador for that country, and had made many such treatises
himself. When he took him the treatise, and that he had read it, he asked him
how he lyked it and said: But I pray you tell me the very troth, and that he
spoke so heartely, that the the other had went he would feign have heard the
t^outh, and in trust thereof he told him a fault therein. At the hearing
whereof, he swear in great anger. By the mass thou art a very fool. The
other afterward told me that he would never tell him truth again.


Anthony. Without question Cosyn, I cannot greatly blame him, and thus
themself make every manne mock them, flatter the^ and deceive them. Those I
say, that are of such vayneglorious mind: For if they be content to hear the
truth, let them than make much of those that tell them truth, and withdraw
their ear from them that falsely flatter them, and they shall be more truly
served than with.xx. requests praying men to tell them truth. King Ladislaus,
our lord assoyle his soul, used much this manner among his servants, when
any of them praised any deed of his, or any condition in him, if he perceived
that they said but truth he would let it pass by uncontrolled. But when he
saw that they set to a gloss upon it for his praise of their own making
beside, then would he shortly say unto them: I pray thee good fellow, when
thou say grace at my board, never bring in, Gloria patri, without a Sicut
erat. Every act that ever I did, if thou report it again to mine honor with
a Gloria patri. Never report it but with a Sicut era^, that is to wete, even
as it was^ and none other wise: and lift me not up with no lies, for I love it
not. If men would use this way with them, that this noble king used, it would
minishe much of their false flatery. I can well allow that me^ should commend
(keeping them within the bonds of truth) such things as they see praise worthy
in other men to give them the greater courage to thencrease ther^f, for men
keep still in that point one condition of children, that praise mus^e prycke
them forth, but better it were to do well, and look for none.

Howbeit, they that can not find in their heart to commend an other man's
good deed, show them self either envious, or else of nature very cold and
dull. But out of question, he that puts his pleasure in the praise of the
people, has but a fond fantasy. For if his finger do but ache of an hot
blayne^ a great mayny of men's mouths blo^ing out his praise, will scantly do
him among them al^ half so much ^ase, as to have one little boy^ to blow upon
his finger.


The.xi. Chapter. The little commodity that men have o^ ^ovvme^, offices and
autor^tie, if they desire them but for the^r vvorldly co^modi^ie.
LEt us now consider in likewise, what great worldly wealth aryseth unto me^
by great offices, tow^^s and authority to those worldly disposed people, I say
that desyer^ the^ for no better purpose. For of them that desyer them for
better, we shall speak after anon. The great thing that they chief like al
therin^ is that they may bear a rule, command and controlled other men, and
live vnco^maunded and uncontrolled themself^: and yet this commodity took I so
little head of that I never was ware it was so great, till a good fre^d of ours
merely told me once, yt his wife once in a great anger taught it him. For wha^
her husband had no lust to grow greatly v^ward in ye world, nor neither would
labor for office of authority, and over yt forsook a right worshipful rowme
when it was offered him, she fell in hand with him (he told me^ and al to rat^d
him, and asked him: what will you do? will you sit still by the fire and make
goslynges in ye ashes with a sticks as children do? would god I were a man,
and look what I would do: Why wife quod her husband, what would you do?
what? by god go foreward with ye best of the^ For as my mother was wont to
say, god have mercy on her soul: It is better to rule the^ to be ruled. And
therefore by god I would not I warrant you be so foolish to be ruled, where I
might rule. By my truth wife, quod her hus^and, in this I dare say you say
truth. For I never found you willing to be ruled yet.

Vincent. Well uncle, I wot where you be well enough. She is in deed a stout
master woman: and in good faith for ought yt I can see, even that same
womannish mind of hers, is yt greatest commodity yt men reckon upon, in ^owmes
and offices of authority.


Anthony. By my troth and me thinkeeth very few there are of them that attayn
any great commodity therein. For first there is in every kingdom, but one
that can have an office of such authority that no man may command him or
control him. None officer can there stand in that case, but the King
himself, which only vncont^olled or commanded, may controlle and
command all.

Now of all the rem^aunt, each is under him: and yet beside him, almost every
one is under more commanders and controllers too than one: and some man that is
in a great office, commands fewer things and less labor to many men that
are under him, tha^ some one that is over him commands him alone.


Vincent. Yet it does them good uncle, that men must make curtesy to them, and
salute them with reverence, and stand bare headed before them, or to some of
them knele peradventure too.


Anthony. Well Cousin, in some part they do but play at gl^ke, receive
reverence, and to their cost pay honor again therefore. For except, as I said,
only a king, the greatest in authority under him, receives not so much
reverence of no man, as according to reason, himself does honor to him.
Nor.xx. men's courtesies do him not so much pleasure, as his own once
kneling does him pain, if his knee hap to be sore. And I wi^t once a great
o^ficer of the Kings say, (and in good faith I wene he said but as he
thought) that twenty men standing barehead before him, kept not his head half
so warm, as to keep on his own cappe. Nor he never took so much ease with
their being barehead before him, as he caught once grief with a cough that
came upon him, by standing barehead long before the King. But let it be that
these commodities be somewhat such as they be, yet than considre whither that
any incommodities be so joined therewith, that a man were almost as good lack
both, as have both. Goes all thing evermore as every one of them would have
it? that were as hard, as to please all the people at once with one weather,
while in one house, the husband would have fayer weather for his corn, and
his wife would have rain for her leekes. So while they that are in
aucthoryte, be not al evermore of one mind. But sometime variance among them
either for the respect of profyite or for contencion of rule or for
mayntenaunce of matters, sundry parts for their sundry friends. It can not be
that both the parts can have their own mind, nor often are they content
which see their conclusion quail, but x. times they take the missing of their
mind more dyspleasauntly than other poor men do. And this goes not only
to men of mean authority, but unto the very greatest. The princes the^self
can not have you wot well al their will: for how were it possible while each
of them almost would, if he might, be lord over all the remnaunte? Than many men
under their princes in authority, are in the case that prieuy malice and envy
many bear them in heart falselye speak them fair, and praise them with
their mouths which when there happeth any great fall unto them, baule and
bark and byte upon them like dogs. Finally, the cost and charge, ye danger
and peril of war, wherein their part is more than a poor man's is, sith
the matter more depends upon them, and many a poor plough man may sit
still by the fire while they must rise and walk, and sometime their authority
falls by the change of their masters mind, and of that see we daily in one
place or other ensamples such, and so many, that ye parable of ye Philosopher
can lack no testimony, which likened y^ servants of great princes unto the
coumptors, with which men do cast a coumpt. For like as the countor y^ stands
sometime for a farthing, is suddenly set up and stands for a. M. pound, and
after as sone set down, efte sone beneath to stand for a farthing again: So
fares it lo, sometime with those yt seek the way to rise and grow up in
au^thoritie, by ye favor of great princes, yt as they rise up high, so fall
they down again as low. Howebeit, though a man escape al such adue^tures and
abide in great authority til he dye^ yet tha^ at ye least wise every man mu^t
leave it at ye last: and that which we call at least, has no very long time to
it. Let a man recke^ his years yt are passed of his age ere ever he can geat up
alofte: and let him when he has it first in his fiste, reckon how long he
shall be like to live after, and I ween that th^n ye mo^^ part shall have little
cause to rejoice, they shall see the time likely to be so short, yt their honor
and autoriti^ by nature shall endure, beside the manifold chances whereby they
may lose it more soon. And than when they see that they must needs leave it,
the thing which they did much more set their heart upon than ever they had
reasonable cause, what sorrow ^hey take therefore, that shall I not need to tell
you.

And thus it seems unto me Cousin, in good faith, that since in the having ye
profit is not great, and the displeasures neither small nor few, and of the
lesing so many sundry chau^ces, and yt by no mean a man can keep it long, and
that to part there from, is such a paynefull gri^fe, I can see no very great
cause, for which as an high worldly commodity, men should greatly desire it.


The.xii. Chapter. That these outvvard good, desired but for worldly wealth be
not only little good for the body, but ^re also^ much harm for the soul.
ANd ^hus far have we considered hither to^ in these outward goods that are
called the gifts of fortune no farther but the slender commodity that
worldely minded men have by them. But now if we consider farther what harm to
the soul, they take by them ye desire the^, but only for ye wretched wealth of
this work: Tha^ shall we well perceive, how far more happy is he that well
leseth the^, than he that cuil finds them. These things though they be such,
as are of their own nature indifferent, yt is to wit of them self, things
neither good nor badde, but are matter that may serve to the tone or the
the other, after as me^ will use them, yet need we little to doubt it, but that
they that desire them but for their worldely pleasure, and for no farther godly
purpose, ye deui^ shall soon turn them from things indifferent unto the^ and
make them things very naught. For though that they be indifferent of their
nature, yet can not the use of the^, lightly stand indifferent, but
determinately must either be good or badde. And therefore he yt desires the^
but for worldly pleasure, desires the^ not for any good. And for better
purpose tha^ he ^esireth them, to better use is he not likely to put the^, and
therefore not unto good, but consequentlye to naught. As for ensample first
consider it in riches he that longs for them, as for things of temporal
commodytie and not for any godly purpose, what good they shall do him Saint
Paul declares where he writes unto Timothe, Qui volunt diuites fieri,
incidunt in temptacione^ and in laqucum di^boli and des^deria mu^ta inutilia
and noxia que ^ergu^t homines in interi^u^ and penditionem. They that long to
be rich fall into te^ptacio^, and into the grinne of the devil, and into many
desiers unprofitable and noyous, which droune men into death and into
perdicion. And the holy scripture says also in the.xxi. Chapter of the
Proverbs. Qui ^ongrega^ thesauros inpingetur in laqueus mortis. He that
gathers treasures shall be showued into ye grinnes of death, so that where as
by the mouth of. S. Paul god says yt they shall fall into the devils grinne,
he says in the the other place, that they shall be pusshed or showued in by
violence, and of troth while a man desires riches, not for any good godly
purpose, but for only wealth, it must needs be that he shall have little
conscience in the geatting, but by all evil ways than he can inuente shall
labor to geatte them, and than shall he either nigardly heap them up
together, which is you wot well damnable, or wastfullye missespende them about
worldly pomp pride and glotony, with occasion of many sins more, and that is
yet much more damnable. As for fame and glory, desired but for worldly
pleasure, does unto the soul inestimable harm.

For that sets men's hearts upon high deuyces and desiers of such
things as are immoderate and outrageous, and by help of false flatterers puff
up a man in pride, and make a bryttel man lately made of earth, and that shall
again shortly be laid full low in earth, and there lie and rotten and turn
again into earth, take him self in the mean time for a god here upon the
earth, and ween to win him self to be lord of al ye earth. This makes
battelles between these great princes, and with much trouble to much people
and great e^fusio^ of blood one King to look to raygne in five realms yt
can not well rule one. For how many has now this great Turk, and yet
aspireth to more? And those y^ he has he orders evil, and yet him self
worse. Than offices and roumes of authory^ye (if men desire them only for
their worldly fa^tasies) who can look yt ever they shall occupy the^ well, but
abuse their authorytie and do thereby great hurt. For than shall they fall from
indifferency, and maintain false matters of their fre^des, bear up their
servants and such as depend upon the^, with bearing down of other innocent
folk, and not so able to do hurt, as easy to take harm. Tha^ ye laws yt
are made against malefactors, shall they make as an old Philosopher said, to
be much like unto cobbewebbes, in which the little gnattes and flies stycke still
and ha^g fast: but ye great humble bees break the^ and fly quite through, and
then ye laws yt are made as a buckler in ye defense of Innoce^tes, those shall
they make serve for a sword to cut, and so^e wounded the^ with, and therewith
wou^d they their own souls sorer. And thus you se Cousin, yt of al these
outeward goods which mer^^al ye goods of fortune, there is never one yt unto
the^ which long therfore^ not for any godly purpose, but only for their
worldly wealth, has any great commodity to ye body, and yet are they al in
such case besides yt, very deadly destruccio^ unto the soul.

The.xiii. Chapter. VVhither men desire these outvvard goods for their only
vvorldly vvelthe, or for any good verteous purpose, this persecucion^ of the
Turk ag^inste the faith vvil declare and the comfort that both tvvaine may
rake in the lesyng them thu^.
Vincent. Verily good Uncle this thing is so plainly true, yt no man may with
any good reason deny it. But I wee^e Uncle also, yt there will no man say nay.
For I see no man yt will for very shame confess that he desires riches, honor
and renown, offices and roumes of authority, for his only worldly pleasure.
For every man would feign seem as holy as a horse. And therefore will every man
say and would it were so believed to, yt he desires these things (though for
his worldly wealth a little so) yet principally to merit thereby through doing
some good deed therwt.


Anthony. This is Cousin very sure so, yt so does every man say, but first he yt
in ye desire thereof, has his respect therein, unto his worldly wealth as you
say, but a little so, so much as him self weeneth were but a little, may sone
prove a great deal to much: and many men will say so to that have in deed
their principal respect unto their worldely commodity, and unto godward
therein, little or nothing at al: and yet they pretend y^ contrary, and that
unto their own harm, quia deu^ n^ irridetur, God can not be mocked. And some
peradventure, know not well their own affeccion the^ self, but there lies
more imperfeccion, secret in their affeccion, tha^ them self are well ware of,
which only god behold^th, and therefore says the Prophets unto god.
Imperfectum meum viderant oculi ^ui. Myue imperfeccion have thy yien beholde^.
For which the prophet prays: Ab occultis meis mund^ me dom^ne^ From my hid
sins cleanse thou me good lord. But now cousin this tribulacion of the Turk,
if he so persecute us for the faith, yt those that will forsake their faith
shall keep their goods, and those shall lose their goods that will not leave
their faith. This manner of persecucion lo, shall like a touch stone try them,
and shown the feigned from the true minded, and teach also them that ween
they mean better than they do in deed better to deserne the^ self. For some^
there are y^ ween they mean well while they frame the^ felfe a conscience and
ever keep still a great heap of superfluous substance by them, thinking ever
^^il yt they will bethink the^ self upon some good deed, whereon they will well
bestow it once or else their executors shall. But if they lie not unto the^
self, but keep their goods for any good purpose to ye pleasure of god in
deed, tha^ shall they in this persecucion for the pleasure of God, in the
keeping of his faith, be glad for to depart fro the^. And therefore as for all
those things ye loss I mean of al those outward things that men call the
gifts of fortune, this is me thinks in this Turks pers^cucion for ye faith,
consolacion great and sufficient, y^ since every man that has the^, either
sets by the^ for the world or for God. He that sets by the^ for the
world, has as I have showed you little profit by the^ to the body, and great
harm unto y^ soule'. And therefore may well (if he be wise) recko^ that he
wins by the loss although he lost the^ but by some commen chance. And
much more happy tha^ while he leseth them by such a meritorious mean. And on
the the other side, he that keeps them for some good purpose entending to bestow
the^ for the pleasure of god, ye loss of the^ in this Turks persecucion for
keeping of the faith, can be no manner grief unto him, since yt by his so parting
from the^, he bestows them in such wise unto gods pleasure, yt at that time
when he leseth the^ by no way could he bestow the^ unto his high pleasure
better. For though it had been peradventure better to have bestowed ^he^ well
before, yet since he kept the^ for some good purpose, he would not have left
them vnbestowed^ if he had foreknowe^ the chance: but being now prevented so
by persecucion the he can not bestow them in that other good way that he
would, yet while he parts from them because he will not part from the faith
though the devils escheator violently take them from him, yet willingly he
gives them to God.


The.xiiii. Chapter. An other cause for which any man should be content to
forgo his goods in the Turks said persecucion.
Vincent. I Can not in good faith good Uncle say nay to none of this, and in
deed unto them that (by the Turks over runninge of y^ country) were happed to
be spoiled and robbed, and al their substance mouable and immovable, berefte
and lost already, their persons only fled and safe: I think that these
consideracions considered therewith, that as you lately said, their sorrow
could not amend their chance, I might unto the^ be good occasion of comfort,
and cause them as you said make a virtue of necessity: but in the case Uncle
that we now speak of, y^ is to wete, where they have yet their substance
untouched in their own hands, and that y^ keeping or ye losing shall hang both
in there own hands by the Turks offer upon the retaining or ye renouncing of
ye christian faith, here uncle I find it as you said y^ this te^ptacio^ is most
sore and most perilous. For I fear me y^ we shall find few of such as have
much to lose, that shall find in their hearts so suddenly to forsake their
goods with all those other things before rehearsed. whereupon all their
worldely wealth depends.


Anthony. That fear I much Cousin too, but thereby shall it well as I said
appear, yt seemed they never so good and verteous before, and flattered they
the^ self with never so gay a gloss of good and gracious purpose y^ they kept
their goods for, yet were their hearts inwardly in y^ deep sight of god, not
sound and sure, such as they should be, and as peradventure some had the^
self, went they had be but like a pursering of paris, holowe, light and
counterfaite in deed. And yet they being such, this would I feign ask one of
the^ and I pray, you Cousin take you his person upon you, and in this case
answer for him. What lets, would I ask you (for we will take no small man
for a sa^ple in this part, nor him yt had little to leese, for such one were me
think so far from al frame, that would cast away GOD for a little, that he
were not worthy to talk with:) what lets I say therefore your Lordeshyp,
that you be not gladlye content without any d^lib^ra^ion at all in this kind of
persecucion, rather t^en to leave your faith, to let go all that ever you have
at onc^.


Vincent. Sith ^ou put it uncle unto me to make the matt^r more plain, that
I should play ye great man's part that is so wealthye, and has so much to
lose, albeit I cannot be very sure of an other man's mind, nor what another
manne would say, yet as far as mine own mind can conjecture, I shall
answer in his person what I wene would be his let. And ^herfore to your
question I answer, that there lets me the thing that your self may
lightlye guess, the losing of the manifold commodities which I now have:
Rytches and substance, lands and great possessions of enheritaunce, with
great rule and authority here in my country: all which things the great
Turk grants me to keep still in peace, and have them enhaunced too, so that
I will forsake the faith of Christ: Yea, I may say to you, I have a mocion
secretly made me far^her, to keep all this yet better cheap, yt is to wete,
not be compelled utterly to forsake Christ, nor all the whole christian faith,
but only some such parts thereof, as may not stand with Machomets law, and
only grau^ting Machomet for a true prophet, and serning ye Turk truly in his
wars against all christen Kings, I shall not be let to praise Christ
also, and to call him a good man, and worship him and serve him too.


Antony. Nay nay my lord, Christ has not so great need of your lordeship,
as rather then to lose your service, he would fall at such couenauntes with
you, to take your service at halfes to serve him and his enemy both: he has
given you plain warnyng already by. S. Paul, that he will have in your service
no parting fellow. Que societas lucis ad tenebras^ Christi ad Belial? what
fellowship is there between light and da^kenes? between Christ and Belial? And
he has also plainlye showed you himself by his own mouth: Nemo potest doubus
domini^ seru^re. No man may serve two lords at once. He will have you believe al
yt he tells you, and do all that he bids you, and ^orbeare all that he
forbids you without any manner excepcion. Break one of his commandments,
and break al. Forsake one point of his faith, and forsake all, as for any
thank you geat for ye remnaunt. And therefore if you devise as it were
Indentures between god and you, what thing you will do for him, and what thing
you will not do, as though he should hold him content with such service of
yours as your selflu^t to appoint him: If you make I say, such Indentures, you
shall seal both ye parts your self, and you geat thereto no agreement of him.
And ^his I say: though ye Turk would make such an appointment with you as you
speak of, and would when he had made it keep it, whereas he would not I
warraunt you leave you so, when he had once brought you so far forth, but
would little and little after ere he left you, make you deny Christ altogether
and take Machomette in his ^lede. And so does he in the beginning when he will
not have believe him to be God. For surely if he were not god, he were no good man
neither, while he plainly said he was god. But though he would never go so
far forth with you, yet Christ will (as I said) not take your service to
halfes, but will that you shall love him with all your whole heart. And because
that while he was living here fiftene hundredth year agoe^ he for^sawe this mind
of youres that you have now, with which you would feign serve him in some
such fashion as you might keep your ^orldely substance still, but rather
forsake his service ^hen put all your substance from you: he tells ^^u
plain.xv hundredth year ago his own mouth, that he will no such service of
you, saying: Non pote^tis d^o seruire et Mammone. You cannot serve both God
and your richesse together. And therefore this thing stablished for a plain
conclusion, which you must needs grant if you have faith. And if you be gone
from that ground of faith already: than is al your dysputacion you wotte
well, at an end. For whereto should you than rather leese your goods, then
forsake your faith, if you have lost your faith and let it go already?
This point I say therefore, put first for a ground between us both
twain agrred, that you have yet the faith still, and entende to keep it
always still in your heart, and are but in doubt whether you will leese all
your worldely substance, rather than forsake your faith in your only
word. Now shall I replye to the point of your answer, wherein you tell me
the lothnes of ye loss, and the comfort of keeping lets you to forgo them,
and moves you rather to forsake your faith. I let pass all that I have spoken
of the small commodity of the^ unto your body, and of the great harm that the
having of them do to your soul. And since the promise of the Turk, made unto
you for the keeping of them, is the thing that mou^^h you and makes you thus
to doubt, I ask you first whereby you wotte, that when you have done all that
he will have you do against Christ to the harm of your soul, whereby wot
you I say, that he will keep yo^ his promise in these things that he
promyseth you, concerning the retaynynge of your well-beloved worldly wealth for
the pleasure of your body.


Vincent. What surety can a man have of such a great Prince but his promise?
which for his own honor it cannot become him to break.


Anthony. I have known him, and his father before him, to break more promises
than.v. as great as this is yt he should here make with you. Who shall come
and cast it in his teeth, and tell him it is a shame for him to be so fickle and
so false of his promise? And then what cares he for those words that he
wotteth well he shall never hear? not very much although they were told him
too. If you might come after and complain your grief unto his own person
your self, you should find him as shamefast as a friend of mine a merchant,
found once the Soudan of Syrry, to whom (being certain years about his
merchandise in that country) he gave a great sum of money for a certain
office mete for him there for the while, which he scant had him granted and
put in his hand, but y^ or ever it were ought worth unto him, the Sowdan
suddenly sold it to another of his own sect, and put our hungarien out. Tha^
came he to him and humbly put him in remembrance of his grant passed his own
mouth, and signed with his own hand: whereunto the Sowdan answered him with a
grimme countenance. I will thou wit it losell, yt nether my mouth nor my hand
shall be master over me, to bind al my body at their pleasure: but I will so be
lord and master over them both, that whatsoever the one say, or the other
write, I will be at my own liberty, to do what me lust my self, and ask them
both no leave: wene you now my lord yt Sowdan and this Turk, being both of
one false sect, you may not find them both, like false of their promise.


Vincent. That must I needs ieoparde, for other sure^y can there none be had.


Antony. An unwise ieoparding to put your soul in peril of da^nacion, for
the keeping of your bodily pleasures, and yet without suerty thereof must
ieoparde the^ too: but yet go a little farther lo, suppose me that ye might
be very sure that the Turk would break no promise with you, are you than sure
enough to retain all your substance still?


Vincent. Ye than.


Anthony. What if a man should ask you how long?


Vincent. How long? as long as I live.


Anthony. Well, let it be so tha^: but yet as far as I can see, though the
great Turk favor you never so much and let you keep your goods as long as
ever you live: yet if it hap that you be at this day fifty year old, all
the favor that he can show you, can not make you one day younger to morrow,
but every day shall you wax elder than other: and then within a while, must
you for all his favor lose all.


Vincent. Well, a man would be glad for all that to be sure not to lack while
he lives.


Anthony. Well, tha^ if the great Turk give you your good, can there than in
all your life no other take them from you again?


Vincent. Uerely I suppose no.


Anthony. May he not lose this countreye again unto christen me^, and you
with the taking of this way, fall in yesame perel than that you would now
eschew?


Vincent. Forsooth I think that if he geat it once, he will never lose it again
in our days.


Antony. Yes by gods grace, but yet if he lose it after your days, there goes
your childrens enheritaunce awa^ again. But be it now that he could never lose
it^ could none take your substance from you than?


Vincent. No in good faith none.


Antony. No? none at all? not god?


Vincent. God? what? yes perdy, who doubts of that?


Antony. Who? mary he yt doubts whyther there be any god or no: and that
there lacks not some such, the Prophet testifies where he says. Dixit
insipiens in cord suo non est deus. The fool has said in his heart there is
no god. With the mouth the most folish will forbear to say it unto other folk,
but in the heart they let not to say it softely, to themselfe^ and I fear me
there be many more such fools than every man would wene there were, and would
not let to say it openly to, if they forbear it not more for dread of shame
of men, than for any fear of god. But now those that are so frantike foolish,
as to wene there were no god, and yet in their words confess him, though that
(as. S. Paul says: in their deeds they deny him. We shall let him pass til
it please god to show him self unto them, either inwardly betyme, by his
merciful grace, or else outwardly (but over late for them) by his terrible
judgment. But unto you my lord, sith you believe and confess (like as a wise
man should) that though the Turk keep you promise in letting you keep your
substance, because you do him pleasure in the forsakyng of your faith: yet
God (whose faith you forsake, and therein do him displeasure) ^ay so take them
from you^ that the great Turk with all the power he hath^ is not able to keep
you, the^ why will you be so unwise with the loss of your soul to please the
great Turk for your goods, while you wot well that god whom you displease
therewith, may take them from you too: besides this since you believe there is a
god, you cannot but believe therwiththat the great Turk cannot take your good
from you without his will or sufferaunce, no more than the d^uill could fro Job.
And think you tha^ that if he will suffer the Turk take away your good, albeit
that by the keeping and confessing of his faith you please him: he will when you
displease him by forsaking his faith, suffer you of those goods that you geat
or keep, thereby to rejoice and enjoy any benefit.


Vincent. God is gracious, and though that me^ offend him, yet he suffers
them many times to live in prosperity long after.


Anthony. Long after? nay by my troth my lord that does he no man: for how
can that be that he should suffer you live in prosperity long after, when your
whole life is but short in all together, and either almost half thereof or
more than half (you think your self I dare say) spent out already before?
can you burn out half a short candle, and than have a long one left of the
remnaunt? there cannot in this world be a worse mind, tha^ that a man to
delight and take comfort in any commodity that he takes by synnefull mean:
for it is ye very straight way toward ye taking of boldness and courage in
sin, and finally to fall into infidelity and think, that god car^th not,
nor regards not what thing me^ do hear, nor what mind we be of: but unto
such minded folk speaks holy scripture in this wise, Noli dicere peccaui, et
nihil mihi accidit tr^^te, patiens enim redditor est dominus. Say not I have
sinned, and yet has there happed me no harm: for god suffers before he
strike. But as. S. Auste^ says: The longer yt he tarieth or he strike, the
sorer is y^ stroke when he strikes: and therefore if yo^ will well do, reke^
your self very sure, yt when you deadly displease god, for the geatting or ye
keeping of your goods, god shall not suffer those goods to do you good, but
either shall he take them shortly from you, or suffer you to keep them for a
little while to your more harm: and after shall he when you least look
therefore, take you away from them, and than what an heap of heaviness will
there enter into your heart, when you shall see yt you shall suddenly so go from
your goods and leave them here in ye earth in one place, and that your body
shall be put in the earth in an other place: and (which tha^ shall be most heaviness
of al) when you shall fear (and not without great cause) that your soul shall
first forthwith, and after that, at the fynal judgment, your body to be
driven down deep toward the centry of ye earth into the fiery pit and
do^geon of the devil of hell, there to tarry in torment world without end? What
goods of this world can any man imagine whereof the pleasure and commodity
could be such in a thousand year, as were able to recompense that
intolerable pain, yt there is to be suffered in one year, or in one day, or
one hour either: yea and the^ what a madness is it, for that poor pleasure of
your worldly goods of so few years, to cast your self both body and soul
into ye everlasting fire of hell, whereof there is not minished the mou^tenaunce
of a moment by the lying there the space of an hundredth thousand years. And
therefore our savior in few words concluded and confuted al these folyes of
them, that for the short use of this worldly substance forsake him and his
faith, and sell their souls unto the devil for ever, where he says: Quid
prodest homini sivniuersum mundum lucretur, anime vero^ sue detrimentum
patiatur? what avails it a man if he wanne all ye whole world, and lost his
soul? This were me thinks cause and occasion enough, to him that had never
so much part of this world in his hand, to be content rather to lose it al,
than for the retaynyng or encreasyng of his worldly goods to leese and
destroy his soul.


Vincent. This is good uncle in good faith very true, and what other thing any
of them (that would not for this be content) have for to allege in reason
for the defense of their folly, that can I not ymagine, nor lust in this matter
to play their part no longre. But I pray God give me the grace to play the
contrary part in deed, and that I never for any goods or substance of this
wretched world, forsake my faith toward God, nether in heart ^or tongue, as I
trust in his great goodness I never shall.


The.xv. Chapter. This kind of tribulacion tries what mind men have to their
goods, which they that are wise, vvil at the fame thereof see well and
vvisely laid up safe before.
ME thinks Cousin that this persecucion shall not only as I said beefore^
try men's hearts when it comes, and make them know their own affeccions,
whither they have a corrupt gredy covetous mind or not: but also the very fame
and expectacion thereof may teach them this lesson ere ever the thing fall upon
them it self to their no little fruit, if they have the wit and the grace
to take it in time while they may. For now may they find sure places to lay
their treasures in, so that all the Turks army shall never find it out.

Vincent. Mary uncle that way they will I warrant you not forgeat, as near as
their wits will serve the^. But yet have I known some that have ere this,
thought that they had hid their money safe enough, digging full diepe in the
ground, and have missed it yet when they came again, and have found it
dug out and carried away to their hands.


An^ony. Nay, fro their hands I wene you would say: and it was no marvel.
For some such have I known too^ but they have hyd their goods foolishly, in
such place as they were well warned before that they should not, and that were
they warned by him that they well knew for such one, as wist well enough what
would come thereon.


Vincent. Than were they more than mad. But did he tell them too where they
should have hid it to have it sure?


Anthony. Ye by S. Mary did he. For else had he told them but half a tale, but
he told them a whole tale, byddyng them that they should in no wise hyde
their ^reasure in the ground: and he showed the^ a good cause, for there thieves
use to dig it out, and steal it away.


Vincent. Why, where should they hyde it than said he? For thieves may hap
to find it out in any place.


Anthony. Forsothe he counsayled them to hyde their treasure in heaven, and
there lay it up, for there it shall lie safe. For thither he said there can no
thief come till he have left his theft and be waxen a true man first. And he
that gave this counsel, wiste what he said well yonough. For it was our
Savior himself, which in the syxth Chapter of Saint Mathewe, says:
Nolite thezaurizare v obis thezauros in terra v by erugo et tinea demolitur et
v by fures effodiunt et furantur. Thesaurizate vobis thesauros in celo, vbi ne
que erugo neque tinea demolitur, et v by fures non effodiunt nec furantur: vbi
enim est thesaurus tuu^, ibi est et cor tuum. Hoorde not up for you treasures
in earth where the ^ust and the mothes fret it out, and where thieves dygge it
out and steal it away. But hoorde up your treasures in heaven, where ^eyther
the ruste nor the mothe frette them out, and where thieves dig the^ not out
nor steal them away. For where as is thy treasure, there is thy heart too. If
we would well consider these words of our Savior Christ, we should as me
think, need no more counsel at al, nor no more comfort neither, concerning the
loss of our temporal substance in this Turks persecucion for ye faith. For
here our lord in these words teaches us where we may lay up our substance
safe before the persecucion come. If we put it into the poor men's bosoms,
there shall it lie safe. For who would go search a beggars bag for money,
if we deliver it to the poor for Christ's sake? we deliver it unto Christ
himself: and than what persecutour can there be so strong, as to take it out
of his hand.


Vincent. These things are uncle undoubtedly so true, that no man may with
words wrestle therewith, but yet ever there hangs in a man's heart a lothenes
to lack a living.


Anthony. There does in deed, in theyrs that either never, or but seldom hear
any good counsel there against. And when they hear it, hearken it but as they
would an idle tale, rather for a pastime or for manner sake, tha^ for any
substancial intent or purpose, to follow good advertisement, and take any fruit
thereby. But verily, if we would not only lay our ear, but also our heart
thereto, and considre yt the saying of our savior Christ is not a Poets
fable, nor an harpers song, but the very holy word of almighty god himself,
we would, and well we might be full sore ashamed in our self, and full sorry to.
when we felt in our affeccion those words to have in our heart^s no more
strength and wayght but that we remayn still of the same dull mind, as we did
before we heard them.

This manner of ours in whose breasts the great good counsel of God no better
setleth nor takes no better root, may well declare us, that the thorns and
the briars and brambles of our worldly substance grow so thick, and spring
up so high in the ground of our hertes, that they strangle as the gospel
says, the word of God that was sown therein. And therefore is god very good
lord unto us, when he causes like a good husband man his folk to come afield,
(for the persecutors be his folk to this purpose) and with their hooks and
their stocking yrons, grubbe up these wicked wedes and busshes of our earthly
substance, and carry them quite away from us that the word of God sown in
our hearts, may have rowme therein, and a glad round about for the warmesome
of grace to come to it and make it grow. For surely these words of our
Savior shall we find full true. Vbi thesaurus tuus, ibi est et cortuum Where
as thy treasure is there is also thy heart. If we lay up our treasure in earth,
in earth shall be our herts. If we send our treasure into heaven, in heaven shall
we have our hertes. And surely the greatest coumfort that any man may have in
this tribulacion, is to have his heart in heaven. If thy heart were in deed out
of this world, and in heaven, all the kinds of tormente that all this world
could devise, could put the^ to no pain here. Let us the^ send our hertes hence
thither, in such manner as we may by sending thither our worldly substance
hence, please god. And let us never doubt it, but we shall (that once done)
find our hearts so conversant in heaven, with the glad consideracio^ of our
following the gracious counsel of Christ, that the coumfort of his holy
spirit inspired us therefore, shall mitigate, minishe assuage, and in a manner
quench the great furious fervor of the pain that we shall hap to have by his
loving sufferaunce for our farther merit in our tribulacio^. And therefore,
like as if we saw that we should be within a while drieuen out of this land and
fayn to flee into another, we would wene that man were mad, which would not be
content to forbear his goods here for the while, and send them into that
land before him, where he saw that he should live all the remnaunt of his
life. So may we verily think yet our self much more mad (seeing that we
be sure it can not be long ere we shall be sent spyte of our teeth out of this
world) if the fear of a little lack, or the love to see our goods here about
us, and the lothnes to part from them for this little while, which we may keep
the^ here, shall be able to let us from that sure sendyng them before us into the
the other world, in which we may be sure to live wealthely with them, if we
send them thither, or else shortly leave them here behind us, and tha^ stand
in great ieopardy, there to live wretches for ever.


Vincent. In good faith uncle, me think yt concerning the loss of these
outward things, these co^sideracions are so sufficient comfortes, y^ for my
own part save only grace well to remember the^, I would me think desire no
more.


The.xvi. Chapter. Another comfort and courage against the loss of vvorldly
substance.
Much less then this may serve Cousin, with calling and trusting upon gods
help, without which much more than this cannot serve. But the fervor of ye
christen faith so sore faints now adays, and decays coming from hot unto
leuke warm, and from leuke warm almost to kaye cold, that men must now be
feign as at a fire that is almost out, to lay many dry sticks thereto, and use
much blowing thereat^ but else would I wene by my troth, y^ unto a warm
faithful man, one thing alone whereof we spoke yet no word, were comfort enough
in this kind of persecu^ion against the loss of all goods.

Vincent. What thing may that be uncle?


Anthony. In good faith Cousin, even the bare remembrance of the poverty that
our Savior willingly suffered for us. For I verily suppose, that if there were a
great king yt had so tender love to a servant of his yt he had, to help him
out of danger, forsaken and left of al his worldly wealth and royalty, and
become poor and nedy for his sake: ye servant couldscant be found, yt were of
such an unkind villayn courage, yt if himself came after to some substance,
would not with better will lose it al ^gain, than shamefully to forsake such a
master. And therefore as I say, I do verily suppose, yt if we would well
remember and in wardly considre ye great goodness of our savior Christ toward
us, not yet being his poor siuful servants, but rather his adversaries and
his enemies. And what wealth of this world yt he willinglye forsook for our
sake, being in deed universal king thereof: and so having ye power in his own
ha^d^ to have used it if he had would, instead whereof (to make us rich in
heaven) he lived here in nedines and poverty al his life, and nether would
have authority, nor keep netherla^des nor goods. The deep co^sideracion and
earne^^ aduiseme^t of this one point alone, were able to make any kind christian
man or woman well content rather for his sake again to give up al yt ever god
has lent them:) and lent the^ has he al yt ever they have) than unkindly and
unfaithfully to forsake him. And him they forsake, if yt for fear ^hey forsake
ye confession of his christen faith. And therefore to finish this piece wi^hal
concerning y^ dread of lesing our outward worldly goods, let us consider ye
sl^ndre commodity y^ they bring, with what labor they be b^ught, how little while
they abide, with who^soeuer they be lo^gest, what pain their pleasure is
mingled withal, what harm ye love of them does unto the soul, what loss is
in y^ keeping, Christ's faith refused for the^: what winning in ye loss, if we
lose the^ for gods sake, how much more profitable they be well given, than evil
kept. And finally, what unkindness it were, if we would not rather forsake the^
for Christ's sake, tha^ unfaithfully forsake Christ for them: which while he
lived for our sake, forsook al ye world, beside the suffering of shameful and
painful death, whereof we shall speak after. If we these things (I say, will
consider well and will pray god with his holy hand to print the^ in our hearts,
and will abide and dwell still in ye hope of his help, his truth shall (as the
prophet says) so compass us about with a pauice, y^ we shall not need to be
afraid ab incursu et demonio meridiano. of this incursion of this midde day
devil, this open plain persecucion of ye Turke^ for any loss yt we can take by
ye bereuing from us of our wretched worldly goods, for whose short and small
pleasure in this life forborne, we shall be with heavenly sub^taun^e
euerlastinglye recompensed of God in joyful bliss and glory.


The.xvii. Chapter. Of bodily pain, and that a man has not cause to take
disco^fort in persecucion, though he feel himself in an horror, at the
thistking upon the bodily pain.
Vincent. Forsooth uncle, as for these outward goods you have so far^orth
said, yt albeit no man ca^ be sure what strength he shall have, or how faint
and how feeble he may hap to find himself when he shall come to ye point, and
therefore I can make no warra^tise of my self, seeing yt S, Peter so suddenly
fainted at a womans word, and so cowardly forsook his master for whom he had
so boldl^ fought wtin so few hours before. And by yt fall in forsaki^g, well
perceued yt h^ had been rash in his promise and was well worthy to take a fall
for puttyng so full trust in himself: yet in good faith me thinks now, (and
God shall I trust help me too, keep this thought still) yt if the Turk should
take all that I have unto mi very shyrt, except I forsake my faith, and offer it
me al again with.v. times as much thereto to fall into his sect, I would not once
stick thereat, rather to forsake it every whit, the^ of Christ's holy faith to
forsake any one point. But surely good uncle, when I bethink me farther on the
grief and the pain that may turn unto my flesh: here find I yt fear yt
forseth my heart to tremble.


Anthony. Neither have I cause to marvel thereof, nor you Cousin cause to be
dismayde therefore. The great horror and fear that our Savior had in his own
flesh against his paynful passion, makes me little to meruayl, and may well make
you take that comfort to, yt for no such manner of gendring felt in your se^sual
parts, the flesh shrinketh at the meditacion of pain and death, your reason
shall give over, but resist it and manlye master it: and though you would
feign flee from the payneful death, and be loath to come thereto: yet may the
meditacion of his great grievous agony move you, and him self shall, if you so
desire him, not fail to work with you therein, and geat and give you the grace
that you shall submit and conform your will therein unto his, as he did his unto
his father, and shall thereupon be so comforted with the secret inward
inspiracion of his holy sprite, as he was with the personal presence of yt
Angel, that after his agony came and comforted him, that you shall as his true
disciple follow him, and with good will without grudge, do as he did, and take
your cross of pain and passion upon your back, and dye for the truth with
him and thereby reign with him crouned in eternal glory. And this I say to give
you warning of the thing tha^ is truth, to thentent when a man feleth such an
horror of death in his heart, he should not thereby stand in outrageous fear
that he were falling, for many such men stands for all that fear, full fast.
And finally, better abides the brunte when god is so good unto him, as to
bring him thereto and encourage him therein, tha^ does some other, that in the
beginning feleth no fear at al, and yet may it be, and most often so it is,
for god having many mansions, and all wonderful welthfull in his fathers house,
exalts not eueri good man up to the glory of a martyr, but foreseing their
infirmity, that though they be of good will before, and peradventure of right
good courage to, would yet play. S. Peter, if they were brought to the point,
and thereby bring their souls into the peril of eternal damnacion. He
provides otherwise for them, before they come thereat, and either finds away
that men shall not have the mind to lay any hands upon them, as he found for
his di^ciples, when himself was willingly taken, or that if they set hand on
the^, they shall have no power to hold the^, as he found for. S. John
theuangelist, which let his sheet fall from him, whereupon they caught
hold and so stedde himself naked away, and escaped fro them or though they
hold him and bring him to prison to, yet god sometime delivers them thence,
as he did. S. Peter, and sometime he takes them to him, out of the prison into
heaven, and fuffereth them not to come to their torment at all, as he has done
by many a good holy man. And some he suffers to be brought into the tormente,
and yet he suffers them not to dye therein, but live many years after, and
dye their natural death, as he did. S. John theuangelist and by mani an other
more, as we may well see both in sundry stories, and in the Epistles of
Saint Ciprian also. And therefore which way GOD will take with us, we can
not tell: but surely if we be true Christian men, this can we well tell, that
without any bold warrantise of our self, or foolish trust in our
strength, we be bound upon pain of damnacion, that we be not of the contrary
mind. but that we will with his help, (how loathe so ever we feel our flesh
thereto) rather yet than forsake him or his faith before the world (which if
we do, he has promised to forsake us before his father, and all the holy
coumpanye of heaven.) Rather I say, than we would so do, we would with his
help endure and sustayn for his sake all the tormentrye that the devil with
all his faithless tormentors in this world, would deuyse. And then when we be
of this mind, and submytte our will unto his, and call and pray for his
grace, we can tell well enough that he will never suffer them to put more
upon us, than his grace will make us all to bear, but will also with their
temptacion provide us for a sure way, for Fidelis deus? (says Saynct Paul)
Qui non patitur vos tentari supra id quod potestis, sed dat etiam cum
temptatione prouentum. GOD is (says the Apostle, faithful, which suffers
you not to be tempted above that you may bear, but gives also with the
temptacyon a way out. For either as I said, he will keep us out of their
hands (though he before suffer us to be feared with them to prove our faith
wythal, tha^ we may have by the examinacio^ of our own mind, some coumforte in
hope of his grace, and some fear of our own frayltie to drive us to call for
grace (or else if we fall in their hands) so that we fall not fro the trust
of him nor cease to call for his help) his truth shall as the prophet says)
so compass us about with a pauice^ that we shall not need to fear this
incursion of this midde day devil. For either shall these Turks his
tormentors, that shall enter this, and and persecute us, either they shall I
say, not have the power to touch our bodies at all, or else the short
pain that they shall put unto our bodies, shall turn us to eternal
profit both in our souls and in our bodies too. And therefore Cousin, to
beegynne with, let us be of good coumforte. For sithe we be by our faith
very sure, that holy Scripture is the word of god, and that the word of
god, can not be but very true, and that we see that both by the mouth of his
holy Prophet, and by the mouth of his blessed Apostle also, god has made us
so faithful promise, both that he will not suffer us to be tempted above our
power, but will both provide a way out for us, and that he will also round
about so coumpasse us with his pauice, and defend us, that we shall have no
cause to fear this midde day devil, with all his persecucion: we can not now
but be very sure (except we be very shamefullye cowardous of heart, and
toward god in faith out of measure fainte and in love less tha^ leuke warm,
or waxen even kaye cold) we may be very sure I say, that either God shall
not suffer the Turks to invade this land, or if they do god shall provide
such resistance that they shall not prevail, or if they do prevail, yet if
we take the wai that I have told you) we shall by their persecucyon take
little harm or rather no harm at all, but that that shall seem harm, shall in
deed be to us no harm at al, but ^ood. for if god make us and keep us good
me^ (as he has promised to do if we pray therefore) tha^ says holy scripture.
Bonis omnia cooperantur in bonum. Unto good folk all things turn them to
good: and therefore Cousin, sith that God knows what shall hap and not we,
let us in the mean while with a good hope in the help of Gods grace, have
a good purpose with us of sure standing by his holy faith against all
persecucions, from which if we should (which our lord forbid) hereafter
either for fear or pain (for lack of grace lost in our own default)
myssehappe to decline: yet had we both won the well spent time in this good
purpose before, to ye minishme^t of our pain, and were also much the more
lykely that god should lift us up after our fall, and give us his grace
again: howbeit, if this persecucion come, we be by this meditacion and well
continued entente and purpose before, the better strengthed and comfirmed, and
much the more lykely for to stand in deed. And if it so fortune (as with gods
grace at men's good prayers and amendment of our evil lives, it may fortune
full well) that the Turks shall either be well withs^anden and vanquished, or
paraduenture not invade us at all: than shall we perdye by this good purpose
geat our self of god a very good cheap thank: and on the other side, while
we now think thereon (as not to think thereon, in so great lykelihode thereof,
I wene no wise man can. If we should for the fear of worldly loss or bodily
pain, framed in our own minds, think that we would give over, and to save
our good and our lives forsake our Savior by denial of his faith, than
whither the Turk come or come not, we be gone from god the while, and then if
they come not in deed, or come and be driven to f^yghte, what a shame should
this be to us before y^ face of god, in so shameful cowardous wise to forsake
him for fear of that pain, that we neither felt, nor never was falling
toward us.


Vincent. By my troth uncle I thank you, me think that though you never said
more in the matter, yet have you even with this that you have of the fear of
bodily pain in this persecucion, spoken here already merueilously comforted
my heart.


Antony. I am glad Cousin, if your heart have taken comfort thereby: but and if
you so have, give god the thank and not me, for that work is his and not
mine, For neither am I able any good thing to say but by him, nor all the good
words in this world, no not ye holy words of god himself, and spoken also
with his own holy mouth, can be able to profit the man with the sound entering
at his ear, but if the spirit of god therewith inwardely work in his soul:
but that is his goodness ever ready to do, except the let be through the
untowardness of our own froward will.


The.xviii. Chapter. Of comfort against bodily pain, and first against
captiuytie.
ANd therefore now being somewhat in comfort and courage before, whereby we may ye
more quietly consider every thing which is somewhat more hard and difficile to
do, when the heart is before taken up and oppressed with ye troublous affeccion
of heavy sorrowful fear: let us examine the wayght and substance of these
bodily pains as the sorest part of this persecucion which you rehearsed
before, which were (if I remember you right) thraldom, imprisonment,
painful and shameful death. And first let us as reason is, begin with the
thraldom, for that was, I remember the first.

Vincent. I pray you good uncle say tha^ somewhat thereof, for me thinks
uncle yt captivity is a merueilous heavy thing, namely wha^ they shall, as they
most commonly do, carry us far from home, into a strange uncouth land.


Anthony. I cannot say nay, but that some grief it is Cousin in deed: but yet
as unto me not half so much as it would be^ if they could carry me out into any
such unknown country that god would not wete where nor find the mean to
come at me but in good faith Cousin, now if my transmigracion into a strange
country should be any great grief unto me, ye fault should be much in my
self. For since I am very sure that whithersoeuer men co^uay me, god is no more
verily here, then he shall be there, if I geat (as I may if I will) the grace to
set my whole heart on him^ and long for nothing but him, it can than make no
great matter to my mind, whither they carry me hence or leave me here. And tha^
if I find my mind much offended therewith, that I am not still here in my own
countreye, I must considre that the cause of my grief is mine own wrong
imaginacion, whereby I beguile my self with an untrue persuasion, wening that
this were mine own country, whereas of truth it is not so. For as S. Paul
says. Non habemus hic ciuitatem manentem sed futuram inquirimus we have here
no City nor dwelling country at al. but we seek for one that we shall come to,
and in what country so^uer we walk in this world, we be but as pilgrims and
way faring men: and if I should take any country for my own, it must, be
that country to which I come, and not the country from which I ^ame, that
country that shallbee to me than for a while fo strange, shall yet perdye be
no more strange to me, nor longer strange to me neither, tha^ was mine own
native country when I came first into it. And therefore if ye point of my being
far from hence be very grievous to me, and that I find it a great pain,
that I am not where I would be: that grief shall great part grow for lack
of sure setting and setlyng my mind in god, where it should be: which fault
of mine when I mend, I shall soon ease my grief. Now as for all other griefs
and pains that are in captivity, ^hraldom and bondage, I cannot deny but
many there are and great, howbeit they seem yet somewhat (what say I
somewhat, I may say a great deal) the more because we took our former
liberty for more a great deal than in deed it was. Let us therefore consydre
the matter thus: captivity, bondage or thraldom what is it but the violente
restrainte of a man, being so subdued under the dominion, rule and power of an
other, that he ^ust do what the the other lust to command him, and may not at
his liberty do such things as he lust himself: now when we shall be
carried away with a Turk, and be feign to be occupied about such things as
he lust to set us here shall we lamente the loss of our liberty, and
think we bear an heavy burdayne of our servile condycion, and so to do I
grant well we shall have many times great occasyon, but yet should we I
suppose set thereby somewhat the less, if we would remember well what
liberty that was that we lost, and take it for no larger than it was in ded^:
for we reckon as though we might before do what we would, but therein deceive
we our self. For what free man is there so free^ that can be suffered to do
what him lust? In many things GOD has res^rayned us by his high
commandment so many, that of those things which else we would do, I wene
it be more ^he^ the half. Howbeit, because (god forg^ue us) we let so little
therefore, but do what we lust, as though we heard him not, we recke^ our
liberty never ye less ^or y^: But ^han is our liberty much restrained by
the laws made by men, for the quiet and politic governance of the people.
And these would I wene let our liberty but a little neither, were it not for
fear of pains that may fall thereupon. Look than whither other men, yt have
authority over us, command us never no business which we dare not but do,
and therefore do it full often, full sore against our wills. Of which things some
service is some time so paineful and so perilous too, y^ no lord can lightly
command his bond man worse, nor seldom does command him half so sore.
Let every free man that rekoneth his liberty to stand in doing what he lust,
co^sydre well the points, and I wene he shall tha^ find his liberty much less
tha^ he took it for before. And yet have I left untouched ye bondage, y^
almost every man is in, y^ bosteth himself for free, ye bondage I mean of sin:
which to be a very bondage, I shall have our savior himself to bear me good
record. For he says: Qui facit peccatum seruus est peccati. He yt commits
sin is the thral, or the bondsman of sin. And then if this be thus (as it must
needs so be since god says it is so) who is there tha^, yt may make so much
boste of his liberty, yt he should take it for so sore a thing and so strange
to become through chance of war, bo^d unto a man while he is already,
through sin become willingly thrall and bond unto the devil. Let us look well
how many things and of what vile wretched sort the devil drives us to do
daily through the rash braydes of our blind affeccions, which we be for our
fautful lack of grace, feign to follow, and are to feeble to refrain, and than
shall we find in our natural fredome, our bond service such, that never was
there any man lord of any so vile a villain, yt ever would for very shame
command him so shameful service. And let us in the doing of our service to
the man, that we be slave, unto, remember what we were wont to do about the
same time of the day while we were at our free lybertye before, and were well
likelye if we were at liberty to do the like again: and we shall peradventure
perceive that it were better for us to do this business than that. Now shall
we have great occasion of comfort, if we considre that our servitude (though
in the coumpte of the world it seem to come by chance of war) comes yet
in very deed unto us, by the provident hand of god^ and that for our great
good if we will take it well, both in remyssion of sins, and also matter of
our merit. The greatest grief, that is in bondage or captivity, is this as I
trow, yt we be forced to do such labor, as with our good will we would not.
But then against that grief Senecke teaches us a good remedy. Semper da
operam ne quid inuitus fatias. Endeavor thy self ever more yt thou do nothing
against thy will. But that thing that we see, we shall needs do, let us use
always to put our good will thereto.


Vincent. That is uncle sone said: but it is hard to do.


Anthony. Our froward mind makes every good thing hard, and that unto our own
more hurt and harm. But in this case, if we will be good christen me^, we
shall have great cause gladlye to be content for the great comfort yt we may
take thereby, while we remmbre y^ in the pacient and glad doing of our service
unto y^ man for gods sake according to his high commandment by the mouth
of. S. Paul. Seruiobedite dominis. We shall have our thank and our whole
reward of god, finally if we remember the great humble mekenes o^ our savior
Christ him self, yt he being very almighty god Humiliauit seme^ip^um formam
serui accipiens, Humbled him self and took ye form of a bond man or a slave,
rather than his father should forsake us, we may think our self very unkind
caitiues, and very fra^tique foles to, if rather tha^ endure this worldly
bondage for a while, we would forsake him yt has by his own death, delivered
us out of everlasting bondage of ye devil, and will for our short bondage give
us everlasting liberty.


Vincent. Well fa^e you good uncle, this is very well said, albeit y^ bondage
is a co^dicio^ yt every man of any courage would be glad to eschew, and very
loath to fall in, yet have you well made open, yt it is a thing neither so
strange nor so sore^ as it before seemed unto me, and specially far from such
as any man y^ any wit has should for fear thereof shrink fro ye confession
of his faith: and now therefore I pray you somewhat speak of impriesonme^t.


The.xix. Chap. Of impryesonmen^e and comfort there against.
Anthony. THat shall I Cousin with good will: and first if we ^oulde considre
what thing impriesonment is of his own nature, we should not me thinks have
so great horror thereof. For of it self it is perdie, but a restraynt of
liberty, which lets a man from going whither he would.


Vincent. Yes by. S. Mary uncle, me thinks it is much more sorrow than so.
For beside y^ ^^t and re^^rainte of liberty, it has many more displeysures and
very sore griefs knitte and adjoined thereunto.


A^thony. That is Cousin very true in deed. And those pains, among many sorer
tha^ those, thought I not after to forgeat: howbeit^ I purposed now to consider
first impri^sonme^t, but as impriesonment only without any other commodity
beside. For a man may be perdy imprisoned, and yet not set in ye stocks, nor
colored fast by the neck, and a man may be let walk at large where he will
and yet a pair of f^tters fast riueted on his legs. For in this country ye
wot well and in Cicile and port^ngale to, so go there all ye slaves.
Howebeit, because yt for such things men's ha^tes has such horror thereof,
albeit that I am not so mad as to go about, to prove yt bod^ly pain were no
pain, yet sith yt because of these manner of pains, we so specially abhore the
state and condition of prisoners, we should me think well perceive that a
great part of our horror grows of our own fantasy if we would call to mind
and consider the state and condition of many other folk in whose state and
condisio^ we would wish our self to stand taking the^ for no prisoners at al
y^ stand yet for all that in much part of ye self same points yt we abhor
imprisonment for. Let us therefore consider these things in order. And first as
I thought to begin, because those other kinds of grieves yt come with
impriesonme^t are but accedentes thereunto, and yet neither such kinds of
accede^tes as be either proper thereunto, but yt they may (almost al) fall unto
a man without it, nor are not such accedentes therinto^ as are inseparable
therfro: but yt imprisonment may fall to a man, and none of all the therwt. We
will I say therefore begin with ye considering what manner pain or commodity we
should reckin impriesonment to be of him self and of his own nature alone.
And than in the course of our communicacion, you shall as you lust encreace and
aggreue ye cause of your horror with ye terror of those painful accedentes.


Antony. I am sorry yt I did enterrupte your tale. For you were about I se well
to take an orderly way therein. And as yourself have devised, so I beseech you
proceed. For though I reckin impriesonme^t much y^ sorer thing by sore and
hard handling therein, yet recke^ I not ye inpriesonment of it self any less
tha^ a thing very tedious, al were it used in ye most favorable manner ye
i^possiple might. For uncle, if it were a great prince yt were taken prisoner
upon ye field, and in ye hand of a christian king, which use in such case (for
the co^sideracio^ of their former state (and the mutabl^ change of ye war)
to show much humanity to the^, and in very favorable wise entreat the^. For
these infidele Emperors handle often times the princes that they take, more
villanously, then they do the poorest men, as the great Tamberlayne kept the
great Turk when he had taken him, to tread on his back always while he
lepte on horse back. But as I began to say by the sample of a prince taken
priesoner, were the impriesonmente never so favorable, yet were it in my mind
no little grief in it self for a man to be pinned up, though not in a narowe
chaumber, but although his walk were right large, and right fair gardens to
therein, it could not but grieve his heart to be restrained by an other man,
within certain limittes and bounds, and lose the liberty to be where him
lust.


Anthony. This is Cousin well considered of you. For in this you perceive well,
that imprysonment is of him self, and his own very nature alone, nothing else
but ye retaining of a man's person wtin the circuit of a certain space
narrower or larger as shall be lymited to him, restraining his liberty from the
father going into any other place.


Vincent. Uery well said as me thinks.


Anthony. Yet forgot I Cousin, to ask you one question


Vincent. What is yt Uncle?


Anthony. This lo, if there be two me^ kept in two several cha^bers of one
great castle, of which two cha^bers, ye tone is much more larger tha^ the
the other: whither be the prisoners both or but ye tone, yt has the less rowme
to walk in?


Vincent. What question is it uncle, but yt they be priesoners both as I said
my self before, although ye tone lay fast locked in slockes, and the the other
had all the whole castle to walk in.


Antony. Me thinks verily Cousin, yt you say ye truth, and tha^ if prisonme^t
be such a thing as your self here agree it is, y^ is to wit, but a lack of
liberty to go whither we lust, now would I feign wit of you what any one
man you know yt is at this day out of prison?


Vincent. What one man Uncle? Mary I know almost none other. For suerly^
prisoner am I none acqainted with yt I remember.


Anthony. The^ I see well you visete pore prisoners selde.


Vincent. No by my troth uncle, I cry god mercy, I send the^ sometime my
almose, but by my troth, I love not to come my self, where I should see such
misery.


Antony. In good faith Cosi Uince^t, though I say it before you^ you have many
good conditions: but suerly though I say it before you, to ye condition is none
of the^: which co^dicio^ if you would amend, than should you have yet ye more
good co^dicio^s by one. And peradventure by mo tha^.iii. or four. For I assure
you, it is hard to tell how much good to a man's soul ye personal visiting
of poor prisoners does. But now since you can name me none of them that are in
prieso^, I pray you name some one of al the^, yt you be, (as you say) better
acquainted with, men I mean, yt are out of prison: for I know me think as few
of the^ as you know of ye the other.


Vincent. That were uncle a strange case, for every man is uncle out of
prieso^, yt may go whither he will, though he be ye pores^ beggar in ye town.
And in good faith uncle (because you recke^ impriso^ment so small a matter of it
self) the poor beggar yt is at his liberty and may walk where he will, is as
me seems in better case, then is a king kept in prieson yt can not go but
where men give him leave


Antony. Well Cousin, whether every way walking beggre be by this reason out of
prieso^ or no, we shall consider farther when you will: but in ye mean while I
can by this reason see no prince yt seems to be out of prison. For if the
lack of liberty to go where a man will be impriesonment, as your self say
it is. Than is the great Turk by whom we so fear to be put in prison, in
prison already him self. For he may not go where he will, for and he might,
he would into Portingale, Italy, Spain, France, Almayne and England and as
far on an other quarter to: both preter John's land and ye graund Canis to.
Now ye beggar yt you speak of, if he be as you say he is, by reason of his
liberty to go where he will, in much better case then a king, kept in
prieson because he can not go but where me^ give him leave: tha^ is yt beggar
in better case not only then a prince in prieson, but also the^ many a prince
out of prison to. For I am sure there is many a beggar yt may without let, walk
farther upon other men's ground, tha^ many a prince at his best liberty may
walk upon his own. And as for walking out abroad upon other me^nes, yt prince
might hap to be said nay, and holden fast, where that beggar with his bag
and his staff would be suffered to go forth and hold on his way. But for as
much Cousin, as neither the beggar nor ye prince is at free liberty to walk
where they will, but that if they would walk in some place, neither of the^
both should be suffered, but men would wtstand the^ and say the^ nay: Therefore
if priesonme^t be (as you grant it is) a lack of liberty to go where we
lust, I can not se but as I say ye beggar and the prince, whom you reckon both
at liberty, be by your own reason restrained in prison both.


Vincent. Yea but uncle ye tone and the the other have way enough to walk: ye
tone in his own ground, ye the other other men's, or in ye common hye way
where they may walk till they be both weary of walking, ere any man say the^
nay.


Antony. So may Cousin ye king yt had as your self put ye case al ye wole castle
to walk in, and yet you say not nay, but that he is prisoner for all yt, though
not so straightly kept, yet as verily priesoner as he yt lies in ye storkes^


Vincent. But they may go at ye least ways to eu^ry plac^ yt they need, or yt
is commodious for them, and therefore they do not will to go but where they
may goe^ and therefore be they at liberty to go where they will.


Anthony. Me needs not Cousin to spend the time about ye inpugning every part
of this answer for letting pass by, yt though a priesoner were with his keeper,
brought into every place where need requiered: yet ^ith he might not when he
would, go where he would for his only pleasure, he were you wot well a
prisoner still. And letting pass over also this, yt it were to this beggar
need, and to this king commodious to go into diverse places, where neither of
the^ both may come: And letting pass also that neither of them both is
lightly so te^peratly determined, but yt they both feign so would do in deed,
if this reason of youres put the^ out of prison, and set the^ at liberty,
and make the^ fre (as I will well grant it does if they so do in deed) yt is to
wit, if they have no will to go, but where they may go in deed. Tha^ let us
look on our other prisoners, enclosed wtin a castle^ and we shall find yt the
s^raites^ kept of the^ both (if he get ye wisdom, and the ^race to quiet his
own mind, and hold him self content with yt place, and long not (like a woman
wy^h child for her lusts) to be gadding out any where els^ is by ye same
reason of youres while his will is not longing to be any where else, he is I
say at his free liberty, to be where he will, and so is out of prieson to. And
on the the other side^ if though his will be not longing to be any where else,
yet because that if is will so were, he should not ^o be suffered, he is
therefore not at his free liberty, but a prisoner still: so since your free
beggar that you speak of, and the prince that you call out of prieson to,
though they be (which I ween very few be) by some special wisdom, so
te^perately disposed, yt they have not the will to be, but where they see they
may be suffered to be, yet since yt if they would have that will, they could not
tha^ be where they would, they lack theffecte of free liberty and b^ both
twain in prison to.


Vincent. Well Uncle, if every man universally be by this reason in prieso^
already after ye very property of impriso^me^t, yet to be imprisoned in this
special manner, which manner is only comonlye called imprisonment, is a thing
of great horror and fear, both for the straytnes of the keeping, and the hard
handling yt many me^ have therein, of al which griefs and pains, and
displeasures in this other general imprisonment yt you peake of, we feel no
thing at al, and therefore every man abhors the tone, and would be loath ^o
come into i^: and no man abhors ye the other, for they feel no harm, nor find
no fault therein. Wherefore uncle in faith though I can not find answers
convenient wherwyth to avoid your arguments, yet to be plain with you, and
tell you ye very troth, my mind finds not it self satisfied in this point.
But ever me thinks y^ these things wherewith you rather convince and conclude
me, tha^ induce a credence and persuade me yt every man is in prison already^
be but sophistical fa^tasies. And yt (except those yt are commonly called
prysoners^ other men are not in prieson at all.


Antony. Well fare thy heart good Cousin Uincent. There was in good faith no word
yt you spoke since we talked of those matters, that half so well liked me as
these that you speak now. For if you had assented in words, and in your
mind departed vnperswaded, than if the thing be true that I say, yet had
you lost the fruit. And if it be peradventure false, and my self deceived
therein, tha^ while I should wene that it liked you to, you should have
confermed me in my folly. For in good faith Cousin, such an old fool am I,
that this thing, in the persuading whereof unto you, I had went I had quit me
well, and when I have al done, appears to your mind but a trif^e and a
sophistical fantasy, my self have so many years taken for so very
substauncyall truth, that as yet my mind cannot give me to think it any
other, wherefore lest I play as the french priest played that had so long
used to say Dominus with the second syllable long, at the last he thought it
must needs be so, and was ashamed to say it short, to thentent that you may
the better perceive me, or I the better my self, we shall here between us a
little more considre the thing, and hardely spet well on your hands and take
good hold, and give it not over against your own mind, for than were we
never the nere.


Vincent. Nay by my truth uncle, that intended I not, nor no thing did yet
since we began, and that may you well perceive by some things, which without
any great cause, save for the farther satisfaccion of mine own mind I repeted
and debated again.


Anthony. That guise Cousin hold on hardely still, for in this matter I purpose
to give over mi part, except I make your self perceive, both that every man
universally is a very prisoner in very prieson, plainly without any
sophisticacion at al, and that there is also no prince living upon earth, but
he is in worse case prisoner by this general imprisonment that I speak of,
than is many a lewd simple wretch, by ye special prisonment, that you speak
of, and over this that in this general imprisonment that I speak of, me^ are
for the time that they be therein, so sore handled and so hardely, and in such
painful wise, that men's hertes have with reason great cause as sore to abhor
this hard handlyng that is in this imprisonment, as the other that is in that.


Vincent. By my truth uncle these things would I feign see well proved.


Anthony. Tell me tha^ Cousin by your truth, if there were a man attainted of
treason or of felony, and after judgment given of his death, and yt it were
determined that he should dye, only the time of his exequcion delayed, till ye
kings farther pleasure known, and he thereupon delivered unto certain kepers
and put up in a sure place, out of which he could not escape, were this man a
prisoner or no?


Vincent. This man quod he? ye mary that he were in very deed, if ever any man
were^


A^thony. But now what if for the time that were mean between his attender
and his exequcion, he were so favorably handled that he were suffered to do
what he would, as he was while he was abroad, and to have the use of his
lands and his goods, and his wife and his children, license to be with him,
and his friends leave at liberty to resort unto him, and his servants not
forbodden to abide about him: and add yet thereunto, that the place were a
great castle royal with parkes and other pleasures therein, a very great
circuit about, yea add yet and ye will, yt he were suffered to go and ride
also, both when he would and whither he would, only this one point always
provided and foresene, that he should ever be surely seen to and safely kept
from scaping, so that took he never so much of his own mind in the mean
while all other ways save scaping, yet he well knew that escape he could not,
and that when he were called for to exequcio^, and to death he should, now
Cousin vincent what would you call this man^ a prisoner, because he is kept for
exequcion? or no prisoner because he is in the mean while so favorably
handled, and suffered to do al yt he would save escape, and I bydde you not
here be hasty in your answer, but advise it well, that you grant no such
thing in haste, as you would after misselike by laysor, and think your self
deceived.


Vincent. Nay by my truth uncle, this thing needs no s^udy in my mind, but
that for all this favor showed him, and all his liberty lent him yet being
condemned to death, and being therefore kept, wi^h such sure watch laid upon
him yt he cannot escape, he is all that while, a very plain prisoner still.


Antony. In good faith Cousin me thinks you say very true, but the^ one thing
must I yet desire you Cousin to tell me a little farther. If there were an other
laid in prison for a fraye, and through the Iailors displeasure were bolted and
fettered, and laid in a low dongeon in the stocks, where he might hap to lie
peradventure a while, and abide in the mean season some pain, but no danger
of death at al, but that out again he should come well enough: whither of these
two priesoners stood in worse case, he that has all this favor, or he that is
thus hardely handeled?


Vincent. By our lady uncle, I wene the most part of men if they should needs
choose, had le^er be such prisoners in every point as he that so sorely lies
in the stocks, then in every point such as he that at such liberty walks
about the pa^ke.


Antony. Considre tha^ Cousin whither this thing seem any sophestry to you, yt I
shall show you now. For it shall be such as seems in good faith substauncially
true to me, and if it so hap that you think otherwise, I will be very glad
to perceive which of us both is beg^iled. For it seems to me Cousin first that
every man coming into this world here upon earth as he is created by God, so
comes he hither by the providence of god: is this any sophestrye first or not?


Vincent. Nay verily, this is very substanciall truth.


Anto^y. Now take I this also for very truth in my mind, that there comes no
man nor woman hither into thearth, bu^ yt e^e ever they come into the world,
out of the mothers womb, god condemns them unto death by his own sentence
and judgment, for the original sin that they bring with them contracted in
the corrupted stock of our forefather Adam: is this think you Cousin, verily
true or not?


Vincent. This is uncle very true in deed.


Antony. Tha^ seems this true farther unto me, yt god has put every man here
upon thearth, under so sure and under so safe keeping, yt of al ye whole people
living in this wide world, there is neither man woman nor child, would they
never so far wander about and seek it, that possibly can find any way
whereby they may escape from death: is this Cousin a fond imagined fa^tasy, or is
it very truth in deed?


Vincent. Nay this is no imaginacion uncle, but a thing so clearly proved
true, that no man is so mad to say nay.


Antony. Than need I no more Cousin, for than is al yt matter plain and open
evident truth, which I said I took for truth, which is more a little yet now,
then I told you before, when you took my proof yet but for a sophistical
fantasy, and said yt for all my reasoning that every man is a prisoner, yet you
thought, yt except those, who^ the come^ people call prisoners, there is else no
man a very prisoner in deed, and now you grant your self again, for very
substauncial truth, yt every man is here (though he be the greatest king upon
earth) set here by ye ordinance of god here in a place (be it never so large)
a place I say yet (and you say^ the same) out of which no man can escape but yt
therein is every man put under sure and safe keeping to be redely fet forth, when
god calls for him, and that tha^ he shall surely die, and is not tha^ Cousin by
your own granting before, every man a very prisoner, when he is put in a place
to be kept, to be brought forth when he would not, and himself wot not
whither?


Vincent. Yes in good faith uncle, I cannot but well perceive this to be so.


Anthony. This were you wot well true, although a man should be but taken by ye
arm, and in faier manner lead out of this world unto his judgment, but now
while we well know, yt there is no king so great, but yt al ye while he walks
here, walk he never so lose, ride he with never so strong an army for his
defense, yet himself is very sure (though he seek in the mean season some
other pastyme to put it out of his mind) yet is he very sure I say, y^ escape
he cannot, and very well he knows, that he has already sentence given upon
him to dye, and that verily dye he shall, and that himself (though he hope upon
long respyte of his execucion) yet can he not tell how soon. And therefore,
but if he be a fool, he can never be without fear, that either on the morrow,
or on the self same day, the grisely cruel hangman, death, which from his
first coming in has ever houed aloof, and looked toward him and ever lie in a
wait on him, shall amydde among al his royalty and al his mayn strength,
neither knele before him, nor make him any reverence, nor with any good manner
desire him to come forth, but rigorouslye and fiercely grype him by the very
breast, and make all his bones rattle: and so by long and diverse sore
torments, stryke him stark dead in this prieson, and then cause his body to
be cast into the ground in a foul pytte, within some corner of the same,
there to rotte and be eaten with the wretched worms of the earth, sending yet
his soul out farther unto a more fearful judgment, whereof at his temporal
death, his success is uncertain, and therefore though by Gods grace not
out of good hope: yet for all that, in ye mean while in very sore dread and
fear, and peradventure in peril inevitable of eternal fire too. Me thinks
therefore Cousin, that as I told you, this keeping of every man in this wretched
world for execucion of death, is a very plain imprisonment in deed, and ye as
I say such yt ye greatest king is in this prison, in much worse case in all his
wealth, then many a man is by the other imprysonmente, that is therein sore
and hardelye handled. For where some of those lie not there attaynted nor
condemned to death, the greatest manne of this world, and the most wealthye
in this universal prison is laid in to be kept undoubtedly for death.


Vincent. But yet uncle in that case, is the the other prisoner too: for he is as
sure that he shall dye to perdye.


Antony. That is very truth Cousin in deed, and well objected too: but then
must you consider, that he is not in danger of death, by reason of that
prison, into which he is put, peradventure but for a light fray: but his
danger of death is by the other imprisonment, by which he is prisoner in ye
great prison of this whole earth, in which prison al ye princes thereof be
prisoners as well as he, if a man condemned to death were put up in a large
prison, and while his execucio^ were respited, he were for fightyng with his
fellows put up in a straight place: part of ye same he is in danger o^ death
in yt strait prison, but not by ye being in yt, for therein is he but for ye
fray: but his deadlye imprisonment was ye other (ye larger I say) into which he
was put for death. So the prisoner yt you speak of, is beside ye narow prison,
a prisoner of ye broad world, and all the princes thereof, therein prisoners with
him. And by ye imprisonment, both they and he in like danger of death, not by
ye strait imprisonment, yt is commonly called imprisonment, but by yt
imprisonment which (because of y^ large walk,) me^ call it liberty, and which
prison you thought therefore but a fantasye sophistical, to prove it any prison
at al. But now may you me thinks very plainly perceive that this whole earth
is not only for all ye whole kind of man a very plain prison in deed, but
also that eueri man without excepcion even those that are most at their
liberty therein and recko^ themselfes great Lords and possessioners of very
great pieces thereof, and thereby wax with wantonness so forgeatfull of their
own state, that they ween they stand in great welthe, do stand for all that
in deed, by the reason of their imprisonmente in this large prison of the whole
earth, in the self same condition that other do ^tande, ^hiche in the narow
prisons, which only be called prisons, and which only be reputed priesons
in the opinion of the common people stand in the most fearful and in the
most odious case, that is to wit, condemned already to death. And now Cousin,
if this thing that I tell you, seem but a sophistical fantasye to your mind, I
would be glad to know what moue^h you so to think. For in good faith as I
have told you twice, I am no wyser but that I verily wene, that y^ thing is
^hus of very plain truth in very deed.


The.xx. Chapter.
Vincent. IN good faith uncle, as for thus farforth, I not only can make with
any reason, no resystence there against, but also see very clearly that it
can be none otherwise but that every manne is in this world a very prisoner,
sithe we be all put here into a sure hold to be kept, till we be put
to execucyon as folk already condemned all to death. But yet Uncle that
strayte keeping, collerynge, boltynge, and stockynge, with lying in straw or
on the cold ground, (which manner of hard handling is used in these special
priesonmentes that only be commonly called by that name) must needs make that
impriesonment which only among the people bears that name, much more odious
and dreadeful than ye general impriesonme^t wherewith we be every man
universally priesoned at large, walkyng where we will round about ye wide world:
In which broad prieso^, out of those narrow priesons, there is with ye
priesoners no such hard handlyng used.


Antony. I said, I trow Cosyn, that I purposed to prove you farther yet, that
in this general prieson, the large prieson I mean of this whole world folk,
be for the time that they be therein as sore handled and as hardly, and wre^ched
and wrongen, and braked in such paynful wise, that our hertes (save that we
consider it not) have with reason good and great cause to grudge against. And
(as farreforth only as pertayneth to the respect of pain) as much horror to
conceive against the hard handling that is in this prieson, as the the other that
is in that


Vincent. In deed uncle truth it is that this you said you would prove.


Anthony. Nay so much said I not Cosyn, but I said I would if I could,
and if I could not, than would I therein give over my part. But yt trust I
Cosyn, I shall not need to do, the thing seems me so plain. For Cosyn, though
the prince and Kings have both Aungelles and deuylles that are Gaylors over
him, yet the chief Gaylor over this whole broad prieson the world, is (as I
take it) God. And that I suppose you will grant me too.


Vincent. That will I not uncle deny.


Antony. If a man be Cousin committed unto prieson, for no cause but to be
kept, though there lie never so great charge upon him, yet his keeper if he
be good and honest, is neither so cruel that wound pain the manne of
malice, nor so couetyse that would put him to pain to make him seek his
friends, and to pay for a pennye worth of ease. Else if the place be such
that he be sure to keep him safe otherwise, or yt he can geat suretye, for the
recompense of more harm than he sees he should have if he escaped: He will
never handle him in any such hard fashion^ as we most abhor imprisonment
for. But marye if the place be such, as the keeper can not otherwise be sure,
then is he compelled to keep him after the rate the straiter. And also if the
prisoner be unruly, and fall to fyghting with his fellows, or do some other
manner of shrewde turn, then uses the keeper to punish him sundry wise, in some
of such fashions as your self have spoken of. So is it now Cousin, that god the
chief Iailor as I say of this broad pryeson the world, is neither cruel nor
coue^ise. And this pryeson is also so sure and so subtellye builded, that
albeit that it lies open upon every side without any wall in the world:
yet wandre we never so far about therein, the way to geat out at, shall we
never find, so that he needs neither to collar us, nor to sto^ke us, for any
fear of scapyng away. And therefore (except he see some other cause than
our only keeping for death) he lets us in the mean while (for as long as
he lust to respite us) walk about in the pryeson, and do therein what we
will: vsyng our self in such wise as he has (by reason and reuelacyon from
time to time told us his pleasure.) And hereof it comes, lo, that by reason
of this fauou^e for a time, we wax as I said so wanton, that we forgeat
where we be: wenyng that we were Lords at large, where as we be in deed (if
we would well consider it) eue^ sely poor wretches in prieson.

For of truth our very prieson, this earth is: and yet thereof we caute us
out (partly by couenau^tes y^ we make among us, and part by fraud, and part
by violence too) diverse parts diversely to our self, and change the name
thereof, from the odious name of prison, and call it our own land or our
liuelode. Upon our prison we build our prison, we garnishe it with gold, and
make it g^orious. In this prison they bye and sell. In this prieson they brawle
and chyde. In this prison they run together and fight. In this they dyce. In
this they card. In this they pype and reuill. In this they sing and dance.
And in this prieson many a man reputed right honest, lets not for his
pleasure in ye dark prieuelye to play ye knave. And thus while god our king,
and our chief Iaylor too, suffers us and lets us alone: we wene our self
at liberty, and we abhor the state of those whom we call pryesoners, taking
our selves for no pryesoners at al. In which false persuasion of wealth, and
forgeatfulnes of our own wretched s^ate (which is but a wanderyng about for
a while, in this prieson of this world, till we be brought unto the execucyon
of ^eath) while we forgeat with our sollye both our self and our Gayle,
and our under Iaylours Angels and devils both. And our chief Iailoure God
too, GOD that forgeat^eth not us, but sees us all the while well enough, and
being sore dyscontente to see so shreude rule kept in the Iayle (:beesyde that
he sends the hang manne death, to put to execucyon, here and there: some
times by ye thousa^des at once) he handles many of the remnaunte (whose
execucion he forbeareth yet unto a farther time) even as hardly, and ^unisheth
them as sore, in ^hys common pryeson of the world, as there are any handled
in those specyal prye^ons, which for the hard handlyng, used you say therein,
your heart has in such horror, and so sore abhors.


Vincent. The remnaunt will I not gain say. For me ^hynke I see it so in deed,
but that god our chief Iaylor in this world uses any such priesonlye
fashyon of punishment, that point I must needs deny. For I neither see him
lay any man in the stocks or strike fetters on his legs, and so much as
shut him up in a chaumber either.


Anthony. Is he no minstrell Cousin, that plays not on a harp? makes no man no melody, but he that plays on a lute? He may be a minstrell and make
melodye you wot well, with some other instrument, some strange fashioned
peradventure that never was seen before.

God our chyefe Iayl^ure, as himself is inuysyble, so uses he in his
punyshemente inuysyble instruments: and therefore not of like fashyon^ as the
the other Iaylours do: but yet of like effect, and as painful in felyng as
those. For he laye^h one of his priesoners with an hot f^uer, as evil at his
ease, in a warm bed as the the other Iaylour lays his upon the cold ground.
He wryngeth him by the brows with a mygreme he collereth them by the neck
with a quynsy: bolteth them by the arms with a palsy, that they can not lift
their hands to their heads: he manacleth their hands, with the gout in
their fingers: he wringeth the^ by the legs with a crampe in their shinnes^
he byndeth them to the bed board, with the c^icke in the back: and lies on
there a long and as unable to ryfe^ as though he lay by the fee^e fa^te in
the stocks.

Some pryesoner of another Gayle, syngeth, daunceth in his two fetters, and
fears not his feet for stumblyng at a stone, while gods priesoner that
has but his one foot fettered with the gout, lies gronynge on a couche, and
quaketh and cries out, if he fear there would fall on his foot no more but
a cushion. And therefore Cousin as I said, if we consider it well, we shall find
this general prieson of this whole earth^ a place in which the pryesoners be
as sore handled as they be in ye other. And even in the other some make as
merye too, as there do some in this, that are very merye at large out of
that. And surely, like as we wene our self out of pryeson now: so if
there were some folk borne and brought up in a prieson, that never came on
the wall, or looked out of the door, nor never heard of other world abroad,
but ^aue some for shrewde turns done among them self, lo^ked up in s^rayter
rowme, and heard them ^nelye called prye^oners that were so served, and them
self ever called free folk at large: the like opinion would they have there
of them self than, that we have here of our self now. And when we take our
self for other than pryesoners now, as verily be we deceived now^ as those
pri^soners should there be than.


Vincent. I can not Uncle in good faith say nay, but that you have performed
all that you have promised: but yet since that for all this there appears no
more but that as they be priesoners, so be we too: and that as some of them be
sore handled so be some of us too: sith we wot well for all this, that when
we come to those pryesons, we shall not fail to be in a straiter prison then
we be now: and to have a door shut upon us, where we have none shut on
us now: this shall we be sure of at the least wise, if there come no worse.
And ^hen may there come worse you wot well it comes there so commonly,
wherefore for all this, it is yet little marvel though men's hearts grudge
much there against.


Anthony. Surely Co^yn in this you say very well, howbeit somewhat had your
words touched me the nearer, if I had said that imprisonment were no
dyspleasure at al. But the thing that I say Cousin, for our comfort therein
is, that our fantasye frames us a false opinion by which we deceive our
self, and take it for sorer then it is, and that do we by the reason that we
take our self before for more free than we be, and prisonme^t for a stranger
thing to us the^ it is in deed. And thus farreforth as I said, have I proved
truth in very deed: but now the inco^modities that you repeat again (those I
say that are proper to themprisonme^t of their own nature, that is to wit, to
have less roum^ to walk in, and to have the door ^hutte upon us, these are me
think so very slender and slyghte, that in so g^eate a cause as to suffer for
Gods sake, we might be sore ashamed, so much as once to think upon them.

Many a good manne there is you wot well^ which without force at all or
any necessitye, wherefore he so^ ^houlde do, suffers these two things
wyllinglye o^ his own choice with much other hardines more.

Holy Monckes I mean of the Cherterhouse order, such as never pass their
celles, but only to the Church set fast by their celles, and thence to
their celles again, and Sayncte Brygettes order, and Sayncte Claryce much
like, and in a manner all close relygyouse houses, and yet Ancres and An^ressis
most special. All whose whole room is less than a metelye large chamber:
and yet are they there as well content many long years together, as are
other men, and better too, that walk about the world.

And therefore you may see with the lothenesse of less rowme and the door
shut upon us, while so many folk are so well content therewith, and will
for gods love live so to choose, is but horror enhau^ced of our own fantasy.

And in deed I wiste a woman once that came into a pryeson to vysite of her
charity a poor pryesoner there, whom she found in a chaumber (to say the
truth) meetelye fair, and at the leastwyse it was strong enough: but with
the mattes of straw the pryesoner had made it so warm, both under the
foot, and round about the walls, that in these things for the keeping of
his health, she was on his beehalfe glad and very well coumforted: but
among many other dyspleasures, that for his sake she was sorye for: once she
lamented much in her mind, that she should have the chamber door shut
upon him by night, made fast by the Tayloure, that should shut him in:
for by my trou^he quod she, if the door should be shut upon me, I would
ween it would stop up my breath. At that word of hers^ the pryeson^r
la^ghed in his mind, but he durst not laughe a loud, nor say nothing to
her, for some what in deed he stood in awe of her, and had his finding
there much part of her Charytye, for almose, but he could not but laughe
inwardelye, while he wyste well enough that she used on the insyde to shut
every night full surely her own chaumber to her, bo^he door and wyndowes
too, and used not to open them, of all the long night.

And what diff^rence then as to the stoppinge of the breathe, whyther they were
shut up within or without. And so surely Cousin these two things that you
speak of, are neither another of so great weyghte, that in Christ's cause
ought to move a Chrystyan manne, and the tone of the twain is so v^rye a
chyldy she fantasye, that in a matter almost of three Chyppes: but if it were
in chance of fire, neither should move any manne as much as think thereof.

As for those other accidents of hard handling therein, so mad am I not, to
say they be no gryefe, but I say that our fear may ymagyne them, much
grea^er grief than they be.

And I say that such as they be, many a man endures them, yea, and many
a woman too, that after fare full well. And than would I wit what
determinacion we take, whyther for our Saviors sake to suffer some pain in
our bodies (sithe he suffered in his blessed body so great pain for us) or
else to give him warning and be at a point rather v^terlye to forsake him,
than suffer any pain at al. He that comes in this mind unto this latter
point (from which kind of unkindness, God keep every manne, coumforte he
none needs, for he will fly the need: and counsel I fear avayleth him
little, if grace be so far gone from him.

But on the the other side, if rather than forsake our Sauyoure we determyne
our self to suffer any pain at all: I can not than see, that the fear of
hard handlyng should any thing ^^ycke with us, and make us so to shrynke,
as we rather would forsake his faith, than to suffer for his sake so much as
impryesonmente, sithe the handlyng is neither such in pryeson, but that many in
many years, and many weomen to leave therewyth, and sustain it, and
afterward yet fare full well. And yet that it may well fortune that beesyde
the very bare ympryesonmente, there shall happen us no hard handelynge at
all, nor that same happelye but for a short while neither, and yet be^yde al
this peradventure not at all. And specyallye sithe which of all these ways
shall be taken with us, lies all in his will: for whom we be content to
take it, and which for that mind of ours favors us, and will suffer no man to put more pain unto us, than he well wotteth we shall be well able to
bear. For he will give the strength ^here to him self as you have heard his
promise already by the mouth of Saint Paul. Fidelis deus qui non
patiturvos tentari supra id quod potestis far fed dat etiam ^um t^tacione
prouentum. God is faithful, which suffers you not to be tempted above that
you may bear, but gives also with the temptacion a way out. But now if we
have not lost our faith already before we come to forsake it for fear: we
know very well by our fayth^ that by the forsaking of our faith, we fall into
the state to be cast into the prieson of hell, and that can we not tell how
soon: but as it may be that God will suffer us to live a while here upon earth,
so may it be that he will throw us into the dongeon beneath, before the time
that the Turk shall once ask us the question. And therefore if we fear
impriesonmentes so sore, we be much more than mad, if we fear not most the
more sore: for out of that prieson shall no man never geat. And in this other
shall no man abide but a while. In prieson was Joseph, while his brethren were
at large, and yet after were his brethren feign to seek upon him for bread. In
prieson was Daniel, and the wild Lions about him: and yet even there God
kept him harmless, and brought him safe out again. If we think that he will
not do the likewise for us, let us not doubt but he will do for us, either
the like, or better. For better may he do for us, if he suffer us there to
dye. Saint John the Baptist was you wot well in prieson, while Herod and
Herodias sat full merry at the feast, and the daughter of Herodias delyted
them with her daunsing, till with her daunsyng she daunsed of Saint John's head.
And now sits he with great feast in heaven at Gods boarde, while Herod and
Herodias full heauely sit in hell burning both twain. And to make them sport
withal the devil with the damsel daunse in the fire before the^. Finally Cosyn
to finishe this piece with, our Savior was him self taken prisoner for our
sake, and prisoner was he carried, and prisoner was he kept, and prisoner was
he brought forth before Annas. And prisoner from Annas carried unto Caiphas.
Than prisoner was he carried from Caiphas unto Pilate: and prisoner was he sent
from Pilate to king Herod: prisoner from Herod unto Pilate again. And so
kept as prisoner to the end of his passion. The time of his imprisonment I
grant well was not long, but as for hard handling (which our hertes most
abhor) he had as much in that short while as many me^ among the^ al in much
longer time. And surely than, if we consider of what estate he was, and
therewith that he was prisoner in such wise for our sake, we shall I trow
(but if we be worse then wretched beasts (never so shamefully play the unkind
cowardes, as for fear of imprisonmente sinnefully to forsake him, nor so
foolish neither, as by forsakynge of him, to give him the occasion again to
forsake us, and with the auoydyng of an easyer prison, fall into a worse. And
instead of a prison that cannot keep us long, fall into that prison, out of
which we can never come, where the short prisonment would win us
everlasting liberty.


The.xxi. Chapter. The fear of shameful and paynefull death.
Vincent. FOrsothe uncle (our Lord reward you therefore) if we feared not
farther beeside ymprisonmente, that terryble dart of shameful and paynefull
death: as for ymprysonmente I would verelye trust, that remembering those
things which I have here heard of you, rather than I should forsake the
faith of our Savior, I would with help of grace never shrynke thereat. But
now are we come uncle with much work at the last, unto the last and
vttermoste point, of the dread that makes, incursum and demonium meridianum.
This incursyon of this mydde day devil, this open inuasyon of the Turk, and
his persecucion against the faith, seem so terrible unto men's minds, that
although the respect of GOD vanquisheth all the remnaunte of the troubles
that we have hitherto perused as loss of goods, lands and liberty, yet when
we remember the terroure of shameful and paynefull death, that point so
sodaynelye puts us in obliuyon of all that should be our coumforte, that
we feel (all me^ne I fear me for the most part) the feruouce of our faith
wax so cold, and our hearts so fainte, that we find our self at the
point to fall even there fro for fear.


Anthony. To this I say not nay Cousin, but that in deed in this point is ye
sore pynche. And yet you se for all this, that even this point too, takes
increase or minishme^t of dread after the difference of the affeccions that are
before fixed and rooted in the mind so far forth that you see some man set
so much by his worldly substance, that he less fears the loss of his
life, than the loss of lands: yea some manne shall you see that abyde^h
d^adlye tormente, and such as some other had rather dye then endure, rather
than he would bring out the money that he has hid. And I doubt not but
you have heard of many by right ante^tiue stories, that (some for one cause,
some for other) have not let wyllinglye to suffer death, diverse in diverse
kinds: and some both with dyspightful rebuke and painful tormente too. And
therefore as I say, we may see that the affeccion of the mind toward the
increase or decrease of the dread, makes much of the matter. Now are the
affeccions of men's minds imprinted by diverse means: One way, by the bodily
senses moved by such things pleasant or dyspleasant, as are outwardly through
sencible worldly things offered and abiected unto them. And this manner of
receyuyng the impressyon of affeccions, is common unto men and beasts.
Another manner of receiving affeccions, is by the mean of reason, which both
ordinately tempereth those affeccions, that the bodily.v. wits imprint and
also dysposeth a man many times to some spiritual virtues, very contrary to
those affeccions that are fleshly and se^sual. And those reasonable
disposicions been affeccions spiritual and proper to the nature of man, and
above the nature of beasts. Now as our gostly enemy the devil enforces
himself to make us lean to the sensual affeccions and beastly: so does
almightye God of his goodness by his holy spirit inspire us good mocions, with
aid and help of his grace toward the the other affeccions spiritual, and by
soondrye means instructs our reason to lean unto them, and not only to
receive them as engendered and planted in our soul, but also in such wise
water them with wise advertisement of godly counsel and continual prayer,
that they may be habitually radycate, and surely take deep root therein, and
after as the tone kind of affeccion or the the other bears the strength in our
heart, so be we stronger or febler against the terror of death in this cause.
And therefore will we Cousin, assaye to consider what things there are for
which we have cause in reason^ to master that affeccion fearful and sensuall^
and though we cannot clean avoid it and put it away^ yet in such wise to
bridle it at the leaste^ that it ^un^^ not out so far, like ^n head strong
horse^ that spite of our ^eeth it carye us out unto the devil. Let us
therefore now consider and way well this thing, that we dread ^o sore, that is
to wit, shameful and painful death.


The.xxii. Chapter. Of death considered by himself alone as a bare leaving of
this life only.
ANd first I perceive well by these two things, that you join unto death,
that is to wit, shameful and painful. You would esteem death so much the
less if he should come alone without either shame or pain.

Vincent. Without doubt uncle, a great deal the less, but yet though he
should come without the^ ^oth by himself, whatsoever I would, I wete well many
a man would be for all that, very loath to dye.


Antony. That I believe well Cousin, and the more pity it is, for that affeccion
happeth in very few, but that either the cause is lack of faith^ lack of
hope, or finally lack of wit. They that believe not the life to come after
this, and we^ne themself here in wealth are loath to leave this, for than they
think they lose all, and thereof comes the manifold foolish unfaithful
words, which are^ so rise in over many men's mouths this world we know and
the other we know not, and that some say in sport, and thinke^ in earnest, the
devil is not so black as he is painted, and let him be as black as he will, he
is no blacker than a crow, with many such other foolish fantasies of the same
sort: some that believe well enough, yet through the leudenes of living fall out of
good hope of salvation, and tha^ though they be loath to dye, I very little
marvel howbeit some that purpose to mend, and would feign have some time left
the longer to bestow some what better, may peradventure be loath to die also
by and by: and that manner lothenesse (albeit a very good will gladlye to die,
and to be with god) were in mi mind so thankful that it were well able to
purchase as full remission both of sin and pain, as peradventure he were like,
if he lived to purchase in many years penance, yet will I not say, but that
such kind of lothenes to die, may be before god alowable. Some are there
also, yt are loath to die, that are yet very glad to dye, and long for to be
dead.


Vincent. That were uncle a very strange case


Antony. The case I fear me Cousin falls not often, but yet sometime it
does, as where there is any man of that good mind that. S. Paul was, which
for the longing that he had to be with god, would feign have been dead, but
for the profit of other folk, was content to live here in pain, and differ
and forbear for ye while his inestimable bliss in heaven. Cupio dissolui and
esse cum christo bonum autem mihi manner propter vos but of all these kinds of
folks Cousin, that are loath to dye, (except the first kind only that lacks
faith) there is I suppose none, but that except the fear of shame, or sharp
pain joined unto death, should be the let, would else for the bare respect of
death alone, let to depart hence with good will in this case of faith, well
witting by his faith, that his death taken for ye faith, should cleanse him
clean of al his sins, and send him straight to heaven. And some of those,
(namely the last kind) are such, that shame and pain both joined unto death,
were unlikely to make them loath death or fear death so sore, but that they
would suffer death in this case wi^h good will, since they know well that the
refusing of ye faith for any cause in this world (were the cause never so good
in sight) should yet sever them from god: wi^h who^ (save for other folks
profit) they so feign would be. And charity can it not b^ (for the profit of
the whole world), deadly to displease him that made it. Some are there I say
also, that are loath to dye, for lack of wit, which albeit that they bel^ue
the world that is to come, and hope also to come thither yet they love so
mu^he the wealth of this world, and such things as delight them therein, that
they would feign keep them as long as ever they might, even with tooth and
nail.

And when they may be suffered in no wise to keep it no lenger^ but that death
takes them ^heref^o: than if it may be no better, they will agree to be (as
soon as they be hence) hawsed up into heaven, and be with GOD by and by.
These folk and as very nedyote fools, as he that had kept from his
chyldehodde a bag full of chery s^ones, and cas^e such a fantasye thereto,
that he would not go from it, for a bygger bag filled full of gold. These
folks fare Cosin^ as Esope telle^h in a fable that the snayle did: for when
Jupiter (whom the Poets feign for the great God) invited all the poor worms
of thea^th unto a great solemn feast, that it pleased him (I have forgotten
upon what occasion) upon a time to prepare for them, the snaile kept her at
home, and would not come thereat. And when Jupiter asked her after wher^ore she
came not at his feast, where he said she should have been welcome and have
faren well, and should have seen a goodly palace, and been delighted with many
goodly pleasures: she answered him, that she lo^ed no place so well as her own
house. With which answer I^piter waxed so angry, that he said, since ^he
loves her house so well, she should never after go from home, but should
always bear her house upon her back wheresoever she wen^e. And so has she
done ever since as they say, and at the leastwise I wot well she doe^h so
now, and has done as long time as I can remember.


Vincent. Forsooth uncle I would wene the tale were not all feigned? For I think
verily that so much of your tale is true.


Antony. Esope meyn^e by that fained fable to touch ^he folly of such folk,
as so set their fantasye upon some ^male simple pleasure, that they cannot
find in their hear^es to forbear it, neither for the pleasure of a better
man, nor for the gaining of a better thing: by which their fond froward
fashion, they sometime fall in great indignacion, and take thereby no little
harm. And surely such Christen folk, as by their foolish a^fe^cio^, which
they have set like y^ snaile upon their own house here this earth cannot for y^
lothenes of leuing that house find in their heart with their good will, to go
to ye great feast yt god prepares in heaven, and of his goodness so gentely
calls the^ to. Be like I fear me (but if they mende that mind in time) to be
served as the snayle was, and yet much worse to, for they be like to have their
house here, y^ earth, bound fast upon their ba^kes for ever, and not walk
therewith where they will as the snaile ^^epeth about with hers, but lie fast
bound in the mids with the foul fire of hell about them: for into this folly
they bring themself by their own fault, as the dro^ken man brings him self
in^o drunkenness whereby the evil that he does in his drunkenness is not
forgeuen him for his folly, but to his pain imputed to his fault.


Vincent. Sur^ly uncle this seems not unlikely, and by their fault they fall
to such folly in deed. And yet if this be folly in deed, there are than some
folk fools that wene them self right wise.


Anthony. That wene themself wise? mary I never saw fool yet^ that thought
himself other than wise. For as it is, one spark of sobernes left in a
dronken head, when he perceyueth himself drunk, and geatteth him fair to bed:
so if a fool perceive himself a fool, that point is no folly but a little
spark of wit. But now Cousin, as for those kind of fools, since they be loath
to dye for the love that they bear to their worldly fantasyes, which they
should by their death leave b^hind them and forsake: they that would for that
cause rather forsake the faith than die, would rather forsake it than sell their
worldly goods, though there were offered the^ no perel of death at al. And
tha^ as touching those that are of that mind, we have you wot well, said as
much as your self thought sufficient this after none here before.


Vincent. Ue^ely that is uncle very true, and now have you rehearsed as far
as I can remember, al ye other kinds of them that would be lo^h to die for any
other respect than the grievous qualities of shame and pain joined unto death:
and of all those kinds except the kind of infidelity whom no comfort can
help, but counsel only to thatteining of faith, which faith must be to the
receiving of comfort presupposed and had ready before, as you showed in the
beginning of our communicacio^ the first day that we talked of the matter. But
else I say, except that one kind, there is none of the remnaunt of those that
were before untouched which were lykely to forsake their faith, in this
persecucion for the fear and dread of ^eath, save for those grievous qualities
(pain I mean and shame) that they see well would come therewith. And therefore
uncle I pray you give us some comfort against those twain. For in good faith,
if death should come without them in such a case as this is, whereby the lesing
of this life, we should find a far better mine own reason gives ^e: that
save for the other griefs going before, the ^haunge, there would no man yt
wit has, any thing stick at al.


Antony. Yes peradventure suddenly before they gather their wits unto them
and therewith well way the matter, but they Cousin that will considre the matter
well reason grounded upon the foundacio^ of faith, shall show them very great
sub^tancial causes for which the dread of those grievous qualities that they
see shall come with death (shame I mean and pain also) shall not so sore abashe
them as sinfully to drive them therfro: for the proof whereof let us first
begin at the considera^ion of the shame.


The.xxiii. Chapter. Of the shame that i^ joined with the death in the
persecucion for the faith,
How can any faithful wise man d^eade that death so sore for any respect of
shame, wha^ his reason and his faith together may shortly make him p^^c^^ue, yt
there is therein no pe^e of very shame at al. For how can that death be shameful
that is glorious? or how can it be but glorious to dye for the faith of Christ
(if we dye both for the faith and in the faith joined with hope and charity)
while the Scripture ^o plainly ^ayeth: pre^iosa in conspectu domini mors
sanctoru^ eiu^ precious is in ye sight of god, the death of his saintes^ ^ow if
the death of his Saints be glorious in ye sight of god, it can n^uer be
sham^full in very d^de, how shameful so ever it seem here in the sight of
men for here we may see and be sure that not at the death of Saint Stephin
only (to whom it lyked him to show himself with the heaven open over his head)
but at the death also of every man that so dies for the faith, god with his
heavenly company, beholds his whole passion and verily looks on. Now if it
so were Cousin, that you should be brought through the broad hie street of a
great long City and that all a long the way that you were going there were
on the tone side of ye way a rabble of ragged beggars, and mad men that would
despise you, and disprayse you with all ye shameful names that they could call
you, and all the villainous words that they could say to you: and that there
were than al a long the other side of the same street, where you should come by
a goodly company standing in a fair raunge a row, of wise and worshipful
folk, allowing you and commending you mo than.xv. times, as many as that
rabble ragged beggars and railing mad men are. Would you let your way by your
will, wening that you went unto your shame for the shameful iestyng and
railing of those mad foolish wretches, or hold on your way with a good
chere and a glad heart^ thynkyng your self much honored by the laud and
approbacion of that other honorable sort.

Vincent. Nay by my truth uncle, there is no doubt, but I would much
regard the commendacion of those commendable folk, and not regard of a rishe
y^ railing of all these ribauldes.


Anthony. Than Cousin can there no man that has faith, account himself shamed
here by any manner death that he suffers for the faith of Christ, while how
vile and how shameful soever it seem in the syghte here of a few worldly
wretches, it is allowed and approved for very precious and honorable in the
sight of god, and all the glorious company of heaven, which as perfectly
stand and behold it as these peuishe people do, and are in number more than an
hundred to one: and of that hundred every one an hundredth times more to be
regarded and esteemed than of the the other, and hundred such whole rabbles. And
now if a man would be so mad as for fear of ye rebuke that he should have of
such rebuke full beasts, he would be ashamed to confess the faith of Christ,
than with fleing from a shadow of shame he should fall into a very shame and a
deadly painful shame in deed: for than has our Savior made a sure promise
that he will show himself ashamed of that man before the father of heaven and
al his holy angels, saying in ye.ix. Chapter of. S. Luke. Qui me erubuerit and
meo sermones huncfilius homini^ erubesset quum venerit i^ maiestate sua and
patris and sanctorum angelo^um. He that is ashamed of me and my words, of him
shall the son of man be ashamed when he shall come in the majesty of himself
and of his father, and of the holy Angels. And what manner a shameful shame
shall that be than, if a man's chekes glowe some time for shame in this
world? they will fall on fire for shame when Christ shall show himself
ashamed of them there, to suffer the thing for Christ's faith that we worldly
wretched fools wene were villainy and shame, the blessed Apostles reckened for
great glory. For they when they were with dispite and shame scourged, and
thereupon commanded to speak no more of the name of Christ, went their way
fro the counsel, joyful and glad that god had vouchesafed to do them the
worship to suffer shameful dispite for the name of Jesus, and so proud were
they of that shame, and vilanous pain put unto them, that for all the
forbidding of that great counsel assembled, they ceased not eueri day to
preach out the name of Jesus still, not in the temple only out of which they
were fet and whipped for the same before, but also to double it with, went
preaching that name about from house to house to. I would, since we regard so
greatly thestimacion of worldly folks, we would among many noughtie things
that they use, regard also some such as are good: for it is a manner among the^
in many places, yt some by handy craft, some by merchandise, some by other
kind of liuyng^ arise and come forward in ye world, and commonly folk are
inowe set forth to convenient masters under who^ they be brought up and grow:
but whenever now they find a servant such as disdaineth to do such
things as he that is his master did while he was servant himself, that
servant every man accompteth for a proud unthrift, never like to come to
good proof. Let us so mark and consider this, and way well therwithal, that
our master Christ, not the master only, but the maker of all this whole
world, was not so proud to disdain for our sakes the most villainous and
most shameful death after the worldly account that then was used (...) the
world, and the most dispightefull mockyng therewith joined to most grievous
pain, as crownyng him with sharp thorn, that the blood ran down about his
face: than they gave him a read in his hand for a septre and kneled down to
him, and saluted him like a king in scorn, and bet then the read upon the
sharp thorns about his holy head, now says our savior that the disciple or
ye servant is not above his master, and therefore since our master endured so
many kinds of paynfull shame^ very proud beasts may we w^ll think our
self if we disdain to do as our master did. And whereas he through shame
ascended in to glory, we would be so mad that we rather will fall into
everlasting shame, both before heaven and hell, than for fear of a short
worldly shame to follow him unto everlasting glory.


The.xxiiii. Chapter. Of paynful death to be suffered in the Turks persecucion
^or the faith.
Vincent. IN good faith uncle as for the shame, ye shall need to take no more
pain, for I suppose surely that any man that has reason in his head shall
hold himself satisfied with this: but of truth uncle, all the pinche is in
the pain: For as for shame, I perceive well now a man may with wisdom so master
it, that it shall no thing move him at all, so far forth that it is almost in
every country become a comen proverb, that shame is as it is taken but by god
uncle, all the wisdom in this world can never ^o master pain but that pain
will be paynfull spite of all the wit in this world.


Antony. Troth is it Cousin that no man can with all the reason he has in such
wise change the nature of pain, that in the having of pain, he feel it not,
for but if it ^e felt, it is perdy no pain, and that is the natural cause
Cousin, for which a man may have his leg stricken of by the knee and grieve him
not, if his head be of but half an hour before: But reason may make a
reasonable man (though he would not be so foolyshe as causeles to fall therein)
yet upon good causes, either of gayning some kinds of great profyt, or
auoydyng some kind of great loss, or eschewing thereby the suffering of far
great pain, not to shrynke therfro, and refuse it to his more hurt and harm,
but for his far greater advantage and commodity content and glad to
sustai^e it, and this does reason alone in many casis where it has much less
help to take hold of the^ it has in this matter of faith. For well you wot,
to take a sour and a bitter pocion is great grief and displeasure, and to be
launced and to have ^he flesh cut is no little pain: now when such things
shall be ministered unto a child, or to ^ome childishe man either, they will by
their own wills rather let their sickness or their sore grow on to their more
grief, til it be come incurable than abide the pain of the curing in time, and
that for faint heart joined with lack of discrecion. But a man that has more
wisdom though he would without cause, no more abide the ^ayne wyllyngly than
would the other, yet ^ith reason shows him what good he shall have by the
sufferyng and what harm by the refusing, this makes him well content, and glad
also to take it. Now the^ if reason alone, be sufficient to move a man to take
pain for the gaining of some worldly rest or pleasure, and for ye avoiding of
another pain, though perad^enture more, yet i^durable but for a short season.
Why should not reason grounded upon the sure foundation of faith, and helped
also forward with aid of Gods grace (as it is ever ready undoubtedly when
folk for a good mind in Gods name common together thereon our Savior saying
himself: Vbi sunt duo vel tres congregati in nomine meo, ibi and ego sum in
medio-eorum^ where there are two or three gathered together in my name there am
I also eue^ in ye very mids of them:) why should not tha^ reason I say, thus
forthered with faith and grace, be much more able to engendre in us first such an
affeccion, and after by long and deep meditacion thereof, so to continue yt
affeccio^, yt it shall turn into an habitual fast and deep rooted purpose of
pacie^t suffering the painful death of this body here in earth for yt gayning
of everlasting welthy life in heaven, and avoiding of everlasting painful
death in hell.


Vincent. By my truth uncle, word^s can I none find yt should have any reason
with the^ (faith al way presupposed as you protested in the beginning for a
ground) words I say can I none find wherewith I might reasonably counterpleade
this that you have said here alreadi. But yet I remember yt fable ye E^ope
tells of a great old heart that had fled from a little bitche which had made
suit after him, and chased him ^o long that she had lost him and as he hoped
m^re tha^ half given him over, by occasion whereof having tha^ some time to
talk and meting with an other of his fellows, he fell in deliberacio^ with him
what were best for him to do, whith^r to ru^ne on still and fly farther from
her, or turn again and fight with her: whereunto the other heart advised him to
fly no farther, lest yt bitche might hap to find him again at such time as he
should with ye labor of his farther flying be falen out of breath and thereby al
out of ^^re^gth to, and so should he be killed lying where he could not stire
him, where as if he would turn and fight, he were in ^o ^erell at al. For the
man with whom she hunteth, is more ^hen a mile behind her, and she is but a
little body scant half so m^che as thou, and thy horns may thruste her through
before she c^n touch thy flesh, be ^ore then.x^ times her to the length: now
but by my truth quod the other harte^ I like your counsel well, and me think
yt the thing is eu^n ^othely such as you say: but I fear me when I here once
that ^rchin bitche bark, I shall ^al to my fe^te and forgeat altogether. But
yet and you will go back with me, tha^ me think, we shall be strong enough
against that one bitche, between us both, where unto the other heart agreed, and
so they both appointed them thereupon. Here it must be known of some man that
can skill of hunting, whither that we mistake not ^ure terms, for than are we
utterly shamed ye wot well, and I am so conning that I cannot tell whither
among them, a bitche be a bitche or no, bat as I remember she is no bitche, but
^ brach^, this is an high point in a low house: beware of barkyng, for there
lacks an other hun^ing term, at a fox it is called crying, I wot not what
they call it at an heart, but it shall make no matter of a far. But eue^ as
they were about to buske the^ forward to it, the bitche had found the foot
again, and on she came yerning toward ye place, whom as soon as the hearts
heard^ they to go both twayn a pace: and in good faith uncle even so I fear
me^ it would fare by my self and many other too, which though we think it
reason that you say, and in our minds agree that we should do as you say,
yea and do paraduenture think also that we would in deed do as you say: yet
as soon as we should once he^^ these hell hounds, these Turks come yelpyng
and bauling upon us our hearts should soon fall as clean from us, as those
other hearts fly from the hounds.


Antony. Cousin, in those days that Esope speaks of, though those hearts and
other brute beasts mo, had (if he say soth) the power to speak and talk,
and in their talking, power to talk reason to: yet to follow reason, and rule
themself thereby, thereto had they never given them the power. And in good
faith Cousin, as for such things as pertayne toward the conducting of
reasonable men to salvation, I think without help of grace, men's reasoning
shall do little more. But ^han are we sure as I said before, that as for grace,
if we desire it, God is at such reasonyng always present, and very ready to
give it: and but if that men will afterward willingly cast it away, he is
ever still as ready to keep it, and from time to time glad to increase it, and
therefore byddeth us our Lord by the mouth of the Prophet, that we should
not be like such brutyshe and unreasonable beasts, as were those hearts and as
are horses and mules. Nolite fieri sicut equus and mulus in quibus non est
intellectus. Be not you like an horse and a mule that has no understanding:
and therefore Cousin let us never dread, but that if we will apply our minds
to the gathering of comfort and courage against such persecucio^s and hear
reason, and let it sink into our heart and cast it not out again, nor even
there choke it up and stifle it with pampering in and stuffing up our stomakes
with a surfite of worldly vanities, god shall so well work there with that
we shall find great strength therein, and not in such wise have all such
shameful cowardous hearts, as to forsake our Savior and thereby lose our
own salvation, and run into eternal fire for fear of death, joined
therewith, though bitter and sharp, yet short for all that and in a manner a
momentary pain.


Vincent. Every man uncle naturally grudgeth at pain and is very loath to come
to it.


Antony. That is very truth, nor no man bids any man to go run into it,
but that if he be taken, and may not flee, than we say that reason plainly
tells us that we should rather suffer and endure the less and the shorter
here, than in hell the sorer and so far the longer to.


Vincent. I heard uncle of late where such a reason was made as you make me
now, which reason seems undoubted and inevitable unto me: yet heard I late as I
say a man answer it thus: he said, that if a man in this persecucion should
stand still in the confession of his faith, and thereby fall into paynfull
tormentory, he might peradventure hap for the sharpenes and bitterness of the
pain to forsake our Savior even in the mids, and die there with his
sin, and so be damned for ever, whereas by the forsaking of the faith in the
beginning by time, and for the time, and yet not but in word neither keeping
it still never the less in his heart a man may save himself from that
paynful death, and after ask mercy and have it, and live long, and do many
good deeds and be saved as. S. Peter was.


Anthony. That man's reason Cousin, is like a three foted stole so tottering on
every side, that whosoever sit thereon, may soon take a foul fall: for these
are the three feet of this totteryng stole: fantastical fear, false faith,
false flatteryng hope.

First this is a fantastical fear, that the man conceiue^h that it should be
perilous to stand in the confession of the faith at the beginning, lest he
might afterward through the bitterness of pain, fall to the forsaking, and so
dye there in the pain, therewith ^ute of hand, and thereby be utterly damned,
as though that if a man by pain were overcome, and so forsook his faith, god
could not or would not, as well give him grace to repent again, and thereupon
give him forgeuenes, as him that forsook his faith in the beginning, and dy^
set so little by him that he would rather forsake him, tha^ suffer for his
sake, any manner pain at al, as though the more pain that a man takes for
gods sake, the worse would god be to him. If this reason were not
unreasonable tha^ should our Savior not have sai^ as he did. Nolite timere eos
qui corpus possunt occidere, and vlterius non habent quod faciunt. Fear not
the^ yt may kill the bodi and after yt have nothing yt they can do farther: for
he should by this reason have said, dread and fear them that may slaye the
body for they may by the tormente of paineful death (but if thou forsake me be
times in the beginning and so save thy life, and geat of me thy pardon and
forgiveness after) make thee peradventure forsake me to late, and so be damned
for ever. The second foot of this tottering stole^ is a false faith, for it is
but a feigned faith for a man to say to god secretly, that he believes him,
trusts him, and loves him, and the^ openly where he should to Gods honor
tell the same tale and thereby prove that he does so: there to gods dishonor
as much (as in him is) does he ^^atter gods enemies and do them pleasure and
worldly worship, with the forsaking of gods faith before ye world, and is
either faithles in his heart to^ or else wo^teth well y^ he does God this dispite,
even before his own face: for (except he lack faith) he can not but know
that our Lord is every where present: and while he so shamefullye forsake
him, full angrely looks on. The third foot of this totteryng stool, is
false flattering hope. For ^i^h the thing yt he does when he forsakes his
faith for fear, is by the mouth of god (upon ye pain of eternal death)
forbodden, though ye goodness of god forgeueth many folk ye fault, yet to be
the boulder in offending for the hope of forgeuing, is a very false pestilente
hope, wherewith a man flattereth him self toward his own destruccio^. He that
in a sudden brayde for fear, or other affeccio^ unadvisedly falls, and
after in laboring to rise again comforts the^ self with hope of gods gracious
forgeuenes, walks in y^ ready way toward his salvation. But he that with ye
hope of gods mercy to follow does encourage him self to sin and therewith
offends god, first I have no power to shut the hand of god fro giving out his
pardon where he lust, ^or would if I could, but rather help to pray
therefore. But yet I very sore fear yt such a man may miss the grace to
requier it in such effectual wise, as to have it granted: nor I can not
suddenly now remember any sample or promise expressed in holy scripture, that
the offender in such a kind shall have the grace offered in such wise to seek
for pardon, that god has (by his other promises of remission promised to the
penite^tes, bound him self to grant it. But this kind of presumpcion under
pretexte of ho^e, seems rather to draw nere on ye tone ^ide, as despair does
on ye the other side, toward ye abominable sin of plasphemie against the holy
ghost. Against which sin concernig either thimpossibilitie or at the least,
great difficulty of forgeuenes, our Savior has showed him self in the xii.
Chapter of. S. Mathewe, and in ye third of. S. Mark where he says, that
blasphemy against ye holy ghost, shall never be forgeuen, neither in this
world nor in the world to come. And where the man that you spoke of, took in
his reason a sample of Saint Peter: which forsook our sa^iour, and gate
forgeuenes after. Let him consider again on ye the other side, yt he forsook him
not upon the boldenes of any such sinful trust, but was overcome and
vanquished upon, a sudden fear: and yet by the forsaking, S^ Peter wanne but
little. For he did but delay his trouble for a little while you wot well. For
beside yt, he repented forthwith very sore, yt he so had done, and wept
therefore by and by full bitterly. He came forth at the whitsontyde ensewing,
and confessed his master again, and sone after that he was imprisoned
therefore, and not ceasing so, was thereupon sore scourged for the confession of
his faith, and yet after ye imprisoned again a fresh, and being from thence
delivered, stinted not to preach on still, until yt after manyfold labors,
travails and troubles, he was at Room crucified, and with cruel torment,
slain. And in likewise I ween I might in a manner well warraunt that there
shall no man (which denies our savior once, and after a^taineth remission)
escape through that denying, one penny the better cheap, but that he shall ere he
come in heaven, full suerly pay therefore.


Vincent. He shall peradventure work it out afterward Uncle in the fruitful
works of penance, prayer and almose deed done in true faith, and dew
charity, and attain in such wise forgeuenes well inoughe.


Antony. All his forgeuenes goes Cousin you se well but by perhaps: but as it
may be perhaps ye, so may it be perhaps nay. And where is he than? and
you wot well yet by no manner hap, he shall never hap finally to escape fro
death, for fear of which he forsook his faith.


Vincent. No, but he may dye his natural death, and escape that violent death,
and than he saves him self from much pain, and so wins therewith much
ease, for evermore a v^olent death is painful.


Anthony. Peradventure he shall not avoid a violent death thereby, for god is
without doubt displeased, and can bring him shortly to a death as violent by
some other way: how be it, I see well that you reckon, that whosoever dies a
natural death, dies like a wanton even al at his case. You make me remember a
man yt was once in a galley subtle with us on the sea, which while the sea was
sore wrought, and the waves rose very high, and he came never on the sea before,
and lay tossed hither and thither^ y^ pore soul groned sore, and for pain he
thought he would very feign be dead, and ever he wished would god I were on
land yt I might die in rest: the waves so troubled him there, with tossing him up
and down to and fro, yt he thought y^ trouble let him to dye, because the
waves would not let him rest: but if he might geatte once to land he though he
should tha^ dye there eue^, at his ease.


Vincent. Nay Uncle, this is no doubt but that death is to every man painful:
but yet is not the natural death so painful as the violent.


Anthony. By my troth Cousin me thinks yt the death which men call commonly
natural, is a violent death to every man whom it fetche^h hence by force
against his will, and that is every man which when he dies, is loath to die, and
feign would yet live longer if he might. How be it, how small the pain is
in the natural death Cousin, feign would I wit who has told you. As far
as I can perceive, those folk ye commonly depart of their natural death, have
ever one disease and sickness or other, whereof if y^ pain of ye whole weke or
twain in which they lie pining in their bed, were gathered together in so
short a time, as a man has his pain yt dies a violent death: it would I wene
make double ye pain yt it is, so yt he y^ naturally dies, ofter suffers
more pain than less, though he suffer it in a longer time. And tha^ would
many a man be more loath to suffer so long lingering in pain, tha^ with a
sharper to be sooner rid. And yet lies many a man more days tha^ one in welnere
as great pain continually, as is ye pain that with the violent death riddeth
y^ man in less tha^ half an hour, except a man would wene, yt where as ye
pain is great, to have a knife cut his flesh in the out side fro the skin
inward, y^ pain would be much less, if ye knife might on the inside begin,
and cut fr^ ye mids outward. Some we hear in their death beds complain
yt they think they feel sharp knifes cut a two their heart stringes. And
some cry out and think they feel within the brain pan, their head pricked
even full of pinnes. And they that lie in a pleuresie think at every time that
they coughe, they feel a sharp sword swappe them to the heart.


The.xxv. Chapter. The co^sideracion of the pain^ of hell, in which we fall
if we forsake our sauiour^ may make us set all the painful death of this
world at right naught.
HOwebeit, what should we need to make any such co^pariso^ between the
natural death and the violent. For the matter y^ we be in hand with here, may put
it ^ut of doubt, that he which for fear of the violent death, forsakes the
faith of Christ, puts him self in ye perel to find his natural death more
paineful, a thousand times. For his natural death, has his everlasting pain
so sodeinly knyt unto it, that there is not one moment of an hour between, but
the end of the tone is the beginning of the the other, that after shall never
have end. And therefore was it not without great cause that Christ gave us so
good warning before, when he said as, S. Luke in the.xii. chapit^r reherseth.
Dico ^obis amicis meis ne terreamini ab iis qui occidunt corpus and post hac
non habent amplius quod faciant, Ostendam autem vobis quem ^imeatis, Timete eum
qui postquam occiderit habet potestatem mittere in ge^ennam, Ita dico vobis
hunc timete^ I say to you yt are my fre^des, be not afraid of them that kill the
body, and which when that is done are able to do no more. But I shall show you
whom you shall fear: Fear him that, which when he has killed, has in his
power farther to cast him whom he kills, into everlasting fire. So I say to
you, be af^ayd of him. God means not here that we should nothing dread at al
any man yt can but kill y^ body, but he means yt we should not in such wise
dread any such, yt we should for dread of the^ displease him yt can
everlastingly kill both body and soul with a death ever dying, and yt shall yet
never dye. And therefore he adds and repeateth in the end againe^ the fear
that we should have of him, and says. Ita dico vobis hun^ timete, so I say to
you, fear him. Oh good god Cousin, if a man would well waygh these words and
let the^ sink as they should do, down deep into his heart, and often bethink
him self thereon, it would, I doubt not be able enough ^o make us set at naught
al ye great Turks threats and esteem him not at a straw, but well content to
endure all the pain that all the world could put upon us (for so short while as
all they were able to make us dwell therein) rather than by the shrinking from
those pains (though never so sharp, yet but short (to cast our self into the
pain of hell, an hundredth thousand times more intolerable, and whereof there
shall never come an end. A woeful death is that death, in which folk shall
evermore be dying, and never can once be dead, whereof the scripture says.
Vocabunt mortem and mors fugiet ab eis. They shall call and cry for death and
death shall fly from the^. O good lord, if one of the^ were now put in ye
choice of ye both, they would rather suffer the whole year together the most
terrible death that all the Turks in Turkeye could devise, tha^ y^ death yt
they lie in for y^ space of half an hour. In how wreched folly fall tha^ these
faithless or feeble faithed folk, yt to avoid ye pain so far the less and
so short, fall in the stead thereof into pain a thousand thousand times more
horrible, and of which terrible torment, they be sure they shall never have end.
This matter Cousin lacks as I believe but either full faith or sufficient
minding. For I think on my faith if we have the grace verily to believe it, and
often to think well thereon, the fear of all the Turks persecucio^ (with all
this midde day devil were able to make them do, in the forcing us to forsake
our faith) should never be able to turn us.

Vincent. By my troth Uncle, I think it is as you say, for sure if we would,
as often think on these pains of hell, as we be very loath to do and seek us
peuish pastimes of purpose to put such heavy things out of our thought this
one point alone were able enough to make I think many a martyr.


The.xxvi. Chapter. The consideracion of the Joys of heaven should mak^ us
for Christ's sake abide and endure any painful death,
Anthony. Forsooth Cousin, if we were such as we should be, I would scant for
very shame (in exhortacion to ye keeping of Christ's faith) speak of ye pains
of hell. I would rather put us in mind of the Joys of heaven, the pleasure
whereof we should be more glad to geat, than we should be to fly and escape all the pains in hell. But surely god in ye thing wherein he may seem most rigorous,
is merueilous merciful to us, and that is (which many me^ would little ween)
in yt he provided hell. For I suppose very surely Cosin^ y^ many a man and
woman, of whom there sit some now, and more shall hereafter sit full gloriously
crowned in heaven had they not first been afraid of hell, would toward heaven
never have set foot forward. But yet undoubtedly were it so yt we could as
well conceive in our hearts the m^rueilous Ioies of heaven, as we conceive ye
fearful pains of hell (howbeit sufficiently we can conceive neither another,
but if we could in our imaginacion draw as much toward ye perceiving of the
the other, we would not fail to be far more moved and stired to the suffering
for Christ's sake in this world, for ye wi^ning of those heavenly Ioies, tha^
for ye eschewing of al those infernal pains. But for as much, as ye fleshlye
pleasures be far less pleasant, tha^ the fleshly pains are painful,
therefore we fleshlye folk yt are so drowned in these fleshly pleasures, and in
the desire thereof, yt we can have almost no manner savor to taste in any
pleasure spiritual, have no cause to marvel, that our fleshlye affeccions be
more abated and refrained by ye dread and terror of hell than affeccions
spiritual imprynted in us, and pricked forward with the desire and joyful
hope of heaven: howebeit if we would somewhat set less by the filthy
volupteous appetites of ye flesh, and would by withdrawing from them, with
^elpe of prayer through the grace of god draw never to the secret inward
pleasure of the spirit, we should by the little sipping that our hearts
should have here now and that sudden taste thereof, have such an estimacion of
the incomparable and vncogitable Joy, that we shall have (if we will) in heaven,
by the very full draught thereof, whereof it is written Sa^^abor quu^ app^^uerit
gloria tua^ I shall be ^aciate, satisfied or fulfilled, when thy glory good lord
shall appear.) That is to wit, with the fruicion of the sight of gods
glorious majesty face to face, that the desire. expectacion, and heavenly hope
thereof, shall more encourage us, and make us strong to suffer and sustain for
the love of god and salvation of our soul, than ever we could be moved to
suffer here worldly pain by the terrible dread of all horrible pains that
damned wretches have in hell. Wherefore in ye mean time for lack of such
experimental taste as God gives here sometime to some of his special servants,
to thentent we may draw toward ye spritual exercise to for which spiritual
exercise, god with ye gift, as with an ear^est penny of their whole reward
after in heaven, comfort the^ here in earth. Let us not so much with looking
to have described what manner of Joys they shall be, as with hea^ing what our lord
tells us in holy scripture, ho^e merueilous great they shall be. Labor by
praie^ to conceive in our hearts such a feru^nt longing for them, that we may
for attaining to the^ utterly set at naught al fleshly delight, al worldly
pleasures, al earthly losses, al bodily torments and pain. Howebeit some
things are there in scripture, expressed of the mane^ of the pleasures and
Joys, that we shall have in heaven, as where, Fulgebunt iusti sicut sol, and
qui ^rudiunt ad iusticiam tanquam sci^^t^lle in arundin eto discurrent.
Righteous me^ shall shine as the sun, and shall run about like sparckles of
fire among reeds.

Now tell some carnal minded man of this manner pleasure, and he shall take
little pleasure therein, and say he cares not to have his flesh shine hye,
nor like a spark of fire to skippe about in the sky. Tell him that his bodi
shall be impassible, and never feel harm: ^^t if ^e think tha^ therewith that he
shall never be an hu^gred nor a thyrst, and shall thereby forbear al his pleasu^e
of eating and drinking, and that he shall never have lust to s^epe, and thereby
lose the pleasure that he was wont to take in slogging, and that men and women
shall there live together as Angels without any manner mind or mocion unto ye
carnal act of generation. And yt he shall thereby not use there his old filthy
volupteous fashion, he will fay he is better at ease already, and would not
give this world for that. For as^ S. Paul says. Animalis homo no^ percipit
e^ quesunt spiritus d^i stultica enim est illi: but when the time shall come
that these foul filthy pleasures shall be so taken from him, that it shall
abhor his heart once to think on the^ whereof every man ha^h among a
certain shadow of experience in the fervent grief of a sore paineful sickness
while the stomach can sca^te abide to look upon any meat. And as for y^ acts
of y^ the other ^oule filthi lust, is ready to vomit, if it happen him to
think thero^, when men shall I say after this life, feel that horrible
abhominacion in their heart, at the remembrance of these volupteous
pleasures: of which abhominacio^, sickness has been a shadow, for which
volupteous pleasures he would here be loath to change with the Joys of heaven
when he shall I say after this life have his fleshlye pleasures in
abhominacion, and shall of those heavenly Joys which he set here so little by,
have there a glymering, though far from a perfect sight. Oh good god, how
feign will he than be, with how good will and how glad will he than give this
whole world if it were his, to have the feling of some little part of those
Joys. And therefore let us all that can conceive now such delight in the
consideracion of the^ as we should have often in our yies by reading often, in
our ears by hearing often, in our mouths by rehersing often, in our hearts,
by meditacion and thinking upon those Joyful words of holy scripture, by
which we learn how wonderful houge and^ great those spi^itual heavenly
Joys are, of which our carnal hearts has so feeble and so faynte a feling and
our dull worldly wits so little able to conceive so much as a shadow of y^
right imaginacion, a shadow I say. For as for y^ thing as it is that ca^ not
only no fleshly carnal fantasy conceive, but over that no spiritual gostlye
person, peradventure neither that here is living still in this world.

For since the very substance essencial of all the celestial Joys stands in
blessed beholding of the glorious godhed face to face, there may no man
presume^ or look to attain it in this life. For God has so said him self: Non
videbit me homo and viuet. There shall no man here living behold me. And
therefore we may well know, that for the state of this life, we be not only
shut from the f^uicion of the bliss of heaven, but also that the very best man
living here upon earth (the best man I mean being no more but a man) can not I
ween attain the right imaginacion thereof, but those that are very verteo^s
are yet in a manner as far therfro, as the borne blind man fro the right
imaginacio^ of colors. The words that Saint Paul rehearses of the prophet
Esaias prophesying of Christ's incarnacio^, may proprely be verified of y^ Joys
of heaven, N^^ oculus vidit ^ec a^ris a^diuit n^cin cor hominis ascendit que
preparauit deus diligentibus se. For suerly for y^ state of this world y^ Joys
of heaven are by man's ears not audible, to man's mouth unspeakable, to
man's ears not audible, to man's heart vncogitable, so far forth excel
they all that ^uer me^ have heard of, all that ever me^ can speak of and al y^
ever any man can by natural possibility think on. And yet where the Joys of
heaven being such prepared for every saved soul, Our lord says yet by the
mouth of Saint Ihon that he will give his holy martyrs, that suffer for his
sake, many a special kind of joy: For he says, Vincenti dabo edere de ligno
vite. To him yt ouercommeth^ I shall give him to eat of the tree of life. And
also he that overcomes, shall be clothed in white clothes, and I shall
confess his name before my father and before his Aungelles. And also says:
fear none of those thinges^ that you shall suffer. etc. But be faithful unto
the death, and I shall give them the croune of life. He that ou^rcommeth shall
not be hurt. Of y^ second death, he says also. Vincenti da^o manna
absconditum and da^o illi calculum candidu^ and in calculo nomen nouum scriptu^
quod nemo scit nisi qui accip^t: To him that overcomes will I give manna
secret and hid. And I will give him a white suffrage, and in his suffrage a
new name written which no man knows but he y^ receives it. They v^ed of
old in Greece (where as Saint Iho^ did write) to elect and choose men unto
honorable Rowmes, and every man's assent was called his suffrages, which in
some place was by the voices, in some places by hands and one kind of those
suffrages was by certain things that are in Latin called Calculi. because
that in some places they used thereto round stones.

Now says our lord, y^ unto him which overcomes, he will give a white
suffrage. For those that wear white, signified approving, as the black
signified reproving. And in these suffrages, did they use to write the name of
him to whom they gave their voice. And now says our lord, that to him y^
overcomes, he will in the ^uffrage give him a new name, which no man knows
but he that receives it. He says also, he y^ overcomes I will make him a
pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out thereof. And I
shall write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the City of my God,
the new H^erusalem which descends from heaven from my GOD, and I shall write
upon him also my new name, if we would dylate and were able to declare these
special gifts, with yet other mo, specified in ye second and third Chapter of
ye Apocalips: There would it appear how far these heavenly Joys shall
surmounte above all the comfort yt ever came in the mind of any man living
here upon earth. The blessed Apostle Paul, y^ suffered so many perelles, and
so many passions, he yt says of him self that he has been, In laboribus
pluribu^ in carceribus abu^d^ncius in plagis su^^^ m^du^^ etc^ In many
labors, in priso^s, of^er tha^ other. In stripes above measure. At point of
death often times. Of y^ Jews had I five times ^xl. stripes sa^e one. Thrice
have I been beaten with roddes^ once was I stoned. Thrice have I been in
shipwrake. A day and a night was I in y^ depth of ye sea. In my Iourneies often
have I been in perel of floodes. In perel of thieves. In perilles by y^ Jews,
In perilles by the Painims. In perilles in the City, In perilles in deserte.
In perilles in the sea. In perilles by false brethren. In labor and misery.
In many nights watch. In hunger and thyrst. In many fastinges in cold and
nakedness, beside those things yt are outward, my daily instant labor, I mean
my care, and solicitude about all the churches: and yet says he more of his
trybulacions, which for length I let pass. This blessed Apostle I say, for
all these trybulacions yt him self suffered in the continuance of so many
years, calls yet all ^he tribulacions of this world, but light and short,
as a moment in respect of the weighty glory yt it after this world wins
us. Id enim quod in presenti est momentaneu^, and le^e tribulacionis nostre
supra modum in sublimitate eternu^ glory pondus operatur in nobis no^
contemplantibus nobis que videntur, ^ed que non ^identur. Que enim videntur
te^poralia suit, que autem non videntur eterna sunt. This same short and
mome^tary tribulacio^ of ours y^ is in this present time, works within us the
weight of glory above measure in sublimitie, on high we beholding not those
things yt we see, but those things yt we see not. For those things yt we se,
be but temporal things: but those things yt are not seen, are eternal. Now
to this great glory can there no man come headless. Our head is Christ, and
therefore to him must we be joined, and as members of his, must we follow him if
we will come thither. He is our gide to gide us thither, and is entered in before
us. And he therefore that will enter in after, Debet ^itu^ille ambulauit, and
ipse ambulare, the same way that Christ walked the same way must he walk.
And what was the way by which he walked into heaven, him self shows what
way it was that his father had provided for him, where he said unto the two
^isciples going toward ye castle of Emaus. Nescieba^is qui^ oportebat Cristu^
pati and sic introire in regnum suum? Knew ye not that Christ must suffer
passion, and by that way enter into his kingdom? Who can for very shame desire
to enter into ye kingdom of Christ with ease, when him self entered not into
his own without pain.


The last Chapter. The consideracion of the painful death of Christ, is
sufficient to make us content to suffer painful death for his sake.
SUrely Cousin as I said before, in ye bearing the loss of worldly goods, in
suffering of captivity, thraldom and imprisonment, and in the glad sustaining
of worldly shame, that if we would in all those points depely ponder ye sample
of our savior him self, it were of it self alone sufficient to encourage
every kind Christen man and woman, to refuse none of al those calamities for
his sake^ So say I now for paineful death also, yt if we could and would
with dew compassion conceive in our minds a right imaginacion and
remembrance of Christ's bitter paynful passion, of ye many sore bloody strokes
that the cruel torme^tors with Rods and whippes gave him upon every part of
his holy tender body: the scorneful crown of sharp thorns beaten down
upon his holy head so s^rayte and so deep, that on every part his blessed
blood issued out and streamed down his lovely limbs, drawn and stretched
out upon the cross, to the intolerable pain of his forbeaten and sore beaten
veins and senewes, new feling, with ye crewel stretching and straining pain,
far passing any crampe in euey part of his blessed body at once. Than the
great long nails crewe^ly driven with hammers through his holy hands and
feet, and in this horrible pain lift up and let hang with y^ paice of al his
body, bearing down upon the painful wounded places, so grievously perced with
nails and in such torment (without pity, but not without many dispightes)
suffered to be ^ined and pained ye space of more than three long hours til him
self willingly gave up unto his father, his holy soul. After which yet to
show ye mightines of their malice after his holy soul departed, persed his
holy heart with a sharp spear, at which issued ^ut ye holy blood and water,
whereof his holy sacraments have inestimable secret strength: if we would I
say remember these things in such wise as would god we would, I verily think
and suppose, y^ the consideracion of his incomparable kindness, could not in
such wise fail to inflame our kaye cold hearts, and set them on fire in his
love, that we should find our self, not only conte^te, but also glad and
desirous to suffer death for his sake, that so marvelous louinglye let not
to sustain so far passing painful death for ours. Would GOD we would
here to the shame of our cold affeccion again toward God, for such
ferue^te love, and inestimable kyndnes of GOD toward us: would god we would I
say, but consider what hoate affeccion many of these fleshely lovers have
borne, and daily do bear to those upon whom they dote.

How many of them have not let to ieoparde their lives, and how many have
willingely lost their lives in deed, without either great kindness showed them
before (and afterward you wot well they could nothing win?) but ^uen that
it contented and satysfied their mind, y^ by their death their lover should
clearly se how faithfully they loved. The deli^e whereof, imprinted in their
fa^tasie, not assuaged only, but counterpaised also they thought al their
pain. Of these affeccio^s with ye woonderful dolorous effects following
thereon, not only old written stories, but over yt I think in every country
christen and heathen both, experience gives us proof enough. And is it not
tha^ a wonderful shame for us for y^ dread of temporal death, to forsake our
savior yt willingly suffered so painful death, rather tha^ he would forsake
us, considering yt he shall for our suffering^ so highly reward us with
everlasting wealth. Oh, if he yt is content to die for her love, of whom he
looks after for no reward, and yet by his death, goes from her, might by his
death be sure to come to her; and ever after in delight and pleasure to dwell
with her. Such a lover would not let here to dye for her twice, and how cold
lovers be we tha^ unto god, if rather tha^ dye for him once, we will refuse him
and forsake him for ever, that both died for us before, and has al^o provided
that if we die here for him, we shall in heaven everlastingly both live and
also reign with him. For as Saint Paul says, if we suffer with him, we shall
reign with him.

How many Romans, how many noble courages of other sundry cou^treies have
willingly given their own lives and suffered great deadlye pains, and very
painful deaths for their countreyes^ and the respect of winning by their
deaths, the only reward of worldly renown and fame. And should we tha^
shrink to suffer as much for eternal honor in heaven and everlasting
glory? The devil has some also so obstinate heretyques^ that endure wit^ingly
painful death for vain glory: and is it not than more then shame; that
Christ shall ^ee his catholyques forsake his faith, rather than suffer the same
for heaven and very glorye^ Would god as I many times have said, that the
remembrance of Christ's kindness in suffering his passion for us, the
consideracion of hell that we should fall in by forsaking of him, the joyful
meditacion of eternal life in heaven, that we shall win with this short
temporal death patiently taken for him: had so deep a place in our breast as
reason would they should, and as (if we would do our deuor toward it, and labor
for it, and pray therefore) I verily think they should: for then should they
so take up our mind^ and ravish it al an other way, that as a man hur^ in a
fraye feleth not sometime his wound, nor yet is not ware thereof til his mind
fall more thereon, so farforth, yt sometime an other man shows him that he has
lost an hand before he perceive it himself. So the mind ravished in the
thinking depelye of those other things, Christ's death, hell and heaven, were
likely to minish and put away of our painful death four parts of ye
feling, either of the fear or of ye pain. For of this am I very sure, if we
had the fiftienth part of ye love to Christ that he has had, and has unto us:
all the pain of this Turks persecucion could not keep us from him but that
there would be at this day as mani martirs here in Hungary, as have be before
in other countries of old. And of this point put I no doubt^ but that if the
Turk stood even here, with all his whole a^mie about him, and every of them were
ready at our hand with all the terrible torments that they could ymagine, and
(but if we would forsake the faith) were setting their torments to us, and to
the increase of our ^er^or fell al at once in a shoute with trumpets tabrets
and tembrels al blowe^ up at once, and al their gunnes let go, therewith to
make us a fearful noise if there should sodeinly than on the other side ye
ground quake and riue a twayn, and the devils rise out of hell, and show
themself in such ougli shape as damned wretches shall see the^, and with ye
hidious howlyng that those hell hounds should shritche, lay hell open on every
sdie round about our fete, that as we stood, we should ^oke down into that
pestilent pit, and see the swarm of sely souls in the terrible torments
there, we would ware so frayde of the sight, that as for the Turks host we
should scantly remember we saw them: and in good faith for all that, yet think
I far^her this, that if there might tha^ appear the great glory of god, the
Trinity in his high marvelous majesty, our Savior in his glorious manhood,
sitting on his trone with his immaculate mother, and al yt glorious company
calling us there unto them, and that yet our way should lie through marvelous
painful death, before we could come at them, upon the sight I say of that
glory there would I wene be no man that once would shrink thereat, but every
man would run on toward the^, in all that ever he might, though there lay
for malice to kill us by the way^ both all the Turks tormentors, and all ye
devils to. And therefore Cousin, let us well considre these things, and let us
have sure hope in the help of god, and I than doubt not, but we shall be sure,
that as the Prophet says, the trou^h of his promise shall so compass us with
a pauice, that of this incurcion of this midde day devil, this Turks
persecucio^, we shall never need to fear: for either if we trust in god well,
and prepare us therefore, the Turks shall never meddle with vs^ or else if he
do, harme^ shall he none do vs^ but in s^ede of harm, inestimable good, of
whose gracious help wherefore should we so sore now despair (except we
were so mad men as to wene, that either his power or his mercy were worn
out already, when we see so many a thousand holy martirs by his holy help
suffered as much before as any man should be put ^o now. Or what excuse can we
have by ye te^dernes of our flesh, when we can be no more tender, tha^ were
many of the^ among who^ were not only me^ of strength, but also weak women
and children and since the strength of them all s^ode in the help of god, and
yt the very strongest of them all was never able of them self and with gods
help the feblest of the^ al was strong enough to stand against al ye world,
let us prepare our self with prayer, with our whole trust in his help without
any trust in our own strength, let us think th^ron and prepare us in our
minds thereto, long before: let us therein conform our will unto his, not
desiring to be brought unto the peril of persecucion, for it seems a proud
high mind to desire martirdom, but desiring help and ^^rength of god, if he
suffer us to come to the stresse either being sought, found, or brought out
against our wils^ being by his commandment (for the comfort of our cure)
bounden to abide: let us fall to fasting^ to prayer to almose deed in time, and
give that unto god that may be taken from us. If the devil put in our mind^ ye
saving of our land and our goods, let us remember that we cannot save the^
long. I ^he fear us with exile and fleing from our country, let us remember
yt we be borne into ye broad world (and not like a t^ee to s^i^ke still in on^
place) and yt whither so ever we go god shall go with us. If he three a^e^ us with
captivity, let us tell him again, better is it to be thral unto man a ^hile for
ye pleasure of god, tha^ by displeasi^g of god, be perpetual thral unto ye
devil: if he threate us with impriso^me^t let us tell him we will rather be man's
prisoners a while here in earth, than by forsaking the faith, be his prisoners
for ever in ^el. If he put in our minds the terror of the Turks, let us
consider his false slight therein, for this tale he tells us to make us
forgeat him. But let us remember well yt in respect of himself, the Turk is but
a shadow, nor all that they al can do, can be but a fle a biting in comparison
of the mischief that he goes ab^ut. The Turks are but his tormentors for
himself does the deed. Our Lord says in the Apocalips, Diabolus m^tret aliquos
vestrum^n carcerem, vt tentemini. The devil shall send some of you to prison
to tempt you. He says not y^ men shall, but that the d^uil shall himself. For
without question the devils own deed it is to bring us by his temptacion with
fear and force thereof into eternal damnacion. And therefore says, S. Paul.
Non est nobis colluctatio aduersus carnem and sa^guinem, fed etc. Our wrestlyng
is not against flesh and blood. etc. Thus may you see that in such
persecucions it is the mid day devil himself that makes such incursion upon
us, by the men that are his ministers, to make us fall for fear. For ^y^ we
fall, he can never hurt vs^ And therefore says. S. Petre, Resistite diabolo and
fugiet a vob^s^ Stand against the devil, and he shall fly from you. For he
never ^unneth upon a man to season him with his claws, til he see him down on
the ground willingly fallen himself. For his fashion is to set his servants
against us, and by the^ to make us for fear or for impacience to fall, and
himself in ye mean while compasses us running and roaring like a ra^^ing Lion
about us, loking ^^o w^l fall, yt he than may devour him, Aduer^^riu^ v^ster
diabolus (says. S. Peter) Sic^: leo rugiens c^rcuit queren^ quem de^oret, Your
aduersa^ye the devil l^ke a roaring Lio^, runs about incircui^e, seking who^
he may devour. The devil it is therefore that if we for fear of men will fall)
is ready to run upon us, and devour us. And is it wisdom than so much to
think upon the Turks that we forgeat the devil? what mad man is he that when
a Lio^ were about to devour him, would vouchesafe to regard the biting of a
little fysling ^urre? Therefore when he roareth out upon us by ye threts of
mortal men, let us tell him that with our inward iye, we see him well enough, and
entend to stand and fight with him, even hand to hand: if he threaten us that
we be to weak, let us tell him that our Captain Christ is with us, and that we
shall fi^hte with his strength, that has vanquished him already, and let us
fence us with faith, and comfort us with hope, and smite the devil in the face
with a fyrebrande of cha^itie. For surely if we be of the tender loving mind
that our master was^ and not hate them that kill us but pity them and pray
for them, with sorrow for the peril that they work to them self, that fire of
charity thrown in his face, strikes the devil suddenly so blind, that he
cannot se where to faste^ a stroke on us. When we feel us to bol^, remember our
own feblenesse. When we feel us to fainte, remember Christ's strength. In our
fear let us remember Christ's painful agonye that himself ^oulde (for our
coumfort) suffer before his passion, to the^te^t yt no fear should make us
despair. And ever call for his help such as him self lust to send us, and than
we need never to doubt but that either he shall keep us from the painful death,
or shall not fail so to strength us in it, that he shall ioyou^ly bring us to
heaven by it. And then does he much more for us then if he kept us from it. For
as god did more for poor Lazare in helping him pacientely to dye for hunger at
the rich man's door, than if he had brought him to the door all the rich
glotous dinner, so though he be gracious to a man whom he delyuereth out of
paynefull trouble, yet does he much more for a man, if through right paynful
death he deliver him from this wretched world into eternal bliss, from which
whosoever shrink away with forsaking of his faith, and falls in the perell
of everlasting fire, he shall be very sure to repent it ere it be long after.
For I ween that whenever he falls sick next, he will wish that he had
been killed for Christ's sake before. What folly is it than for fear to fly
from that death, which thou see thou shall shortly after wish thou had
dyed, yea I wene almo^t every good christian man would very feign this day that
he had been for Christ's faith cruelly killed yesterday, even for the desire of
heaven, though there were no hell, but to fear while the pain is coming,
there is all our let. But then if we would remember hell pain on the other
side, into which we fall while we fly fro this, then should this short pain be
no let at al, and yet should we be more pricked forward, if we were faithful
by deep considering of the Joys of heaven of which the Apostle says: Non
sunt digne passi^nes huius temporis ad futuram gloriam que reuelabitur in nobis
the passions of this time, be not worthy to ye glory that is to come, which
shall be showed in us. We should not I wene Cousin, need much more in all this
whole matter, than that one text of. S. Paul if we would consider it well. For
surely my own good Cousin, remember that if it were possible for me and you
alone^ to suffer as much trouble as the whole world does together, all that
were not worthy of it self to bring us to the joy which we hope to have
everlastingly: and therefore I pray you let the consideracion of that Joy, put
our all worldly trouble out of your heart, and also pray that it may do
the same in me: and even thus will I good Cousin, with these words make a
sudden end of my whole tale, and bid you fare well, for now I begin to feel
myself some what weary.

Vincent. Forsooth good uncle this is a good end, and it is no marvel though
you be waxe^ weary, for I have this day put you to so much labor, ye saving for
the comfort that your self may take of your time so well bestowed, and for the
comfort that I have my self taken and more shall I trust for your good counsel
given, else would I be very sorye to have put you to so much pain, and now
shall our lord reward and recompense you therefore, and many shall I trust pray
for you for to thentent that the more may take profit by you, I purpose uncle as
my poor wit and learning will serve me, to put your good counsel in
remembrance not in our language only, but in the Almayne tongue to, and thus
praying god to give me and all other that shall read it, the grace to follow
your good counsel therein, I shall commit you to god.


A^tony. Since you be minded Cousin, to bestow so much labor thero^. I would it
had happed you to fetch the counsel at some wyser man that could have given
you better, but better me^ may set more things and better also thereto, and in
the mean time, I besec^e our lord to breath of his holy spirit in ye readers
breast which inwardely may teach him in heart, without whom, little avails
all that all ^he mouths of the world were able to teach in men's ears. And
thus good Cousin, fare well till God bring us together again, either here or
in heaven. Amen.


FINIS.
Imprinted at London in fletestrete within Temple bar at the sign of the
hand and star by Richard Tottel ye xviii. day of Noue^bre in ye year of our
lord. 1543.

Cum priuilegio ad impris mendum s^lum.


