1607 Lamentable news out of Monmouthshire in Wales.

CONTAINING, The wonderful and most fearful accidents of the great
ouerflowing of waters in the said Countye, drowning infinite numbers of
Cattle of all kinds, as Sheep, Oxen, Kine and horses, with others: together
with the loss of many men, women and Children, and the subversion of xxvi
Parishes in January last 1607.

depiction of flood

LONDON Printed for W. W. and are to be sold in Paul's Church yard at the
sign of the Greyhound.

To the Reader.
REader, when these news were brought, and an importunity used to me, that I
would give the^ some form, and bestow an exhortation on them, I was unwilling,
both in regard of that short space (of less then one day which was limited to
undertake the matter) and also in respect of the usual vnfaithfullnes of men
ordinarily in reporting of such accidents as these be: whereby it often
falls out, that the relater of them reapeth much discredit. But when I could
not have these just excuses taken, I began and finished this business, as the
short space would permit me. And now I offer it unto thee, read it with that
good affection wherewith I do present it, and I am sure, it both may and will
profit thee by putting thee in remembrance why God does punish others, that so
thou may thy self in time look unto thine own courses, least he proceed in
the same or some more grievous manner with thee: for our vices are the serpe^ts
of our souls, stinging them to death, unless we look up unto him that was
nailed upon the Cross, that so we may be cured of them, and be brought to
forsake and relinquish them. Well then, seeing that it is mere wickedness to
change or alter good laws, to awake strife, or wilfully to maintain it; to
abate nobility, and exalt the unworthy; to banish gods servants, and to honor
the graceless; to love flatterers and dispraise the virtuous and plain
dealers; to embrace delights and pastimes, and neglect works of duty and
office, to account vanity a mother, and pure religion a stepmother; and in a
word to regard nothing but idleness, riot, and wantonness; and that the Lord
uses from time to time, to reveal his wrath from heaven against these and
such like impieties: the Lord of his goodness purge our land daily, more and
more, from such of them as do bear any rule in it: that so Gods indgements
bring auerted, we may have his mercies continually multiplied upon us and
ourposteritie, unto the worlds end.

Amen.
Farewell.
Woeful news from Wales. Or The lamentable loss of diverse Villages and
Parishes (by a strange and wonderful Flood) within the Countye of Monmouth in
Wales; Which happened in January last past 1607. whereby a great number of his
Maties. Subjectes, Inhabiting in those parts, are utterly undone.
THE holy Scriptures teaches us, that when as God had framed the Heavens,
Earth, Sea, Air and all that in them is, he then created Mankind the last of
all: even as it were a little brief or concise Map, a sum or an
abridgement of the whole Worlds perfections: to the intent, that beholding is
soon as he was made this comely and gloriour Theater of nature replenished
with all things profitable and delightful, either for soul or body, he might
presently be put in remembrance how much he was obliged unto his and their
Creator: yea admonished what occasion and cause he had to love him in true
sincerity of affection, to obey his statutes in integrity of devotion, to
worship and glorify him, who in infinite and abundantly ineffable mercy, had
ordained him sovereign Lord and master over all his creatures. But the text
does ad a point more notably to be observed: namely that the Lord made mankind
even in his own Image and likeness: the which was placed not only in the
erternall figure of his body, as Auidius wickedly maintained, but even both in
soul and body, seeing sin does consist in both, which is the contrary
thereunto: and also that the renewing of the same again in us, is the
sanctification of the one, as well as of the other: nay, as wax is apter to
receive a print then clay; so the Soul being a spirit, and so nearer unto the
Divine nature in the essence of it;

It took more into it of Gods Image, and did better express it then the body
either did or could do, wherefore the Lords Image wherein he created our first
parents, was placed partly in ma^s substance, especially in his soul, and in
the essential parts powers, and forces of it, and partly also in certain
qualities, and in a certain honor, dignity, and glory, wherewith they were
adorned: for first the very substance of Adams soul did resemble Gods
essence, in the simplicity, inuisiblenes, and immortallitie thereof, and also in
that power which it inioyed to know and will.

Again, as God is but one in the world, sustayning, quickening with life, and
governing the same, so there is but one soul in the body, which being whole
in every part thereof without either augme^tation or deminution rules it,
giving unto it life, sense and motion. Further also, the soul is like unto God
in the faculties of the same, considering that as there is but one only divine
essence in the Godhead, and yet three distinct persons in respect of their
external actions, so the soul is but one, howsoever it consists of three
essential faculties: the intelletiue, the sensitive and the vegetative.
Moreover as for the qualities of the soul, it did in wisdom, Justice tne
hollines resemble God, as appears, in that Paul exhorts us to be renewed
unto these parts of his image as the most excellent: On the other side, as
for the body, it did resemble God in that immortality wherein at the first it
was created: Again, the several members of the body, resembled the variety
of his perfections, and therefore in respect of their diverse uses they are
often in y^ scriptures, Metaphorically ascribed to him, as hands to show us
his omnipotence, and eyes to teach to us his providence: Besides, in his very
body man resembled God, in regard of a certain imperious majesty conspicuous
therein; but principally in his face, and countinance which caused all y^
living Creatures to stand in aw of him. Briefly the whole man both soul and
body, did and does still in some small measure resemble God, in that his
dominion wherein as a little God, he is by the Lord appointed sovereign ruler
ouerall things both in the earth, sea, and air. No to the devil the old
Serpent, being fallen through his transgression into wretchedness and misery,
and enoying the blessedness in which he saw our first pa^e(...)s were planted
in earthlye Paradise. he possessed the body of a serpent, and there in did
come and te^pt Euah the mother of us al, to disobey the Lord in tasting of y^
fruit which he had forbidden her and her husband upon pain of death to meddle
withal. What should I say more? he drew her by his wiles to hear him accuse god
of unkindness: from hearing to suspicion of his love, from suspicion unto direct
rebellion against his law: she took of y^ meat prohibited and eat thereof. yea
not so contented she did entice and allure by persuasions her husband, unto the
same capital crime and office against the divine majesty, ye worlds creator.
The fact being thus notoriously committed, the Lord came and gave his sentence
upon ye malefactors, namely that they should among other punishments specified
in the text, return unto earth from whence they were taken:

Thus of immortal they were made mortal, children of death and corruption, but
happy it had been if this calamity had extended no further then themselves:
^las Adam was a public person, and received graces for all his posterity, and
therefore if he had stood, we had likewise done so, but he falling. we fall
together with him into the same calamityes which sin brought him into, even
into all miseries leading unto death, and death it self unto temporal and
eternal, unless we be redeemed by our blessed mediator and redeemer Jesus
Christ our Savior. So yt howsoever many of the old worlds Patriarchs lived
seven, eight, and nine hundred years, by means not only of their own
temperance, but also of a singular blessing of God bestowed on them, to the end
they might the better find out arts and Sciences which required long
experience: fill also the world the sooner with people, have their obodience
unto the Lord the more fully tried. and the more purelye convey true religion
unto their posterity, as not passing through the hands of many persons, yet
you see still at the last they dyed: the power of original sin, the wages
whereof is death, always at y^ length taking hold upon them, and because they
used the benefit of their long life, not in such holy manner as the Lord
required, but grew shameless in all evil courses, we see that Almighty God
being moved unto wrath by their enormous vices, sent a flood upon them, and
swept them away from the sace of the earth, like dung and excrements, only
preserving faithful Noah and his household, together with some relics of the
creatures, in an Arc which he had caused him to frame for that service: and as
for their posterity in Noah's lineage, who repeopled the world again, we see
that the Lord did abridge their years by many hundreds from those which their
forefathers did enjoy that so they and we to the worlds end might be
perpetuallye mindful of their and our departure out of this vale of misery,
wherein we have no certain habitation or inheritance, but are continually
subject unto the arrest of death and hels prison, unless in time we get all
the debts of our offenses ca^celled by being made heirs of the riches of Gods
lone in his Son Christ Jesus, for death strikes with more darts then one,
he has even almost infinite ways to seize upon us, when from the Lord he
has his license.

Thus we see sometimes men consume away and languish: sometimes the Pestilence
does destroy them: sometime the sword, and sometimes famine: every one some
thing or another according to the speech of the Poet, Happy is he that is so
provided as y^ in deed no kind of death is sudden to him: and seeing
examples use to move us, let us seriously think upon the late inundation of
waters, which has even a^ unawares surprised many who little expected such an
accident, that so by the due noting of it, we may be incited to prepare our
selves for some tempest in one kind or another, as terrible unto us as that
has been to the^ knowing that these prodigious ouerflowinges of the waters,
howsoever natural causes, as Gods instruments do claim their parts in the^
yet they proceed from the Lords own direction, who by his punishing of others
with the^, does threaten grievous calamities, eue^ against our vice, unless I
say speedy repentance, and amendment do auert his fearful wrath and iudgemen
from us, appara^tly kindled in many kinds within these few years last past
against us. It has already by the pen of another been related, what great
harm has been done by the deluge of waters inuading Somersetsh. and
covering near the Severne 20, mile in co^pas, to the ruin of al creatures and
places which lay within y^ circuit: further it has been showed yt al Erent
marsh is covered, and y^ sea got up between Barstable and Bristowe as high as
Bridge-water: what is done in Herefordsh Glocestersh. and diverse other
bordering places upon y^ seas, it cannot yet in special be recorded upon ground
of certaintye: but touching Monmothsh. in Wales, the report of one in place of
authority, and that not upon a bare hearesay, is this.

IN the month of January last past upon a Tuesday, the Sea being very
tempestuously moved by the winds, ouer-flowed his ordinary Banks, and did
drown 26. Parishes adjoining on the Coast side, in the foresaid Country of
Monmouth-shire, the particulars whereof do follow: all spoiled by the grievous
and lamentable fury of the waters.

Matharne. Portescuet. Caldicot. Vndye. Roggiet. Lanihangiell. Ifton. Magor.
Redwicke. Gouldenlifte. Nashe. Saint Peire. Lanckstone. wiston. Lanwerne.
Christchurch. Milton. Bashallecke. Saint Brides. Peterston. Lambeth. Saint
Mellins. Romney. Marshfield. Wilfricke.
Now all kind of Cattle being for twenty four miles in length, and four in
breadth, were drowned: R^kes and mowes of corn torn out of their places and
carried away. Again, the Sea has beaten down at the foresaid times, a great
multitude of houses, scattering and dispersing the poor substance of
innumerable persons. So that the damage done in the foresaid places, both in
cattle and other goods, is supposed to amount unto the value of above an
hundredth thousand pounds.

But alas, a man will give all that he has, so that his life may be preserved
and this is it which we esteem of above all worldly treasures: howsoever, as
one said well of old, it being nothing but a bridle and miserable fetter,
which chaineth the pure and everlasting soul, unto the vile, sinful, and
corruptible body. But surely there is none either so great an Orator, or
else so mighty an Enchaunter as life is; for it does persuade us unto the
contrary of that which we both see and feel: for although we know our own
frailty, and that we must needs die, yet what wrongs, what hatreds, what
labors, and what unspeakable wretchedness will men endure, rather then leave
these their clay houses, wherein they are but Tenants at Will, subject to be
dispossessed at Gods pleasure. Well, said the Roman wise man: That seeing the
flowers of life be but lusts and pleasures, false shows, shadows, and
vanities, the fruits thereof but labor, care, sickness, and tediousnes, yea
the tree it self but corruption and frailety? Oh what reason have men to doat
upon it? why should death be so fearful unto them: especially when having
their portion in Christ Jesus, they are well assured that their felicity is not
in this life to be expected, but in the world to come. Into the which, Death is
our Ferriman: and consequently our advantage: as the Scripture terms him.
Nevertheless, seeing life is precious, as Natures blessing, left with us by
the Lord in trust, and to be redemanded by him, and obediently yielded up by us
at his pleasure, for his glory: how happy would those that endured the
foresaid losses have thought themselves, if so be that they had but escaped
away with their lives. But poor wretches, the most of them were drowned, by
the foresaid inundation: not as though I did judge them all miserable who did
die therein. For as Koper says touching the flood which did surprise the old
world: in the first judgment, wherein the transgressing Angels were to be
censured, and in the last day of Assizes general: only the reprobate have
been and shall be condemned, the elect saved. But in judgments that fall out
between; neither the elect alone are preserved, nor the reprobate only are
destroyed. And yet no doubt many of them, yea the most were profane, as the
residue of all our Country is, in respect of the multitude: for pride,
gluttony, drunkenness, the very Metropolitan City of all the Province, of
vices, fornication, and all sorts of uncleanness, the which the Lord
threatens to punish where he finds them, in a fearful manner: do even
walk up and down like Rulers in all places. And what shall I say concerning
the contempt of the Ministry of the word, and the manifold wrongs continually
offered even unto the most reverend and faithful Ministers of the same. Is the
covetousness of our iron hard hearted age, unknown to any man? does it not
destroy and corrupt daily more and more, both Church and Common weal among us?
has it not stolen almost into every corner, and crept wei near into every
heart, maring all where it comes? But he is blind who notes not the
several kinds of oppression every where practiced: and the lying and
dissimulation every where used. In a word, iolenesse, one of those sins which
caused Sodom to be destroyed, is most palpably to be noted in all states and
conditions of men among us: both in Church and commonweal: while the Clergy
does nothing but look for livings, and leave the labors of their function:
and the Gentry esteem more of their Hawks, Howndes, and other their vainer
pleasures, then the godly discharging of their offices wherein the Lord has
set them? And shall we then imagine that they were only good that are gone in
this calamity of waters? Certainly, as I make no question, but God has had
his faithful servants among them: so I doubt not, but that the greatest part of
them were even as the rest of our Nation is at this day: lewd and profane
wretches, whom the Lord has thus plagued, for to recall us if it be possible
from our filthy practices: lest at once he be provoked to pour down the full
vialls of his wrath upon us. And therefore, if we be wise, let other men's
harms make us wary, lest custom in vice make it grow even another nature to
us. Wherefore above all things, let us take heed that long escape of
punishment, or the vain hope of long life do not delude us, and make us run on
still into our sins like the hard horse into the battle: for our life is but
like the Gourd of Jonas, or the pilgrimage of Jacob, the days whereof (...) as
few as evil: yea it is like unto the viston of Esdras, goodly too look upon,
but vanished in a moment: And therefore, there is nothing more perillons to be
entertained by us then the Mot of Epicures, (o thanatos vden pos:) death
belongs not to us: seeing we are thereby brought to be careless of our actions.
But to return unto our foresaid narration.

The foresaid waters having gotten over their wonted limittes, are affirmed to
have run at their first entrance with aswiftnesse so incredible, as that no
Gray-hounde could have escaped by running before them. And they yet cover
twenty four miles in length, and four and more in breadth: which it the water
were quite gone again, be not to be recovered within the space of five or six
years, to be so serviceable ground as formerly they have been: yea, and
there is no probability that that part of the Country, will ever be so
inhabited again in our age as it was before this flood, howsoever it has
heretofore been reputed, the richest and the fruitfullest place in all that
Country.

Moreover, the land ouerflowed with the Seuerne sea, is valued at above forty
thousand pounds by the year, only in the said Country of Monmouth, which is
yet under the waters, and to he recovered again from them at the Lords good
pleasure.

Further, among other matters, these things are related as certain truths. As
that a certain man and a woman heuing taken a tree for their succor, and
espying nothing but death before their eyes: at last among other things which
were carried along in the stream, perceived a certain Tubbe, of great
largeness to come nearer and nearer unto them, until it rested upon that
Tree wherein they were: Juto which (as sent unto them by GODS providence)
committing themselves they were carried safe, until they were cast up upon
the dry shore.

Again, of a maid ceilde, not passing the age of four years: it is
reported, that the mother thereof, perceiving the waters to break so fast into
her house, and not being able to escape with it, and having no clothes on it,
set it upon a beam in the house, to save it from being drowned. And the matters
rushing in a pace, a little Chicken as it seems, flew up unto it, (it being
found in the bosom of it, when ^s help came to take it down) and by the
heat thereof, as it is thought, preserved the childs life in the midst of
so cold a tempest.

An other little child is affirmed to have been cast upon land in a Cradls, in
which was nothing but a Catte, the which was discerned as it came floating to
the shore, to leap still from one side of the Cradle unto the other, even as
if she had been appointed steresman to preserve the small bark from the waves
fury.

Moreover one Mistress Van, a gentlewoman of good sort, whose living was an
hundred pound and better by the year, is avouched, before she could get up
into the higher rooms of her house, having marked the approach of the waters,
to have been surprised by them and destroyed, howsoever, her house being
distant above four miles in breadth from the sea.

Besides these things in Monmouth-shiere, already specified: One Mistress
Mattheus of Landaffe in Glamorgin Shiere, dwelling some four miles in breadth
from the Sea, is said to have lost four hundredth English Ewes. Much corn is
likewise there destroyed in that Country, many houses ruinated, and many other
kinds of Cattle perished. The number of men that are drowned, are as yet not
known to exeeede abaoue twenty hundred. A multitude more then did, had
perished for want of food, and extremity of cold, had not the right
Honorable the Lord Herbert, son and heir to the Carle of Worcester, and sir
Waltar Mountague, Knight, brother unto the Recorder of London, who dwell near
unto the foresaid places, sent out boats, (fetched ten miles compass upon
Waines) to relieve the distressed. The Lord Herbert himself (as the relation
is) going himself, unto such houses as he could, that were in extremity, to
minister unto them provision of meat and other necessaries. And these are the
things touching these foresaid places, which have been delivered as truths
unto us, of undoubted verity. And there we leave them.

As for our selves, seeing we are all of us subject unto the like sins that
others are: and that these when we daily fall into them, do like the blood of
Abell, solicit the wrath and vengeance of the Lord to be powered down upon
us. Let us think upon the judgments which God has inflicted upon others for
their vices, that so we may be the more auerted from the like offenses. Thus
did David do. And the Prophet Hab: does witness, that the grievous plagues
which even in a vision he did see should came upon the Chaldeans, did make him
to quake and tremble: what would he have done, it so be that he had seen the
very actual execution of them? would not he have applied them unto his own
person, remembering that his misery by nature was as great as any others? But
no man-careth to know himself and his own deseruings: every one dalighteth
to mark his brethren, and their infirmities, being therein like unto those
Lamiae or Faicies: concerning which, Plutarch speaks, who when they went
abroad, filled their heads with eyes, but when they came home again, plucked
them out, and put them up in boxes: As for his own breath, each one thinks
it to be sweet enough, as the Proverb speaks. The Lord of his mercy
grant, that we may learn in time to be wise unto our own health and
salvation, least that these water-flouds in particular, prove but forerunners
unto some scarefull calamities, more general.

FINIS.

