decorative border

DIANA OF GEORGE OF MONTEMAYOR: Translated out of Spanish into English by
BARTHOLOMEW YOUNG of the Middle Temple Gentleman.

At London, Printed by Edm. Bollifant, Impensis G. B. 1598

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE and my very good Lady the Lady RICH.
RIGHT HONORABLE, such are the apparent defects of art and judgment in this
new pourtraied DIANA, that their discovery must needs make me blush and abase
the work, unless with undeserved favor erected upon the high and shining
pillar of your Honorable protection, they may seem to the beholder less, or
none at all. The glory whereof as with reason it can no ways be thought
worthy, but by boldly aduenturing upon the apparent demonstration of your
magnificent mind, wherein all noble virtues have their proper seat, and on
that singular desire, knowledge and delight, wherewith your Ladyship
entertaineth, embraces and affects honest endeavors, learned languages, and
this particular subject of DIANA, warranted by all virtue and modesty, as
COLLIN in his French dedicatorie to the Illustrous Prince LEWIS of LORRAINE at
large sets down and commends: so now presenting it to so sovereign a
light, and relying on a gracious acceptance, what can be added more to the full
content, desire and perfection of DIANA, and of her unworthy Interpreter
(that has in English attire exposed her to the view of strangers) then for
their comfort and defense to be armed with the Honorable titles and countenance
of so high and excellent a Patroness? But as certain years past (my
Honorable good Lady) in a public show at the Middle Temple, where your
Honorable presence with many noble Lords and fair Ladies graced and
beautified those sportes, it befell to my lot in that worthy assembly,
unworthily to perform the part of a French Orator by a deducted speech in
the same tongue, and that amongst so many good conceits and such general skill
in toongs, all the while I was rehearsing it, there was not any, whose mature
judgment and censure in that language I feared and suspected more then your
Ladyships, whose attentive ear and eye daunted my imagination with the
apprehension of my disabilitie, and your Ladyships perfect knowledge in the
same: Now once again in this translation out of Spanish (which language also
with the present matter being so well known to your Ladyship) whose
reprehension and severe sentence of all others may I more justly fear, then
that which (Honorable Madame) at election you may herein duly give, or with
favor take away. But as then by your gracious aspect and mild countenance I
flattered my self with your favorable applause of the first; So now to
prevent the second, I have no other means, then the humble insinuation of it
to your most Honorable name and clemency, most humbly beseeching the same to
pardon all those faults, which to your learned and judicious view shall
occur. Since then for pledge of the dutiful and zealous desire I have to
serve your Ladyship, the great disproportion of your most noble estate to the
quality of my poor condition, can affoorde nothing else but this small
present, my prayer shall always importune the heavens for the happy increase
of your high and worthy degree, and for the full accomplishment of your most
Honorable and virtuous desires.

From High Onger in Essex the 28. of Nouemb. 1598. Your Honors most humbly
devoted, BARTHOL. YOUNG.

The Preface to diverse learned Gentlemen, and other my loving friends.
ABout nineteen years past (courteous Gentlemen) coming out of Spain into my
native country, and having spent welny three years in some serious studies
and certain affairs, with no means or occasion to exercise the Spanish tongue
(by discontinuance whereof it had almost shaken hands with me) it was my good
hap to fall into the company and acquaintance of my especial good friend
Edward Banister of Idesworth in the County of Southampton Esquier; who
perceiving my remissenes in the said language, persuaded and encouraged me
earnestly, by some good translation to recall it to her former place: And to
that intent he gave me the first and second Part of Diana of Montemayor in
Spanish, which Book (although I had been two years in Spain) till then I
never saw nor heard of; whose friendly care and desire to prevent so great a
loss, and to preserve such an ornament in me, I confess was the chief and
principal cause (and therefore the only credit) of this translation, whereby
I recovered that tongue again that lay (as it were) smothered in the cinders of
oblivion. The second cause of this my labor, was the delight I passed in
discurring most of those towns and places in it with a pleasant recordation of
my pen, which mine eyes so often with joy and sorrow had beheld. The third, the
resolved then intent I had never (howsoever now it has escaped my hands) to
put it in Print, in proof whereof it has lain by me finished Horaces ten and
six years more. For till then I never tried my improper vain in making an
English verse: how well or ill then the hard and strange kind of Spanish is
turned, I leave to your favorable censure and pardon: The low and pastoral
style hereof, Montemayor in his Epistle to the L. of Villanoua excuses,
entreating of Shepherds, though indeed they were but shadows of great and
honorable personages, and of their marriages, that not many years ago lived
in the Court of Spain, whose posterity to this day live in noble estate. But
touching the Books following, you must understand that George of Montemayor a
Gentleman sprung out of the noble house of Montemayor in Portugal, after he had
ended his first Part of Diana, which he distributed into seven Books,
intending to set forth the second Part, and before his departure into Italy
(where I heard he died) imparted his purpose, and the subject of his intended
second Part, to Alonso Perez, who answering his intent, wrote the second Part
of Diana, containing eight Books, promising in the end thereof to continue it
with a third Part, which yet he has not done, although I hear he has a
purpose to do it. But Gaspar Gil Polo a Valentian Gentleman, who in my opinion
excels for fine conceit (whether before or after that Alonso Perez second
Part came forth) made another Part of Diana, naming it the first Part of
Enamoured Diana; the which being divided into five Books, he intituleth to
follow in due sequence the first seven Books of Diana of George of Montemayor.
And in the end of that first Part of Enamoured Diana, he likewise makes a
reference to another Part which he promised to set forth; the which and that
of Alonso Perez, if ever they come to light, I leave to some finer wit and
better judgment to English, my self having done too much by launching so far
into the maine, unless (happily) in your favorable judgments it may find a
friendly and temperate construction. Having compared the French copies with the
Spanish original, I judge the first Part to be exquisite; the other two
corruptly done with a confusion of verse into Prose, and leaving out in many
places diverse hard sentences, and some leaves in the end of the third Part,
wherefore they are but blind guides by any to be imitated. Well might I have
excused these pains, if only Edward Paston Esquier (who here and there for
his own pleasure (as I understand) has aptly turned out of Spanish into
English some leaves that liked him best) had also made an absolute and complete
translation of all the Parts of Diana; the which, for his travel in that
Country, and great knowledge in that language, accompanied with other learned
and good parts in him, had of all others, that ever yet I heard translate these
Books, proved the rarest and worthiest to be embraced. The faults escaped in
the Printing, the copy being very dark and enterlined, and I loath to write
it out again, I pray you Gentlemen pardon, since all the last Term that it
was in the Press (having matters of greater consequence in charge) I could not
intend the correction: aduertising you by the way that the greatest faults are
at the end of the Book set down, the less being of no moment purposely
omitted. Fare ye well and continue me in your woonted love and favors.

Yours in all friendly offices, B. Y.


THE EPISTLE To the Illustrous and noble Lord Don Iuan de Castella de Villa
Noua, Baron of Bicorb and Quesa, of GEORGE of Montemayor.
ALthough this custom were not very ancient, most noble L. for Authors to
dedicate their works to personages of honor and renown, by whom they were
protected and defended; notwithstanding your rare and high deserts (as well for
your noble and ancient house from whence you are descended, as also for the
resplendant valor and virtue of your person) might with greater reason then I
can express, incite me to perform more then this obliged duty. And admit the
base style of the work, and the Authors small worth, in reason ought not so
far extend as to dedicate it to your Lordship: yet excluded from all other
remedies, I presumed only on this, that it was somewhat accounted of. For
precious stones are not so highly valued for the name they have (for they may
be false and counterfeite) as for his estimate in whose hands they are: I
humbly beseech your good Lordship to entertain this book under your Hon.
ampare and correction, as to the Author hereof (being but a stranger) you
have done no less, since his poor ability is not able to serve your Lordship
in any other thing: whose wished life and noble estate our Lord increase for
many years.

To the same Lord.
Moecenas was to Maro of great fame
A singular good Lord and loving friend,
And Alexander did enjoy that same
Rare wit of Homer, death though him did end:
And so the Villanouas generous name
The Lusitan poor Author does defend,
Making a base and wanting wit t'aspire
Unto the clouds, and yet a great deal higher.
Don Gaspar Romani to the Author.
If Lady LAVRAS memory unstained
PETRARC in endless verse has left renowned:
And if with Laurel HOMER has been crowned
For writing of the wars the Greeks obtained:
If Kings t'aduaunce the glory they have gained
In life time, when fierce MARS in battle frowned,
Procure it should not be in LETHE drowned,
But after death by history maintained:
More justly then should thou be celebrated
(O excellent DIANA) for the fairest
Of all the fair ones, that the world has brought forth:
Since all those wits, whose pens were estimated
To write the best, in glory thou impairest,
And from them all the Laurel crown have sought forth.
Don Hieronymo Sant-Perez, to George of Montemayor.
Parnasse, O sacred mount and full of glory,
The Poets muse, delight of their desires:
Me thinks thou art too comfortless and sorry,
Compared with this, whose famous name aspires.
In deed J am, since that the Muses left me,
And with their gracious Quire from hence descended
To mount this Hill, whose Greatness has bereft me
Of all my fame, and glory that is ended.
Thrice happy his Diana, since her flower
In top of this High Hill was set so lately,
That all the world might view it every hour,
Where she does live most sovereign and stately:
In all the world most celebrate and graced,
Being no less excelse, then highly placed.
The Argument of the first Seven Books.
IN the fields of the ancient and principal city of Leon in Spain, lying
along the banks of the river Ezla, lived a Shepherdess called Diana, whose
beauty was most sovereign above all others in her time. She loved, and was
dearly beloved again of a Shepherd called Syrenus, in whose mutual love was
as great chastity and virtue as might be. At the same time another Shepherd
called Syluanus loved her also more then himself, but so abhorred of the
Shepherdess, that there was not any thing in the world, which she hated more.
But it fell out, that as Syrenus was constrained to be out of the kingdom about
certain affairs, which could by no means be excused, nor left undone, and the
Shepherdess remaining at home very sad for his absence, time, and Dianas heart
with time were changed, who then was married to another Shepherd called
Delius, burying him, whom she had but of late so greatly loved, in unjust
oblivion. Who, after a whole year of his absence coming home again with
great affection and desire to see his beloved Shepherdess, knew before he
came, that she was already married. And from hence the first book begins: and
in the others following, they shall find diverse histories of accidents, that
have truly happened, though they go muffled under pastoral names and style.

The first Book of Diana of George of Montemayor.
Down from the hills of Leon came forgotten Syrenus, whom love, fortune, and
time did so entreat, that by the least grief, that he suffered in his
sorrowful life, he looked for no less then to loose the same. The unfortunate
Shepherd did not now bewail the harm, which her absence did threaten him, and
the fear of her forgetfulness did not greatly trouble his mind, because he
saw all the prophecies of his suspicion so greatly to his prejudice
accomplished, that now he thought he had no more misfortunes to menace him. But
the Shepherd coming to those green and pleasant meades, which the great river
Ezla watreth with his cristalline streams, the great felicity and content
came to his wandering thoughts, which sometimes he had enjoyed there, being
then so absolute a Lord of his own liberty, as now subject to one, who had
wrongfully enterred him in dark oblivion. He went musing of that happy time,
when in those meadows, and on those fair banks he fed his flocks, applying
then his mind in the only care and interest he had to feed them well: and
spending the rest of his hours in the only delight, that he took in the
sweet smell of those golden flowers, at that time especially, when cheerful
spring-tyde (the merry messenger of summer) is spread over the face of the
whole earth: sometimes taking his rebecke, which he ever carried very neat in a
scrip, and sometimes his bagpipe, to the tune of which he made most sweet
ditties, which of all the Shepherdesses of those hamlets thereabouts made him
most highly commended. The Shepherd busied not his thoughts in the
consideration of the prosperous and preposterous success of fortune, nor in
the mutabilitie and course of times, neither did the painful diligence and
aspiring mind of the ambitious Courtier trouble his quiet rest: nor the
presumption and coye disdain of the proud and nice Lady (celebrated only by
the appassionate vows and opinions of her amorous sutours) once occur to his
imaginations. And as little did the swelling pride, and small care of the
hawtie private man offend his quiet mind. In the field was he borne, bred, and
brought up: in the field he fed his flocks, and so out of the limits of the
field his thoughts did never range, until cruel love took possession of his
liberty, which to those he is commonly wont to do, who think themselves
freest from his tyranny. The sad Shepherd therefore came softly on his pace,
his eyes turned into fountains, the fresh hew of his face changed, and his
heart so tempered to suffer Fortunes unworthy disgraces, that if she would have
given him any content, she must have sought him a new heart to receive it. The
weeds that he did wear, was a long gray coat, as rugged as his haps,
carrying a sheepehooke in his right hand, and a scrip hanging on his left arm.
He laid himself down at the foot of a thick hedge, and began to cast
forth his eyes along those fair river banks, until their beams came to that
place, where first they beheld the beauty, grace, and rare virtues of the
Shepherdesle Diana, she, in whom skillful nature had consummated all
perfections, which in every part of her dainty body she had equally bestowed.
Then did his heart imagine that, which before it diuined of, That sometimes he
should find himself put amongst sorrowful memories. And then could not the
woeful Shepherd stop his tears from gushing out, nor smother his sighs which
came smoking out of his breast, but lifting up his eyes to heaven began thus to
lament. Ah memory (cruel enemy to my quiet rest) were not thou better
occupied to make me forget present corsies, then to put before mine eyes passed
contents? What say thou memory? That in this meadow I beheld my Lady Diana,
that in the same I began to feel that, which I shall never leave of to lament,
That near to that clear fountain (set about with high and green Sicamours)
with many tears she solemnly swear to me, that there was not the dearest thing
in the world, no, not the will of her parents, the persuasion of her brethren,
nor the importunities of her allies, that were able to remove her from her
settled thoughts? And when she spoke these words, there fell out of those fair
eyes tears like oriental pearls, which seemed to testify that, which
remained in her secret heart, commanding me, upon pain to be accounted of her a
man but of a base and abject mind, if I did not believe that, which so often
times she had told me. But stay yet a little Memory, since now thou have put
before me the foundations of my mishap (and such they were, that the joy, which
I then passed, was but the beginning of the grief which now I suffer) forget
not to tune me this iarring string, to put before mine eyes by one and one, the
troubles, the turmoiles, the fears, the suspects, the iealousies, the
mistrusts, and cares, which leave not him, that most truly loves. Ah memory,
memory, how sure am I of this answer at thy hands, that the greatest pain,
that I passed in these considerations, was but little in respect of that
content, which in lieu of them I received. Thou have great reason memory, and
the worse for me that it is so great: and lying and lamenting in this sort, he
took a paper out of his bosom, wherein he had a few green silken strings and
hair tied up together, and laying them open before him upon the green grass,
with abundance of tears he took out his Rebecke, not half so iocund as it
was wont to be, at what time he was in Dianas favor, and began to sing that
which follows.

Hair in change what liberty,
Since I saw you, have I seen?
How unseemly has this green
Been a sign of hope to me?
Once I thought no Shepherd might
In these fields be found (O hair)
(Though I did it with some fear)
Worthy to come near your sight.
Hair, how many times and tides
Did my fair Diana spy,
If I ware or left you by
And a thousand toys besides.
And how often in weeping sort
(Of deceitful tears O springs)
Was she jealous of the things,
Which I spoke or did in sport?
Those fair eyes which wrought my woe,
(Golden hair) tell me what fault
In believing them I caught,
When they did assure me so?
Saw you not how she did grieve,
Spilling daily many a tear,
Unto her till I did swear,
That I did her words believe?
Who more beauty ever knew
In a subject of such change,
Or more sorrows or more strange
In a love so perfect true?
On the sand her did I see
Sitting by you river bright,
Where her finger this did wright
Rather dead then changed be.
See how love bears us in hand,
Making us believe the words,
That a woman's wit affordes,
And recorded in the sand.
Syrenus had not so soon made an end of his sorrowful song, if that his tears
had not been at hand, for such an one was he, from whom fortune had cut off all
the ways and means of his remedy. Sorrowing thus, his Rebecke fell out of
his hand, and taking up the golden hair he put them in their place again,
saying, O pledges of the fairest and most disloyal Shepherdess that humane
eyes may behold, how with your own sasetie have you beguiled me? Woe is me,
that I cannot choose but see you, my whole grief consisting in having seen
you. And pulling his hand out of his scrip, he found a letter, that Diana in
time of his prosperity had sent him, which when he beheld, with a burning
sigh, that came from his very heart, he said. O letter, letter burned may
thou be by his hands, who may best do what he list: and woe be to him that
now shall read thee: But who may do it? And opening it, he saw that it said
thus.

Dianas letter to Syrenus.
HOw ill I should brook thy words (my Syrenus) who would not think, but that
love made thee utter them? Thou say I love thee not so much as I ought to
do, I know not whereby thou perceiuest it, and conceive not, how I should
love thee more. Behold, it is now no time not to believe me, because thou
see, that the love, which I bear thee, compels me to believe that, which
from thy very thoughts and affection thou do tell me. I imagine oftentimes,
that as thou supposest, that I love thee not (by loving thee more then my
self) so must thou think, that thou love me by hating me. Behold Syrenus,
how time has dealt better with thee then thou did imagine at the beginning
of our loves (with safety yet of mine honor) which owes thee all that it may:
wherein is not any thing, that I would not do for thy sake, beseeching thee,
as much as I may, not to trouble thy mind with jealousy and suspicions,
because thou know, how few escape out of their hands with safety of life,
which God give thee with all the content that I wish thee.


Is this a letter said Syrenus, sighing, to make one think, that oblivion
could enter into that heart, from whence such words came forth? And are these
words to be passed so slightly out of memory? And that she then spoke them,
and now forget me? O sorrowful man, with what great content did I read this
letter when my Mistress had sent it me, and how many times in the same hour
did I read it over again? But for every pleasure then, with seven fold pain
I am now apaide: and fortune could do no less with me, then to make me fall
from one extreme to another: For it had ill beseemed her with partial hand to
exempt me from that, which to all others she is commonly wont to do.

About this time from the hill beneath, that led from the village to the green
medowe, Syrenus might perceive a Shepherd coming down pace by pace, and
staying awhile at every step, sometimes looking up to heaven, and sometimes
casting his eyes upon the green meadow and fair river banks, which from aloft
he might easily view and discover (the thing which more augmented his sorrow)
seeing the place, where the beginning and root of his mishap did first grow.
Syrenus knew him by and by, and looking toward the place from whence he came,
said. Unfortunate Shepherd (though not half so much as I am) that art a
corriuall with me in Dianas love, to what end have thy bootelesse suites served
thee, and the disdain that this cruel Shepherdess has done thee, but to put
them all on my score? But if thou had known that the final sum of all thy
pains should have been like to mine, what greater favor had thou found at
fortunes hands, by preserving thee still in this hapless estate of life, then
by throwing me headlong down from it, when I did lest suspect it? But now
despised Syluanus took out his bagpipe, and playing on it a little, with great
sorrow and grief did sing these verses following.

I Am a lover, but was never loved,
Well have I loved, and will though hated ever,
Troubles I pass, but never any moved,
Sighs have I given, and yet she heard me never:
I would complain, and she would never hear me,
And fly from love, but it is ever near me:
Oblivion only blameless does beset me,
For that remembers never to forget me.
For every ill one semblant I do bear still,
To day not sad, nor yesterday contented,
To look behind, or go before I fear still,
All things to pass alike I have consented:
I am besides my self like him that daunceth,
And mooues his feet at every sound that chances:
And so all like a senseless fool disdaines me,
But this is nothing to the grief that pains me.
The night to certain lovers is a trouble,
When in the day some good they are attending:
And other some do hope to gain some double
Pleasure by night, and wish the day were ending:
With that, that greeueth some, some others ease them,
And all do follow that, that best does please them:
But for the day with tears I am a crying,
Which being come, for night I am a dying.
Of Cupid to complain who ever crave it,
In waves he writes and to the winds he cries:
Or seeks help of him, that never gave it:
For he at last thy pains and thee defieth.
Come but to him some good advise to lend thee,
To thousand od conceits he will commend thee.
What thing is then this love? It is a science,
That sets both proof and study at defiance.
My Mistress loved her Syrenus dearly,
And scorned me, whose loves yet I avouched,
Left to my grief, for good I held it clearly,
Though narrowly my life and soul it touched:
Had I but had a heaven as he once shining,
Love would I blame, if it had been declining.
But love did take no good from me he sent me,
For how can love take that he never lent me.
Love's not a thing, that any may procure it,
Love's not a thing, that may be bought for treasure;
Love's not a thing, that comes when any lure it,
Love's not a thing, that may be found at p^re:
For if it be not borne with thee, refrain it
To think, thou must be borne anew to gain it:
Then since that love shuns force, and does disclame it,
The scorned lover has no cause to blame it.
Syrenus was not idle when Syluanus was singing these verses, for with his
sighs he answered the last accents of his words, and with his tears did
solemnize that, which he conceived by them. The disdained Shepherd after he had
ended his song, began to reuolue in his mind the small regard he had of
himself, and how for the love of his cruel Mistress Diana, he had neglected
all his business and flocks: and yet he reckoned all this but small. He
considered, that his service was without hope of recompense, a great occasion
to make him, that has but small firmness, easily cut off the way of his love.
But his constancy was so great, that being put in the mids of all the
causes, which he had to forget her, who never thought of him, with his own
safety he came so easily out of them, and so clearly without prejudice to the
sincere love, which he bare his Shepherdess, that (without any fear) he never
committed any ignorance, that might turn to the hurt or hinderance of his
faith. But when he saw Syrenus at the fountain, he woondred to see him so
sad, not that he was ignorant of the cause of his sorrow, but because he
thought that if he had tasted but the lest favor, that Syrenus had sometimes
received at Dianas hands, such a contentment had been enough for him all his
life time. He came unto him and embraced him, and with many tears on both
sides they sat them down upon the green grass, Syluanus beginning to speak
in this sort. God forbid (Syrenus) that for the cause of my mishap, or at the
lest for the small remedy thereof, I should take delight or revenge in thine,
which though at mine own pleasure I might well do, yet the great love which I
bear to my Mistress Diana, would never consent thereunto, nor suffer me to
go against that, which with such good will and liking she had sometimes
favored: if thy sorrows grieve me not, let me never have end of mine; and in
such sort, that as soon as Diana was about to marry, if it killed not my heart
with thinking, that her marriage and thy death should have been both at one
time, let me never enjoy any other estate and condition of life then now I do.
Can thou then think (Syrenus) that I would wish thee ill, because Diana
loved thee? And that the favors that she did thee, were the occasions to make
me hate thee? What man, my faith was never so basely poysed, but that it was
ever so serviceable to my Mistress humor, not only in loving thee, but in
loving and honoring all that ever she loved. And yet thou have no cause to
thank me for this care and compassion of thy grief, for I am so dissolved
into cares, that for mine own good I would be sorry, how much more then for
other men's harms. This strange kind of the Shepherd Syluanus his greeting
caused no small admiration in Syrenus, and made him for a while in suspense
with himself, woondring at his great sufferance, and at the strange quality
of his love, that he did bear to his Shepherdess. But remembering himself at
last, he said. Have thou (Syluanus) happily, been borne for an example of
patience to those, who know not how to suffer the adversities, that fortune
puts before their eyes? Or may it be, that nature has given thee so strong a
mind, that it is not enough for thee to suffer thine own, but thou will
needs help others to support theirs? I see thee so conformable to the hard
condition of thy fortune, that, promising thee no help of remedy, thou do
ask no other, then that it has already given thee. I tell thee (Syluanus)
that time shows well by thee, how every day it discouers novelties and
strange conceits beyond the compass of man's imagination. O how much more
then ought this unfortunate Shepherd to emulate thee, by seeing thee suffer thy
greefes with such content, which thou might rather have done to him, when
thou saw him so happily enjoy his merry times. Have thou not seen how
greatly she favored me, and with what sweet and gracious words she
manifested her love unto me? Did thou not see, how she could never go with
her flocks to the river, or take her lambs out of the fold, or in the heat
of the day drive her sheep into the shades of these Sicamours without my
company? But for all this, I wish I may never see the remedy of my grief, if
I ever expected or desired any thing at Dianas hands that was repugnant to her
honor, or if any such thing did ever pass my thought. For such was her
beauty, her brave mind, her virtue, and such unspotted purity in her love to
me again, that they admitted no thought into my mind, which in prejudice of
her goodness and chastity I might have imagined. I believe it well (said
Syluanus sighing) for I can say as much by my self, and think moreover that
there was never any, that casting his eyes on Dianas peerless beauty, durst
desire any other thing, then to see her, and to converse with her. Although I
know not, whether such rare and excellent beauty might in some men's thoughts
(not subject to such a continent affection as ours) cause an excessive desire:
and especially, if they had seen her, as I did one day sitting with thee near
to you little brook, when she was kembing her golden hair, and thou holding
the glass unto her, wherein now and then she beheld her divine figure, though
neither of you both did (perhaps) know that I espied you from those high
bushes, near to the two great oaks, keeping (yet) in mind the verses, that
thou sungest upon the holding of the glass, whiles she was addressing her
resplendant tresses. How came they to thy hands, said Syrenus? The next day
following (said Syluanus) in that very place I found the paper wherein they
were written, and reading them, committed them to memory: And then came Diana
thither weeping for the loss of them, and asking me, if I had found them,
which was no small joy and contentment to me, to see my Mistress power forth
those tears, which I might speedily remedy. And this I remember was the first
hour, that ever I had a gentle and courteous word of her mouth (how greatly in
the mean time stood I need of favors) when she said unto me, that I might
highly pleasure her, to help her to that, which so earnestly she sought for:
which words, like holy relikes, I kept in my mind; for in a whole year after
I took no regard of all the woes and greefes that I passed, for joy of that
one only word, which had in it but a small appearance of joy and happiness.
Now as thou love thy life (said Syrenus) rehearse those verses, which, thou
said, I did sing, since thou have them so well by heart. I am content, said
Syluanus: and these they were.

FOr a favor of such worth
In no doubt I do remain,
Since with self same coin again
(Mistress) thou art paid right forth.
For if I enjoy with free
Pleasure, seeing before me
Face and eyes, where Cupid stands:
So thou seeing in my hands,
That which in thine eyes I see.
Let not this to thee seem ill,
That of thy beauty divine
Thou see but the figure shine,
And I natures perfect skill:
Yet a thought, that is free and set
Never yet in Cupids net,
Better then the bond beholdes,
Though the one the lively mouldes,
The Other but the counterfeit.
When Syrenus had heard the song out, he said to Syluanus. I wish that love,
gentle Shepherd, with hope of impossible felicity may remedy my greefes, if
there be any thing in the world, that I would sooner choose to pass away my
sorrowful life with, then in thy sweet and gracious company, and if it
greeues me not now to the heart, that Diana is so cruel unto thee, that she
has not (which well she might have done) once thanked thee, nor showen thee a
favorable and grateful countenance for all thy long and loyal service, and
for so true love that thou have showed therein. I could with a little content
me (said Syluanus sighing) if my angry fortune would persuade Diana to give
me some hope, which she might well afford without stain to her honor, or
breach of faith to thee. But so hard hearted is she, that not only when I crave
it, she denies it me, and flies from me when I come in her sight, but to
comfort me with any small sign or token, whereby I might imagine or hope
hereafter to enjoy it, she would never yet consent. Whereupon I said many
times to my self. It may fall out that this stony hearted and fierce Tygresse
may one day conceive some displeasure against Syrenus, for revenge whereof, and
to despite him, she will perhaps show me some fained favor; for so disgraced
and comfortless a man as I am would be glad but with fained favors to content
him, and to embrace them as true ones. And when thou wentst out of this
country, then I infallibly persuaded my self, that the remedy of my grief
was knocking (as it were) at my door, and that oblivion was the certainest
thing to be expected after absence, and especially in a woman's heart. But after
when I saw her tears, her little rest and staying in the village, her delight
in seeking out solitary places, and her continual sighs, when I say I beheld
all these things, God knows with what impatience and grief of mind I felt
them. For though I knew, that time was an approved physician of sorrow, which
absence is commonly wont to procure, yet I desired not, that my Mistress
might pass one hour of grief, although I hoped to get thereby two thousand
of content. A few days after thy departure I saw her at the foot of yonder
hill, leaning against an oak, and staying her tender breast upon her
sheepehooke, where she stood in that sort a good while before she espied me,
who, though afterward she lifted up her eyes, yet her tears that issued out
so fast, did also hinder her (I think) that she could not well perceive me.
She should then be musing on her solitary and sorrowful life, and on the
grief that by thy absence she conceived: But a little after that, not without
many tears (accompanied with as many painful sighs) she took out her
bagpipe which she carried in a fine scrip, and began to play on it so sweetly,
that the hills, and dales, the rivers, the enamoured birds, and the rockie
mountains of that thick wood were amazed and ravished with her sweet
music. And leaving her bagpipe, to the tune that she had played, she began to
sing this song following.

O Eyes, that see not him, who looked on you
When that they were the mirrours of his sight,
What can you now behold to your content?
Green flowrie meade where often I did view,
And staid for my sweet friend with great delight,
The ill, which I do feel with me lament.
Here did he tell me how his thoughts were bent,
And (wretch) I lent an ear;
But angry more then whelplesse Bear
Presumptuous him I called, and indiscreet:
And he laid at my feet,
Where yet (poor man) me thinks I see him lie:
And now I wish that I
Might see him so, as then I did: O happy time were this,
Sweet shadowed river banks tell me where my Syrenus is.
Yon is the river bank, this is the meade,
From thence the hedge appeeres and shadowed lay,
Wherein my flocks did feed the sauourie grass:
Behold the sweet noys'd spring, where I did lead
My sheep to drink in heat of all the day,
When here my sweetest friend the time did pass:
Under that hedge of lively green he was;
And there behold the place,
Where first I saw his sweetest face
And where he saw me, happy was that day,
Had not my ill haps way
To end such happy times, O spring,
O hedge, and every thing
Is here, but he, for whom I pain continually, and miss,
Sweet shadowed river banks tell me where my Syrenus is.
Here have I yet his picture that deceaues me,
Since that I see my Shepherd when I view it,
(Though it were better from my soul absented)
When I desire to see the man, that leaves me
(Which fond deceit time shows and makes me rue it)
To yonder spring I go, where I consented
To hang it on yon Sallow, then contented
I sit by it, and after
(Fond love) I look into the water,
And see us both, then am I so content here,
As when his life he spent here:
This bare devise a while my life sustaineth;
But when no more it faineth,
My heart surcharged with anguish, and cries out, but yet amiss,
Sweet shadowed river banks tell me where my Syrenus is.
Speaking to it no words it is replying,
And then (me thinks) revenge of me it takes,
Because sometime an answer I despised.
But (woeful soul) I say unto it crying,
Syrenus speak, since now thy presence makes
Aboade, where never once my thoughts surmized:
Say, in my soul art thou not only prized?
But not a word it says,
And as before me there it staieth,
To speak, my soul does pray it (in conclusion)
O what a brave delusion,
To ask a simple picture tongue or senses?
O time, in what offenses
Of vainest hope is my poor soul so subject unto his?
Sweet shadowed river banks tell me where my Syrenus is.
I never can go homeward with my sheep,
When to the west the sun begins to gyre,
Nor to the foldes return from our town,
But every where I see, and (seeing) weep
The sheep cote of my joy and sweet desire
Broken, decayed, and thrown unto the ground:
Careless of lambs and sheep, there sit I down
A little while, until
The herdesmen feeding on the hill,
Cry out to me, saying, O Shepherdess
What do thy thoughts possess,
And let thy sheep go feeding in the grain?
Our eyes do see it plain:
For them the tender grass in pleasant vales does grow ywisse,
Sweet shadowed river banks tell me where my Syrenus is.
Yet in thine own opinion greater reason
(Syrenus) it had been, thus to have started
With more constraint, and force then I did see yet,
But whom do I accuse of guiltless treason?
For what could make him stay and not have parted,
If fate and fortune thereto did agree yet?
No fault of thine it was, nor could it be yet
In my belief, have ended
Thou would in ought, or have offended
Our love so plain and simple, as to leave it
Nor will I once conceive it,
Though many shows and signs thereof there were yet:
O no, the fates did swear it,
With clouds of sorrow to obscure my heaven of joy and bliss,
Sweet shadowed river banks tell me where my Syrenus is.
My song take heed thou go where I betake thee,
Yet shall thou not forsake me:
For it may be that fortune will with such a humor place thee,
That may term thee importunate and by that means disgrace thee.
After Syluanus had made an end of Dianas amorous song, he said to Syrenus,
who in hearing the loving verses that his Shepherdess had sung after his
departure, was almost besides his wits. When fair Diana was singing this song,
it was seen by my tears if I felt not those at my heart, which for thy sake
she powered out: but making as though I had not heard, nor seen any thing, by
dissembling the matter the best I could, (which I could scarce do) I came to
the place where she was. Syrenus interrupting him at these words, said. Stay
a little Syluanus, (I pray thee) and tell me what heart was able to change,
that ^elt such passions? O constancy, O firmness, how seldom and how small a
time do you soiourne in a woman's heart? That the more subject she is to love
and to embrace you, the more ready she is to leave and forget you. And surely I
was of this opinion, that this imperfection was incident to all women, but to
my Mistress Diana, in whom I ever thought that nature had not omitted to frame
every good and perfect thing. But Syluanus after this prosecuting his history,
said unto him. When I came near to the place where Diana was, I saw her
fixing her fair eyes in the clear fountain, where using her accustomed
manner, she began to say. O woeful eyes, how sooner shall you want tears to
water my cheeks, then continual occasions to power you out? O my Syrenus, I
would to God, before the winter with his blustering storms despoyles the green
meadow of fresh and fragrant flowers, the pleasant valleys of fine and tender
grass, and the shadowed trees of their green leaves, that these eyes may
behold again thy presence so much desired of my loving soul, as mine is
eschewed and (perhaps) hated of thine: With this she lifted up her divine
countenance, and by chance espied me, and going about to dissemble her
sorrowful complaint, she could not so cunningly do it, but that her tears
made it too manifest, by stopping the passage of her dissimulation. She rose up
at my coming, and said. Sit down here Syluanus, and see how thou art now
(to mine own cost) sufficiently revenged of me. Now does this miserable woman
pay thee home again those pains, which thou did suffer (as thou said) for
her sake, if it be true, that she was ever, or yet is the cause of them. Is it
possible Diana (said I again) that these ears may hear these words? In the
end, I perceive, I am not deceived by saying, that I was borne to discover
every day new kinds of torments for thy sake, and thou to requite them with
the greatest rigor in the world. Do thou now therefore doubt, that thou art
the cause of my grief? If thou art not, who (do thou imagine) can deserve so
great love as this: or what heart in the world (but thine) had not before this
been mollified and made pitiful by so many tears? And to these I added many
other words, which now I do not so well remember. But the cruel enemy of my
rest cut off my words, saying. If thy tongue, Syluanus, fondly presumes to
speak to me again of these matters, and not to entertain the time with talk
of my Syrenus, I will (at thine own pleasure) leave thee to enjoy the delight
of this fair fountain, where we now sit. For know thou not, that every
thing that intreates not of the goodness of my Shepherd is both hateful and
hurtful to my ears? And that she, that loves well, thinks that time but
ill employed, which is not spent in hearing of her love? Whereupon, fearing
least my words might have been an occasion to have made me loose that great
content and happiness, that I had by her sweet sight and presence, I sealed
them up with silence, and was a good while without speaking a word, only
delighting my self with the felicity I had, by contemplating her sovereign
beauty, until night with greater haste then I desired, came on, when both of
us then were constrained to go homewards with our flocks to our village. Then
Syrenus giving a great sigh, said. Thou have told me strange things,
Syluanus, and all (wretched man) for the increase of my harms, since I have
tried too soon the small constancy that is in a woman's heart, which for the
love that I bear to them all (for her sake) in very truth greeues me not a
little. For I would not, Shepherd, hereafter hear it spoken, that in a
moulde, where nature has conioined such store of peregrine beauty, and mature
discretion, there should be a mixture of such unworthy inconstancy as she has
used toward me. And that, which comes nearest to my heart, is, that time shall
make her understand, how ill she has dealt with me, which cannot be, but to
the prejudice of her own content and rest. But how lives she, and with what
contentment after her marriage? Some tell me, said Syluanus, that she brooks
it but ill, and no marvel, for that Delius her husband though he be (as thou
know) enriched with fortunes gifts, is but poor in those of nature and
good education: For, thou know, how lowtish of spirit and body he is, and
namely for those things, which we Shepherds take a pride in, as in piping,
singing, wrestling, darting of our sheepehookes, and dancing with the wenches
on Sunday, it seems that Delius was borne for no more, but only to behold
them. But now good Shepherd, said Syrenus, take out thy Kit, and I will take my
Bagpipe, for there is no grief that is not with music relented and passed
away, and no sorrow, which is not with the same again increased. And so both
the Shepherdes tuning, and playing on their instruments with great grace and
sweetness began to sing that which follows.

Syluanus. SYrenus, what thought thou when I was viewing thee
From yonder hedge, and in great grief suspending me
To see with what affliction thou were ruing thee?
There do I leave my flock, that is attending me:
For while the cleerest sun goes not declining it,
Well may I be with thee, by recommending me
Thine ill (my Shepherd) for that (by defining it)
Is passed with less cost, then by concealing it:
And sorrow (in the end) departs resigning it.
My grief I would recount thee, but revealing it,
It does increase, and more, by thus recording me
How in most vain laments I am appealing it:
My life I see (O grief) long time's affoording me
With dying heart, and have not to revive me it,
And an unwonted ill I see aboording me,
From whom I hoped a mean, she does deprive me it:
But (sooth) I hoped it never, for bewraying it,
With reason she might gain say to contriue me it.
My passions did solicit her, essaying yet
With no importune means, but seemly grounding them,
And cruel love went hindering and dismaying it.
My pensive thoughts were carefully rebounding them
On every side, to fly the worst, restraining them,
And in unlawful motions not confounding them.
They prayed Diane, in ils, that were not fayning them,
To give a mean (but never to repel it thee)
And that a wretch might so be entertaining them.
But if to give it me, I should refell it thee,
What would thou do (O grief) that thus adiuring it,
Feign would I hide mine ill, and never tell it thee.
But after (my Syrenus) thus procuring it,
A Shepherdess I do inuoke (the fairest one)
And the end goes thus, unto my cost enduring it.
Syrenus. Syluanus mine, a love, of all the rarest one,
A beauty, blinding presently disclosing it,
A wit, and in discretion the waryest one,
A sweet discourse, that to the ear opposing it,
The hardest rocks entendereth in subduing them.
What shall a hapless lover feel in loosing it?
My little sheep I see, and think in viewing them,
How often times I have beheld her feeding them,
And with her own to foulde them, not eschewing them.
How often have I met her drive, and speeding them
Unto the river, in the heat, where resting her
With great care she was telling yet, and heeding them.
After, if that she was alone, deuesting her,
Thou should have seen the bright sun beams envying her
Resplendant hair, to kembe them manifesting her.
But on the sudden meeting, and espying her,
(My dearest friend Syluane) how often incended was
Her fairest face, with orient blushing dying her?
And with what grace, how mildly reprehended was
My staying long, which she did ask, correcting me?
Which if I grieved, with blandishments amended was.
How many days have I found her expecting me
At this clear fountain, when that I was seeking her
Along that thickest hedge, to grief subiecting me?
All pains and troubles what so ere (in meeting her)
Of sheep, or lambs, we straight way were forgetting them,
When she saw me, or when that I was greeting her.
Some other times (Syluane) we tuned (in setting them)
Our Bagpipe and the Rebeck, which we played on,
And then my verses sung we, nothing letting them.
After with bow and arrows we estraied on,
Sometimes with nets, and she never refraining me,
And came not home without some chase we prayed on.
Thus fortune went by these means entertaining me:
Reserving for some greater ill, and tendering me,
Which has no end, but by deaths end restraining me.
Syluanus. Syrenus, that most cruel love, engendring me
Such grief, stints not, nor hinders the persuading me
Of so much ill: I die therein remembering me.
Diane I saw, but straight my joy was failing me,
When to my only sight she was opposing her:
And (to my grief) I saw long lift inuading me.
How many times have I found her, in losing her,
How often lost, in finding and espying her?
And I my death and service not disclosing her.
My life I lost, when meeting I was eying her
Fair lovely eyes, which, full of anger, cruelly
She turned to me, when that my speech was plying her:
But her fair hair, where Cupides in their f^ll lie,
When she undid and kemb'd, unseen, then leaving me,
My ils returned most sensibly, which rue well I.
But pitilesse Diana then perceiving me,
Turned like a cruel serpent, that in winding it,
Assailes the lion: the my life be reauing me.
One time false hope (deceitfully but blinding it)
My heart maintained, ewen for my comfort choosing it,
But afterward in such an error finding it,
It mocked hope, and then it vanished loosing it.
Not long after that the Shepherdes had made an end of their sorrowful songs,
they espied a shepherdess coming out of the thicket near to the river,
playing on a Bagpipe, and singing with as sweet a grace and delicate voice, as
with no less sorrow and grief, which by her countenance and gesture she so
lively expressed, that it darkened a great part of her excellent beauty:
Whereupon Syrenus, who had not of a long time fed in those valleys, asked
Syluanus what she was, who answered: This is a fair Shepherdess, that has
sed but a few days since in these meadows, complaining greatly of love, and
(as some say) with good cause, though others say, that she has been a long
time mocked by the discovery of a deceit: Why, said Syrenus, lies it then in
her to perceive it, and to deliver her self from it? It does, said Syluanus,
for I think there is no woman, though never so much in love, whose wits and
senses the force and passion of love can so much blind, that may not perceive
whether she be beloved again or not. I am of a contrary opinion, said
Syrenus. Of a contrary, said Syluanus? Why, thou shall not flatter thy self
so much, for, the affiance which thou had in Dianus words, has cost thee
dear, and yet I blame thee not, considering that as there is none, whom her
beauty ouercomes not, so is there not any, whom her words deceive not. How
know thou that, since she never deceived thee by word nor deed. It is true,
said Syluanus, that I was ever (if so I may term it) vndeceiued by her, but I
durst (by that which has hitherto fallen out) that she never meant any deceit
to me, but only to deceive thee. But let us leave this, and harken to this
Shepherdess, that is a great friend to Diana, who is well worthy for the
commendable report of her wisdom and good graces to be harkened unto. But now
was the fair Shepherdess coming toward the fountain, and began to sing
this Sonnet following.

A Sonnet.
MIne eyes, once have I seen you more contented,
And my poor heart, more joyful I have known thee:
Woe to the cause, whose greefes have over grown thee,
And yet whose sight your comforts once presented.
But as this cruel fortune has invented
(Sweet joy) to root thee up, where she had sown thee,
So now (Seluagia) she has over thrown thee:
Thy pleasures scarce begun, she has tormented.
Let me to time or to his changing take me,
Let me with motions out of order lead me,
Then I shall see how free my heart is to me.
Then will I trust in hopes that not forsake me,
When I have staide her wheels that ouertread me,
And beaten down the fates that do undo me.
After that the Shepherdess had made an end of her song, she came directly to
the fountain where the Shepherdes were, and while she was a coming, Syluanus,
smiling, said. Mark but those wo^, and the burning sigh wherewith she ended
her song, what witnesses they are of her inward love and grief. Thereof I have
no doubt, said Syrenns, for I would to God I could so speedily remedy her
sorrow, as I believe (to my great grief) all that she has by doleful song
uttered. And talking thus together, Seluagia was by this time come, and knowing
the Shepherds, courteously saluted them, saying. What do you in this green and
pleasant meadow, despised Shepherds? Thou say not amiss, fair Seluagia, by
asking us what we do, said Syluanus, for we do so little in respect of that
we should do, that we can never conclude and bring any thing to pass, that
in our loves we desire to have. Marvel not thereat, said Seluagia, for there
are certain things, that before they end, they that desire them, are ended.
True, said Syluanus, if a man puts his rest in a woman's disposition, for she
will first end his life, before she will end or determine to give him any
favor, that he is still hoping to receive at her hands. Unhappy women are
these, said Seluagia, that are so ill entreated by your words: But more
unfortunate are those men, said Syluanus, that are worse handled by your
deeds. Can there be a thing more base and of less account, then that you are
so ready for the lightest thing in the world to forget them, to whom you have
borne the greatest love? For, absent your selves but a day from him whom you
love well, and then shall he need to commence his suite new again. Two things
I gather, said Seluagia, by thy speech, which make me wonder not a little. The
one, to see thy tongue go so much awrie, and contrary to that which I ever
coniectured, and knew by thy behavior and conditions. For I thought, when I
heard thee talk of thy love, that in the same thou were a Phoenix, and that
none of the best lovers to this day came ever near to the extreme that thou
had, by loving a Shepherdess, whom I know, a cause sufficient enough not to
speak ill of women, if thy malice were not greater then thy love. The second,
that thou speak of a thing thou understand not; for to blame
forgetfulness, who never had any trial thereof, must rather be attributed to
folly and want of discretion, then to any thing else. For if Diana did never
remember thee, how can thou complain of her oblivion? I think to answer,
said Syluanus, both these points, if I shall not weary thine ears with
hearing me. To the first, saying, That I wish I may never enjoy any more
content then now I have, if any (by the greatest example that he is able to
allege me) can with words set down the force and power, that this thanklesse
and disloyal Shepherdess, whom thou know, and I would I knew not, has
over my subjected soul. But the greater the love is I bear her, the more it
greeues me, that there is any thing in her that may be reprehended. For here
is Syrenus, who was favored more of Diana, then any lover in the world of his
Mistress, and yet she has now forgotten him, as thou fair Shepherdess, and
all we do know. To the other point, where thou say, that I have no reason
to speak ill of that, whereof I never had experience, I say, that the
Physician may judge of that grief, which he himself never had: and will
further satisfy thee, Seluagia, with this opinion of me, that I bear no hate
to women, nor (in very truth) wish them ill, for there is nothing in the
world, which I would desire to serve with more reverence and affection. But in
requital of my zealous love, I am but ill entreated, and with such intolerable
disdain, which made me speak so much by her, who takes a pride and a glory
in giving me such cause of grief, Syrenus, who had held his peace all this
while, said to Seluaggia: If thou would but listen to me, fair
Shepherdess, blameless thou would hold my rival, or (to speak more
properly) my dear friend Syluanus. But tell me, what is the reason, that you
are so inconstant, that in a moment you throw a Shepherde down from the top
of his good hap, to the deepest bottom of misery: know thou whereunto I
attribute it? To nothing else but to your own simplicity: because you have no
perfect understanding to conceive the good, nor know the value of that, you
have in your hands. You meddle with love and are incapable to judge what it
means; how do you, then, know to behave your selves in it. I tell thee,
Syrenus, said Seluagia, that the cause why Shepherdesses forget their lovers,
is no other, but because they are forgotten of them again. These are things,
which love does make and undo, things which time and place alters and buries
in silence, but not for the want of women's due knowledge in them, of whom there
have been an infinite number in the world, who might have taught men to live,
and to love, if love were a thing that might be taught or learned: But yet for
all this, there is not (I think) any baser estate of life then a woman's; for
if they speak you fair, you think them by and by to die for your love; if
they speak not to you, you think them proud and fantastical; if their
behavior be not to your liking, you think them hypocrites. They have no kind
of pastaunce, which you think not to exceed: if they hold their peace, you
say they are fools: if they speak, you say they are so troublesome, that none
will abide to hear them: if they love you the most in the world, you think
they go about to deceive you: if they forget you, and fly the occasions of
bringing their good names in question, you say they are inconstant, and never
firm in one mind and purpose: So that the good or ill woman can do no more
to please your minds, then never to exceed the limits of your desires and
dispositions. If every one fair Seluagia, said Syrenus, were endued with this
finenesse of wit and grave understanding as thou art, they would never give us
occasions to make us complain of their small regard in their love. But
because we may know what reason thou have to find thy self so much aggreeued
with it, so may God give thee comfort needful for such an ill, as thou
would vouchsafe to tell us the substance of thy love, and all the occurrents
which have hitherto befallen thee therein. For (it seems) thou can tell us
more of ours, then we are able to inform thee, to see, if his effects, which
thou have passed, will give thee leave to speak so freely as thou do: for by
thy words thou seem to have more experience in them, then any woman that
ever I knew. If I were not the most tried woman in them, said Seluagia, I am
(at the lest) the worst entreated by them, as any ever was, and such an one,
who with greater reason then the rest may complain of loves frantic effects
(a thing sufficient to make one speak enough in it.) And because by that which
is past, thou may know that which I now suffer, to be a devilish kind of
passion, commit your misfortunes a while to silence, and I will tell you greater
then ever you heard before.

IN the mighty and invincible kingdom of Portugal run two great rivers,
which wearied with watring the greater part of our Spain, not far from one
another enter into the maine Ocean. Between both which are situated many old
and ancient towns, by reason of the great fertility of the soil, which has
not the like in the whole world. The inhabitants lives of this province are so
much sequestered and estranged from things, that may disturb the mind, that
there is not any (but when Venus by the mighty hands of her blind son
means to show her power) who troubles his mind more, then to sustain a quiet
life, by maintaining a mean and competent living with those things, which for
their poor estates are requisite. The men's endeavors are naturally disposed to
spend their life time in sufficient content, and the women's beauties to take it
from him, who lives most assured of his liberty. There are many houses in the
shadowed forrestes, and pleasant vales, the which being nourished by the silver
deaw of sovereign heaven, and tilled by their inhabitants, favorable summer
forgets not to offer up into their hands the fruits of their own travels,
and provision for the necessity of their lives. I lived in a village near to
great Duerus one of these two rivers, where Minerua has a most stately temple
built unto her, the which in certain times of the year is visited of all, or
most of the Shepherdesses, that live in that province: who, with the fair
Nymphs thereabouts, begin, a day before the holy feast, with sweet songs and
hymns to celebrate it, and the Shepherdes likewise to solemnize the same with
challenges of running, leaping, wrestling, and pitching the bar, appointing
several rewards and gifts for them, that bear the bell away, sometimes a
garland of green Iuie, sometimes a fine Bagpipe, Flute, or Sheepehooke of
knottie Ash, and other guerdons which Shepherdes make most account of. But the
festival time being come, I with other Shepherdesses my friends and
acquaintance, leaving of our servile and worke-day apparel, and putting on the
best we had, went the day before to that place, determining to watch all that
night in the temple, as other years before we were wont to do. Being therefore
in company of my friends, we saw coming in at the door a Beuie of fair
Shepherdesses, attended on by jolly Shepherdes, who leaving them within, and
having done their due orisons, went out again to the pleasant valley: for the
order of that province was, that no Shepherd might enter into the temple, but
to do his devotion, and then presently to go forth again, until the next
day, when all came in together to participate the ceremonies and sacrifices,
which were made there. The reason was, because the Shepherdesses and Nymphs
might sit alone, and without trouble or occasion to think of any other matter,
then devoutly to celebrate the feast, and to make merry with one another,
according to the ancient accustomed manner. And the Shepherdes to remain
amongst themselves without the temple in a fair green meade hard by, where by
the brightness of nocturnall Diana they might disport themselves. But the
foresaid Shepherdesses being come into the sumptuous temple (after they had
said a few prayers, and presented their offerings upon the altar) they placed
themselves down by us. And it was my ill hap, that one of them sat next unto
me, to make me unfortunate as long as her memory did importune me. The
Shepherdesses came in muffled, for their faces were covered with white vailes
tied up above their hats, which were artificially made of fine straw, and so
curiously wrought with many works of the same, that it excelled the glittering
gold in show. But as I was eying her, that sat next unto me, I perceived how
she did seldom cast off her eyes from beholding me again; and when I looked
on her, I might see her cast them down, fayning as though she would see me,
but in such sort, that I might not perceive it. I did not meanly desire to
know what she was, because, if she had spoken to me, I might not upon
ignorance have made a fault by not knowing her again, who all the while that I
sat thinking of some other matter, did never cast her eyes off me, but viewed
me so much, that a thousand times I was about to speak unto her, being
suddenly enamoured of those fair eyes, which of all her face were only
discovered and open. But she seeing me sitting in this perplexity, pulled out
the fairest, and most dainty hand, that ever I did see, and taking mine into
it, did with a sweet and amorous eye a little while behold me: whereupon being
now so stricken in love, as tongue cannot express, I said unto her. It is not
only this hand, most fair and gracious Shepherdess, that is always ready to
serve thee, but also her heart and thoughts, to whom it appertains. Ismenia
(for so she was called, that was the cause of my disquiet and molested
thoughts) having now complotted in her mind to mock me (as you shall hear)
answered me softly, that none might hear her, in this manner, saying. I am so
much thine, sweet Shepherdess, that, as such an one, I boldly presumed to do
that which I did, praying thee not to be offended with me, for no sooner I
viewed thy fair and amiable face, but presently I lost the power of my
conquered soul: I was so glad to hear these words, that coming nearer unto
her, with a smile I answered her thus. How can it be, gentle Shepherdess, that
thy self being so passing fair, should fall in love with her, who wants it
so much, to make her have the name of such an one, and more, with a woman as I
am. It is that love (fair Shepherdess) said she again, that seldom ends,
suruiuing all destinies, and which is neither subject to change of time, nor
fortune. If the condition of my estate (said I again) could prompt me so fit
an answer, as thy wise and discreet words do enforce, the desire which I
have to serve thee, should not let me from manifesting the same by most loving
terms, but in these few ones believe me (fair Shepherdess) that the
resolution which I have to be thine, not death it self can determine, nor take
away. After these words, our mutual imbracings were so many, and our loving
speeches to one another so often redoubled, and of my part so true and
unfeigned, that we regarded not the Shepherdesses songs, nor beheld the daunces,
nor other sportes that were made in the temple. And now by this time was I
earnest with Ismenia to tell me her name, and to put off her muffler, both
which not only she cunningly excused, but very suttly turned her talk to
another matter. But midnight being now past, and I having the greatest desire
in the world to see her face, and to know her name, and of what village she
was, began to complain of her, and to tell her, that it was not possible that
the love, which by her words she protested to bear me, was so great, since
having told her my name, she concealed hers from me: and that loving her as I
did, it was impossible for me to live, unless I knew whom I loved, or from
whence I might hear news from my love again, and many other things I told
her in so good earnest, that the same, and my tears helped to move false
Ismenias heart: who rising up and taking me by the hand, to carry me aside into
some secret place, where none might hear her, began to say these words unto
me, making as though they came out from the bottom of her heart. Fair
Shepherdess, borne only for the unrest and torment of a soul, that hitherto
has lived as exempt and free as possible might be, who can choose, but tell
thee that thou requirest at my hands, having now made thee the sole Mistress
of my liberty? Unhappy me, that the change of my habit has deceived thee,
although the deceit redoundes to mine own harm: The muffler, which thou
intreatest me to pull off, behold, to please thee, I take away, but to tell
thee my name makes not much to thy purpose, when as hereafter (though I would
not) thou shall see me oftener then thou may well suffer. And speaking these
words, and pulling off her muffler, mine eyes beheld a face, whose
countenance, though it was somewhat manlike, yet was the favor and beauty of
it so singular, that it made me to wonder. But Ismenia prosecuting her speech,
said. And because thou may know (fair Shepherdess) the sum of this
pain which thy beauty has made me feel, and that the words which have
passed between us but in sport, are true, know, that I am a man, and not a
woman, as thou take me to be: These Shepherdesses, which thou see here in
my company (my kinswomen and familiar acquaintance) to make some sport and to
laugh, apparelled me in this sort; for otherwise I could not have stayed in the
temple, by reason of the old custom so strictly observed here. When I heard
these words, and perceived as I said before, not those effeminate looks in
her face, nor that demure modesty in her eyes, which maidens for the most part
are wont to have, I verily believed that all was true that she told me, and
then was so far besides my self, that I knew not what to answer her. Yet mine
eyes did still contemplate that most perfect beauty, and marked those words,
which with so great dissimulation she had told me: for never could any make a
false and fained tale seem more apparent and true as that crafty and cruel
Shepherdess did. Then I felt my self so entangled in her love, and so well
content to hear that she was enamoured of me again, as (gentle Shepherdes) I
am not able to declare. And though I had not till then any experience of love
passions (a cause sufficient not to make me express them) yet forcing my self
the best I could, in this sort I said unto her. Fair Shepherdess, that have
(to make me live without liberty, or for some other respect, which fortune
best knows) taken upon thee the habit of her, who for thy love has entirely
vowed her affections to thee, thine own had sufficed to overcome me, without
making me yield with mine own weapons. But who can fly from that, which
fortune has allotted her? Thrice happy might I have thought my self, if on
purpose thou had done that, which by chance, and only for merriment thou
have devised. For, if by changing thy natural habit, it had been only to have
seen me, and to unfold to me thy amorous desires, I would then have
attributed it to mine own deserts, and (no doubt) to thy great affection, but
seeing that the intent was of an other consequence, although the effect has
resulted to this thou see, it contents me not so greatly (I must needs
confess) being done in such sort as I have said. And let not this desire
amaze nor grieve thee; for there is no greater sign of a perfect lover, then
to desire to be beloved of him, to whom she has wholly offered up her liberty.
Whereupon by that thou have heard me utter, thou may gather, how thy sight
has blinded my understanding, and made me become such an one as I am,
beseeching thee to use the power thou have over me, in such sort, that I may
entertain this opinion, to think my self happy and fortunate to the end of
our love, the which for my part (while life does last) shall not die in my
faithful and loving breast. Deceitful Ismenia was so skillful to frame a
subtle answer to my simple words, and to feign speeches so fit for the
subject of our talk, that none could escape the cunning deceit, whereinto I
fell, unless fortune by the thread of wisdom had vnwound her out of so
intricate a laberinth. And in this sort we were together until morning came
on, talking of that, which she may imagine, that has passed the like
disordered occurrents in love. She told me her name was Alanius, her country
village Gallia, three miles from our town, where we appointed to meet, and
see one another many times together. But now began the duskie welkin to wax
clear, and hasty morning was come, when both of us with many imbracings,
tears, and sighs were constrained to depart from one another. She went from
me, and I, turning my head back to behold her, and to see if she looked back
at me again, perceived how she went away smiling to her self, whereof
(thinking that mine eyes did but deceive me) I made no regard at all. Away she
went with the company that came with her, and I with more then I brought,
since in my troubled mind I carried back with me the eyes and Idea of fained
Alanius, the words, by the which she had opened to me her malicious and
ridiculous love, the imbracings, that I received of her, and the cruel grief,
which until that time I had never proved before. And now you must know (good
Shepherdes) that this false and subtle Ismenia had a cousin called Alanius, whom
she loved more then her self, for in countenance and eyes, and in every other
part and lineaments, she resembled him so much, that if they had not been of
different sex, none could have judged the one from the other. And the love
which she did bear him, was so great, that when I asked her her name in the
temple, and seeing that she must needs tell me some Shepherdes name or other,
the first that came to her mind and mouth, was that of Alanius. For there is
no greater certainty, then that the tongue in a sudden matter does ever
concur with the heart. And her the Shepherd loved well, but yet not so much as
she did him. But now when the Shepherdesses were come out of the temple, to go
home to their villages, Ismenia went to her kinsman Alanius, who, to show her
all the courtesy, that in so great and mutual love was requisite, leaving the
yongsters company of his town, accompanied her all alone: whereat Ismenia was
not a little proud and joyful: who to entertain the time with some talk by
the way, told him all that had passed between us, not omitting any thing, and
not without great sport and laughter of them both, telling him also, that I
went away with firm belief, that she was a man, and greatly enamoured of her.
When Alanius heard these novelties, he dissembled the matter the best he
could, saying, that it was a pleasant and pretty jest. And picking all out of
her, that had passed between us, so that (he thought) there was nothing left
untold, they came to their town. But eight days after (which I thought were
eight thousand years) the traitor Alanius (for so I may with greater reason
call him, then he had afterward to cast me off) came to our town, and stood
attending me in such a place, where I could not choose but see him, as I was
going with other maids to the fountain not far from the town: whom when I
espied, I was rapt out of mind for extreme and sudden joy, thinking he was the
very same, that in the habit of a Shepherdess had spoken to me in the temple;
whereupon I made him some secret signs to come to the fountain, whither I was
going, who knowing my meaning, performed forthwith my mind. Thither he came,
and there we were talking together as long as time would give us leave, and
the love (of my side at the lest) was so strongly confirmed between us, that
though the deceit had been discovered (as not many days after it was known)
it was yet of so great force and virtue, that it could never make me alienate
my mind and affection from him. And I also believed, that Alanius loved me
well, and that especially from that time he was greatly enamoured of me, though
afterward in effect he did not so well declare it: so that for certain days
together our love happily continued, and was handled with the greatest secrecy
that might be, which was not yet so great, but that subtle Ismenia in the end
perceived it: who (seeing her self to be the only cause thereof, and most in
fault) not only by deceiving me, but by ministering occasion to Alanius of
discovering himself, and by that which passed, to fall in love with me, and to
forget her (as indeed he did) for very grief was almost out of her wits, but
that with this poor hope she comforted her self again, that, if I knew the
truth, I would immediately forget and cast him off, wherein she was not a
little deceived: for as he afterward loved me more and more, so by his
several beauties and singular deserts, I was more obliged to love and honor
him. But Ismenia purposing to open the deceit, which by her own folly and
suttletie she had framed, wrote me this letter following.

Ismenias letter to Seluagia.
IF we are bound to love those well (Seluagia) that love us, there is nothing
in the world, which I ought to esteem deerer then thy self; but if to hate
them that are the cause, why we are forgotten and despised, I leave it to thine
own discretion. I would put thee in some fault, for casting thine eyes upon my
Alanius, but (wretched woman) what shall I do, that am the organ of mine own
mishap. O Seluagia, to my grief I saw thee, and well could I excuse that
which I passed with thee, but in the end such fond prankes have seldom good
success. For laughing but one little hour with my Alanius, and telling him
what had passed between us, I must now weep and lament all my life time, if
my grief (at the lest) may not move thee to some remorse of pity. I beseech
thee (by all I may) that the discovery of this deceit may suffice, and so
work with thee, to make thee forget my Alanius, and restore this hapless
Shepherdess to that, which (being not a little) thou art able to do, if love
will permit thee to grant me this favor, which I request at thy hands.


When I had read this letter, and imparted it to Alanius, he then at large
unfolded unto me the manner of her deceit, but not one word of the love, that
was between them both, whereof I made no great reckoning; for I was so assured
of that which he seemed to bear me, that I would never believe that any
passed or future thoughts might have been an occasion to have made him
afterward forget me. But because Ismenia might not by my silence think me
discurteous, I answered her letter thus.

Seluagias letter to Ismenia.
I Know not fair Ismenia, whether I may justly accuse thee, or give thee
thanks for disposing my mind and affection in this sort, nor can resolve with
my self whether of these two I should do, until the success of my love do
counsel me herein. On the one side I am sorry for thy ill hap; on the other,
I see that thou wentst forth (as it were) to meet and embrace it. Seluagia
was free when thou did delude her in the temple, and is now subject to his
will, into whose hands thou would needs deliver her. Thou praiest me to
leave off the love, that I bear Alanius, with that which thou thy self
would do in this behalf, I may easily answer thee. Yet one thing makes me
very sad, that thou art grieved for that, for which thou have no just cause of
complaint, which to the patient thereof gives the greatest pain in the world.
I do often consider and think of those fair eyes, with which thou did
behold me, and of that sweet face, which (after many importunate requestestes)
thou did show me, and it greeues me Ismenia, that such fair things, and so
like to my Alanius, should suffer any sorrow and coffeehouse at all. Behold
then what remedy is left for thy grief: that for the bounty, which thou have
used toward me, by giving me the most precious gemme thou had, I kiss thy
fair and dainty hands; which courtesy of thine being so great, God grant
that by some means or other I may be able to requite. If thou see my Alanius
there, tell him (I pray thee) what reason he has to love me, for he knows
already, how much he has to forget thee. And God glue thee the content thou
desire, which may not be to the cost of that which I have, by seeing my
affection so happily and well employed.


Ismenia could not read this letter to the end, for in the midst of it her
sighs and tears, which she powered out, were so many, that she thought at that
very time to have lost her life. She labored (as much as she could) to make
Alanius forsake me, and devised so many means for the same purpose, as he, to
shun those places and occasions, whereby he thought he might see her. Not that
he meant her any harm thereby, but because he thought (by doing so) in some
part he requited the great love that I bare him. All the days that he lived in
this mind, there escaped not any, wherein I saw him not; for he passed
evermore that way, feeding his flocks, which from our town did lead to his.
He accounted no travels nor troubles too great, which he did for my sake, and
especially, if he thought I regarded them. Day by day Ismenia inquired after
him, and never ceased to seek him out, who being sometimes told by others,
and sometimes knowing her self, that he was in our town, had no patience at
all to suffer such a corsiue at her heart. And yet for all this, there was not
anything, that contented and pacified her troubled mind more, then when she
could get some little time to speak with him. But as necessity is so
ingenious and politic, that it seeks out remedies, where man's wit can scarce
imagine any, despised Ismenia adventured to help her self by one, which I
would to God had never entered into her thought, by faining that she extremely
loved another Shepherd called Montanus, who a long time had loved and served
her before. And as she purposed, so she put it in practice, to try if by this
sudden change she might draw Alanius to that which so much she desired. For
there is not any thing, which a man thinks he has most sure, though making but
a small account thereof, but that the loss of it (if on a sudden he loose it)
does not a little grieve him. But now when Montanus perceived that fair
Ismenia his love and Mistress had at last mollified her long obdurate heart,
and now thought good to requite the great love that he had so long time borne
her, Shepherdes, you may well imagine, what content he felt. For so great was
his joy, so obsequious his services to her, and so many troubles that he passed
for her sake, that they were an occasion (with the disfavors and contempt that
Alanius had shown her) to make that fained love prove true, which but in jest
she began to bear him. So that Ismenia yielded her heart wholly to Montanus with
such firmness, that there was not any in the world, whom she loved more then
him, nor whom she desired less to see then my Alanius: the which (as soon as
she could) she gave him to understand, thinking that as by these means she was
sufficiently revenged of his for getfulnesse, she had likewise busied my head
with the cruel thought thereof. The love that Alanius did bear me (although it
grieved him to the heart to see Ismenia love that Shepherd, who^ in all his life
time he could never abide) was yet so great, that he never seemed to make any
show of his secret greese. But certain days passing on, and thinking with
himself, that he only was the cause of his enemies good hap, and of those
singular favors, that Ismenia showed him, and that the Shepherdess did now
shun his sight (who not long since before died for the want thereof) despite,
wroth, and jealousy at once so fiercely assailed him, that his impatience had
almost bereft him of his wits, if presently he had not determined to hinder
Montanus his good fortune, or in the pursuit thereof to have lost his dearest
life. For performance whereof, he began to look on Ismenia again, and not to
come so openly in my sight, as he was wont to do, nor to be so often out of
his town, least Ismenia might have known it. The love between her and
Montanus went not on so forwards, as that between me and my Alanius
backwardes, though not of my part (when nothing, but death, was able to divorce
my mind from him) but of his, in whom I never thought to see such a sudden
change: For so extremely he bumed with choler and rancour against Montanus, and
so deeply envied his good fortune, that (he thought) he could not execute nor
assuage that anger, but by renewing the old love, that he bare to Ismenia; for
furtherance whereof, his coming to out town was a great impediment, whose
absence from me as it engendered forgetfulness in him, so the presence of his
Ismenia, rekindled his heart with a stranger kind of love then before:
whereupon he returned again to his fust thoughts: And I (poor soul) remained
all alone deceived and scorned in mine own affection. But all the service that
he bestowed on Ismenia, the tokens and letters that he sent her, and the
pitiful complaints that he made unto her, or any thing else that he was able to
do, could never move her fetled mind, nor make her forget the lest part of
that love, which she bare Montanus. I being therefore lost for the love of
Alanius, Alanius dying for Ismenia, and Ismenia for Montanus, it fell out, that
my father had a certame occasion of business about the buttals of certain
pastures with Phylenus father to Montanus, by reason whereof both of them came
often to our town, and in such a time, that Mont anus (whether it was for the
superfluous favors, that Ismenia bestowed on him (which to men of a base mind
is a cloying) or whether he was too jealous of the renewed and earnest suites
of Alanius) waxed very cold in his love to Ismenia. In the end when he espied
me driving my sheep to the fold, and with a curious eye looking on me, he
began presently to be enamoured of me, so that (by the effects which he daily
showed) it was not possible for me to bear greater affection to Alanius, nor
Alanius to Ismenia, nor Ismenia to Montanus, nor Montanus to love me more, then
in very truth he did. Behold what a strange cousinage of love: If Ismenia
went by chance to the field, Alanius went after her; if Montanus went to his
flocks, Ismenia after him; if I went to the hills with my sheep, Montanus
after me; if I knew that Alanius was in the wood, where he was wont to seed
his flocks, thither I hied me after him. And it was the strangest thing in the
world to heart how Alanius sighing said, Ah my Ismenia; and how Ismenia said,
Ah my Montanus; and how Montanus said, Ah my Seluagia; and how Seluagia said,
Ah my Alanius. It fell out afterward on a day, that we four met together in
a forest that lay between all our towns, and the reason was, because Ismenia
went to visit certain Shepherdesses of her acquaintance, which dwelt
thereabouts, which when Alanius knew, being forced, and driven on by his
fleeting thoughts, he went after to seek her out, and found her near to a
fine spring kembing her golden hair. I being told by a certain Shepherd (my
neighbout) that Alanius was gone to the forest of the valley (for so it was
called) took out before me a few goats, that were shut up in a little yard
near to our house, (because I would not go without some errant) and went
after him, where my desire guided me; whom by chance I found weeping and
complaining of his ill fortune, and the Shepherdess laughing and jesting at
his bootlesse tears, and sighs. When Ismenia espied me, she was not a little
glad of my company, and began to be merry with me, although I had no cause to
be so with her, to whom I rather objected the small reason, and less regard
of modesty and discretion she had, to grieve my heart with that uncivil part
and bad deceit; whereof she so wisely excused herself, that whereas I thought
she would have made me some amends for all my grief and sorrow, by her wise
and well ordered reasons, she gave me to understand, that I was rather bound to
her, in that if she had mocked me, I had (said she) satisfied my self as
well, and requited her again, not only by taking Alanius her cousin from her,
whom she loved more then her self, but also by enticing Montanus to my love,
from that he was wont to show her. By this time came Montanus, who was told by
a Shepherdess (a friend of mine) called Solisa, that I was gone to the forest
of the valley with my goats. And when all the four discontented and
discordant lovers met there together, it cannot be imagined what we all felt:
for every one looked upon another that would not have been viewed of those eyes
again. I asked my Alanius the cause of his forgetfulness, he sued for mercy at
crafty Ismenias hands; she accused and complained of the cold love of
Montanus; he of Seluagias cruelty. Being therefore in this sort (as you have
heard) every one tormented for them, who loved them not again, Alanius to the
tune of his Fiddle by this doleful song began to complain of Ismenias
cruelty.

NO more (O cruel Nymph) now have thou prayed
Enough in thy revenge, prove not thine ire
On him that yeeldes, the fault is now apayed
Vntomy cost: now mollify thy dire,
Hardness and breast of thine so much obdured:
And now raise up (though lately it has erred)
A poor repenting soul, that in the obscured
Darkness of thy oblivion lies enterred.
For it falls not in that, that does commend thee,
That such a Swain as I may once offend thee.
If that the little sheep with speed is flying
From angry Shepherd (with his words affraied)
And runs here and there with fearful crying,
And with great grief is from the flock estraied:
But when it now perceiues that none does follow,
And all alone, so far estraying, mourns,
Knowing what danger it is in, with hollow
And fainting bleates, then fearful it returns
Unto the flock, meaning no more to leave it,
Should it not be a just thing to receive it?
Lift up these eyes (Ismenia) which so stately
To view me, thou have lifted up before me
That liberty, which was mine own but lately,
Give me again, and to the same restore me:
And that mild heart, so full of love and pity,
Which thou did yield to me, and ever owe me.
Behold (my Nymph) I was not then so witty
To know that sincere love, that thou did show me:
Now woeful man full well I know and rue it,
Although it was too late before I knew it.
How could it be (my enemy) say, tell me,
How thou (in greater fault and error being
Then ever I was thought) should thus repel me?
And with new league and cruel title seeing
Thy faith so pure and worthy to be changed.
And what is that Ismenia, that does bind it
To love, whereas the same is most estranged,
And where it is impossible to find it?
But pardon me, if herein I abuse thee,
Since that the cause thou gave me does excuse me.
But tell me now what honor have thou gained,
Auenging such a fault by thee committed;
And thereunto by thy occasion trained:
What have I done, that I have not acquitted?
Or what excess, that is not amply paid,
Or suffer more, that I have not endured?
What cruel mind, what angry breast displaied,
With savage heart, to fiercenes so adjured,
Would not such mortal grief make mild and tender,
But that, which my fell Shepherdess does render?
Now as I have perceived well thy reasons,
Which thou have had, or have yet to forget me,
The pains, the greefes, the guiltes of forced treasons,
That I have done, wherein thou first did set me:
The passions, and thine cares, and eyes refusing
To hear, and see me, meaning to undo me:
Came thou to know, or be but once perusing
Th'vnsought occasions, which thou gave unto me,
Thou should not have wherewith to more torment me,
Nor I to pay the fault my rashness lent me.
Thus did my Alanius end his sweet song, wherewith I would my life had also
ended, and not without great cause, since my mishap could not be more extreme,
then to see him (whom I loved more then my self) before mine eyes to pine so
much for the love of another, and so strangely to forsake me. But as I was not
alone in these misfortunes, I did dissemble them for that time (as well as I
could) as also because fair Ismenia, casting her eyes upon her Montanus, began
to sing that which follows.

HOw fond am I to hope for any rest
In endless plaints, vain sighs, and bootelesse tears?
The present now at hand to be expressed,
Yet few to these, that, with ten thousand fears,
I have powered out unto thy cruel ears.
And if at any time my life did tend
To other loves in earnest or in jest,
This love by that I never could offend,
Because I did but then begin to prove,
And learn, how well Montanus I could love.
Then did I learn to love, my self I taught
To love, by him, who loved me not again:
For I suspected that I should be brought
Unto thy love (Montanus) when in vain
I loved him, that did my love disdain:
I try'de (I say) my free and careless heart
Of love to taste some sorrow, that it sought:
And let that Shepherd with his love depart,
That loves with thee, for all his pain and grief
Is but in vain, when vain is his relief.
Let none accuse me then, if I disdain
Alanius loves, whose loves are but a show,
For I could never love nor entertain
Any but thee, for whom I will bestow
My dearest life, since heavens will have it so.
And if at any time I fein'd to like,
I liked (I say) but how I did I know,
For never any Shepherd else could strike
My heart indeed, but thou, to whom I give
My faith kept for thee since I first did live.
Let burning sighs go forth and still increase,
Let both mine eyes become two springs of tears,
Let accidents, repugnant to mine ease
Arise, for thoughts, which now my mind for swears,
Shall never hurt that love which now it bears:
Let sorrow go, and ill which way they will,
And now let ioies return which way they please,
For where they are, there will I houer still,
Since that no harm my purpose may reclame,
Nor cruel death it self, although it came.
Ismenia by this song had revenged me of cruel and disloyal Alanius, (if in
the love (at the lest) which I did bear him, any desire of revenge could
befall,) but Montanus stayed not long from requiting Ismenia again, who
casting his eye upon me, sung this song as follows.

FOolish love, ah foolish lover,
I for thee, thou for another.
I am a fool, and seem no less,
For thee who will not be?
For he is a fool I do confess,
That is not one for thee:
And yet this does not well agree,
To be a foolish lover,
Or fool for her, that is a fool for loving of another.
Now seeing thee, thou see not me,
And die for my foe,
Eat me with sauce (that loves thee)
Of him thou love so:
So shall thou make me (to my woe)
To be a foolish lover,
And such a fool for loving thee as thou art for another.
When he had made an end of the last verses, notwithstanding the present
agony and sorrow, that we al suffered, we could not choose but laugh heartily
to see how Montanus would have me deceive my taste by looking on him, with the
sauce and appetite of Alanius, whom I loved, as if it might have fallen in the
compass of my thought, to suffer it to be deceived by the appearance of an
other thing. But now with greater firmness then the rest, I began to tune and
play on my Bagpipe, and to sing a song to it, as you shall hear; for by the
same I thought to show how more constantly then any of the rest there, I had
perseuered in my love to Alanius.

ALthough my quiet it does let,
Rather then blame discredit me,
(For God forbid that I forget)
Let me with wrong forgotten be.
Not only where oblivion raineth,
There is no love, nor can be none,
Nay, where there is suspicion,
There is no love, but such as faineth;
Great harm it is to love, where set
In bootelesse hopes, the mind they free,
But God defend that I forget,
Forgotten though a jest it be.
If that I love, why then love I,
To sport or leave to love at all?
For what more honor can befall,
Then die for that, for which I die:
To live therefore and to forget,
Is such a shameful life I see,
That I had rather love one yet,
Forgotten though to death I be.
When I had made an end of my song, the Shepherdes tears (but those
especially of fair Ismenia) were so many, that of force they made me
participate some of her grief, which thing I might well have left undone, for
no fault could justly have been attributed to my great mishap, as to all those
that were there, it was sufficiently known. After this every one of us went to
their own town, because it was not meet for us to be out of them at such
inconvenient and late hours. And the next day, my father (without telling me
the cause why) carried me out of our town, and brought me to yours, placing me
there in the house of Albania mine aunt, and his sister, whom you know well,
where I have remained a few days since my coming hither, not knowing the
cause of my sudden exile, but have heard of late, that Montanus has married
Ismenia, and that Alanius was about to marry a sister of hers called Syluia:
whereupon to conclude, I wish that he may live (since it was not my good
fortune to have him) as joyful a life with his new spouse, that nothing may
want to the full accomplishment of their content and happiness: For, the love,
which I bear him will suffer me no less, then to wish him all the felicity
of this life.

When Seluagia had made an end of her sorrowful tale, she began to weep so
bitterly, that both the Shepherdes (being a kind of friendly duty, wherein
they had no small experience) began also to help her with their tears, and
after having spent a little time in this sort, Syrenus said unto her. Great is
thy grief (fair Seluagia) and yet I judge thy patience and discretion
greater. Take example by other men's harms, look into their pains, consider
their woes, if thou will the better support thine own: And because it grows
now toward night, let us be iogging toward our town, and to morrow pass
away the heat of the day near to this clear fountain, where we will all
three meet. Let it be as thou say (said Seluagia) but because between this
and the town there is a pretty way, let every one of us (to pass it away with
some thing) sing a song befitting the condition and quality of his love. The
Shepherdes answered, if she would begin, they would follow, which Seluagia did,
all three going on softly toward the town.

SHepherd who can pass such wrong
And a life in woes so deep?
Which to live is to too long,
As it is too short to weep.
Grievous sighs in vain I waste,
Leesing my affiance, and
I perceive my hope at last
With a candle in the hand.
What time then to hope among
Bitter hopes, that ever sleep?
When this life is to too long,
As it is too short to weep.
This grief which I feel so rife,
(Wretch) I do deserve as hire,
Since I came to put my life
In the hands of my desire.
Then cease not my plaints so strong,
For (though life her course does keep)
It is not to live so long,
As it is too short to weep.
With a burning sigh that came from her afflicted soul, Seluagia ended her
song, saying, How unfortunate (alas) am I that see my self buried in jealousy
and despair, which cannot in the end but bring my life to no other pass, then
to that which is infallibly expected of them. After this, forgotten Syrenus to
the tune of his Rebecke began to sing this song following.

Weep not my doleful eyes,
But if you weep, think (at the lest)
They told no truth but lies,
And then it may be you may rest.
Since that imagination
Does cause so much in every state,
Think that she loves thee as of late,
And thou shall have less passion.
And if you will (mine eyes)
Have ease, imagine then the best,
And that they told you lies:
And so perhaps you may have rest.
Think that she loves as well,
As ever she did heretofore:
But this sad men caunot restore,
To think what once befell:
Then mournful eyes, where lies
Your help? Yet think of some at lest,
If not, weep still mine eyes,
Or make an end, and you shall rest.
After that sorrowful Syrenus with many tears had made an end of his song,
despised Syluanus began his thus.

MY life (young Shepherdess) for thee
Of needs to death must post;
But yet my grief must stay with me
After my life is lost.
The grievous ill, by death that cured is
Continually has remedy at hand:
But not that torment, that is like to this,
That in slow time, and fortunes means does stand.
And if this sorrow cannot be
Ended with life (as most)
What then does this thing profit me,
A sorrow won or lost?
Yet all is one to me, as now I try
A flattring hope, or that that had not been yet.
For if to day for want of it I die,
Next day I do no less for having seen it.
Feign would I die, to end and free
This grief, that kills me most
If that it might be lost with me,
Or die when life is lost.
And in this sort the two Shepherdes went homewardes in company of Seluagia,
departing from one another with accord to meet the next day following at the
same place.

The end of the first book of Diana.
The second Book of Diana of George of Montemayor.
NOw did the Shepherdes, which fed their sheep in the fields of Ezla, begin
to show themselves, every one with his flocks along the banks of those
cristalline waters (each Shepherde knowing, and choosing out the best place
before the Sun did rise, the better to pass away the burning heat of the day)
when the fair Shepherdess Seluagia came down from the hill, which from her
town did lead to a thick wood, driving her gentle sheep and lambs before
her: who, after she had put them amongst the low shrubs, which grew very
thick thereabouts, and seeing them busy in knobbing the young and tender
boughs, to stanch their hunger, went directly to the fountain of the
Sicamours, where the day before, in company of the two Shepherds, she had
passed away the noone-tide heat: and seeing the place so agreeable to
melancholy, and contemplation of her sorrows, she thought it not amiss to
take the opportunity of the time, and place, and to sit down by the
fountain, whose waters seemed with her swelling tears to increase: where,
after she had a great while busied her self in diverse and sundry thoughts,
she began thus to say. May it be possible Alanius, that thou art the man, whose
eyes I never saw dried up from tears in presence of mine? And he, who, falling
down so many times at my feet, with loving and pitiful words, craved mercy
and clemency at my hands, the which (to my great harm and grief) I so
gently bestowed on thee? Tell me Shepherd (the falsest that lives on earth) is
it true that thou louedst me, to cloy thy mind, with my favors, and so soon
to be weary of the love that thou did bear me? Thou might imagine, that
it was no less in my power, to forget and despise thee, as thou have forgotten
me. For it is the part of those, that handle not their matters of love so well
as they should, to think that their Mistresses may play the like parts with
them, as they have done before; though some use it for a remedy and policy to
make their love increase the more. And others, that jealousy (the occasion
whereof most commonly they feign) may so captiuate their Mistresses minds,
that (as they make them believe) they are not able to settle their affection in
any other place: whereupon most of them come by little and little to manifest
all that they fained before, whereby more clearly they discover their
disloyalty. All which extremes at last result to the grief and prejudice of
us poor souls, who (not considering how the ends of such things commonly
fall out) do so deeply sink into that kind of assured affection, that we
never leave of to love you, nor you to requite us with ingratitude and
inconstancy, as thou do that love (disloyal Alanius) which I have borne,
and do still bear thee. So that which of these thou have been, I cannot
conjecture. But wonder not Seluagia, that thou understand so little in
matters of disdain, that art so well practiced in loves affairs. Thou did
ever bear an honest and virtuous pretense by thy words, whereby I never
looked for less by thy deeds, which made me think, that that love, (whereby
thou made me believe, that thy desire extended to wish no more of me, then
pure love again) should never have an end: for if any further drift had been
in thy desires, I would never have suspected firmness in thy love. O wretched
woman, how soon have I begun to know thy intentions, and yet how late to
prevent my harms? Come thou to me my pretty Bagpipe, and with thee will I
pass the time away: for had I spent it only in thy exercise and delight, it
had been better for me: and after she had played a while on it, she began to
sing this Sextine following.

WAters that fall from top of these steep Hills,
With such a noise into these low deep Vales,
Why think you not of those, which from my Soul
Continually distill my wearied Eyes?
And what is the cause of them? Unlucky Time,
In which hard fortune robbed all my Joy.
Love gave me hope of such a golden Joy,
That there is no Shepherdess in all these Hills,
That had such cause to praise a happy Time:
But after he did put me in these Vales
Of swelling tears, that fall from both mine Eyes:
Not to behold such grief as kills my Soul.
Such is the pain, that wounds a loving Soul,
That in the end I know what thing is Joy:
O where shall I then turn my wearied Eyes?
If that the meadows, woods, the plains, and Hills,
The pleasant groves, and fountains of the Vales,
Still to my thoughts present so sweet a Time?
Who would have thought that such a happy Time
Should be so fierce a torment to my Soul?
Or cruel fortune banish me the Vale,
Wherein all things were objects of my Joy?
Until the hungry woolfe, which to the Hill
Ascending up, was pleasant to mine Eyes.
But fortune now, what may my drenched Eyes
Behold, which saw their Shepherd many a Time
Driving his lambs before him down this Hill?
Whose name for ay shall rest within my Soul.
O fortune foe unto my former Joy,
How do I languish in this irksome Vale?
But when so pleasant and so fresh a Vale
Is not delightful to my wearied Eyes,
And where I cannot find content and Joy:
And hope not now to have it any Time,
See what extremes enuiron then my Soul:
O that he came again. O that sweet Hill:
O highest Hills, and fresh and pleasant Vale,
Where once my Soul did rest and both these Eyes,
Tell me shall I in Time have so much Joy?
About this time Syluanus was with his flocks in a thicket of Myrtle trees
near to the fountain, musing and imagining diverse things in his mind: but
when he heard Seluagias voice, awaked as it were out of a slumber, he gave
attentive ear to the verses, that she did sing. But as this Shepherd was
cruelly entreated of love, and contemned of Diana, so his passions made him
wander a thousand times out of his wits, as that he now spoke ill of love, and
by and by praised it, sometimes merry, and other times more pensive and sad,
then the most sorrowful man in the world, to day speaking ill of women, to
morrow extolling them above all mortal creatures. And thus did this sorrowful
Shepherd lead a life, which as to all, so especially to those that are free
from love would be tedious and difficult to describe. But having heard
Seluagias sweet verses, and obtained leave of his sad thoughts, he took his
Kit, and to the tune thereof began to sing that which follows.

TO hear me wearied is the cleerest river,
Tedious I am to every vale and mountain:
And now to hear (O love, my sorrows giver)
My plaining, wearied is each cristall fountain.
The Sicamour, the Oak, and Elm are weary,
Spring, Summer, Autumn, and the winter season
Hearing my cries, are sworn not to be merry.
With tears I melt these rocks: and yet all reason
Of pity (Tigresse) thou do still deny me,
When trees, and stones for grief are dying by me.
A bondslaue of a freeman thou have made me,
And of a man of reason, clean contrary:
With life, and death, by turns thou do invade me,
And to tormenting grief my soul do carry.
Of affable, and one that lived so gayly,
Made me thou have to frowards disdaining:
Of one, that did converse with all men daily,
Made me thou have their company refraining.
Eyes had I once, now blinded with desire:
I was a man of flesh, but now of fire.
What Is this my heart, thy torments do thou double?
Tell me mine eyes, and are you still a weeping?
My soul, suffices not my passed trouble?
My tears, and are ye yet in rivers steeping?
My wandering wits, and are you not molested
More then enough with such incessant sorrow?
And are ye not my senses also wrested
From your right course, resting not even nor morrow?
How know I then, weep, see, or feel this hour,
When torments waste their force and several power?
Who made my Shepherdesses tresses twist all
Of fine Arabian gold, not gilt-like shining:
Her face of cleerest and of chosen christ all,
Her rubie lips, two rows of pearl combining:
Her dymond eyes, like to those stars above all,
Her neck, that whitest Allablaster stayneth,
Her passing wit, enforcing us to love all:
Her stately mind, that all our loves disdaineth.
Why made she not her heart of melting matter,
Then of such marble stone so hard to batter?
One day I do conform me to my fortune,
And to my grief, that fair Diana causes:
Next day mine ill does vex me, and importune
My soul with thoughts of grief that seldom pauseth:
Cruel and fierce and inhumane I call her,
And so there is no order in my sorrow:
For afterward in phrases I install her,
What now I say, I do deny to morrow.
And all is thus leading a life in anguish,
Which soon mine eyes may see by death to languish.
When fair Seluagia knew the Shepherd Syluanus by his voice, she went to him,
and saluting one another with courteous and loving words, they sat them down
under the shadow of a thick and leafie myrtle, in the mids of a little meadow,
which for the diversity of fine golden flowers wherewith it was spotted, more
then their sorrowful thoughts could desire, was most pleasant to the wandering
eye. And Syluanus began to speak in this sort. The diversity of so many
unaccustomed mishaps, that daily harm us woeful and true lovers cannot be
(fair Seluagia) without grief and compassion of mind considered. But amongst
them all, there is none (me thinks) that ought to be so much feared as that,
which he suffers, who has once seen himself in a good and joyful estate:
the which by experience (as yesterday thou did tell me) I never came yet to
know: for the life (which I pass) is so far from rest, and delivered up to
sorrowful imaginations, that a thousand times in vain I seek out new
inventions and means to deceive and alter my taste. For remedy whereof, I do
sometimes think, That I am dearly beloved of my mistress, which thought
(without opening any further passage to this fiction) I retain as long as I
can in my mind: but when I consider afterward the truth of my estate, I am so
confounded with my self, as I am not able to express it, and then (against my
will) am void of all patience: since then a bare imagination is not such a
thing, that may be suffered, behold what the truth is able to do? I would to
God (Syluanus) I were free (said Seluagia) from this frantic passion that I
might speak the better in it, as in such a case it were most needful. For
thou can not know any greater sign of love, whether it be little or much, or
of passion, whether it be small or great, then by hearing her tell it, that
feels it: for a passion extremely felt can never be well manifested by her
tongue that suffers it. So that I (being subject to my mishap, and sorrowful
for that disgrace, which Alanius does me) am not with words able to express
the Chaos of grief wherein I am overwhelmed. Wherefore I leave it to thy
consideration and judgment, as to things wherein I may put an assured
confidence and trust. I know not Seluagia, what to say (replied Syluanus
sighing) nor what remedies we may hope for of our harms, do thou (perhaps)
know any? How should I not know (said Seluagia) And wottest thou what it is? To
leave of to love. And this may thou do thy self (said Syluanus.) As fortune
and time shall ordain (said Seluagia.) Then I tell thee (said Syluanus
maruelling much) that thou need not trouble thy self so much by complaining
of thy grief, because that love, which is subject to time and fortune, cannot
be so extreme, to give one any trouble or pain that suffers it. And can thou
deny (said Seluagia, again) that it is not possible to have an end in thy
love, either by death or absence, or by being favored in some other place,
where thy suits and services may be more esteemed, and better recompensed? I
will not make my self (said Syluanus) such an hypocrite in love, that I will
not grant, what thou say may be possible, but not in me. For woe betide
that lover, that (though he see such fortune fall to others) would have so
little constancy in his love, to think that any thing (contrary to his faith)
may befall unto him. I am a woman (said Seluagia) and thou shall see by me if I
love not as much as any may. And yet this offendes not my love to think, that
there may be an end of every thing, be they never so firm and strong, since it
is the property of time and fortune with their usual changes to alter all
things, as they have ever done. And think not Shepherd, that any obliuious
thought of his love, that has so injuriously forgotten me, makes me speak
this, but that, which I have seen by experience in these passions. And talking
thus together they heard a Shepherd singing, as he came along the meadow before
them, whom they knew by and by to be the forgotten Syrenus, who, to the tune of
his Rebecke came singing this Sonnet.

Go now my thoughts, where one day you were going,
When neither fortune, nor my love did lower:
Now shall you see that changed day and hour,
Your ioies decayed, and uncouth sorrows growing?
And in the glass, where I was often bestowing
Mine eyes, and in that sweet and pleasant flower,
A sluggish drone unworthily deuower
That honey, which for me sometimes was flowing.
And you shall see to whom I did surrender
My subject life, that causeless did despise it:
And though this ill no remedy can borrow,
Yet tell her, that my mind did once engender
A fear of that, which after to mine eyes yet
She makes more plain, to end my life in sorrow.
After Syrenus had made an end of his Sonnet, he saw fair Seluagia, and
Syluanus coming toward him, whereof he was not a little glad, and after some
courteous salutations between them, they determined to go to the fountain of
the Sicamours, where they had been the day before, but before they were come
thither, Syluanus said, Hark, do you not hear certain voices singing? Yes
(said Seluagia) and me thinks of more then one. Where might it be (said
Syrenus.) In the meadowe of the Laurel trees, said Syluanus, in the mids
whereof the spring, that comes out of this clear fountain so pleasantly
runs: It shall not be amiss for us to go thither, but so softly, that they
that are singing, may not perceive or hear us, lest we break off their sweet
music. Let us go, said Seluagia: and so step by step, they went toward the
place, where they heard that singing, and hiding themselves behind certain
trees near unto the brook, they saw three Nymphs sitting upon the golden
flowers, of such excellent beauty that (it seemed) nature had made a manifest
proof of that, she was able to do. They were apparelled with upper garments of
white silk, wrought all above with fringe of gold, their hair, (which in
brightness obscured the sunnie beams) was tied about their heads with fillets
of oriental pearl, whose curled locks upon their christalline foreheads made
a fine periwig; just in the mids whereof hung down an Eagle of gold, holding
between her talants a rich and precious Diamond. All three with marvelous
good consent so sweetly played on their instruments, whereunto they joined
their Angelical voices, that it seemed no less then celestial music, and
the first thing they sung, was this fancy.

COntents of love,
That come with so great pain,
If that you come, why go you hence again?
Not fully come,
But you begin to starte:
Never with perfect some
To nestle in a woeful heart.
And will you now so soon depart,
And leave me in such pain?
Then hence delights, and see me not again.
From you I fly,
(Since you deny my sight)
To make me know thereby
The loss, if that I loose you quite.
Then (since you do me such despite)
Depart not grief and pain,
For when you go, you soon return again.
After they had ended their song, one of them called Doria said. Are these
(Cynthia) the river banks, where the Shepherd Syrenus went up and down,
tormented and lost for the love of the fair Shepherdess Diana? I without
doubt (said the other) they must be these, for near unto a fountain not far
from this meadow, it was told me, they took of each other their last farewell,
which is (I assure thee) worthy to be celebrated with eternal memory, for
the amorous and loving speeches, that passed between them. When Syrenus heard
this, he was almost out of his wits, to see how the three Nymphs had knowledge
of his mishaps. But Cynthia, proceeding, said. And among these river banks are
many other fair Shepherdesses, and enamoured Shepherds, where love has showed
his mighty power and effects, and some clean contrary to that they hoped for.
This is a thing (said Polydora, for so was the third called) not greatly to be
marvelled at, because there is no success in love, (be it never so
preposterous) which may cause wonder in those that have passed his disordinate
effects. But tell me Cynthia, how knew thou of this farewell? I knew it thus
(said Cynthia) for at that time when they took it, near to the foresaid
fountain, Celius, who behind an Oak was listening to them, heard it, and
committing it to memory, did truly put it in verse, as it passed between
them. Therefore if thou will hear it, I think, I can sing it to the tune of my
lute. Fair Cynthia (answered Polydora) so may thy destinies and fortune favor
thee, as thy beauty and good graces are no less delightful unto us, then the
hearing of so sweet a song shall be (wherein is matter so worthy to be
known) if thou will deyne to pleasure us with the recital of it. Cynthia then
taking her harp, began to sing as follows.

The song of the Nymph.
Near to the river banks, with green
And pleasant trees on every side,
Where freest minds would most have been,
That never felt brave Cupids pride,
To pass the day and tedious how'rs
Amongst those painted meades and flowers.
A certain Shepherd full of woe
( Syrenus called) his flocks did feed,
Not sorrowful in outward show,
But troubled with such grief indeed,
As cruel love is wont t'impart
Unto a painful loving heart.
This Shepherd every day did die
For love he to Diana bare,
A Shepherdess so fine perdie,
So lively young and passing fair,
Excelling more in beauteous feature,
Then any other humane creature.
Who had not any thing, of all
She had, but was extreme in her,
For meanly wise none might her call,
Nor meanly fair, for he did err,
If so he did: but should devise
Her name of passing fair and wise.
Favors on him she did bestow,
Which if she had not, then (be sure)
He might have suffered all that woe,
Which afterward he did endure
When he was gone, with lesser pain,
And at his coming home again.
For when in deed the heart is free
From suffering pain or torments smart,
If wisdom does not ouersee,
And bears not the greater part,
The smallest grief and care of mind
Does make it captive to their kind.
Near to ariuer swift and great
(That famous Ezla had to name)
The careful Shepherd did repeat
The fears he had by absence blame,
Which he suspect, where he did keep
And feed his gentle lambs and sheep.
And now sometimes he did behold
His Shepherdess, that thereabout
Was on the mountains of that old
And ancient Leon, seeking out
From place to place the pastures best,
Her lambs to feed, her self to rest.
And sometimes musing, as he lay,
(When on those hills she was not seen)
Was thinking of that happy day,
When Cupid gave him such a Queen
Of beauty, and such cause of joy,
Wherein his mind he did employ.
Yet said (poor man) when he did see
Himself so sunk in sorrows pit,
The good that love has given me
I only do imagine it:
Because this nearest harm and trouble
Hereafter I should suffer double.
The Sun, for that it did decline,
The careless man did not offend
With fiery beams, which scarce did shine,
But that which did of love depend,
And in his heart did kindle fire
Of greater flames and hot desire.
Him did his passions all inuit,
The green leaves blown with gentle wind,
Cristalline streams with their delight,
And Nightingales were not behind,
To help him in this loving verse,
Which to himself he did rehearse.
Syrenus his song.
A Farewell they departure call,
That loves delight did never know,
But that that ends with life and all,
I term a grief and endless woe.
God grant therefore that all that space
My lingering life I might sustain,
Until I see again the place
Where my true heart does still remain.
For only thinking to depart,
The thought does make me so afraid,
That it must kill my trembling heart
With force of such great grief apaid.
Syrenus did these verses sing,
And on his Rebecke sweetly play,
So far from joy or joyful thing,
And from contentment any way:
That he could not pronounce his mind
For weeping, which was left behind.
And now because he would not be
In fault, (if that his grief and pain
The accents and the verse, which he
Pronounced, did hinder or restrain)
That which his willing mind did let,
His heart to end did not forget.
But after that the Shepherd had
With moornefull voice these verses soong,
He saw Diana come so sad,
And yet so fair, so fresh and young,
That where she cast her star like eyes,
With colors brave the meades she dies.
Her face as fair and fresh as flower,
And yet so sorrowful again,
That none could judge at that same hour,
Whether her grief and inward pain,
Or her brave beauty did surpass?
In her so fair, and sad (alas.)
Thus coming many a time she staide,
Casting unto the ground her eyes,
So comfortless and so dismade,
And sometimes up into the skies,
That there they hung with grief in steed
Of two bright stars, like stars in deed.
Saying with greater grief of mind
(Then humane thought can once conceive)
Since such annoy in joy I find:
From this day (love) well may thou leave
Thy ioies unto thy self to keep,
And me, to feed no more but sheep.
The cause of all her grief and woe,
Which she by absence wrong did fear,
There did she very clearly show,
And if she wasted many a tear,
Ask but those blasing eyes, which still
With passions did Syrenus kill.
If that her love had ever peer,
Her goodness there hid not the same:
And if that absence cost her dear,
Or feared her before it came,
This song above each other thing
Can tell, which she with tears did sing.
Dianas song.
O Love thou gave me not the joy,
That in sweet presence I did find,
But that in absence the annoy
Should seem more grievous to my mind.
Thou give ease, thou give rest,
But not to give content but guile,
And that the suffrance in my breast,
Might be but idle for a while.
She loves inventions, never scant
In presence to afford relief,
Because in absence I should want
Defense against my mortal grief.
Now fair Diana being come
Unto the place, where she did spy
Her love, she would have spoken some
Few words, but grief did them deny:
And woeful man, he nothing spoke,
Though he did often a semblant make.
How much they had between them both
To talk, their eyes made manifest,
Declaring that, which very loath
Lay in their secret hearts and breast,
With that mild countenance and show,
With which they spoke not long ago.
They both together down did sit
Under a flowrie Myrtle tree,
One by the hand the other yet
Did take, for over come was he
By her, and she by him again,
Both in their mutual passions slain.
For that great pleasure and delight
Of seeing one an other there,
And grief, to leese that happy sight,
So wrought their hearts with joy and fear,
That to each other neither could
Utter a word, though feign they would.
Some other times they met again
Upon this bank with other passions,
Which meetings they did entertain
And celebrate with other fashions:
Not, as in times then gone and past,
For of this sort, this was the last.
A strange effect of mighty love,
To see two love in such degree,
That greater torments they did prove,
When either did each other see,
Then when they were removed quite
From ioying in each others sight.
Syrenus seeing now the hour,
When grief of parting was to come,
He had no patience nor no power
To speak, but straight was stricken dumb:
Nor of his tears he could get leave
To utter what he did conceive.
His Shepherdess he did behold,
His Shepherdess beheld again
The man, whose heart with fear was cold,
Speaking to her with cruel pain:
Indeed his Grief for him did speak,
For he could not whose heart did break.
Alas Diana, who would have said,
When I was in most heavy case,
Or who would have imagined,
But that, when I did view thy face,
My very soul then most oppressed,
Should by that sight have found some rest.
In any time who would have thought,
That any thing (sweet Mistress) might
A greater grief or pain have brought
Unto my soul with more despite,
Then thy sweet presence and thy sight,
(My sovereign joy and chief delight)
Who would have thought, but that again
Those eyes, when that they viewed me,
Should have dissolved, and burst in twain
The knot of all my misery:
Which my mishaps (so long assured)
By any way might have procured.
Fair Mistress then behold my state,
And how mishap my soul does chase,
For if I died but of late
With great desire to see thy face,
Now do I die by seeing thee,
Present and not thou killest me.
And think not that this passion draws
To want of loving thee, for none
Has been so firm, but now because
I come unto this meade with moan
To take my leave, where I before
To see thee came, but now no more.
My soul I would have given feign
This day, which thou have conquered so,
Not to have seen thee in this plain
(Although no other life I know)
Only to miss (I care not how)
The grief of this departure now.
And give me leave (fair Shepherdess)
To think, that thou can not deny it,
But thou do feel my heaviness
In that degree, as I do try it:
For in thy presence it is not such
A matter to presume so much.
If then, Diana, it be so,
Tell me, how can I now depart?
How do thou suffer me to go
When each does carry others heart?
Or how do I come hither yet,
To take my farewell without let?
O my fair Shepherdess again
No reason can I yield thee why,
Nor how of thee I should complain,
As thou shall have continually
Absent, when I am gone from thee
O, never to remember me.
I know right well it is not thou,
That make me to depart, and less,
My purest faith constraines me now,
(For needs I must the same confess)
And if I should but tell and show it,
Who does the same, I do not know it.
Thus full of pain and bitter tears,
And sighing, which he never spared,
The Shepherd to her loving ears
Did speak these words which you have heard.
And hearing them, in mind she kept
Them, and full bitterly she wept.
To answer him she went about
A thousand times, but could not do it,
For still her grief did put her out,
And so she could not frame her to it.
But then for her, her love so stable
An answer shapt (her tongue unable.)
My friend in such a time I am,
Where I shall speak more then I would,
That though mine ill, which lately came,
Cannot be uttered (as it should:)
Yet (Shepherd) would I think it good,
To hold my peace if that I could.
But woe is me, that this great ill
I come to tell, and publish it
In such a time against my will,
That it auailes not any whit
Thy journey to delay a while,
Nor these my torments to beguile.
Why go thou hence (O Shepherd) tell:
Why will thou now forsake me here?
So full of grief alone to dwell,
Where time, and place, and all the dear,
And sweetest joys of this our love
Shall never from my mind remove.
What shall I feel (unhappy wight)
Coming unto this pleasant green,
When I shall say (Farewell sweet sight)
Here have I my Syrenus seen;
Here did we sit, here did we play,
Discoursing with him day by day.
Behold if that it will not be
A daily sorrow, when these banks
I do behold, and cannot see
Thy self, where goodly trees in ranks
And in their bark my name to stand
Carved so finely by thy hand.
And see if any grief or dole
Is like to this, when I behold
The place so sorrowful and sole,
Where dear Syrenus with a cold
And trembling fear thou did protest
Thy grief to me within thy breast.
If then thy heart (so cruel now)
Is mollified by falling tears,
How melts it not for grief, and how
Consumes it not with many fears,
At this occasion (so unjust)
To leave my comfort in the dust?
Then Shepherd weep not, for in vain
Thy plentious tears and sighs are spent,
For he that does lament the pain,
In whom it lies to prevent,
I think he is not sound of wit,
If such a folly he commit.
But my Syrenus pardon me,
If my sharp words thine ears offend,
And give me leave to speak with thee
In this fair meade, where (cruel friend)
Thou leau'st me not one little how'r
With my poor self, nor in my power.
For I will not, (nor yet in jest)
Shepherd from thee my self absent,
Then go not, will thou? say at lest,
And to these eyes, that ever lent
Such help to thee, some pity keep,
And sorrow now to see them weep.
Syrenus answered her again,
Alas thou can not choose but know
By all these tears I spend in vain,
If that I do desire to go;
But thou commaundest me to stay,
And my hard hap to go away.
Thy matchless beauty when I see,
(Mistress) then am I ever bound
Willing at thy command to be:
But woeful Shepherd when I found
My hap to bear so great a sway,
Of force I must the same obey.
Then my departure forced is,
But by no fault that I did make,
And credit me (sweet Nymph) in this,
That all the world I would forsake,
In these fair meades with thee to wend,
Where now I see my joys do end.
My Master that great Shepherd is
He, that does make me to depart,
Whom I may see, and wish that his
Exempted thoughts and freest heart
Brave love may punish with such pain,
As at this parting I sustain.
I would to God, my going hence
(Only to pleasure thee this day)
By showing of my just pretense,
Lay in my power any way:
As Mistress in thy fairest hands
My life and death at mercy stands.
But credit me, it is in vain,
(To that which ever I do try,
And that thou think as much again)
That never in my hands did lie
Ought in the world, that might but give
Any content to make me live.
Another course well might I take,
And leave my flock to stray about,
I might my Shepherd to forsake
And seek some other Master out:
But if the end I mark and see,
This with our love does not agree.
For if I do forsake my flock,
Which unto me he did commend,
And take in hand some other stock
Of cattle or of sheep to tend,
Tell me, how can I come unseen
Without thy harm upon this green?
And if the force of this great flame
My willing presence here detaines,
It is a sign, that I do frame
My thoughts on thee, and so it stains
Thy honor, which to sail is sent,
Only (sweet life) for my content.
And if (they say) I do employ
(Fair Shepherdess) my love on thee,
And that again I do enjoy
Thy love so frankly given me.
Thee they condemn, thou do sustain
The only loss, and I no gain.
The Shepherdess at this same season
This answer with great grief did make,
O Shepherd tell me now, what reason
Thou have my presence to forsake?
Since that in love there is no sound
Of any reason to be found.
A sign it is (not good to use)
By daily proof we see the same,
That he that can so well excuse
His absence from his loving dame,
If he were gone out of her sight,
He would account the same but light.
Ah grief, since going now away,
I know not what will chance to thee,
And forced if I am to stay
Nor then what shall become of me?
Nor there if thou will think (my dear)
That one did see another here.
I know not if I am deceau'd,
By having laid before thine eyes
This painful grief that has bereaved
Me of my joy, where now it dies,
But that which to my harm must be,
I know shall be most sure in me.
Thou greeu'st not at my little ease,
Go Shepherd then, take shipping now,
With brittle bark the Ocean seas,
In steed of these green fields go plow:
Since of my tears these seas (alas)
So quickly thou do ouerpasse.
The heavens from storms thy bark defend,
From rocks, from wrecke, and swallowing sand,
And that thou mai'st (my sweetest friend)
Safely arrive in wished land:
And fortune better deal with thee,
Then at this time thou do with me.
Alas for very grief I die,
Seeing mine eyes to take their leave
Of all their sweet contents, whereby
This grief, and tears do so bereave
My tongue of speech, that feign I would
Speak more unto thee if I could.
And Shepherd I do wish besides,
That these two eyes (which weep in vain)
Before that death my life deuides,
May see thee here yet once again:
And though their harm thou do procure,
They wish thee yet all good be sure.
He answered her, my Mistress dear,
A mischief never comes alone:
A mortal grief does not appear
Without more company, and one
That is more mighty then the rest,
And this it is that wounds my breast.
For though I see I must depart
From my sweet life, (since from thy sight)
Not half so much it greeues my heart,
At seeing thee in such a plight
For my departure, and sustain
Such grief indeed and cruel pain.
But if those eyes I do forget,
(The mirrours of my happiness)
I wish that God above may let
Me not this wished life possess,
Or if my thoughts employed be
(Sweet life) on any but on thee.
And if that any beauty else
Shall make new motions in my mind,
(Though it be never so excelse)
Or in the same content I find,
For one small hour of such content,
I wish eternal punishment.
And if my firmest faith for strange
And foreign love, that may befall,
Or my sincerest love I change,
I wish that fortune may recall
Me to a life most desperate,
Throwing me down from this estate.
O sweetest Mistress of my heart,
Prescribe no time for my return:
For it does kill me to depart,
And I shall never cease to mourn,
And pass the greatest grief and pain,
Until these eyes see thee again.
She answered him, (my dear Syrenus)
If that I shall in any day
(Though now our destinies do weane us)
Forget thee, then I wish the May
And freshest flowers in this meade
May die, when on them I do tread.
And if on any man alive,
But only thee (my love) I think,
I wish, that, (when my sheep I drive
Unto the river streams to drink)
Coming unto them, at my sight,
The waters may be dried up quite.
Shepherd, receive this little string
Made of my hair for thy sweet sake,
Because by seeing of the thing,
Thou may remember thou did take
Possession of my loving heart,
And them, with which thou do depart.
And this ring with thee thou shall bear,
With hand in hand, as thou do see,
Which for my sake I pray thee wear,
That though our bodies parted be,
Nothing shall part, not death alone,
Two souls united both in one.
He said with thee what shall I leave,
Naught have I but this Sheepehooke here:
The which I pray thee to receive,
And Rebecke, to the which (my dear)
Thou saw me sing in this green meade,
And play and many a dance to lead.
To sound of which (my Shepherdess)
A thousand songs to thee I soong,
Singing of thy great worthiness
(Too high for my base song and tongue)
And of our loves and of my passions,
And of my sweetest lamentations.
Each one embraced the other fast,
And this (I think) the first time was,
And (as I guess) it was the last,
Because those times did change and pass:
And love with time did change and vary
From that, which once they both did carry.
For though Diana felt great pain
For absence of her lover dear,
Yet in the same she found again
A remedy, as did appear,
For after he the seas did pass,
She to another married was.
Fair Cynthia having made an end of her sweet song, Doria and Polydora
wondered that a Shepherdess could be the cause, that love kindled such burning
flames, and marueiled no less how time had cured her grief, which seemed at
their farewell to be remediless. But unfortunate Syrenus all the while the
Nymph with her sweet song did manifest his old cares and sighs, forgot not to
breath them out so thick, that Syluanus, and Seluagia could not by any means
comfort him: for he was now no less pensive then at the very time, when he
passed them, maruelling much how she knew of these particulars which passed
between him and Diana. And Syluanus and Seluagia were no less astonished at
the passing sweet grace, wherewith Cynthia both song and played the same.

But now the fair Nymphs, took up their instruments, and went walking up and
down the green meadow, lest of all suspecting that, which happened unto them:
for having gone but a little way from the place, where the Shepherdes were
secretly abiding, three monstrous and foul Savages came out of a thicket of
high broom and bushes on the right hand of the wood, armed with corselets
and morions of tygres skins, and so ugly to behold, that to the fearful
Nymphs it was a strange and terrible sight. The braces of their corselets were
at the ends armed with gasping mouths of serpents, out of the which their
arms showed monstrously great, and full of hair, and their morions that
encompassed their grisely foreheads, with dreadful heads of lions, being naked
in every other part of their body, but that it was covered all over with long
and thick hair, and bearing in their rude hands clubs, armed with iron and
sharp steeled points. At their necks their bows and arrows, and likewise
their shields, which were broad shells of monstrous Tortuses were hanging down
behind them: who with an incredible swiftnes ran upon the fearful Nymphs,
saying. Now is the time come (ingrate and scornful Nymphs) that by our
strength and wills you shall be forced to do that, which our mild love and
long suites could never bring to pass, for it is not reason that fortune
should do such injury to our captive hearts, with so long and great pain to
defer our remedies. In fine, we have now in our hands the guerdon of our sighs
and lamentations, which wearied the birds and beasts of the dark and
enchaunted wood, where we dwell: and the recompense of our burning tears,
wherewith we made the raging and loathsome river, that watreth the dreadful
fields and plains of our territories to swell, and ouerflowe his banks: Since
then you have no other means to save your lives, but by easing and helping our
harms, be not so wilful by resistance, to make our cruel hands take
vengeance of that pain, which so long you have made our afflicted hearts to
feel. The Nymphs at the sudden sur-sault of these monsters were so amazed,
that they were not able to answer to these proud and cruel words, but only
with silence and tears. Albeit fair Doria, who had more courage then the
rest, at last did stoutly answer them thus again. I never thought that love
could bring a lover to so foul an extreme, as with violent hands, and such
unseemly force to sease upon his beloved. It is the manner of cowards to carry
weapons, and fight with silly women, in an open and desert field, where none
is able to defend them, but their virtue, and honest reasons. But of one thing
(cruel and vile beasts) you may be ascertained, that your menaces shall not
make us leese one jot of that, which our honors require, and that we will
sooner leave our lives in your barbarous hands, then suffer our deer chastities
by your beastly forces to be violated. It is needless (Doria) (said one of
them again) to harken to their reasons, who had none at all to handle us with
so great scorn and cruelty: whereupon unloosing the string from his bow,
that hung at his neck, he took her by both her fair hands, and rudely tied
them together, and so did his companions, Cynthias and Polydoras. The two
Shepherds and the Shepherdess Seluagia, astonished at the monstrous violence
of the Savages, and seeing what beastialitie they began to use to the fair
and tender Nymphs, not able to endure it, resolved to die, or to defend them
from their cruel hands. Wherefore all three taking out their slings, and
filling their scrips with stones, came out of the wood, into the green
medowe, and began to throw them at the Savages with such courage and
dexterity, as though their lives had lien in their hands; And thinking to
plie them so fast with stones, that the Nymphs (while the Savages were busy
about their own defense) might escape, and save their persons from their vile
immanitie, they redoubled their force, with the greatest speed and valor they
could: Whose driftes the subtle Savages suspecting, one of them had an eye to
the fair prisoners for running away, while the other two, by winning ground on
their enemies, thought to make a quick dispatch of them. But the stones came
so dangerously and so many, that they had enough to defend themselves, so
that, as long as they lasted, the Savages fared very ill. But as the Shepherdes
were afterward occupied in stowping down to take up more stones, the
Savages came running in to them so speedily with their massy clubs, that now
they were without any hope of life, if presently a certain strange
Shepherdess (of such singular beauty and comely feature, as made both the
Savages and the rest amazed at her goodly personage) had not come out of the
thick wood near unto the fountain, where they before were singing. She had
her bow hanging on her left arm, and a quiver of arrows at her shoulder, in
her hand a fine staff of wild oak, armed at the end with a long and well
steeled pike. But when she saw the three Nymphs in so great distress, and the
effray between the two Savages and the Shepherdes, who now looked for nothing
more then present death, by putting quickly a sharp headed arrow into her
bow, with no mean force and skill she shot it at one of the Savages, leaving
it half hidden in his hard breast, whereby the arrow of love, that pierced his
heart lost the force, and the Savage his life. Neither was she slow in putting
another in her bow, nor less skillful in shooting it, for with the same she
as well ended the enamoured passions of the second Savage, as of the first. But
settling her self to shoot at the third, that was keeping the three Nymphs,
she could not so soon effect it, but that he came running in to her, within
the length of his club, and had surely dispatched her with one blow, if the
fair Shepherdess, by lifting up her knottie staff (as he was discharging
upon her) had not taken it upon the iron point (whereby his club brake in two
pieces) and immediately requited him with another upon the top of his crown,
wherewith she made him stagger on his knees, and then running a thrust at his
face (and with such force and aim it was) that pearcing his eyes, her staff
made speedy passage through his brains, so that the fierce. Savage, yelling
out a horrible and loud groan, fell down dead to the ground. The Nymphs
seeing themselves delivered from so great violence, and the Shepherdes and
Shepherdesses from expected death, whereunto they were so near, and how by the
admirable valor and strength of that Shepherdess, not only they, but the
Shepherdes had escaped, they were in a trance for a while, and could not
afterward imagine her to be any humane wight. But the Shepherdess coming
now unto them, began to untie their hands, saying. They deserved no less
punishment, then that they have (fair Nymphs) that with these rude and rough
bonds durst presume to bind such white and delicate hands, whose beauties are
fitter to bind tender and relenting hearts. Accursed be such proud monsters,
and ill befall to such senseless and beastly men: but Ladies, they have their
hire, and I my desire, by having done you this small service, and coming in so
good a time with speedy remedy for such an outrage, although these hardy
Shepherdes, and fair Shepherdess deserve no less thanks for hazarding their
lives in your defense, who would (no doubt) like my self have thought them
well employed, and themselves well appaied, if in so good a quarrel, and for
such worthy personages they had jointly lost them. The Nymphs were no less
amazed at her rare beauty and wisdom, then at the courage and force, that
she had showed in their defense, whereupon Doria with a gracious semblant
answered her thus again. Fair Shepherdess, if thou art not (as by thy
approved valor and brave mind, thou seem to be) the daughter of
invincible Mars, yet for thy beauty (which is celestial) thou must needs be
the daughter of lovely Venus and fair Adonis; and if of neither of them, it
cannot then otherwise be, but that Minerua must be thy mother, since such great
wisdom cannot proceed from any other part, although it is most true that
nature has endowed thee with the principal of them all. And since for so
strange a courtesy, and good turn that thou have done us, extraordinary and
great must the services be, wherewith they must be requited, we hope, that at
sometime or other, occasion may be offered, wherein thou may know, what
earnest desire and entyre good wills we have, to repaie so singular and worthy
a favor. But because (it seems) thou art weary, let us go to the fountain of
the Sicamours, near to yonder wood, where thou may rest and refresh thy
self. Let us go lady (said the Shepherdess) not so much to ease my wearied
body, as to talk of other matters, wherein my souls health and the sum of my
content does chiefly consist. That will we do with all possible diligence
(said Polydora) since there is not any, whom we should with greater reason
endeavor to content then thy self. But fair Cynthia turning to the Shepherdes,
said. The debt (fair Shepherdess, and stout Shepherds) wherein you have
perpetually bound us to you, your selves know well enough, which though we are
never able to acquit, yet we will not cease to wish, that some occasion may
hereafter fall out, wherein we may show the earnest will and affection we
have to discharge it, according to our great desire. These thanks (fair
Nymphs) answered Seluagia, and your gentle offers, are more due to these two
Shepherds then to me, that could do no more then pray for your safe delivery.
But is this the Shepherd Syrenus (said Polydora) so much beloved in times past,
as now forgotten of the fair Diana? And is this other, his corriuall Syluanus?
They are the same (said Seluagia.) Then am I glad (said Polydora) that you are
such kind of men, whom we may in some part recompense, the great good will you
showed, and the peril you passed to set us free. Doria woondring at that she
had heard, said. And is it true that this is Syrenus? I am very glad that I
have found thee, and that there is an occasion ministered me to seek out some
remedy (which (I hope) shall not be small) for thy great cares and sorrow. Nor
sufficient enough for so great grief, if it be small (said Syrenus.) Let us
go to the fountain (said Polydora) where we will at large discourse of these
and other matters. To the which when they were come, the Nymphs, placing the
Shepherdess in the mids of them, sat them down, and the Shepherds at the
Nymphs requests, went to the next town to provide some victuals, because it
was now somewhat late, and that they all had an appetite to eat. But the three
Nymphs remaining all alone with the unknown Shepherdesle, fair Doria thus
began to say unto her. It is no less strange to us, to see such an one as thou
art (most valiant and fair Shepherdess) of such valor and strength in these
plains and woods, sequestered from all popular concourse, then to thee (I
think) to see three Nymphs here all alone, and without company to defend
them from the like assaults. But because we may know what thou art (which is
our chief desire) we will enforce that favor with this small desert, by
telling thee first what we are, for the better knowledge whereof, thou shall
understand (courageous Shepherdess) that this Nymph is called Polydora, that
Cynthia, and my self Doria, we having our mansion place in Dianas wood, where
sage Felicia keeps her stately court, whose course of life, and only
exercise, is to cure and remedy the passions of love. We, going to visit a
certain Nymph her cousin, that lives on this side of the Gallician hills, came
by chance to this pleasant and shadowed dale, where, seeing the place fit to
pass away the heat of the noone day, under the shadow of these green
Sicamours and Laurel trees, and emulating the harmony of this running spring,
which passes through this green meadow, we took our instruments, to see if we
could imitate the same. And our hap (or rather mishap) it was that these
Savages long since captiuated (as they say) in our loves, by chance came
hither, who importuning us many times with their brutish requests, to grant
them our love, and seeing that by no means we gave them any hope thereof, with
violent hands determined to put their beastly intents in practice; and finding
us here all alone, did that, which (fair Shepherdess) thou saw, when so
fortunately thou came to our rescue. The Shepherdess hearing what fair
Doria had told her, with plentious tears gave an evident testimony of the
inward grief, which her afflicted heart felt, and looking upon the Nymphs, she
began thus to say.

Love is not such a quality (fair Nymphs of the chaste Goddess) that the
person, whom it holds in captivity, can have any regard of reason, neither
is reason a means to make an enamoured heart forsake that way, wherein the
cruel destinies will conduct it. For proof whereof, experience is at hand:
for though you were loved of these cruel Savages, and that the laws of honest
and pure love does prohibit all injuries, and whatsoever might offend you, yet
on the other side, that headlong disorder comes, wherewith it works such
strange and sundry effects, that the same men, that should serve and honor
you, seek to spoil and hurt you. And because you may know, that I am not
urged to say this, as only induced by that, which now at my coming I have
seen in this vallie, I will tell you that, which I thought to conceal from
all the world, but only from him, to whom I yielded up long since the freedom
of my heart, (if ever time and fortune grant mine eyes such favor, that they
may see him once again) whereby you shall see how in the school of mishaps I
have learned to talk of loves consequences, and of the effects, which the
traitor works in their sorrowful hearts, that are subject unto him.

You shall therefore know (fair Nymphs) that great Vandalia is my native
country, a province not far hence, where I was borne, in a city called
Soldina, my mother called Delia, my father Andronius, for lineage and
possessions the chiefest of all that province. It fell out that as my mother
was married many years, and had no children, (by reason whereof she lived so
sad and malecontent, that she enjoyed not one merry day) with tears and sighs
she daily importuned the heavens, and with a thousand vows and devout
offerings besought God to grant her the sum of her desire: whose omnipotency
it pleased, beholding from his imperial throne her continual orisons, to make
her barren body (the greater part of her age being now spent and gone) to
become fruitful. What infinite joy she conceived thereof, let her judge, that
after a long desire of any thing, fortune at last does put it into her hands.
Of which content my father Andronius being no less partaker, showed such
tokens of inward joy, as are impossible to be expressed. My mother Delia was so
much given to reading of ancient histories, that, if by reason of sickness, or
any important business, she had not been hindered, she would never (by her
will) have passed the time away in any other delight: who (as I said) being now
with child, and finding her self on a night ill at ease, entreated my father
to read something unto her, that, her mind being occupied in contemplation
thereof, she might the better pass her grief away. My father, who studied for
nothing else but to please her in all he might, began to read unto her the
history of Paris, when the three Ladies referred their proud contention for
the golden Apple, to his conclusion and judgment. But as my mother held it for
an infallible opinion, that Paris had partially given that sentence, (persuaded
thereunto by a blind passion of beauty) so she said, that without all doubt
he did not with due reason and wisdom consider the Goddess of battles; for
as martial and heroical feats (said she) excelled all other qualities, so
with equity and justice the Apple should have been given to her. My father
answered, that since the Apple was to be given to the fairest, and that Venus
was fairer then any of the rest, Paris had rightly given his judgment, if that
harm had not ensued thereof, which afterward did. To this my mother replied,
that, though it was written in the Apple, (That it should be given to the
fairest) it was not to be understood of corporal beauty, but of the
intellectual beauty of the mind. And therefore, since fortitude was a thing
that made one most beautiful, and the exercise of arms an exterior act of this
virtue, she affirmed, that to the Goddess of battles this Apple should be
given, if Paris had judged like a prudent and vnappassionate judge. So that
(fair Nymphs) they spent a great part of the night in this controversy, both
of them alleging the most reasons they could, to confirm their own purpose.
They persisting in this point, sleep began to overcome her, whom the reasons
and arguments of her husband could not once move, so that being very deep in
her disputations, she fell into as deep a sleep, to whom (my father being now
gone to his chamber) appeered the Goddess Venus with as frowning a
countenance, as fair, and said. I marvel Delia, who has moved thee to be
so contrary to her, that was never opposite to thee? If thou had but called
to mind the time, when thou were so overcome in love for Andronius, thou
would not have paid me the debt (thou owe me) with so ill coin. But thou
shall not escape free from my due anger; for thou shall bring forth a son and
a daughter, whose birth shall cost thee no less then thy life, and them their
contentment, for uttering so much in disgrace of my honor and beauty: both
which shall be as unfortunate in their love, as any were ever in all their
lives, or to the age wherein with remedylesse sighs they shall breath forth
the sum of their ceaselesse sorrows. And having said thus, she vanished
away: when likewise it seemed to my mother that the Goddess Pallas came to her
in a vision, and with a merry countenance, said thus unto her. With what
sufficient rewards may I be able to require the due regard (most happy and
discreet Delia) which thou have alleged in my favor against thy husbands
obstinate opinion, except it be by making thee understand, that thou shall
bring forth a son and a daughter the most fortunate in arms that have been
to their times. Having thus said, she vanished out of her sight, and my mother
through exceeding sear, awaked immediately. Who within a month after, at one
birth was delivered of me, and of a brother of mine, and died in childebed,
leaving my father the most sorrowful man in the world for her sudden death,
for grief whereof within a little while after, he also died. And because you
may know (fair Nymphs) in what great extremities love has put me, you must
understand, that (being a woman of that quality and disposition (as you have
heard) I have been forced by my cruel destiny to leave my natural habit, and
liberty, and the due respect of mine honor, to follow him, who thinks
(perhaps) that I do but leese it by loving him so extremely. Behold how
bootelesse and unseemly it is for a woman to be so dextrous in arms, as if it
were her proper nature and kind, wherewith (fair Nymphs) I had never been
endued, but that by means thereof, I should come to do you this little
service against these villains, which I account no less then if fortune had
begun to satisfy in part some of those infinite wrongs, that she has
continually done me. The Nymphs were so amazed at her words, that they could
neither ask nor answer any thing, to that the fair Shepherdess told them:
who prosecuting her history, said. My brother and I were brought up in a
Nunnerie, where an aunt of ours was Abbess, until we had accomplished twelve
years of age, at what time we were taken from thence again, and my brother
was carried to the mighty and invincible King of Portugal his Court (whose
noble fame and princely liberality was bruted over all the world) where, being
grown to years able to manage arms, he achieved as valiant, and almost
incredible enterprises by them, as he suffered unfortunate disgraces and foiles
by love. And with all this, he was so highly favored of that magnificent King,
that he would never suffer him to depart from his Court. Unfortunate I,
reserved by my sinister destinies to greater mishaps, was carried to a
grandmother of mine, which place I would I had never seen, since it was an
occasion of such a sorrowful life, as never any woman suffered the like. And
because there is not any thing (fair Nymphs) which I am not forced to tell
you, as well for the great virtue and deserts, which your excellent beauties
do testify, as also for that my mind does give me, that you shall be no
small part and means of my comfort; know that as I was in my grandmothers
house, and almost seventeen years old, a certain young Gentleman fell in
love with me, who dwelt no further from our house, then the length of a garden
Terrasse, so that he might see me every summers night, when I walked in the
garden. When as therefore ungrateful Felix had beheld in that place the
unfortunate Felismena (for this is the name of the woeful woman that tells you
her mishaps) he was extremely enamoured of me, or else did cunningly dissemble
it, I not knowing then whether of these two I might believe, but am now
assured, that whosoever believes lest, or nothing at all in these affairs,
shall be most at ease. Many days Don Felix spent in endeavoring to make me
know the pains, which he suffered for me, and many more did I spend in making
the matter strange, and that he did not suffer them for my sake. And I know not
why love delaied the time so long by forcing me to love him, but only that
(when he came indeed) he might enter into my heart at once, and with greater
force and violence. When he had therefore by sundry signs, as by Tylt and
Tourneyes, and by prauncing up and down upon his proud Iennet before my
windows, made it manifest, that he was in love with me (for at the first I did
not so well perceive it) he determined in the end to write a letter unto me,
and having practiced diverse times before with a maid of mine, and at length
with many gifts and fair promises, gotten her good will and furtherance, he
gave her the letter to deliver to me: But to see the means that Rosina made
unto me (for so was she called) the dutiful services and unwonted
circumstances, before she did deliver it, the others that she swear unto me,
and the subtle words and serious protestations she used, it was a pleasant
thing, and worthy the noting. To whom (nevertheless) with an angry
countenance I turned again, saying. If I had not regard of mine own estate,
and what hereafter might be said, I would make this shameless face of thine
be known ever after for a mark of an impudent and bold minion. But because
it is the first time, let this suffice that I have said, and give thee warning
to take heed of the second. Me thinks I see now the crafty wench, how she
held her peace, dissembling very cunningly the sorrow, that she conceived by
my angry answer: for she fained a counterfaite smiling, saying. Jesus
Mistress, I gave it you, because you might laugh at it, and not to move your
patience with it in this sort, for if I had any thought that it would have
provoked you to anger, I pray God he may show his wrath, as great toward me,
as ever he did to the daughter of any mother. And with this she added many
words more (as she could do well enough) to pacify the fained anger, and ill
opinion that I conceived of her, and taking her letter with her, she departed
from me. This having passed thus, I began to imagine what might ensue thereof,
and love (me thought) did put a certain desire into my mind to see the
letter, though modesty and shame forbad me to ask it of my maid, especially
for the words, that had passed between us, as you have heard. And so I
continued all that day until night, in variety of many thoughts. But when
Rosina came to help me to bed, God knows how desirous I was to have her
entreat me again to take the letter, but she would never speak unto me about
it, nor (as it seemed) did so much as once think thereof. Yet to try, if by
giving her some occasion, I might prevail, I said unto her. And is it so
Rosina, that Don Felix without any regard to mine honor dares write unto me?
These are things Mistress (said she demurely to me again) that are commonly
incident to love, wherefore I beseech you pardon me, for if I had thought to
have angered you with it, I would have first pulled out the bals of mine eyes.
How cold my heart was at that blow, God knows, yet did I dissemble the matter,
and suffer my self to remain that night only with my desire, and with
occasion of little sleep. And so it was indeed, for that (me thought) was the
longest and most painful night, that ever I passed. But when with a slower
pace (then I desired) the wished day was come, the discreet and subtle Rosina
came into my chamber to help me to make me ready, in doing whereof, of
purpose, she let the letter closely fall, which when I perceived, what is that
that fell down (said I,) let me see it. It is nothing Mistress, said she.
Come, come, let me see, it (said I) what, move me not, or else tell me what
it is. Good lord Mistress (^ide she) why will you see it: it is the letter I
would have given you yesterday. Nay that it is not (said I) wherefore show it
me, that I may see if you lie or no. I had no sooner said so, but she put it
into my hands, saying: God never give me good, if it be any other thing; and
although I knew it well indeed, yet I said, what, this is not the same, for
I know that well enough, but it is one of thy lovers letters, I will read it,
to see in what need he stands of thy favor. And opening it, I found it
contained this that follows.

I ever imagined (dear Mistress) that your discretion and wisdom would
have taken away the fear I had to write unto you, the same knowing well enough
(without any letter at all) how much I love you, but the very same has so
cunningly dissembled, that wherein I hoped the only remedy of my griefs had
been, therein consisted my greatest harm. If according to your wisdom you
censure my boldness, I shall not then (I know) enjoy one hour of life: but if
you do consider of it according to loves accustomed effects, then will I not
exchange my hope for it. Be not offended I beseech you (good Lady) with my
letter, and blame me not for writing unto you, until you see by experience,
whether I can leave of to write: And take me besides into the possession of
that which is yours, since all is mine does wholly consist in your hands, the
which with all reverence and dutiful affection a thousand times I kiss.

When I had now seen my Don Felix his letter, whether it was for reading it at
such a time, when by the same he showed, that he loved me more then himself,
or whether he had disposition and regiment over part of this wearied soul, to
imprint that love in it, whereof he wrote unto me, I began to love him too well
(and alas for my harm) since he was the cause of so much sorrow, as I have
passed for his sake. Whereupon asking Rosina forgiveness of what was past (as a
thing needful for that which was to come) and committing the secrecy of my
love to her fidelity, I read the letter once again, pausing a little at every
word, (and a very little indeed it was) because I concluded so soon with my
self, to do that I did, although in very truth it lay not otherwise in my
power to do. Wherefore calling for paper and ink, I answered his letter thus.

Esteem not so slightly of mine honor, Don Felix, as with fained words to
think to enueagle it, or with thy vain pretenses to offend it any ways. I
know well enough what manner of man thou art, and how great thy desert and
presumption is, from whence thy boldness does arise (I guess,) and not from the
force (which thing thou would feign persuade me) of thy fervent love. And if
it be so, (as my suspicion suggesteth) thy labor is as vain, as thy
imagination presumptuous, by thinking to make me do any thing contrary to
that, which I owe unto mine honor. Consider (I beseech thee) how seldom,
things, commenced under suttletie and dissimulation, have good success; and
that it is not the part of a Gentleman, to mean them one way, and speak them
another. Thou praiest me (amongst other things) to admit thee into possession
of that, that is mine: but I am of so ill an humor in matters of this
quality, that I trust not things experienced, how much less then thy bare
words, yet nevertheless, I make no small account of that, which thou have
manifested to me in thy letter; for it is enough that I am incredulous, though
not unthankful.

This letter did I send, contrary to that I should have done, because it was
the occasion of all my harms and greefes: for after this, he began to wax
more bold by unfolding his thoughts, and seeking out the means to have a
parley with me. In the end (fair Nymphs) a few days being spent in his
demands and my answers, false love did work in me after his wonted fashions,
every hour seasing more strongly upon my unfortunate soul. The Tourneies were
now renewed, the music by night did never cease, amorous letters and verses
were recontinued on both sides: and thus passed I away almost a whole year, at
the end whereof, I felt my self so far in his love, that I had no power to
retire, nor stay my self from disclosing my thoughts unto him, (the thing
which he desired more then his own life.) But my adverse fortune afterward
would, that of these our mutual loves (when as now they were most assured) his
father had some intelligence, and whosoever revealed them first, persuaded him
so cunningly, that his father (fearing least he would have married me out of
hand) sent him to the great Princess Augusta Caesarinas court, telling him, it
was not meet that a young Gentleman, and of so noble a house as he was, should
spend his youth idly at home, where nothing could be learned, but examples of
vice, whereof the very sameidlenes (he said) was the only Mistress. He went
away so pensive, that his great grief would not suffer him to acquaint me with
his departure, which when I knew, how sorrowful I remained, she may imagine,
that has been at any time tormented with like passion. To tell you now the
life, that I led in his absence, my sadness, sighs, and tears, which every day
I powered out of these wearied eyes, my tongue is far unable: if then my pains
were such, that I cannot now express them, how could I then suffer them? But
being in the mids of my mishaps, and in the depth of those woes which the
absence of Don Felix caused me to feel, and it seeming to me that my grief
was without remedy, if he were once seen or known of the Ladies in that
Court (more beautiful and gracious then my self.) By occasion whereof, as
also by absence (a capital enemy to love) I might easily be forgotten, I
determined to adventure that, which I think never any woman imagined: which
was, to apparel my self in the habit of a man, and to hye me to the Court to
see him, in whose sight al my hope and content remained: which determination, I
no sooner thought of, then I put in practice, love blinding my eyes and mind
with an inconsiderate regard of mine own estate and condition. To the
execution of which attempt, I wanted no industry, for, being furnished with
the help of one of my approved friends, and treasouresse of my secrets, who
bought me such apparel, as I willed her, and a good horse for my journey, I
went not only out of my country, but out of my dear reputation (which (I
think) I shall never recover again) and so trotted directly to the Court,
passing by the way many accidents, which (if time would give me leave to tell
them) would not make you laugh a little to hear them. Twenty days I was in
going thither, at the end of which, being come to the desired place, I took
up mine Inn in a street lest frequented with concurse of people. And the
great desire I had to see the destroier of my joy, did not suffer me to think
of any other thing, but how or where I might see him. To inquire of him of mine
host, I durst not, lest my coming might (perhaps) have been discovered: and to
seek him forth, I thought it not best, lest some inopinate mishap might have
fallen out, whereby I might have been known. Wherefore I passed all that day
in these perplexities, while night came on, each hour whereof (me thought) was
a whole year unto me. But midnight being a little past, mine host called at my
chamber door, and told me if I was desirous to hear some brave music, I
should arise quickly, and open a window toward the street. The which I did by
and by, and making no noise at all, I heard how Don Felix his Page, called
Fabius (whom I knew by his voice) said to others that came with him. Now it is
time my Masters, because the Lady is in the gallerie over her garden, taking
the fresh air of the cool night. He had no sooner said so, but they began to
wind three Cornets and a Sackbot, with such skill and sweetness, that it
seemed celestial music. And then began a voice to sing, the sweetest (in my
opinion) that ever I heard. And though I was in suspense, by hearing Fabius
speak, whereby a thousand doubts and imaginations (repugnant to my rest)
occurred in my mind, yet I neglected not to hear what was sung, because their
operations were not of such force, that they were able to hinder the desire,
nor distemper the delight that I conceived by hearing it. That therefore which
was sung, were these verses.

Sweet Mistress harken unto me
(If it greeues thee to see me die)
And hearing though it greeueth thee,
To hear me yet, do not deny.
O grant me then this short content,
For forced I am to thee to fliie:
My sighs do not make thee relent,
Nor tears thy heart do mollify.
Nothing of mine does give thee pain,
Nor thou think of no remedy:
Mistress how long shall I sustain
such ill, as still thou do apply?
In death there is no help, be sure,
But in thy will, where it does lie:
For all those illes which death does cure,
Alas, they are but light to try:
My troubles do not trouble thee,
Nor hope to touch thy soul so nie:
O from a will that is so free,
What should I hope, when I do cry?
How can I mollify that brave
And stony heart, of pity dry?
Yet Mistress turn those eyes (that have
No peers) shining like stars in sky:
But turn them not in angry sort,
If thou will not kill me thereby:
Though yet in anger, or in sport,
Thou killest only with thine eye.
After they had first with a concent of music sung this song, two played, the
one upon a Lute, the other upon a silver sounding Harp, being accompanied with
the sweet voice of my Don Felix: the great joy that I felt in hearing him,
cannot be imagined, for (me thought) I heard him now, as in that happy and
passed time of our loves. But after the deceit of this imagination was
discovered, seeing with mine eyes, and hearing with mine ears, that this
music was bestowed upon another and not on me, God knows what a bitter death
it was unto my soul: And with a grievous sigh, that carried almost my life away
with it, I asked mine host, if he knew what the Lady was, for whose sake the
music was made? He answered me, that he could not imagine on whom it was
bestowed, because in that street dwelled many noble and fair Ladies. And
when I saw he could not satisfy my request, I bent mine ears again to hear
my Don Felix, who now to the tune of a delicate harp whereon he sweetly
played, began to sing this Sonnet following.

A Sonnet.
MY painful years impartial Love was spending
In vain and booteles hopes my life appaying,
And cruel Fortune to the world bewraying
Strange samples of my tears that have no ending.
Time every thing to truth at last commending,
Leaves of my steps such marks, that now betraying
And all deceitful trusts shall be decaying,
And none have cause to plain of his offending.
She, whom I loved to my obliged power,
That in her sweetest love to me discouers
Which never yet I knew (those heavenly pleasures,)
And I do say, exclaiming every hour,
Do not you see, what makes you wise, O Lovers?
Love, Fortune, Time, and my fair Mystresse treasures.
The Sonnet being ended, they paused a while, playing on four Lutes together,
and on a pair of Virginals, with such heavenly melody, that the whole world
(I think) could not afford sweeter music to the ear, nor delight to any
mind, not subject to the panges of such predominant grief and sorrow as mine
was. But then four voice passing well tuned and set together, began to sing
this song following.

A Song.
THat sweetest harm I do not blame,
First caused by thy fairest eyes,
But grieve, because too late I came,
To know my fault, and to be wise.
I never knew a worser kind of life,
To live in fear, from boldness still to cease:
Nor worse then this, to live in such a strife,
Whether of both, to speak, or hold my peace?
And so the harm I do not blame,
Caused by thee, or thy fair eyes:
But that to see how late I came,
To know my fault, and to be wise.
I ever more did fear, that I should know
Some secret things, and doubtful in their kind,
Because the surest things do ever go
Most contrary unto my wish and mind.
And yet by knowing of the same,
There is no hurt, But it denies
My remedy, Since late I came,
To know my fault, and to be wise.
When this song was ended, they began to sound diverse sorts of instruments, and
voices most excellently agreeing together, and with such sweetness, that they
could not choose but delight any very much, who were not so far from it as I.
About dawning of the day the music ended, and I did, what I could to epsy
out my Don Felix, but the darkness of the night was mine enemy therein. And
seeing now that they were gone, I went to bed again, where I bewailed my great
mishap, knowing that he, whom most of al I loved, had so unworthily forgotten
me, whereof his music was too manifest a witness. And when it was time, I
arose, and without any other consideration went straight to the Princess her
palace, where (I thought) I might see that, which I so greatly desired,
determining to call my self Valerius, if any (perhaps) did ask my name.
Coming therefore to a fair broad court before the palace gate, I viewed the
windows and galleries, where I saw such store of blazing beauties, and
gallant Ladies, that I am not able now to recount, nor then to do any more, but
wonder at their graces, their gorgeous attire, their jewels, their brave
fashions of apparel, and ornaments, wherewith they were so richly set out. Up
and down this place before the windows road many lords, and brave gentlemen
in rich and sumptuous habits, and mounted upon proud Iennets, every one casting
his eye to that part, where his thoughts were secretly placed. God knows how
greatly I desired to see Don Felix there, and that his injurious love had been
in that famous palace, because I might then have been assured, that he
should never have got any other guerdon of his suits and services, but only
to see, and to be seen, and sometimes to speak to his Mistress, whom he must
serve before a thousand eyes, because the privilege of that place does not give
him any further leave. But it was my ill fortune, that he had settled his love
in that place, where I might not be assured of this poor help. Thus as I was
standing near to the palace gate, I espied Fabius, Don Felix his page,
coming in great haste to the palace, where speaking a word or two with a
porter that kept the second entry, he returned the same way he came. I gessed
his errant was, to know whether it were fit time for Don Felix to come to
dispatch certain business, that his father had in the court, and that he could
not choose but come thither out of hand. And being in this supposed joy, which
his sight did promise me, I saw him coming along with a great train of
followers attending on his person, all of them being bravely apparelled in a
liuerie of watchet silk, guarded with yellow velvet, and stitched on either
side with threedes of twisted silver, wearing likewise blew, yellow, and white
feathers in their hats. But my Lord Don Felix had on a pair of ash color
hose, embrodered and drawn forth with watchet tissue, his dublet was of white
satin, embrodered with knots of gold, and likewise an embrodered ierkin of
the same colored velvet, and his short cape cloak was of black velvet, edged
with gold lace, and hung full of buttons of pearl and gold, and lined with
razed watchet satin, by his side he ware at apaire of embrodered hangers a
rapier and dagger, with engraven hilts and pommell of beaten gold. On his
head, a hat, beset full of golden stars, in the mids of every which a rich
orient pearl was enchased, and his feather was likewise blew, yellow, and
white. Mounted he came upon a fair dapple graie Iennet, with a rich furniture
of blew, embrodered with gold and seed pearl. When I saw him in this rich
equipage, I was so amazed at his sight, that how extremely my senses were
ravished with sudden joy, I am not able (fair Nymphs) to tell you. Truth it
is, that I could not but shed some tears for joy and grief, which his sight
did make me feel, but fearing to be noted by the standers by, for that time I
dried them up. But as Don Felix (being now come to the palace gate) was
dismounted, and gone up a pair of stairs into the chamber of presence, I went
to his men, where they were attending his return, and seeing Fabjus, whom I
had seen before amongst them, I took him aside, and said unto him. My
friend, I pray you tell me what Lord this is, which did but even now alight
from his Iennet, for (me thinks) he is very like one, whom I have seen before
in an other far country. Fabius then answered me thus. Art thou such a
nouice in the court, that thou know not Don Felix? I tell thee there is not
any Lord, knight, or gentleman better known in it then he. No doubt of that
(said I) but I will tell thee what a nouice I am, and how small a time I have
been in the court, for yesterday was the first, that ever I came to it. Naie
then I cannot blame thee (said Fabius) if thou know him not. Know then
that this gentleman is called Don Felix, borne in Vandalia, and has his
chiefest house in the ancient city of Soldina, and is remaining in this court
about certain affairs of his fathers and his own. But I pray you tell me
(said I) why he gives his liueries of these colors? If the cause were not so
manifest, I would conceal it (said Fabius) but since there is not any that
knows it not, and can not come to any in this court, who cannot tell thee
the reason why, I think by telling thee it, I do no more then in courtesy I
am bound to do. Thou must therefore understand, that he loves and serves a
Lady here in this City named Celia, and therefore wears and gives for his
liuerie an azure blew, which is the color of the sky, and white and yellow,
which are the colors of his Lady and Mistress. When I heard these words,
imagine (fair Nymphs) in what a plight I was, but dissembling my mishap and
grief, I answered him. This Lady certes is greatly beholding to him, because
he thinks not enough, by wearing her colors, to show how willing he is to
serve her, unless also he bear her name in his liuerie: whereupon I guess,
she cannot be but very fair and amiable. She is no less indeed (said
Fabius) although the other, whom he loved and served in our own country, in
beauty far excelled this, and loved and favored him more then ever this
did. But this mischievous absence does violate and dissolve those things, which
men think to be most strong and firm. At these words (fair Nymphs) was I
feign to come to some composition with my tears, which if I had not stopped
from issuing forth, Fabius could not have chosen, but suspected by the
alteration of my countenance that all was not well with me. And then the Page
did ask me, what countryman I was, my name, and of what calling and
condition I was: whom I answered, that my country, where I was borne was
Vandalia, my name Valerius, and till that time served no Master. Then by this
reckoning (said he) we are both contrymen, and may be both fellows in one
house if thou will: for Don Felix my Master commanded me long since to seek
him out a Page. Therefore if thou will serve him say so. As for meat, drink,
and apparel, and a couple of shillings to play away, thou shall never want,
besides pretty wenches, which are not dainty in our street, as fair and
amorous as Queens, of which there is not any, that will not die for the love
of so proper a youth as thou art. And to tell thee in secret (because perhaps
we may be fellows) I know where an old Cannons maid is, a gallant fine girl,
whom if thou can but find in thy heart to love and serve, as I do, thou shall
never want at her hands, sine hand-kerchers, pieces of bacon, and now and then
wine of S. Martyn. When I heard this, I could not choose but laugh, to see how
naturally the unhappy Page played his part, by depainting forth their
properties in their lively colors. And because I thought nothing more
commodious for my rest, and for the enjoying of my desire, then to follow
Fabius his counsel, I answered him thus. In truth I determined to serve none,
but now, since fortune has offered me so good a service, and at such a time,
when I am constrained to take this course of life, I shall not do amiss if I
frame my self to the seruiee of some Lord or Gentleman in this Court, but
especially of your Master, because he seems to be a worthy Gentleman, and
such an one, that makes more reckoning of his servants then an other. Ha thou
know him not as well as I (said Fabius) for I promise thee by the faith of a
Gentleman (for I am one in deed, for my father comes of the Cachopines of
Laredo) that my Master Don Felix is the best natured Gentleman that ever thou
knew in thy life, and one who uses his Pages better then any other. And
were it not for those troublesome loves, which makes us run up and down
more, and sleepelesse, then we would, there were not such a Master in the
whole world again. In the end (fair Nymphs) Fabius spoke to his Master Don
Felix as soon as he was come forth in my behalf, who commanded me the same
night to come to him at his lodging. Thither I went, and he entertained me for
his Page, making the most of me in the world, where, being but a few days
with him, I saw the messages, letters, and gifts that were brought and carried
on both sides, grievous wounds (alas and coruiues to my dying heart) which made
my soul to fly sometimes out of my body, and every hour in hazard to leese
my forced patience before every one. But after one month was past, Don Felix
began to like so well of me, that he disclosed his whole love unto me from the
beginning unto the present estate and forwardnes, that it was then in,
committing the charge thereof to my secrecy and help, telling me, that he was
favored of her at the beginning, and that afterward she waxed weary of her
loving and accustomed entertainment, the cause whereof was a secret report
(whosoever it was that buzzed it into her ears) of the love, that he did bear
to a Lady in his own country, and that his present love unto her was but to
entertain the time, while his business in the Court were dispatched. And there
is no doubt (said Don Felix unto me) but that indeed I did once commence that
love that she lays to my charge, but God knows if now there be any thing in
the world, that I love and esteem more dear and precious then her. When I
heard him say so, you may imagine (fair Nymphs) what a mortal dagger pierced
my wounded heart. But with dissembling the matter the best I could, I answered
him thus. It were better sir (me thinks) that the Gentlewoman should complain
with cause, and that it were so indeed, for if the other Lady, whom you served
before, did not deserve to be forgotten of you, you do her (under correction my
Lord) the greatest wrong in the world. The love (said Don Felix again) which I
bear to my Celia will not let me understand it so, but I have done her (me
thinks) the greater injury, having placed my love first in an other, and not
in her. Of these wrongs (said I to my self) I know who bears the woorst
away. And (disloyal) he pulling a letter out of his bosom, which he had
received the same hour from his Mistress, read it unto me, thinking that he
did me a great favor thereby, the contents whereof were these.

Celias letter to Don Felix.
Never any thing, that I suspected touching thy love, has been so far from
the truth, that has not given me occasion to believe more often mine own
imagination, then thy innocence, wherein, if I do thee any wrong, refer it
but to the censure of thine own folly: For well thou might have denied, or
not declared thy passed love, without giving me occasion to condemn thee by
thine own confession. Thou say I was the cause that made thee forget thy
former love: Comfort thy self, for there shall not want another to make thee
forget thy second. And assure thy self of this (Lord Don Felix) that there is
not any thing more unbeseeming a Gentleman, then to find an occasion in a
Gentlewoman to leese himself for her love. I will say no more, but that in an
ill, where there is no remedy, the best is not to seek out any.


After he had made an end of reading the letter, he said unto me. What think
thou Valerius of these words? With pardon be it spoken my Lord; That your
deeds are showed by them. Go to, said Don Felix, and speak no more of that.
Sir, said I, they must like me well, if they like you, because none can judge
better of their words, that love well, then they themselves. But that which I
think of the letter is, that this Gentlewoman would have been the first, and
that Fortune had entreated her in such sort, that all others might have envied
her estate. But what would thou counsel me said Don Felix? If thy grief
does suffer any counsel, said I, that thy thoughts be divided into this
second passion, since there is so much due to the first. Don Felix answered me
again sighing, and knocking me gently on the shoulder, saying. How wise art
thou Valerius, and what good counsel do thou give me, if I could follow it.
Let us now go in to dinner, for when I have dined, I will have thee carry me a
letter to my Lady Celia, and then thou shall see, if any other love is not
worthy to be forgotten in lieu of thinking only of her. These were words,
that grieved Felismena to the heart, but because she had him before her eyes,
whom she loved more then her-selfe, the content, that she had by only seeing
him, was a sufficient remedy of the pain, that the greatest of these stings
did make her feel. After Don Felix had dined, he called me unto him, and
giving me a special charge what I should do (because he had imparted his
grief unto me, and put his hope and remedy in my hands) he willed me to carry
a letter to Celia, which he had already written, and reading it first unto me,
it said thus.

Don Felix his letter to Celia.
THe thought, that seeks an occasion to forget the thing, which it does love
and desire, suffers it self so easily to be known, that (without troubling
the mind much) it may be quickly discerned. And think not (fair Lady) that
I seek a remedy to excuse you of that, wherewith it pleased you to use me,
since I never came to be so much in credit with you, that in lesser things I
would do it. I have confessed unto you, that indeed I once loved well,
because that true love, without dissimulation, does not suffer any thing to be
hid, and you (dear Lady) make that an occasion to forget me, which should be
rather a motive to love me better. I cannot persuade me, that you make so small
an account of your self, to think that I can forget you for any thing that
is, or has ever been, but rather imagine, that you write clean contrary to
that, which you have tried by my zealous love, and faith toward you. Touching
all those things, that in prejudice of my good will toward you, it pleases
you to imagine, my innocent thoughts assure me to the contrary, which shall
suffice, to be ill recompensed, besides, being so ill thought of, as they are.


After Don Felix had read this letter unto me, he asked me if the answer was
correspondent to those words that his Lady Celia had sent him in hers, and if
there was any thing therein, that might be amended. Whereunto I answered thus.
I think Sir, it is needless to amend this letter, or to make the Gentlewoman
amends, to whom it is sent, but her, whom you do injury so much with it.
Which under your Lordships pardon I speak, because I am so much affected to
the first love in all my life, that there is not any thing that can make me
alter my mind. Thou have the greatest reason in the world (said Don Felix) if
I could persuade my self to leave of that, which I have begun: But what will thou have me do, since absence has frozen the former love, and the continual
presence of a peerless beauty rekindled another more hot and fervent in me.
Thus may she think her-selfe (said I again) unjustly deceived, whom first
you loved, because that love, which is subject to the power of absence, cannot
be termed love, and none can persuade me that it has been love. These words
did I dissemble the best I could, because I felt so sensible grief, to see my
self forgotten of him, who had so great reason to love me, and whom I did love
so much, that I did more, the^ any would have thought, to make my self still
unknown. But taking the letter and mine errant with me, I went to Celias
house, imagining by the way the woeful estate, whereunto my hapless love had
brought me; since I was forced to make war against mine own self, and to be
the intercessour of a thing so contrary to mine own content. But coming to
Celias house, and finding a Page standing at the door, I asked him if I might
speak with his Lady: who being informed of me from whence I came, told Celia
how I would speak with her, commending therewithal my beauty and person unto
her, and telling her besides, that Don Felix had but lately entertained me into
his service, which made Celia say unto him. What, does Don Felix so soon
disclose his secret loves to a Page, but newly entertained? he has (belike)
some great occasion that mooues him to do it. Bid him com in, and let us know
what he would have. In I came, and to the place, where the enemy of my life
was, and with great reverence, kissing her hands, I delivered Don Felix his
letter unto her. Celia took it, and casting her eyes upon me, I might perceive
how my sight had made a sudden alteration in her countenance, for she was so
far besides her-selfe, that for a good while she was not able to speak a
word, but remembering her-selfe at last, she said unto me. What good fortune
has been so favorable to Don Felix to bring thee to this Court, to make thee
his Page? Even that, fair Lady, said I, which is better then ever I
imagined, because it has been an occasion to make me behold such singular
beauty and perfections, as now I see clearly before mine eyes: And if the
pains, the tears, the sighs, and the continual disquiets, that my Lord Don
Felix has suffered, have grieved me heretofore, now that I have seen the
source, from whence they flow, and the cause of all his ill, the pity, that I
had on him, is now wholly converted into a certain kind of envy. But if it
be true (fair Lady) that my coming is welcome unto you, I beseech you by
that, which you owe to the great love, which he bears you, that your answer
may import no less unto him. There is not any thing (said Celia) that I
would not do for thee, though I were determined not to love him at all, who for
my sake has forsaken another. For it is no small point of wisdom for me, to
learn by other women's harms to be more wise, and wary in mine own. Believe
not good Lady (said I) that there is any thing in the world, that can make
Don Felix forget you. And if he has cast off another for your sake, wonder
not thereat, when your beauty and wisdom is so great, and the others so
small, that there is no reason to think, that he will (though he has
woorthelie forsaken her for your sake) or ever can forget you for any woman
else in the world. Do thou then know Felismena (said Celia) the Lady whom
thy Master did once love and serve in his own country? I know her (said I)
although not so well as it was needful for me, to have prevented so many
mishaps, (and this I spoke softly to my self). For my fathers house was near
to hers, but seeing your great beauty adorned with such perfections and
wisdom, Don Felix can not be blamed, if he has forgotten his first love,
only to embrace and honor yours. To this did Celia answer merrily, and
smiling. Thou have learned quickly of thy Master to sooth. Not so fair Lady,
said I, but to serve you would I feign learn: for flattery cannot be where
(in the judgment of all) there are so manifest signs and proofs of this due
commendation. Celia began in good earnest to ask me what manner of woman
Felismena was; whom I answered, that touching her beauty, Some thought her to
be very fair, but I was never of that opinion, because she has many days
since wanted the chiefest thing, that is requisite for it. What is that said
Celia? Content of mind, said I, because perfect beauty can never be, where
the same is not adjoined to it. Thou have the greatest reason in the world,
said she, but I have seen some Ladies, whose lively hew sadness has not one
whit abated, and others, whose beauty anger has increased, which is a strange
thing, me thinks. Hapless is that beauty said I, that has sorrow and anger
the preseruers and mistresses of it, but I cannot skill of these impertinent
things: And yet that woman, that must needs be molested with continual pain
and trouble, with grief and care of mind, and with other passions to make her
look well, cannot be recknoed among the number of fair women, and for mine
own part, I do not account her so. Wherein thou have great reason said she, as
in all things else that thou have said, thou have showed thy self wise and
discreet. Which I have dearly bought, said I again: But I beseech you
(gracious Lady) to answer this letter, because my Lord Don Felix may also have
some contentment, by receiving this first well employed service at my hands. I
am content, said Celia, but first thou must tell me if Felismena in matters of
discretion be wise and well advised? There was never any woman (said I again)
more wise then she, because she has been long since beaten to it by her great
mishaps; but she did never advise her self well, for if she had (as she was
accounted wise) she had never come to have been so contrary to her self. Thou
speak so wisely in all thy answers, said Celia, that there is not any,
that would not take great delight to hear them: which are not viands (said I)
for such a dainty taste, nor reasons for so ingenious and fine a conceit
(fair Lady) as you have, but boldly affirming, that by the same I mean no
harm at all. There is not any thing, said Celia, whereunto thy wit cannot
attain, but because thou shall not spend thy time so ill in praising me, as
thy Master does in praying me, I will read thy letter, and tell thee what thou
shall say unto him from me. Whereupon unfolding it, she began to read it to
herself, to whose countenance and gestures in reading of the same, which are
oftentimes outward signs of the inward disposition and meaning of the heart,
I gave a watchful eye. And when she had read it, she said unto me. Tell thy
Master that he that can so well by words express what he means, cannot
choose but mean as well as he says: And coming nearer unto me, she said
softly in mine ear. And this for the love of thee Valerius, and not so much
for Don Felix thy Master his sake, for I see how much thou love and tenderest
his estate: And from thence alas (said I to my self) did all my woes arise.
Whereupon kissing her hands for the great courtesy and favor she showed me, I
hied me to Don Felix with this answer, which was no small joy to him to hear
it, and another death to me to report it, saying many times to my self (when
I did either bring him home some joyful tidings, or carry letters or tokens
to her) O thrice unfortunate Felismena, that with thine own weapons art
constrained to wound thy euer-dying heart, and to heap up favors for him, who
made so small account of thine. And so did I pass away my life with so many
torments of mind, that if by the sight of my Don Felix they had not been
tempered, it could not have otherwise been, but that I must needs have lost
it. More then two months together did Celia hide from me the fervent love she
bare me, although not in such sort, but that by certain apparent signs, I
came to the knowledge thereof, which was no small lighting and ease of that
grief, which incessantly haunted my wearied spirits; For as I thought it a
strong occasion, and the only mean to make her utterly forget Don Felix, so
likewise I imagined, that, perhaps, it might befall to him, as it has done to
many, that the force of ingratitude, and contempt of his love, might have
utterly abolished such thoughts out of his heart. But alas it happened not so
to my Don Felix, for the more he perceived that his Lady forgot him, the more
was his mind troubled with greater cares and grief, which made him lead the
most sorrowful life that might be, whereof the least part did not fall to my
let. For remedy of whose sighs and pitious lamentations, poor Felismena
(even by maine force) did get favors from Celia, scoring them up (whenever
she sent them by me) in the catalogue of my infinite mishaps. For if by chance
he sent her any thing by any of his other servants, it was so slenderly
accepted, that he thought it best to send none unto her but my self,
perceiving what inconvenience did ensue thereof. But God knows how many tears
my messages cost me, and so many they were, that in Celias presence I ceased
not to power them forth, earnestly beseeching her with prayers and petitions,
not to entreat him so ill, who loved her so much, because I would bind Don
Felix to me by the greatest bond, as never man in like was bound to any
woman. My tears grieved Celia to the heart, as well for that I shed them in her
presence, as also for that she saw, if I meant to love her, I would not (for
requital of hers to me) have solicited her with such diligence, nor pleaded
with such pity, to get favors for another. And thus I lived in the greatest
confusion that might be, amids a thousand anxieties of mind, for I imagined
with my self, that if I made not a show that I loved her, as she did me, I did
put it in hazard, lest Celia, for despite of my simplicity or contempt, would
have love Don Felix more then before, and by loving him, that mine could not
have any good success; And if I fained my self on the other side, to be in
love with her, it might have been an occasion, to have made her reject my Lord
Don Felix, so that with the thought of his love neglected, and with the force
of her contempt, he might have lost his content, and after that, his life, the
least of which two mischiefs to prevent, I would have given a thousand lives,
if I had them. Many days passed away in this sort, wherein I served him as a
third between both, to the great cost of my contentment, at the end whereof,
the success of his love went on worse and worse, because the Love, that
Celia did bear me was so great, that the extreme force of her passion made her
leese some part of that compassion, she should have had of her self. And on a
day after that I had carried, and recaried many messages and tokens between
them, sometimes faining some my self from her unto him, because I could not see
him (whom I loved so deerly) so sad and pensive, with many supplications and
earnest prayers I besought Lady Celia with pity to regard the painful life,
that Don Felix passed for her sake, and to consider, that, by not favoring
him, she was repugnant to that, which she owed to her self: which thing I
entreated, because I saw him in such a case, that there was no other thing to
be expected of him but death, by reason of the continual and great pain,
which his grievous thoughts made him feel. But she with swelling tears in her
eyes, and with many sighs answered me thus. Unfortunate and accursed Celia,
that now in the end do know, how thou live deceived with a false opinion
of thy great simplicity (ungrateful Valerius) and of thy small discretion. I
did not believe till now, that thou did crave favors of me for thy Master,
but only for thy self, and to enjoy my sight all that time, that thou did
spend in suing to me for them. But now I see thou do ask them in earnest,
and that thou art so content to see me use him well, that thou can not
(without doubt) love me at all. O how ill do thou acquit the love I bear
thee, and that, which for thy sake I do now forsake? O that time might revenge
me of thy proud and foolish mind, since love has not been the means to do
it. For I cannot think, that Fortune will be so contrary unto me, but that
she will punish thee for co^temning that great good which she meant to bestow
on thee. And tell thy Lord Don Felix that if he will see me alive, that he see
me not at all: And thou vile traitor, cruel enemy to my rest, com no more (I
charge thee) before these wearied eyes, since their tears were never of force
to make thee know how much thou art bound unto them. And with this, she
suddenly flang out of my sight with so many tears, that mine were not of force
to stay her. For in the greatest haste in the world she got her into her
chamber, where locking the door after her, it auailed me not to call and cry
unto her, requesting her with amorous and sweet words to open me the door, and
to take such satisfaction on me, as it pleased her: Nor to tell her many other
things, whereby I declared unto her the small reason she had to be so angry
with me, and to shut me out. But with a strange kind of fury she said unto
me. Come no more, ungrateful and proud Valerius in my sight, and speak no
more unto me, for thou art not able to make satisfaction for such great
disdain, and I will have no other remedy for the harm, which thou have done
me, but death it self, the which with mine own hands I will take in
satisfaction of that, which thou deseruest: which words when I heard, I stayed
no longer, but with a heavy cheer came to my Don Felix his lodging, and with
more sadness, then I was able to dissemble, told him, that I could not speak
with Celia, because she was visited of certain Gentlewomen her kinsew omen.
But the next day in the morning, it was bruted over all the city, that a
certain trance had taken her that night, wherein she gave up the ghost, which
stroke all the court with no small wonder. But that, which Don Felix felt by
her sudden death, and how near it grieved his very soul, as I am not able to
tell, so can not humane intendement conceive it, for the complaints he made,
the tears, the burning sighs, and hart-breake sobbes, were without all
measure and number. But I say nothing of my self, when on the one side, the
unlucky death of Celia touched my soul very near, the tears of Don Felix on
the other, did cut my heart in two with grief: And yet this was nothing to that
intolerable pain, which afterward I felt. For Don Felix heard no sooner of
her death, but the same night he was missing in his house, that none of his
servants, nor any body else could tell any news of him.

Whereupon you may perceive (fair Nymphs) what cruel torments I did then
feel, then did I wish a thousand times for death to prevent all those woes and
myseries, which afterward befell unto me: For Fortune (it seemed) was but
weary of those which she had but till then given me. But as all the care and
diligence which I employed in seeking out my Don Felix, was but in vain, so I
resolved with my self to take this habit upon me as you see, wherein it is
more then two years, since I have wandered up and down, seeking him in many
countries: but my fortune has denied me to find him out, although I am not a
little now bound unto her by conducting me hither at this time, wherein I did
you this small piece of service. Which (fair Nymphs) believe me, I account
(next after his life in whom I have put all my hope) the greatest content, that
might have fallen unto me.

When the Nymphs had heard fair Felismenas tale, and understood what a great
Lady she was, and how love had made her forsake her natural habit, and taken
upon her the weeds and life of a shepherdess, they were no less amazed at
her constancy and zeal, then at the great power of that cruel tyrant, who
absolutely commands so many liberties to his service. And they were moved
besides to no small pity, to see the tears and burning sighs wherewith the
Lady did solemnize the history of her love. Doria therefore, whose tender
soul Felismenas grief did most transpierce, and who was more affected to her,
then to any woman, with whom she had over conuersed before, took her by the
hand, and began to say to her in manner follwing. What can we do (saire Lady)
against the blows of Fortune, what place is there so strong, where one may be
safe from the mutabilities of time? What harneys so impenetrable, and steel so
well tempered, that may serve for a defense against the violence of this
tyrant, whom so unjustly they call Love? And what heart (though it be harder
then diamond) which an amorous thought can not mollify and make tender? Certes
this beauty, this valor, and this wisdom, deserve not to be forgotten of
him, who had but once seen and known them: But we live now in such an age,
that the deserts of any thing, are the means and occasions of not obtaining
it. And cruel love is of so strange a condition, that he bestows his
contents without any good order and rule, and gives there greatest favors,
where they are lest esteemed; but the medicine of so many ils, (whereof this
tyrant is the cause) is her discretion and courage that suffers them. But whom
does he leave so free, that these may serve her for a remedy? Or who can
command her self so much in this passion, that in other women's affairs she is
able to give counsel, how much less to take it in her own. Yet for all this,
I beseech thee (fair Lady) to put before thine eyes, and consider what thou
art, because if women of such high renown and virtue as thou art, are not able
to tolerate his adverse effects, how can they suffer them, that are not such.
And in the behalf of these Nymphs and mine own, I request thee, to go with
us to the sage Felicias palace, which is not far from this place, for that
to morrow about this time we may be well there: where (I am assured) thou shall
find great remedies for thy greefes, as many others have done heretofore,
that have not deserved them as much as thou have: whose profounde skill and
rare experiments (besides many other notable things in her, wherein no man or
woman in our times came ever near her) and her princely bounty doth'make her
so famous and renowned, that the greatest kings and estates in the world are
desirous of her company. I know not fair Nymphs (said Felismena again) who
is able to apply a remedy to such an ill, but he that first caused it. But
nevertheless I will fulfill your wills herein, and since your company is such
an ease and lighting to my pain, it were a fond part to reject that comfort,
whereof at this time I stand in so great need. I wonder said Cynthia, that
Don Felix (all the while thou did serve him) did not know thee by thy fair
face, thy sweet grace, and looking daily on such fair eyes. He did so little
remember those beauties, said Felismena, which he had once scene in me, (his
thoughts being so deeply imprinted on Celias which he daily viewed) that he
had no power, nor knowledge left to think once of mine. And talking thus
together, they heard the Shepherds singing, (that in company of discreet
Seluagia were coming down the hill) the oldest songs they knew, or that their
several greefes did put into their heads, every one taking that, which made
most for his purpose. And the first that began to sing, was Syluanus, who did
sing this song following.

MY passion (Love) thou do disdain,
But God keep thee from such a pain.
I am of Love disdained,
And Fortunes wheel does broose me,
I care not now to loose me,
And hope not to be gained.
So care to care is chained
By Fortune and by Love again:
But God keep thee from such a paina.
In playntes Love entertained
Myhart (such sport to choose me)
And fortune thus vndooes me,
To make me think unfeigned,
That Time a change maintained,
But Both do still my greefes ordain,
But God keep thee from such a pain.
Seluagia, who bare no less love, or at lest no less presumption thereof to
her Alanius, then Syluanus to fair Diana, and who thought her self no less
grieved for the change, that he had made in his love, then Syluanus for the
long perseuera^ce in his harm, changing the first verse of this old pastoral
round that follows, she began to sing it, applying it to her purpose in this
sort.

Say Shepherdess, what has deprived thee
Of courtesy and joy,
Since that so merry thou were wont to be?
The dear remembrance of my passed gladness
In mids of all my present grief and pain,
Woe to my soul, that feels it with such sadness,
If long in such a state it does remain:
And since that time has changed (to beplaine)
A Shepherd to offend and trouble me,
Merry and pleasant I could never be.
Syrenus thought Seluagias song sufficient enough to manifest his greese, if
Syluanus and she had agreed thereunto; who also persuading him to choose out
some song, that he had sometimes heard most fit for his purpose, he began to
sing this which follows.

Mistress thou have forgotten me,
But more I love and honor thee.
Haples, I see I am forgot,
And yet I know no reason why,
To whom thy faith thou do apply.
And take from whom thou do not wot:
Being beloved, he loves thee not,
And Mistress thou do not love me,
But more I love and honor thee.
Me thinks I do behold with pride
Those eyes (my joys not long ago)
And for thou will not see me so,
Thy fairest face from me do hide:
And that I say to thee, beside,
Mistress lift up those eyes to me,
For more I love and honor thee.
The Nymphs with no small delight and content, were harkening to the Shepherds
songs, but the infinite sighs and tears which the noble Shepherde sse powered
forth, did not suffer her to be idle, while the Shepherds were a singing. When
they were come to the fountain, and had done their due reverence, they spread a
fair white cloth upon the green grass, and setting that meat on it, which
they had brought with them from the town, they sat them down to eat, whom
their thoughts (at lest) would give leave, and they, (who had not such a
privilege) importuned by them, that were most free, must needs do the like.
And after they had refreshed themselves, Polydora said thus. The remedy of
your pains disdained Shepherds, (if it be lawful to call you by that name,)
which (to your grief) fortune has cast upon you, consists in the hands of
the grave Lady Felicia, to whom nature has given that divine knowledge, which
she has denied us: And therefore since you see, how greatly it imports you
to go visit her, in the name of these two Nymphs (to whom you have done this
day so great service) I request you, not to refuse our company, because by no
other means you may receive the reward of your travel and pain, the which
this worthy Shepherdess intends to take, who needs it no less then your
selves. And thou Syrenus, whom Fortune has tossed from a happy and joyful
time, to a life as hapless and full of sorrow, despair not, but cheer up
thy self, for if thy Mistress had the remedy of the miserable life, which
she leads with Delius so near her, as thou of that, which she makes thee
suffer, it would be no small lighting to those churlish words, and jealous
iarres, which I know she passes every day with him. There is nothing fair
Polydora (said Syrenus) that gives me now any greater discontent, then that
Diana has revenged herself on me so much to her own cost, for loving one,
who has not any thing in him that deserves such love, and being perforce in
his company, thou see how much it must grieve her; and as for me, to seek a
remedy for my grief, I would do it, if time and fortune would permit me. But
I plainly see, that all the ways of it are stopped up, and know not whither
thy self and these fair Nymphs will carry me to seek it out. But let it be
as it will, I will follow you, as Syluanus (I think) and Seluagia will do no
less, if they be not of so small understanding, that they conceive not the
great favor, that you do to us all. And so they two referring themselves to
that, which Syrenus had answered, and committing their flocks to their friends
(which were not feeding far from that place) while they came back again,
they went altogether, which way the Nymphs did lead them.

The end of the second book of Diana.
The third Book of Diana of George of Montemayor.
WIth great content the fair Nymphs with their company were going on their
way through the mids of a thick wood, and now the sun being ready to set,
they entered into a fair valley, in the mids of which ran a swift brook, beset
on either side with thick Sallows and Sicamours; amongst the which were many
other kinds of less trees, which twyning about the greater, and the golden
and colored flowers of the one, wouen (as it were) with the green bows of
the other, represented a goodly sight and delight to the eye. The Nymphs and
Shepherds took a pathway between the brook and the fair arbours, who had
not gone far, when they came to a large green meadow, wherein was a very
fair great moate of clear water, from whence the brook did spring, that with
great force ran through the valley. In the mids of that moate was an Island,
wherein grew some green trees, amongst the which stood a Sheepe-cote, and
about the same a flock of sheep went seeding of the green and tender grass.
The Nymphs thinking this a fit place to pass away the night, which was near
at hand, upon a fine causey of stones most artificially (as it seemed) laid
in order, they passed all over into the island, and went directly to the cote
which they saw before them. But Polydora going in first (for she was a little
before the rest) was scarce entered in when she came forth as fast again, and
looking toward her company, did put her singer upon her mouth, in token that
they should come softly on and without any noise, which the Nymphs and the
Shepherdes perceiving, with the least they could, came into the cote, and
looking into it, espied a bed in a corner, not made of any other thing, then of
the green bows of those Sicamours, that were growing about it, and of the
green grass, that did grow about the water brinkes. Upon the which they saw
a Shepherdess lying a sleep, whose beauty stroke them with no less
admiration, then if on a sudden they had seen fair Diana before their eyes.
She had on a light sky colored petticoate, and under that a gorget of so
passing fine net-worke, that they might at pleasure behold the delicate
proportion of her snow white breast, and comely feature of her even body, for
the upper part (being of the same color with the rest) hung so loose about
her, that they might take a perfect view of her fine and dainty waste. Her
yellowe hair in brightness surpassing the sunnie beams, were loose and hanging
down without any order. But never did frizeling and adorned periwigge of any
Lady in stately court beautify in such sort, as the careless disorder that
these had; and her white leg, being bare by the negligence of her harmless
sleep, lay seemly out of her petticoate, but not so much, that the lookers
on might perceive any part, but what with modesty they might well behold. And
by many tears that (sleeping yet) went trickling down her fair and rosy
cheeks, her sleep (it seemed) should not hinder her sorrowful imaginations.
The Nymphs and Shepherds were so amazed at her beauty, and at her inward
sorrow, which by outward signs they well coniectured did trouble her waking
soul, that they knew not what to say, but were forced to shed tears for
pity of those, which they saw the Shepherdess power forth: who (as with
pity and admiration they were looking on her) turned her on the other side,
and with a grievous sigh fetched from the bottom of her heart, said thus to
her self. How unfortunate art thou Belisa, that thy grief consists in no
other thing, but in that thy life is of so small value, that it is not able to
pay those things with extinction thereof, which by thine own occasion are
destroyed and lost? And then with a sudden sursault she awaked in such sort,
that the end of her days (it seemed) was near at hand: But when she saw the
three Nymphs, and two such fair Shepherdesses with two Shepherds, she was so
amazed, that it was a good while before she came to her self again, who at
last lifting up her eyes to look on them again, without stopping her tears,
which continually she powered out, or putting silence to her burning sighs,
which her afflicted heart sent forth, began to speak in this sort. How great
a comfort to so comfortles a sonle as mine is should it be, if I were assured,
that none by word nor deed would endeavor to give me any at all; because the
great reason, that I have (fair Nymphs) to live enwrapped in such sadness as I
do, has put such a kind of emnitie between me and the consolation of my
grief, that if I thought at any time to enjoy it, I would my self be the
author of mine own death: Whereat marvel not fair Nymphs, or that I would
seek to prevent me of this remedy, since there is no other, that can grieve
me more, then this your sudden sight and coming to this uncouth cote, a place
selected out and fit for no other thing, but to bewail remediless greefes.
Wherefore let it be a warning to those that are attending their torments, to go
quickly out of this place, because the misfortunes of love have stopped up the
ways in such sort, that they never let any hope of comfort or remedy enter
in. But what hap has led such a fair company to this place, where nothing
is that yields content. What is it (think you) that makes the green grass of
this island grow, and the waters (that encompasse it round about) to increase,
but my ceasles tears? What is it, that moves the trees of this fair valley,
but the voice of my piteous outcries, and the violent breath of my sorrowful
sighs, which, filling the air, do execute that office for it, which for it
self it cannot do? Why do the pretty birds sing among these springes, when
golden Phoebus is in all his force, but to help to lament and bewail my
mishaps? Wherefore is it that the timorous wild beasts come forth to the
green meadowe, but to hear my continual plaints? I pray God your fortune
has not brought you (fair Nymphs) to this place to that end, that mine has,
because nature (according to the sorrowful life, that I do pass in it) has
for no other thing (it seems) framed it, but for those that are troubled with
the incurable malladies of love, therein to pass away their sorrowful lives:
If any of you therefore be in this extremity, let her pass on no farther, if
not, let her go quickly from hence again, least by staying here long, she be
forced by the nature and quality of the place. The fair Shepherdess spoke
these words with so many tears, that there was not any amongst them, that
could stay theirs. They were all amazed to see the spirit, gesture and
countenance wherewith she spoke them, for they came (as it appeered) from the
very center of her painful soul. And she could do no less then this,
because the sorrowful success of her love did take away all manner of
suspicion, that that grief, which so extremely she showed, was either
counterfaite or fained. But fair Doria spoke thus unto her. What is the cause
(fair Shepherdess) that has driven thy beauty to these extremities? What
grief so strange could love make an occasion of so many tears, accompanied
with so sole and solitary a life, as thou do lead in this place? But what
do I ask, when seeing thee to complain of love, thou tellest me more then I
am able to ask thee. It was thy desire, when we came hither, to be assured
that none of us would offer thee any comfort, wherein I cannot blame thee,
since it is the property of sorrowful souls not only to abhor comfort,
but to fly from them, by whom they think by any means to receive it. If I
should tell thee (fair Shepherdess) that I could help thy grief, what does
it avail, if the same will not give thee leave to believe me? To tell thee,
that in thine own judgment and discretion thou do help thy self, I know
thou have it not so free, that thou can do it: Of one thing yet (good
Shepherdess) thou may be assured, that there is no means in the whole world
to rid thee from this painful life, which I would not give then, if it lay in
my power. And if this good will deserves any thing at all, I beseech thee for
their sakes (that are heete present) and for mine own, to tell us the cause of
thy grief, because there are some in this company, that have as great need
of remedy, and whom love has driven to so narrow a straight, that, if Fortune
do not succor them the sooner, I know not what will become of their lives.
The Shepherdess, hearing Doria speak these words, came out of her
melancholy cell, and taking her by the hand, carried her unto a fountain in a
little green meadowe not far off. Whither the Nymphs and Shepherdes went
after them, and about the same sat them down altogether, when golden Phoebus
had made an end of his diurnall course, and silver Diana began hers with such
brightness, as if it had been midday. Where being in such sort as you have
heard, the fair Shepherdess began to tell this which follows.

AT that time (fair Nymphs of the chaste Goddess) when I was free from love,
I heard once a certain thing, the experience whereof did afterward beguile
me, finding it clean contrary to that which I heard reported. For it was
told me, that there was no kind of grief, but (by telling it) was some
lighting and ease to her that did suffer it. I find, that there is not any
thing, that more augments my mishap, then to call it to memory, and tell it
her, that is free from the like. For if I thought otherwise, I durst not
(believe me) recount unto you the history of my annoies. But because it is
true, that the telling of it to you shall be no cause of comfort to my balefull
soul (which are the two causes most abhorred of me,) give ear, and you shall
hear the most strange and haples accidents, that ever fell in love.

Not far from this valley toward that part, where the sun does set, there
is a village in the mids of a forest near to two rivers, which with their
currants do water and give life to the green trees, whose shadowed bows are
so delightful, and thick together, that one house may hardly be discerned
from another. Every one of them has their limits round about them, where the
gardens in summer time are decked with fragrant flowers, besides the abou^dance
of pleasant orchards, which are there naturally brought forth, though helped
by the industry of them, which in great Spain are called (Freemen) by reason
of the antiquity of their houses and lineage. In this place was the unfortunate
Belisa borne, for this name I took from the funt, where I would to God I had
left and lost my life. Here lived also a certain Shepherd, one of the
chiefest for birth and riches, that was in all that country, called Arsenius,
and married to the fairest Shepherdess in all her time, but untimely death
(because her destinies would have it so, or else for avoiding some other
inconvenience that her beauty might have caused) did within a few years
after she was married, cut asunder her vital thread. The grief that Arsenius
felt for the death of his beloved Florida, was so extreme, that he was almost
in danger of loosing his life: the which yet he preserved by the comfort of a
son she left behind her called Arsileus, whose beauty and comely feature so
far excelled others, that they matched the gifts so highly commended (and
descended to him) from Florida his mother. And yet did Arsenius for the loss
of her, lead the most sorrowful and desolate life, that might be. But seeing
his Son in sufficient years to set him to some virtuous exercise, knowing,
That idleness in boys was the curse of vices, and an enemy to virtue, he
determined to send him to the famous Academie of Salamanca, with intent to
have him learn those sciences, which make men mount up to higher degrees
then men, and so sent him thither indeed. But fifteen years being now past
since the death of his mother, it fell out that I going on a day with others
of our neighbors daughters to the market, kept in a pretty town not far
from ours, unfortunate Arsenius (to his own harm, and (alas) to mine, and to
the prejudice of his hapless son) by chance espied me. This sight kindled an
extreme kind of love in him, as it appeered afterward by the strange effects
he showed: for he endeavored to make me know it sometimes in the field, as I
was going to carry the Shepherds their dinner; sometimes again, as I was
going to the river to rince my clothes; and sometimes for water to the
fountain, where he never missed, of purpose to meet me. But I, (that was till
then but a nouice in matters of love, although by heare-saie I understood some
of his disordinate effects) sometimes dissembled the matter, as though I
understood not his meaning, and sometimes made but a mock of them, and was
angry to see him so importunate and earnest. But my words were not able to
defend my self from his continual suites, nor the great love he bare me,
suffered him to leave of to woe me more and more: And in this sort I passed
away more then four years, in which space he left not of his fond attempt,
nor I to resolve with my self to give him the lest favor in the world. About
this time came his hapless son Arsileus from his study, who amongst other
sciences, that he had studied, was so bravely seen in Poetry and Music,
that he excelled all others in his time. His father took such exceeding joy in
him, that he could never be out of his sight, and not without great reason,
because Arsileus was such an one indeed that he deserved to be beloved, not
only of his father whom nature constrained to love as his son, but of every
one else in the world: And so in our town he was so much esteemed and
regarded of the cheifest and vulgar sort, that they talked amongst themselves
of no other thing, then of the great wisdom, graces, gentilitie, and many
other good parts more, which beautified the flourishing prime of his youth.
Arsenius was so secret to his son, that by no means he would let him
understand any thing touching his love, whom although Arsileus had seen on a
day very sad, yet he durst not ask him the cause of his heaviness, but rather
thought, those passions to be the relics of that sorrow, which yet for the
untimely death of his fair mother, remained in his fathers breast. But Arsenius
greatly desiring to send me a letter, and to get it in such sort from his
son, (for he knew him to be an excellent Poet) that he might not perceive
for whom it was, he thought it most fit to discover the matter, and the sum
of his love to a great friend of his called Argastus, a towns-man and our
neighbor, praying him earnestly to request his son Arsileus (as a thing that
he stood greatly in need of) to pen him a letter, and to tell him, that it was
to be sent a good wale thence to a bonnie Shepherdess, whom he loved and
served. And so he gave him instructions of other things, making most for his
purpose, that he was to request him to put in the letter. Argastus was so
careful about his friends business, that Arsileus (urged thereunto by his
incessant requests) delivered him the letter in as ample sort as he requested
it. Which Arsenius seeing so fit for his purpose, wrought the means, that it
came to my hands: the which receiving much against my will, I found that it
said thus.

Arsenius his letter.
Fair Shepherdess whose hap and fare,
That such it be, it is Gods will:
Let not such grace and beauty rare
Decay, or be employed ill.
And whose mild lambs and marked sheep
Thou may behold (with merry cheer)
By flocks increase, where they do keep
On tops of these green hillocks here.
Hark to a Shepherdes wretched cry,
Unto himself so great a foe,
As for thy sweetest sake to die,
He finds he does it well be stowe:
Turn thy deaf ears unto my smart,
And mollify thy hard pretenses,
And now begin to put thy heart
Into the hands of thy sweet senses.
Turn these two fair and cruel eyes
Unto this hapless Shepherd Swain:
Thy flock regard not, but his cries,
And think a little on his pain,
Let that but move and change thy will:
To think thereof, I pray thee deine yet,
And not to remedy mine ill,
But to behold how I sustain it.
How often have thou come and lead
(...) the field thy flock and dams,
(...) many times unto the meade
Have thou brought forth thy pretty lambs?
That I told not my little ease,
That I became a fool for thee,
But better had I held my peace,
So little it auailed me.
That which I feel for thy sweet sake
With what words shall I now declare?
Or with what knowledge shall I make
My faith but known and heavy care?
What humane senses shall suffice
To feel that pain, and that unrest,
Which for thy lake Love did devise
To give me (though I tell it best.)
Why do thou hide thy self from me,
Since thou do know it very clear,
That present when I am with thee,
Most absent from thee I appear:
I, in suspences to enfolde me
Being where thy fair beauties are:
And thou, when that thou do behold me,
From seeing me then art thou far.
To show me likewise thou do know
(To mock me when thou do pretend)
Things from thy thought, which ever go,
And so deceive me in the end.
See then who greater love can give,
Or greater grounded love in hand,
That my deceived thought must live
With that thou make it understand.
Behold th'extreme wherein I am,
Seeing my good in doubtful state,
That silly creatures I became,
(Less then my self) to emulate:
For, for the bird the wind does bear,
And fish that in the waves do live,
For their sweet freedom every where
My understanding I would give.
A change of thousand times I see,
And nouels every day do rain:
Minds change from that they wont to be,
Obliuions do revive again.
In every thing there is great change,
The which I never saw in thee,
Whereby thou may perceive how strange,
And vain my hope is unto me.
The other day thou did pass by,
Feeding thy fiocke upon the hill:
For grief I sighed somewhat high;
Meaning thereby to thee no ill:
A lamb the head then lift up, that it
Did hear, and did some pity feel,
And thou did fling thy sheep hook at it:
See what a hardened heart of steel.
Could thou not (armed with such power)
After such long time killing me
Help me a day or but an hour?
If that does seem too much to thee,
Do it to see how I may prove
Or how with favors, that ensue,
In better sort entreat this love:
Then after kill my soul anew.
I do desire to change estate
From pain to pain, and not to pleasure:
Nor yet to change from love to hate,
And all in one degree and measure.
And though the ill in substance should
Be but all one and of one sort:
Yet in the circumstance I would
That more or less it did import.
For that may be of such behoof,
And Mistress, so much it may do
That love may give thee greater proof,
Then it has given thee hitherto.
And whom an ill and firmest love
Can neither grieve, nor mollify,
It may be such a grief may move
Thee, of some greater quality.
Unto the meade if thou do go,
Unto the river or the plain,
Then am I diligent to know,
If thou art gone or come again.
If angry, when I follow thee,
Or mock me, if behind I stay:
See then how fear does trouble me,
And what extremes I do essay.
To Syluia then thy dearest friend
I go (to seek a poor relief)
To know if (happily) in the end
Thou have informed her of my grief.
But nothing when of thee she speaks,
Then do I say, this cruel foe
Unto her good companion breaks
Nothing of me, nor of my woe.
Some other times I watch the place,
To hear the singing in the night,
With singular and sweetest grace,
A thousand songs of great delight:
For I do hear them one by one,
And thou seek'st out the worst of all,
And ever from thy mouth hear none
That in love matters do befall.
I saw thee yet the other day,
Talking with Maudline, who in fine
To thee her sorrow did bewray:
O would to God it had been mine.
I thought thou would not long defer
(Poor soul) to cheer her heavy heart,
But laughing, thou did answer her.
It is a jest, in love's no smart.
Thou left'st her weeping all in vain,
And I came thither by and by:
Of thy hard heart she did complain,
And sighing, this I did reply:
No wonder, for this cruel one
Delights not only, that above
All others she loves not alone,
But that all others should not love.
Some other times I thee epsy
Talking with other Shepherdesses,
All is of feasts and bravery,
Who daunceth best, and like digresses:
That this maid has a seemly grace,
And he this, or that interest:
But if of love they touch an ace,
Then straight thou turn'st it to a jest.
Beware yet, live not too secure,
For in brave love and fortunes art,
There is not anything less sure
Then such a free exempted heart.
And it may be with after woe
That cruel love will subject thee,
To one that will entreat thee so,
(Cruel) as thou intreatest me.
But (if that fall out to thy cost)
God grant the same may never be,
And first I wish my life were lost,
Rather then such a thing to see.
For this poor heart which in my breast
Is burning in so strange a fire,
Fears more thy harm and thy unrest,
Then it respects her own desire.
With the greatest signs of dolor and of a most afflicted heart indeed, the
Shepherdess Belisa rehearsed Arsenius his letter, or (to say more truly) the
letter of his son Arsileus, staying between many verses, and repeating some
of them twice, and at other some lifting up her eyes to heaven with such
anguish and grief of mind, that one would have thought her heart would have
burst in pieces. But prosecuting the sorrowful history of her love, she said
unto them.

This letter (fair Nymphs) was the beginning of all the harm of the woeful
man, that made it, and the end of all the rest and content of the hapless
woman, to whom he wrote it. For when I had read it, by some curious
inuestigation that my surmise found out, I perceived, that it sauoured more of
his son his quick wit, then of the father his blunt affection. And because
the time was now at hand, wherein love came to take an account of the small
care, I had till then of his invincible power, or because in the end I should
have some feeling of his poisoned sweet, I perceived my self a little more
mollified then before, and not so little, but that I gave love place to take
possession of my liberty. And that which this tyrant did by me, was the
strangest thing that ever happened in matters of love, for he made me not only
love Arsileus, but also his father Arsenius. Truth it is, that I loved the
father to requite the love he bare me; and the son, to yield up my entyre
liberty into his hands, as from that hour I did indeed give it him. So that I
loved the one, not to seem ungrateful; and the other, because it was not in
my power to do any less. But when Arsenius perceived me to be more gentle then
before (which thing he desired so long since) there was not any thing in the
world, which he would not have done for my content and pleasure: For so many
were the presents, the jewels, and many other gifts he sent me, that it
grieved me a little to see my self so greatly indebted to him. With every
thing he sent me, came so many amorous verses and letters, that I was forced to
answer them again, whereby I showed him no signs of love to put him in any
hope, nor my self so coie as I was wont to be. But the love I bare to
Arsileus took every day deeper root in my heart, and molested my senses in
such sort, that it left no quiet place in all my soul. It fell out afterward,
that Arsenius and Arsileus being in company on a summers night with certain of
their neighbors, and sitting under a fair great Oak, that stood in a broad
place before our house, Arsenius began to commend the skill which his son
Arsileus had in music and musical instruments, to give them occasion that
were present, to pray him to go fetch a harp from home, and to play and sing
there among them, who sat so near to our house, that I could not choose, but
hear the music. And as he imagined it, so it fell out answerable to his
desire: For Arsileus, being earnestly requested by the company, sent for a
harp, and sweetly thereon began to play and singe. When I heard Arsileus,
and with what dainty melody he played, and enticing grace he sung, I was gone
almost as far as might be in Cupids affects, seeing his father would needs
bestow the music on me, and unwittingly enamour me of the excellent graces
of his worthy son. Wherefore I said to my self. Thou do no less
deceive thy self Arsenius by procuring thy son to sing, that I might hear
him, then by sending me a letter of his own hand. If thou did but know
what will ensue thereof, thou might well from this day admonish all lovers,
not to procure their Mistresses love by other men's gifts and graces, because it
commonly falls out that women do sooner fall in love with those that are the
instruments and means, then with those that think to benefit themselves by
them. But now by this time did my Arsileus, with a singular sweet grace and
voice, begin to sing this Sonnet to the tune of his silver sounding Harp.

A Sonnet.
IN this clear Sun with golden beams that shines,
In thu most high divine and rare perfection,
In this sweet soul and figure, that refineth
Our age with joys, with treasures and affection.
O blinding light and face each hearts subjection,
Where beauties store to pities want inclines:
Sweet words, but hard condition of reiection;
Sweet looks, yet sight that many sorrows shrineth.
For these sweet Mistress, I am thus enwrapped,
For these I fear to see mine own desire,
And pass the time in thinking of thy treasures.
A case most strange, effects that never happed,
That seeing thee, I see my greatest pleasures,
And harms, when that to see thee I require.
After he had made an end of this Sonnet, he began to sing this song with so
marvelous sweet grace and delectable voice, that he held all his hearers in
a great suspense, and me (poor sorrowful soul) that loved him more, then
ever any could be.

TO see thee I lift up my happy eyes,
And having seen thee, cast them down again.
For further to proceed the same denies:
Nor other joy but thy love to contain.
What greater glory is there then to view thee,
If that he knew the sight that he did see,
For never was there any one that knew thee,
That could be weary of beholding thee,
And though he could not know thee any wise
As well as I have known thee to my pain,
Yet should he be besides himself, if dies
Not at the least, to see thee once again.
If that my erring pen did others praise
It was but trid, I see, upon the lest,
For they were all but papers of essaies
Of that, wherewith thou truly were possessed.
And if (before I loved thee) with surmise,
My pen has for some other writ in vain,
It was not for because I saw her eyes,
But hoped it should see such a Sovereign.
Nature in framing thee did so excel
And showed so brave a skill and subtle art,
That one of thy perfections served well
Beauty to thousand others to impart.
She that to thee is like in any wise
In least of all I saw in thee so plain:
To pass no further she may well suffice,
Nor he, that sees thee but must love contain.
Who sees thee as God made thee, and has seen
An other thing that is fair and of delight,
He thinks, he sees a thing that would have been
Thy self in any thing, if that it might:
But if he sees thee with such perfect eyes,
And (Mistress) as I saw thee, then again
There Is no compare (compare for it denies)
Nor glory, but thy sweet love to contain.
It was not only this, which Arsileus sung that night to the sound of his
Harp, but as Orpheus, when he demanded his Nymph Euridice, made the hellish
furies gentle with his sweet song, suspending for a while the pains of the
damned ghostes; so did unfortunate Arsileus not only amaze and mollify their
hearts that were present, but wretched Belisaes also, who with great boldness
from a high garret window was harkening unto him: whose sweet music
delighted moreover the heaven, the stars, and the clear moon, which was
then in her force and vigor, that in what part soever I did then cast mine
eyes, it admonished me (me thought) and told me, that I loved him more then
mine own life: whereof it was needless for any to put me in mind, for if I
had then been Lady of all the world, I had thought my self too mean to be
worthy of him. And from thence I purposed to hide this affection as little
from him as I could. All that night I lay imagining, by what means I might
best discover unto him my grief, but in such sort, that my virtuous name and
modesty might not suffer any blemish, though death (when this was wanting)
with her appalled fear and danger should not have hindered mine intent. And yet
when that should come, and when we have the greatest care to avoid the
occasions that might hinder it, even then and most of all they present
themselves. The next day after needs I must go with other country maids (my
kineswomen and neighbors) to a thick wood, in the mids whereof was a clear
fountain, whither every other holy day we carried our kine, as well for that
there was good pasture for them, as also for that (the fresh and hungry evening
being come) we might take the milk of the next day, whereof we made sweet
butter, and fresh chief and cream. But I and my company being set round
about the fountain, and our kine liyng in the cool shades of the thick and
branchie trees of that hedge, licking their young and tender caluelings, that
lay by them, one of my friends amongst the rest, (unacquainted (it seemed)
with that love that warred within my soul) with many requests importuned me
(upon pain never to receive any pleasure at her hands) to entertain the time
and that company with some song or other. My many excuses (with telling her
besides that times and occasions were not always one, nor alike) auailed me
very little from performing that, which with so great instance she requested of
me: And therefore to the sound of a Bagpipe, whereon one of them most sweetly
played, I began to sing these verses.

Love passed by me with his bow unarmed,
His eyes cast down, mild, gentle, modest gay,
And (careless) left me then behind vnharm'd:
How small a time did I this joy essaie?
For presently envious Fortune said,
Stay love, why passest thou so soon away?
Forthwith the blind boy turned to me, and staide
Angry to see himself so checked with blame,
For there is no blame, where his hot fire is laid:
Cupid was blind, but well he spide his game:
So blinded b^ he, that he may see none,
That did so blind my wit, and sense inflame:
O that I might revenge my self of one
That wishes harm to all, and will not free
(With his consent) not one poor heart alone:
Straight did the traitor arm his bow, and he
with poisoned shaft did pierce my careless heart,
Which in his bow he put, and aimed at me:
Fortune unarmed did take me, for his part
Love never plays, nor works not any feate,
But on free souls, exempted from his darte:
A hardened heart his arrow brake (...) with heat,
And brake a never subject freedom, so
That I did yield, and his content was great:
O sole free quiet life that I forgo,
O meadowe seen so often with freest eyes,
Cursed be Love, his arrows, and his bow:
Now follow love, and what he does devise,
Come from security to greatest care,
And pass from rest, to thousand miseries:
See now how that a careful heart does fare,
Which lately was without suspect or thought
Subject to be to such a tyrants snare.
O soul with tears undone and brought to naught,
Now learn to suffer, since you learned to see,
But what auailes, if this my Fortune wrought?
O wretched eyes (if with this term he be
Not angry) whom you savve with free consent,
Where have you put and placed my liberty?
O meadovves, groves, and vvoods of svveete content,
Which bred so free a heart as I had here,
So great an ill why did you not prevent?
Swift running brook, and river pure and clear,
Where once my flock were wont to drink their fill,
O every season of the passing year,
Why have you put me in a state so ill?
Since only I did love you, and these plains,
And this most pleasant vale, and greenest hill.
Here did I mock a thousand Shepherd swains:
Who now will laugh at me, when they shall know.
That now I do begin to feel their pains.
They are not ils of Love, that vvound me so,
For if they were, then should I pass them all,
As thousands, who have died in Cupids vvoe.
Fortune it is, that turns, and makes me fall
From every mean occasion, path, and way,
Whereby I might but show my painful thrall.
How can the causer of my passion (say)
Help them, if that their pain he never knows,
But there is no love, where reason bears sway,
To how much ill is fortune drawing those,
Whom she makes love? since nothing can restore
(sea, earth nor Sun, moon, stars nor any shows)
Or give delight, unless one love before.
And all is thus, and wretched thus am I,
Whom time persuades and hinders more and more.
Cease now my verse, since love with angry eye
Beholds, how soon of him I do complain,
And for my harms do crave his remedy.
Complain not often, for fear of his disdain,
Now hold your peace, since I seal up my words,
And when you see Loves fell, and angry vain,
Cease, for Loves wroth no remedy affoordes.
These verses of the Shepherdess Belisa pleased the Nymphs and Shepherdes, no
less then the sweet and sorrowful note, wherewith she sung them, who
(prosecuting the history of her mishap) said: But Arsileus was not far from
thence, when I sung these verses, for having gone forth that day a hunting,
and being in the thickest of the wood to pass away the heat of the day, it
seemed he heard us, and as one, that loved music well, came softly pacing
amongst the thickest trees that were near unto the fountain, because he might
from thence the better hear us. But our music being ended, he came straight
to the fountain, whose sudden sight engendered a forcible passion of joy and
fear in my amazed soul. Which was no great marvel, because an enamoured heart
may be as well sursaulted with a sudden joy, as with an unexpected sorrow. He
came to us where we were set, and courteously saluting us, in very good sort,
and with a good grace requested pardon of us; That certes (fair Nympes) when I
begin to think of the sweet behavior, and ripened wisdom of unfortunate
Arsileus, I do not think that his sinister fates and fortune were the cause,
that death took him away so quickly from my sight, but rather that the world
was not worthy to enjoy any longer so singular a youth, on whom nature had
bestowed so many perfections of beauty and enriched with so many gifts of the
mind, as that he left not his like behind him. After he had saluted us, and
leave obtained (which he humbly requested of us) to pass away the heat of
the day in our company, he cast his eyes upon me (which had he never done,
happy had we both been) and was (as it appeered afterward by diverse signs,
whereby he manifested his affection to me) extremely overcome in my love.
Unhappy I, (that needed not to look on him to love him, being so much
enwrapped in his, by seeing him before, as he was now in mine after he had
seen me) lifted up mine eyes to behold him at the very instant when he
addressed his to look on me, which forcible encounter both of us would
willingly had not befell, because that modesty and shame sharply rebuked me,
and fear left not him without bitter punishment. But he to dissemble his new
grief, began to discourse with me in matters clean different from those,
which he would have imparted to me, to some of which I answered again, my
thoughts and senses being then more careful to see, if by the alteration of his
countenance, or mildenes in his words he showed any signs of love, then fully
to satisfy his questions. For then so greatly I desired to hear him sighe,
(to confirm me in my doubtful hope) that in lieu of such a happiness I would
not have cared to have passed any grief whatsoever. And in the end I could
not wish for more apparent signs of love in him, then at that present I
beheld: for what with his tongue he could not, with his eyes he manifestly
declared unto me the amorous and secret passions of his heart. And being in
these points, the two Shepherdesses, that were with me, rose up to milk their
kine, whom I prayed to take the pains to milk mine likewise, for that I felt
my self not well at ease. And needless it was for me to entreat them much,
and for Arsileus to have any fitter occasion to declare unto me his grief,
wherein I know not if he was deceived, by imagining the occasion why I would
be without company, but am assured, that he was not a little glad to help
himself by the opportunity thereof. The Shepherdesses were busy about
milking their kine, which suffered themselves to be deceived with humane
industry by tying their gentle cauelings to their feet. That Arsileus now
(newly suprised in love) had yielded himself so much to Cupids bonds, that
nothing but speedy death could give him liberty, I perceived apparently, in
that four or five times he began to speak unto me, and every time in vain:
for the fear he had of my displeasure came ever between him and his speech,
and therefore I began to talk to him of another matter, not far from his
intent, because he might not digress much from it, inducing him thereby to
tell me what it was that so often he went about to speak and could not utter,
saying. Does this country like thee well, Arsileus? For the entertainment and
conversation of that, where thou have lately spent thy time, is, I know, far
different from ours, which therefore cannot so well content thee as that. As of
my self (quoth he) I have not so much power, so has not my understanding
(fair Shepherdess) so much liberty, to answer this demand. And changing this
manner of talk (to show him the way with occasion) I said unto him again: I
have heard say, that in those parts are many fair Shepherdesses, that
paragonned to us, they so far excel us, that we must seem but mean in thy
sight that are here. I might be thought too simple (said Arsileus) if I
would confess this, for though there are as fair there (as you have heard)
yet here are they which with mine own eyes I daily see, that so far
surmount them, as the sun does the chiefest stars in brightness. This is the
greatest gloss in the world (said I again) and yet for all this I am not
sorry, that our countrey-women are so far in your good opinion and liking,
because I am one of them my self. Which only reason (said he) if there were
no other, were sufficient enough to prove what I have said. So that by word
and word he came to tell me that, which I desired to hear, though I would not
then make him know so much, but rather entreated him to stop up the passage of
his words. But fearing least this might have been an occasion to qualify his
love (as often times it falls out, that disgraces and disfavors in the
beginning are the means to make any leave of their true commenced love) I
began to tune again my iarring answer, saying thus unto him. And if thy love
be such Arsileus, that it will not suffer thee to leave of to love me, be
secret therein, since it is the manner of those that are wise and judicious
(like thy self) to be no less in things of meaner consequence. Albeit by all
this, which I have said unto thee, I would not have thee think to profit thy
self any more, then that I must for ever live bound unto thee, if thou will
follow my counsel in this behalf. This did my tongue speak, but an other
thing did my pitiful eyes affirm, with the which I still looked him in the
face, and casting out a sigh (an assured messenger of my inward and sensible
passion) which Arsileus might have perceived well enough (if Love at the least
would have given him leave) I held my peace. In this sort we departed from one
another, and many times afterward he talked with me of these matters, who sent
me besides many letters, and fine Sonnets of his own making. And as he sung
them night by night to the tune of his sweet Harp, with amorous tears I
oftentimes harkened unto him, so that in the end both of us was assured of
each others love. But now did Arsenius his father importune me in such sort,
with his messages and presents, that I knew not what way to take, to defend me
from him. And it was the strangest thing in the world to see, how the love,
which increased every day in the son, was also augmented in the father,
though they were both of different age and powers: and yet the same (I must
needs confess) made me not reject him, nor refuse any thing, that he sent me.
But living now in all contentment, and seeing my self so truly beloved of
Arsileus, whom I loved so dearly again, it seemed that fortune would make an
end of all my joy with the most hapless event that was ever seen before. For
thus it was, that Arsileus and I appointing to meet together on a certain
night (too dark and dismal for me; because I never since knew perfectly what
day meant) we concluded that he should come into my fathers orchard, and I to
my chamber window, which opened right upon a Mulberie tree, whereon he might
easily get up to be necre unto me, there to talk together of our matters.
Accursed Belisa that shall never conceive to what purpose I brought him to such
danger, when as every day, sometimes in the field, sometimes at the river
side, and sometimes at the wood, when I carried my kine to pasture, and
sometimes when I drive my sheep to the fold, he might at pleasure have talked
with me, as he did many days before. But my hard hap was the cause, that
fortune would be paid for the content, which she had lent me till then, with
making me live all my life time without it. For now the appointed hour, (which
was the end of his days, and the beginning of my woes) being come, Arsileus
came just at the time, and to the very place, where both of us talking together
of those things, which they may imagine, that have sometimes loved well, his
wretched father Arsenius, that accustomed many nights to walk up and down
about our house, to see if he could see me (which if I had so well remembered,
for it was so far out of my thoughts, as if I had never known any such
matter, I would never have consented to put him in such danger) in the end
happened to come thither that night, and just at that hour when his son was
in the tree, and so privily, that though he had quickly espied us, we could
neither hear, nor see him. And knowing it was I, that was speaking out at the
window, but not his son, that was in the Mulberie tree, not imagining who he
might be, it was the principal cause of our ill success. For thereupon he
conceived such great wroth and jealousy, that, without any noise at all, he
bied him home, where bending a Crossebowe, and putting a poisoned arrow in it,
came again to the place where we were, and aimed so right at his son, that
the arrow pearcing his tender heart, he fell immediately down dead from the
tree, saying. How little time (my dear Belisa) does fortune lend me to serve
thee according to my great good will and desire. Which words he could scarce
utter, when the accursed father, who by his speech knew that he was the
homicide of his own son, with a desperate outcrie said. Thrice wretched and
accursed may I ever be, if thou art my son Arsileus, who seem to be no
other by thy voice. Whereupon coming unto him, and by the light of the moon,
that shone upon his face, knowing him well, and that he had given up the ghost,
he said. Since (cruel Belisa) my unfortunate son by thy means has been
slain, it is not meet that the murdering father survive to lament his
untimely death. At which words taking out his Woodknife, he thrust it into his
heart, and fell down presently dead! O unhappy chance! O strange case, never
heard of, nor seen before! O grievous scandale to their ears that shall he
are the lamentable discourse of my balefull tragedy? O miserable Belisa, may
thy guilty heart think of these things, and not take that way, which both
father and son have taken for thy sake? Alas it shall be great impiety not
to mingle thy blood with theirs, who desired so much to serve thee. But when
wretched soul I saw this unlucky accident, without any more ado, I left my
fathers house, and went up and down, wearying the heavens with importunate
complaints, and burning the air with smokie sighs, until I came to this
place, where accusing cruel fortune and hateful death, that had in so short
time taught me to feel the wounds of their cruel darts. I have lived six
months, without seeing or speaking to any person, and not desirous of any
company or consolation whatsoever.

Fair Belisa having made an end of her pitiful tale, began to weep so
bitterly, that every one there was forced with their tears to help to bewail
her dire misfortune. And adding further she said. This is fair Nymphs, the
sorrowful history (or rather doleful tragedy) of my hapless loves, and of
their bloody success: Behold then if this be such an ill, that fortune or
time may cure and remedy? O Arsileus, how often did I fear it, without
thinking of that, which I justly feared. But she that will not believe her
fear and prevent it, let her not marvel, when she sees that come to pass
which she feared, for well I knew, thou could not be any long time without
meeting me, and that my joy could endure no longer, then when Arsenius thy
father perceived any thing of our loves. I would to God it had so fallen out,
that the greatest hurt that he could have done me, had been but to banish thee
his sight and our town. For an ill which is cured with time, may with less
harm be suffered. O Arsenius, the death of thy son is no impediment to the
grief, that I also conceive for thine, for the love which thou did
continually bear me, thy virtuous and pure zeal, wherewith thou did ever
love me, thy bounty and cost bestowed on me, the tempestuous and ill nights,
that thou have passed for my sake, will let me do no less, then lament and
bewail thy disastrous end, for by this time I had been married unto thee, if
thy sweet son Arsileus had not come to our town. If I should say, that I
did not love thee well, I should deceive the world; for in the end there is no
woman, if she knows she is truly beloved, but will love little or much again,
although otherwise she manifest the same. But now my tongue hold thy peace,
since thou have told more then thou were asked. And pardon me (fair Nymphs)
if I have been tedious in my sorrowful narration, because so great mishaps
cannot be comprised in few words. Whilst the Shepherdess was telling that
which you have heard, Syrenus, Syluanus, Seluagia, and fair Felismena, and the
three Nymphs could not give ear without some secret tears, although the
Nymphs, as women never touched with love, felt her pain and grief, but not
the circumstances of it. But fair Doria seeing the comfortless Shepherdess
did not leave of her bitter complaint, began to comfort her in this sort. Let
thy tears cease Belisa, since thou see what small remedy thou have of them,
and weigh that two eyes are not able to bewail so great a grief. But what
sorrow can there be, which is not ended, or ends not her that suffers it: and
yet I could show thee the way whereby I could a little lighten thy pain.
Wherefore, I pray thee go with us as well for this respect, as for that it is
not meet thou should waste thy life so fondly, for in that place where we
carry thee, thou may choose out what manner of life thou list, and where
none is that may hinder thee of it. This place (answered the Shepherdess) I
thought most fit not only to lament my woes in, but to end my life in the
same, the which (if time does but entreat me as it has done hitherto) shall
not be very long. But now since this is thy will, I am minded not to gainsay
it; and as for mine (fair Nymphs) from this time forward you may use it
according to your own pleasures. They were all glad that she yielded to go
with them. And because the night was passed on more then three hours, and the
moon did shine as clear as day, they supped there with that provision the
Shepherdes had in their scrips. And after they had supped, every one chose out
her place that did best content her, to pass the rest of the night away, the
which the lovers spent more in tears and sighs then in sleep; and the rest
that were free, eased themselves of their weariness they had the day before.

The end of the third book
The fourth Book of Diana of George of Montemayor.
NOw did the morning star begin to cast forth her woonted brightness, and
with the comfort of her light the pretty birds and nightingales were warbling
up their sweetest notes to the skies, when the three Nymphs with their
company departed from the little Island, where Belisa passed away her
sorrowful life; whose grief, though she was a little comforted by the
enamoured shepherdes, and cheered up by the rest, did nevertheless haunt her
so much, that she found no remedy, nor means to rid hir-selfe from it. Both
the Shepherds acquainted her with their passed pains, and the Shepherdesses
told her the sorrowful sum of their loves, to try if by these means they
might mitigate her pain a little. But all comfort is in vain where the grief
is remediless. The disguised Lady took such delight in Belisaes beauty,
discretion, and sweet graces, that she could not satisfy her-selfe by asking
her still more questions, though Belisa was almost weary with answering to
them. And the familiarity between them both was so great, that it made the
Shepherds and the Shepherdess in a manner emulate their conversation. But they
came to a thick wood full of wild shadowed trees, where they could not
choose, (had they not been guided by the Nymphs) but have lost themselves.
They therefore led the way before through a narrow glade, where they could not
enter in but by one and one. And having gone half a league through the thickest
thereof, they came into a broad and fair plain lying between two goodly
rivers, both which were brinked on either side with green and tall trees. In
the mids thereof suddenly appeered unto their sight a stately Palace, with
so high and lofty turrets, that it filled them full of wonder and delight to
behold it. Before they came to this great palace, they saw diverse Nymphs of
incomparable beauty coming forth to meet them: All of them apparelled with
dainty white vailes, curiously wouen with fine threeds of gold and silver,
wearing garlands of redolent flowers upon their yellow hair, which in most
comely grace was hanging down loose upon their shoulders. After them came a
Lady, which seemed (by the gravity and majesty of her person) to be a woman
of some great state and authority, attyred in black velvet, and leaning (as
she came) upon one of her Nymphs shoulders, the fairest in the company. When
the three Nymphs were come unto them, with great joy and many imbracings they
were received of the other. But when the Lady came nigh, with great reverence
they kissed her hands, whom she entertained and wel-commed as joyfully as they
could wish. And before the Nymphs spoke one word of that which had passed,
sage Felicia (for so was this honorable Lady called) said to Felismena. The
great adventure which thou have done for these three Nymphs, cannot (fair
Shepherdess) be requited with less, then by ever having me bound unto thee;
and to do thee all the favor I may, which shall not be small, thy need being so
great: For since I know what thou art (without report of any) and whether thy
thoughts do lead thee, thou shall in the end perceive if I be able to help
thee in any thing. Wherefore be of good cheer, for if I live, thou shall see
and enjoy thy desire, in pursuit whereof though thou have passed much pain
and travel, there is nothing (as thou know) obtained nor gotten without it.
Fair Felismena, maruelling much at Felicias words, and forgetting not to give
her due thanks for so great courtesies and promises, answered thus. Since you
deigne (sage Lady) not only in the end to remedy my griefs, but to bless
the remnant of my life with happiness and content, whereas there is no desert of
my part that may challenge any such favor at your gracious hands, do but
consider (good Lady) what is due to your self, and then you shall see how I
remain acquitted of this debt, and your self sufficiently paid. For so great
deserts as thine are (said Felicia) and for such excellent beauty, as nature
has bestowed on thee, all that may be done, is little enough. Felismena then
bowed herself at these words to kiss her hands: but Felicia embraced her
lovingly, and looking upon the Shepherds and Shepherdesles, said unto them. Be
not dismayed courageous Shepherds, and discreet Shepherdesses, at the
continuance of your several greefes, for I have also no less care of their
speedy remedies. The Shepherdes and the Shepherdess kissed her hands, and
went in all together to the stately Palace. Before which was a fair broad
court, set round about with high Cypres trees, and placed in good order, and
interpaued all over with Lozanges of Allablaster and black Marble in manner of
checkey work. In the mids whereof stood a fountain of Iaspar Marble, set upon
four great brazen Lions. And in the mids of the fountain a Iaspar pillar,
about the which four Nymphs (most lively made out of white Marble) had their
places. They reached up their arms on high, and in their hands held several
vessels after the Antique Roman manner, out of the which from certain Lions
mouths, that were painted in them, they powered Cristalline water: The portall
of the Palace was of polished Marble, with all the bases and chaptres of the
pillars gilded, as likewise the garments of the imagerie that was set in it.
All the house seemed to be made of shining Iaspar, with statues and figures of
many Roman Emperors and matrones therein engraven, and with other like
antiquities. All the windows were double leafed a piece, and the springs and
bars belonging to them of bright silver, and all the gates of stately Cedar.
The house was quadrant, and at every Canton was reared up a high and
artificial tower. Coming to the portall, they stayed a little to behold the
strange workmanship and the imagerie that was so lively graven in it, that it
seemed rather a natural then artificial work, or wrought by humane
industry, wherein were two Nymphs of massy silver that stood on the tops of
two pillars, and held up between them a polished table of smooth Ieat with
golden letters graven in it, that said thus.

WEll let her life that enters here be waighed,
And if she has not chastity estranged,
And she that loves, or Loves laws has essaied,
If for another love she has not changed:
And if from former faith she has not straied,
And kept her first true love, and has not ranged:
May enter here into Dianas temple,
Whose sovereign grace to such appeeres most gentle.
When fair Felismena heard this, she said to the Shepherdesses Belisa and
Seluagia, I think we may safely enter into this sumptuous Palace, without
breach of the laws, that this table does depaint unto us. Syrenus answering to
that, said. But fair Diana could not do so, because she has not only gone
against them, but against all, that good and honest love commands to be
observed. Be not angry with her Shepherd (said Felicia,) for before many
days hence thou shall wonder that thou were so much angry, and laugh at this
hard opinion thou had of her. And so hands in hands they went into the
sage Felicias chamber, which was richly hanged with cloth of gold and tissue
of inestimable value. And by and by (after they were come in) supper was made
ready, where fine white clothes being spread on the tables, and furnished with
dainty cates, every one was placed in order: Felismena was set next to the
sage Lady Felicia, and the Nymphs took the Shepherdes and Shepherdesses
between them, whose talk at the board was full of modest mirth and delight.
There were the rich tables of Cedar, and stools framed out of Iuorie, with
cushions of fine needle work wrought with gold and silver, many cups,
goblets, and glasses of diverse forms and metals, were common there, and all
of no small price, some of them artificially made of strange glass, others of
fine Cristall, with the feet and handles of pure gold; others, all of gold
and silver most richly garnished with precious stones of inestimate value. They
were served with such plenty of sundry dainty dishes, as is almost
impossible in order to set down. After that supper was ended, three Nymphs
came into the hall, one of them playing on a Harp, another on a Lute, and the
third on a base Vial de gamba, but with such sweetness and melody, that they
that were present, were (as it were) enchaunted and ravished with it. They
placed themselves in one side of the hall, and the Shepherdes and Shepherdesses
(being lovingly requested by the three Nymphs, and by sage Felicia) placed
themselves right over against them on the other side, with their Rebeckes and a
Bagpipe, whereon Seluagia sweetly played. And then the Nymphs began to sing
this song, and the Shepherdes to answer them in manner following.

The Nymphs. THe authors of subiections
Fortune and Love, and of most peevish fashions,
Above the moon affections
Do place, and hard reiections,
And in the same extremest pains and passions.
The Shepherdes. Lessemay he vaunt and boast
For joy, whom Love did never yet molest,
Then he, that loves most,
And favors ever lost,
Since they that suffer more are ever best.
The Nymphs. If Loves extremes releene you,
And did not gainsay reason, as we view them,
Perhaps we would believe you:
But seeing how they grieve you,
Happy are we that can so well eschew them.
The Shepherdes. The hardest things the stout
And valiant persons ever take in hand:
And that of greatest doubt
Brave courage brings about,
For it is no honor small things to withstand.
The Nymphs. The Lover well does see,
To fight it out, it is not Loves intent
With magnanimity:
In torments he must be
Of those, that suffering them are most content.
The Shepherdes. If any joy we sought
By any ill of Love which we obtain,
It cannot be the thought
Unto the passion brought:
But he is more happy that endures more pain.
The Nymphs. The best estate and fare,
Where he does see himself that loves best,
Brings nothing else but care:
And yet does never spare
With flames to burn the dame and servants breast:
And he that is favored most,
Is changed in the twinkling of an eye:
For with disfavors tossed,
And in oblivion lost,
It kills his heart and makes his joys to die.
The Shepherdes. To leese a good estate
By falling from it, is a grief and pain:
Blameless is Love, but fate
It is, and Fortunes hate,
That no exception makes from his disdain:
Unjust and far unfit
Is death, if Love does say that we shall live,
If death it promised yet,
No fault he does commit:
For in the end his promise he does give.
The Nymphs. Fierce Love they do excuse,
That find themselves entangled with his fetter:
And blame those that refuse
Him, but of these to choose
The blamed man's estate is far the better.
The Shepherdes. Fair Nymphs, it is denied
The free and bond with one tongue to debate,
Live men and those that died,
The loved, and defied,
All speak according to their own estate.
Sage Felicia and the Shepherdess Felismena gave attentive ear unto the
music, that the Nymphs and Shepherdes made, and to the sundry opinions,
which on both sides they showed by singing. And Felicia smyling on Felismena,
said to her in her ear. Who believes not (fair Shepherdess) but that most
of these words have touched thy soul to the quick? who with a mild and sober
grace, answered her again. Such were the words good Lady, that whose soul
they did not touch, the same should not be touched with such love as mine is.
Felicia then lifting up her voice a little higher, said unto her. In these
love matters I note a certain conclusion, which I find for the most part
true, That the generous mind and delicate wit by many degrees excels him
in affection, that has not these gifts. Because as love is a virtue, and
virtue does ever choose her being in the best place, it is clear, that persons
of valor and dignity, are more enamoured, and (as they are properly termed)
better lovers, then those of baser condition and estate. The Shepherds and
Shepherdesses hearing what Felicia said, seemed to be somewhat angry in their
minds, which made Syluanus to think, that her words ought not to escape
without an answer, who therefore said thus unto her. Wherein good Lady does a
noble mind and fine wit consist? Felicia (who by and by perceived to what
purpose the Shepherd demanded this question, because she would not give him
any occasion of discontent) said. In no other thing but in the proper and
sole virtue of him that loves, as to have a lively and quick wit, a mature
and good judgment, a thought tending to high and stately things, and in other
virtues which do arise and flow from them themselves. I am satisfied said
Syluanus, and so are these Shepherdesses, because we imagined (discreet Lady)
that you take valor and virtue to be only in noble personages. I speak it to
this end, because he is but poor in the gifts of nature, that goes to seek
them forth in those that are gone and past. It pleased not the other
Shepherdess a little to hear what Syluanus had said; and the Nymphs did
laugh, to see how the Shepherds did blush at Felicias proposition. Who taking
Felismena by the hand, brought her into a fair chamber, where she lay her
self all alone: And after she had passed the time with her in many discourses,
she put her in great hope of enjoying her desire, and the virtuous end of her
love, by having Don Felix to her husband, albeit she said, that this could not
be done, without passing first some few travels and troubles more: which the
Lady made small account of, who in countermaund of them did encourage and
comfort her self with the guerdon that she hoped to gain by them. Felicia
told her moreover, that during her abode in her palace, she should put off
her pastoral habits, until the time came, when she was to wear them again.
And therefore calling unto her the three Nymphs, in whose company she came,
she commanded them to apparel her in such garments, as to her noble and high
estate were requisite. The Nymphs were not slow in executing her command, nor
Felismena disobedient in doing that which Felicia thought convenient for her.
They leading her therefore away by the hand, brought her into an inward
chamber, at the one side whereof was a door, which fair Doria opening, they
went down a pair of alablaster stairs into a fair hall, in the midst
whereof was a cesterne of most clear water, where all the Nymphs did use to
bathe themselves. Where stripping themselves naked with Felismena, they did
bathe themselves. And after they had adressed their golden hair, they went up
to one of Felicias inward chambers, where the Nymphs having apparelled
themselves, they did also put these garments on Felismena: A fair petticoate
of carnation printed satin, the upper body of shining cloth of gold, of the
same color, and fringed beneath, and guarded with a lace of beaten gold and
small pearl. A gown of crymosin velvet, with the sleeves, the bodies and
skirts beneath embrodered with knots of seed pearl, and gold which was
curiously wrought with needle by artificial and cunning hand. A kirtle of
pure white satin full of embrodered flowers and rare works of silver, in the
mids whereof did stick out fair oriental pearls. And tying up her hair
with a carnation ribbon of silk and silver, they did put thereon a caul of
glittering gold, in every corner whereof a precious Ruby was set, with a
natural crisped periwigge of her own hair, matching the brightest gold in
color, which adorned either side of her cristalline forehead: wherein were put
two jewels curiously enchased with tablet Diamonds and Saphires of infinite
value. The border that bound up her caul, was of chosen flowers of gold,
enameled with sundry lively colors, and beset between with Emeraulds and
Rubies, in the mids whereof, just between the two periwigs, hung down a
rich jewel of sparkeling Diamonds upon her snow white browe, with three long
oriental pearls in form of acornes, hanging therea. The attire of her head
was in form of two little ships made of Emeraulds, with all the shrouds and
tackling of clear Sapphires. About her white neck, they put a little chain of
fine gold, made in manner of a wreathed snake, with an enameled Eagle of gold
in her mouth, which held between both her tallons a Rubie of infinite price.
When the three Nymphs did see her adorned in this sort, they wondered at her
excellent beauty, and then brought her into the hall, where the other Nymphs
and Shepherds were. And whereas they did till then know her for none other
then a Shepherdess, they remained so astonished, that they knew not what to
say. Felicia commanded her Nymphs after this to carry fair Felismena and her
company to see the sumptuous and rich temple, which was presently done, the
sage Lady betaking her self to her solitary chamber. Pollydora therefore and
Cynthia taking Felismena between them, and the other Nymphs the Shepherdes and
Shepherdesses, who for their wisdom, and many other good parts were not a
little made of, went out into a great court, the arches and pillars whereof
were of Iaspar marble, and the bases and chaptres of Allablaster, with many
borders and works cut out after the Roman manner, gilded in some places very
curiously, and wrought all over with Moysaical work: the pillars were
supported with Lions, Ounces and Tygres, so lively cut of brass, that they
looked as though they would assail them that came into that place. In the
midst of the court was an eight square pattern or Obeliske of shining copper,
ten cubits high, upon the top whereof stood fierce Mars armed at all points
after the ancient manner, whom the Gentiles called the God of battles. In this
Obeliske with marvelous art and skill were set forth the proud squadrons of
the Romans on the one side, and the Carthaginian camp on the other side.
Before the one (...) stood the noble captain Hanniball, and before the other,
the invincible and valiant African Scipio, in whom, before he had either age or
experience, nature showed great tokens of valor and magnanimity. On the
otherside stood Marcus Furius Camillus the wise and valiant captain fighting
in the high capitol, to set his country at liberty, from whence he had
himself been late banished. There stood Horatius, Mutius Scaeuola, the
happy Consul Marcus Varro, Caesar, Pompey with great Alexander, and all they
who by war had achieved great enterprises, and woone great same, with
scrolles and characters in gold, declaring their names and famous deeds, and
in what especial point every one of them had showed himself most valiant and
courageous. And a little above these stood an invincible knight armed all
over, with a naked sword in his hand, and with many dead men's heads under
his feet, with these words over his head.

I Am Cid the honor of Spain,
If that any more could be
In my works thou shall see.
On the other side stood another brave knight armed in like manner, the sight
of his beuer lifted up with these words also above his head.

Hernand Goncales of Castile I am
In number the first Earl, and endless praise,
The Spanish Scepters honor, since the same
With my brave deeds so highly I did raise,
My valor and my manhood golden Fame
Can tell, that sa we it, wherefore she displaies
My high deeds in eternal memory,
As tells you the Castilian history.
Next to him stood another knight of great force and courage, as by his face
they might well judge, armed in bright silver, which was sown full of Lions
and castles, who showed by his countenance a kind of fiercenes, making them
(almost) afraid that looked on him; and that which was written above him was
this.

Bernard of Carpio I am,
The Pagans terror, and their smart:
An honor to the Christian name,
Since that my hands aduaunc't the same
By valor of my stoutest heart:
Fame, just it is not thou conceal
My matchless deeds from tender years,
But nothing if thou will reveal,
To Ronces-Vales I appeal,
That sometimes was of the twelve Peers.
On the other side stood a valiant captain in gilded armor, with six bendes
gueles in the mids of his shield, and on the other side on him many enfolded
Ancients, and a captive king in a chain, whose superscription said thus.

My greatest valors they shall see,
Which knew them not, whereby again
I only have deserved to be
Surnamed (The great Captain)
And in strangelandes, and in our own
I purchased so great a fame,
That my exploites are held and known
To be far greater then my name.
Next to this stout captain stood a knight all in silver armor, sown full
of stars, and of the other side on him a king with three Fleure de Lyses Or
in his shield Azure, before whom he tare certain papers; the superscription
above him was this.

I am Fonseca whose brave history
Europe does know, and does so much commend,
(Whose life though ended) yet my memory
Enrolled by living fame shall never end.
My souer aigne King I served, and did bear
My country love, and not in fained show,
I never did leave of for servile fear
To keep that holy law, which every where
The servant does unto his master owe.
In another quadrant of the Obeliske stood an armed knight, his armor sown
full of little golden shieldes, who by the valor of his personage seemed to be
descended from some noble and high blood: casting his eyes amongst many other
Lords and knights of his ancient lynage, the subscription beneath his feet was
this.

Don Luys of Villanoua I am named,
And from the great Marquess of Tranz descended,
My valor and renown (with praise proclaimed
In Italy, France, Spain) is far extended.
Bicorb, an ancient house my state is framed,
That fortune to a heart has now commended
So high, sans peer, and that so much surmonnteth,
As to command a world, it smally counts.
After they had particularly beheld the pattern, and all the knights and
valiant champions placed in it, they went into a rich hall, the feeling whereof
was all of yuorie, woonderfully wrought and carved, the walls of allablaster,
and many ancient histories so lively cut out and graven in them, that one would
verily have thought, that Lucretia killed her self indeed, and subtle Medea
undid her web in the Island of Ithaca; and that the famous Roman Lady
yielded to the fatal sister, because she would not offend her honor with the
sight of the horrible monster; and that the loving wife of Mauseolus was making
great lamentation, thinking to what end the sepulcher of her husband was
counted for one of the seven wonders of the world: And many other histories and
examples of chaste Ladies worthy to be eternized with immortal fame through
out the whole world, because it seemed not sufficient enough for some of them,
to give manifest examples by their unspotted life, but for others, by their
untimely and cruel death great testimony of their pure and undefiled
thoughts, amongst the which the Spanish Coronella was one, who did rather
commit her body to consuming flames, then suffer her chaste mind to be
overcome with the motion and delight of a dishonest thought. After they had
viewed all the figures well, and the variety of the histories round about the
walls of the hall, they went into another square court, which for the riches
thereof, seemed to their judgments so much to excel all that they had seen,
as the substance does the shadow; for all the walls of it were covered over
with fine gold, and the pauements of precious stones. Round about this
Quadrant stood the figures of many Ladies of Spain, and of other nations, and
above them all, the Goddess Diana curiously cut out of metal of Corynth,
with short garments like a hunter, adorned with much pearl and precious
stones of great value, who had her bow in her hand, and her golden quiver
hanging down by her side, environed round about with a troop of Nymphs
fairer then Titan in his cheifest glory. The Shepherdes and the Shepherdesses
were so amazed at the sight of these things, that they knew not what to say,
because the riches of the house were so infinite, the figures so lively, the
workmanship of the Quadrant so excellent, and the proportion of the Ladies that
were retracted there, with so great art, that they thought it impossible to
imagine a more perfect and absolute, or a more sumptuous building in the whole
world then that was. On the one side of the Quadrant stood four Laurel trees
of gold, so bravely enameled with green leaves, that in gardens there were
none more fresh or lively, and near to them a little fountain made all of
beaten silver, in the mids whereof was likewise a Nymph of beaten gold, which
at her fair breasts through nybles of Rubies spouted out water cleerer then
Cristall: and near to this fountain did Orpheus the famous musition sit,
enchaunted with the age that he was in, when his Euridice was requested of
importunate Aristeus: He had on a cote of cloth of silver, interseamed and
imbrodered with flowers of seed pearl, his sleeves broad about the shoulders,
and falling very narrow to his elbowes, from whence his arms came out naked.
He had on a pair of hose of cloth of silver to the knee, and made after the
old fashion of Thrace, wrought full of little golden Harpes and Citherens, his
golden bush of hair, which hung down curled and long, was tied about with a
fair Laurel wreath. But when he perceived the Nymphs coming toward him,
he began most sweetly to touch a fine Harp, which he had in his hands, with
the divine melody whereof the strangers were so much ravished, that they
forgot all that they had seen, in respect of this new delight. Felismena sat
her down upon a fair low bed in the Quadrant, which for the most was covered
all over with purple damask, finely wrought and fringed with gold, and the
Nymphs and Shepherdesses about her, the Shepherdes leaning upon the silver
fountain. In this sort therefore they were harkening to worthy Orpheus, as if
he had bin singing amongst the Cyconians when Cyparisus was turned into a
Cypres tree, and Atis into a Pine tree. Enamoured Orpheus then began to sing so
sweetly to the tune of his Harp, that with the heavenly music thereof he
suspended their amazed senses. And turning his sweet face to Felismena, he
began to sing these verses following.

Orpheus his song.
Hark Felismena to the sweetest song
Of Orpheus, whose love has been so high,
Suspend thy grief (Seluagia) somewhat long,
Whilst now I sing, that once for love did die:
Forget (Belisa) now thy woeful wrong,
And to my voice sweet Nymphs your ears apply:
That lost his eyes, to beauties blaze then turning,
And Shepherdes, cease a while your amorous mourning.
I will not speak (for God forbid the same)
Of that most heavy process of mine ils,
Nor when I so did sing, that I did tame
Wild beasts and birds, and moved trees and hills:
Nor when I did suspend the infernal flame,
Nor when I saw Pluto, nor that, that kills
My soul with grief, when I looked back to see,
If that Euridice did follow me.
But I will sing with pure and sweetest voice
Of those perfections, and that grace display,
That wisdom, wit and beauty of such choice,
Of those who do illustrate Spain this day.
Then see her (Nymphs) whose beauty does rejoice
Us all: her great Diana, and her gay
And goodly train, on whom both Gods and men
Cannot enough employ their toongs and pen.
Lift up your eyes this Lady to behold,
That here is sitting in this highest chair,
With scepter near to her and crown of gold,
And angry fortune by her on the staire:
This is the star that Spaines light did enfolde,
Whose absence now her glory does impair:
Her name is Lady Mary that has been
Of Hungary, Boeme, and of Austrie Queen.
The next that sits to her, is Lady Jane
Princess of Portugal and of Castille
The Infant, and from whom fortune had taken
The crown and scepter by her turning wheel:
And unto whom death was so inhumane,
That in her self great wonder she does feel,
To see how soon she did stretch forth her hands
On her, that was the light of Lusitans.
Behold (fair Nymphs) that Lady Mary great
And sovereign Infant of her Portugal:
Whose grace and beauty has this day a seat,
Where humane thought could never reach at all:
Behold, though cruel for tune there does threat:
Her wisdom yet does count of her but small:
For time, and death, and destiny cannot
Conquer her goodness, virtues, and her lot.
Those two that are by her on either side,
Whose beauties Titans brightness do offend:
Their sleeves of gold, their gowns of damask tide
With pearl, and where fair Emerauldes depend:
Their curled golden locks, wauing so wide
Upon their shoulders, loose that do descend:
Daughters they are of the Infant Lusitanc:
Duarta the valiant, and great Cristiane.
Those two great Dutchesses of worthy fame,
For beauties prize in either of our Spaines
Which there you see to life se^ out in frame,
With grace, and features, that all others stains
Of Sessa and Najare each has her name:
Whose company Diana not disdaines
For their exceeding beauty, and desartes,
Discretion, wisdom, and all other parts.
Behold a golden Phoenix all alone:
Arare perfection never seen before,
Wisdom, as like was not in any one,
Beauty, and grace, where never could be more.
She that pulls fortune from her vaunting throne,
And has her subject to her will and lore:
Great Lady Leonore Manuell has to name,
The Lusitane light that does the world inflame.
The Lady Luise Carillo, that in Spain
Has made Mendocas blood of such renown:
Whose beauty, and brave grace has in a chain
Cupid himself, for love of her cast down:
She Is waiting still upon our Goddess train:
For chastity worthy to wear a crown.
Of fair and honest an example here,
And of them all a mirror bright and clear.
Rehold a sweet perfection and a rare,
Of her, whom fame her self does greatly fear:
Behold a passing beauty, sans compare,
Founded in grace and wisdom every wheare:
That both with reason bind to love and care.
For in her does the lest part beauty bear.
Lady Eufrase of Guzman is her name,
Worthy to be eternized with fame.
That matchless beauty sweet and peregrine,
Not seen in any, but in her alone,
Which every wit and soul does so refine
With holy love, as like was never none:
Apparelled with Crimson, that does shine
With flowers of gold, and pearl that there are sown.
The Lady Mary Aragon her name:
The world does know, and he auen does know the same.
Her do you know to whom Diane her face
Does turn, and points her to us with her hand,
Who matcheth her in wisdom and in grace,
And equal is with others in this land
In wit, and has in beauty highest place,
Apt to conduct and lead a martial band.
It Is Lady Isabell Mauriq of Padille,
Who Mars does conquer and with wonder fill.
The Ladies Mary Manuell and Ione
Osorius, are those two, which you do see,
Whose grace, and beauty, as the like not known,
Even Love himself with love does wound and slay.
And this our Goddess does not joy alone,
To see two such with her, but also we.
Since then no tongue their worthiness may praise,
Reason, and fame to heaven the same shall raise.
And those two sisters of such worthy name,
Either of them a second never had.
Their grace, and beauty fills the world with fame:
This day their golden beams does each one glad:
Me thinks I see them in their perfect frame,
To which more beauty nature could not add.
The Lady Bettrice Sarmient is one,
With Castro her fair sister so well known.
That cleerest sun, which here you see does shine,
And here and there her golden beams does cast,
She, that does laugh at lovers that do pine
In love, and at the tears, that they do wast,
And at Loves power: whose countenance divine
Says more then I, though praising her so fast,
It Is Lady Ione Carate, in whom we see
Surpasing grace and beauties praise to be.
The Lady Anne Osorius, that brave dame,
And Castro next to her possess their place,
For peerless beauty honored with fame,
For goodly gifts, for modesty, and grace:
But her hard hap (alas) was much to blame,
So cruelly her glory to deface:
Because her fortune equal might not be
Unto her wisdom, beauty, and degree.
That matchless beauty that is adorned so
With honesty, and grace so sovereign,
Which was with reason chosen to bestow
Her honor in the Temple of Diana,
Not conquered, but still conquering high and low:
Her name (O Nymphs) is Lady Iuliana,
Niece to that greatest Duke and Conestable,
Speak fame of her, for I am far unable.
Behold the beauty (on the other part)
Of many fair and brave Valencian Dames,
Whom with my pen, but more yet with my heart,
I will procure to celebrate their names?
Here Fount of Helicone, vouchsafe thy art,
And here Minerua help me in these blames;
To tell what those brave Ladies be, whose sight
Only to them all eyes and hearts inuit.
See here four blasing stars that brightly shine,
Of whom Fame brutes their name in every ground,
That from three famous kingdoms draw their line,
And from Cardonas aneient house come down,
On the one side Dukes most excellent decline,
And from the other scepter, throne, and crown:
Daughters unto Sogorbe, whose golden fame
From Atlas unto Maurus soundes their name.
The light of all the world, the flower of Spain,
The end of perfect beauty, and of grace,
A royal heart, that ever does maintain
Valor, and bounty, in a virtuous race:
That look so modest, and so sweet again,
Adorned with so fair and mild a face,
Gives Lady Anne of Aragon such fame,
That Love himself is captive to her name.
Her sister Lady Bettrice, that you see,
Is next (if that you can behold such light)
Whom none can praise, for this is only she,
Whom none can praise according to her right:
That Painter that did make her, so must be
Her praiser, and her gifts he must reeite:
For where all humane wit cannot attain,
My poor conceit does labor there in vain.
The Lady Frances of great Aragon
Show you I would, but she is alvvaies hid:
Her sweetest beauties leaves not any one
With life, for so her starlike eyes forbid
Our mortal sight to view the same alone:
In life and death, her virtues ever did
Subject each heart to love, and admiration:
As fame can tell in every foreign nation.
Now Lady Magdalene you may reveal,
Sister unto those three which I have shown,
Behold her well, and see how she does steal
Her gazers hearts, and subject lives to none.
Her peerless beauty threats, and in a chain
Leads little Cupid, turned into a stone:
None see her, but they die, and none there are
But she does conquer without arms or war.
Those two bright stars, that here and there do vaunt
Their shining beams, that dim the starrie sky,
And making that illustrous house of Gaunt
In all the world with high renown to fly.
This day their wisdom, and their beauties daunt
Each humane thought, and every mortal eye.
For who sees Magdeline and Marguerite,
That does not die (for love) at such a sight?
But will you see the thing, that has undone
All wits, and made them all to wonder so?
Behold a Nymph more fair then orient sun,
Or lovely rose, or lilly hard by Po;
This Phoenix name, that through the world does run,
Is Lady Caterine Milane, for so
Valencia calls her, and the world does say,
She is as fair, and wise, as lives this day.
Lift up your eyes (fair Nymphs) and now behold
The Lady Mary Pexon cannoguere,
How by the river banks her locks of gold
She kembes, adorning of her shining hear,
Whose beauty, wisdom, and brave gifts are told
For rarest in our Europe every wheare,
Behold her eyes, her fair and Cristalline face,
Her sweet demeanor and her heavenly grace.
Those two behold, the rest that do excel
Inperfect wisdom, and in quick conceate:
And for brave beauty bear away the bell,
A pair sans peer, whose starlike eyes do threate
Despair and death, to those that view them well:
For there sits Cupid in his proper seat.
Their blessed names do with their nature fit,
Fair Bettrice Vigue and Bettrice Fenollir.
What time Diana went to sport and play,
With her most sovereign face, and more divine,
Amorning star arose in month of May,
Like to that Star, that near the Moon does shine:
Which when she saw so glorious every way;
A famous place to her she did a ssigne:
Her beauties tell you, if her name you seek,
That she is the peerless Lady Anna Vigue.
Fair Nymphs, behold the Lady Theodore
Carroz, that is great Lady and the Queen
Of such brave beauty, never seen before,
Wisdom, and grace, as like was never seen:
Each thing of hers enamours more and more.
The brauest men's deserts have never been
Such, as they durst attempt, or ever sought,
By them to place in her an amorous thought.
See (Shepherdes) Lady Angelas brave grace,
Of Borja, looking on Diana bright;
And how to her the Goddess turns her face,
To view those eyes, that all eyes do inuit,
And mighty Love himself weeping apace,
And how the Nymph derides his conquered might:
And laughes to see the cruel Tyrant lying,
Wrapped in chains, to her for mercy crying.
Of that most famous stock of cannoguere
A flower sprung out, so perfect and so pure,
That living yet but young, she need not fear
Any that may her beauties blaze obscure:
Her mothers heir she is, for she does bear
The praise, which she did with her gifts procure.
So has Lady Hieronyma, you see,
In grace, and wit obtained the highest degree.
Now in a wonder (Nymphs) will you remain?
And see what fortune gave to her alone,
How wisdom, beauty, and the goodly train
Of virtues, make in her the chiefest throne?
Lady Veronica Marrades see again,
For only by her figure it is known
That she has all, and nothing wants to serve her,
Unless it be, that none can well deserve her.
The Lady Luise Penaroje we see
In more then humane beauty and in grace,
In every thing most excellent is she:
All beauties else she stains, and gaine^pace,
Love dies for her, and he will not agree,
That any should behold so sweet a face:
Who sees it dies, unless he see it again,
And seen it, then his sight augments his paint.
Now see I (Nymphs) that you are seeing her,
On whom my thoughts continually devise,
And yours perforce from her can never stir,
Cupid for robs, and in her love he dies:
See how her beauties make the world to err?
See, but beware such light blind not your eyes.
The Lady Jane Cardona, that fair star,
It is to whom loves powers subjected (...).
That beauty, which exceeds humane thought,
Which you do see, if that you can behold it,
She, whose estate was blessed, esteeming naught
Of fortune, time, or chance, that could enfold it.
She, to the world that such rare gifts has brought:
She that is my Muse, and Parnasus, untold yet,
Lady Ione Anne of Catalane, The end
She is of all, that e're I did commend.
Near unto her there is a great extreme
In purest virtue, high and sublimate,
In comely grace, the fairest in this Realm,
Her golden hair, her neck most delicate;
Each gracious eye a fiery pointed beam,
A noble wit, and name of heavens estate:
The Lady Angela Fernando named:
Whom nature to her name like gifts has framed.
Next to her sits the Lady Marian,
Who has not in the world her paragon,
Near to her sister, fairer then the swan
In cristall streams, or fine Vermillion.
Proud is our age of both of them, that can
In tender years have no comparison
For wisdom; for so much they may presume,
As thousand toongs can tell, or golden plume.
The two fine sisters Borjas which you see,
Hyppolita and Isabell so fair,
With grace and gifts, that so adorned lee,
That Phoebus brightest beams they do empaire.
And see how many lives, that once were free,
Their beauties conquers ( Cupids only snare),
Behold their hair, their countenance, and eyes,
This gold, that sweet, and those like stars in skies.
Behold the Lady Mary Cannoguere,
Who wow is Lady of sure Catarasse,
Whose beauty, and sweet grace does every where
Conque^ (...) with vnrepaired loss!
Fame on her wings ^row out the world does bear
Her virtues rare, that shine like gold to dross.
Since each one them that sees her must commend her,
Who them can praise her well and not offend her?
The Lady Isabell Bor^ here does stand
Perfect and absolute in every thing
Behold her face, her fine and dainty hand,
Over whose head the nightingales do sing.
Our age she honors, and the Hiberian land:
Of grace, and virtue she is the only spring:
And those, to whom nature did beauty give,
She stains, as fairest that did ever live.
She, that her hair has hanging down, and speed
Abroad, and tide with golden third behind:
And that fair face, that has so often led
So many hearts to bondage of the mind:
Her Iuorie neck her ties in beauty bred,
Fair, modest, gray, not looking out of kind:
Her famous name is Lady Iuliana,
That honors ^ere the Temple of Diana.
She, whom you there do see, whom nature made
So curiously, at never like before,
Since that her beauty never seemed to fade,
Nor that a fair one can desire more:
Whose great deserts, and wit, does still persuade
Fame, to the world her praises to restore:
Is called Lady Moncia Fenollit,
To whom Love yields himself and does submit.
The song of renowned Orpheus was so pleasant in Felismenas ears, and in all
theirs, that heard it, that it held them in such a suspense, as if they had
passed by no other thing but that, which they had before their eyes. Who now
having particularly viewed the rich chamber of estate with every thing in it
that was worth the seeing (as all was) the Nymphs went forth by a certain
door into the great hall, and by an other out of the hall into a fair garden,
the beauty whereof stroke no less admiration into their minds, then the
strange things which they had seen before: for amongst the fruitful trees,
and sweet flowers, were many sepulchers and tombs erected of diverse Nymphs
and Ladies, which with great purity had kept their chastity (due to the
Goddess thereof) inniolate and unstained. Some of the tombs were adorned with
coronets of knottie Iuie; others with chapplets of sweet Myrtles; and some
with garlands of green Laurel. There were also many Allabluster fountains
in the garden, some of Iaspar marble, and some of other metal seated under
vines, which with artificial arches and wreathes aloft did spread forth their
branches depressed with clusters of colored grapes. The Mytrhe trees grew in
manner of four walls, with embattlements and pinnacles on the tops of them,
and on the sides above them were certain Terrasses and walks, reared up,
whereon (as over all the garden besides) did grow many sweet flowers of
sundry colors, as white Iesmins, Woodbyne, and many more delightful to the
insatiable eye. In the hiddes of the garden stood a Ieat-stone upon four
brazen pillars, and in the thids of it a tomb framed out of Iaspar, which
four Nymphs that were wrought out of white Allablaster did hold up with their
hands, and about it stood many Tapers of Virgin wax burning in massy
candlestickes of bright silver, that were made in artificial manner. About
this tomb stood certain Lords and Knights, some fashioned out of stone, and
metal, other some out of Iaspar marble, and other matter. Which figures showed
such great sorrow by their countenances, that they filled Felismenas heart, and
all theirs that were looking on the tomb, with no less grief, then
admiration. But viewing it narrowly, they saw in a table of shining gold,
which at the foot of the sepulcher, a dead and pale mattone held between her
hands, this Epitaphe subscribed.

Here Lady Katherine entombed lies,
Of Aragon and Sarmient, whose fame
Does mount with praise unto the lofty skies:
And sounds from North to South, her worthy name.
Death killed her, to revenge the sacrifice
Of those she killed, when she was a dame:
Her body's here, her soul in heaven with pleasure:
The world unworthy to possess such treasure.
After they had read this Epitaphe, they saw an Eagle of black marble, with
displaied wings on the top of the tomb, with a golden table between her
tallons, with those verses in it.

EVen as (O death) the Planets should remain
Without Apollo and Diana bright,
The ground without mankind, and beasts again,
The Mariner without the North-starre light;
The field without fair flowers, grass, or grain,
The mornings show without the dew of night:
Virtue and beauty so remain and die
Without the dame that in this tomb does lie.
When they had read both these Epitaphs, and Belisa had understood by them
what the Nymph was, that was buried therein, and how much Spain lost by
leesing her, calling therewithal to mind the untimely death of her dear
Arsileus, she could not, but with tears breath out these sorrowful words. O
death, how far am I from thinking that thou may comfort me with other women's
harms? The small time, that the world enjoyed the great beauty and wisdom,
wherewith they tell me this Nymph was endowed, does not a little grieve me,
because as she was not her-selfe in love, so did not any deserve, she should be
so. For had she been, I would then account her for so happy a woman by dying,
as my self unfortunate, by seeing how small reckoning thou make of me
(cruel death) since taking from me all my good, and the only joy of my life,
thou do not leave me here, but only to feel the neuer-ceasing pain of
this heavy want. O my Arsileus, O rare wisdom in such young years? O the
most faithful lover that ever was, and the finest wit that the heavens could
ever infuse into so brave an ornament of nature. What eyes may without
inundations of reares behold thy sorrowful absence? And what hard heart suffer
thy untimely and difastrous end? O Arsenius, Arsenius, how small a time were
thou unable to endure the violent death of thy unfortunate son, having more
occasion to suffer it, then my self? Why did thou make me (cruel Arsenius)
participate of two deaths? Of both which to prevent the least that did grieve
me, I would have given a thousand lives. Farewell (happy Nymphe) the light and
honor of the royal house of Aragon: God give thy soul eternal glory, and
deliver mine from so many woes and afflictions, wherinto it is so deeply
sunk. After that Belisa had spoken these words, and after they had seen many
tombs more, very richly erected, they went out by a back door in the garden,
into a green meadowe, where they found the sage Lady Felicia recreating
her-selfe alone, and walking up and down, who seeing them coming toward her,
received them all with a joyful countenance. And whilst it was time to go to
supper, they went to a pleasant walk in a grove of Sicamours hard by, where
the Nymphs of the sumptuous temple were wont many times to go and disport
themselves: where sitting down in a little plat of green grass, that was
encompassed round about with leauie Sicamours, they began to discourse one with
another of that, which did best please their fancies. The Lady Felicia called
the Shepherd Syrenus, and Felismena to her. The Nymph Doria sat her down with
Syluanus in one place of the green meadowe, and the Shepherdesses Seluagia and
Belisa went by themselves, with the most beautiful Nymphs Cynthia and
Polydora into another, so that (though they were not far asunder) yet they
might talk together well enough, and not trouble one another. But Syrenus
desiring that their talk and conversation might be conformable to the time,
place, and person with whom he talked, began to say in this manner. I think
it not (sage Lady) much beyond the purpose, to demand a certain question, to
the perfect knowledge whereof, as I could never yet attain; so do I not
meanly desire by your Ladyships wisdom to be resolved therein: and this it
is. They do all affirm (that would seem to know something) That true Love
does spring of reason: which if it be so, what is the reason, that there is not
a more timorous and unruly thing in the world then love, and which is left of
all governed by it? As this Question (answered Felicia) is more then a simple
Shepherdes conceit, so is it necessary, that she that must answer it, ought
to have more then a silly woman's wit: But to satisfy thy mind with that
little skill I have, I am of a contrary opinion, affirming that Love, though
it has Reason for his mother, is not therefore limited or governed by it. But
it is rather to be supposed, that after reason of knowledge and understanding
has engendered it, it will suffer it self to be governed but few times by it.
And it is so unruly, that it resultes oftentimes to the hurt and prejudice of
the lover: since true lovers for the most part fall to hate and neglect
themselves, which is not only contrary to reason, but also to the law of
nature. And this is the cause why they paint him blind, and void of all
reason. And as his mother Venus has most fair eyes, so does he also desire
the fairest. They paint him naked, because good love can neither be dissembled
with reason, nor hidden with prudence. They paint him with wings, because he
swiftly enters into the lovers soul: and the more perfect he is, with more
swiftnes and alienation of himself, he goes to seek the person of the
beloved, for which cause Euripides said; That the lover did live in the body
of the beloved. They paint him also shooting his arrows out of his bow,
because he aims right at the heart, as at his proper white: And also, because
the wound of love is like that, which an arrow or dart makes, narrow at the
entrance, and deep in his inward soul that loves. This is an inscrutable,
and almost incurable wound, and very slow in healing: So that thou must not
marvel Syrenus, that perfect love (though it be the son of reason) is not
governed by it, because there is nothing, after it is borne, that does less
conform it self to the original of his birth, then this does. Some say
there is no other difference between virtuous and vicious love, but that the
one is governed by reason, and the other not: but they are deceived; because
excess and force is no less proper to dishonest, then to honest love, which
is rather a quality incident to every kind of love, saving the one does make
virtue the greater by it, and the other does the more increase vice. Who can
deny, but that in true and honest love excessive and strange effects are
oftentimes found? Ask it of many, who for the only love of God made no
account of themselves, and cared not to leese their lives for it, although
knowing the reward they looked for, did not work Io much in their minds. And
how many again (enflamed with the love of virtue) have gone about to cast away
themselves, and to end their lives, to get thereby a glorious and suruiuing
name? A thing truly, which ordinary reason does not permit, which does rather
guide every effect in such sort, that the life may honestly preserve it self.
But what diversity of examples could I bring thee (Syrenus) of many, who only
for the love of their friends have lost their lives, and every thing that with
life is lost. But let us leave this love, and come again to that which nature
has bred between man and woman: wherein thou must know, that if the love,
which the lover bears to the mistress of his affections, (although burning in
unbridled desire) does arise of reason, and of true knowledge and judgment, as
by her only virtues he does judge her worthy to be beloved, That this kind
of love (in my opinion,) (and yet I am not deceived) is neither unlawful nor
dishonest, because all love being of this quality, does tend to no other end
but to love the person beloved for her own sake, without hoping for any other
guerdon or effect of his true, and sincere love. So that this is as much as (me
thinks) may be said in answer of thy question, which thou have put me.
Syrenus then said unto her. I am resolved (sage Lady) of that which I desired
to understand; and also belceue, that by your gracious wisdom which is
great, and bounty which is no less, I shall be thoroughly instructed of
whatsoever I would desire to know, although some finer capacity then mine
were more requisite to conceive these deep reasons, so perfectly alleged by
your learned assertions.

Syluenus, that was talking with Polydora, said: It is strange (fair Nymph)
to see what a sorrowful heart (that is subject to the traunces of impatient
love) does suffer, because the lest ill, that it causes in us, is the
deprivation of our judgment, the loss of our memory, and the surcharging of
our imaginations with his onelse objects, making every one to alienate himself
Iron, himself, and to impropriate himself in the person of his beloved. What
shall that woeful man then do, who sees himself so great an enemy to
pleasure, such a friend to solitarines, so full of passions, environed with
fears, troubled in his spirits, martyred in his wits, sustained by hope,
wearied with thoughts, afflicted with griefs, haunted with iealousies, and
continually worn with sobs, sighs, sorrows, and woes, which he never
wants? And that, which makes me more to marvel, is, that the mind does not
procure, (this love being so intolerable and extreme in cruelty) nor has any
desire at all to part from it, but does rather account it her enemy, that
gives it any counsel to that effect. All this is true (said Polydora) but I
know well that Lovers for the most part have more words, then passions. This is
a sign (said Syluanus) that thou can not conceive them (fair Nymph)
because thou can not believe them, nor that thou have been ever touched with
this pleasing ill. And I wish thou may not, the which none can believe, nor
know the multitude of woes proceeding from it, but only she that does
participate of his bitter effects. Why? do thou think (fair Nymph) when the
lover that finds himself continually confused, his reason obscured, his
memory gone, his fancies and senses wearied by excessive love, that his tongue
can then remain so free, that it may feign passions, and show another thing by
words, then that he feels by deeds? Ah deceive not thy self with these
words, which I know are clean contrary to thy thought. Behold here am I, in
whom there is nothing, that can be governed by reason; neither can he have it,
that is so much without his liberty as I am, because all corporal subiections
do suffer the will (at the least) to be free, but the bondage of love is such,
that the first thing it takes in hand, is to constrain one, to make a
profession of it. And will thou Shepherdess then believe, that he does form
complaints, and feign sighs, that sees himself handled in this sort? It
seems well thou art free from love, as I did but even now tell thee. I know
Syluanus (said Polydor a again) that lovers are full of troubles, and
afflicted in mind all the while they do not obtain their desires. Thou
speak in a thing (said Syluanus) wherein it seems thou have no experience,
because their love, whose pains cease after the accomplishment of their
desires, proceeds not from reason, but from a base and dishonest appetite.

Seluagia, Belisa, and fair Cynthia were talking together, what the reason was
that in absence, love did for the most part wax cold. Belisa could not
believe, that for any thing in the world she might entertain such disloyalty
in her heart, saying: That since she did bear her Arsileus (being now dead, and
too well assured never to see him again) the self same love, that she did,
when he was alive, how much more then was it impossible for any other to
forget that love, which one does hope sometimes to see again. I cannot answer
thee Belisa (said the Nymph Cynthia) so sufficiently as perhaps this matter
does require, because as it is a thing impertinent to our condition, so the
resolution thereof is it not expected of a Nymphs wit and profession. But
yet this is my opinion, that though one departs from the presence of her lover,
yet the remembrance of him afterward remains in her eyes, by the present
occasions whereof she still sees the Idea of the thing that she desires. The
charge and office of this remembrance is to represent that to the
understanding, which it contains in it, and of thinking of the person whom
she loves, comes will (the third power of the soul) to engender desire, by
means whereof the person absented suffers pain, by not seeing that which
she loves well. So that all these effects are derived from the memory, as
from a fountain, from whence the beginning of desire springs. But you must
now know (fair Shepherdesses) that as the memory is a thing, that the more
it increases, the more it loses her strength and virtue, for getting that
which the eyes did deliver and put into it; so likewise do the other powers,
whose works had their beginning in it, in the very same sort as rivers should
want their streams, if the fountains from whence they spring, did cease to
flow. And as this is understood of him that departs, so is it likewise of her
that remains still. And whereas thou do think (fair Shepherdess) that
time will not cure thy grief by committing the remedy thereof into my Lady
Felicias hands, thou art much deceived, because there is not any, whom she
does not help, and lovers more then any other kind of people.

The sage Lady Felicia (though she was somewhat from them) heard what Cynthia
said, and answered. It might be thought no small point of cruelty in me, to
put the remedy of her greefes (who needs it so much) in the hands of so slow
and tedious a physician as time is: For though it be sometimes a help, yet it
falls out in the end, that the greatest malladies (if they have no other
remedies then their own) do last so long a time that before they have an end,
they end their lives that have them. And therefore because I mean to be
think me of that, which touches Felismenaes ease, and the remedy of her
greefes, and those of all her company, and that now the beams of golden
Apollo seem to make an end of their days journey; I think it best to seal
up our discourses, and to go in, bieause supper (I think) by this time is
staying for us. And so they went into the great Ladies Palace, where they
found the tables ready furnished and set under an arbor of green vines, in a
pleasant and fresh garden within the house. And supper being ended, the sage
Lady prayed Felismena to tell them some discourse, were it a history, or some
notable accident, that had befallen in the Province of Vandalia? Which
Felismena did not deny: for with a sober and gentle grace she began to tell
this history following.

IN the time of the Valiant Prince Don Fernando, who was afterward King of
Aragon, lived a knight in Spain called Rodriga of Naruaez, whose singular
virtues and approved manhood were so great, that as well in peace, as in war,
he got the Surname of the best knight of all those that lived in his time; and
where he did especially win it, when the same noble Prince overcame the power
of the Moors at the city of Antiquera, showing by his great enterprises and
martial feats in this war, an absolute mind, an invincible heart, and a
noble kind of liberality, by means whereof a good Captain is not only
beloved, and highly esteemed of his own soldiers, but also of strangers and
his chiefest enemies: In regard of which worthy service, he was guerdoned
after the subduing of that country (although but meanly in lieu of his high
deserts and excellent deeds) with the regiment of Antiquera and Allora, where
he spent most of his time with fifty choice gentlemen at the Kings pay, for
defense and garrison of both those frontier towns. All which by the good
government of their Captain enterprised many valiant deeds in defense of the
Christian faith, atchieuing them with great honor, and registring the in
perpetual same with notable adventures done in mainrenance of the same. Whose
minds therefore being so great enemies to idleness, and the exercise of arms
so agreeable to the generous heart of their valiant Governor; it fell out that
upon a certain summers night, Cynthia inuiting them to take part of the bright
and cool air, Rodrigo with nine of his gentlemen (for therest remained in
garrison of the town) armed at all points, went out of Allora, to surprise the
Moors which lay on their frontiers, careless (perheps) in their charge and
negligent. And emboldened by the privilege of the night, they passed by
certain ways near unto their towns. The valiant Captain therefore going on
with his gentlemen as secret as he might, and very careful not to be
discried, came to a way that parted into two, where consulting to divide
themselves into two companies of five a piece, and in such sort, that if the
one company perceived themselves to be in any danger, by sounding of a cornet
they might be presently aided by the other five. The Governor and four of them
took one way, and the other five an other: who riding in several companies
together, and talking of diverse matters, every one desiring some adventure to
try his manhood, and to show himself a courageous man at arms, as almost
every day they were wont to do, they heard not far from them a man's voice
sweetly singing, and now and then breathing out a profound sigh; whereby they
coniectured that some amorous passion did trouble his thoughts. The horsemen
therefore that heard this, rode into a little wood hard by the way, and because
the moon did shine as clear as day, they might perceive a Moore coming that
way they went, so gallant and comely a genteleman, that his personage did well
testify that he was of noble blood, and singular valor. He came mounted upon
a daple graie horse, and the garments he had on was a horse-mans coat of
crimosin damask, and upon that a Barberie mantell fringed about with gold,
and embrodered all over, and edged with many works of silver twist. He ware by
his side a fair Moresco Cymitarre, with tassels of carnation silk and gold
hanging at it; on his head a Tunez Turbant or roll of silk and white cotton,
which was listed with gold, and fringes of the same, which being wrapped many
times about his head, did serve him for an ornament, and a defense of his
person. He carried a great Target on his left arm, and in his right hand a
Lance of two punches: and with so goodly grace and countenance came the
enamoured Moore, that they could not wish to see a better sight. But giving
attentive ear unto his song, they heard that the dittie (although it was in
the Arabicke tongue) said thus.

FIrst in Granada Ivvas borne,
In Cartama brought up and bred,
To Allora fronter, which I scorn,
And in Coin enamoured.
Though in Granada I was borne,
And brought up in Cartama brave;
My faith in Coin I have sworn,
And there my liberty I gave.
There do I live, where I do die,
And where my care is thither led
To Allora Fronter am I,
And in Coin enamoured.
The five horsemen, who had perhaps but small experience in amorous passions,
or whether they had or no, regarding more the interest, which so brave an
adventure did promise them, then the song of the enamoured Moore, issued out of
the wood, and ran with great violence upon him. But the valiant More, who in
like assaults was a tried champion (though love at that time was Lord of his
thoughts) was not a whit dismayed, but couching his lance in rest, with
wonderful courage began to skitmish with them all, whom he made immediately
know, that he was no less valiant then amorous. Some say, they set upon him
by one and one, but they that have sought out the truth of this history,
assirme, that they ran all upon him at once, which is most like they did so,
to take him prisoner, but when they saw him begin to defend himself, that
then perhaps the other four did stand by, whilst one of them did fight with
him alone. But howsoever it was, he drove them to such a narrow straight, that
casting three of the^ to the ground, the other two very fiercely set upon him,
who needed not to use their ordinary strength against so valiant an
adversary; for though he was wounded in one of his thighs, yet his strength
and courage was not of such a temper, that mortal wounds could daunt his
mind, nor make him leave of that, which so highly touched his honor. But
having by chance let fall his lance, he put spurs to his horse making a show
of flight, whom the two Christians pursued at his very heels, which when he
perceived, he turned back against them both, and passing through them like a
furious and swift lightning, came to the place where one of the three lay,
which he had unhorsed, where stooping down from his horse to take up his
lance that lay by him, he mounted nymbly into the saddle again: which one of
the two horsemen seeing, and thinking they were not able to make their party
good, he sounded his Cornet; but the Moore in the mean time so fiercely
assailed them, that if the valiant Governor had not come, they had kept
company with their other three companions, that lay hurt on the ground. But
when the governor was come, and saw how valiantly the Moore did fight, he
made great account of him in his mind, and having an eagre desire in single
combat to prove his manhood with him, he said unto him. Such is thy noble
valor and rare strength (brave knight) that by ouercomming thee, there cannot
be but great honor and glory got; which singular favor if gentle Fortune
would but grant me, I could not (by my life) request any other at her hands.
Wherein though I put my person in no small danger, by offering him the combat,
that can so bravely defend himself, yet for a world I will not leave it,
when by so brave an enterprise, and howsoever I speed, I cannot choose but
win great honor and renown. And saying this, he badde his men stand aside,
appointing the conquered the prise of the victory. When they were both
asunder, a hot fight began between these valiant men at arms. The
magnanimious Narudez desired the victory, because the valor of the brave
Moore increased the glory, that he hoped to get by it: And the stout Moore, to
no other end but to attain to the effect of his hope and desire. And so they
belaied about them, passing active and nimble in lending blows, and so hardy
in assayling each others person, that had it not been for the former wearines,
and wound that the Moore had, (who by this time grew somewhat faint by leesing
his blood) with great difficulty had the Gouenour got the happy victory. But
these impediments, and being not able to manage his horse any longer, did
promise it Naruaez clearly; and not because he knew there wanted one jot of
courage or valor in the Moore, who (when he saw that in this single combat
his life was in hazard, which he would have willingly changed for the
contentment, which Fortune did then deny him) he r'enforced himself with all
his might, and standing vptight in his styrrops, gave the Gouenour a dangerous
thrust, which he received upon his target, who was not slack in answering him
with another upon the right arm, and trusting to his strength, if the matter
came to handie gripes, at last he ran in, and closed with him, and with such
force shaked him, that casting him out of his saddle, he also fell with him to
the ground, saying. Yield thy self knight, if thou make any account of thy
life, which is now in my hands. It is in thy hands (said the Moore) to kill me
as thou say, but fortune shall never do me such despite, to make me ouercommed
by any, but only by whom I have long since suffered my self to be conquered.
And this only content does remain to me of my prison, whereunto my misfortune
has now brought (...). The Governor did not then mark the Moore his words so
much, nor to what end he spoke them, but using the mercy that the valiant
conqueror is wont to use to the forlorn man of Fortune, he helped him to
rise up, and to bind up his wounds, which were not so great, but that he
might get upon his horse, and so all of them with their prisoner took the next
way home to Alora. The Governor as he rode, did continually cast an eye upon
the Moore whom he thought with himself, a goodly man of person, and gracious
of visage, remembering therewithal, how stoutly he had defended himself; but
thought his sadness too great for so brave a mind as he carried; and because he
intermixed his sorrow with sighs, which were tokens of greater grief, then
could be imagined in so brave a man, and also desirous to know more of the
matter, he said unto him. Behold Sir knight, how the prisoner that leeseth his
heart and magnanimity for fear of imprisonment, does hazard the law of his
liberty, and that in Martial affairs, adversity must be entertained with as
merry a countenance, as by this greatness of mind it may deserve to enjoy
prosperity again. And these sighs are not (me thinks) beseeming that valor
and courage, which thou have showed by trial of thy person; neither are thy
wounds so mortal, that thy life is in hazard, whereof besides thou have
showed not to make so much account, but that thou would willingly have left
it for thine honors sake: If there be then any other occasion of thy heaviness,
tell it me: for by the faith of a gentleman, I swear unto thee, that I will
use as much courtesy and friendship toward thee, as thou shall not have
occasion to repent thee, that thou have told me it. The Moore hearing the
Governors gentle speech, whereby he argued in him a brave and noble mind, and
his courteous and friendly offer to help him, thought it no point of wisdom
to conceal the cause of his grief from him, because by his mild words and
gracious countenance he had such great hope of help and favor, that lifting
up his face, which with the weight of sorrow he went carrying in his bosom, he
said unto him. How art thou called Sir Knight, that do thus comfort me in my
sadness, whereof thou seem to have some feeling, and the which thou do
enforce me to tell thee. My name is Rodrigo of Naruaez, and Governor I am of
Alora, and Antiquera, of both which towns of garrison the King of Aragon my
Lord and Master, has appointed me Chiefetaine. When the Moore heard this, with
a merrier countenance then before, he said: I am glad that my misfortune has
been so fortunate, to make me fall into thy hands; of whose force and
manhood I have been long since informed, the trial whereof though it had
cost me deerer, could not have greatly grieved me, since it does so greatly
content me to see my self his prisoner, whose virtues, valor, and dexterity
in arms does importune every ones ears so much. And becauie the subduing of
my person does oblige me to esteem thee the more, and that thou may not
think it is any kind of pusyllanimitie, or fear in me (without some other
great occasion, which lies not in my power to forsake) that makes me so sad and
pensive, I pray thee gentle Knight, by that thou art, to command thy gentlemen
to ride on before, because thou may know, that neither the pain of my green
wounds, nor the grief of my present captivity is cause of my heavy
thoughts. The Governor hearing these words, made greater reckoning of the
Moore, and because he was very desirous to be thoroughly resolved what he was,
he willed his gentlemen to ride on before: and they two coming on fair and
softly behind, the Moore fetching a profound sigh from his soul, began thus to
say.

IF time and trial of thy great virtues (most valiant Governor) and that
golden fame wherewith they are spread in every place, had not penetrated my
heart with desire of knowing them, and now put them manifestly before mine eles,
these words, which thy will does enforce me to relate, should be now excused,
and the discourse, which I mean to tell thee of a life, continually environed
with disquiets and suspects (the least whereof being (as thou will judge no
less) worse then a thousand deaths) remain untold. But as I am on the one
side assured of that I speak, and that (on the other) thou art a worthy
kinght, and noble gentleman, and have either heard, or else thy self passed the
like passion to mine, Know, that my name is Abyndaraez the yoonger in
difference of an uncle of mine, my fathers brother who is also called so.
Descended I am from the noble house of the Abencerrajes in Granada, by whose
unlucky destinies I did learn to be unfortunate. And because thou may know
what theirs was, and may by them the better conjecture, what may be expected
of mine, Thou shall understand, that in Granada was a noble lineage of Lords,
and Knights, called Abencerrajes, whose valiant deeds, and grave personages, as
well in martial adventures, as in peaceable and wise government of our
commonwealth, were the mirrours of that kingdom. The old men were of the
Kings counsel; the young gentlemen exercised their minds, and bodies in feats
of arms, in the service of Ladies and gentlewomen, and by showing in every
point their valor and gentilitie. And as they were honored of the popular
sort, and well-beloved among the principal, (for in all those good parts that a
gentleman should have, they far excelled others) so were they very well
thought of with the King: They did never any thing in war abroad, nor in
counsel at home, that their experience was not correspondent to their
expectation: whose valor, bounty, and humanity was so highly commended, that
for a common example it was ever alleged, That there was never Abencerraje
coward, niggard, or ill disposed person. In the city they were the masters of
brave inventions for apparel: In the Court, of maskes, daunces, and triumphs,
and in the court and city, in the service and courting of Dames passing
gracious: For never did Abencerraje love and serve any Lady, of whom he was
not favored, nor any Lady (were she never so fair and amiable) think her
self worthy of the name and title of an Abencerraje his mistress. They
living therefore in as great prosperity, honor, and reputation, that might be,
came fortune (an enemy to the rest and contentment of happy men) to cast them
down from that joyful estate, to the most unfortunate and grievous condition
of disgrace that might be. The beginning whereof was, that the King having done
a certain injury to the Abencerrajes, they made an insurrection, wherein, with
ten gentlemen more of their kindred, they conspired to kill the King, land to
divide the kingdom amongst themselves, and so to be revenged of the unworthy
disgrace received by him. This conspitacie (whether it was true or false) was
discovered before it could be put in practice, and they apprehended, and
condemned to die, before the citizens had intelligence thereof; who, without
all doubt for the great love they bare them, would have risen, not consenting
that justice should have been done upon them; For, carrying them to exequution,
it was the strangest spectacle in the world, to see the lamentations that some
made; the privy murmuring of one to another; and the bootlesse excuses, that
for compassion of these gentlemen were generally made in all the city. They
ran all to the King, and offered to buie his mercy with great sums of gold
and silver; but such was his severity, that it expelled all motions of pity
and clemency: Which when the people beheld, they began to weep, and lament
again: The Lords, Knights and gentlemen did weep and mourn, with whom they
were wont to keep company: The tender Ladies and Damsels of the Court wept,
whom they loved and served: And all the whole city wept, for the great honor
and auctority, that such noble citizens gave them. The lamentations, and
outcries were so many, and so loud, as if the earth had sunk, or the world
been drowned anew. But the King, who to all these tears, lamentations, and
pitiful outcries did stop his ears, commanded, that his definitive sentence
should be presently executed: So that, of all that house, and lineage there
remained not one man alive, that was not beheaded that day, except my father
and mine uncle, who were not found accomplices in that conspiracy. These ils
resulted to them (besides this miserable chance) that their houses were
ruinated; they proclaimed traitors to the King; their goods, lands, and
possessions confiscated: And that no Abenceraje should live any longer in
Granada, except my father and mine uncle; and they but with this condition,
that if they had any issue, they should send the men children (as soon as they
were borne) to be brought up out of the city, never to return into it again;
and if they were women, and marriageable, to be married out of the Realm. When
the Governor heard the strange discourse of Abyndaraez, and the terms
wherewith he complained of his misfortune, he could not stop his tears, but
did show by them the sensible grief, which of such a disastrous accident could
not be but felt. And therefore turning himself to the Moore, said unto him.
Thou have good cause Abyndaraes, to be sorry for the fall of thy noble house
and kindred, whose heads (I think) could never hatch so great treason: And
were it for no other proof, but that so worthy a gentleman as thy self came
out of it, this only were sufficient to make me believe, that they never
pretended such wickedness. This gentle opinion, which thou have of me (said the
Moore) and of the goodness of my ancestors, I know not (worthy Governor) how
to requite, but only with unfeigned and humble thanks. But now, when I was
borne into the world, with the inheritance of the self same mishap of my
kindred, they sent me (because they would not infringe the Kings edict) to be
nursed, and brought up in a certain fort, belonging sometimes to the
Christians, called Cartama, committing the charge and care of me to the
Governor thereof, with whom my father had ancient familiarity and
acquaintance: A man of great account in the kingdom, upright in the manner of
his life, and very rich, but chiefly in a daughter that he has, which is the
greatest ^ie, which I account of in this life, the which I wish I may never
enjoy, if in any ^g (but only her) I ever took content and pleasure. With her
was I brought up (...) my childhood, (for she was borne but three years after
me) and as we were ^erally thought of all to be brother and sister (for like
such was our education) so did we also think our selves to be. The love that I
did bear Xarifa (for thus is the Lady called that is mistress of my liberty)
were but little, if I could tell it: Let it ^fice that time has so confirmed
the same, that I would give a thousands lives (if ^ad them) but to enjoy one
momentarie sight of her fair face. Every day increased our age, but every
hour augmented our love, and so much, that now (me thought) I was made of
another kind of metal, then of consanguinitie. I remember that Xarifa being
on a day in the orchard of the Iesemynes, dressing her fair head, by chance I
espied her, amazed at her singular beauty, and how (me thought) it grieved me,
that she was my sister. And by the extreme passion of my love, driven out of my
musing, I went to her, who, as soon as she saw me, with open arms came to
receive me: And sitting upon the fountain by her, she said unto me. Why have
thou (good brother) left me so long alone? It is (sweet Lady) said I again,
a good while since I having sought thee in every place, and found not any,
that could tell me what was become of thee, my heart at last coniectured where
thou were: Buttel me now (I pray thee) what certainty have thou, that we are
brother and sister? No other (said she) then of the great love I bear thee,
and to see, how every one does call us so, and that my father does bring us up
like his son and daughter. And if we were not brother and sister (said I)
would thou then love me so much as thou do? Oh see thou not (said she)
that we should not be suffered to go so continually together, and al alone, if
we were not. But if we were deprived of this joy, that which I feel in my
self is a great deal more: At which words her fair face being tainted with a
vermillion blush, she said unto me. What could thou leese by it, if we were
brother and sister? My self and thee to, said I. I understand thee not said
she, but (me thinks) (being brother and sister) it binds us to love one
another naturally. Thy only beau^ (said I) does oblige me to this brotherhood,
which rather qualifieth my love, (...) sometimes distempers my thoughts: At
which words blushing for too much bol^es, casting down mine eyes, I saw her
divine figure in the cristalline fountain so lively represented, as if it had
been she her self, and in such sort, that wheresoever she turned her head, I
still beheld her image, and goodly counterfaite truly translated into very
heart. Then said I softly to my self. O, if I were now drowned in this
fountain, where with pride I behold my sweet Lady, how more fortunate should
I die then Narcissus? And if she loved me as I do her, how happy should I be?
And if fortune would let us live ever together, what a happy life should I
then lead? These words I spoke to my self, and it would have grieved me, that
another had heard them. But having spoken this, I rose up, and reaching up
(...) hand to certain Iesemynes that grew round about that fountain, I made
of the, and of some Orange flowers a fair and redolent garland, and putting it
upon my head, I sat down again crowned, and conquered. Then did she cast her
eyes upon me (to my thinking) more sweetly then before, and taking it from my
head, did put it upon her own, seeming then more fair then Venus. And looking
^on me, she said. How do thou like me now Abyndaraez? That in beauty (said
I) and sweet perfections, thou ouercomest all the world, and that crowned
Queen and Lady of it. At which words rising (...) of her place, she took me
by the hand, and said unto me. If it were so indeed (b^er) thou should leese
nothing by it ^d so without answering her again, I followed her out of the
garden. But now from that time certain days after, wherein cruel Love
thought he was too long from discovering unto me the deceit that I had of my
self, and time meaning then to lay open hidden and secret things, we came to
perfect knowledge, that the kindred between us was as much as nothing, whereupon
our firm affections were confirmed more strongly in their former and true
places. All my delight was in her, and my soul cut out so just to the
proportion of hers, that all, that was not in her face, seemed to mine eyes
foul, frivolous, and unprofitable in the whole ^orld. And now were our
pastimes far different from our first, and I beheld her with a certain kind of
fear, and suspect to be perceived of any: And now had I also a certain envy
and ^lousie of the sun, that did touch her. Who, though she looked on me
again with the very same desire and intent, wherewith she had beheld me
before; yet thought it was not so, because ones own distrust is the most
assured and certain thing in an enamoured heart. It fell out afterward, that
she being on a day it the clear fountain of the Iesmynes, I came by chance
thither, and beginning to talk with her, her speech (me thought) and
countenance was not like to her former looks and communication. She prayed me
to sing, for she was greatly delighted with songs and music: And I was then so
trustles and misconceiuing of my self, that I thought she bad me sing, not for
any pleasure that she took by hearing me, but to pass away the time, and only
to entertain my company with such a request: so that I then wanted time to
tell her the whole sum of my grief. But I who employed my mind in nothing
else, but to do whatsoever my Lady Xarifa commanded me, in the Arabicke tongue
began to sing this song, whereby I gave her to understand the cruelty that I
suspected of her.

IF thy soft Hairs be threads of shining gold,
Under the shade of which are two fair Eyes,
(Two suns) whose Brow like heaven does them uphold,
Rubie thy Mouth, and lips where Coral lies?
Could Cristall want, to frame thy Neck so white,
And Diamond, to make thy Breast so bright?
Thy heart is not unlike unto thy Breast,
Since that the flight of metal of thy Hair
Did never make thee turn thy Neck at lest,
Nor with thine Eyes give hope, but cold despair.
Yet from that sugared Mouth hope for an I,
And from that snowe-white Brow, that makes me die.
Ah beautiful, and yet most bitter Brow,
And may there be a Breast so hard and fair,
So sweet a neck, and yet so stiff to bow,
So rich, and yet so covetous a Hair?
Who ever saw so clear and cruel Eyes,
So sweet a Mouth, yet mooues not to my cries.
Envious Love my Neck does chain with spite,
His passions make my Brow look pale and swart,
He makes mine Eyes to leese their dearest light,
And in my Breast does kill my trembling heart.
He makes my Hair to stand in ghastly wise,
Yet in thy Mouth all words of comfort dies.
O sweetest face, and lips more perfect fair,
Then I may tell; O soft and dainty Neck,
O golden Rays of yonder Sun, not Hair,
O Cristalline Brow, and Mouth with Rubie decked,
O equal white and red, O Diamond Breast,
From these fair Eyes when shall I hope for rest?
But if a (No) by turning of thine Eyes,
Hark yet what says her sweetest Mouth to me?
See if her hardness in her Breast yet lies,
And if she turns her whitest Neck to thee?
Mark well the beckning of her fairest Brow,
Then from her Hair what may I hope for now?
If that her Lilly Breast and Neck do once affirm their (No)
And if her shining Eyes and Hair will not conclude an (I)
What will her Ruby Mouth then do, and Brow as white as snow,
Nay what shall I my self expect but with denials die?
These words were of such force, that, being helped by the love of her, in
whose praise they were sung, I saw her shed certain tears, that I cannot tell
you now (noble Governor) how much they moved my heart, nor whether the content,
that I had by seeing so true a testimony of my Mistress love, or the grief,
(my self being the occasion of her tears) was greater. Calling me to her, she
made me sit down by her, and thus began to say unto me. If the Love
Abyndaraez, whereunto I am obliged (after I was fully assured of thy thoughts)
is but small, or such, that cannot but with extinction of life be ended, my
words (I hope) before we leave this only place, shall make thee sufficiently
know. And blame thee I will not for thy mistrust, which has made thee
conceive amiss; for I know it is so sure a thing to have it, as there is
nothing more proper and incident to Love. For remedy whereof, and of the
sorrow that I must needs have, by seeing my self at any time separated from
thy sweet company, from this day forth for ever thou may hold and esteem
thy self such a Lord and Master of my liberty, as thou shall be indeed, if
thou art willing to combine thy self in sacred bonds of marriage with me, the
refusal whereof is (before every other thing) no small impediment to both our
contents, a prejudice to mine honor, and the sole obstacle of enjoying the
great love which I bear thee. When I heard these words (Love working my
thoughts to things clean contrary) I conceived such great joy, that had it
not been but by only bowing down my knees to the ground, and kissing her
fair hands, I was not able to do any other thing. With the hope of these
words I lived certain days, in the greatest joy in the world, whilst
mutable Fortune (envying my prosperity and joyful life) bereaved us both of
this sweet contentment: for not long after, the King of Granada minding to
prefer the Governor of Cartama to some higher charge, by his letters commanded
him forthwith to yield up the charge of that Fort, which lies upon the
frontires, and go to Coin, where his pleasure was he should be captain and
Governor, and also to leave me in Cartama under the charge of him, that came
to be Governor in his place. When I heard these unlucky news for my
Mistress and my self, judge you (noble Gentleman, if at any time you have
been a lover) what a world of grief we conceived. We went both into a secret
place to weep, and lament our misfortunes, and the departure and loss of each
others company. There did I call her my sovereign Mistress mine only joy, my
hope, and other names, that Love did put into my mouth: with weeping I said
unto her. When the view of thy rare beauty shall be taken from mine eyes,
will thou then Xarifa, sometimes remember me? Here did my tears and sighs
cut off my words, and enforcing my self to speak more (being troubled in
mind) I uttered I know not what foolish words unto her: for the apprehended
absence of my dear Mistress in my thoughts did utterly carry away my wits,
senses, and memory with it. But who can tell what sorrow my dear Lady felt
for this departure, and what bitter potions of grief her oriental tears,
(which for this cross of fortune she powered forth) made me sup up? She did
then speak such words unto me, the lest of which was enough, to have made the
hardest heart thought of a sorrowful departure for ever: which (valiant
Governor) I will omit to tell thee, because thou will think them (if thy
breast was never possessed with love) impossible. And if it has been for
fear, lest by hearing some of them, thou could not, but with hazard of
life, stay out to hear the rest. Let it suffice, that the end of them, was by
telling me, that, having any fit occasion by her fathers sickness, or by his
absence, she would send for me, that, that might have effect, which was
betrothed and agreed upon between us both. With this promise my heart was
somewhat lightened, and for this infinite courtesy, (which she did promise me
when time and occasion served) I kissed her dainty hands. The next day after,
they went away, and I tarried still behind, like one that (wandering upon
craggie and wild mountains, and having lost the comfortable light of the
sun) remained in hideous darkness: with great grief I began to feel her
absence, and sought all the false remedies (I could) against it: for sometimes
I did cast mine eyes up to the windows, where she was wont to look out;
sometimes upon the bed where her tender body was accustomed to take rest; and
went sometimes into the garden, where daily she used to disport herself, and in
the heat of the day to the christalline fountain, where she bathed and
refreshed herself under the shade of Limon and Pomegranate trees: I walked and
went all her stations, and in every one of them I found a certain
representation of my sorrowful thoughts. Truth it is, that the hope that she
gave me (to send for me) eased my pains a little, and with it I dissembled
some part of my woes. But for as much as the continual thought of my desire so
long deferred, did increase my pain the more, me thought sometimes I would
have been glad, if I had been left altogether without hope, for desperation
does but trouble one, until it be certainly known; but hope, until the
desire be accomplished. But my good Fortune did so much favor me, that this
morning my Lady stood to her word, by sending for me by a gentlewoman of hers
(a trusty secretary of her thoughts) for the Governor her Father was gone to
Granada, who being sent for thither by the king, was to return home in a short
time again. Awaked out of my heavy slumber and melancholic cares with these
inopinate and happy news, I prepared my self to go with winged speed unto
her: yet staying for night, and because I might the better escape unknown, I
did put on this habit, as thou see, and the brauest I could devise, to make
the better show to my Lady of my proud and joyful heart. In which journey
(truly) I would not have thought, that two of the best knights at arms had
been sufficient to abide me the field, because I carried my Mistress with
me. Wherefore Rodrigo if thou have ouercomed me, it was not by pure strength,
which was impossible, but it was either my hard fortune, or the determination
of the heavens, that would prevent me of such a supreme good. Whereupon
consider now in the end of my true tale, and of the good that I have lost, and
the ill which I possess: I came from Cartama to go to Coin, but a short
journey, although the desire of the proudest Abencerraje that ever lived, made
it a great deal longer. I went, sent for by my Lady, to see my Lady, to enjoy
my Lady, and to marry my sweetest Lady. But now I see my self wounded,
captive, and in subjection to him, who will do, I know not what with me. And
that which greeues me most, is, that the time and enjoying of my desire, ends
with this present night. O suffer me then Christian to comfort my self at the
least with my secret lamentations: let me euacuate out of my sorrowful breast my
choking and smothering sighs, and water mine eyes with burning tears: All
which impute not to any imbecillitie or fear of mind, though it were a great
deal better for me that I had a heart, that could bear and suffer this hard
and sinistrous chance of Fortune, then to do that which I now do.

The discourse of the enamoured Moore pierced deeply into the valiant Naruaes
his soul, who was not a little amazed at the strange success of his love. And
thinking with himself, that for the better dispatch of his affairs, nothing
might hinder them more, then his long staying, he said unto him. I am minded
Abyndaraes, to make thee know how much my virtue surmounteth thy ill fortune,
for if thou will but promise me to return to my prison within three days, I
will set thee at liberty, because thou may not leave of thy amotous
enterprise. For it would grieve me to cut off so good, and honest an endeavor.
The Abenceraje hearing this, in token of thanks would have fallen down at his
feet, and said unto him. If thou do me this unexpected favor (noble
Governor of Alora) thou shall restore me again to life, and show the greatest
gentilitie of mind, that ever any Conqueror did. Take what security thou will of me, for whatsoever thou do demand, I will not fail to accomplish.
Then Rodrigo of Naruaes called his gentlemen unto him, and said. Gentlemen,
trust me for this prisoner, for whose ransom my self will be a pledge. They
answered him again, that he might dispose of him at his own pleasure, for
whatsoever he did, they would be well content withal. Then the Governor
taking the Abenceraje by his right hand, said unto him. Do thou promise me
as thou art a Gentleman to come to my Castle of Alora, there to yield thy
self my prisoner within three days? I do (said he) and with solemn oath
bind it. Then go (said the Governor) and good fortune with thee, and if
thou stand in need of mine own person to accompany thee, or of any other
thing for thy way, speak, and thou shall have it. The Moore thanked him very
much, but took no more but a horse, which the Governor gave him, for his own
was hurt in the late encounter between them, and went very heavy, being also
wearied and faint with much blood, which he lost by the way: and so turning the
raines, he rode as fast as he could toward Coin. Rodrigo of Naruaes and his
Gentlemen returned homewardes to Alora, talking by the way of the valor and
goodly behavior of the Abenceraje. The Moore was not long (according to the
great speed he made) in coming to the Fort of Coin, where, going directly as
he was commanded, he first went about all the walls, until at last he found a
posterne gate, and the Centrinels on the walls fast asleep, who though he had a
great desire, and made no less haste to enter in, yet he stayed a little,
looking about him on every side, least happily he might be espied, or in danger
of some thing else. But when he perceived that all was quiet, he knocked with
the punch of his lance at the wicket (for that was the watchworde, that his
Mistress had given him by the gentlewoman that went to call him) the which was
immediately opened unto him by the same gentlewoman, who said unto him: Sir
your long tarying has put my Lady in a great fear, for she has staide this
good while for you. Alight and I will bring you up where she is attending your
presence in great perplexity: he then dismounted from his horse, and set him
up in a secret place, that he found there, where also leaving his Lance
against a wall with his Target and Cymitarre, the gentlewoman took him by the
hand, and very softly led him up a pair of stairs, for fear of being heard
by them in the castle, and brought him into Xarifaes chamber. Before whom when
he was come, with a sudden sursault of joy she ran to receive him, and both
of them with such extreme passions of love and gladness embracing one another,
were not able to speak one word, for the infinite joy they had at each others
sight: But coming to themselves again, at the last she said thus unto him.
What the cause may be, that thou have stayed so long (my loving Lord) I know
not, but what sorrow and anxieties of mind I have passed for thy slow
coming, my impatient love is able to testify. I hope, thou do imagine fair
Lady (said he again) that it is not by my fault and negligence, but men's
disseignes do not always fall out fit to their desires: So that if there be
any truth in me, thou may well believe me, that it was not in my power to
come sooner then I have done. But breaking him off in his excuses, she took
him by the hand, and leading him into a rich chamber, they sat them down upon
a fair bed, where thus she said unto him. I was desirous my thrice beloved
Abyndaraes, to have thee see, how captives in love can fulfill their promise;
for, from the very day, that I gave thee my word for pledge of my heart, I have
sought the means to discharge me of it. I sent for thee to come to this
Castle, to be my prisoner, as I am thine. But now I have brought thee in
hither, to make thee Lord of me, and of my fathers treasure, under the
honorable name of a lawful husband, whereunto my estate, nor thy loyalty
cannot otherwise consent. I do know well, that my fathers will will be contrary
to our workings, who being ignorant of thy valor, and not knowing thy deserts,
as well as I do, will perhaps bestow some richer husband on me: but I esteem
thy noble personage, and thy virtuous and valiant mind more, then the greatest
riches in the world. And having said thus unto him, she hung down her head,
blushing not a little, that she had so much discovered her self, and in so
plain and open terms declared her affection unto him. The noble Moore took
her in his arms, and many times kissing her white hands for such loving and
courteous words, said thus unto her. I have no new thing (sweet Lady of my
soul) to give thee in requital of such great good as thou do offer me,
because I am no less (as I was before) wholly thine. Only this pledge I give
thee in token of my unspeakable love, that I receive thee for my beloved Lady
and wife: And heerewithall thou may lay aside for a while that modest
shamefastnes, and maidenly teynt, which continually thou have had, since thou
have taken me for thine own. Unwillingly she did the same: And upon this
conclusion they went to bed, where with a new experience they rekindled the
flames of their enamoured hearts. In which amorous enterprise, passed on either
side many loving words, and deeds fitter for imagination, then to be written.
The Moore being in so great joy and pleasure, fetched on the sudden a profound
and painful sigh, and turning from her, began to lie so sad and pensive, that
fair Xarifa perceiving it, was much amazed and troubled in mind to see so
sudden an alteration: who lying still, heard him breath forth a deep and
doleful sigh with turning his body on every side. The Lady unable to suffer so
great an injury to her beauty and loyalty, thinking he was displeased with
the one or both, rising up a little in the bed, with a mild and merry voice
(though somewhat troubled) said unto him. What means this Abyndaraes? It
seems thou art offended with my mirth. I heard thee sigh, and tumble, and
toss thy body on every side: why man, if I am wholly thy joy, and thy delight,
why do thou not tell me for whom thou do sigh; and if I am not, why have
thou thus deceived me? If thou have found any fault in my person, that has
abridged the delight of thy imagination, cast thine eyes and mind upon my
will, which is sufficient to supply many wants, and upon my zealous and loving
heart, that wishes it the fairest and finest in the world for thy sake. If thou
seruest any other Lady, let me know her, that I may serve her to: And if thou
have any other grief (which shall not offend me) tell it me, for I will either
die, or rid thee from it. And clasping him with a kind of violent and forcible
love, she turned him to her again, who being then confounded, and ashamed for
that he had done, and thinking that it might be an occasion (if he did not tell
her the cause of his sorrow) to fill her head full of jealousy and suspicion,
with an appassionate sigh he said unto her. If I did not (my sweetest life)
love thee more then mine own soul, I would never have made such signs of
inward grief, for the wounding thoughts, which I brought with me (when I came
with my self all alone) I passed away with a better heart; but now that I am
constrained to go from thee, I have no force to endure them at all. And because
thou shall be no longer in suspense of knowing the cause of my sorrow, I will
tell thee what lately passed: And then he told her all the matter, not leaving
any thing out, in the end of his tale with many tears saying thus unto her. So
that thy captive (fair Lady) is also prisoner to the Governor of Alora: And
the pain of that imprisonment, which thou have cast upon me, and taught my
heart to suffer, I feel not, but the torment and bondage by living without
thee, I account worse then any death: Whereupon thou see, that my sighs are
rather arguments of greater loyalty, then of any want thereof. And with this,
he began again to be so pensive and sad, as he was before he had told her his
grief. But then with a merry countenance she said unto him: Trouble not thy
mind Abyndaraes with these thoughts, for I will take the care and remedy of
this grief upon me, as a thing that touches me most of all; and the more,
since it is not denied any prisoner that has given his word to return to
prison, to satisfy it, by sending the ransom that shall be demanded of him:
Wherefore set thy self down what sum thou will, for I have the keys of al
my fathers treasure, which I will put into thy hands, and leave it all at thy
disposition. Rodrigo of Naruaez is a courteous gentleman, and a good knight, and
one who gave thee once thy liberty: And as thou have acquainted him with the
trust of these affairs; so is he now the more bound to use greater virtue and
gentleness toward thee. I am sure he will be contented with reason; for having
thee in his power and prison, he must perforce set thee at liberty, when he
has the value of thy ransom. I see well fair Lady (said the Abencerraje
again) that the love which thou do bear me, will not suffer thee to give me
the best counsel, for I will never commit so foul a fault as this. For if I
was bound to fulfill my word, when I was alone, and without thee, now that I am
thine, the bond is greater: I will therefore return to Allora, and yield my
self into the Governors hands, and when I have done what I am bound to do, let
Fortune do with me what she will. Nay let me rather die, said Xarifa (if thou
go to be prisoner) then once desire to remain here at liberty. For being
thy captive, by duty I am bound to accompany thee in this journey for the
extreme love that I bear thee, whereas also the fear of my fathers frowns,
which I have purchased by offending him, will let me do no less. The Moore
weeping for joy, to hear these words, embraced her saying. Thou never ceasest
(my dearest soul) to heap favors upon my happy head, do therefore what thou will, for this is my resolution. With this determination they rose before it
was day, and providing some necessary things for their journey, they went
very secretly toward Allora: and when the day began to wax clear, Xarifa
went with her face covered with a mask, for fear of being known, and by
reason of the greath aste they made, they came in good time to Alora, where
going directly to the castle, and knocking at the gate, it was opened to them
out of hand by the Centrinels, who had notice of that was past, and what they
should do. The valiant Governor received them courteously: and Abyndaraes going
to the gate and taking his wise by the hand brought her unto him, and said.
Behold Rodrigo of Naruaez if I keep not well my word and appointed time? For
promising thee to return thy prisoner, instead of one, I bring thee two, for
one was enough to overcome many. Behold here my Lady, and judge if I have not
justly suffered for her sake: accept us now for thine, for in thy virtuous and
noble mind I repose my whole trust and confidence, and into thy hands commit
her dear and chiefest honor. The Governor was very glad to see them both,
and said to Xarifa: I know not fair Lady which of you have conquered each
other in love and courtesy, but truly think my self greatly bound unto you
both. Come in therefore, and rest you in your own house, the which from
henceforth, as also the master of it, accept for none other. After this
friendly entertainment, they went with him into his dining chamber, where
after a little while they refreshed themselves, because they came somewhat
weary. The Governor asked the Moore how he did for his wounds. I think (said
he) that what with the way, and what with pain, they are somewhat rankled:
which fair Xarifa hearing, with an altered an appalled countenance said unto
him. Alas how comes this to pass my Lord? Have you any wounds about you, and
I not know them? Who escapes (said he) from thine, needs little to care for
any other. Truth it is, that at our late skirmish in the night I got two little
wounds, which my troublesome journey and negligence in curing them has made
somewhat worse, but all is but little or nothing. It is best (said the
Governor) that you lay you down, and I will send for a Surgeon that is
here in the Castle to cure them. Following which counsel, fair Xarifa
caused him to put off his apparel, and though she set a good face on the
matter (because she would not give him any occasion to feel her inward
grief) yet was she altered much and troubled in her mind. The Surgeon
came, and searching his wounds said, that they were not dangerous, because the
sign was not in those places when he received them; and also, because they
were smitten overthwart, would not be long in healing: For with a certain
ointment that he made out of hand, the pain of them was somewhat assuaged; and
in four days (by means of the great care the Surgeon had in healing them)
he was as sound and whole as ever he was before. But one day, after dinner was
done, the Abenceraje said thus unto the Governor. As you are wise, Rodrigo of
Naruaez, so can you not choose, but by the manner of our being at Coin, and of
our coming hither, imagine more then you have seen, which affairs of ours by
our own misfortunes (driven to this desperate (though happy) event, wherein
they now are) must be (I hope) by your advise and help brought to some good
end. This is fair Xarifa, of whom I told you: This is my Lady, and my dearly
beloved wife: In Coin she would not stay for fear of her Father. For though
he knows not what has passed between us, yet she feared least this accident
at some time or other might be discovered. Her Father is now with our King of
Granada, whose highness I know, does bear you especial good will, and loves
you, (though you be a Christian) for your valor and virtuous disposition.
Wherefore I beseech you (gentle knight) to solicit our pardon at his gracious
hands for doing what is past without his leave and priuitie, since Fortune
has brought it (though happily) to this doubtful pass. Comfort your selves
Abyndaraes and fair Xarifa (said the noble Governor) for by the faith of a
gentleman I promise you to do what I can for you in this behalf, whereupon he
presently called for ink and paper to write a letter to the king of Granada,
which in a few words and true, opening their estate unto him, said thus.

MOst mighty king of Granada, Rodrigo of Naruaez the Governor of Alora, by
these letters kisseth your royal hands, and gives your Majesty to
understand, that Abyndaraez Abencerraje borne in Granada, brought up in
Cartama and being under the charge and government of the captain of that
Forte, was enamored of Xarifa his fair daughter: And after that it pleased
your Majesty to prefer the said captain to the government of Coin, the two
lovers (to bind themselves in a mutall and indissoluble bond) betrothed their
faith to each other before her departure, who sent to Cartama for the
Abencerraje in her Fathers absence (being now in your Majesty's Court) to whom
as he was going to Coin, in the way I met him, and in a certain skirmish
between us, (wherein he showed himself a valiant and courageous man at arms)
made him my prisoner: who telling me his pitiful case (my heart being moved
with compassion of his grief, and with his earnest prayers) I set him free for
two days, who went his way, and got him to his wife, so that in that journey
he woone his wife, and lost his liberty. But seeing the Abencerraje (according
to his word) would needs return to my prison, she came also with him, and
so they are both now in my power. Let not the name of Abencerraje, I beseech
your Majesty offend it, for this Gentleman and his Father were not privy (as
I have heard) nor consenting to the conspiracy pretended against your royal
person, in testimony whereof, they are yet both living. Wherefore I humbly
beseech your Majesty to impart-betweene your Grace and me a remedy for these
hapless lovers, whose ransom I will frankely forgive, and freely let them
go. May it only please your Majesty to procure the Ladies pardon with her
Father, who is your subject, and to entreat him to receive the gentleman into
his affinity and good liking: By doing whereof (besides the singular favor
that your Highness shall do me) your Majesty shall do no less, then is
expected of the woonted virtues and bounty of your Royal and magnificent
mind.

With this letter he dispatched away one of his gentlemen, who coming before
the King, gave it him into his own hands, the which he gratefully received,
when he knew from whom it came, for he loved this Christian, especially for his
valor and goodly personage: and reading it, he turned his face, and by chance
espied the Governor of Coin, to whom (taking him aside) he gave the letter,
saying unto him. Read this letter, who read it, and seeing what was past, by
his countenance did manifest how much he was grieved in mind. Which thing the
King perceiving, said unto him. Be not offended, nor sorry, although thou have
good cause; for there is not any reasonable thing, that the noble Governor of
Alora requesteth at my hands (if it lies in my power) which I will not do for
him. And therefore I command thee by deferring no time, presently to go to
Alora, and to pardon thy daughter and son in law, and carry them with thee to
thy Castle; in recompense whereof I will not forget to bestow on thee
continual favors. It grieved the old Moore to the very heart, when he
understood of this event; but seeing he must not disobey the Kings command, by
counterfeiting a merry countenance, and borrowing a little courage of his
daunted spirits, as well as he could, he said That he would do it. The Governor
of Corn departed from the Court in all haste, and came to Alora, where
(understanding by the way of the Governors Gentleman that went with him, all
that had passed in this adventure) he was courteously received: The Abencerraje
and his daughter teynted and appalled with shame and fear came before him, and
kissed his hands, who receiving them joyfully, said unto them. I come not
hither of mine own accord to repeat, nor entreat of things past, but by the
commandment of the King, who willed me to pardon your misdeeds, and your
sudden marriage without my consent. And as for the rest daughter, thou have
chosen a better husband for thy self, then I could have given thee. Rodrigo of
Naruaez was very glad to hear this gentle greeting of the old Moore, for
whose entertainment he made many feasts and banquets. And one day when diner
was done, he said unto them. I am not so glad, as proud, that I have been some
part and means, whereby these occurrents are brought to so good a pass; in
proof whereof, and that nothing else could make me more content, for the
ransom of your imprisonment, I will have but only the honor, that I have
enjoyed by getting and keeping such brave prisoners. Wherefore Abyndaraes, thou
art free, in testimony whereof I give thee leave to go whither it please
thee, and whenever thou will. He humbly thanked him, and so they prepared
themselves to be gone the next day, when Rodrigo of Naruaez bearing them
company, they went from Alora, and came to Coin, where great triumphs,
banquets, and feasts were made in public celebration of the marriage: The
which being past, their father taking them both one day aside, spoke these
words unto them. Now that you are (my beloved son and daughter) possessours
of my riches, and live in rest, it is not reason that you forget the manifold
good turns done you by the Governor of Alora, for which you are yet indebted
unto him; and it stands not with our honors, for using you with such great
virtue and humanity, that he should leefe the right of your ransom, which
should be rather (if you confider the matter well) more then ordinary. I will
give you four thousand double ducats, send them unto him, and behold them
here, which he well deserves (as a friend indeed) though there be different
laws between you and him. The Abencerraje thanked him very humbly, and
taking them, sent them in a little rich coffer to Rodrigo of Naruaez. And
because he would not of his own part show himself unthankful, he sent him
there with all six fair Barbary horses with rich saddles and furniture, and
six targets, and lances, the bars and punches being of fine gold. Fair
Xarifa wrote a sweet and loving letter unto him, wherein she gave him infinite
thanks for the benefits she had received by his means, and for the gentle
entertainment she had in his Castle. And willing to show her self as liberal
and thankful as the rest, she sent him a sweet Cypress chest, finely
wrought and carved for a present, and within it most curious and costly white
garments for his own person. The valiant Governor accepting the presents,
with great thanks to them that sent them, gave the horses, targets, and
lances incontinently amongst the gentlemen that did accompany him that night
in the skirmish, taking the best of each, and also the Cyprsse chest, with that
which fair Xarifa had sent him for himself, and returning the four thousand
double pieces to the messenger again, he said unto him. Tell thy Lady Xarifa,
that I receive the Ducats for her husbands ransom, and (to do her service)
send them back again, toward the charges of her marriage, and, that for
her friendship and sweet sake, I would change all the interests that I have
in the world, in lieue that she would make an account of this Castle, as her
own, and her husbands also. The messenger returned back to Coin, where he
was well received, and the liberality of the noble Captain of every one
highly commended, whose lineage does continue in flourishing estate to this day
in Antiquera, equivalent in Heroical and Martial deeds with the first
original, from whence they are descended. The history being ended, Felicia
did commend the grace, and good words wherewith fair Felismena did tell it,
and so did all the rest, that were preient, who taking their leave of the sage
Lady, went all to take their rest.

The end of the fourth book.
The fifth Book of Diana of George of Montemayor.
THe next day in the morning the Lady Felicia rose up, and went to Felismenas
chamber, whom she found, not with few tears, newly making an end of
apparelling her-selfe, thinking every hour she stayed there a thousand years.
And the sage Lady taking her by the hand, they went into a gallerie that
looked into a garden, where they had supped the night before, and having asked
her the cause of her tears, and giving her some comfort and assured hope, that
her greefes should have such an end, as she her-selfe desired, she said unto
her. There is nothing in the world more ready to take her life away, whom I
love well, then with incertaine hope to deprive her of the remedy of her
grief, for there is not an hour that seems not so long unto her (living in
this sort) as she thinks the hours of her life short and speedy. Because
therefore my desire is to fulfill thine, and after some few troubles to have
thee obtain the sweet content and rest, that Fortune has promised thee, thou
shall depart from thine own house here, in the same habit that thou came,
when thou did defend my Nymphs from the force and violence of the brutish
and cruel Savages; assuring thee besides, that when my help and favor may
stand thee in steed, unsent for, thou shall always have it. So that thy
departure fair Felismena must be presently; and trust in God, that thy desire
shall have a happy end: For if I knew it to be otherwise, thou may well
think, I would not be without other remedies to make thee forget these
thoughts, as I have done to many other Lovers more. Felismena was glad to hear
the grave Ladies words, to whom she replied thus. I know not how with words
(discreet Lady) I may give you condign thanks, nor with what deeds and
humble service make any part of satisfaction of this infinite favor, which I
receive at your Ladyships hands. God grant I may live so long, that by proof
your Ladishippe may know the great desire I have to do you all the service I
may. That which your Ladyship commands me to do, I will presently go about,
which cannot but have good success, being directed by her counsel, that can
in every thing give the best. The sage Lady embraced her, saying. I hope to see
thee, fair Felismena, in this house more loyfull and contented, then now thou
art. And because the two Shepherdes and Shepherdesses are staying for us, it is
reason that I go, to give them also some remedy for their sorrows, that need
it so much. Wherefore both of them going out of the hall, and finding Syrenus
and Syluanus, Seluagia and Belisa attending their coming, the Lady Felicia
said to Felismena. Entertain this company fair Lady, while I come hither
again: and going into a chamber, it was not long before she came out again
with two cruets of fine cristall in either hand the feet of them being of
beaten gold, and curiously wrought and enameled: And coming to Syrenus, she
said unto him. If there were any other remedy for thy grief (forgotten
Shepherd) but this, I would with all possible diligence have sought it out,
but because thou can not now enjoy her, who loved thee once so well, without
another death, which is only in the hands of God, of necessity then thou
must embrace another remedy, to avoid the desire of an impossible thing. And
take thou, fair Seluagia, and despised Syluanus, this glass, wherein you
shall find a sovereign remedy for all your sorrows past and present; and a
beginning of a joyful and contented life, whereof you do now so little
imagine. And taking the cristall cruet, which she held in her left hand, she
gave it to Syrenus, and badde him drink; and Syrenus did so; and Syluanus, and
Seluagia drunk off the other between them, and in that instant they fell all
down to the ground in a deep sleep, which made Felismena, and Belisa not a
little to wonder, to whom the sage Lady said. Discomfort not thy self
Belisa, for I hope in time to see thee as glad, as ever any was after their
many sorrows and pains. And until thy angry fortune be not pleased to give
thee a needful remedy for thy great greefes, my pleasure is, that thou still
remain here in my company. The Shepherdess would have kissed her hands at
these words, but Felicia did not let her, but did rather embrace her, showing
how greatly she loved her. But Felismena standing half amazed at the deep
sleep of the Shepherdes, said to Felicia: If the ease of these Shepherds
(good Lady) consists in sleeping (me thinks) they have it in so ample sort,
that they may live the most quiet life in the world. Wonder not at this
(said Felicia) for the water they drunk has such force, that, as long as I
will, they shall sleep so strongly, that none may be able to awake them. And
because thou may see, whether it be so or no, call one of them as loud as
thou can. Felismena then came to Syluanus, and pulling him by the arm, began
to call him aloud, which did profit her as little, as if she had spoken to a
dead body; and so it was with Syrenus and Seluagia, whereat Felismena marvelled
very much. And then Felicia said unto her. Nay, thou shall marvel yet more,
after they awake, because thou shall see so strange a thing, as thou did
never imagine the like. And because the water has by this time wrought those
operations, that it should do, I will awake them, and mark it well, for thou
shall hear and see woonders. Whereupon taking a book out of her bosom, she
came to Syrenus, and smiting him upon the head with it, the Shepherd rose up on
his seete in his perfect wits and judgment: To whom Felicia said. Tell me
Syrenus, if thou might now see fair Diana, and her unworthy husband both
together in all the contentment and joy of the world, laughing at thy love,
and making a sport of thy tears and sighs, what would thou do? Not grieve
me a whit (good Lady) but rather help them to laugh at my follies past. But if
she were now a maid again, (said Felicia) or perhaps a widow, and would be
married to Syluanus and not to thee, what would thou then do? My self would
be the man (said Syrenus) that would gladly help to make such a match for my
friend. What think thou of this Felismena (said Felicia) that water is
able to unloose the knottes that perverse Love does make? I would never have
thought (said Felismena) that any humane skill could ever attain to such
divine knowledge as this. And looking on Syrenus, she said unto him. How now
Syrenus, what means this? Are the tears and sighs whereby thou did
manifest thy love and grief, so soon ended? Since my love is now ended (said
Syrenus) no marvel then, if the effects proceeding from it be also determined.
And is it possible now (said Felismena) that thou will love Diana no more? I
wish her as much good (answered Syrenus) as I do to your own self (fair
Lady) or to any other woman that never offended me. But Felicia, seeing how
Felismena was amazed at the sudden alteration of Syrenus, said. With this
medicine I would also cure thy grief (fair Felismena) and thine Belisa, if
fortune did not defer them to some greater content, then only to enjoy your
liberty. And because thou may see how diversely the medicines have wrought in
Syluanus and Seluagia, it shall not be amiss to awake them, for now they have
slept enough: wherefore laying her book upon Syluanus his head, he rose up,
saying. O fair Seluagia, what a great offense and folly have I committed, by
employing my thoughts upon another, after that mine eyes did once behold thy
rare beauty? What means this Syluanus (said Felicia.) No woman in the world
even now in thy mouth, but thy Shepherdess Diana, and now so suddenly changed
to Seluagia? Syluanus answering her, said. As the ship (discreet Lady) sails
floting up and down, and well-ny cast away in the unknown seas, without hope
of a secure haven: so did my thoughts (putting my life in no sinall hazard)
wander in Dianas love, all the while, that I pursued it. But now since I am
safely arrived into a haven, of all joy and happiness, I only wish I may have
harbor and entertainment there, where my irremooueable and infinite love is so
firmly placed. Felismena was as much astonished at the second kind of
alteration of Syluanus, as at that first of Syrenus, and therefore said unto
him laughing. What do thou Syluanus? Why do thou not awake Seluagia? for
ill may a Shepherdess hear thee, that is so fast asleep. Syluanus then
pulling her by the arm, began to speak out aloud unto her, saying. Awake
fair Seluagia, since thou have awaked my thoughts out of the drowsy slumber
of passed ignorance. Thrice happy man, whom fortune has put in the happiest
estate that I could desire. What do thou mean fair Shepherdess, do thou
not hear me, or will thou not answer me? Behold the impatient passion of the
love I bear thee, will not suffer me to be unheard. O my Seluagia, sleep not
so much, and let not thy slumber be an occasion to make the sleep of death put
out my vital lights. And seeing how little it auailed him, by calling her, he
began to power forth such abundance of tears, that they, that were present,
could not but weep also for tender compassion: whereupon Felicia said unto
him. Trouble not thy self Syluanus, for as I will make Seluagia answer thee,
so shall not her answer be contrary to thy desire, and taking him by the
hand, she led him into a chamber, and said unto him. Depart not from hence,
until I call thee; and then she went to the place again where Seluagia lay,
and touching her with her book, awaked her, as she had done the rest, and
said unto her. Me thinks thou have slept securely Shepherdess. O good Lady
(said she) where is my Syluanus, was he not with me here? O God, who has
carried him away from hence? or will he come hither again? Hark to me
Seluagia, said Felicia, for me thinks thou art not well in thy wits. Thy
beloved Alanius is without, and says that he has gone wandering up and down
in many places seeking after thee, and has got his fathers good will to marry
thee: which shall as little avail him (said Seluagia) as the sighs and tears
which once in vain I powered out, and spent for him, for his memory is now
exiled out of my thoughts. Syluanus mine only life and joy, O Syluanus is he,
whom I love. O what is become of my Syluanus? Where is my Syluanus? Who hearing
the Shepherdess Seluagia no sooner name him, could stay no longer in the
chamber, but came running into the hall unto her, where the one beheld the
other with such apparaunt signs of cordial affection, and so strongly
confirmed by the mutual bonds of their known deserts, that nothing but death
was able to dissolve it; whereat Syrenus, Felismena, and the Shepherdess were
passing joyful. And Felioia seeing them all in this contentment, said unto
them. Now is it time for you Shepherds, and fair Shepherdess to go home to
your flocks, which would be glad to hear the wonted voice of their known
masters: And make this account, that you shall never want any help and favor
at her hands, who is soready to pleasure you in what she may. And the holy
end (Syluanus) and consummation of thy love shall be, when with her, whom thou
do so deerly love, thou shall combine thy self in the sacred bonds of chaste
and lawful marriage, whereof I will be careful to put you both in mind, when
time and opportunity shall serve. And (fair Felismena) prepare thy self also
for thy departure, for to morrow is the day, wherein it behooues thee to go
from hence. After this, all the Nymphs came in at the hall door, who now knew
of the remedies, that their gracious Lady had given the Shepherds for their
griefs, which thing made them not a little glad, Doria especially, Cynthia and
Polydora, because they were the principal occasions of their content. The two
new lovers did busy themselves in nothing else, but in looking upon one
another with such affection and tenderness, as if a thousand years had bin past
since their loves had first begone between them. And that day they all tarried
there, with as great joy and pleasure, as by such a new commenced love might be
imagined, until the next day in the morning, when the two Shepherds and the
Shepherdess, taking their leave of the sage Lady Felicia, and of Felismena,
and Belisa, and likewise of all the Nymphs, with great joy returned to their
villages, whither they came the very same day. And fair Felismena (who had
that day put on again her Shepherdesses weeds) taking her leave of the sage
Lady, and being particularly and well advised what to do, with many tears
embraced her, and, accompanied of all those Nymphs, went forth into the great
Court before the Palace gate, where embracing every one by her self, she
went that way that they did direct her. Felismena went not alone, neither did
her imaginations give her leave so to do: for on the one side she went thinking
of that, which the wise Lady had told her; and considering on the other, what
little hap and less success, she had yet in her love, which made her doubt of
her future happiness. With these contrarieties of thoughts did she go warring in
her mind, which though on the one side they made her weary; yet on the other
they did entertain her with their company, so that in the mean time she
forgot her solitary and painful way. She had not traveled far in the mids
of a fair valley, when toward the west part thereof, she espied a far off a
Shepherds coat, which, at the entrance of a green wood stood, amongst many high
Oaks, and invited thither by her importunate hunger and wearines, and also
because the heat of the day began to come on so fast, that she was forced to
pass it away under the shadow of those braunchie trees, she bended her steps
directly toward it. Coming to the coat, she heard how a Shepherd said unto a
Shepherdess, that sat near unto him, these words. Entreat me not, good
Amarillis, to sing, since thou know what great causes I have to sigh, and
weep all the days, whilst my languishing soul shall not forsake this
wearied and fainte body. For though music is no small means to increase his
melancholy, that is ever sad and pensive, as his joy and mirthe, who lives
a merry life; yet my grief is not of such a quality, that by any humane art
or industry may be increased or diminished. Here have thou thy baggepipe,
play and sing, fair Shepherdess, for well may thou do it, having thy heart
as free, as thy will exempt from the bondage of love. Then the Shepherdess
answered him again. Be not such a niggard of thy skill, Arsileus, which the
heavens and nature have so bountifully bestowed on thee: for, she that does
ask it at thy hands, will not deny to pleasure thee in any thing she may.
Sing if it be possible that song, which (at the request of Argastus) thou did
make in the name of thy father Arsenius, when, for her love, you both served
and sued to the fair Shepherdess Belisa. Thy condition is strange Amarillis
(said the Shepherd again) still demanding that of me, which does least of all
content me. What shall I do, for perforce I must please thee, and yet not
perforce, since he were very discourteous (to say the truth) that would not of
his own accord do thee any service he could. But now thou see, how my ill
fortune does ever narrowly pursue me, when I would feign take some small
respite, and ease from my grievous thoughts. And seeing the great reason I have
(Amarillis) to burst out in continual lamentations and tears, why do thou
then command me to sing? What pleasure do thou take to offend the occasions
of my sorrow? I pray God thou may never have the like, to feel the grief
that I do, because Fortune might not (so greatly to thy cost) inform thee of
my pain. Thou know well enough I have lost my Belisa, and that I live
without hope of her recovery. Why do thou then command me to sing? But
since I will not have thee conceive an opinion of me to be discourteous (for it
was never my manner and condition to be accounted so amongst fair
Shepherdesses, to whom we Shepherdes, and my self especially for my Belisas
sake, owe all respect of love and duty, and are so much beholding) I will
endeavor (though most against my mind) to content thee: Whereupon taking up
his Rebecke that lay hard by him, he began to tune it, and do that, which the
Shepherdess requested him. Felismena, that was listening to their talk, might
hear very well what speeches passed between them; And when she saw they
talked of Arsenius, and Arsileus, servants to fair Belisa, (both which she
took to be long since dead, as Belisa had told, not only her, but the Nymphs
also, and the Shepherds, when they found her in the Shepherds coat in the
Island) she verily thought, that all, that she heard, and saw there, was but a
mere dream, or some fantastic illusion. But giving attentive ear, she
perceived how the Shepherd began to touch his Rebecke so divinely, that she
thought it to be some celestial music, who having plaide on it a little with
a more heavenly then humane voice, began to sing this song following.

O Vainiest hopes, Alas, how many Days
Have I been bondslaue to a brave Deceit?
And how, in vain, have these two wearied Eyes
With showers of tears watered this pleasant Vale?
Appaid I am of cruel Love, and Fortune,
And know not yet whereof I do Complain.
No small harms I must pass, smce I Complain,
For, to endure, framed are all my Days,
The traunces, and deceites of Love and Fortune:
But whence Complain I, of a brave Deceit,
Of such a Shepher desse within this Vale,
On whom (to my great harm) I cast mine Eyes?
Yet am I much beholding to my Eyes,
(Although with grief of them I do Complain)
Since by their means I saw within this Vale
The fairest thing, which never in my Days
I thought to see, And this is no Deceit;
In proof whereof, ask it of Love and Fortune.
Though on the other side, instable Fortune,
And time, occasion, and my doleful Eyes,
And not suspecting this most brave Deceit,
Caused all the ill, whereof I do Complain:
And so I think to end my woeful Days,
Counting my greefes, and passions to this Vale.
If that the river, hill, the meade, and Vale,
Earth, heaven, and fate, and cruel Love, and Fortune,
The hours, and the moments, years, and Days,
My soul, my heart, and these two wearied Eyes,
Do aggrauate my grief when I Complain,
Who then can say, I live by fond Deceit?
Deceived I was, but this was no Deceit,
For, that I have beheld within this Vale
So rare perfection, I do not Complain,
But to behold, how Love and cruel Fortune
Would signify unto these wearied Eyes,
That there should come a help after some Days.
And now the years are past, the months, and Days,
Upon this confidence, and clear Deceit:
Weary with weeping are my watrie Eyes:
Weary to hear me is the hill, and Vale.
And in the end thus answered of false Fortune,
Jesting at that, whereof I do Complain.
But woeful man, whereof do I Complain,
But of the length of my prolonged Days?
Perhaps, a slave to me is cruel Fortune,
That for my fault she must pay this Deceit?
Went he not free, exempted in this Vale,
Who did command me to lift up mine Eyes?
But who again can tame his greedy Eyes,
Or can I live, if I do not Complain
Of the will, which Love has done me in this Vale.
Cursed be that ill, that lastes so many Days:
But death cannot (if this be no Deceit)
Stay long to give an end unto my Fortune.
Calmes wonted are to come after hard Fortune,
But never shall be viewed of mine Eyes.
(Nor yet I think to fall in this Deceit)
O well, let the first suffice, which I Complain,
And will (fair Shepherdess) as many Days,
As the remembrance lasts of this Vale.
If (Shepherdess) that day, when in this Vale
I did behold thee (to my hardest Fortune
The final end had come of all my Days,
Or I had less beheld those coyest Eyes,
The cause should cease, whereof I do Complain,
And I would fall no more into Deceit.
But purposing to work me this Deceit,
When by and by thou saw me in this Vale,
Mild thou did seem: See then if I Complain
Unjustly of false Love, and cruel Fortune?
And now I know not, why thou turn'st thine Eyes
Away, unless thou greeuest at my Days.
My song of Love and Fortune I Complain,
And since a brave Deceit so many Days
Did last, water mine Eyes this hill and Vale.
This did the Shepherd sing, keeping time with his tears, and resting with his
sighs, and the Shepherdess sat harkening unto him with great content, to see
with what a grace he did both play and sing. But after the Shepherd had made an
end of his song, laying his rebecke out of his hand, he said to Shepherdess.
Art thou now pleased Amarillis, for (to content thy mind) thou may make me
do that, which does utterly displease me. And accursed Alfeus, I wish that
Fortune would bring thee to that pass, whereunto by thy detested forceries I am
come, because thou might then know what good cause I have to hate thee, for
the cruel despite that thou have done me. O sweet Belisa, is there any in the
world more bound to thee then I am? God grant I may deduct this sorrowful
life so long, that mine eyes may once again enjoy thy peerlesse beauty, and
that thine may see, if I do not acknowledge, how much I do owe unto them. These
words the Shepherd spoke with such plenty of tears, that there was no heart
(had it been never so hard) that by hearing them, would not have melted. But
now that thou have told me Arsileus (said the Shepherdess unto him) the
beginning of thy affection, and how thy father Arsenius was the principal
occasion of thy service and great love to Belisa; because when he sued unto
her, she did participate, and thou profit thy self by thine own letters and
songs, and some times by thine own music, (of all which he might have well
excused himself) I pray thee now tell me, how thou did leese her. This is a
thing (said the Shepherd) which I would seldom repeat, but because it is ever
thy quality, to command me to tell thee that, which is most grievous unto my
soul, hark then, and in a few words I will tell it thee.

There was a man in our town called Alfeus, who had the name amongst us to be
a great Magician, and he loved Belisa extremely, before my Father ever began to
serve her, but she could not abide, not only to see him, but not to hear of
his name, which if any had but founded in her ears, they could not have angered
her worse. Now when this Coniurer understood (I know not how) of the appointed
meeting between me and Belisa, to talk together in the night from the top
of a Mulberie tree in her fathers Orchard; Alfeus, full of devils, commanded
two spirits to take the shape of my father Arsenius, and mine upon them, and
that he, that took upon him my shape, should go to the appointed place; and the
other, that took my fathers, should come thither, and shoot at him in the tree
with a crosbow arrowe, thinking he was not his Son, but another, and then to
come presently unto him, and knowing him to be his Son, should kill himself,
for grief that he had stain his own Son, to the end that the Shepherdess
Belisa should kill her-selfe, seeing my self and my Father dead, or at least
do that, which afterward she did. This villainy did the traitor Alfeus work,
for despite of that great love, which he knew Belisa did bear me; and for the
contempt, which she had of his unworthy affection. When this was in manner
aforesaid done, and Belisa thought that my Father and I were both stain, like
a careless and desperate woman, she forsook her Fathers house, and is gone
where none can yet tell where she is, or any tidings of her. This did the
Shepherdess Armida tell me, and I do verily believe it, according to that which
succeeded after. When Felismena had heard what the Shepherd had told
Amarillis, she wondered not a little, imagining with her-selfe, that all that he
told, did seem to be true, and by the signs that she saw in him, knew that
he was the same Arsileus, Belisas servant, whom she thought to be dead, and
therefore said to her-selfe. It is not reason, that Fortune should give her
any content, that would deny it a Shepherd, that does so well deserve it, and
that stands so much in need thereof. I will not at the least, depart from this
place, without giving him such joy, as he will receive at the news of his
beloved Shepherdess. Whereupon coming to the door of the coat, she said to
Amarillis. Will it please thee (fair Shepherdess) to give the forlorn woman
of Fortune, that has lost her way, and the hope to find it out again, leave
to pass away the heat of the day in this place with thee? The Shepherdess
seeing on a sudden such exceeding beauty, and so comely a feature, was so
amazed, that she was unable to answer one word again: but Arsileus said unto
her. There wants no other thing (fair Shepherdess) for the performing of thy
request, but the place, which is not so good as thou deseruest: but if thou art
wont to be served with such homely lodging, Come in, and wherein we may do
thee any service, our good wills shall excuse the wants of our ability. These
words Arsileus (said Felismena again) seem well to come out of thy mouth,
but the joy, that I will leave with thee in requital of them, I wish may
befall to me of that, which I have so long desired. And saying thus, she went
into the Coat, and the Shepherd and Shepherdess rose up, offering her their
places, and all three sitting down again, Arsileus said to Felismena. Have
you ever seen me before (fair Shepherdess,) or has any body told you of
my name? I know more of thee Arsileus (said Felismena) and of thy estate,
then thou think, although thou art in a Shepherdes weed, far different from
that I saw thee in, when thou were a student in the famous Academie of
Salamanca: If there be any thing here to eat, I pray thee give it me, for I
will tell thee afterward a strange and true thing, which thou have desired
long since to know. This will I do with a good will (said Arsileus) though I
can do no kind of service, due enough to the great appearance of thy virtues
and deserts. Whereupon Arsileus and Amarillis, taking of their seuerallscrips,
gave Felismena such victuals, as they had. And after she had refreshed her
self, desirous to make him a joyful man, who lived so long a time in grief
and sorrow, she began to speak to him in this sort. There is nothing in the
world (Arsileus) that ought more religiously to be kept then firmness, and
most of all in a woman's heart where it is seldomer wont to be found. But the
reason thereof I plainly perceive, that men for the most part are occasions of
their small constancy toward them. I speak this for the greatbond wherein
thou art obliged to a Shepherdess, that I know, who would not (if she knew
thou were alive) exchange her joy and content for all that the whole world
could afford. And then she began to tell him in order all that was past, from
the time that she killed the three Savages, until she came to the Lady
Felicias house: In which discourse Arsileus heard the golden news of the
thing, which he so dearly loved, and all that had passed between her and the
Nymphs, when they found her sleeping in the Island of the Lake, as you have
heard before: And that joy, which he then felt, when he understood, that the
love and faith which his Shepherdess did bear him, remained yet sincere, and
inuiolate in her heart, and the place certain, where he might find her out,
was so extreme, that he fell down in a trance between them both, by putting
his life in hazard, with surfeit of that sudden passion: But coming to
himself again, he said to Felismena. With what words shall I sufficiently
(fair Shepherdess) thank thee for the great courtesy thou have done me, and
with what deeds acquit that singular content, wherewith thou have now blessed
me, the like whereof I pray God so amply in every thing may give thee, as thy
heart can either wish or desire. O my sweet Belisa, is it possible that I shall
see those eyes so soon again, that had so great power over mine, to kiss
those delicate hands, that made so intricate a knot in my heart, to hear those
angelical words, and see that singular beauty, that ravished so much my
admiring senses. And that after so many troubles of mind, and turmoiles of
Fortune, such sovereign felicity to succeed in their places? And speaking
this with many tears, he took Felismenas hands, and with great reverence
kissed them. And so did the Shepherdess Amarillis, saying. Thou have revived
(fair Shepherdess) the most sorrowful man that ever I did see, and filled
him full of joy, who did lest deserve to have it. Six months has Arsileus
lived in this Cotage so sorrowful and desolate a life, as none could imagine
the like, without all manner of consolation, but that cortaine Shepherdesses,
seeding their flocks in these plains (of the which I am one) sometimes come
in to visit him, and to afford him that comfort, which his grief (were it at
the lest capable of any at all, would give him leave to embrace. This is not
such a grief (said Felismena again) that he, that has it, may think to
take any comfort in any thing, but in the first causer thereof, or by whom he
hears such news, as I have now told him: which are so good for me (fair
Shepherdess) said Arsileus, that they have revived a living heart in me, which
was mortified and worn almosT out with the clogge of continual care. So much
did the Shepherds words and tears, uttered and powered forth for joy, mollify
her tender heart, as by her own, she gave manifest proof thereof. And in this
sort they tarried there, until the heat of the day was past; and then
Arsileus, taking his leave with great thanks to both the Shepherdesses, with
infinite joy went toward the Temple of Diana, the same way that Felismena did
direct him.

Syluanus, and Seluagia with that content, as they are wont to have, which
after a long absence, enjoy the sight of their desired Love, did go toward
the pleasant meadows, where their flocks went feeding in company of the
Shepherde Syrenus, who went also free and delivered from that kind of content,
that he beheld in them, and from the pain, which the want thereof is wont to
procure; because he neither thought of loving well, nor cared, whether he was
beloved or no? Whereupon Syluanus said unto him. Every time that I see thee
(my dear friend Syrenus) thou should not be the man (me thinks) that thou
were wont to be, but that jointly with thy former thoughts and affection, thou
art thy self also changed: On the one side, I have in a manner pity of thee;
on the other, it greeues me not to see thee careless of loves misfortunes. In
what respect (said Syrenus) have thou pity on me? Because I think it (said
Syluanus) the most malecontent and worst estate of life, not to love well, nor
to be beloved again. It is not long since that thou did understand this
clean contrary (said Syrenus.) And for mine own part, I pray God that
Fortune may still preserve me in this ill estate, and thee in that joy and
pleasure which thou take in seeing thy Seluagia. For though there might arise
some emulation of thy love, and being beloved of so fair a Shepherdess; yet
can I assure thee, that Fortune does not neglect to tune you the content, that
you receive of your mutual love. The hurt, said Seluagia, that she may do us
with her disordinate effects, can never be so great, as my joy is to see my
self so well bestowed. Ah Seluagia (said Syrenus to her) I have also seen my
self as well beloved, as none might be more, and thought as little to see an
end of my love, as you do now: but let none account without Fortune, nor lay
his foundation without the consideration of the mutabilitie of time. But I do
owe no small respect of love and duty to the sage Lady Felicia, whom the
heavens requite: For I never imagined to speak so freely of mine ill in such a
time, when I thought to feel it so little. But I am more indebted to her
(said Seluagia) because she was the cause, that I loved him well, whose sight
I ever enjoyed before mine eyes: But Syluanus turning his eyes to her, said.
This debt I should with great reason (my life) requite, if it were such a
thing, that might with life be paid, which God grant thee (said Seluagia)
since without the same mine should be worse then a continual death. Syrenus
seeing the amorous words on both sides, with a smiling countenance said unto
them. It is well that every one can so well acquit himself for his good turn
done him, that the one will neither be in debt, nor the other have any indebted
to him; and yet in mine own opinion it is better, that you rejoice so much,
and so lovingly entreat of your amorous affections, my self not being a
third in them. With these and other speeches the new Lovers and careless
Syrenus passed away the time and length of the way, which they made an end of
about sun set: And before they came to the fountain of the Sicamours, they
heard a voice of a Shepherdess sweetly singing, whom they knew by and by, for
Syluanus hearing her said unto them. This is Diana doubtless, that singes at
the fountain of the Sicamours. It is she indeed (said Seluagia.) Let us go
behind these Myrtle trees near unto her, because we may hear her the better.
Agreed said Syrenus, although the time has been, when her music and sight
delighted me more then now. But all three going into the thicket of Myrtle
trees, and because it was about the going down of the Sun, they saw fair
Diana near to the fountain, shining with such surpassing beauty, that they
stood (as men that had never seen her before) amazed and in a wonder. Her
hair hung down loose from her head behind, and gathered up with a carnation
stringe, which parted them in the mids: her eyes were fixed on the ground,
and sometimes looking into the clear fountain, and wiping away some tears,
that now and then trickled down her beautiful cheeks, she sung this Dittie.

WHen that I poor soul was borne,
I was borne unfortunate:
Presently the Fates had sworn
To foretell my hapless state.
Titan his fair beams did hide,
Phoebe 'clips'd her silver light,
In my birth my mother did,
Young, and fair in heavy plight.
And the nurse, that gave me suck,
Hapless was in all her life:
And I never had good luck
Being maid or married wife.
I loved well, and was beloved,
And forgetting, was forgot:
This a hapless marriage moved,
Greeuing that it kills me not.
With the earth would I were wed,
Then in such a grave of woes
Daily to be buried,
Which no end nor number knows.
Young my father married me,
Forced by my obedience:
Syrenus, thy faith, and thee
I forgot, without offense.
Which contempt I pay so far,
Never like was paid so much:
Iealousies do make me war,
But without a cause of such.
I do go with jealous eyes
To my foldes, and to my sheep,
And with jealousy I rise,
When the day begins to peep.
At his table I do eat,
In his bed with him I lie,
But I take no rest, nor meat,
Without cruel jealousy.
If I ask him what he ailes,
And whereof he jealous is?
In his answer then he fails:
Nothing can he say to this.
In his face there is no cheer,
But he ever hangs the head:
In each corner he does peer,
And his speech is sad and dead.
Ill the poor soul lives ywisse,
That so hardly married is.
The time was once, when Dianas tears and doleful song and the sorrow, that
by her sad looks she expressed, might have so much moved Syrenus heart, as
put the Shepherdes life in such danger, that all other remedies (but only
proceeding from the same) had been impossible to have helped it; whose eyes and
heart, since now they were delivered out of that dangerous prison, took no
delight to behold Diana, nor grieved at her sorrowful lamentations. And the
Shepherd Syluanus had less cause in his mind to be condolent for any grief
that Diana had, considering she never had the smallest regard of the greatest
woes which he passed for her sake. Only Seluagia helped her with her tears,
fearful (by the fall of her joy) of her own fortune, whereupon she said to
Syrenus. There is no perfection, beauty, nor favor, in natures gift, which
she has not liberally bestowed on Diana, because her beauty is peerless,
her wit and discretion admired, her good graces excellent, and all other her
commendable parts, which a Shepherdess should have, not to be seconded: since
in the lest of them, that made her such a wonder in our age, there was never
any yet that excelled her. Only one thing she wanted, which I ever suspected
and feared, and this was her good Fortune, which would never accompany her,
to have made her live a contented and joyful life, which (to speak the truth)
she ever well deserved. She that so unjustly has taken it from so many (said
Syrenus) by great reason should not enjoy such a happy estate; which I speak
not, that I am not sorry to see this Shepherdess so sorrowful, but for the
great reason I have, not to wish her any content at all. Say not so (said
Seluagia) for I cannot think, that Diana has offended thee in any thing. What
offense did she by marrying, compelled thereunto by the constraint of her
parents, and kinsfolks, and not by her own will? And after she was married,
what could she do (having due regard to her honor and honesty) but forget
thee? Truly Syrenus, thou should have greater cause to complain of Diana,
then I have heard thee hitherto allege. In truth Syrenus (said Syluanus)
Seluagia has so great reason for that she says, that none can well disprooue
it. And if there be any that of ingratitude can justly accuse her, it is I, who
loved her more then my self, she requiting it so ill again, and with such
cruel contempt as thou know well enough. Seluagia casting an amorous eye
upon him, said. But thou did not deserve (my beloved Shepherd) to be so ill
entreated, since there is no Shepherdess in the world, that may not think
her-selfe blessed to enjoy thy happy love. About this time Diana perceived, that
their talk was of her, for the Shepherds were so loud, that she might hear
them very well: Wherefore rising up, and looking among the Myrtle trees, she
knew the Shepherdes, and the Shepherdess that was sitting between them. Who,
perceiving that she had espied them, came to her, and courteously saluted her,
and she them again with a good grace and countenance, asking them, where they
had been so long a time. Whom they answered with another kind of words and
countenance, then they were wont to do, which seemed so strange to Diana, that
though she took no care for any of their loves, yet in the end it grieved her,
to see them so much altered from that they were wont to be, and especially when
she perceived what great joy Syluanus took in beholding fair Seluagia. And
because it was now time to go home, and that the flocks took their accustomed
way toward the village, they went after them, and by the way fair Diana said
to Syrenus. There are many days past, Shepherd, since I saw thee in these
valleys. But more (said he) since I would have lost my life, in lieu she had
not seen me, that made me pass it away in such great grief, whereas in the
end it contents me not a little to talk of my passed fortunes, that find my
self now in a safe haven. Do thou then think this to be a sure estate,
(said Diana) wherein thou now live? It cannot be dangerous (said he) when I
dare speak thus before thee. I never remember (said Diana) that I saw thee
so much lost for my love, but that thy tongue might have had as much liberty,
as now it has. Thou art as discreet in imagining this (said he) as in all
other things else. Why so (said Diana?) because there are no other means
(said he) to make thee not know that, which thou have lost in me, but only by
thinking that I did not love thee so much, that my tongue might not have that
liberty, as thou say. But yet for all this I pray God give thee so much
content as sometimes (fair Diana) thou have wished me: For though my love be
now past, yet the relickes thereof that remain in my soul, are sufficient to
wish thee all the happiness in the world. Every word that Syrenus spoke was a
dagger to Dianas heart. For God knows, if she would not have rather given a
more willing ear to his wonted complaints, then occupied her mind in
believing such apparent signs of his new liberty. And though she answered to
every thing the Shepherd spoke unto her, with a certain kind of carelessenes,
and did help her-selfe by her own discretion (because she would not show any
sign of sorrow for their liberty) yet in her mind she ruminated the
discontent, that by their speeches and semblances she had so deeply conceived.
And with talking of these and other matters, they were come to their village by
that time the Sun had hidden all his beams, and taking leave one of another,
they went to their own houses.

But coming to Arsileus again, who went with great joy and desire toward
the wood where Dianas Temple was, to see his Shepherdess, he came to a little
brook, that ran hard by the Temple amongst a row of green Sicamours, under
whose cool shadows he sat him down, hoping that Fortune would send some body
that way, by whom he might make his Belisa understand of his being there,
because he thought it somewhat dangerous to come upon her on the sudden,
especially when she thought him long since to be dead: And on the other side,
the impatient desire that he had to see her, would not suffer him to take any
rest at all. But the Shepherd consulting with himself what was best to be
done, espied by chance a Nymph of wonderful beauty coming toward him with
her bow in her hand, and her quiver at her neck, looking on every side, if
she could epsy any Dear or wild beast, to try how she could bestow an
arrow, that she carried in her bow ready bent. But seeing the Shepherd, she
went straight unto him, who rising up, did her such reverence as was due to so
fair a Nymph, whom she courteously saluted again: For this was fair Polydora,
one of the three that Felismena and the Shepherds delivered from the violent
hands of the Savages, and a dear friend to Belisa. But both sitting down
again upon the green grass, Polydora asked him what country man he was, and
the cause of his coming thither. Whom Arsileus answered thus. The country
where I was borne (fair Nymph) has so ill entreated me, that (me thinks) it
greeues me to call it mine, although on the other side, I am bound to love it
much, and more then I am able to express. And to tell thee the cause, that
Fortune had to bring me to this place, it were first needful for thee (fair
Nymph) to tell me, if thou do belong to the sage Lady Felicia, in whose
Palace (I heard say) my dearest Belisia does remain, the only cause of my
exile out of my native town, and of that infinite sorrow, which her long absence
has made me feel, I am of Lady Felicias house (said Polydora) and the gretest
friend in the world to the Shepherdess that thou have named: and because thou
may also make such an account of me, if I thought I might profit thee any
thing by giving thee some consel, I would advise thee to forget her, if it were
possible, or (if it lay in thy power) not once to have an amorous thought of
her, because the remedy of thy grief is no less impossible, then the help
of that, which she suffers, since the cruel ground does now feed on him, who
was once the hope of al her sorrow. And may this be true (said he) that the
earth does consume her servant Arsileus? most true (said Polydora) for this was
he, whom she loved more then her self, and he, whom I may justly call the most
unfortunate man besides thee, because thou have settled thy thoughts in such a
place, where it is impossible for them to have any remedy. For though I was
never in love my self, yet do I hold it for a firm opinion, that the passion
of death is not so ill, as that, which one suffers by loving, her that has her
affection settled in another place. I believe it well fair Nymph (said
Arsileus) and that such are Belisas golden virtues and rare constancy, that as
imperious death cannot make her settle her affection in any other place, so
there is none in the world, that can make her change her mind, wherein (fair
Nymph) the whole sum of my felicity consists. How does thy felicity
consist Shepherd (said she) by loving so as thou say, when as her love is so
strongly fixed in another place? This is a strange kind of affection, and
never heard of before. Because thou may no longer (fair Nymph) marvel at my
words, nor at the manner of the love which I bear to Belisa the sovereign
mistress of my thoughts, give ear a while (said Arsileus) and I will tell thee
that, thou never thought to hear, although the beginning of it, thy friend,
and the loadstarre of my life has perhaps told thee. And then he told her from
the beginning of their loves to Alfeus his inchauntments and brave deceit, and
every thing else, that till then in his loves aforesaid befell unto him: which
the Shepherd told sometimes with tears, being loath to recall to memory his
passed mishaps; sometimes with sighs, that he fetched from the center of his
heart, imagining what his mistress Belisa might feel in these occurrents and
grievous accidents. And by his doleful words and alterations in his
countenance, he gave so great a spirit to that he said, and showed such signs
of inward grief, that as it struck the Nymph in a great admiration, so
likewise in no less compassion of his pains: but when she understood, that
undoubtedly he was Arsileus, the joy that she conceived thereof was so great,
that with words she could not tell it, and thought her self unable at that
present to do any more, but with inward sense to surfeit on the sweet joy of
such happy news. Behold then what might be expected of comfortless Belisa,
when she should understand of these gladsome tidings. The Nymph therefore
casting her eyes on Arsileus, not without tears of inward gladness said unto
him, I would I had thy ripe wit and fluent tongue (Arsileus) to make thee know
what infinite pleasure I conceive by the good success, that Fortune has
solicited for my Belisa, because I might otherwise be deceived, by thinking
that so simple a conceit and barren words as mine are, could declare it. I
ever thought that the coutinuall grief of my Belisa should be at length
converted into great gladness, induced thereunto by the great deserts of her
singular beauty, wisdom, and faith that she has ever kept firm and
inuiolate, but did ever fear on the other side, that Fortune never made
account to give it her so amply, and in such sort, as I did desire it, because
it is her condition (for the most part) to bring her effects to pass clean
contrary to their desires that love well. Happy may thou call thy self
Arsileus, since thou did deserve to be so well beloved in life, that
could not be forgotten after death. And because the deferring of such great
joy, for a heart that needs it so much, may not be too long, give me leave to
go and carry so good news to thy Shepherdess, as those of thy life, and of
her deceived mind. And depart not from this place until I come again with
her whom thou do so much desire, and most deserve to see. As I can expect
nothing else (said Arsileus) from such excellent wisdom, and exceeding
beauty as thine, but all joy and contentment whatsoever: even so fair Nymph
(because thou do so greatly desire to give it me) thy will be done, whereby I
hope to govern my self as well in this, as in all things else, that shall
ensue thereof. Whereupon they taking leave of one another, Polydora went to tell
Belisa these inopinate news, and Arsileus remained still, tarying for them
under the pleasant shadow of those green Sicamours, who (to entertain the time
with something) as they are wont to do, that are attending some joyful thing,
took out his Rebecke, and to the tune of it, began with sweetest voice to sing
these verses following.

NOw Love, and fortune turn to me again,
And now each one enforces and assures
A hope, that was dismayed, dead, and vain:
And from the harbor of mishaps recures
A heart, that is consumed in lurning fire,
With unexpected gladness, that adiures
My soul to lay aside her mourning tire,
And senses to prepare a place for joy.
Care in oblivion endless shall expire:
For every grief of that extreme annoy,
Which when my torment reigned, my soul (alas)
Did feel, the which long absence did destroy,
Fortune so well appaies, that never was
So great the torment of my passed ill,
As is the joy of this same good I pass.
Return my heart, sur saulted with the fill
Of thousand great vnrests, and thousand fears:
Enjoy thy good estate, if that thou will:
And wearied eyes, leave of your burning tears,
For soon you shall behold her with delight,
For whom my spoils with glory Cupid bears.
Senses which seek my star so clear and bright,
By making here and there your thoughts estray,
Tell me, what will you feel before her sight?
Hence solitariness, torments away
Felt for her sake, and wearied members cast
Of all your pain, redeemed this happy day.
O stay not time, but pass with speedy have,
And Fortune hinder not her coming now.
O God, betides me yet this grief at last?
Come my sweet Shepherdess, the life which thou
(Perhaps) did think was ended long ago,
At thy command is ready still to bow.
Comes not my Shepherdess desired so?
O God what if she is lost, or if she stray
Within this wood, where trees so thick do grow?
Or if this Nymph, that lately went away,
Perhaps forgot to go and seek her out.
No, no, in her oblivion never lay.
Thou only art my Shepherdess, about
Whose thoughts my soul shall find her joy and rest:
Why comm'st not then to assure it from doubt?
O see thou not the sun pass to the west,
And if it pass, and I behold thee not,
Then I my wonted torments will request
And thou shall vvaile my hard and heavy lot.
When Polydora went from Arsileus, not far from thence she met with the
Shepherdess Belisa, who was going to recreate her self in the green wood, in
the company of the two Nymphs Cynthia and Doria, who seeing her coming in
such haste, began to be afraid, thinking that she ran away from some thing,
from the which it behooved them also to fly away. But now when she came nearer
unto them, the joy that they perceived by her mild eyes and countenance did
warrant them from danger, and being come to them, she went presently to the
Shepherdess Belisa, and embracing her with great joy and gladness, said thus
unto her. If thou knew from whom this imbracement came, thou would with
greater content (fair Shepherdess) receive it then now thou do. It can come
from no part fair Nymph (said she) where I may more joyfully accept it, then
from thine own self, since he, from whom with the supre most joy in the world
I should entertain it, is not now in the world: And I would desire to live no
longer, if I were now altogether deprived of the content, that this miserable
life may at some times affoorde me, which only I account, fair Nymph, thy
friendly and gracious company. This life (said Polydora) from henceforth I
hope thou shall enjoy with more content then thou can imagine: And because
thou may know how, let us sit under the shade of this green Sicamour, and I
will acquaint thee with such matters, as shall revive thy spirits, and decayed
soul. Belisa, and the Nymphs sat them down taking Polydora in the mids, who
said to Belisa. Tell me (fair Shepherdess) how certain art thou of the death
of Arsenius and of Arsileus? Belisa unable to stop the sudden eruption of her
violent tears, answered. So certain, as one that beheld that tragical
spectacle with her own eyes, the one shot through with an arrowe, the other
killing himself with his own Faulchion. But what will thou say to one, that
will tell thee, that these two, whom thou did see dead, are alive, and in
perfect health? Her would I answer (said Belisa) that told me this, that she
had a desire to renew my tears, and to bring those to my thoughts again,
whose remembrance is my death, or that she took a delight to sport her self
with my greefes. I am certain (said Polydora) thou think not so of me, for
thou know how thy cares have touched me nearer then any other, to whom thou
did ever impart them. But tell me what is that Shepherd of thy town, that is
called Alfeus. The greatest Coniurer (said Belisa) and the most cunning
Magician that is (I think) in Europe, who did once fondly spend his time in
loving and serving me. He is a man (fair Nymph) whose dealing and conversation
is altogether with Devils, which he makes to take such shapes upon them as he
list himself, so that many times thou would think, thou were talking with
thy familiar acquaintance (into whose shape he transformeth some spirit or
other) when indeed thou art talking with a very Devil. Thou must therefore
know fair Shepherdess (said Polydora) that the same Alfeus with his
enchantments and devilish devises has been the cause of the deceit, wherein
hitherto thou have lived, and of the infinite tears, that for the same thou
have powered forth, because knowing that Arsileus was to speak with thee that
night (as it was concluded between you) he caused two spirits to take the
shapes of Arsileus and his father upon them. And Arsileus desiring to talk
with thee, effected that, that should fall out, which with thine eyes thou
did that night behold. Because thinking they were dead, thou might
despair and kill thy self, or do that (at the least) which thou have already
done. When Belisa heard what fair Polydora did tell her, she was so far
beside her-selfe, that for a while she could not speak one word, but coming
to her-selfe again, she said unto her. Thou have told me (fair Nymph) strange
things, if my sorrow would give me leave to believe them. By that love which
(thou say) thou do bear me, tell me (I beseech thee) how thou know it,
or of whom thou have understood that those two, which I saw dead before mine
eyes, were not Arsenius and Arsileus? Of no other said Polydora, but of
Arsileus himself. What, of Arsileus, said Belisa? Is it possible that my
Arsileus does live, and so nigh to bless me with these happy news? I will
tell thee how possible it is (said Polydora) if thou will go with me, for
before we come yonder to those three hedges, which thou see before thee, I
will show thee the man, that shall restore thy decayed hope, and restore thee
thy life again. O sovereign Deities (said Belisa) what words do I hear? That
the renewing of my joys and felicity is so apparent, and that my Arsileus is
there? Why do thou not lead me (fair Nymph) to the place, where I may see
him, and die at his feet with joy of his happy sight? Ah thou do not love me
(Polydora) so much as thou say. This did the fair Shepherdess speak with
an uncertain kind of joy, and doubtful hope of that, which she so much
desired. But Polydora rising up, and taking her by the hand, and the Nymphs
Cynthia and Doria, who for joy also to see Belisas good hap, would not stay
behind, went to the brook, where Arsileus was: And before they came, a
temperate air, that came from the place where he sat, ravished their senses
with the sweet voice of the enamoured Shepherd, who had not yet left off his
music, but still began a fresh to sing upon this old proverb. Good fortune
come and tarry.

With the gloss that he himself did descant upon it to his own purpose.

The Gloss.
WHat motions, times and changes,
What ways, what uncouth ranges,
What slights, what disillusions,
What gladness (in conclusions)
Have risen of such sorrows?
One faith yet all these borrowes,
And one goodloue assures,
And my misfortunes cures.
And since from grief they vary,
Good fortune come and tarry.
Good hap thou still do move thee,
So light as not behooues thee,
And if, thus to content me,
Thou think to repent thee?
Then better is my smarting:
For if thou go, At parting
My sense and wits forsake me:
But if (more sure to make me)
Thou come, my soul to marry,
Good fortune come and tarry.
But if I come in vain here,
Or live deceived, to plain here:
For, wretched men what fear not?
To loose my life, then wear not
The same more safe each hour?
O fear, strange is thy power.
For the will thou figurest ever.
But since such beauty never
Did any falsehood carry, Good fortune come and tarry.
When Belisa heard Arsileus his music, she felt such inward joy, as the like
did never any, whereupon resolving with her self to shake off all former
sorrow that had appalled that surpassing beauty, which nature had bountifully
bestowed on her, and decayed those pleasant looks, and comely favor (the
only source of Arsileus his tears and sighs) in her sweet and alluring
face, now on a sudden with a renewed grace and excellent beauty (whereat the
Nymphs were not a little amazed) she spoke in this sort, saying. This is,
without doubt, the voice of my Arsileus, if I do not deceive my self by
calling him mine. When the Shepherd did see the cause of all his passed cares,
and present contents before his eyes, the ineffable joy that he conceived
thereat was so great, that his heart unable to comprehend it, was troubled in
such sort, that at that instant he could not utter a word: To whom the Nymphs,
perceiving in what a trance the sight of his Shepherdess had put Arsileus,
most lovingly came, when the Shepherd, suspending that for a little while, which
the present joy wrought in him, with many tears said. With what words am I
able to express the satisfaction that fortune has made me for so many greefes
and troubles, as for thy sake (sweet Shepherdess Belisa) I have endured. O
who may give me now a new heart, and not so distempered with sorrowful
thoughts, to receive into it such unspeakable joy as thy happy sight presents
me! O fortune, I have no more to request of thee, and thou no more to give me:
yet only one thing I ask thee, That, since it is thy fashion to give no
supreme happiness without extreme heaviness, the great force of this
unexpected joy, which thou have given me this seuenfold happy day, may with
little sorrow (in liew of such a sovereign sweet) and with such an opposite,
as may but a while countermaund this sweet content, be mildly and with favor
tempered. And fair Nymphs, in whose sacred guard and ampare, such great
treasure has bin divinely preserved, and where it could never have been
better employed, let your hearts rejoice with mine, at this infinite joy that
reuiues it, which thing (if you your selves have sometimes loved well) shall
seem no less then due to my restored good. O fair Shepherdess, why do
thou not speak unto me, does it grieve thee to see me, or do thou take no
delight in seeing thy Arsileus? has his grievous sight troubled thy tongue, or
the extreme joy thereof hindered the passage of thy golden words? Whom Belisa
answered thus. The joy which I have to see thee (my dear Arsileus) were but
little, if with words it might be told. Let it suffice thee to know in what
continual panges and dangers of my life, thy supposed death has put me, and by
that thou shall see what a world of joy thy renewed life has brought to this
my mournful soul. At the end of which words, by reason of an issue of
swelling tears ascending up from the center of her sorrowful heart into her
eye brinkes, she was not able to utter out the rest of her mind, which the
tender hearted Nymphs, being mollified with the mild and pitiful words of
both these lovers to one another, did help and accompany with theirs. And
because night was coming on, they went all to Felicias house, telling to each
other the discourse and accidents of their lives, which till then they had both
passed. Belisa asked her Arsileus for his father Arsenius, who told her, that,
as soon as he knew she was gone, he went to one of his Farms not far from
thence, where he lives as quiet and contented a life, as he could wish, having
put all mundane affairs in oblivion: whereat Belisa was very glad, and so
they came to the Palace of sage Felicia, where they were welcomed with great
joy and feast, whose hands Belisa kissed many times, saying, evermore that
she was the cause of her good Fortune. And so did Arsileus, to whom Felicia
showed an earnest will to do ever for him, what lay in her power.

The end of the fifth book.
The sixth Book of Diana of George of Montemayor.
AFter that Arsileus was gone, Felismena stayed still with the Shepherdess
Amarillis, that was with him, demanding of one an other the course of their
lives, a common thing to them, that find themselves in like places. And as
Felismena was telling the Shepherdess the cause of her coming thither, a
jolly Shepherd came to the Coat, though very sad by his countenance and gate.
When Amarillis saw him, she rose up in great haste to be gone, but Felismena
taking hold by her garment, and suspecting what the cause of her sudden
departure might be, said unto her. It were not reason Shepherdess, that I
should receive this discourtesie at thy hands, who desires so much to serve
thee. But as she striued to be gone from thence, the Shepherd with many tears
said unto her. My desire is (Amarillis) having respect to that, which thou
make me suffer, not to see thee sorry for this unfortunate Shepherd, but to
consider what belongs to thy wisdom and beauty, and that there is nothing in
the world worse beseeming a Shepherdess of thy brave qualities, then to
entreat one so cruelly, that loves thee so entirely. Behold these wearied
eyes (Amarillis) that have shed so many tears, and then thou shall see what
reason thine have to show themselves so angry against this miserable man.
Alas, that thou fliest away from me, not seeing the reason thou have to abide
my presence. Stay Amarillis, and harken to my complaints, and to my just
excuses, and if thou will not answer me at all, yet I will be content, so that
thou staiest still. What can it hinder thee to hear him, whom it has so
dearly cost to see thee? And looking upon Felismena, with many tears he
besought her, not to let her go, who with sweet and gentle words entreated
the Shepherdess not to use him with so small pity, whom he showed to love
more then himself, or that she would (at the lest) harken unto him, since she
could not hurt her self much by doing so little. But Amarillis said: Entreat me
not (fair Shepherdess) to give ear to him, who believes his thoughts, more
then my words. For behold, this Shepherd that stands in this fained sort before
thee, is one of the most disloyal men, that ever lived, and one of them that
most of al troubles our simple loving Shepherdesses with his false deceits and
dissimulatio^s. Then said Filemon to Felismena. My only request and desire is,
fair Shepherdess, that thou would be judge in the cause between Amarillis
and me, wherein if I am found culpable, or the just prouoker of that anger, and
ill opinion that she has wrongfully conceived against me, that then I may
loose my life; and if she be, that I may have no other thing for satisfaction,
but her confession, how much she has injured, and owes me. To leese thy life
(said Amarillis) I am sure thou will not, because thou will not wish thy self
so much harm, nor me so much good, as for my sake to put thy life in
adventure. But I am content, that this fair Shepherdess be judge (if it
please her) between us, to consider of our reasons, and to declare which of us
both is more worthy of blame. Agreed (said Felismena) and let us sit down at
the foot of this green hedge near to the flourishing meadow before our eyes,
for I will see what reason you have to complain of one another. After they
were all three set down upon the green grass, Filemon began thus to say. I
trust fair Shepherdess, if thou have at any time been touched with the force
of Love, that thou shall plainly perceive what small reason Amarillis has to
be angry with me, and to conceive so ill an opinion of the unstained faith I
bear her, which makes her surmise that, which never any other Shepherdess
has ever yet imagined of her loving Shepherd. Know therefore (fair
Shepherdess) that the fates (not only when I was borne, but long before)
determined, that I should love this fair Shepherdess, which fits before thy
fair and my sorrowful eyes, whose intents I have answered with such effect,
as there is no love (I think) like mine, nor any ingratitude like to hers. It
fell out afterward, that from my childehood, serving her in the best manner I
could, there are five or six months past, since my mishap brought a Shepherd
hither called Arsileus, who went up and down seeking a Shepherdess called
Belisa, which by some ill success of Fortune, wandered like an exile here and
there amongst these woods and groves. And as his sorrow was very great, it
fell out, that this cruel Shepherdess, either for great pity she took of
him, or for the little she had of me, or for what cause else (she knows best
herself) would never be out of his company: To whom if by chance I did but
speak thereof, she was ready to kill me with anger; for those eyes which thou
see there, procure death no less, when they are angry, then life when they
are mild and gentle. But now when all my senses were thus occupied, mine eyes
with tears, my ears with hearing denials, my thoughts with a bitter taste of
sorrow, my soul with a rare and unspeakable kind of affection, and my
understanding with the greatest jealousy, as the like never any had, I made my
complaint to Arsileus with sighs, and to the earth, and these groves with
pitiful and bitter lamentations, showing them what injuries Amarillis did me.
Her deceived imagination of the suspect, that I had of her honesty, has
bredde in her so great despite and hatred against me, that to be revenged of
me, she has hitherto perseuered therein, which grievous torment she is not
only content to lay upon me, but when she sees me before her eyes, flies from
my presence, as the fearful Hind from the hungry and pursuing Hounde. So
that by the love which thou owe thy self, I pray thee (good Shepherdess)
judge whether this be a sufficient cause to make her thus abhor me, and if my
fault on the other side, be so great, that it deserves such endless and extreme
hate. Filemon having made an end of the cause of his grief and injury,
wherewith his Shepherdess tormented him; Amarillis began to shape her answer
thus. This Filemon (fair Shepherdess) that sits before thee, has loved me
well (I must needs confess) or at the least, made a fine show thereof, and
such have his services been toward me, that to say otherwise of him, then he
deserves, it would ill beseem me. But if for his sake, in lieu and recompense
of that affection, I have not rejected the suites and service of many jolly
Shepherds that feed their flocks upon these downs, and in these pleasant
vales; and also (for his love) have not contemned many country youths, whom
nature has enriched with no less perfections then himself, let himself be
judge. For the infinite times, that with their amorous suits I have been
importuned, and those wherein I have kept that firmnes due to his faith, have
not (I think) been at any time out of his presence, which nevertheless
should be no sufficient cause for him to make so small account of me, as to
imagine or suspect any thing of that, wherein I am most of all bound to my
self. For if it be so, (as he knows well enough) that for the love of him I
have cast off many, that died by mine occasion, how could I then forget or
reject him for the love of another? A thousand times has Filemon watched me,
not leesing a step that the Shepherd Arsileus and I have trodden amiddes these
green woods, and pleasant vales, but let him say, if he ever heard Arsileus
talk to me of love, or if I answered him any thing touching such matter. What
day did Filemon ever see me talk to Arsileus, whereby he might conceive any
thing else by my words, but that I went about to comfort him in such great
forrow, as he suffered: And if this be a sufficient cause to make him think
ill of his Shepherdess, who can better judge it, then himself? Behold then
(fair Shepherdess) how much he was given to false suspects and wrongful
jealousy, that my words could never satisfy him, nor work with him, to make
him leave off his obdurate mind by absenting himself from this valley,
thinking thereby to have made an end of my days, wherein he was deceived, when
as he rather ended his own joy and contentment, if for me at the least he had
ever any at all. And this was the michiefe besides, that Filemon being not
only content to bear me such a kind of unjust jealousy, whereof he had so
small occasion, as now (fair Shepherdess) thou have seen, he did likewise
publish it at every feast, in all bridales, wrestlings, and meetings, that
were made amongst the Shepherds of these hills. And this thou know (good
Shepherdess) how it did prejudice mine honor more then his contentment: In
the end he absented himself from me, which course since he has taken for
a medicine of his malladie (which it seems has the more increased it) let him
not find fault with me, if I have known how to profit my self more thereby
then he has. And now that thou have seen (fair Shepherdess) what great
content that I felt, when thou toldst the Shepherd Arsileus so good news of
his Shepherdess, and that I my self was most earnest with him to have him go
and seek her out, it is clear, that there could not be any thing between us,
that might inge^der such cause of suspicion, as this Shepherd has wrongfully
conceived of us. So that this is the cause, that has made me not only so cold
in the love that I did bear him, but not to love any more, whereby to put mine
honor and good name in hazard of false suspects, since my good hap has brought
me to such a time, that (without forcing my self) I may do it at mine own
choice and liberty. After Amarillis had showed the small reason the Shepherd
had to give so great credit to his jealous imaginations, and the liberty
wherein time, and her good fortune had put her (a natural thing to free hearts)
the woeful Shepherd replied in this sort. I do not deny (Amarillis) but that
thy wisdom and discretion is sufficient to clear thee of all suspicion. But
will thou now make novelties in love, and invent other new effects, then those
which we have heretofore seen? When a lover would love well, the least
occasion of jealousy torments his foul, how much more when those were
greater, which by thy privy conversation and familiarity with Arsileus thou
have given me. Do thou think (Amarillis) that for a jealousy certainties
are needful? Alas thou deceiuest thy self, for suspicions be the principal
causes of their entrance: which was also no great matter, since I believed that
thou did bear Arsileus good will, the publishing whereof was as little
prejudicial and less offensive to thine honor, since the force of my love
was so great, that it made me manifest the ill that I did fear. And though
thy goodness assured me, when, at stealth and deceit of my suspectes, I
thought thereof, yet I always feared, least some adverse success might befall
unto me, if this familiarity had been still continued. But to that thou
say (fair Shepherdess) that I absented my self, I answer, that upon a
stomach, or to give thee any offense or grief thereby, I did it not; but to
see if I could have any remedy in mine own, not seeing the cause of my great
mishap and grief before mine eyes, and because my pursutes might not also
offend thee. But if by seeking remedy for so great an ill, I went against
that, which I owed thee, what greater punishment can I have, then that which
thy absence has made me feel? If thou say thou did never love Arsileus,
it gives me greater occasion to complain of thee, since for a thing of so
small importance, thou did forsake him, who so greatly desired to serve thee.
So that I have the more cause to accuse thee, the less thy love was to
Arsileus. And these are the reasons Amarillis and many more, which I do
allege, not in mine own excuse and favor, whereby I think not to help my
self at all, since in matters of love they are wont to profit so little;
only requesting thee (gentle Amarillis) that thy clemency and the faith which
I have ever borne thee, may be of my side, and move thee unto pity, the want
whereof can prescribe no end to my grief, nor means of reconciliation in thy
hard condition and cruelty. And with this the Shepherd made an end of his
words, and began to pour forth so many tears, that they were sufficient (with
the requests and sentence that Felismena gave in his behalf) to mollify
Amarillis hard heart, and to make the enamoured Shepherd come again into her
good grace and liking, for which he was so glad a man, as never more; and
Amarillis not a little joyful, by showing how much Filemon was deceived in his
false suspicions of her. And after this, they passed away that day with great
content of the two reconciled lovers, and with greater sorrow of fair
Felismena, who next day early in the morning departed from them after many
embracings, and promises, to send to each other news of their affairs.

But Syrenus being now free from love, and Syluanus and Seluagia more enamored
then ever before, and fair Diana, not a little discontent for the sorrowful
success of her affairs, passed away her melancholic life, feeding her flock
along the banks of the great river Ezla, where, many times meeting with one
another, they talked of that, which pleased their fancies best. And discreet
Seluagia being on a day at the fountain of the Sicamours, the Shepherdess
Diana came thither by chance, to seek a lamb that had run out of the
foulde, which Syluanus had tied to a myrtle tree, for when they came thither,
they found it drinking at the clear spring and by the mark knew it to be
fair Dianas. But being come (as I say) and courteously welcomed of the new
lovers, they sat them down upon the green grass, leaning to one of the
Sicamours, that stood about the fountain, and after they had talked of many
matters, Syluanus said unto her. Why do thou not ask us (fair Diana) for
Syrenus? Because I would not talk of matters past (said Diana) for the great
grief which present things do give me: The time was, when I took more delight
to ask for him, and he for me, and to speak and converse with one another
then now, which gives neither of us the like contentment; but time does cure
infinite cares, that seem remediless to many men, which if I understood not
so, there could not be now a Diana in these fair meades and plains, in regard
of the sorrows and care that are daily offered me. God never grant so much
harm to our pleasant fields (said Seluagia) by depriving them of such great
beauty as hers is. That shall not be wanting as long as thou live (said
Diana) and wheresoever thy grace and perfections are, little may be lost by my
want, in truth whereof, behold thy Syluanus, who (I thought) would never have
forgotten me for any other Shepherdess, and yet in the end has shaken hands
with me for thy love, which deserved a great deal more. This did Diana speak
with a gracious smile, although she laughed not so much in mind at these
things, nor with so good a heart as they thought. For though she once loved
Syrenus more then her own life, and despised Syluanus, as nothing so much, yet
it grieved her more, that Syluanus had forgotten her for the love of another,
whose sight he now enjoyed every day with great contentment of his new love,
then that Syrenus had freed himself out of her love, whom now no new
affection moved. When Syluanus heard what Diana said, he answered her thus.
Time, and the reuolutions of the heavens shall first cease (fair Diana) before
I will forget thee, for thy beauty and wisdom is not such, that may be ever
put in oblivion. Truth it is that I am now bound to my Seluagia, because
(besides many other good parts in her obliging me to her love) she never
esteemed her Fortune to be worse by this, that she is now beloved of him,
whom thou did always so reject and make so small account of. No more of this
(said Diana) for thou art well bestowed, and I was not well advised by not
loving thee, as thy love deserved it at my hands. But if at anytime thou did
desire to give me some content, I beseech thee (al I may) and thy fair
Seluagia, to sing some song, to entertain the time, and to pass the heat of
the day a^way; which now begins so fast, that we must be feign to pass it
under these Sicamours, and there enjoy the bubling of this clear spring, which
shall not a little help the sweetenes of your song. The new lovers were not
dainty to be prayed, though fair Seluagia was not very well content with this
kind of talk that Diana had with Syluanus. But because in her song, she
thought to be revenged on her, to the tune that Diana played on her Bagpipe,
both of them began to sing as follows.

I See thee jolly Shepherd merry,
And firm thy faith and sound as a berry.
Love gave me joy, and fortune gave it,
As my desire could wish to have it.
What did thou wish, tell me (sweet lover)
Whereby thou might such joy recover?
To love where love should be inspired,
Since there is no more to be desired.
In this great glory, and great gladness,
Think thou to have no touch of sadness?
Good for tune gave me not such glory,
To mock my love, or make me sorry.
If my firm love I were denying,
Tell me, with sighs would thou be dying?
Those words in jest to hear thee speaking,
For very grief my heart is breaking.
Yet would thou change, I pray thee tell me,
In seeing one, that did excel me?
O noe, for how can I aspire,
To more then to mine own desire.
Such great affection do thou bear me
As by thy words thou seem to swear me?
Of thy deserts, to which a detter
I am, thou may demand this better.
Sometimes me thinks, that I should swear it,
Sometimes me thinks, thou should not bear it.
Only in this, my pap does grieve me,
And my desire, not to believe me.
Imagine that thou do not love mine,
But some brave beauty that is above mine.
To such a thing (sweet) do not will me,
Where faining of the same does kill me.
I see thy firmnes gentle lover,
More then my beauty can discover.
And my good fortune to be higher
Then my desert, but not desire.
About this time came Syrenus down from the village toward the fountain of
the Sicamours, with great desire to meet Seluagia or Syluanus, for he now
took no greater delight in any thing, then in the company of these two lovers.
And if he had (perhaps) a touch of Dianas love in his memory, the time that he
had spent in loving her, did not leave him altogether without some pensive
thoughts, not, for that her love now gave him any pain; but because the
remembrance of a good estate, does breed some small kind of grief and
discontent in him that has lost it. Before he came to the fountain, in the
mids of the green meadow which was beset round about with Myrtles and Laurels,
he found Dianas sheep, that went by themselves all alone feeding amongst the
trees under the keeping of two fierce masties. And as the Shepherd stayed to
look upon them, thinking of the time, wherein he had greater care of them,
then of his own, the masties with great fury came running upon him. But when
they came somewhat nigh and knew him, by wagging their tails, and holding
down their necks (that were armed with collers of sharp nails) the one fell
down at his feet; and the other by skipping upon him fawned on him with the
greatest joy in the world. And the sheep did no less, for the Bell-wether
with his rural bleating came to the Shepherd, whom all the rest followed, and
knowing Syrenus, came round about him, which sight he could not behold without
tears, calling to mind that sometimes in the company of fair Diana he had fed
that gentle flock. And seeing that in the silly beasts that love and knowledge
did abound, which wanted in their mistress, it was so forcible a motion in his
mind, that if the virtue of the water, which sage Felicia had given him, had
not made him forget his old love: it might well have been, that there was
nothing else in the world that could have let him from renewing it again.
But seeing himself thus in the mids of Dianas sheep, and with the thoughts,
that the memory of such a thing did put before his eyes, to the tune of his
merry Recbecke he began to sing this song.

PAssed contents,
O what mean ye?
Forsake me now, and do not weary me.
Will thou hear me, O memory,
My pleasant days, and nights again,
I have appaid with seuenfold pain:
Thou have no more to ask me why,
For when I went, they all did die:
As thou do see,
O leave me then, and do not weary me.
Green field, and shadowed valley, wheare
Sometime my chiefest pleasure was,
Behold what I did after pass:
Then let me rest, and if I bear
Not with good cause continual fear,
Now do you see.
O leave me then, and do not trouble me.
I saw a heart changed of late,
And wearied to assure mine:
Then I was forced to recure mine
By good occasion, time and fate,
My thoughts, that now such passions hate,
O what mean ye?
Forsake me now and do not weary me.
You lambs and sheep that in these lays,
Did sometimes follow me so glad:
The merry hours, and the sad
Are passed now with all those days:
Make not such mirth, and wonted plays,
As once did ye:
For now no more you have deceived me.
If that to trouble me you come,
Or come to comfort me indeed:
I have no ill for comforts need.
But if to kill me, Then (in sum)
Full well may ye
Kill me, and you shall make an end of me.
After Syrenus had made an end of his song, fair Diana knew him by his
voice, and so did the two enamoured Shepherdes Syluanus and Seluagia. They
called to him, telling him, that if he was minded to pass away the heat of
the day in the field, there was the fresh fountain of the Sicamours, and fair
Diana, both which should be no small allurements to inuit him thither. Syrenus
answered him, that be must needs stay all day in the field, until it was time
to go home again with his sheep to the town, and coming where the Shepherd
and Shepherdesses were, they sat round about the clear fountain, as they were
commonly wont to do. But Diana, (whose life was so sorrowful, as one may
imagine, that ever saw a Shepherdess, the fairest and wisest that was then
known, married so greatly to her grief) went day by day seeking out new
occasions to entortaine the time, and to pass her life away, and studying
often to prevent her continual and sorrowful thoughts. But the Shepherdes
sitting and talking of other matters touching the feeding of sheep, and their
profit, Diana brake off the substance of their talk, saying to Syluanus. It
is a proper thing, Shepherd, that, sitting before thy fair Seluagia, thou
talkest of other impertinent things, and not of praising her beauty, nor of
the great love, that she bears thee: Let the field and lambs alone, the good
or ill success of time and fortune, and enjoy the good hap that (Shepherd)
thou have now, by being beloved of so fair a Shepherdess, for where there is
so great reason to have continually such contentment of mind, thou need'st not
care for that, which Fortune does but sometimes give. How much I am beholding
to thee Diana (answered Syluanus) none can express but he, that knows what
great reason I have to acknowledge this debt, because thou did not only then
teach me to love well, but now also show me the way to use the contentment,
that my love affoordes me: The reason thou have to warn me, not to talk of
any other matter (my Mistress being in presence) but only of the content that
by her sight I receive, is great and infinite, the which I promise thee (fair
Diana) to do, while my happy soul shall be contained in this joyful body. But
I marvel at one thing, to see how thy Syrenus does cast his eyes another way,
when thou speak unto him, it seems thy words please him not, or that he is
not satisfied with thy answers. Blame him not (said Diana) for careless men
and enemies to their own good will do more then this. Enemy to mine own good
(said Syrenus?) If I was ever such an one, let death punish me for my error.
This is a pretty shift to excuse thy fault. To excuse my fault (said Diana?) If
I have not yet the first offense to do thee, I pray God I may never have any
other content, then that, which I now enjoy: It is well that thou do find
fault with me for being married having parets. But it is well (said Syrenus)
that thou did marry having another Love: And what power had that Love (said
Diana) where obedience was due to parents? And what power had those parents
(said Syrenus) that obedience, those times, those favorable or sinistrous
successes of Fortune, to ouerrule so true a Love, as before my departure thou
did show me? Ah Diana, I never thought there was any thing in the world,
that could dissolve so great a faith as that, and how much more Dianas,
considering that well thou might have married, and not forgotten him, who
loved thee so entyrely. But thinking of the matter vnappassionately, it was now
better for me, since thou were resolved to marry, and being married, to forget
me quite. For what reason said Diana? For what, said Syrenus? Because there
is no worse thing in the world, then for a Shepherd to love a Shepherdess
that is married, nor that makes him, (that bears her true love and affection)
sooner to loose his wits and senses: the reason whereof (as we all know) is,
that the principal passion which does torment a lover (after the desire of his
Mistres) is cruel jealousy: For what do thou then think, that a poor
unfortunate Lover that loves well is able to do, what grief (think thou) he
passes, when he knows, that his Shepherdess is in the arms of her new
married husband, and he bewailing and weeping his disgrace and ill Fortune in
the street. And this is not all the torment, when such a mischief and death
remains yet thereof, that he must not complain of it at all, but must suffer
(silly man) and hold his peace, because by complaining he shall be thought no
less then a fool or a mad man (a thing as contrary to his rest as may be:)
For if the iealousies were of some other Shepherd, that served her, by
complaining of the favors she does him, and by hearing her excuses, the Lover
might better pass away his grief; but this is such a kind of torment, that
in an instant one shall loose it, if he have no stay in his desire. Leave of
this talk (said Diana) for thou have no need to love, nor to be beloved. In
respect of not having it to love (said Syrenus) I am glad in not having it
also to be beloved. Strange is thy liberty (said Diana) but stranger was thy
forgetfulness (said Syrenus) if thou do remember well the words thou spakest
to me at my departure. But let us (as thou say) leave of to speak of
things which are past, and let us thank time and Lady Felicia for those that
are present. And thou Syluanus, take thy Pipe, and I will tune my Rebecke to
it, and let us sing some verses together, although so free a heart as mine
cannot sing of any thing, that may give content to thine, that is of another
quality. I will give thee a good remedy for this (said Syluanus:) For let us
imagine that we are both in the same case, as this Shepherdess made us live,
when we filled these hills and dales with our amorous complaints. Syluanus
devise liked them all well, but Seluagia was a little displeased thereat, who
for that time, (because she would not seem to be jealous, where she was
ascertained of so great love) held her peace: And the Shepherds began to sing
in manner following.

Syrenus. IF tears cannot with tenderness relent thee,
How can my song thy cruelty assured,
Since naught of mine could ever yet content thee:
What heart was ever that so much endured?
That to deride thou never can suffice thee,
Agreefe that has the worlds wonder procured.
Ah blind conceit, let love nor time disguise thee,
And such a thought of change that never told me
But to thy good and my content a duise thee.
Ah will thou in such cares and greefes enfold me,
Fierce Shepherdess, and in such lamentations
To spend my doleful years, will thou behold mo?
A heart that is thine, dispos'st thou in such fashions?
Intreat'st thou thus a soul to thee affied,
That the lest grief it is to suffer passions?
Syluanus. Love such a knot, that is endless thou have tied,
That Is blind, and thou, and I more blind intended:
She is blind, for whom my life's denied:
For I saw not my life, and pleasure ended,
Nor she how I for her to death employ me,
Nor thou, that I in flames am thus incended.
Fell Love, shall fair Diana now destroy me
With absence? then conclude (since hate surrounds it)
To end my life, and fortunes that annoy me.
Ioy's slow, time flies, and with his shortness wounds it,
Hope dies, an amorous thought lives still augmented:
Love shortens it, prolongs it, and confounds it.
To speak I am ashamed thus tormented,
And though it greeues me, yet with ceaseless payning
Without the same I cannot live contented.
Syrenus. O soul, forsake not now thy doleful plaining,
And you my wearied eyes
Cease not in swelling tears my cheeks to steep,
Since you have learned to weep,
And wail the chiefest cause of all my cries.
Syluanus. And wail the chiefest cause of all my cries:
Yet (cruel Shepherdess)
Sometimes they were of my most sweet content.
O thoughts in sorrow spent,
How small time lasts a joy and happiness?
Syrenus. How small time lasts a joy and happiness,
And that sweet gracious smile,
(Fortune) wherewith I saw thee not accoyd?
Now all is well imployd
In him, whom time does counsel and beguile.
Syluanus. In him, whom time does counsel and beguile,
Love works his behest:
But in his things who can him well advise?
Or his deceites who spies?
O cruel Shepherdess, O cruel breast.
Syrenus. O cruel Shepherdess, O cruel breast
Whose cruelty is no
Whit less then her brave beauty and her grace,
And my mishap and case:
How to my cost my sorrows do I know?
Syluanus. My Shepherdess, in white and red more clear,
Then both those roses plucked, in May we see:
And brighter then the sun beams sent
From their coruscant Orient
By morning, that upon thy foldes appear:
How can I live, if thou forgettest me?
My Shepherdess, thy rigor then impair,
For cruelty becomes not one so fair.
Syrenus. My fair Diana more resplendant, then
The Emerauld, or Diamond in the night:
Whose beauteous eyes do cease
My sorrows, that increase,
if gently that (perhaps) to me they bend.
So may thou with thy flock so fair and white,
Come to my shadowed sheepefold in the heat,
That such a wretch thou would not ill entreat.
Syluanus. My Shepherdess, when that thy yellow hair
Thou combest in the beams of shining sun,
Do thou not see the same obscured?
My pride andioy by them procured?
That am from hence beholding it so fair,
Won now with hope, now with despair undone,
But so may thou thy beauty brave enjoy,
As thou would give, ameane in such annoy.
Syrenus. Diana, whose sweet name in all these hills
The wild beasts tames, and cruelty rebates:
And whose surpassing beauty to it
Does subject fortune, and undo it.
And fears not love, but wars against his wills:
Respecting not occasion, time, nor fates.
To thee thy flocks and folds such joy may give,
As careless of my grief thou would not live.
Syluanus. The heat is past (Syrenus) and does cease,
The Shepherds to their folds begin to go,
And weary grasshoppers do hold their peace:
The night will not stay long, which, hid belovve,
Is coming in, while Phoebus in our sky
Does here and there his vading light bestow:
Therefore before the darkest shade shall lie
Upon the ground, and while the vvren does sing
In top of this green Sicamour on hie,
Our vvandring flocks together let us bring,
And drive them where Diana now does stay
For us, while in the vvoods our voices ring.
Syrenus. My friend, Syluanus, go not yet away,
Since all his beams not yet the sun does hide,
And that we have sufficient of the day.
There Is time for us and for our flock beside,
And time to drive them to the river clear.
For in this meade to day they shall abide:
And, Shepherd, let my song be ended here.
All the while that the Shepherds were singing, the Shepherdess Diana was
leaning her fair face upon her hand, whose sleeue falling down a little from
her wrest, discovered an arm whiter then the driven snow, she held her eyes
down to the ground, pouring out such plenty of tears, as were sufficient
arguments of more inward grief and pain, then she would (though feign) have
then uttered. And as the Shepherds ended their song, with a deep sigh, in
company whereof it seemed that her soul would have flowen out, she rose up,
and without taking her leave, went down along the valley, dressing her golden
hair, whose veil hung entangled behind in a bow, when she rose up. And if
the Shepherds had not tempered the great pity which they had of her, with the
little that she had of them, neither the one nor the others heart had been able
to endure it. And so all of them went to gather up their sheep, that
(scattered abroad) went skipping up and down the green meadow.

The end of the sixth book.
The seventh Book of Diana of George of Montemayor.
AFter that Felismena had reconoiled Amarillis and Filemon, and left them with
full purpose and resolution, the one never to do any thing to the
coffeehouse and complaint of the other: being now gone from them, she went
down along the valley, wherein she wandered many days without hearing any
news, that might affoorde her the least content, that she desired: and yet
carrying with her an assured hope of sage Felicias words, she did not let it
pass out of her mind, but thought, that after so many travels, Fortune would
be weary at the last of troubling her any more: And these imaginations
supported her somewhat in the greatest torments of her desire. But traveling
one morning on her way, through the mids of a wood, and at the going out of
certain thick bushes which appeared from the top of a high hill, she beheld
before her a most pleasant and green Champaine that lay all along beneath the
hill, and of such length, that she could scarce see to the end of it; for
twelve miles right out it butted upon the bottoms of certain hills, that might
hardly be discerned. Through the mids of this pleasant plain a goodly river
ran, which in many places made fresh and fair banks on both sides, whereon
grew thick Birches, green Sicamours, and diverse other trees; and in other
places leaving the cristalline waters discovered to the wandering view, and in
some (brinked with sandy plats) did from a far off more bravely beautify the
fair river banks. The grain which was sown in all those fields, was at hand
to yield up the desired fruit, and by reason of the fertile soil was very
well grown: which being moved by a little gale of wind, waued up and down
some in green, and some in yellow colors, which made most pleasant shades and
delightful objects to the greedy eye. The green and delectable vale was in
some places three miles broad, and in others a little more, and in none less
then this. The fair Shepherdess therefore coming down her way from the hill
above, entered into a great wood full of Sicamours and wild Olive trees; in
the mids whereof were many stately houses so sumptuously built, that they
made her not a little to marvel: And lifting up her eyes on a sudden, there
appeared to her sight a great and fair City, which being full of fair houses
and stately buildings, from the top of a rockie hill that was right before her,
reached in breadth with the walls to the great river that ran through the mids
of the plain. The buildings of that famous city were high, and wrought with
as great art, as human industry could devise. Amongst the which were many
towers, Pyramydes, and shining pinnacles, reared up to the skies. The Temples
were many, and sumptuous, the houses strong, the walls lofty and strongly
embattelled; the bulwarks thick and full of munition: so that excelling in
stately structure and even proportion, it made a fair show, and gave a goodly
glory to the great and ancient City: all which from that place she severally
beheld. The Shepherdess was amazed to see that brave sight, and on the sudden
to be so near so fair a City; from whence, as from all other popular
concurse with great care she endeavored to fly. And yet she could not choose,
but sat her down a little under the shadow of an Olive tree, to behold from
thence all in particular which you have heard; and seeing that populous City,
great Soldina her native City and Country came to her musing thoughts; from
whence, the love that she bare Don Felix had exiled her, which was an occasion
not to make her pass it out of her memory without tears, because the
remembrance of a good thing lost, does for the most part offer occasions of no
less. But the fair Shepherdess leaving that place and city on the right
hand, went softly on by a path hard by the river toward that part, where the
Cristalline waters with a gentle and pleasant noise run smoothly into the
Ocean. And having gone six miles by the pleasant banks of that river, she
espied two Shepherdesses at the foot of a great Oak near to the river side,
passing away the heat of the day, both which (though they were but meanly
fair) yet in sweet favor and gentle behavior, were passing gracious. The
hew of their faces was a nutbrowne sanguine, but amiable, the color of their
hair, a dark browne-abram; their eyes and eiebrowes black, and yet of a
sweet and mild aspect in their countenances. Upon their hands they had
several garlandes of green Iuie, tied up together with many roses and sweet
flowers. The fashion of their attire seemed to her to be different from any
other kind of apparel, that she had seen till that time. But one of them
rising up in great haste, to drive a flock of sheep out of a flax field,
where they had broken in, and the other going to drive her goats to the river
to drink, they went and sat them down again under the shadow of that leafie
Oak. Felismena, that had hid her self in a plat of high bulrushes, and so
near to the Shepherdesses, that she might well hear what passed between
them, understood that the language they spoke, was the Portugal tongue, and that
the kingdom wherein she was, was Portugal; for one of the Shepherdesses
taking the other by the hand with a sweet grace in her own tongue said thus to
the other. Ah my Duarda, what small reason have thou to despise him, who loves
thee more then himself? How better beseeming thee were it, not so ill to
entreat a thought that is so much employed in thy perfections? It greeues me
that so fair a Shepherdess should be so far from pitying him that has so
great need thereof. The other, that seemed to be more at liberty, with a
certain disdain, and a fillippe of her hand (a common note of careless and
free minds) answered her thus. Will thou have me tell thee, Armia? If I should
trust him another time, who has so ill apaied the love I bare him, he shall
not bear the blame of the ill, that I shall procure by mine own desire, but
my self. Lay not before mine eyes the services, that this Shepherd has
sometimes done me, nor tell me the reasons that he gives thee to move me, for
the time is now past, when they once helped him. He promised to marry me, and
behold he has married another. What would he now have? Or what pretendes this
enemy of my quiet rest? What, now that his wife is dead, would he have me
marry him? O God forbid that I should do my self so great injury. Let him
go, Armia, let him go: for if he loves me so much as he says, this love shall
serve me for a renenge of his deep deceit. The other joining her smiling face
to Duardas srowning countenance, and lovingly embracing her, with mild and
gentle words replied thus. How well has all becomen thee, gracious
Shepherdess, which thou have said? I would never desire to be a man, but even
now, to love thee more then mine own self. But tell me, Duarda, why art thou
so desirous to have Danteus lead so sorrowful a life? He says, the reason
that thou have to complain of him, serves him for his excuse. For, before he
married, being with thee one day near to the hedge of Fremoselle, he said
unto thee. Duarda, my father will marry me, what is thy advise in this matter?
And that thou did answer him roughly. How now Danteus? Am I so old, or have
I so great power over thee, that thou do ask my opinion and leave for thy
marriage? Thou may do what thou list, and what thine own will and thy
fathers shall oblige thee to: for in the like case I my self would do no
less: And this was spoken with an estranged countenance, and not with that
woonted kind of mild and gentle speech, but as if it had been quite past thy
memory, that thou did once love him well. Call thou this an excuse (said
Duarda) If I knew thee not Armia, so well as I do, thy wisdom and discretion
should hazard their credit with me. What should I answer a Shepherd, who
published every where, that there was nothing in the world whereon he would cast
an affectionate eye, but on me, how much more then, that Danteus was not so
ignorant, but that he understood by my countenance and manner of my words,
that with my will I would not have answered him, as I did. What a mockery was
this (I pray thee Armia) for him to meet me one day before this came to pass,
near to the fountain, and with many tears to say thus unto me. Why are thou
so ungrateful (Duarda) to the good will which I bear thee, that thou will not
be married to me without thy fathers consent? when time (thou know) will
wear out the anger, that they may conceive thereof. Whom I then answered thus.
Content thy self Danteus, that I am thine, and that I can never be any others,
whatsoever shall befall unto me. And thy word and promise, which thou have
given me to be my husband, contents me well enough: desire not then, in respect
of staying a little time longer, a thing, whereof such mischief may ensue. At
which words he took his leave, telling me the next day that his father would
marry him, and requesting me to give him leave, and not content with this, but
to be married in deed three days after. Do thou not therefore think this
(Armia) a sufficient reason for me, to use the benefit of that liberty, which
with such trouble of my thoughts I have at last obtained? These are things
(said the other) soon spoken and passed between the truest lovers, but must
not be taken so much at the heart, nor so narrowly interpreted, as thou do
understand them. For those, which are spoken, thou have reason, Armia; but for
those that are done, thou see it well enough, if they touch not our souls
too near, that love well. In the end Danteus married, and it greeues me not a
little, that so fair a Shepherdess lived so small a time, and more, to see
that one whole month after her burial being scarce past, new thoughts began
to occupy his mind again. God took her away (said Armia) to the end that
Danteus might be thine, for indeed he could be no others but thine. If this be
so (said Duarda) that he that is ones, cannot be another, I find my self now
to be mine own; and therefore cannot be Danteus his. But let us leave of a
thing not worth the loss of time that is spent about it, which shall be better
employed in singing a song: And then both of them in their own tongue with a
sweet grace began to sing that which follows.

TImes change and shall (as we do see)
And life shall have an end:
But yet my faith shall ever be
Whereon my eyes depend.
The days, and moments, and their scope,
The hours with their changes wrought,
Are cruel enemies to hope,
And friends unto a loving thought.
Thoughts still remain, as we do see,
And hope shall have an end;
But yet my faith shall not leave me,
Her honor to defend.
Inconstancy in trust contrived,
Causes great danger in conclusion,
And life that is of hope deprived,
Stands not in fear of disillusion.
Times go and come, as we do see,
And life shall have an end,
But yet my faith shall never be
Distan'd for foe or friend.
This song being ended, Felismena came out of the place, where she had hid
herself, directly to that place where the Shepherdesses were, who amazed at
her sudden sight, but more at her rare grace and beauty, went to her, and with
loving embracings welcomed her, asking her of what country she was, and from
whence she came. To which demaundes fair Felismena could not answer, but with
many tears asked them what country that was, wherein they now where. For by
her own tongue she clearly made them know, that she was of Vandalia, and that
for a certain mishap she was banished from her country. The Portugal
Shepherdesses with their pitiful tears did the best they could to comfort
her, being very sorry for her exile, a common thing to that nation, and more
proper to the inhabitants of that province. And Felismena asking them what
city that was, which she had left, where the river with his christalline
streams, and speedy course came running on with great force: and because she
also desired to know, what castle that Montemayor was, which was situate on
the hill, higher then the rest, and many other demands, one of them called
Duarda, told her, that the city was Coymbra, one of the most famons and
principal cities, not only of that kingdom, but of all Europe, for the brave
territories and fields about it, which that great river (called Mondego)
watered with his cleerest waters. And that all those fields, where with great
swiftnes it ran, were called the fields of Mondego: And that the castle
which she saw before her, was the ancient light and glory of Spain; which
name (she said) did better fit it, then the right name of it, because in the
mids of the infidelity of Marsilius the Mahometicall king, who had so many
years encompassed it with a cruel and continual siege, it did ever so
strongly defend it self, that it was always the conqueror, and never
subdued, and that it was called in the Portugal tongue Montemor, or Velho,
where the virtue, valor, wisdom, and magnanimity remained for trophies of
the noble deeds, that the Lords and Knights of it did in those days, and that
the Lords and Ladies that now dwelt in it, flourished in all kind of virtues,
and commendable parts. And so did the Shepherdess tell her many other things
of the fertility of the foil, of the antiquity of the buildings, of the
riches of the inhabitants, of the beauty, discretion, and virtues of the
Nymphs and Shepherdesses, and of the aptnes and actiuitie of the jolly
Shepherdes, that dwelt about that impregnable castle: All which things did put
Felismena in great admiration. But the Shepherdesses requesting her to eat
something (because they thought she needed it) she thankfully accepted their
courteous offer. And whiles she was eating that which the Shepherdesses had set
before her, they saw her shed so many tears, that caused no small sorrow in
them both. And desirous to ask her the cause of them, they were hindered by the
voice of a Shepherd, that came sweetly singing to the tune of his Rebecke,
whom the Shepherdesses knew to be the Shepherd Danteus, for whom Armia pleaded
so much to the gracious Duarda for pity and pardon. Who said to Felismena.
Although these are but homely cates (fair Shepherdess) and country
Shepherdesses fare, yet falls it out to be a dinner for a Princess, for thou
did but little think when thou came hither, to dine with music. There is
not any music in the world (said Felismena) that pleases me better then thy
sight and conversation, gracious Shepherdess, which by greater reason makes me
think, that I am a princess, then the music thou talkest of. These words
should be adressed (said Duarda) to one of more worth, and higher deserts then
I am, and that had a riper wit, and deeper conceit to understand them. But
howsoever I am, to my poor ability, thou shall find an earnest will and an
unfeigned affection in me ready to do thee all the service it may. Ah Duarda
(said Armia to her) how discreet art thou, and how might thou not win the
only praise of wisdom, if thou were not cruel? Is there any woman in the
world like thee herein, who of purpose art offering occasions of impertinent
speech, and to busy thy head with other matters, because thou have no list to
harken to the woeful Shepherd that by doleful song is breathing out his
sorrows and mishaps. Felismena understanding what that Shepherd was by Armias
words, prayed them to be still and to give ear unto him, who to the tune of
his Rebecke did in his own tongue sing this song following.

Sighs, since you lighten not my heart,
Why go you not, why stay you still?
For in the end hope does impart
Aremedie unto mine ill.
Yet hope to help me never stood,
Where reason works all in vain:
Nor ever promised so much good,
As cruelty does give me pain.
But love and trust give me an art,
And quality of such a skill,
That neither hope reuiues my heart,
Nor cruelty the same does kill.
Mine eyes you need not then complain,
With which her fair ones I have seen,
And what need you to fear again,
Since viewed by her you have been?
And therefore change shall have no part,
Nor entrance in my constant will,
Though cruelty does kill my heart,
Or whether hope remains still.
The Shepherds music pleased Felismena better then the Shepherdesses meat,
for she thought the song was made to complain more of his own grief, then to
lament an others. And as he made an end, she said. Shepherd, it seems thou
have truly learned by my ils to complain of thine own. Unfortunate woman,
that can neither hear, nor see any thing, which sets not before me the small
reason I have, to desire life. But yet God grant I may so long enjoy it, until
mine eyes may see the cause of their burning tears. Think thou fair
Shepherdess (said Armia to her) that these words deserve not to be heard, and
that the heart, from whence they came forth, to be more esteemed then this
Shepherdess regards them? Talk not said Duarda of his words, talk of his
works; speak not of his dittie, but of his deeds, for by them his intent and
meaning is to be judged. If thou do enamour thy self of songs, and
delightest in Sonets compacted of industry of fine and flattering words;
Think not, that I do so: for as they are things wherein I take least pleasure;
so by them I less persuade me of the love he bears me. Felismena then
favoring Duardas reason, said. Behold Armia, how many ils might be avoided,
and great mischiefs not effected, if we would not hearken to smooth and filed
speeches, and lightly credit words framed by free hearts: for, by nothing else
they show their properties more, then by a cunning and false tale, uttered by
an eloquent and fine tongue; that when we think it most true, there is nothing
more false. Unhappy me, that could not in time help my self with this
counsel. But by this time was the Porugall Shepherd come where the
Shepherdesses were, who in his own language said to Duarda. If the tears of
these eyes, and the sighs of this my heart are not sufficient (Shepherdess) to
mollify that hardness, wherewith thou do so ill entreat me, I require
nothing else, but that my company may not be troublesome unto thee in these
fields, and that the sorrowful verses (which my grief makes me sing, like to
the dying swanne near to this river) may be no occasion of thy miscontent and
trouble. Pass away (fair Shepherdess) the parching heat of the day under
the shade of these green Osiars, for thy swain will drive thy goats to the
river to drink, and tarry with them, while they are washing themselves in the
cristalline waters. Kembe and adresse (lovely Shepherdess) thy silk soft
hair upon the brinke of this clear fountain, from whence issues out the
running brook, that round about waters this sweet meadow: And in the mean
time I will carry thy fair flocks to feed, and keep thy sheep from going
into the corn, that grows along the river side. I pray thee (sweet
Shepherdess) take no care for anything, for I have no rest all the while that
I am not traveling about thy business. If this seems to thee but a small token
of love, tell me then, wherein I may show the good will and entire affection
that I bear thee? For no especial love does wrong (to speak the truth) in
anything whereof it offers any experience at all. Danteus having made an end,
the Shepherdess Duarda answered him thus. If it be true (Danteus) that there
is any love in the world, I have borne it thee, and as great, as thou thy self
know. Never any of these Shepherds, that bring their flocks to seed in the
fields of Mondego, and to drink in these clear waters, obtained so much as
one only word of me, whereby thou might have occasion to complain of
Duarda, nor of the love that she has ever showen thee. Thy tears, and burning
sighs have never touched any nearer at the heart then me. The day, mine eyes
beheld thee not, could not see anything that pleased them. The bullocks that
thou did keep, were of more account to me, and I had a greater care of them,
then of mine own. And (for the most part) fearing, least the keepers of this
delightful Champaine might hinder their feed, I went to the top of this little
hill, to see if I could epsy them, whereas I brought mine in place, when they
could not feed the grass of these fair river banks, without fear of being
impounded. And I was not afraid to put my self in this subjection and danger,
to put thee in assurance and safety. I know well, that of this my subject and
apparent kind of love thy affiance did arise; and of thy affiance, that which
thou do. Thou did marie Andresa (whose soul is now in glory) a thing
that in times past, made me to die for grief: but I prayed to God, that I
might see my self at last revenged of her and thee, and after thy marriage I
have suffered that, which thou and others sufficiently know: And in the end my
Fortune has concluded, that thine shall give me no more pain and care. Let me
then enjoy my liberty, and hope not to regaine that with me, which by thine
own folly and default thou have so fondly lost.

The Shepherdess having made an end of her sharp answer, and Felismena
beginning to arbitrate the matter between them; they heard a great noise in the
other side of the meadow, like to the sound of blows, and smiting of swords
upon harneies, as if some armed men had fought together, so that all of them
with great haste ran to the place, where they heard the noise, to see what
the matter was. And being come somewhat near, they saw in a little Island,
(which the river with a round turning had made) three knights fighting against
one. And although he defended himself valiantly, by showing his approved
strength and courage, yet the three knights gave him so much to do, that he was
feign to help himself by all the force and policy he could. They fought on
foot, for their horses were tied to little trees, that grew thereabouts. And
now by this time, the knight that sought all alone and defended himself, had
laid one of them at his feet with a blow of his good sword, which ended his
life: But the other two that were very strong and valiant, redoubled their
force and blows so thick on him, that he looked for no other thing then
death. The Shepherdess Filismena seeing the knight in so great danger, and if
she did not speedily help him, that he could not escape with life, was not
afraid to put hers in ieopardy, by doing that, which in such a case she
thought, she was bound to perform: wherefore putting a sharp headed arrowe
into her bow, she said unto them: Keep out knights, for it is not beseeming
men that make account of this name and honor, to take advantage of their
enemies with so great odds. And aiming at the sight of one of their helmets,
she burst it with such force, that the arrow running into his eyes, came out of
the other side of his head, so that he fell down dead to the ground. When the
distressed knight saw two of his enemies dead, he ran upon the third with such
force, as if he had but then begun the combat; but Felismena helped him out of
that trouble, by putting another arrow into her bow, the which transpiercing
his armor, she left under his left pap, and so justly smot his heart, that this
knight also followed his two companions. When the Shepherds and the knight
beheld what Felismena had done, and how at two shootes she had killed two such
valiant knights, they were all in great wonder. The knight therefore taking
off his helmet, and coming unto her said. How am I able (fair Shepherdess)
to requite so great a benefit, and good turn, as I have received at thy hands
this day, but by acknowledging this debt for ever in my grateful mind. When
Felismena beheld the knights face, and knew him, her senses were so troubled,
that being in such a trance she could scarce speak, but coming to her-selfe
again, she answered him. Ah my Don Felix, this is not the first debt, wherein
thou art bound unto me. And I cannot believe, that thou will acknowledge this
(as thou say) no more then thou have done greater then this before. Behold
to what a time and end my fortune and thy forgetnesse has brought me, that
she that was wont to be served of thee in the city with Tilt and Tourneyes,
and honored with many other things, whereby thou did deceive me, (or I
suffered my self to be deceived) does now wander up and down, exiled from
her native country and liberty, for using thus thine own. If this brings
thee not into the knowledge of that which thou owe me, remember how one whole
year I served thee as thy page in the Princess Cesarinas Court: and how I was
a solicitor against my self, without discovering my self, or my thoughts unto
thee, but onley to procure thy remedy, and to help the grief, which thine
made thee feel. How many times did I get thee favors from thy mistress Celia
to the great cost of my tears and greefes: all which account but small Don
Felix in respect of those dangers (had they been insufficient) wherein I would
have spent my life for redress of thy pains, which thy injurious love
affoorded thee. And unless thou art weary of the great love, that I have borne
thee, consider and weigh with thy self the strange effects, which the force of
love has caused me to pass. I went out of my native country, and came to
serve thee, to lament the ill that thou did suffer, to take upon me the
injuries and disgraces that I received therein; and to give thee any content, I
cared not to lead the most bitter and painful life, that ever woman lived. In
the habit of a tender and dainty Lady I loved thee more then thou can
imagine, and in the habit of a base page I served thee (a thing more contrary
to my rest and reputation then I mean now to rehearse) and yet now in the
habit of a poor and simple Shepherdess I came to do thee this small service.
What remains then more for me to do, but to sacrifice my life to thy
louelesse soul, if with the same yet, I could give thee more content: and if
in lieu thereof thou would but remember, how much I have loved, and do yet
love thee: here have thou thy sword in thy hand; let none therefore, but thy
self revenge the offense that I have done thee. When the Knight heard
Felismenas words, and knew them all to be as true as he was disloyal, his heart
by this strange and sudden accident recovered some force again to see what
great injury he had done her, so that the thought thereof, and the plenteous
effusion of blood that issued out of his wounds, made him like a dead man fall
down in a swoune at fair Felismenas feet. Who with great care, and no less
fear, laying his head in her lap, with showers of tears that rained from her
eyes, upon the Knights pale visage, began thus to lament. What means this
cruel Fortune? Is the periode of my life come just with the last end of my
Don Felix his days? Ah my Don Felix (the cause of all my pain) if the
plenteous tears, which for thy sake I have shed, are not sufficient: and these
which I now distill upon thy lovely cheeks, too few to make thee come to thy
self again, what remedy shall this miserable soul have to prevent, that
this bitter joy by seeing thee, turn not into occasion of utter despair. Ah
my Don Felix, Awake my love, if thou do but sleep, or be in a trance,
although I would not wonder if thou do not, since never any thing that I
could do, prevailed with thee to frame my least content. And in these and other
lamentations was fair Felismena plunged, whom the Portugal Shepherdesses with
their tears and poor supplies, endeavored to encourage, when on the sudden
they saw a fair Nymph coming over the stony causey that lead the way into the
Island, with a golden bottel in one hand, and a silver one in the other, whom
Felismena knowing by and by, said unto her. Ah Doria, could any come at this
time to succor me, but thou fair Nymph? Come hither then, and thou shall see
the cause of al my troubles, the substance of my sighs, and the object of my
thoughts, lying in the greatest danger of death that may be. In like occurrents
(said Doria) virtue and a good heart must take place. Recall it then (fair
Felismena) and revive thy daunted spirits, trouble not thy self any more, for
now is the end of thy sorrows, and the beginning of thy contentment come.
And speaking these words, she besprinkled his face with a certain odoriferous
water which she brought in the silver bottle, whereby he came to his memory
again, and then said unto him. If thou will recover thy life, Sir Knight, and
give it her that has passed such an ill one for thy sake, drink of the water
in this bottle: The which Don Felix taking in his hand, drunk a good draught,
and resting upon it a little, found himself so whole of his wounds, which the
three knights had given him, and of that, which the love of Celia had made in
his breast, that now he felt the pain no more, which either of them had caused
in him, then if he had never had them. And in this sort he began to rekindle
the old love, that he bare to Felismena, the which (he thought) was never more
zealous then now. Whereupon sitting down upon the green grass, he took his
Lady and Shepherdess by the hands, and kissing them many times said thus
unto her. How small account would I make of my life (my dearest Felismena) for
cancelling that great bond, wherein (with more then life) I am for ever bound
unto thee: for since I enjoy it by thy means, I think it no more then right,
to restore thee that, which is thine own. With what eyes can I behold thy
peerless beauty, which (though unadvisedly) I knew not to be such, yet how
dare I (for that which I owe thee) cast them in any other part? What words are
sufficient to excuse the faults, that I have committed against thy faith, and
firmest love, and loyalty? Wretched and accursed for ever shall I be, if thy
condition and clemency be not inclined to my favor, and pardon: for no
satisfaction can suffice for so great an offense, nor reason to excuse me for
that, which thou have to forget me. Truth it is, that I loved Celia well, and
forgot thee, but not in such sort that thy wisdom and beauty did ever slide
out of my mind. And the best is, that I know not wherein to put this fault,
that may be so justly attributed to me; for if I will impute it to the young
age that I was then in, since I had it to love thee, I should not have wanted
it to have been firm in the faith that I owed thee. If to Celias beauty, it
is clear, that thine did far excel hers and all the worlds besides. If to
the change of time, this should have been the touchstone which should have
showed the force and virtue of my firmenes. If to injurious and traiterous
absence, it serves as little for my excuse, since the desire of seeing thee
should not have been absent from supporting thy image in my memory. Behold
then Felismena, what assured trust I put in thy goodness, that (without any
other means) I dare put before thee, the small reason thou have to pardone me.
But what shall I do to purchase pardon at thy gracious hands, or after thou
have pardoned me, to believe, that thou art satisfied: for one thing greeues me
more then any thing else in the world, and this it is. That, though the love
which thou have borne me, and wherewith thou do yet bless me, is an occasion
(perhaps) to make thee forgive me, and forget so many faults: yet I shall never
lift up mine eyes to behold thee, but that every injury, which I have done
thee, will be worse then a mortal incision in my guilty heart. The Shepherdess
Felismena, who saw Don Felix so penitent for his passed misdeedes, and so
affectionately returned to his first thoughts, with many tears told him, that
she did pardon him, because the love, that she had ever borne him, would suffer
her to do no less: which if she had not thought to do, she would never have
taken so great pains and so many weary iourneyes to seek him out, and many
other things, wherewith Don Felix was confirmed in his former love. Whereupon
the fair Nymph Doria came then to the Knight, and after many loving words and
courteous offers in the Lady Felicias behalf passed between them, she
requested him and fair Felismena to go with her to Dianas Temple, where the
sage Lady (with great desire to see them) was attending their coming. Don
Felix agreed thereunto, and taking their leave of the Portugal Shepherdesses
(who wondered not a little to see what had happened) and of the woeful
Shepherd Danteus, mounting upon the horses of the dead Knights that were slain
in the late combat, they went on their way. And as they were going, Felismena
told Don Felix with great joy, what she had past since she had last seen him,
which made him to marvel very much, and especially at the death of the three
Savages, and at the Palace of the sage Lady Felicia, and success of the
Shepherds and Shepherdesses, and at every thing else contained in this book.
And Don Felix wondered not a little to understand how his Lady Felismena had
served him so many days as his page, and that he was so far gone out of his
wits and memory, that he knew her not all that while. And his joy on the other
side, to see that his Lady loved him so well, was so great, that by no means
he could hide it. Thus therefore riding on their way, they came to Dianas
Temple, where the sage Felicia was looking for their coming: and likewise the
Shepherd Arsileus, and Belisa, Syluanus, and Seluagia, who were now come
thither not many days before. They were welco^med on every side, and with
great joy entertained; but fair Felismena especially, who for her rare virtues
and singular beauty was greatly honored of them all. There they were all
married with great joy, feasts, and triumphs, which were made by all the
goodly Nymphs, and by the sage and noble Lady Felicia; the which Syrenus with
his coming augmented not a little, of whom, and of the Portugal Shepherds
Danteus, and Duarda, more shall be spoken in the second part of this book.

The end of the seven Books of Diana of George of Montemayor.
THE FIRST BOOK OF THE SECOND PART OF DIANA OF George of Montemayor.
Written by Alonso Perez.
ALthough it was not otherwise possible, but that the joy of these happy
Lovers was very great, since fortune had now lifted them up to so high a degree
of content, and happiness, as they themselves could not wish for more, (every
one possessing his only desire) yet I think that Felicias was not any whit
less then theirs, by seeing her self visited by so worthy a company, and
that by her only means they enjoyed such wished rest: And the rather, for
that she was more capable to feel this joy, by reason of the excellency of
her wit, the mature judgment whereof, the more it was higher then theirs, the
more it made the internal powers and works of the soul more perfect and
absolute. So that if the sage Lady had only regarded her pleasure and content
(forgetting what was conueeient for every one of them) she would not have
requested them to come to her Palace again: but being so careful for those
things, which were most needful for them, by neglecting her own will and
desire, she provided for every one in particular. Whereupon (certain days
being past, in which she had entertained them with most royal and sumptuous
feasts, and small they were not, since she was mightier in operations then
others in imaginations) she bethought her of Arsileus, and of his dear love
Belisa, and therewithal remembered how needful it was for them to go visit
and comfort their aged parents, who passed many a doubtful and sorrowful
thought for them, Arsenius especially father unto Arsileus, whom she had now
remedied and rid from the love, which so lately had made him dote on fair
Belisa. Who therefore giving the Lady Felicia infinite thanks for the
benefits, and loving entertainment they had received at her hands, and taking
their leave of the Lords, Ladies, Nymphs, and Shepherdes that were there, the
next day following went to their own town. And not many days after, Felicia
one night after supper said thus to Syluanus and Seluagia. I could not choose
but blame you fortunate Shepherdes, for the small care you have of your
flocks, if I my self were not in fault, because you have never asked after
them in all this time, nor (I think) once remembered them, fearing lest by
reason of your absence, they have been in great want, and not without cause,
being not carried to feed at convenient times upon the green and sauorie
grass, nor (at their need) driven to the clear springs to quench their
burning thirst, nor with wonted love put into the cool and pleasant shades:
And seeing that with familiar and gentle hand they are not eased of the burden
of their fruitful bags, that swell with abundance of white milk, and that
with the accustomed and known voice of their loving Shepherds they are not
called to lick the smooth peebles of the sauourie salt; nor that your sweet
Bagpipes (seconded with many amorous Ditties, which not long since made there
the woods and dales to ring) have sounded in their ears: It is therefore
convenient that to morrow you depart at the rising of purple Aurora the
foreteller of speedy Phoebus, whereof I put you in mind, at this time
especially, because your absence from them before was not so great, that you
needed to be told thereof. Which departure of yours I would not have you
think is to any other end, but to set some order in your affairs, that at
your pleasure you may the sooner return hither again, assuring you that
elsewhere you shall not be better entertained with deeds, then here with heart
and good will. And your return shall only be to solace your selves in the
company of Don Felix, and Felismena, whose time is not yet come to depart.
Wherefore I pray you go about it, for setting all things in good order
touching your flocks and domestical affairs, you may do the other the
better; yet promising you, that before you come to your dwelling places, you
shall find those that can look well to your flocks, if you will at the lest
commit them to their charge: and who will most willingly take it upon them. Let
your return (therefore) be with as much speed as may be, which shall result
to your own profit, and to their pleasure with whom you shail pass away the
time here. Syluanus and Seluagia had their eyes so fastened on the maiesticall
countenance of the Sage Lady, perceiving her speech to be only addressed to
them, that with great reverence they rose out of their places, and gave a
diligent ear unto her, because they might better understand the meaning and
effect thereof. For otherwise seldom were their eyes carried away into any
other part, but to look upon one another, unable to remove them (the least
time that might be) from thence, wherein each others soul had no small
portion, and thinking it stealth, to remove their thoughts from that entire
affection, whereof their mutual hearts had so sure possession. Whereupon the
sage Ladies speech being ended, both of them turned their amorous eyes to each
other again, Syluanus making loving signs to Seluagia to answer the Ladies
intent. To whom with a seemly blush, as partly ashamed thereat, she said in
this sort. It is now no time (my dear Syluanus) to use circumstances of such
art, when there is no cause, neither do they well beseem this place. For
though their usage to all women is commendable, yet not in particular, for the
husband to his wife, and in such sort as if he went about to prefer her
before himself. For after that the woman has delivered herself into the
possession of her husband, she therewithal yields up to his jurisdiction the
title of her liberty, by the sweet and sacred bond of marriage. Whereupon I
shall see the love thou bear me, if thou use this pleasant bond according
to the just laws thereof, by setting aside the superstitious vanities of
unlawful and wanton love. Syluanus had not let Seluagia escaped so smoothly
without an answer, if he had not thought it an indecent part to defer his to
the sage Lady. Wherefore giving a beck with his head to his Shepherdess in
token of thanks, and that he was well pleased, with her loving words, he
answered Felicia thus. Presupposing (sage Lady) that we must do all that you
command and set down, and that there is nothing more behoouefull for our
welfare, then your will, and pleasure, therein it lies to command us
whatsoever, I feeling no greater reprehension in mine own behalf, then that
which proceeds from your wise and loving advise, saying, that I have no care
of my flocks, nor thought of them at all: For though (I confess) I have not
remembered them as reason would I had done, yet cannot I therefore be justly
blamed, but rather think, that if I had done otherwise, I might have been in
greater fault. For it were not meet, since I have received such benefits in
your house, that I should forget one minute, that joy and content, wherewith
such sweet and pleasant thoughts are engendered and preserved, to think upon
those flocks that feed upon the unsavory grass. And you may also believe,
that if my few and silly sheep, nay if the whole world should perish, and be
lost, and that if it lay in my hands to help them both, in respect of
employing my high and happy thoughts (the least time that might be) on my fair
and virtuous Shepherdess, my sheep should remain without help, and the
world without succor. Seluagia that was not unskillful in paying such debts
with like coin again, an swered him thus. As it lies not in me, (my dear
friend) so will I not find fault with any thing thou do: which I speak to
this end, because thou should not use (as I told thee before) any more words
so apparently manifesting that love, whereof I doubt not: Although there is
nothing (if I must tell the truth, after the glory that I have conceived in my
joyful thoughts by being thine) that can please and content me more then to
see, how far by words and effect thy true love extends. For though some
say, That where deeds be, words are in vain, yet I take great pleasure in
hearing them, when they are by all probability correspondent unto deeds, and
especially in matters of love, whereof we now talk. For since the interior
part is a hidden and secret thing, and which is soonest discovered by words,
we must therefore not meanly account of them, that pretend to make the
interior known by th'exteriour. True it is that such words and outward acts
must be measured by the effects of him that pronounces them. For oftentimes we
see that many things are vttred by a false and deceitful tongue, which were
never meant in the heart. Which I speak not in preiddice of thy love (my dear
Shepherd) or to (...) thee of disloyalty, assuring that I am glad to hear thy
words, whereby (besides the certainty that I have of thy truest love) thou
make me the most contented woman in the world. And in this I take no small
glory, and that thy love (not able to contain it self within the soul)
flows out by the mouth, like the little pot which filled with water is hardly
set on the fire without running over. And because thou may not think to
overcome me in affection, I would wish that as love has given me deeds, it
had also lent me some words, to make a full satisfaction of those true signs
of thy unfeigned good will, which has brought me so much in thy debt. But since
they are so strange unto me, I must, with only offering that which I am able
to give, endeavor to discharge my self thereof. They all took great delight
to hear what amorous words passed between the Shepherdes, which had not
ended so soon, if Felicia had not cut them off, saying: That since the one was
satisfied and content with the others answer, their complements should now
cease, and turning to Syrenus, she said. And think not (free Shepherd) that I
have forgotten thee, for thou shall hereafter see woonders at my hands. I know
not any thing good Lady (said Syrenus) wherein I may truly say you have
forgotten me, since you have made me so much remember my self, that with
clear eyes I may easily discern, not only my follies past; but also those
which these Gentlemen and shepherds are so fondly fallen into. Every one
laughed at Syrenus words, to whom Felicia said. In sooth Syrenus, all are of
thy opinion, if not, ask thy corriuall Syluanus, and his beloved Seluagia. The
blind man (answered Syrenus) cannot judge of colors. Whom will thou have then
for judge (said Felicia?) Him (said Syrenus) that has the eyes of reason. And
who is he, said Felicia? If there be no other (said Syrenus) my self. So
would thou give sentence (said Felicia) in thine own favor; but know
thou not, that the judge is not admitted, when he is not free from passion? But
I am (said Syrenus.) Otherwise (said Felicia) thy judgment would not be
allowed. Not for me at the least (said Syrenus) though it be for others. Let
us leave this for some fitter time (said Felicia.) And (Syrenus) thou shall to
morrow accompany Syluanus and Seluagia home, because thou came in their
company hither, but with condition (as theirs is) of thy speedy return
again. Syrenus answered, that it pleased him well. It is well then, said
Felicia: and therefore let us go take our rest with some parting song to the
tune of thy free Rebecke, and Syluanus and Seluagia with their enamoured
Bagpipes shall answer thee. Then did Syluanus take his Bagpipe for Syrenus to
sing to it, and Syrenus his Rebecke to play to Syluanus when he had done. And
so Syrenus leading the song, began thus.

Syrenus. WHo has of Cupids cates and dainties prayed,
May feed his stomach with them at his pleasure:
If in his drink some ease he has essated,
Then let him quench his thirsting without measure:
And if his weapons pleasant in their manner,
Let him embrace his standard and his banner.
For being free from him, and quite exempted,
Joyful I am, and proud, and well contented.
Syluanus. Of Cupids dainty cates who has not prayed,
May be deprived of them at his pleasure:
If wormwood in his drink he has essated,
Let him not quench his thirsting without measure:
And if his weapons cruel in their manner,
Let him abjure his standard and his banner:
For I not free from him, and not exempted,
Joyful I am, and proud, and well contented.
Syrenus. Love's so expert in giving many a trouble,
That now I know not, why he should be praised:
He is so false, so changing, and so double,
That with great reason he must be dispraised:
Love (in the end) is such a iarring passion,
That none should trust unto his peeutsh fashion:
For of all mischief he is the only Master,
And to my good a torment and disaster.
Syluanus. Love's so expert in giving joy, not trouble,
That now I know not, but he should be praised:
He is so true, so constant, never double,
That in my mind he should not be dispraised:
Love (in the end) is such a pleassing passion,
That every one may trust unto his fashion:
For of all good he is the only Master,
And foe unto my harms, and my disaster.
Syrenus. Not in these sayings to be proou'd a lier,
He knows, that does not love, nor is beloved:
Now nights and days I rest, as I desire,
After I had such greefefrom me removed:
And cannot I be glad, since thus estranged,
My self from false Diana I have changed?
Hence, hence false Love I will not entertain thee,
Since to thy torments thou do seek to train me.
Syluanus. Not in these sayings to be proou'd a lier,
He knows, that loves, and is again beloved:
Now nights and days I rest in sweet desire,
After I had such happy fortune proved:
And cannot I be glad, since not estranged,
My self into Seluagia I have changed?
Come, come good Love, and I will entertain thee,
Since to thy sweet content thou seek'st to train me.
The rest of the company took great delight to hear the Shepherds sing, and
how contrary they were in their opinions, commending Syluanus his wit and skill
very much, which he showed in every point with the same terms to contradict
Syrenus. And after this, they went to sleep, the Shepherds then taking their
leave for their departure early in the morning, because rising betimes, not to
travel in the heat of the day, their visiting in the morning might not hinder
their quiet sleep. Felicia gave Doria in charge to fill their scrips that
night before with sufficient provision for their way, who like a friendly and
loving Nymph, that was never slack to serve their necessity, going about it
immediately, did put into the same good store of victuals.

The opprobrious and rude shame of the ignominious conjunction, had now thrust
out vermillion and purple Aurora to leave with her absence, the deformed little
old man in a solitary sadness, for fear of being espied by Phoebus: and the
little stars as most obedient, and of less force, with the coming of the
mounting Sun into our Hemisphere, hid themselves when the three Shepherds
went from Felicias rich palace toward their poor Cottages by their
accustomed and known ways: which with their pleasant and merry talk they
overcame, and made less painful, conferring together of bitter and sorrowful
memories of times past, and entermingling them with recital of the sweet and
joyful remedies of their former greefes, which by Felicias favors they
enjoyed, living now in a happy and wished estate.

But Clicies loving friend had scarce lifted up his chariot over the face of
the earth, when from the side of a hill they espied a Shepherd coming down
with a paper in his hand, staying between pace and pace, and unfolding it,
looked into it, and put it by and by into his bosom again, and without
playing on Bagpipe or Rebecke, began to sing this Sonnet.

A Sonnet.
FRom whence O Paper mine such happy favor,
That undeservedly thou must be placed
Before that flower that yeeldes the sweetest savor,
Which nature has with all her powers graced?
Thou shall the figure see (my loving Paper)
Where all the virtues make their wished dwelling,
And of the rest not any one escape her,
Graces, and gifts, and beauties most excelling.
Then when thou come before my heavenly treasure,
Say thus from me to her. He sends me hither,
Who lives to serve thee, whilst his life extends:
In only this his thoughts are musing ever:
In joy of this both nights and days he spends:
To serve thee is his only sport and pleasure.
At the very instant when the Shepherd made an end of his Sonnet, the three
Shepherds met with him, for they might well have come to the valley before,
where their way and the other Shepherds met both together in a cross path, but
that of purpose to hear him, they lingered out the time as they went; to whom
(after they had saluted him) they said. Since our Fortune has been so good
to us (jolly Shepherd) to make us take part of thy sweet Sonnet, do not thus
leave us in suspense, by hiding from us, what this happy paper contains. I am
content said (the Shepherd) upon condition (when you have read it,) you will
let me go without any more questions, as well for that I go in haste, as also
that it does not please me to give any further account and discovery of my
self. Syrenus taking the paper to read it, and seeing it was a letter said.
Tell us in brief (if it please thee) the contents heerof, because thou know
how hardly (otherwise) the ground and meaning of letters are understood. No
more (said the Shepherd) but this. A most fair young Shepherdess, to whom in
good qualities, and excellent parts I come nothing near (I will not speak of
the rest, since in these she has not her equal) for want of better company,
has vouchsafed to like of mine, whereupon she and I, to pass away the time,
have feined to play the parts of two true Lovers. Wherein, (when I took least
heed) I quickly perceived, that the faining of my side was turned to good
earnest (she remaining still in her former estate and liberty) and that her
jesting never made any true impression of love in her own heart, as it has
done in mine. The rest and almost all if thou will diligently read, or harken
unto, thou may easily gather. Syrenus then beginning to read it, saw that
it said thus.

Poor I that am not now for thee
(If any health I have to lend)
To thee, that have each part of me
All that I have, I mean to send.
Receive this letter left alone,
That to conuers all his to thine,
And not in any thing his own,
This only paper is behind.
Since I have given thee all the rest,
Thine honor it shall not gainstand,
To take a thing, that is the lest:
Apeece of paper at my hand.
So poor and base a thing as this,
Cannot offend thy mind so high:
Why then, it cannot be amiss,
To take and read it by and by.
But in the same if thou do find
Words written ill, and not well coucht,
Know, that my hand did like the wind
Tremble, when that my pen it touched.
The blots, which here thou see disgrace
My letter, making it to blame,
My tears they are, that fell apace,
Knowing to thee I wrote the same.
Read it, I pray thee, to the end:
And make an end of all my woes,
Open thine eyes to this I send,
And to my griefs give some repose.
And to the end thou may it reed,
It comes not from an Enemies breast,
But from a faithful heart indeed,
And from a friend above the rest.
It is no letter, that defies
(Defied for I am too much)
Alas in conquered men it lies
Not in their power to be such.
In endless peace I seek to live,
And on thy grace I do rely,
If not, the doom and sentence give
Unto my life condemned to die.
I have contended to this hour
Thy mighty forces to resist,
And now I find, thy only power
Does conquer (Mistress) as thou list.
It is not much, that in the field
Unto thy valor I give place,
Since that the God of love does yield
Himself, unto thy wounding face.
So that now subject Iremaine
Unto thy sou'raine force, I see,
Then wound me not, for it is in vain,
Since wholly I do yield to thee.
My life I put into thy hands,
And now do with me at thy will,
But yet behold, how pity stands
Entreating thee thou would not kill.
So shall thou make thy conquest brave,
If in thy spoils and triumphs, such
Remorse of pity thou will have,
Which all the world commends so much.
I saw thee sit not long ago
Feasting with joy and pleasant fare,
And I, because I could not so,
Did feed upon my woes and care.
There leisurely thou did begin
Of other cates and flesh to feed,
But I with haste did rauin in
My pains, wherewith my heart did bleed.
The River water thou did drink
With freest mind deuoid of care,
But I in fluds of tears did sink,
The which to drink I did not spare.
I saw thee with thy little knife
Cutting thy bread and meat again,
And then (me thought) my woeful life
Should in like sort be cut in twain.
A little Boy sat in thy lap,
Thou did embrace him with great joy:
Oh would it had been then my hap
To have been that same little Boy.
Thou gave to him a loving kiss:
What here I felt, I will repeat,
Let it suffice, that I was this
Most happy child, but in conceate.
But not contented with the same,
Marking the place where thou did lay
Thy lips, unto the child I came,
And took from him the kiss away.
Each thing of thine so well I love,
That if I see them to decay,
Me thinks, my care it does behoue
To save, to cast them not away.
For all the bones, which thou did leave,
With greedy stomach I did pick,
Because I only did conceive,
That they thy dainty mouth did lick.
The place I marked of the pot,
That did thy Coral lips divide,
When thou did drink, and I did not
Forget to drink of that same side.
And with the wine which I did shed
Of purpose, on the cloth above:
Often (in vain) these words in red
My finger wrote: I love, I love:
(Disdainful) thou do not esteem
These signs, nor these in ductions know,
Or do at least (as it does seem
Dissemble: it must needs be so.
And only that thou do dissemble,
Which might unto my profit fall,
But that which makes me now to tremble,
Alas, thou fainest not at all.
By seeing such effects in me,
That thou do cause my heaviness,
Thou fain'st, my plaintes are not for thee,
But for some other Shepher desse.
Thou see how for thy love I pain,
And at thy gracious feet I lie.
(To grecue me more) yet do thou feign,
That for another I do die.
But if thy beauties in great store
Engender pride of such excess,
Thou must believe, and feign no more,
That my pure love is no whit less.
If thy perfections do surpass
All beauties that the world does breed,
As much as Dimond passes glass,
So does my love all loves exceed.
And when thou come to know, that none
Is worthy of thy lovely grace,
Thou must not feign, that I am one,
That may deserve so sweet a place.
I am not worthy of so dear
A choice (I say) to be my lot,
Since all the world has not thy peer,
For that it self descrues thee not.
And though I said so (in a vain)
I shall not be believed, I know;
For well thou know what one does feign,
Is of a thing which is not so.
Distose of me even at thy will,
And feign as much as any one,
So thou believe, and feign not still,
That I love none, but thee alone.
Then on thy gentleness I call
In pity, which thou have forgot,
Thou would not mock my love at all,
Nor feign, that I do love thee not.
Great Jove can witness here to thee,
That it does grieve me not so much,
The little love thou bear to me,
As once to feign, that mine is such.
Nor it does grieve me of thy guise,
To see thee mock me in such sort:
Or that my things in any wise
May cause thy laughter and thy sport.
But it does glad me without measure,
That thou do mock my love so lost,
Since by such means I give thee pleasure:
(Although it be unto my cost.)
To make thee laugh, I do adjure
The heavens (as I thy love may joy)
That many times I do procure
To do, and tell thee many a toy.
And though I know none willomit
To call me fool (not without cause)
A simple man of little wit,
Sweruing too much from reasons laws:
Yet Shepherdess it skils me not,
Nor it does not my mind dismay
That all repute me for a sot,
So I may please thee any way.
Since that I cannot (Shepherdess)
With things in earnest please thy vain,
I will content thee (at the lest)
From hence with toies (though to my pain)
To thee they are but things in jest
(For so thou mean to take them all)
But ever to my painful breast
True they have proou'd, and so they shall.
Mock me thy fill, since thou do make
It all thy glee, thy sport, and laughter:
But I do wish, that Love may take
A narrow count of thee hereafter.
I once did also jest with love,
Love did I scoff, and love despise,
But to my pain I now do prove
What did thereof to me arise.
And this is that poor silly me
This wicked traitor brought unto;
But woe is me, that now with thee
I know not what he means to do.
With iestes and sports of thousand fashions
Two thousand favors thou did lend me,
But yet the God of love, to passions
In earnest turns them, to offend me.
With thine own hand (O what a thing)
In jesting did thou carue to me?
In jest thou said, and sometimes sing,
Mine only Shepherd thoushalt be.
O sweetest food of sauourie taste,
Of force my poor lafe to maintain:
Sweet words, whose sound did bind me fast,
Of force to give me rest again.
Both word, and deed, and what did pass
(Though but a merry jest it were yet)
So singular a grace it was,
That in my breast I cannot bear it.
To sickest men, to give great store
Of meat, and so much as they crave,
It is not good, but just no more,
Then it is meet for them to have.
Favors I crave by heaps of thee,
That thou would give me (Shepherdess)
But yet (perhaps) they may kill me,
For little force I do possess.
It hurts the driest field and meade,
As much to cast in them great plenty
Of water, as if they lay dead,
Of water, and of moisture empty.
So favors in the selfsame sort,
If that they have no rule, nor measure,
Suffice to make ones life more short,
As well as scorns, hates, and displeasure.
But in the end, and howsoever,
Take thy full joy, although I die.
Whether it be with death for ever,
Or with my life, I care not I.
Mock, and with me do what thou list,
And happen will, what happen may,
My will thy will shall not resist,
But thy command shall still obey,
Command me then to be thy love,
Command me in thy love to end,
And he that rules, and is above
All hearts, command thy heart to bend.
Since mighty Love commands my heart,
Of force thy lover I must be,
Join thou with love, and take his part,
Then all the world shall honor thee.
But I have written to be plain
Enough, since thou have not thy fill
By giving me continual pain,
Desiring yet to serve thee still.
But in the end now will I cease,
Although my torment does not end:
Desire is conquered by the fear
I have, thy patience to offend.
When Syrenus had made an end of reading this letter, the Shepherd took it out
of his hands, and without staying any longer, went his ways singing. That
which he sung, whilst they could hear him (giving great ear unto him) was to
the purpose of that, which he had told them before he showed them the letter.

A Sonnet.
I Played with Love, Love played with me again,
I mocked him, but I was mocked in deed,
He would not let my heart his art exceed:
For (though a Boy) yet mocks he does disdain.
A friend he is to those, that do not feign:
My iestes (it seems) do true affection breed:
And now, if Love is not revenged with speed,
My heart can witness that with earnest pain.
Go lovers then to jest it out apace
With this God Cupid but a boy, and blind,
And you shall see, if it be good or not?
Thinking to have delight, you shall have woe,
Seeking cold water, fire you shall find,
Who plays with boys, comes often to disgrace.
They marvelled not a little at the sweetenes of his song, and were no less
sorry, because they knew not what Shepherd he was; but seeing it was not then
possible to know him, they went on their nighest ways. Some haste they made to
pass away the heat of the day in that Island, where they found the desperate
Shepherdess Belisa, taking the same to be a more fresh and pleasant place, and
more quiet for their recreation then any other. Whereunto being come, they saw
how a little brook, covered almost all over with sweet and smelling herbs,
ran gently through a little green meadow amongst a rank of diverse trees,
that were nourished and maintained by the clear water; under the shadows of
which, as they were now determined to rest themselves, Syrenus said. Let us see
(if you think good) from whence this little spring does issue forth: It may
be the place is more fresh and cooler thereabouts; if not, or if we cannot
find out the fountain, from whence it flows, we will come hither again. It
liked his company well, and so they desired him to lead the way. Every place
and part, that all the brook upwards they troad on, invited them to pleasant
rest, being all alike to the very fountain, whereupon Seluagia said. If we
cannot find out the beginning of this spring, we shall not find (at the
least) any discontent for our selves, or suffer any trouble in returning back
again, since so convenient places (as better, and more pleasant we cannot wish
for our desired rest) in going up higher, are offered unto us. Having now gone
up a little along the running brook, and not found out the head, and that
every step (as I said) presented unto them a pleasant place of rest, they went
staying sometimes, and sometimes reasoning with themselves, where they might sit,
one of them saying: This place is more fresh: and another answering, no, but
this, let us sit down here, for this is more pleasant: no, but here (said
another:) So that the pleasant object of every place held them in such
suspense, that none of them could choose out the best. But resolving at the
last upon one, they took the scrips of their shoulders, and passing their
sheepehookes from their left hands, they took them in their right to lay them
down to rest, when they saw, that with greater quantity of waters and fresher
shades of green trees the brook ran up higher; so that for a new hope, a new
air and place was objected to them. They had not yet scarce begun to go up a
little farther, when the brook forsaking her right course toward the left
hand, made them turn their steps back again, where they discovered a great
thicket, and spring of diverse trees. Coming to the which, they saw a very
narrow entrance, and somewhat long, whose sides were not of walls fabricated by
artificial hand, but made of trees by nature (the mistress of all things:) so
that the woody place was no less enobled and imbelished with the natural
verdure, then the stately chambers with embossed gold. For there was seen the
deadly Cypress, the triumphant Laurel, the hard Oak, the low sallow, the
invincible palm, the black and ruggie Elm, the Olive, the prickie Chestenut,
and the high Pineapple, one amongst another; whose bodies were bound about with
green Iuie and the fruitful vine, and beset with sweet Iesmines and many
other redolent flowers, that grew very thick together in that place. Amongst
the which many little birds (inhabitants of that wood) went leaping from bough
to bough, as in scornful cages, making the place more pleasant with their
sweet and silver notes. The trees were in such order set together, that they
denied not the golden sunbeames to have an entrance in between the boughs and
leaves, to paint forth the green ground with diverse colors, which
reuerberated from the flowers, that were never steadie in one place, by reason
that the mooueable leaves did disquiet them. This narrow way did also lead to a
little green, covered all over with fine grass, and not touched with the
hungry mouths of devouring flocks. At the side of it, was the fountain of
the brook, having a care, that that place should not dry up, sending forth on
every side her flowing waters. The water of this clear fountain came out of
a stony rock, which a great Oak with his hard roots did embrace, on either
side whereof stood two great Laurel trees. This fountain did rise toward
that place, where the sun begins to mount, declining somewhat to the
septentrionall part. The same rockie stone, whereby the water ran out, served
both for a mouth and channel, which was not wrought with the blow of the hard
Chesil; but by the continual running of the gentle water: and so it was in
some places a little more worn, then in others, being more soft, or (to say
more properly) less hard in one place then in another; and by reason of the
concauitie of the stone, there was seen an inequality, that represented a
more pleasant and gracious running, because it made the water come out more
merrily with high and low falls, representing certain cristalline in cleeres,
and shadows, a pleasant and delightful sight to the greedy eye. The water
fell into a fountain of the same rockie stone, wrought after the same form,
as the channel was: It was fouresquare, and every side was four foot in
breadth, and in depth six or a little more. The Petrenall was not right, to
smite fire with the blow of hard steel, because it was not black, but so
white, that had it not been for the hardness thereof, none would have thought,
but that it had been Alablaster. And though it was not so curiously cut out,
and wrought like marble, yet was it marvelous and strange for the turn it
served. And so for the clecrenes of the water, as also for the whitenes of the
rockie stone it was so christalline, that if any foul thing did fall therein,
it was so apparent to his sight that came thither, that (maugre his will) he
was forced not to suffer it to receive such injury, but to bring it again to
the former pureness: For which cause it was ever kept very clear, and clean.
The water ran out of it into an Island on both sides, to enuironne the green
plat, which was set round about with white Poplars, black Elmes, and green
Sallowes. It was in length about a hundred and fifty paces, and a hundred and
twenty in breadth. There was no entrance into it, but where the Shepheds went
in, and by another way right over against the same, made almost in the self
same form and fashion: for the thicknes of the trees stopped up all other
ways, and also because the water that ran by the sides, issuing toward the
side without in some places of that brook, did wax so broad between the place
of the trees, that by the plain it could not, by reason that it was somewhat
higher. Near to this fountain did the Shepherds sit under the shadow of a
braunchie Oak, and certain Laurel trees, and taking out some of those
victuals that Doria had provided for them (after they had rested themselves a
little) they overcame their importunate hunger, satisfying their appetites
sufficiently with the same: and because they had a good way to go that day,
they took not their rest, as much as the place and their desires did inuit
them; but before all the heat of the day was past (least the time should also
pass away with it) they were about to go from that place. But as they were
preparing themselves to rise, and to be gone, Syrenus said to Syluanus. It is
not reason Syluanus, that, living now in such joy and content, and in the
presence of thy beloved Seluagia, thou should let thy Bagpipe wax so dry;
nor, is it meet, that from this pleasant place (the friendly entertainment and
delights whereof thou have enjoyed) thou should depart, without requiting it
with the sweetness of thy melody, and song. With greater reason (answered
Syluanus) should the Hamadryades preseruers of these trees, and the Driades
inhabitours of these green woods complain of thee, that would go away,
without giving them some part of thy sweet harmony, and melodious voice. Let
us leave this courteous contention (said Syrenus) and do that which I request
thee, for the great reason which thou have to do it for that which I told thee
first, though thou will not (perhaps) for that, which I alleged last. For the
first indeed I cannot deny thee said Syluanus, but in faith I know not what to
sing, that might not grieve thee, that art so far from love, or offend me that
am so full of amorous thoughts, so that in the end I can sing nothing (unless
it be to mine own grief) but that which belongs thereunto. To hear thy
delicate songs, and enjoy the sweetness of thy voice (said, Syrenus) I will be
content with any thing: but since it must needs be in such sort, in thy song I
pray thee show, how far the firmnenes of thy love extends, which thou bear
to thy loving Shepherdess; for by occasion hereof I know she cannot, nor will
not choose but answer thee again, in whose sweet voice and song I shall take
no less delight, then in thine. I am content said Syluanus. And then thus he
began.

Syluanus. IT may fall out the heavens may turn at leisure,
And stay themselves upon the highest mountains:
And Ezla, and Mondego, at their pleasure.
With hasty course turn back unto their fountains:
And that the flax, or reed, laid to the fire,
May not consume in flames, but burn like wire:
But yet the day and time shall happen never,
When Syluan shall not love Seluagia ever.
Immediately without any entreatie, Seluagia, because she would not die in
Syluanus debt, nor be beholding to him in this respect, taking her Baggepipe
up, in this sort did answer him.

Seluagia. The ground shall first be void, nor trod, nor used,
Leesing her nature, and her proper being:
First shall the rain, and water be refused
Of plants, no moisture round about them seeing:
First shall our life with air be not sustained,
And first the food of hunger be disdained:
Before the world shall see a deed so heinous,
Seluagia not to love her dear Syluanus.
Syluanus. The presence of the wolf, that does devour
The silly lambs, in shades shall not be feared:
As little shall the hare, within her bovvre
The yalping hounds, nor hearts of lions teared;
Nor Mouse of Cat, All hate shall be extruded,
And loving peace tvvixt all shall be concluded:
But yet the time and day shall happen never
When Syluan shall not love Seluagia ever.
Seluagia. The flock of little chickes (the dams dear treasure)
Of ravening kites and gleades shall be eschevved:
The Partridge shall securely live in pleasure,
Of praying Goshauke being not pursued:
The pullaine shall not be of Fox molested,
But peace, and truce tvvixt all shall be suggested:
But never lies a deed in her so heinous,
As that Seluagia should forget Syluanus.
Syluanus. I say, while any part shall be maintained
Of thy Syluanus with blood and vital povvres,
And whilst each member of the same sustained
Shall be with soul, unto their latest hovvres;
And if (besides) the soul can love (expired)
When to the grave the body is retired,
In life, in death, else let him prosper never:
Syluan. sshall love his Shepherdess for ever.
Seluagia. I say, while living breath shall not be vvanting
In thy Seluagia, loving thee so truly:
And while her soul, within her body panting,
Shall make aboade, and govern it so duly:
And afterward, if that (the same deceased)
Body and soul may be in love increased,
In life, and death, and after death so heinous,
Seluagia shall for ever love Syluanus.
Syrenus being very glad for the contentment of their company, and to see them
both love one another with such mutual and great affection, and knowing that
it belonged to the duty of friendship, and (though he had refused) that they
would entreat him in the end to sing, without more ado, took his Rebecke and
sung thus.

THe Gods grant you to frolic in your hall,
His years, that so long time with nature strive,
And that in happy fortune you may live,
Free from all kind of sorrovves, great or small:
And in your love one hair may never fall
Of jealousy, a plague eid like a sieue.
Let heavens to temporal (...) their favors give.
Fire, air, sea, earth, and nature at your call.
The rot may never touch your soundest stocks,
Fear of the wolf your shades may not molest:
And vvily fox not fear your pretty lambs.
In plenty may increase your goodly stocks,
Two kids may yearly yeane your fruitful dams,
And your fair Evves with double tvvinlings blessed.
The Shepherds having made an end of their sweet songs, rose up, and casting
their hairy scrippes on their shoulders, staying themselves upon their knotty
sheephooks, began to go on their way. Who being comen out of that pleasant
place into a fair meade, to pass the time away, and lighten their travel and
length of their way, went inuenting and exercising diverse pastoral sports, of
which they made Seluagia judge between them both; sometimes throwing with
their slings at some white or mark, that they could epsy within their reach
upon the side of some hill or tree; sometimes trying with great dexterity the
goodness of their slings, to see, who could give the greatest crack with them;
sometimes striving who could throw his Sheepehooke farthest; sometimes
contending to pitch them nearest to some white, or Daisie in the way before
them, and whether of them with the strength of his arm could come nighest to
some other mark, as far as they could reach; and sometimes striving who
could smite a stone fardest with them. In this sort they passed the time and
wearines of their way, until the broad mantell of the dark night beginning
to ouerspred those plains and fields, made an end of their sports, and
warned them to take their rest, where they lodged that night. The next day in
the morning betimes, when the pretty birds with their warbling notes filling
the air (not yet fully clear) with harmony, foretold the coming of the
Vermillion morning, they began to make an end of their former journey. And now
did the sun cast down his beams hotter upon their heads, and with greater
heat showing his forces, when the three Shepherds came in sight of their
known fields, and plains, so often trodden of them before. Whereupon they now
began to know their wandering flocks, and amongst those Dianas sheep, although
they were mingled with the flocks of her unworthy husband Delius: And so as
Syluanus was saying, (These are the flocks of the ungrateful and disdainful
Shepherdess Diana, and of the Shepherd Delius, happy without desert) Seluagia
said. It is not good to go by and not salute Diana, if we find her there: And
so they went that way to seek her out, where they had not gone far, but they
saw her standing very sad, and leaning against a great Oak with her elbow
upon her sheepehooke, and her cheek upon the palm of her hand, whereby one
might have judged the care and sorrow that so much troubled her pensive mind.
After a little while (as though she was angry with herself for casting
her-selfe into so great a grief) she put her hand into her bosom, and took
out a fine little Baggepipe, the which putting to her mouth to play on it, in
that very instant, she threw it to the ground, and without more ado, sliding
down along the body of the tree, sat her down, as if for great feeblenes she
had not been able to stay herself on her feet, and casting out a sorrowful
sigh, and looking upon her harmless Baggepipe, she spoke these words. Accursed
Baggepipe, consuming fire burn thee, for the grief and anguish that thou have
given me. I brought thee with me to lighten and assuage my cruel sorrow, in
which duty thou have not only failed, but redoubled it the more. Thou shall
not then accompany me any more, for the ill requital of that love, wherewith
I did ever cherish thee. Now I am not any more for thee, nor thou to serve my
turn: There shall thou lie for the parching sun to open thee, making thee as
dry as I am comfortless; and for the rain to rotte thee, making thee as
moist as my cheeks, spunged with continual tears. Ah woe is me, how am I
deceived, in thinking that the silly and senseless Baggepipe is in fault of
that, which envious Fortune has made me feel, and in forgetting (being so
skillful in other things) how more abundantly my fortune surchargeth my soul
with pain and troubles, then this poor Baggepipe with any fault or injury?
How do I afflict and molest my self for a small cause, having so many to weary
me withal? O God, how comes it to pass, that the cause of my passed joy and
gladness is now the occasion of my present sorrow, and that those things, which
before were light and easy, are now most grievous torments and burdens to me?
How soon is pleasure exiled from my poor soul, wherein it was wont to make
so sweet a soiourne? In how short a time have I lost my dear content, whylom
my only and trusty companion? And how easily am I deprived of all joy and
happiness, which I once so much at will possessed? To what end does it avail me
to be endowed with beauty and wit (which with modesty I may challenge, since
all do affirm the same in me) unless they were sufficient to remove some
part of my grief? But I beseech the sovereign Gods, that I were so far from
beauty and wit, as I am at this present from joy and comfort, so that either
the first had not brought me to this painful condition of life, or want of the
second passed it away without feeling it so sensibly. O Syrenus and Syluanus,
how are ye now revenged of me, although it be unknown to you, thou Syluanus
of the contempt I did unjustly bear thee, and thou Syrenus of the ill
requital I gave thee for thy sincere and earnest love. How near (alas) does
the sorrowful memory of that joyful time come to my mind, that did so soon
slide out of my hands? I would the Gods had been so pitiful to me, at one and
selfsame time to have ended my days, and those delightful hours. When she
had spoken these words, she gave so great a sobbe, and such vehement sighs,
that it seemed she had no more life left to animate her afflicted and feeble
body. Syrenus his liberty and oblivion, and Syluanus his new content were not
so great, but that their hearts did melt with pity at Dianas sorrowful words
and afflictions: for the passions and effects, which with her doleful speeches
so lively she represented, were so many, that might have moved the cruel
Tygres to tenderness and compassion. In all this complaint she spoke not a word
almost, that was not accompanied with a grievous sigh. Seluagia therefore (who
by experience knew well, how much a great grief aggrauateth the heart that
suffers it) felt Dianas pain no less, then both the Shepherds. But above all
the rest, a certain Shepherd, who because he would not be seen, stood
closely behind a great Oak, yet as near unto her as he could, to hear her
the better, and to see her face. The three Shepherds that were not far off,
perceived him, though he saw them not again: And it was worthy of admiration,
to see how astonished he stood at Dianas beauty, augmented (if it might be)
with the burning anger and anguish of her grievous thoughts, and enameled with
the cristalline tears, which he saw trickle down from her clear eyes upon
her Rosy cheeks; so that the Shepherd did neither stir hand nor foot, nor
did once put together (a common and natural thing in all men) his moving
eie-lids. But Diana unable to take some little rest and ease in any place,
rising up from the hard ground, she went into those bushy thickets, next unto
her, which was as great a grief unto the unknown Shepherd, as if his tender
heart had been rent out of his panting breast. For seeing Diana gone, and that
she would not harken to his request (for he prayed her to stay a little longer)
he made haste to follow her: But thinking with himself, that it contented her
better to be alone, he went not after her, because he would not in any thing
offend her, but sitting down again, and taking out his Rebecke, he began to
sing this song following.

Fair Shepher desse Diana,
Where do thou now thy figure hide,
More bright then clear Diana,
When to her full course she is hide.
Venus, the Goddess fair,
Of beauties all the souer aine,
Wonders at this affair,
That now her beauties do not rain.
A sunnie beam thou art,
And who beholdes thy heavenly dies,
Thou wound'st with natures art,
And wounded, in his passions dies.
Thou art a Dimond well,
From whence sweet liquor flows fast,
Ambrosium thou art well,
From which mine eyes shall never fast.
Each thing in thee thou have
To make thee perfect in each part,
If now thou would but haste
To pity, not my soul to part.
This wager will I bear,
And lay, Thou want not an ounce,
More cruel then a Bear
To be, or Tygre, or an Ounce.
Cruel thou art in praying,
For thee I burn, as flames in Kill,
Those that to thee are praying
For mercy, thou do scorn and kill.
My soul thine absence tears,
And gives unto the same again
Torments, my torments tears,
(Tears that do make so small a gain.)
More bitter then the gall,
Thy absence is, or Sallow wan,
With sorrow it does gall
My heart, and makes me pale and wan.
In beauty not a peer
Thou have, for it exceedes the rest,
But where it does appear,
Thy cruelty there gives no rest.
O what a fool am I
To wish to see her in this plain,
That from her mouth an (I)
Will not afford, but (No) so plain.
No pain I do deserve
For words, having worse deeds essaid
For whom Love thus does serve,
It is not much this to have said.
If that thou mean to seal
Thy cruelty in deeds to leave,
How can I then conceal
The same in song among these leaves?
Fair Shepherdess, who bad
Thee fly from me? If thou do weigh,
So base a thing, and bad,
Deserves not glory any way.
They marvelled much at the Shepherdes new kind of song, and how he wrested
the self same words to fall in ryme, that were of different significations: to
whom at last they came, who, perceiving he was espied, held his peace. And
after they had saluted each other, Syrenus said. Whosoever thou art iollie
Shepherd, so may not thy loving flocks be devoured of the hungry wolves, nor
want the sweet and cool shades in burning summer, nor taste of the foul
waters in seeking out clear streams and fountains, that thou would hold
on thy song: for this Shepherd and fair Shepherdess here shall play unto
thee, whose merry Bagpipes, and sweet songs have not once, but a hundred times
stayed the nimble footed Faunes and Satyrs in their swift flight, and made the
fair Nymphs to come out of their green arbours to listen to them. Shepherd,
said Firmius again (for this was his name) thy manner of adiuring me is but
of little force, since it shall grieve me little or nothing whether my flocks
be torn by ravening wolves, when deeper matters then these trouble my mind,
which (more then devouring wolves) tear my heart a sunder. But yet for the
respect which thou have told me of these Shepherds (which I believe no less) I
would be glad to give you all the pleasure I could, but since I have it not my
self, nor am desirous to have it in this sort, it is impossible that you
should take any by my means; and the more, since by those signs of joy, that
by their countenance may be gathered, they have little need to borrowe it
from him, that has none at all. We will not deny (said Seluagia) but that,
which thou have said, is true, that so much, and more ready we are to show our
joy, as thou art to manifest thy sorrow, which is not (by that we our selves
have seen) of many days, nor hours continuance, because it seems to be (to
speak in plainer terms) for love of the fair Shepherdess Diana. And if it
be so, the sorrow cannot be much, which in so small a time cannot do any great
harm. I will not deny Shepherdess (said Firmius) nor confess unto thee, that
Dianas beauty has destroyed my content. But admit she were the cause thereof,
thou have but little skill (it seems) and less experience in Cupides wounds;
for thou say that in a small time a great wound cannot be made, as if it
were needful for love to have some longer time to make a deep and perfect
wound, to touch one to the quick. Thou know mine but a little (said
Seluagia) by not confessing, that it is not only greater then thine, or any
others that were ever borne. Thou had not said amiss (said Firmius) if thou
did add (in thine opinion.) It needed not (said Seluagia.) and less need
have I (said Firmius) by thy love to know mine own, if (at the least) I had any
at al. By not confessing it (said Seluagia) thou show the little interest
thou have in love: and perhaps the great property (said Firmius) that I have
in grief and sorrow, because I dare not tell it. Why (said Seluagia) who does
hide the glory of thy thoughts? My small deserts (said Firmius.) So much the
better (said Seluagia) because the glory is greater. Nay the worse for this
(said Firmius) because the fall shall be the greater. Thou art a great master
of words (said Seluagia.) Nay of works (said Firmius.) I have not seen them
hitherto (said Seluagia.) To this last Firmius would not answer again: But
Syrenus, that marvelled all this while at the sharp and witty answers of the
unknown Shepherd, put himself between them both to end this strife, as also
for that he saw Syluanus somewhat altered, seeing his Shepherdess urged so
much, although he discreetly tempered himself with Firmius his moderate and
mild answers, which made him hold his peace, which otherwise he would not have
done: wherefore Syrenus said. No more gentle Shepherds, as you love your
selves. Then Seluagia acknowledging her fault, and the modesty of the
Shepherd, she looked on him with a mild and sober countenance, saying. Pardon
me good Shepherd, for the force of my great love urged me to say thus much. But
I (said Firmius) must rather crave pardon, for if there be any offense, it is
of my side. I am glad (said Syrenus) that you are friends again, and that
you will not fall out for so small a matter. I knew thee Syrenus, (said
Syluanus) when once thou would not judge it so light a thing as now thou
do. But of friendship Shepherd, (looking upon Firmius) he said, tell us
(since thou have showed thy self so wise in every thing) how that may be,
which thou did say: That love does make his operations as perfect in a short
time, as in a longer: for (me thinks) it should be clean contrary to reason
and experience, I mean, if it be not by some extraordinary and secret
science, as Felicia does, a Lady not meanly experimented in those operations.
On the otherside, I would feign know the cause thereof, if at least there be
any; for to make a change in our selves, (which is but an easy matter in
comparison) we must have the help of some time, how much more then is it
requisite for so great a work as that, which Cupid makes. In base and simple
Cottages in my native fields (replied Firmius) I would have thee also ask
this question, where so wise and learned a Shepherd abides, who is able, not
only to satisfy thy doubts herein, but what else thou would desire to
know. But as concerning this matter, I remember I heard him say: That as the
Sun, when it appeeres, does in the very point and instant power down all his
brightness without wasting any time, and perfectly gives us his light: So Cupid
(whom he called the God of love) when he takes possession of the lovers heart,
does in an instant with his full and absolute force command and reign there.
This comparison (said Syluanus) does not like me so well. Why so, said Firmius?
for according to the same (said Syluanus) we should all love in equal
proportion and degree, if love with all his force in such sort wounded every
one, which I will not confess. Shepherd (said Firmius) thou have so well
touched the matter to the quick, that I must needs yield my self ouercommed,
and yet without shame, since the meaning thereof exceedes my pastoral condition
and conceit. But give me leave a little, and I will bethink me (if I can
remember) how he resolved the like objection. But this (I think) and the rest
is slid out of my memory, and yet (me thinks) I should remember it, and have
it at my toongs end. And now I call it to mind, though I know not whether so
well as he spoke it. But howsoever it is, you must accept it in such rude sort,
as I shall tell it you. He said, if Cupid wrought more in one heart then in
another, that this proceeded not of Cupids part, who assailes all equally, but
of the better disposition of the heart, where he makes his impression; and for
this he brought a pretty comparison. For with examples he made us
Countrey-fellowes understand this and many other things, because by them we
might remember the better what he told us. But the example was this. That as
the Sun or fire does sooner heat a piece of wood, then a stone (giving as
much heat to the one as to the other) because the wood is apter and better
disposed to receive the heat, then the stone: so love makes a greater
impression in one heart then in another, by reason of the better disposition of
one, then of another. He added moreover, that as the stone resists heat
better then the wood; and after it is once hot, more hardly leeseth that heat,
then the wood, which more easily received it: so he, that most resists love,
and being after subject unto it, with greater difficulty delivers himself,
then he who suffered himself but easily to be ouercommed by it. And with this
ask me no more of this matter: for as I now remember no more; so was not then
my weak capacity able to attain to the knowledge and conceit of those things,
which he alleged. And yet I know not how I understood this: for when we were
satisfied, thinking we had known it sufficiently, and that (in our judgments)
there was no more to conceive, you might have seen him change the whole
matter again, and gainesay his former propositions; so that he quite undid all
that he said before, and confuted his former examples by other cleerer
assertions, and more apparaunt reasons that he had in store; and when we were
inclined to this place, he turned us again to the other, and then to the
contrary, at his pleasure: so that he wrought us like weakelings on every
side, as liked him best, making us ever incline to that which he last of all
alleged. In the end, though he had set all clearly down before us; yet (when
he list) he marred, and darkened all again. If he had spoken (said Syrenus) in
any other thing but in love, his company had been as fit and acceptable to me,
as thine is now. But truly it was a strange sufficiency in a Shepherd to do
what thou have told us: for there is no reason (me thinks) to refell that which
thou have said, by that experience which sometimes I have had in like matters.
But tell me young Shepherde, where did this Shepherde learn so much? I know
not, said Firmius. For as I am a stranger in these parts, so is he in
those. But I imagine that love, and his good judgment were his best
Schoolemasters there: For (as I perceived by him) he had in both no small
experience: and was (as we heard) but a Shepherd in habit, and that his
misfortunes had clad him in pastoral weeds. They must (no doubt) be very
great (said Syrenus) when they brought him to so poor an estate. Do you not
know them well, said Firmius? No, said Syluanus; and therefore I pray you tell
them us. It were too long and troublesome a task for me (answered Firmius) to
tell them now, and therefore I pray you request it not of me. He says well
(said Syrenus) and we had also need to rest us, wherefore let us go our ways:
And God be with thee gentle Shepherd. And with you, answered Firmius. But if
our company like thee, said Syluanus, come and rest with us: the which
Seluagia and Syrenus did also both request him to do. The Shepherd thanked
them and refused, for he had rather been alone the better to pass away his
passions in solitariness, and to go seek Diana, whose lovely face and
beauties he carried about with him in his heart. Yet no excuse could avail him
with the Shepherdes, for in the end they carried him with them. The one to take
pleasure in his sweet company and conversation; the other to weane him (if he
could) from his amorous thoughts, with the which he was not meanly troubled
for the love of fair Diana, which they well suspected, though he hid it from
them, as much as he could, because he knew not what Diana was, and feign would
have asked, if he had had any good means and opportunity without suspicion.
But as they were now come near to their town, Seluagia said. It shall not be
amiss, to make our town know of our coming, and content, which our merry
Baggepipes and Rebeckes shall sound forth. They all agreed thereunto, and
tuning one with another, began to play on them very sweetly. Syluanus, and
Seluagia upon Baggepipes, Syrenus and Firmius upon Rebeckes. Seluagia prayed
Firmius and Syrenus, since the played on Rebeckes to sing. To play on my
Rebecke (said Firmius) though unwilling I agree thereunto, but to sing it most
of all discontents me. Yet refuse not (said Seluagia) to pleasure us. Sing if
thou will something in the praise of fair Diana, for this (I imagine) will not
be unpleasant unto thee; and then shall Syrenus sing that which best likes his
fancy. Whereunto Firmius condescending, and every one playing on their
instruments, he began to sing this Sonnet.

THe fearful Bat that lurks in stony wall,
Flies here and there assured of her sight,
When that she sees the signs of darksome night
Approaching on, contented therewithal;
But when she spies the sunnie beams so bright,
Her fault she does acknowledge and recall.
So now of late to me it did befall:
For I did think there was no other light
Nor beauty then in her, who did inuit
My senses first to love: but (to my thrall)
When I beheld Diana so bedight
With beauties, and such grace Angelical,
Then by and by I knevv that heretofore
I plainly erred: but never could do more.
The time was once, when Syrenus could not have been better pleased, then to
have replied upon Firmius in Dian'as praises. But being now free, he thought
there was not any thing, whereon he might best employ his song, then in giving
the fields and Shepherdes to understand of the coming of Syluanus, and
Seluagia his dearest friends, who therefore with a friendly note began to sing
as follows.

THe open fields, the meadovves fresh and green
Their color and their sign of hope had lost,
Having not Syluan. and Seluagia seen,
With whose svveete presence they did alvvaies bost.
The goodly vales and hills were hard and dried,
Without the steps, that now does make them glad,
Shepherds and sheep in me lancholie died,
Deprived of their songs, that once they had.
Now all with pride will show their ioies again,
All will rejoice, as once they did before:
The hill, the vale, the field the, meade, and plain,
For merry spring and summer they restore:
Welcome Seluagia then, your joyful spring,
And her Syluanus, that does summer bring.
Syluanus and Seluagia would gladly have answered him, had they not been
hindered by the confluence and flocking of Shepherdes and Shepherdesses, that
came running together at Syrenus voice (so well known amongst them) and to the
welcome of the Shepherdes, so well-beloved of them all. And because it was now
about that time of the day, when they should defend themselves from the glowing
sun, they were a good while in the town, having left their gentle sheep
under the shades of diverse trees, and safeguard of their fierce masties. Their
welcome of the Shepherdes, and their thanks to them again being past, they
went all to take their rest, taking Firmius with them, who marvelled greatly at
the earnest love and affection that all the Shepherdes and Shepherdesses showed
at Syrenus coming, of whose absence (which till then he knew not of) he would
have talked something with him, but deferred it, until he had fitter time and
opportunity. But it was told him before he asked it, and the whole success of
his loves from the beginning to his present estate of life. O how many bitter
draughts of jealousy did he swallowe down in the mean time (think you) that
they were telling of the favors, that Diana had in times past bestowed on
Syrenus. Then would he have been glad, that they had never begun to tell that
wounding discourse, and if at that time they had not made an end of their
talk, they had put him in great peril of his welfare. Syrenus, Syluanus, and
Seluagia perceived very well his secret grief of mind, by so many changes of
his color, that went and came in his face, that they were apparent signs of
the present grief he felt. But when they came to the drink that Felicia gave
him, they restored him to life again, who took besides no small joy and
comfort in seeing how far Syrenus was from Dianas favors, and how freely, and
without alteration of countenance, he talked himself, and heard them tell the
things that were past and gone, whereupon he never made an end in thanking
and blessing the sage Lady Felicia in his mind, thinking that she had done
that especial favor for him, by giving Syrenus the cup of forgetfulness to
drink on, since by means thereof, she took so great a block out of his way,
not because he thought Syrenus knew not how to serve and please her, better
then he, nor that he had less good parts in him then Syrenus, to obtain any
favor of her; but because he being unknown, and Syrenus having made love so
long before him, he thought it a hard matter to bring him out of favor with
Diana, and as difficult a thing to throw him down from so high an estate, as
he had attained unto. But he reuolued in his memory, and considered of Dianas
inconstancy toward Syrenus, though he laid the fault more on Syrenus for
absenting himself at such a time, thinking, if he had come then in the nicke,
when Syrenus did, that he had known better how to have helped himself by such
an occasion. His head was so occupied in these and other considerations, that
the Shepherdes perceiving in what passions he was, left him all alone, because
they were glad to pleasure him in any thing they could, who then began to talk
of their own affairs, and to give good order for convenient provision, and
keeping of their flocks. After they had agreed upon these matters, they
determined to know of Firmius if he would remain in those parts any long
time, and if it were his will to take upon him the charge and keeping of their
flocks till their return: whereupon they went to him, and asked him his name,
and knowing it, would have known from whence he came, and what he was. But
perceiving these demands did not like him very well, they would not urge him
farther then his own will and pleasure: but they told him what they had agreed
upon, if he thought good to do it. He gave them many thanks for the good
opinion and confidence they had in him, not knowing what he was, saying, he was
very glad to do it. For though he was minded not to stay in that country, yet
to do them any service (he could) he would at such time make his abode there,
during the time they went about their other business. In the end after they had
agreed with him, they delivered him their flocks, which he kept so well and
charily all the time that they were yet at home, that they were very glad they
had found out so good a keeper, but he was more, that his fortune was so
good, to have so fit an occasion to remain, where he thought he might
sometimes enjoy Dianas presence with so good an excuse, and not of intent to
procure the same.

In these days (though they were but a few) none durst take in hand to play
on their Bagpipes and Rebecks; for so sweet were Firmius his songs, and so
melodious his voice wherewith so greatly he ravished the rest, that they
thought their time but ill bestowed, that was not spent in hearing him. They
went many times to entreat with Diana for him; but she was so froward and
disdainefull, that their conversation and speeches with her; and her answers to
them again pleased not each other very well. Not her, not because she was not
glad to see those Shepherds (and Syrenus especially) but because it was a great
grief and torment to her mind to have him before her eyes soliciting for
another, who was sometimes all her joy and delight (having yet some few
relics of her former love she bare him) and to see him now so obliuious of
all the same. Not the Shepherds, because being so iocond and merry, they would
not have any sad in their company, especially Diana, to whom they wished all
the good that might be, though now in another sort, then in times past they did
it. And the company both of the one and other neither pleased Diana nor
themselves, because that sorrow and solitarines, which pleased Diana, the
Shepherdes eschewed and fled, and the delights and joyful company that the
Shepherds sought out, Diana did utterly forsake: So that if they went to see
her, it was only to drive out of her mind (if they could) her great and
grievous thoughts. Into the which, Seluagia seeing her on a day so plunged, to
rid her from them, said. So may the Gods be favorable unto thee Diana, and
give thee that content, which thou most desire, if thou would sing, and
play on thy Bagpipe a little. How art thou deceived Seluagia (said Diana) by
thinking that I should hope for content, when I know assuredly there is none at
all left for me, because all the ways, whereby it should have passage into my
soul, are now stopped up. And this is my greatest grief, that I have no hope
at all never to be rid from my continual sorrow. One only mean, whereon my
chiefest hope depends is left, which is untimely death. And yet fortune being
in every thing so contrary to me, has taken it away also from me, since I
cannot give it my self, without great infamy and shame to remain me ever
after to my name and memory: which should not yet be a hinderance to the
performance of it, nor I would not care for the same, if there were not another
matter in the way. Thou do request me to singe, and (alas) I can do nothing
but weep. The day that you came home, I essaied to do it, but demand of my
heart, if not, of my Baggepipe what passed; for this remained afflicted and full
of grief, and that thrown away in a profounde and painful passion, where yet
(I think) it lies, beseeching the Sovereign Gods, that, as I had strength and
a heart to cast my senceles Bagpipe away, I had also the power to cast my heart
from me, that then and now does feel such excessive woes. So that now having
forgotten my singing, and left my Bagpipe, pardon me if herein I cannot
pleasure thee. Then said Syrenus to Seluagia: It is not in Dianas power (fair
Shepherdess) to do any thing against thy will. Nor in her power (said Diana)
to have any thing fall out to her own will. But since in times past (said
Syrenus) when the conquering of thee did most of all behooue me, thou did
ever carry away the victory, why then in this (wherein I loose nothing, nor
care to be ouercommed) need I pretend to be conquer our? I will not enter into
disputations with thee, and therefore let it be as thou will. O how many
inward sighs did every one of these words, and the remembrance of that which
was past, cost afflicted Diana. But for love of thy self (said Syrenus to
Diana) let us go and seek out thy Bagpipe: for it is no reason thou should
requite it so ill, that has done thee so good service: And by the way we will
go to our flocks, and bring thee acquainted with Firmius, of whom I have told
thee sometimes before, and if we could entreat him to sing, I know thou
would take great delight to hear him: the one for his great judgment and
wisdom; the other, because he is as sorrowful as thy self, whereby thou
might (I think) receive some comfort and content. But if Syrenus had
known, what should afterward have befallen unto him of these praises, and of
other things which he told of Firmius, he would not only have left undone what
he did, nor spoken at all in the matter, but not once have had a thought
thereof. Thou have told me so much of this new Shepherd (said Diana) that I
must needs go see him: for there are two things in him (thou tellest me)
befitting my humors so well, but especially his melancholy and sad life,
wherein I shall best conform my self with him. Now were they come in sight of
the place, where Diana had left her Bagpipe, when they saw Firmius singing to
the tune of his Rebecke. We are come in good time (said Syrenus) for Firmius is
singing, and (happily) I must needs say, since so seldom he is wont to do it,
being continually so full of sad and pensive thoughts. Coming therefore softly
and secretly on, because they would not be seen of him, they heard him singing
this transuersed Sextiuen.

IN this green Meade mine Eyes what do you see,
The Bagpipe of my Nymph so passing fair?
Unless my senses Dream, so should it be,
For Sure this is the Oak, wherewith despair
She leaned unto, and here the grass yet lies,
And field, that she did water with her eyes.
What doubt I then? mine Eyes see it so plain:
For Sure I know, this is the very Meade,
And tree, that did her tender lims sustain:
This is the Bagpipe, which my Nymph did tread
Upon: This is the Oak, the happy beam,
Whereto she leaned, I know this is no Dream.
But if I Dream, that thinking with mine Eyes
All this I see, and all does prove but naught:
And if this Oak in dream I do surmise,
And see this Meade, but only in my thought,
Where my fair Nymph did print her goodly feet:
O Sure it were a dream to me most sweet.
Jove thee I pray, if this I do but fear,
And if my Dream does fall out Sure or no?
By all the love to Nymphs, that thou did bear,
Open mine Eyes the truth that I may know:
Help me to pray him green and flowrie Meade,
Help me to pray him, Oak with branchie head.
What has deserved this fair and stately Oak,
Why that should not be Sure, which I do see?
What heinous fault could this fine Meade provoke,
Why things in deed should seem but Dreams to me?
Unto mine Eyes what is befallen of late,
Why that they should not see my Nymphs estate?
This Bagpipe of my Nymph I will devise,
To hang it here (fair Oak) to honor thee:
A worthy Trophee, though before mine Eyes
Lying disgraced for tears they cannot see,
If it be Sure, or if I dream in vain,
(Spoiled in this Meade with parching sun and rain)
That gracious Nymph that gave my heart the stroke
In this green Meade, I saw (a heavenly prize)
And (if I dream not) leaning to that Oak;
Nay, Sure, I did be hold her with mine Eyes:
O that she had but seen me then again,
Or that I had but seen or dreamed in vain.
Thus as he made an end of his song, gathering up the freshest and sweetest
flowers he could find, he adorned Dianas Bagpipe so finely with them, that one
would have thought, it had been that Horn, that Hercules took from Achelous
transformed into a Bull, the which, the Naiades decked with plenty of colored
Apples and flowers, whereupon it took the name Cornu copia or the Horn of
plenty. When he had done thus, he hanged the Bagpipe upon the Oak, whereunto
she had leaned, and hard by it (as afterward they perceived) wrote these
verses. I am Dianes, the Arabian bird in beauty and in grace,
Let no man therefore once preseume to take me from this place.


Syrenus, who of purpose (it seemed) would have had Diana show some love to
Firmius, stepped before his company, and pulling Firmius by the lap of his
coat behind (for his back was toward him) said unto him. I will show thee
Shepherde a brauer and fresher bow then this, and more worthy of this
Trophee, and which will perhaps give thee more content then this Bagpipe, and
such a thing that shall be no less welcome to it, then to thy self. Firmius
desired him to show it him. Then Syrenus pointing to Diana with his finger,
said unto him. Do thou see it there? Firmius was so altered with the sudden
sight of fair Diana, that though he would feign have dissembled it, neither
the color in his face, nor the faintnes of his legs would give him leave to do
it, for that was gone, and these were not able to support the body without
great pain. But in the end borrowing a little strength of his weakness, in the
best sort he could, he encouraged his heart to hide that, which was so openly
manifest, and answered Syrenus. There should be other Trophies of higher honor
placed in this bow. By this time came the two Shepherdesses, and Syluanus and
saluted him: but he was in such a case, seeing Diana so near him, that he gave
no great heed to their salutations. Whereupon Diana turning to Seluagia, said.
This Shepherd should (belike) talk to none, but to himself alone: for in
company (me thinks) he has no list to answer us. You must needs be the
cause thereof (said Seluagia) for he never wanted talk for us. Now as thou
love thy life (said Diana) ask him how he knew my name. This I can tell thee
(said Seluagia) without asking him. For when thou threwest down thy Bagpipe in
this place, talking with thy self, thou did name thy self, which I know to
be true; for we our selves heard it, and then she told her in what sort they
saw her, and how they found Firmius, and what he then did and said, when she
was gone; and told her moreover, that they had asked the same things of Firmius
himself, because in his song he had many times named her. If it be thus
(said Diana) he knows more of my matters then I would he did. But let us
hear what thy Syluanus says unto us. We have requested Firmius (said he)
to sing here a little, and we can by no means entreat him: but as I
understand by others, and partly by mine own conjecture, that if thou will
but speak the word unto him, he will do it by and by. There is no reason
(said Diana) (by condescending to my requests) that he should deny you
yours. But if you be not able to entreat him, here is Seluagia, that can
enforce him. Indeed in thy beauty (said Seluagia) all the force and virtue
that is sufficient to move greater matters then this, does consist. But let us
leave this, and do that (I pray thee) which my Syluanus requesteth thee. Diana
then looking upon Firmius, said unto him. Urged more by the importunate
requests of these Shepherdes, then by any confidence of thy part, or
assurednes of mine own, I pray thee (young Shepherd) satisfy their desires.
Firmius coming near to Diana, said unto her, and so softly as they could not
hear him. As these Shepherdes are in a safe haven, so would they not (by their
wills) but be ever singing and merry: but as I am continually in stormy
tempests and suffering shipwiacke for thy sake, not knowing on what shelfe of
disgrace my fortune will cast me, would not be but, ever weeping and sad. But
because I neither can, nor will disobey thy will, unless it be in leaving of
to serve thee (which yet at thine own desire I can not do) what shall please
thee, I will sing, though it be with a hoarce voice like to the dying swanne,
divining her ensuing death. Thou art not so near thy end (said Diana) that
death should help thee. I am so near ended (said Firmius) that I look only
but for death. I did never yet see any (said Diana) die for this cause, but
with words, and do believe besides, there are not any such: And speaking a
little louder, because they might all hear, with dissembling that which she
had secretly spoken unto him, she said. Thou would belike have me tell thee
(Firmius) and the rest, that I am desirous to hear thee sing, and because thou
art such a friend to wailing and sadness, it were not meet thou should sing
at my will and pleasure, but to leave it to thine own. But yet let us tune and
concord with these Shepherds, and ask them what thou shall sing. Thou come
too late to agree and concord with us now, said Syrenus: but because it
pleases thee so, entreat him to express by his song the cause of his sorrow
and passions. Let him sing what thou will (said Diana) and what he will,
because thou may not say, that I never knew how to consorme my self with
thee. Then did Firmius take his Rebecke and began to sing in manner following.

SHepherds give ear and now be still
Unto my passions, and their cause,
And what they be?
Since that with such an earnest will,
And such great signs of friendships laws
You ask it me.
It is not long, since I was whole,
Nor since I did in every part
Sreewill resign:
It is not long, since in my sole
Possession I did know my heart,
And to be mine.
It is not long, since even and morrow
All pleasure that my heart could find,
Was in my power:
It is not long, since grief and sorrow
My loving heart began to bind,
And to devour.
It is not long, since company
I did esteem, a joy indeed
Still to frequent:
Nor long, since solitarily
I lived, and that this life did breed
My sole content.
Desirous I (wretched) to see
But thinking not to see so much
As then I saw:
Love made me know in what degree
His valor and brave force did touch
Me with his law.
First he did put no more nor less
Into my heart, then he did view
That there did want:
But when my breast in such excess
Of lively flames to burn I knew,
Then were so scant.
My ioies, that now did so abate
(My self estranged every way
From former rest)
That I did know, that my estate
And that my life was every day
In deaths arrest.
I put my hand into my side,
To see what was the cause of this
Unwonted vain,
Where I did feel, that torments hied
By endless death to prejudice
My life with pain.
Because I savve, that there did want
My heart, wherein I did delight
(My dearest heart)
And he that did the same supplant,
No jurisdiction had of right
To play that part.
The judge and robber, that remain
Within my soul, their cause to try
Are there all one:
And so the giver of the pain,
And he that is condemned to die,
Or I, or none.
To die I care not any way,
Though without why, to die I grieve,
As I do see:
But for because I heard her say,
None die for love, for I believe
None such there be.
Then this thou shall believe by me
Too late, and without remedy
As did (in brief)
Anaxarete, and thou shall see,
The little she did satisfy
With after grief.
The Shepherdes gave a diligent ear to Firmius song, to see if by the same he
would give some light of the love, that he did bear to Diana; but he was so
vigilant to the contrary, that though he reported the cause of his passion,
yet they could understand no more then they did at the beginning. It was
needless for the three Shepherdes to know Firmius passion by hearing him sing,
who wished rather, that he had manifested it by words, that he might not
afterward deny it, or (to say better) confess it, when any such speech
should be offered thereof. For whenever they told him of it, he spoke of
it so obscurely, that he neither confessed, nor denied that he loved her. And
so to this intent he finely cloaked with Syrenus, that Diana by his means
should demand the cause of his sorrow, thinking with himself, that (for any
thing that might ensue) being demanded by her, he would not deny to manifest
it unto her. But if he could have concealed his love as well by deeds, as he
did by words, the Shepherds might have been as wise, as at the first for ever
knowing it. But it fell not out so to Diana, who understood well by his last
verse, that all the rest were only meant of her, for it answered to the latter
end of her speech, when they both talked so secretly together. And so she made
great account of Firmius for his witty and short answer. Every one commended
his singing, and Diana, as well for this, and for that which he sung on the
Baggepipe, as also for that which he had spoken to Syrenus, was somewhat
inclined to like him, thinking very well of that, which he had sung and
spoken. Considering besides, that the trouble, which the Shepherd felt, (being
in her presence) was no small cooling card, and a sharp bridle to his tongue.
For this fear, which Diana clearly perceived was for her sake, she soon
took away, because Firmius might be more accepted of her, if there were (at
the lest) any thing acceptable or pleasant to one, that found her-selfe in so
miserable an estate, as she was. But when the song was ended, Diana said she
would depart, because she had stayed there a great while, and would go seek
out her husband Delius, who would not willingly have been one moment out of
her sight and company. Being determined therefore to depart, Syrenus entreated
her to take her Baggepipe again with her, if so it pleased her, because none
other should unworthily enjoy such a sweet Trophee as Firmius had made of it.
She took it, because she thought thereby to show some especial favor to
Firmius. And taking it from the tree, she said unto it. God knows, I do not
carry thee as a mean to ease or mittigate my passion and sorrow (my intent
being clean contrary) for though I might seek some favor and help to
sustain them (being so many as they are) yet will I not advantage me with any
such remedy, but I do take thee with me, because those Shepherds might not have
an occasion to blame me for discurtesie. When she had spoken this, she turned
to them, and asked them when they would depart: who told her in the morning,
for now they had set all things in good order, and durst not stay any longer,
because Felicia about that time would look for their coming, whom they had
promised to return as soon as they had set their flocks in good order, and in
the custody of some faithful Shepherdes. Their departure grieved Diana not a
little, though she would not manifest so much, but said. Since it is then so,
the Gods be favorable unto you, and be your guides. They thanked her again,
and prayed her not to sorget to look to their affairs, as they would be
careful for hers, and charged her besides, to think upon Firmius and his
business, and to supply his wants, if in their absence, he stood in need of any
thing: And that, the pleasures and favors that she did him, they would esteem
as much, as if she had bestowed them on themselves, since he remained there to
keep and tend their flocks. Some other thing (said Diana) you might have
demanded at my hands, wherein my good will should not be wanting to my power,
for this which you request, considering his great deserts, is no less then due
to him. Truth it is (said Firmius) that of a small desert it has resulted to
be great, not of my part, which could not give so great a leap, but of my
thought, which has been sufficient enough to make it most capable of the
great glory it feels. And yet for all this thou have obliged me to much, for
which I will not give thee those thanks, that are due to such an offer,
because thou may not have occasion to remain contented only with words. I
understand thee not (said Diana) and though I did, yet will I think, that I
do not. But know Shepherd, that I will do what I have said, if I be well;
if not, it may be then an easy thing for me to change my opinion, whereat
thou must not marvel that I (being the only disciple of mutable fortune) do
know so much what belongs to channge. Firmius was so astonished heereat, that
the word prepared already to answer her, stuck frozen in his mouth with the
cold and sharp blast of her answer, and to see with what liberty and
signorie she had openly declared her hard heart. Syrenus perceiving that Firmius
did not speak, said to Diana. Of one being discreet, thou art become extreme.
Rather (answered Diana) of one being extreme (if I may say so) I am become
discreet and wise: for Fortune has taught me so much, that she has brought
me to be extreme in believing it: And I am also my self in extremes; and with
this I go, for behold where Delius comes. For the love of God come quickly
again. Another time (said Syrenus) thou did request this of me, and did
speak these self same words, which then grieved me more, and stroke a deeper
impression into my soul, then now they do. Diana could not hold her tears at
these words, and turning to Syrenus because she would not be seen of them; and
going away, she said unto him. The Gods, Syrenus, take account of all these
cares, that thou pretendest to give me, and of the small benefit thou have got
in casting me in the teeth with this sorrowful memory. With this she held her
peace, breathing out a most doleful sigh, for the grief of mind had taken
her force away from speaking any more; and also because Delius was come very
near unto her. Firmius clogged with the burden of this grievous thought, went
to gather up his flocks, because it was now time. But the Shepherds perceiving
that he was not able alone to drive them together (being so many) every one
went to help him, willing him to take some Swain to his aid, until he heard
more from them. Whereupon the next morning after, they departed toward
Felicias Palace.

The end of the first book.
The second Book of the second Part of Diana of George of Montemayor.
THe Shepherds going on their accustomed way, about that time of the day, when
the flocks (to eschew the heat of the highest Sun, go hanging down their
heads, and with their breath raising up the dry dust, seek out the cool and
pleasant shades) they heard a tune of a Bagpipe, and thinking it strange (for
as often as they had passed that way before, they never heard so much) they
made toward it (the sound thereof being their best guide) to pass away there
the heat of the day, if the place did like them well. But now as they came
somewhat near, they saw a Shepherd, who (leaving his Bagpipe) began to sing
this dittie in a low voice to the tune of a sweet Rebecke that he had in his
hands.

WHen I, poor wretch, of all men most accursed,
That never durst aspire to sweet content,
In dolours spent, in miseries the first,
Lived most secure, to pleasure only bent:
Which to prevent, The traitorous God of Love
With force did shoue into my careless breast
Cares and unrest of things, which I above
All other things till then did scorn and jest:
He thought (at lest) to be revenged of me,
When he did see, that I scorned him alone
Because that none should once presume to be
So stout, as mock his might so tried and known,
Nor his high throne, nor his supreme estate:
The Elfe of late has plaide a suttell part,
As with new art my ioies to ruinate:
For often as he had essaid my heart
With wounding dart of beauty to subdew,
And with the view (not long since) of a face,
Which took no place, for then in vain he threw:
A fair and dainty hand he did unbrace,
With such a grace, and to mine eyes did show,
And such a blow he gave me with the same,
That then with shame his power I did know,
For down it threw me, my brave pride to tame.
Tell me, how came it thus (fair hand) to pass,
That so I was with such a blow again
Thrown down amain, (never to rise, alas)
By thee so fine and tender to be slain?
Alas, in vain I took thee for a hand,
For can it stand, that nature did thee frame?
Into the same, I think a mighty band
Of Cupids powers of late transformed came
My heart to tame, and dire revenge to take,
Since I did make so little of his power:
If now each hour for this thou do awake
Thy hawty force, my poor heart to devour:
Be not so sour, for pardon I do crave,
The which to have, I promise to obey
From day to day thy will, thy force and brave
Command, and also to confess, and say,
That thou do sway, more then the rest above,
O God of Love: And if that any nill
Embrace thy will his follies to reprove,
I will advise him how thy wrath does kill.
And ever will endeavor to reclame
The freest hearts unto thy loving flame.
The Shepherds wished in their minds, that he had not made an end so soon of
his sweet song; but when (staying themselves a little) they perceived, that
he was in contemplation of some thought, they went to him, and saluting,
said. Thy sweet song and merry Bagpipe (Shepherd) have both invited and
forced us (by leaving our high way before due time) to give some rest to our
wearied bodies, and in this place (if our company may not be troublesome to
thee) with thine to pass away the burning heat of the day. Faustus (for so
was he called) answered. Think not (Shepherds) that I am at any time alone,
who indeed knows not whether it be better for me, to be so, or no? Although
your company (by that which I may conjecture of you) shall be as acceptable,
as your selves welcome to me. They thanked him, and sat down, when after a
few sweet speeches that passed together between them, Syluanus said unto
him. So may our God Pan favor thy resounding Bagpipe, and put thee in that
estate thou desire, as thou would sing that once again (so that it be no
pain to thee) which at our first coming to thee thou were a singing. Pain to
me (said Faustus) nay rather Shepherd, it is the greatest pleasure that may be,
to sing of my passions, and of my pride and scorn, wherewith unworthily I have
repugned great Cupids laws. For let not any from hence forth (be he never so
stout and hardy) presume to mock and contemn him, whose force controules
all: And because it may not be displeasant to your ears, I will change the
manner of my song, observing nevertheless the same intent. Then taking a
Rebecke out of his scrip, he thus began to sing.

Cupid was angry with my merry face,
Because I ever laughed him to scorn,
And all his followers (hapless and forlorn)
I mocked in public and in private place:
Wherefore he armed himself (to my disgrace)
When time a fit occasion did suborne,
But naught I wreckt his flames, in vain out worn.
For Satyrlike I did not thee embrace:
Who seeing, that he built upon the sand,
If by a face my life he would devour,
He showed me then a fine and dainty hand,
Which once beheld, it lay not in my power
To be unconquered Tyrantlike; nor would
Deliver me from him although I could.
Syluanus immediately after the Shepherd had made an end of singing, said. For
all that this God Cupid is able to do, I care not greatly that he can do this
or more. No (said Faustus) do you think it so small a matter to conquer Cupid
with a disarmed hand, when as the same lies not in fierce Mars his power: Why
harken a little to this Sonnet.

IT is a sign of valor and of might,
A power, that in wonder does increase,
For any king to win (and never fight)
A kingdom, and to enter it with peace.
Proper it is for Mars to wound with hand:
Mars wounds with hand, if angry once he be:
But now behold, the matter thus does stand,
That Cupid wounds with hand as well as he.
And my good hap, or ill would have it thus,
That first of all my woeful heart should feel
This new Alarm, wherewith he fears us.
So with a hand, to which all hearts may kneel,
My heart he has transfixt to make me know,
His valor, strength, his wounding shaft, and bow.
Thou have sufficiently proved it (said Syluanus) and truly I cannot but
wonder at the new manner of loves proceeding, and how in the end (like one,
whom this affair touches) thou have highly pondred and weighed it in thy
mind. But so may God give thee a good hand in thy love of the hand, as thou
would tell us the manner he had to bring thee to the sweet bondage of so
fair a hand. From that (said Faustus) which hitherto you have heard, you may
deduce (as it were) all the rest; but passing that slightly over, which I have
already told you, I will briefly declare the rest. Living (as I now have told
you) not meanly contented in my judgment to see my self free (if he may be
termed free, that is far from love) on a night I went to visit a friend of
mine, a certain Shepherd, who was by chance wounded with a knife, with whom
passing away the time, in lamenting his mishap (divining perhaps mine own) a
Shepherdess, disguised in her attire, and having all her face covered over
with a fine white veil, came sweetly in, so comely and graceful a personage,
as by her discreet words I judged her to be of excellent and high conceit. Of
both which things, as immediately, so not meanly was I enamoured, for of any
other part I could not, because her injurious veil did hide the rest. But
after a little while (to my great harm) she pulled out a hand (a hand I say
she pulled out) for I know not how such a perfect brightness could be covered.
At the sight whereof mine eyes were so blinded, to give light to my
understanding, that though she did afterward discover her fair face, yet I
was not able to behold it. She went from thence sooner then I would, and I
(sooner then my need required) exiled my self from my wonted joy: for she
would not give me so much as leave to accompany her with this miserable
body, whose happy soul went away in her heavenly company; whereby you may
judge what kind of man I then was, that remained in such anxieties, and what I
am also now, who never since could find out the means to see her any more.
And (Shepherd) this is the sum of that thou did desire to know of me. If
thou tellest us nothing else (said Syluanus) it then seems that as this
Shepherdess does neither know thee, so thy passion is not manifest unto her.
It is true, said Faustus, she knows me not, but has had some certain notice
of me by the means of another fair Shepherdess, with whom she keeps daily
company: who to do me a pleasure (for surely she ever wished my content) made
me write unto her, upon assured promise to give my letter into her own hands,
and to procure me an answer again: though from the last she has not yet
discharged hirselfe. True it is, she tells me (or faines at the least to put me
in some hope and comfort) that she has promised me an answer. I pray thee
pleasure us so much (said Syluanus) to show us thy letter, for being written
by thine own hands, there can be nothing else expected, but an ingenious and
well composed order in it. Although there is no such matter (said Faustus) yet
for your pleasure I will show it you, for here I have the copy of it, hoping
by these means to discharge me of you; but it is in prose of purpose, because
I understood how certain of my rude rymes (against my will) came to her hands.
I think not (said Syluanus) that thy well penned prose is of less substance
and commendation then thy pleasant and gracious verse, and yet I have heard,
that it requires many things more, not so commonly known to us Shepherds. Then
thrusting his hand into the lining of his Shepherds hoode, he took out a
paper, and reading it, they saw it said thus.

Faustus his letter to Cardenia.
HE that has none himself, nor wishes to have any, but only that which may
come from thy hands, sends thee (Gracious Shepherdess) all the health in the
world. My rude hand trembles to think, that a letter written by it, must come
to thy fairest hands, in whose judgment it lies not otherwise (I suspect) but
to condemn my bold attempt, and chastise my foolish rashness, and that I shall
not have force to suffer the rigor of thy angry hand, if thou do but once
withdraw it from my comfort and succor. For thou must not understand that (to
make thee amends for the injury I have done thee) as being but a base
Shepherd, to have placed my thoughts on so famous a young Shepherdess, there
needs any more punishment, then the wound, which thy fair and cruel hand has
given me, if by the same again I am not favored with some remedy. I know
well fair Shepherdess (pardon me for saying so) that reading these ill
compacted lines, thou will be in suspense to know the man, that shows himself
so much appassionate for thy sake; if any such thing occur to thy thoughts,
demand it I beseech thee, of a heart, which thou have lately got into thy
subjection, for that shall tell thee so sincere and pure a truth, as here by a
senseless wit simply set down. Alas for me, that going to visit one wounded
with a knife, I returned from thence wounded by thy Iuorie hand; and thou going
to comfort a weak man in body, did leave me wounded in soul. Behold
therefore, if being compassionate with him, thou have not been cruel to me.
Thou will say perhaps, thou did not think, any such thing would fall out,
which I believe very well, when as the same did as little fall in the compass
of my thought. But yet thou can not be justly excused from fault and
punishment, since, no less then her, that with suspicious and privy weapons
arms her self, thou art worthy of both. Who then can carry about her such
secret weapons as thou have done, assayling my soul (unarmed then and without
defense) with such a victorious and wounding hand. I will not trouble thee any
more with my unpolished and simple reasons, until the string of my iarring
fancies be tuned by thy most sovereign hand, which the immortal Gods defend
with their mighty hands, as thou may me with thy milk white hand.


This letter being short and sententious pleased the Shepherdes very much. But
when it was read out, Faustus said. Behold here (good Shephedes) the estate
wherein I am attending the sentence of my glorious death, or happy life,
written by that incomparable white hand. Entreat (gentle Shepherdes) the
Amorous God of love (if your sacrifices be acceptable to him) to wound her,
like my self, with his golden headed arrow, and hide his leaden one from her.
If the servants of this little boy (enamoured Shepherd) said Seluagia, may
prevail any thing to obtain such favor of him, thou shall be soon delivered
from these passions, by the mild entreaties of my Shepherd Syluanus here, and
of my self. But it is needless to make this Shepherd Syrenus, a mean and
intercessour for thee, because he is the most injurious rebel to love that
dwells in these villages here abouts. O Jupiter, said Faustus! Is it possible
that I enjoy the thing before mine eyes that (next to my most sovereign
Shepherdess) I desired to see, whose loves have wearied fame so much in every
place? I was about to ask you who you were, and which way you traveled,
wherein it only remains for you to satisfy my desire, since of the first I
am not ignorant. Although first I would rather advise thee Syrenus (for keeping
my promise to Cupid) and pray thee besides (having mature consideration to his
invincible might) to follow and obey him, and to beware to rebel against his
sovereignty, because thou may not say, that I have not warned thee before. I
thank thee for thy good will said Syrenus, but for thy counsel I care not.
Well (said Faustus) herein I have discharged my duty, and thou may do what
thou think best. But yet take heed least sometimes hereafter thou be not
punished like my self. But then Syrenus, because he would not have him talk
any more of that matter, told him whither they went, but could not tell him of
their return. I am sorry for that (said Faustus) because at your return I
would willingly go with you to see the ungrateful Shepherdess Dians, whom I
have heard woonderfully commended for beauty and fine graces, and to behold in
what heart such forgetfulness could harbor, hoping (that if, for the great
desire I have to see her, I stay here till your return to accompany you home)
thou w^ not be angry Syrenus. Not I, said Syrenus, but as I must warn you to
take heed; so must I tell you, that this counsel is better for you, then that
which you gave me. In these and other speeches they passed the time away,
until the hour of their departure came, wherein with proffered courtesies, and
gentle offers on both sides they went every one his way.

With some small force yet went vermillion Apollo shining over the face of our
old mother, when the three Shepherds, coming near to the Island where they had
been before at their last departure, did see a company of people together,
and as they came nearer to them, knew it was Felicia, and some of her Nymphs,
with Don Felix, and his Lady Felismena. Not a little amazed thereat, they
stayed, and perceived how they came guiding their steps toward them. But they
marvelled very much to see them come so silent, and not talking a word. But
Felicia being come, and the Shepherds, having in dutiful sort saluted her and
the rest, asked her the cause of their coming that way, and of their unwonted
silence. Whom she answered saying. The desire I have (my friendly Shepherds) to
pleasure Lord Felix and Felismena, and the love I bear to you, to give you all
possible content, has moved me to bring them hither against your coming,
because you might in so delightful a place as this, recreate your minds
altogether. The cause of my coming in such silent sort, and without any
singing of these lovers, or of my Nymphs is, because their noise may not
deprive both them, and you of a sight worthy the marking, which shall by and
by ensue: whereby you shall know, that as you your selves are not only in love,
so all alone you do not suffer troubles and sorrows for your dearest loves:
And therefore I will you all to follow me as softly as you can. The Lady then
going up with her company along the Spring in the Island (the way which I said
before did lead to the pleasant meade where the fountain of the Laurel trees
was) came unawares to the very entrance of it: The which Lord Felix and his
beloved Lady (not having seen that place before) imagined it to be some
earthly paradise, or that they were in the pleasant fields of Elysium,
although they were not suffered to take any other delight therein, but only the
pleasant view thereof with their wandering eyes, because (for the strict silence
enjoined them) with words and worthy praises, they durst not extol that place
of paradise, nor had leave to demand any thing concerning the same. At the
entrance of it, Felicia sat her down, and all the rest after her, who stayed
there a pretty while, not daring almost to breath, and saw no more, then the
trembling Sunne-beames, that with force seemed to pass between leaf and
leaf amongst the green trees that grew near together; whereupon their
thoughts went wandering, and musing of many matters, and their hearts were
constrained to bite on the bit of forced patience: And feign they would have
changed (in their judgments) the pleasure to see that which Felicia promised
them, to be rid of the discontent, which their silence did procure them.
Which thing (when she perceived it) made her smile a little to herself. Being
thus therefore in this pleasant meadow, and tedious mutenes, Felicia pointed
with her finger to an entrance thereof right over against them, to have them
all look that way, where casting their eyes, they saw a reverend old man
coming in, grave in his countenance, person, and disposition, as also in the
manner of his habit and apparel: for in every point he seemed to represent a
most worthy priest of Jupiter. He came holding a staff in his right hand,
and sustained upon it his old and wearied body, whereon sometimes leaning, he
looked steadfastly on the ground, like a man full of imaginations, and
sometimes again lifted up his eyes to heaven, like one most sorrowful and
comfortless. He made such sundry kinds of motions and gestures of his body,
(observing yet always the due gravity of his noble person) that he did not
only mollify the tender hearts of them that were looking on him, but had been
able to have made the cruel Hircanian Tygres mild and gentle, if they had
been present, especially with the outward shows of sorrow that he represented
of some inward grief: for in the mids thereof he gave a turn about,
viewing the heavens on every side, and speaking against Fortune (of whom he
seemed to make his chiefest complaint) he uttered this that follows.

IN each created thing
One motion only, and of might,
Predominant continually is found.
Which still does keep and bring
The same, one way, and course aright,
That Is always like, and uniform, and round.
And none can be unbound
From this compacted order though he would,
None can again the same forsake,
Or any other take,
And yet it would not though perhaps it could:
Thou Fortune art alone
Without it, in disorder only one.
That first, and highest Sphere,
That mooues, and is not moved again
Of any other heaven, that mooues one whit:
The which with his Careare,
And swiftest course does turn away
The lowest heavens, and caries after it:
An order does admit,
And does maintain, not erring in the lest:
For it does carry them with speed,
And with more haste (indeed)
The nearest heaven to it, from East to West:
But rule thou do disdain,
And only without order do remain.
The circled Elements
Of qualities most opposite,
The fire, the air, the sea, and earth below,
In motions not inuents
A novel course, but move aright,
And ever keep good order, as they go:
None erreth, no.
The earth about his lowest Center mooues,
The water next in circle wise,
The air next that that lies,
And fire to that a gallant order proves:
But Fortune in thy Sphere
Thou run'st, without good order, rule, or fear.
The heavy falls down right
(Unless it have impediment)
Unto the Center of his proper Sphere:
And that, which is but light,
If that it have an open vent,
Mounts to his highest region every where:
And so each thing does bear
Good order, and good rule continually:
In generation it does spring,
Corruption it does bring,
In fine, all things by order live and die:
Without it, thou do range
(Fortune) that with disorder still do change.
In this world nothing is
(If out of order it be gone)
But ordered it may be in time again:
There Is nothing in black Dis
(Though there be all confusion)
Nor order kept (for there it were but vain)
But may indeed remain
In order, in their manner, form, and kind,
And may be called to order fit,
If we consider it:
Though naught but pains and plaintes are there assigned.
Thou worse then hellish thought
In no point can not be to order brought.
Thy motion out of kind
So far besides proportion lies,
That it can never be to order brought:
Swifter sometimes then wind,
With hasty speed so soon it flies,
That it is never seen, nor felt, nor thought:
The Parthian never wrought,
Nor sent an arrow out of steeled bow
With such great haste and maine:
Sometimes with sloth again,
Like to the snaile or Tortuse she does go:
Blind Fortune thou do reele,
And more does he, that sits upon thy wheel.
He had no sooner made an end of the complaints, which he declamed against
Fortune, when walking toward the fountain (from the which he was not twenty
paces) on the sudden they saw him fling away his staff, and with a lusty
kind of agilitie (contrary to his aged limbs) lay hand on his Faulchion,
which from under a side garment that he wore, he took out to smite a certain
Shepherd that lay a sleep in that side of the meadow. When they that were
thus beholding him, perceived with what fury he ran upon the silly Shepherd
(whom hitherto they had not seen) and with his naked Faulchion in his hand,
they would all have run to help him, but that sage Felicia with signs which
she made unto them, willed them to sit still, telling them the matter should
not need it. But the old man was now lifting up his Faulchion to smite him on
the head, when two beggarly and foul ragged Shepherdesses which were at hand,
rising from the ground, took hold on him, the one with a sorrowful voice
saying unto him. O my good Father. But the old man vnwinding himself from them
stepped back, making as though he would smite her that went about to hinder him.
Whereupon she, that had first spoken, perceiving that he knew her not, spoke to
him again, saying. O my deer Father Parisiles (for this was his name.) The
angry and afflicted old man amazed at the tender voice he now knew, and like
the marble stone benumbed in all his senses, let his Faulchion presently fall
out of his hands, whom then the Shepherdess (calling him by the same name as
before) most lovingly embraced, as he was falling down to the ground. Who
coming to himself again, and with the tears of mild love supplying the
interrupted voice of his breast, threw his aged arms upon her, and that face
of hers which with loathsome mudde and dirt was so much defiled, sweetly
began to kiss. Felicia turning to her company, that (being now rid from
the grief of their late passed silence) was laughing with a scornful delight
at the present sight, to see him kiss that foul ill favored face, said.
Marvel not my sons and daughters, to see you reverend old man kiss those
deformed cheeks, for fatherly love extends to more then that, so that if she
seems foul in your eyes, he thinks her fair, and no less does the Shepherd
that lies there asleep. Like will to like, said Felismena. It is so (said
Felicia) but because so great an injury may not be offered to the honorable
old man, as to be embraced with such an vnseemelines, let us go to put them
asunder. Whereupon they went toward them, and making as though they had not
seen them before, Felicia said unto them. God save this noble company. The
other Shepherdess yielded her due thanks, and a courteous answer, for the
Shepherd was yet sleeping, and the old man and the other Shepherdess were
still embracing each other. Lord Felix coming to them both, said. Thou
should have enough noble Lord of these unfit embracements. Whereat Felicia
laughed to her-selfe, to see how much in their minds they disdained the
Shepherdess. But the old man said. Now may ye (O Gods) conclude my many
days with their last period, since you have granted me this unspeakable
favor, to see my dearest daughter: now may ye make an end of my wearied
years, having before mine eyes my only beloved Stela, (for so was the
Shepherdess called that spoke unto him) Stela mine only hope, my joy and
comfort of my life. To this end my prayers tended, to lengthen my decaying
life, and to see this joyful day. This was the white whereat my petitions,
oblations, and sacrifices aimed, for prorogation of my death. And now let it
come when it will, since I have her in my presence, who in despite of death
maintains my life; but yet gentle death, rather then by any other misfortune
that may ensue, I might be deprived of her again, come and bereave me of this
common light. O my dearest daughter, who did take thee away from me, for I
could never believe that of thine own accord thou would have left me
without first taking leave of thy loving father. Woe befall to thee (false
Shepherde) that lie there asleep, and an ill end betide thy friend,
wheresoever he be, if he has it not yet already. Bend not thy ears, O
Jupiter (said the Shepherdess) to this cruel petition, but rather turn it
upon me (a thing more requisite for my miseries) and not on them, whose goodness
never deserved any ill at all. I will not consent (good Father) nor be content
to hear them accursed, that in all points are so faultlesse. Lo ( Love she
would have said has erred, if modesty and maidenly shame had not stayed her
tongue in the midst) I have erred, or rather my Fortune (to speak more
truly) has been to blame, by granting me no means to take my leave of thee.
Felicia, who knew the cause of the Shepherdess her grief, said. Let these
excuses now cease. And Parisiles forsake thy sadness, since now thou inioyest
thine only desire. Who turning to sage Felicia, and marking with what grave
authority she spoke unto him, said unto her. Whosoever thou art (noble Lady)
whether thou do reckon thy self in the number of mortal women, or art
registered in the Catalogue of the immortal Gods (for such an one thou seem
to be) pardon me, if hitherto I have not done my obliged duty, and reverence,
having so pitiful and condign a cause of pardon: in every thing hereafter I
am wholly at thy devotions, and subject to thy command whatsoever. It is well,
said Felicia, we shall think of that hereafter. And because I will make thee
more joyful, then ever thou thoughtest to be (for from him thy comfort shall
proceed, of whom thou do most complain) let us go to rest us under the
shadows of those Laurel trees, near to the silver fountain brincke: and
that thou may believe my words to be true, know that I am Felicia, if ever my
name has sounded in thine ears. Parisiles then with the Shepherdesses fell
down on their knees to kiss her hands, saying. Who of all those, that honor
our immortal Gods, is there, that is ignorant of the portion which thou have
with them? Felicia lifted them all three up, and would not suffer them to do
her such honor, and taking one of the Shepherdesses by the hand (called
Crimine) said to all the rest. Go you (my Sons) to the fountain, and rest
you there, while I talk with this Shepherdess, and with that Shepherd a word
or two. And thou (my friend Parisiles) with thy dear daughter shall keep them
company, and tell them some famous history, or antiquite, until it be time to
go in to dinner. Then taking Crimine by the hand, she went toward the Shepherd
that was yet sleeping all this while, and shaking him by the shoulder, awaked
him, and said. He should sleep but a little, that comes as a guard to two fair
young Shepherdesses. Whereat the unknown Shepherd awaked, and not seeing
Stela, without making the sage Lady any answer, with a sudden sursault of
grief, said. O Crimine, where is Stela? Be not afraid (said Felicia) for she
is not far from hence. Thou might do better to look more advisedly to thy
self, when as but even now thy temporal slumber had very near cast thee
into thy last and endless sleep. They (of whose lives and honors they chose
thee their only ampare) had more care to faue thy late endangered person, then
thou had of thy self or them. And because thou may see unto what
extremity thy fates had almost brought thee, know that it is not long since
the knife was at thy throat ready to cut it. The Shepherd could not imagine
what she meant by these words, nor what company that was, that sat about the
fountain, where (turning his eyes about to see Stela) he espied her, but
Crimine secretly admonished him to do his duty to Felicia, who then making
low obeisance unto her, craved pardon of her. Felicia then told him in order
what had passed; and how Parisiles forgetting his aged weakness, and aided by
the force of his fury, would have killed him, and how they would not let him,
with that that followed. In the end the Shepherd was very sad, when he knew
that old Parisiles was there, not for fear of him, but because he now thought
to loose his beloved Stela, which sage Felicia perceiving, said unto him.
Abandon (Shepherd) these sorrowful thoughts, for all shall redound to thy
content and joy: for now thou art in such a place, where thou shall have no
wrong, and where thy passed troubles, and those of thy sweet company and
dearest friends shall be better ended, then thou art able to imagine. To all
this the Shepherd could yield no more but humble thanks, though it was not
sufficient to comfort him, because he was absent from a dear friend of his,
whom he loved more then himself, and who ever requited him with no less love
again, as by many proofs most often it appeered. For well might they two
have been the third number, annexed to the only two pair of friends, that
after so many thousand years were accounted in the world for the greatest.
But the Lady Felicia assured him, how she would find out some means to have
him thither out of hand. At which words he fell down on his knees, and kissed
her hands, for any thing that she could do the contrary. In these and other
speeches, they went talking up and down a pretty while. But God knows, how
Crimine was ashamed of her-selfe before Felicia, though it was not long, for
Felilia did remedy that by and by, having taken her aside to no other end
from the rest of the company. While these three were in these speeches, Lord
Felix, Felismena, the three Nymphs, and the Shepherds, desirous to know who
these four were, and for what cause Parisiles in so great an anger would have
killed the Shepherd that lay asleep, and all the rest of his fortunes, would
feign have demanded the same on him. But yet they did not, because they
suspected he would not tell it them. Whereupon they reserved it, till Felicia
was come, to entreat her to move Parisiles, or the rest thereof, because they
knew they could not then excuse themselves. Lord Felix therefore with the rest
prayed Parisiles to obey the sage Felicia, by discoursing some novelty unto
them. But they seemed importunate and troublesome unto him, for he would not
(willingly) have been one moment from the loving embracements of his beloved
daughter Stela, and so did not one minute (when from any other forced thing he
ceased) cast his tender eyes off her, whereby he gave Stela no means to look
upon the unknown Shepherd, on whom her eyes and heart attended: but every time
that she might steal a look from her Father Parisiles, making as though she
sat not well, or as though she would spit or cough, then with earnest desire
and affection she beheld him. But in the end the old man having no good excuse
to acquit himself from Felicias command, nor from the requests of that fair
company, which so seriously demanded it of him, began to say in this sort.

My loving Sons (for by the privilege of mine age I may call you so) for as
much as the greater part of my life has been dedicated to the worship and
service of our most sovereign Gods, and especially of our Goddess Isis (whose
unworthy Priest from the entrance of my youth I have been) it would be most
agreeable to my condition, to entreat of the manner, that ought to be observed
in worshipping of her, and how much we are bound to perform the same. But
because you have for your Lady and mistress (for so I take her to be, because
you do accompany and follow her) the sage Felicia, to whom not I my self (the
lowest of all Priests) but the best in all the world may justly be disciples,
it must needs be a part beyond all courtesy, and good manners to enterprise
any such task. And this difficulty besides does offer it self to my mind,
in that I know not, with what history to delight al your ears: For the
difference of estates, which in this noble company I perceive, strikes a doubt
into my mind upon the choice of my discourse, considering with my self, that
that which will please some, will (perhaps) offend others. To these Shepherdes
I could present some things requisite for their poor estate and vocations, and
profitable for them and their flocks, and some curious secrets, which they
should know (happily) never yet thought on amongst Shepherdes. As likewise
from whence the playing on the fluite or Bagpipe first came, and when the
honor of their God Pan, and the customs and rites, which in old times they
observed in their sacrifices, were first in use, and why those are decayed, and
other now admitted in their places. To you noble personages, I could present (a
thing (perhaps) which would best fit your desires) whereof love was first
engendered, and how he works, and for what cause the God of Love does keep no
reason, being honored as a God, we holding it for a rule infallible, That the
Gods are just, and that in all things they observe due justice and equity. And
this is that, which I would more willingly entreat of, because in these
meadows here, a question was once moved, which touched not the simplicity
of the Shepherd that did ask it. But because to declare it well, it were
necessary to entreat of the powers of the soul, and the duties thereof, and
what place every one of them has in man's body, (a disputation more fit for
Philosophers schools, then for the fields, where none but flocks are) I will
not explain it, reserving it only for any one that will thereof be privately
instructed. But because I have here a thing before mine eyes, which fills me
with admiration, (although it may be, that many that have been here have
perhaps touched the same) I will make my beginning thus. Do you not see how
nature and art, the one borrowing that of the other, wherein either of them
was defective, have done their utmost in making this Island or meadow (calling
it as it shall best please you) the very pattern of the Elysian fields? But
leaving aside many things, that I could note unto you about this matter, I will
declare unto you why this Oak is placed here in the mids of these Laurel
trees, because you may understand that there was nothing done nor placed here,
but with great wisdom and conceit. The loves of Apollo and Daphne, are
sufficiently known unto you, I mean of Apollo with Daphne, as also the
preheminences wherewith this God endowed the Laurel tree, whereinto this Nymph
was transformed. But how? Doria at these words interrupting his discourse,
said. Me thinks (noble Parisiles) thou have played the part of a gentleman
Sewer, that have (at our chiefest appetite) taken away our best dishes. Since
then these noble personages (pointing to Lord Felix and Felismena) whom the
subject of love did more narrowly touch, and these Shepherds (pointing to
Syrenus, Syluanus, and Seluagia) to whom the first point belonged, have let
thee pass on without interruption, my self (to whom it chiefly appertains,
to hear the accidents of so famous a Nymph, because I am one my self) will
not (with my will) give thee leave to proceed any farther, before thou have
told us the beginning of Apollos loves, and why Daphne refused and disdained so
high a God. Syluanus and Seluagia blushing for shame and anger, that Doria had
pointed to Lord Felix and Felismena, and not to them, when she said, that the
questions of love belonged more to Lord Felix and Felismena, taking Parisiles
by the hand, said. And how think thou Nymph? Are we in respect of these
two so far from love, that to them only, and not to us the treatise of this
demand is more appertaining? Every one laughing at the Shepherds words, Doria
answered. I have made a fault (Shepherds) and so I confess it. It pleases me
well (fair Nymph said Parisiles) to obey thee herein. But if I begin at the
very beginning, it may be I shall not make an end before the sage Lady comes,
where (being constrained to end abruptly) I shall perhaps do you more wrong,
then if I had not begun at all. Leave not of for this (said Felismena) for if
it be so, we will request her to give us leave to hear out the rest. Since
then you will have it so (said Parisiles) give attentive ear, for I will
recite it unto you as I did see it written in Apollo his Temple.

THat deluge of reuengement being past,
Determined that was by Gods above,
For guilt of wickedness of mortal men:
The earth of moisture yet remaining full,
Wherewith the heat of Titans beams conioyn'd,
Strange creatures did engender of the same:
Diverse in shape, proportion and in kind.
Amongst the which a Serpent did arise,
Cruel, untamed, and greater then a hill,
In Thessalie, a Province of great fame;
That first put bridle to the horse his mouth.
This monstrous Serpent did devour, and waste
His native soil, and all the people there:
He spared not the corn (a sweet reward
And hope of him that did with labor sow it)
He spared not the strong and painful Ox,
(The faithful servant of the country toil)
As little spared he the harmless Calves,
Nor goats, nor kids, that skipt about the heathes.
He spared not the flocks of simple sheep,
Nor gentle lambs, nor herds of grazing neat.
He spared no house, nor of the little Be
The sweetest work (the Mistress of her art)
This cruel beast had no regard of men,
For whose avail each thing created was.
But as the supreme Gods would not consent,
With angry hand to spoil the world anew:
They did provide forthwith a speedy help,
Since humane skill and wit could not prevail.
For God Apollo going forth to hunt,
With bow and quiver full of wounding shaftes:
Only on Buckes his cunning aim to try,
On mountain goats, wild boares, and savage beasts,
He did by chance encounter with this Serpent;
Which cruel monster when he did behold,
He by and by contemned his wonted chase,
To make his name eternal by his death.
For straight he bent his hardened bow of steel,
And from his back his golden quiver took,
And drew thereout his shaftes with wounding heads;
Which dipped in poison, he did shoot with force,
And nailed them between the Serpents skailes,
And there lay Python stretched on the ground.
(For this the cruel Serpent had to name)
Apollo haughty in his joyful mind,
For glory of so great an enterprise,
Remaining there, to view his noble spoils,
Proud with himself he did triumph so much
For this great victory, that he did think
That heaven had not a God like to himself;
Which by his speeches he did manifest,
Speaking sometimes unto the monstrous beast,
Sometimes unto his quiver, and his bow;
With joy and pride did utter forth these words.
Glory of glories O most excellent,
Triumph of triumphs O the most esteemed,
Of victories O worthy victory.
O deed, above all deeds in honor deemed:
O chance, then any chance more eminent:
O fame of fames the sole supremacy.
O happy war, whereby
My arm so fortunate
With power did abate
The fiercest Serpent that was ever bred:
O crown most worthy for my conquering head.
O bow, that from complaining did deliver
The people well nie dead,
O happy shaftes, O brave and blessed quiver.
Python, for thee the ground was barren still,
Denying her increase, and wonted fruit,
For thee, the learned Be did aie lament,
That she could not her sweetest work salute:
For thee, the gentle Ewe her self did kill,
For grief to see her lamb in pieces rent:
For thee out of his tent
The Shepherd durst not go,
For clearly he did know,
How much thy poisoned tooth and breath did harm:
For thee the husbandman within his Farm,
And Citizens within their walls, for fear
(Did in their Cities swarm)
Of every shadow thinking thou were there.
What God deserves all the heavenly Quire
Incense in sacrifice as does Apollo?
And what God by his skill and cunning art,
As many as the firmament so hollow
Contains, to such great titles does aspire
With honors type, renowned in every part?
For nature does impart
Her gifts, and every grace
To me, their proper place.
I did invent the art of medicine,
If any one like prophet does divine,
I am the God, that answers and inspires,
My music passing fine
Does answer that the heavens make in their gires.
A famous Surname I shall now obtain,
O Serpent Python by thy mortal death:
And I will cause, that they shall celebrate
This liberty in never dying breath.
With solemn sports and feasting to maintain
This glory, in eternal time and state.
And that this golden date
In history by fame,
That straight does blaze the same,
And sparing such, as always we do see,
Never in this may such a niggard be.
And though of others she does prate too much,
And speaks partially,
Not any lie herein, her tongue shall touch.
He therefore being in this sort content,
By chance (and yet it may be to requite.
The general scorn he made of all the Gods)
The child God Cupid passed by that way.
(A puissant and mighty Lord of love)
A golden quiver hung behind his back,
In his left hand he bare a bended bow:
And in his right, two fine and pretty shaftes.
His eyes were both bound with a silken string,
Whom, now as soon as God Apollo saw,
Thinking that none, but he deserved to bear
A bow, and shaftes, and quiver at his back:
In brauing sort these proud injurious words,
And full of scorn he thus to him affordes.
What Is he so proud, and stout that does impute him
Worthy of those brave weapons in his hand?
What, knows he not that they are due to me;
And none but I this honor may demand?
It Is Venus son, God Cupid, it is he,
So called, but here he comes, I will salute him:
Infamous villain, thief and void of shame,
And wicked robber of another fame.
Be these thy tools? Tell me, why do wear them,
That art a wanton, far for thee unfit?
Deliver them, for these my hands divine
Do beautify, and on my shoulders sit
With better grace, and honor then on thine,
That art not able half enough to bear them.
Then little boy, leave of with these to boast thee,
If not, in faith, full dearly they shall cost thee.
This furniture is proper to my might,
These shaftes, this quiver, and this bended bow:
With them I slew fell Python, that of sheep
Whole flocks within his belly did bestow.
And them to kill wild beasts, and birds I keep,
For only these belong to me of right.
With them (moreover) if it be my will,
With mortal wounds mine enemies I kill.
Thy fires and flames should well content thy mind,
With which (fond Love) with love thou give pain,
Join not thy sportes, nor thy dishonest brandes
With these brave weapons of my glorious gain.
Leave then this bow, dishonored by thy hands,
And see, if that thou can, that art so blind:
Thine eyes are blinded with a silken string,
How can thou then aim right at any thing?
Cupid at this waxt angry and ashamed.
But yet with threats to his unworthy scorns,
Nor with proud words in no wise would reply.
For mighty Love, as he is very wise,
And resolute of that he takes in hand,
Cares not to brag it out with threatening words:
But does perform it with most valiant deeds.
But yet because his follies he should know,
And how he was deceived in his might,
Which all the Gods besides himself had known
(For yet Apollo never felt the pains,
Nor cruel torments that brave Cupid gives)
With gentle words proceeding from a mind,
Incensed more within, then outwardly,
To his brave terms this speech he did reply.
Too proud thou have thy self (Apollo) showen
In speaking such vile words unto my face.
Such rather I embrace
With honor, and I use them not, but saying
Nothing at all in such a wrongful case,
I do such things, as like were never none.
Hark then how I am known
By word of mouth, and how much I am swaying.
After by deed, I will bring thee to obaying.
Neptune, and Jove, and Vulcan I do keep
Under my mighty will:
Few Gods there are, that with their skill,
Do free themselves, but unto me do creep.
The Goddesses do weep
To hear my name, and yield with mere consent
Unto my government.
And Venus, though my loving mother be,
Cannot escape with partial liberty.
What man is he, never so strong in arms,
That has escaped in my amorous field?
Here boots not spear, nor sheeld,
Nor Mars his weapons, nor his strong defense.
In vain he fights, whom I will have to yield.
Learning, and wisdom here procure but harms,
And fly at my Alarmes,
And staying, do imprint a deeper sense
Of loving passions, and with more offense.
Women (mine ornament) do ever hide
What never was concealed.
For flames are hardly unrevealed.
The birds and savage bcastes my hands has tide
Unto my yoke, beside,
That Nature does her self my chariot follow.
Then tell me now Apollo,
If that thou think to get such puissance,
As that with these thou should not come to dance.
Thou do rejoice, because these arms are due
To thee, for killing of that monster fell.
But hark, and I will tell,
How these belong more justly to my might,
Although thy shaft in wounding does excel,
It never yet but beasts and venison slew,
Apollo, this is true.
But mine shall wound thy soul both day and night:
And thou shall swear, mine is the only flight.
So that how much each beast, not me,
In mgiht thou do exceed,
And gett'st most glory by this deed,
So much more famous shall my conquest be.
But now thy follies see,
In saying, that this quiver, and this bow
Did me dishonor so.
For thee, Apollo, better had it been,
If with my self the same thou had not seen.
Thou say I nill deserve this ornament,
Because mine eyes are blinded with a band;
And therefore that my hand
Must needs shoot false because that I am blind.
And yet, besides, I tell thee that they stand
Against all reason, and intendement.
Hark now, to what intent?
And how this comes so fitly to my mind.
Then tell me, if thou think it out of kind,
For any God to burn in fervent love
Of any woman here?
That more his greefes, and pains appear,
The more sheshould from him her liking move.
If blind, such things I prove,
And study to revenge me with my flight?
Tell me, were it not right?
Then take good heed, since thus my bow does kill:
And makes thy reason subject to my will.
This said, he would no longer with him stay,
Nor harken more to answers nor replies:
Nor did Apollo care to answer him,
Esteeming naught his childish words, and threats.
But Cupid wounding with his golden wings
The lofty air, that burned as he went,
Without delay he gains the shadowed top
Of mount Parnasse, where looking round about
He stays, and waits the means to venge himself
At pleasure of Apollos proud contempt.
Wherefore out of his quiver he does take
Two wounding headed arrows fatal both:
In color diverse, and in their effects,
For the one procures love, with burning fire,
The other hate, with cold and frozen ice.
Golden is that, that causes fervent love,
Leaden is that, that causes frozen hate:
And talking with them both, as though they did
Conceive his words, in this sort he did say.
Come speedy out (my loving friends)
And show your valor, and your force so high:
In you my trust, and hope does lie,
That you will show, whereon my strength depends.
Beat down Apollos pride,
That here our honor did deride:
That he may know, how well my words agree
With earnest deeds as shortly he shall see.
Since thou, that art so sharp and tried
With kindling fire in each loving breast,
Thou shall Apollos heart molest,
That cruel pains, and smartes he may abide.
And thou that art of bluntie lead,
Strike thou some woman's heart so dead
In cruel hate, that she shall never feel
The sense of love, no more then stone, or steel.
Apollo there remained very glad,
Calling the heavens, the elements, and beasts,
The trees, the meades, the springs, the birds, and fish
To joy with him in his renowned spoil,
And victory, by Pythons death he got:
For in this sort with joyful face he said.
O heavenly frame,
Whose course, and sweet accents
Give earthly things their life, that are
Of natures name.
You circled elements,
So contrary in secret war,
You beasts, that far
And near, in earth do make your dwelling place,
You birds, that in the sky
With hasty wing do fly,
You fishes, that the crystal streams embrace,
For my brave deed
Come show your selves content in ioies agreed.
You shadowed treene,
An ease of sweet delight,
And fence from Titans burning heat:
Fair meades and green,
And waters sweet and bright,
This forest that with liquours weate:
Green Iuies seat,
That live still, and dy'st not in thy kind,
And wind'st about the tree,
That still vpholdeth thee:
For this brave deed,
Come show your selves content in ioies agreed.
Apollo being in this joyful mood,
Behold where comes a fine and tender Nymph,
And fairer then Aurora in her prime,
Laden with spoils, she got by hunting late,
A Nymph endowed with virtues high and rare.
The father often unto his Daphne said
(For so they say this fairest Nymph was called,
And Pene was her aged fathers name)
Daughter, to me thou ow'st a son in law.
Daughter, to me some nephews thou do owe.
But with a teint, like the Vermillion Rose,
Bespred upon her face as white as snow,
To see her father would have wedded her,
The chastest virgin with her tender arms
All Lilly white about the loving neck
Of her dear father sweetly then did hang:
Requesting him, that he would give her leave,
To lead her life in spotless chastity,
And live therein, as she had lived before.
Her loving father granted her request.
But yet before, to hinder her intent,
With grave advise unto her he did tell,
How heat of youth, and wealth, and beauties lure,
Were contrary unto the chastest mind.
And how that each of them alone is able
To work the tender heart like melted wax.
How much more easy then, when all in one
Were found, as in fair Daphne they did reign.
Yet though she did excel in all these gifts,
She would not leave to put her chaste intent
In practice, and Dianas grace to serve.
And saying, it was true her father spoke.
And said, if that she had such cause to vaunt
That she was rich, and fair, and nobly borne:
That it was tenfold deerer unto her
To be accounted chaste of every one.
And that her chiefest honor did consist
In honest, pure, and undefiled life.
Now therefore as the virgin did not know
(Because her mind was soon virtue bent)
What thing love was, nor due of marriage rites,
To hunt it was her only joy, and sport.
Then hither came this gallant Nymph to chase,
Where proud Apollo went by chance to hunt:
Not thinking to find out so farie a game.
Because his breast, free from the thoughts of love,
Was only bent in thinking of his spoil.
He was so glad and did triumph so much
Within himself, that he did never think
Of any thing but this, till (to his harm)
He cast his wandering eyes unto the place,
Where he did spy fair Daphne in her chase.
The good old man Parisiles went prosecuting his history, carrying all his
hearers with him very silent, by reason that the substance thereof (as also
the style wherewith he told it) delighted them very much, when they perceived
the sage Felicia coming with Crimine, and the unknown Shepherd toward them,
whose coming made not Stela a little glad, for she lent but a small ear to
the tale, because the Shepherd was not in her company. But Parisiles turning
his head, and seeing Felicia, said. Behold how it falls out true, which I
feared: my tale shall break off till another day, when we will have fitter
time and place for it, wherein nothing shall be lost having made so good a
beginning. By no means (said Doria) will I consent hereunto. The like did all
affirm with one voice. Then came Felicia, and as they were rising to do her
honor, they saw the Shepherd that came with her, to be the fairest, most
gracious, and goodliest youth of person, as ever they beheld before. His weeds
were of gray cloth, to signify by that color his troubles and griefs. All
along the border of his coat, and sleeves, went three ribons or laces of
sundry colors, two of them on either side, of Lion tawney and Olive green, to
signify by the first his sorrow, and by the second his torment. That in the
mids of his sorrow and torment was his hope. Other things did the Shepherd
wear, worthy himself, and to be marked. But Parisiles did hinder them,
because Crimine returned now clean, and washed at Felicias request, whom now
he also knew, and therefore with a loud voice, with casting up his eyes to
heaven, he said. And is it true (O Jupiter) which with mine eyes I here behold?
O sweet Nymph; my friend and mistress. Is it possible thou art here? If I had
known my dear daughter had gone in thy company, I would have somewhat
moderated my grief for her absence. And being come to her, with reverence he
lovingly embraced her. But both of them desiring earnestly to know the means
of their unlooked for coming to that place, Felicia said. Defer this till
further time: for I know these questions will not hereafter a little delight
this company. Come thou Crimine, and speak to all this company, who will be
very glad of thine. They were a pretty while in congratulations and
conuesies, wondering at Crimines beauty, and therefore at last thus said. Why
did such a shining gemme as this (Lady Felicia) go hidden in such a base
couerture: if her conpanion be such another, do us this favor to make her wash
her self? To avoid all danger by reason of their tempting beauty (said
Felicia) and not to be molested like those, that have suffered many
inconveniences for theirs, they have gone thus disfigured in apparel and face.
As for the washing of this young Shepherdess (pointing to Stela) it shall
remain at my pleasure, when I will request her to do it, for dinner being
now ready, I will defer it till some other time, for fear I should give
you a dinner against your stomach, for washing now her foul face and hands,
will not (perhaps) make you eat so much, as otherwise you would, and make you
have a less appetite, then to see them in the manner that now they be. But if
you like not of her company at dinner, she shall sit by her self, and dine
with Parisiles, in whose eyes she is nothing so soul, nor ill-fauoured. And
then turning to her Nymphs, she commanded them to bring in dinner, who
presently came in with it. But if you please good Lady (said Lord Felix)
command Parisiles first to make an end of the tale he has begun. Since you
will have it so (said Felicia) I will entreat, not command him. It were great
reason sage Lady (said Parisiles) to hold my peace, and not to show so great
rudenes before your singular wisdom, if it were not more to obey your just
command. It is well (said Felicia) leave off this, and do that which all the
company here requesteth thee. Parisiles then began thus. Obeying then most
willingly (great Lady) what you have given me in charge, and purposing to tell
the cause why this Oak was planted between these two Laurel trees, I have
touched the gifts, that Apollo gave to the Laurel tree, when Daphne was turned
into it: From whence this noble company did not suffer me to pass any further,
though I alleged some excuses to the contrary, but that I must needs from the
beginning recount this transformation of Daphne into a Laurel tree. And so
having told of the glorious victory, that Apollo had of the serpent Python,
and of the quarrel and contention between him and Cupid for carrying both one
weapon, I went on along telling, how Apollo being proud of this conquest, by
chance cast his eyes upon the fair and chaste Nymph Daphne: And when you came
hither good Lady with Crimine, you gave a gracious impediment to my tale. So
that now (since it is your pleasure) I will proccede in it, beginning only but
with a word or two recited before, to annexe that, and this that follows the
better together.

APollo being in this heavenly joy,
For victory by Pythons death obtained,
Lift up by chance his eyes, and spi'de the Nymphe
(The fairest Nymphe as ever he did see)
Whom at the first he only did behold
With an impartial eye (a common thing)
And only marked her beauty, and her grace,
And with that common kind of honest love,
In praise of her these loving words did move.
What Nymph might yonder be,
So fine with her dishieueled hair,
That in this forest hunteth all alone?
I will go near to see,
If that she be indeed so fair,
As she does seem. Ah (Godheades) there is none
In all your heavenly throne,
No Goddess, nor no power divine,
With beauty, and good grace,
That nature does embrace,
Then this, in whom most clearly shine
Her gifts, and chiefest art,
As many as to all she did impart.
But Cupid seeing her in such estate,
Thought it high time to punish the contempt,
And brauing words, that proud Apollo used.
And now to be revenged on his head
With more dishonor and with greater shame,
He did prepare him to assail his foe
With those same weapons, that were threatened him:
So, with his headed shaft of beaten gold
He smot his breast, and passed his careless heart;
Omitting not to wound fair Daphnes to
With that of hate, headed with heavy lead.
And so with this the Boy remained glad,
And well did see, though blind what he had done.
And thus content in mind, he did depart,
Upon some others to employ his might.
O blinded Boy, of strong and mighty force,
Where none is found but only in thy hands,
That more the one with fervent love does burn,
The more the other freezeth with disdain.
And proud Apollo now thou shall perceive,
(That think no equal God to thee in heaven,
Nor celebrated in the earth beaneth
With such like honors, which thou claym'st alone)
That there is one that reigns in heaven and earth,
In hell, and every corner of the world,
More puissant then any other God.
Because thou art inuentor of the skill
Of physic, and of musickes sweetest art;
Because (besides) thou tell with secret power,
Things that are past, and present, and to come,
Thou think thou raign'st alone as Sovereign.
Now art thou subject to a silly maid,
Too base if she be paragon'd to thee:
And yet this greeues him not, but that the more
He loves this Nymph, the more does she contemn
His mighty love, and all his vainest suites.
Fair Daphnes heart is hardened and congealed
In love of this great God of heaven above:
Apollos heart consumes with burning heat
In love of this poor maid in earth beneath.
The God desires to enjoy her love,
And after this desire comes hope.
But here his Oracles deceive him much:
For in these things divining is but vain.
So with this hope, which is but vain, and false,
He does maintain and feed his barren love.
And feeling with great pain his burning fire,
To Cupid in this sort he mildly spoke:
What fire is it, that thus my breast does tame,
And yet no flame, I see that is manifest?
Is this thy best revenge, O Cupid tell,
Fierce God and fell, which on me thou do take?
How do thou make the mighty Gods to bend,
And do offend the rich, the proud, and wise,
And do despise and tame the great and small?
So easy shall not flixe, nor tovv be burned,
Nor reeds be turned to fire laid thereby,
Alas as I with thy revenging games
Do burn in flames: for thou have made my heart
To feel the smart of love, and with thy might
And golden flight, have (cruel) vvounded it.
Which thou have smit, and smitten, stolen away,
And made decay of it within my breast:
Where now no rest, nor wonted joys do dvvell.
Then cruel tell the same where have thouput,
Where have thou shut my heart of sorrovv? what,
And is that, perhaps? O that it is.
And now in this fair forest do they use,
Thus to abuse Gods hearts, and steal and kill?
From hence I will (Cupid) make thee my mate,
And friend (though late) for ever thou shall be,
Since linked me thou have in such a chain.
Her hair does stain the golden Colchos fleece,
Which out of Greece, Jason shall sail to seek.
Her face and cheek enameled with red,
With white be spread, passing the Roses gay
In month of May, that dare not come in place
To see her face, nor yet the Lilly white
Approach in sight, where her brave beauty shines.
Aurora pines in seeing her, and dies.
Her tvvinkling eyes, more then the heavenly lights
In frostie nights do shine, where Gupid skips.
Her rubie lips with praise shall not be vouch't,
But only touched, and kissed of mine again:
Her neck so plain, and smooth, nothing does owe
Unto the snow, for pure unspotted white.
What else (O spite) her wrongful garments grudge
To show, I judge, that nature made each part
With such brave art, as never humane eyes
Did see the like, or heavenly thought devise.
Whilste God Apollo wandreth in her praise,
Daphne with hasty foot does fly away.
Which when he did perceive, these words in vain
(Continuing still his speech) to her did say.
O thou the skies that do excel, stay, stay;
Fly not away so fast, thy friend I am:
So flies the lamb from ravening woolfe away,
The Heart again, of cruel death afraid,
With heart dismayed does from the Lion fly;
The doves do hie them from their praying king
With trembling wing, so each thing here below
Flies from his foe: But Love that burns Apollo
Does make him follow thee with friendly pace:
O see each place, whereon thy feet do tread,
With thorns bespread, unworthily to bear them.
The stones do wear them like the shauing file:
Then stay a while, and haste not so I pray.
Sharp is the way, and I for nothing would
My following should make thee (fair Nymph) to fall.
I pray thee, all I may, to moderate
Thy hasty gate, and I with milder pace,
To save thy face from hurt, will follow thee.
Oh did thou see, and know but who it is,
That moves his great l ue unto thee so,
Thou would I know not fly, but tarry still
To know my will, and think that thou were blessed
To be possessed of such a Lord so high.
I dwell not I, in this poor harren hill,
Though here I kill wild beasts for my delight:
I hold by right, as much as Tanais streams,
And Titans beams do see, where they arise:
This I despise, but only for thy sake,
Where thou did take thy beauties first of all.
Which country shall be reard unto the skies
In all men's eyes, with fame and dignity:
And loved of me, more then The Imperial seat
Of heaven so great, from whence fair Nymph I came.
Neither I am a Shepherd, nor do keep
Cattle, or sheep, but what love does commend
To me to tend. In Delphos for mine honor,
Of which the ovvnour I am, incense burns.
Claros by turns, and Tenedos likewise
Burn sacrifice to me: The lands which great
Xanthus does vveat, vvherevvith such sudden voice
I do rejoice the hearts of them, that crave
Answers to have by Oracle divine.
Delphos is mine, and famous there I am.
Of birth I came more noble then the rest:
For (at the lest) the Gods are kin to me.
First in degree great Jove my father is,
And she ywish that reigns in heavenly seat,
A Goddess great (Latona) fairer then
Fair Titan, when in all his chiefest pride
Unto his bride Aurora he does have:
By me things past, and those that present be
I know, and see, and things to come can tell:
I do excel in verse, and sweetest song:
With arm most strong I draw my bow and flight:
Where it does light, it hits with sure wound:
Yet have I found, that Cupids certain arrow
Does hit more narrow in my wounded breast,
Where all my rest and pleasures it has spent.
I did invent the art of medicine.
My wit divine found out the secret power
Of every flower, and herbs whose virtues still
Unto my skill, and practice subject be.
But woe is me, that neither herb nor pill,
Nor phisickes skill to love no ease imparts.
Nor that those arts, that profit every one,
Cannot help me their master all alone.
Now running fast away between them both,
Daphne to fly Apollos wanton will,
Apollo follovving chaste Daphnes love,
Love help Apollo with his speedy vvings,
And unto Daphnes feet fear tied her vvings.
And both sufficient favors have of both,
But love in fine does overcome pale fear,
Because he is more forvvard, light and hot.
But when the Nymph did see herself surprised,
And that the God embraced her in his arms:
Lifting her hands and eyes unto the heavens,
Succor she craved of all the immortal Gods,
Forgetting not her father demi God.
And in this sort besought their favors all,
Help each immortal power,
For jointly all your helps I do desire,
And humbly do your favors all inuoke:
None I except out of the heavenly quire:
O save my virgin flower:
Be ready, else with force it will be broke.
O let the earth devour,
And swallow me within her hidden veins
With furious pains.
Or else destroy my shape with thunder clap,
Since this mishap
It wrought. Help Pene now my father dear,
If deity be in thy rivers clear.
Scarce had fair Daphne ended her request,
When by and by a trembling fear possessed
Her body with each member of the same.
Hard bark did wind about her snow-white breast:
Her golden hair was turned to green leaves,
Her arms into two long and branchie boughs:
Her nimble foot, which was of late so light,
Fastened remaind in roots that could not stir,
And such like shape remaind in every part.
Apollo dearly loved this Nymph in life,
And now he loves her turned into a tree:
Where thrusting his right hand into the bark
Felt, that transformed Daphnes heart did yet
Tremble, and quake under the same so new.
He does embrace those fine and tender boughs,
As though he would embrace her body yet,
The wood he kisseth, but the wood disdaines
His kisses, and does seem to bend away.
So in this sort Apollo stood a while
Speechless, and thinking of no other thing:
After like one, that is amazed in mind,
Not knowing whether he does dream or no,
Upon the Gods, and heaven he does exclaim
With angry words of pity and despite;
Because they used such rigor to his love.
For feign he would had Daphne to his wife.
But when he savv it could not come to pass,
He chose her for his tree, and gave to it
Great honors, as the like had never yet:
And in this great astonishment he said.
What thing is this, which I do see,
Is it a dream, or none? O that it were
A fancy, or some vain deceit,
What, do I err?
Or is it night, or day, what might I be?
If it be true, I see a loss so great
With many harms my burning soul will threat.
But yet awake I am, for in my right
Hand Python dead, and headless I do bear,
And on my left arm wear
My bow, and low my quiver and my flight.
Why, this is Thessalie,
Which this fell beast did waste both day and night,
O woe, and after such a joy so high,
Must such mishap my sweet content deny?
What hard and cruel God is that,
That has transformed with envy and despite
Her goodly figure, and her face,
Most perfect bright?
Me thinks, he nill deserves to banquet at
The tables of the Gods, nor heavenly place,
Since he has wronged nature in this case.
My skill and powers bear not such a sway,
To change thee to thy former shape again:
And that snowewhite,
And rosy face, which first did breed my pain:
The reason is, because that none
(Though never yet so learned any way,
And though they ioin'd their virtues all in one)
Can undo that, which one did do alone.
But now since all the fates so dire,
And wicked destinies this good forbid,
That thou my loving wife should be:
Yet though they did
With more despite against my will conspire,
Thou shall for ever be my loving tree,
And I will never cease to honor thee.
My yellow hair like shining threeds of gold,
To honor thee, thy leaves shall compass round:
My harp with silver sound
Thou shall adorn, and quiver shall uphold:
In all the world thy noble fame shall bide:
And when triumphantly
In honors chair the Conqueror does ride,
Before them they shall carry thee on high,
Lifting their conquest to the starrie sky.
And as my fair and youthful head
Adorned is with locks of dangling hairs,
Whereon were never yet imploid
The little sheares:
Even so thy leaves shall never be destroid.
And angry time thy honor shall not tear,
But evermore green bows and leaves shall bear.
The lightning, that all creatures does offend,
And every thing of beauties pride bereaues,
Shall never touch thy leaves:
But be obedient to thee without end.
From lightning to defend
The oaks, with them thy branches they shall rear,
And every where
In honor of The Imperial palace gate,
On portals they shall place thee with great state.
This did Apollo speak unto the tree,
And gratefully the Laurel bowed her top,
In steed of moving her new changed head:
And with her new and tender branches made
A sign, that she with thankful mind received
These gifts and favors, which that God did give
To her, while Laurel on the earth did live.
And now behold (noble company) how I have fulfilled your commands, although
not so fitly to your demand nor my desire. Worthy Parisiles (said Lord
Felix) you have done no less then was expected at your hands: but yet one
doubt remains in my mind, for what reason the Oak is better kept then any
other tree, since there are of others a great number more necessary for man's
life. There is no God (answered Parisiles) but has some tree, bird, beast, or
other thing dedicated to his deity: as the Olive to Minerua; the Laurel to
Apollo; the Turtle dove to Venus; the Peacocke to Juno, and so forth. But
because Jupiter is the highest of the Gods, and the Oak is dedicated to him,
for this respect, to that tree, more then to any other, we do greater
reverence. I am satisfied, said Lord Felix. But tell me (I pray you) why the
Oak was rather dedicated to him then any other tree. To show the infinite
power and might of Jupiter, said Parisiles. It is well answered (said
Felicia.) And for this time let demands and answers cease, and let us go about
other necessary business, without the which no mortal creature can any long
time preserve life. The tables therefore being spread, and furnished with many
dainty dishes, Felicia took Crimine and Stela by the hands, and carried them
out of the meadowe to a fine spring, where Stela being washed, she apparelled
them as richly as their woorthines and beauty deserved, for she had commanded
some garments secretly to be brought thither, knowing what would ensue, and
then they returned by and by to the fountain, (for now they were tarying for
her) althings being in a readiness against her coming. Felismena and the
Nymphs beauties were so ecclipsed at Stelas coming, as the clear stars at
the rising of the radiant Sun, whereat all of them did not a little wonder,
the women, not without great emulation, procuring yet to comfort themselves, by
putting some defect therein, although indeed there was not any at all, which
(when they could find any such) they studied to pick it elsewhere, as out
of the baseness of her estate, or to attribute it to some other things, that
they (with inquiring and talking amongst themselves) are commonly wont to help
and flatter theirs withal. But now (said Felicia) you may laugh indeed at
Parisiles embracements, and you shall see, if we did with good cause find
fault with him for conioyning his reverend visage with so foul a face. Then
Parisiles rose up, and began to embrace Stela a new, saying. O my daughter, now
do I see thee like thy self, and in the habit of thine own estate and
deserts. The unknown Shepherd marking all this, his color in his face went
and came, not because he saw Stela in so brave a habit, for his affection
did not augment with the bravery, nor value of her costly garments, neither
did his love diminish with the baseness of her pastoral habit; but for the
remembrance of that time, when he had seen her in like ornaments. His color
changed also for envy of Parisiles, thinking that those imbracings were more
proper and due to him. But Felicia must needs come once again to put old
Parisiles and Stela asunder, which done, they went to dinner. To tell the manner
and order of their libationes, which they made before they went to dinner, and
to describe the preparation, order and diversity of dainty messes, as things
too prolixe, I think best to omit.

The end of the second book.
The third Book of the second Part of Diana of George of Montemayor.
WHen dinner was done, all of them being very desirous to know what these
Shepherdesses and the unknown Shepherd was, and for what cause Parisiles
showed himself so incensed against him, Lord Felix, for his own desire, and
at the request of his beloved Felismena, and the Nymphs and Shepherds, prayed
Felicia in her ear, to entreat it of them; whom Felicia answered, saying: By
this request I might demand of them a thing which I assure you, they themselves
cannot tell, for the unknown Shepherd, and the fair Shepherdess know not
who they are, how can they then make any report of themselves? And it is not
now possible for you to know the course of their lives, for they are here in
the presence of old Parisiles, before whom they dare not unfold it. But yet
leave this charge to me, and I will find out some means to satisfy you
herein. I could tell it better then they, (better I say) touching the
certain knowledge who they are: Nevertheless I mean that you shall hear it
from their own mouths, who can better express their own affections, as
those that they passed themselves. When Felicia had answered thus, Lord Felix
made signs to her to speak no more of the matter for that time, whereupon all
of them were content, perceiving it was most convenient to be so. But having
now reposed themselves a little after dinner, Felicia said unto the unknown
Shepherd. Show these Shepherds thy sheepe-hooke, and view it well, for it
deserves well to be seen. The Shepherd then rose up for it, for he had laid
it aside with his scrip, when he sat down to dinner. And giving it to the
Sepherds, and Lord Felix seeing it of a different color, requested only to
see of what wood it was, for from a very little sidewise, the principal was
not divided, which might be from the mids of the pommell upward, which was
wrought all over, and carved very fine, and from one side thereof (I say) this
caruing was not seen, by reason of the fine workmanship. But when Lord Felix
holding it in his hand, viewed the sheepehooke well, he said. Why would
thou have the Shepherds (good Lady) only enjoy the sight of this sheepehooke?
Because it is a thing (said Felicia) more properly apperteining to their
estate. And me thinks (said Lord Felix) it may well beseem a Prince his
hands, though it is well enough bestowed, where it is. If I am of any worth
amongst so good a company as this (said the Shepherd) I will not gainsay you,
neither is it my mind, to pay you with the same money, least my base words
might diminish your high deserts. Now was Lord Felix answering, when Felicia
reached forth her hand, saying. Here take it, and view it well. Then came the
Shepherds Syrenus, and Syluanus to Lord Felix, to look upon the curious
sheepehooke; Which was all black with some white spots, and the women stayed
to look on it afterward. They varied amongst themselves what wood it might
be, and there were diverse opinions concerning the same. Some of them said it
was the wood of Aloes, others of Ebony; and in the end concluded, that it was
the root of an Olife, which was very like to both. Then they began to view
the sheepe-hooke well, which was of length, as much as a man of mean stature
to the breast; from the part beneath to the mids of the head, and from the part
above in the steel a handful length: it was garnished with copper, which
shined like gold, so finely laid in, and so even with the wood, that if it were
not for the different color, the staff might hardly have been discerned from
the metal. Then from the metal in the steel, without any work, two strikes
went down as broad as two barley corns: the rest of the pommell of the
sheepe-hooke was divided into four pieces in breadth, by four pedestals,
Bases, Cannyons, Chaptrees, Architrees, Frises, and Cornishes. And yet because
all reached not to the steel (for all the four pillars vpheld it) upon every
one was a little child, holding forth his arm, and lifting up one leg, the
better to reach it with his hand, and to support the steel of it. Between
pillar and pillar were four little figures very finely wrought, so that there
were sixteen carved pieces in all the Pommell: But between every pillar, one
only fable was carved, belonging to sheep or Shepherds, because it was a
hook for a Shepherd. In the piece that was first offered to their sight, was a
goodly white Bull in a heard amongst many other Bulls and Cowes, a fairer Bull
then all the rest, and with white horns (for the workman helped himself by
the white streakes of the wood, when he had any occasion) whereon Europa was
putting a garland of flowers, which she took from her own head; the Bull
lying gently, standing quietly, and licking her garments, to assure her the
more of his gentleness. A little before that was she sitting upon the Bulls back,
who by little and little (making as though he went feeding) rose up. Above the
first of these two pieces, the Bull, turning his head, licked the Damsels
hands that rod upon him, and pace by pace went toward the sea shore that
was hard by, putting now and then his foore into the water. Above the second
figure of his first space, the Bull leapt indeed into the sea before him: upon
whose back the Damsel sitting with great fear, and not regarding her wette
and drenched garments, thought good to hold fast by his horns, to save her
self from falling, turning her pitiful face (and wrinkled for fear) to the
shore, which she was forced to leave. When they had beheld this piece,
turning the sheepe-hooke a little about, they saw in the second piece of it a
goodly Shepherd amongst a flock of sheep, wearing upon his yellow locks a
band of fine white silk loose, to tie them up on either side, because they
might not hang down about his eyes. Whom (for that a little before he was more
earnestly, and with more brightness beholding the Moon) they knew to be
Endimion. In the upper part thereof, they saw the selfsame man lying upon the
massy body of a tree (cut down) and the Moon with her arts and power
endeavoring to cast him into a deep sleep. The intent why she had to make him
sleep, was understood by that which followed, for when he was asleep, she
was lovingly kissing the fair youth. In the third part, or space of it, was
the Goddess Juno talking with a Shepherd that had a hundred eyes, (named
Argus) pointing with her finger to a fair white heyfer, which she commanded
him to keep well, and threatening him, if he did otherwise. The same Argus a
little farther was sitting upon a rock, with his ninety eight eyes (which
then watched) looking steadfastly upon the heyfer that was committed to his
charge. In the upper piece Mercury was passing by in a shepherds habit,
playing on a Baggepipe, who being invited by Argus to sit down and rest him,
at the sweetenes of his music, all his eyes fell asleep. A little before
that, Argus being killed by Mercury, he carried the heyfer away, or (to say
more properly) Io transformed into a heyfer, and gave her to Jupiter. In the
fourth part, in Xanthus river banks was Alexander engraven, who was afterward
called Paris, casting his left arm about a Nymphs neck (called Enone) and
with his right hand caruing these letters in a poplar, the smooth bark
whereof served him for paper, and a sharp knife for pen and ink. First shall
these christ all streams their courses backward move,
Before I will forget my sweet and dearest Love.


A little farther was the Nymph with this Shepherd among'st the boughs of a
low Tamarisque, despoyling the harmless Nightingale of her dearest pretty
ones, and the sorrowful Dame fluttering up and down over their heads, and,
for that injury, crying for vengeance to the impartial heavens. In the piece
above, Mercury was showing Paris (who from that time took this name) a golden
apple, pointing to it with a wande in his hand, to give it to the fairest of
those three Goddesses that came with him. A little before this were the three
Goddesses stripping themselves naked at Paris command, the better to give his
judgment, and after having viewed them on every side, and each ones several
beauty, he gave it to Venus, who remained very proud and lofty by obtaining
the prize, and the other two hanging down their heads with sad countenances,
and angry against the Shepherd. In the steel of it diverse artificial sports
were carved, and sundry kinds of huntings, not to be told or written here, to
avoid tediousnes. Although Lord Felix, and the Shepherdes, Seluagia, and the
Nymphs every one by themselves viewed the sheepehooke, yet Parisiles would
never take it in his hands, because it belonged to that Shepherd, whom he hated
above althings in the world. After they had seen and marked the sheepehooke
well, and commended the fine workmanship and devises of it, Syrenus asked the
Shepherd, if he himself had made it. The Shepherd answered no, nor knew by
whom it was made, but only him, that gave it him. It seemed he meant thee no
ill (said Syrenus) when he gave thee so rich a gift as this. Nay rather (said
Crimine) he that gave it him, was even then, and yet is the most mortal enemy
he has, and gave it him to as cruel an intent and purpose, as was ever heard
of, because it might have been the means to have brought this Shepherd to a
violent and untimely death, as it has been the occasion not only of his
banishment and ours, but also of the cruel imprisonment of his dearest friend.
At these words the Shepherd Stela, and Crimine could not hold their tears,
whereupon they would ask them no more of that matter. But Felicia said. I
know my friend Parisiles, that it greeues this young people, that you and I
are here, who having respect and reverence to our age, cannot converse
together with such discourses as are most agreeable to their minds, and common
amongst young folks: Let us therefore give them place, if you think it best,
and go and talk together, for our pastimes shall be no less delightful unto
us then theirs to them. But because they are a suspicious kind of people,
Stela and Crimine shall go with us. They laughed all at these last words, and
then without more ado, Felicia, and they three went walking out of that
meadow. But as they were going (being a little way from the fountain, where
most of the company was) Felicia said to them that went with her. Stay here
a little, for I have forgotten to warn them of one thing: wherefore being come
back to the fountain, she said to the unknown Shepherd. Since I have to
talk with Parisiles about a matter concerning thee, thy friend, and the
content of you all, my departure from hence is to withdraw Parisiles, Crimine,
and Stela from this place, because thou may the better report to them that
stay here with thee, who thou art, or (at the least) as much as thou know
of thy self, and why, and how thou did bring so good company with thee; for
as they greatly desire to hear it, so shall I think thou do much for me, if
thou will afford me and them this content. When she had said thus, she went
back again to her company, which she left staying for her, with whom she
walked to a secret place, where sitting down, she said. Sit down Parisiles,
and daughters forbear us a little, or else go walk up and down there, for I
will not have you bear witness of the love that I have to impart to Parisiles.
They two therefore remaining all alone, Felicia told him all that hereafter
shall be rehearsed, and that he should not take it in ill part, that his
daughter went in the Shepherds company; for such an one he was, by whom
nothing should be lost, and the rather, since he had entertained her, and her
love with the greatest purity, and sincerity in the world. And that he
should expect, that all things should succeed by a preordinate course from
the Gods, which we cannot attain to (said she) in bare conceit, considering
that they for the most part give to those whom they love, wished ease and
content, when they think themselves farthest from it. These and many other
things did she discourse with him. But the unknown Shepherd, that stayed in the
company of Lord Felix, Felismena, the Nymphs, and the Shepherdes ( Felicia
being gone) began thus to say.

TOuching the first thing you demand of me (noble Lord, and the rest) to tell
you who I am, I know not how to resolve you therein, for that not many years
since I knew these parts (my parents not being those whom I took them to be)
and with desire to know who they were, I came with a certain friend of mine
(the half part of mine own soul) out of our supposed own country. The Gods
made him and me not only in body, face, and condition, but in fortune, and
manner of life so like, that it might be said, they gave us two souls for one
body, or two bodies for one soul: and so he knows no more nor less then my
self, who his father or mother is. We believed we were brethren, but that in
distinct places, and with different persons we were brought up: I, with a young
and courteous Shepherd; he, with an old and reverend Shepherdess. I (who am
called Delicius) was brought up in a little village in Tinacria, in the corner
called Pachinus, and in the house of a Shepherd (called Carpostus) my friend
(whose name is Parthenius) in another village in the second corner of one of
the three which that Island has (called Pelorus) in the house of another
Shepherd called Sarcordus. From this base estate fortune lifted us up on high,
wherein we lived a while: but because you may hear the brave and strange
means, whereby our good or ill hap did guide us to it, I will now tell it you,
wherein I must advise you to carry the names of my dear friend and mine in
memory, as also of our nurses, if you will delight you with the rare accident.
It happend that Carpostus my nune (I being then but three years old) went
about certain business to the place where my Parthenius was nursed, who seeing
him play with other children in the street, stood half amazed, thinking it was
I (so like were we to one another) and that from out some Cannon I had been
shot into that place: but yet he marvelled more, when the child (after he was
come to him, and had kissed him against his will) with his weak forces
endeavored to wind himself from him. At the cry that Parthenius gave, his
nurse came out, and with sharp words blamed Carpostus, who not so patiently
endured her, but that he had offered (had it not been for some of the
townsmen which came running out at that noise) to have rudely entreated her.
But he still affirmed obstinately that it was his child, and made such ado
about it, that of all of them there he was reputed for a man out of his wits.
In the end Carpostus held his peace, seeing it was no point of wisdom to be
opposite against the whole town, who affirmed with one voice, that it was the
child of that woman: and seeing moreover, that the child ran away from him
(which more persuaded him to the contrary of that, which he thought in his
mind) he was content to be quiet. But the more he viewed the childs face,
hands, qualities, gesture, age, and stature, the more he found himself
incredulous: And so much, that he could not otherwise think, but that the
woman had bewitched them al, or that he was surely in a dream. To be brief, he
returned as soon (as he could) to his own town in great fear and doubt not
to have found me there. But the joy, that he conceived in seeing me (when he
came home) and with what a glad countenance I ran unto him, as I was wont to
do, made no less alteration in his mind: the which my nurse Carpostus
perceiving, with a moderate laughter said unto me. It is not long since (my
child) thou did deny me: for children and sons our nurses called us,
requested by them so to do, that did first put us to them to be brought up. And
coming to his wife, he asked her if I had been at any time from home since
his departure, who answered no but some little while, when I went to play with
other children abroad. But why said she? Carpostus then told her all that had
happened, at which strange novelty she wondered not a little, and more when he
told her of the great resemblance of us both. And who would indeed have laughed
heartily at the deceit, but that her husband grew very pensive and sad: which
she considering well with her self, asked him if any other thing had happened
unto him, or what the matter was; for if it were no more but that, he might
have greater cause to be glad (she said) then sorry. Carpostus answered, that
he had made so great ado in the town, affirming it was his child, that they
might justly judge him for a senseless and drunken fool. After my nurse
Calasta (for so she was called, who was ever accounted subtle and wise) had
thought a little upon the matter, she resolved upon this which you shall now
hear. And thus it was. My nurse Carpostus and his wife carried me closely
(because I might not be seen) to the town where Parthenius was brought up,
where, being very privately kept, and Calasta tarying with me secretly at the
Inn, Carpostus went again to seek out little Parthenius, and having found
him, began to wrangle as before, affirming still it was his son, and that
he would prove it before the best in the town, or any Justice else, when
as most of the townes-men (that had flocked together to see his madness the
other time before) were laughing again at his headless folly, that now yet
another time he stood stiffely in his former error: who nevertheless took
away the child Parthenius, and (for all that they could do to the contrary)
running as fast as ever he could, carried him home to the Inn. It was worthy
the sight, to see how he carried the child, that cried out amain, and how the
people ran after him, fearing least (like a frantike man) he would have done
it some harm. The brute whereof being spread abroad, Sarcordus, nurse unto
Parthenius, ran up and down in a great heat to seek Carpostus out, fearing
least some harm might befall to his little child. And having quickly found
him in talk with other people in the street, (for by this time he had left the
child privily with Calasta and me) he would feign have had a blow or two
with him; but that the dissuasions of his neighbors stayed his unbridled
fury, as also for the gentle and mild words that Carpostus gave him: who
knowing him to be his father (father he called him, for he knew him for none
other) said thus unto him. Good Man of the child, whether he be thine (as
thou supposest) or mine (as I certainly know it) fear not, but that he is well
enough, and without any harm at all. To return him back to thee, shall be as
we can either of us make our best proof before the judge: So that if the
child be thine, here am I, that will restore him as safe and sound as I took
him away; if he shall be judged to be mine (whereof I doubt not) thou need
not care for his safety, (if thou do not mean (at the least) to care for
other men's matters.) These words of Carpostus liked all the townsmen well,
not because they doubted one whit of the wrong, that he offered the other, but
to hear his reasons, which he grounded upon a thing so much without reason.
For proof whereof much people flocked together with either of them in presence
of the Justices, before whom Carpostus being come, in this sort began to speak.

As I am assured (grave Judges) before my cause shall be fully justified before
you, that you will take me for a man deprived of my wits, (you being informed
perhaps by mine adversary to the contrary of my demand, and by the townsmen
of of this present accident) by wilfully oppugning a thing cleerer (as you
think) then noone day: So when my manifest right is but with indifferent
justice ratified before your impartial ears, I doubt not, but his false
supposall shall be utterly condemned, and my just demand apparently proved.
Whereupon (because the matter may be more rightly scanned and determined)
reverend Judges you must know, that a few days since I was deprived (to
speak more modestly) of a little son, and (thinking least of all of such a
wickedness, as the thing to be most strange) having not long before left him in
my house at my departure, and coming hither with all the haste I could, found
him unawares in this town playing with other children in the street, only
referring it to your tender consideration (that have loving children) what I
might justly feel, when leaving him (as I said) at home a little before, I
found him on the sudden in so distant a place: whereupon (as I did but the
part of a loving father) by taking him away, so was I judged of all men to be a
mad and senseless man. Seeing my self mocked and injured by them for
demanding mine own, I dissembled the matter for that time, because I would not
be such an one indeed, by wilfully resisting a whole town: But now with
witnesses I come to defend my cause, which accustomed proof, if perhaps you will
not allow, as insufficient, or call their sincerity in suspicion of my
supposed right, for better proof and testimony thereof, I mean (by your
permission) to make my claim in such sort, as shall best please mine
adversary; whereby I think not only to convict him, but also to make the
standers by believe, their opinions to be as false, as their words injurious,
that they have unjustly conceived and uttered against me: So that, command mine
adversary (most rightful Judges) to choose out some way or other to try the
truth, if yet (at the least) he claims this child in controversy to be his
son. To this Sarcordus answered thus. The matter brought here before you
(most reverend and just Judges) being accounted of all most bad of it self and
most untrue, I think so far unfit (for the high respect due unto you) to
trouble your grave ears withal, that were it not by the dissuasion of my
friends, but especially by the due regard of justice (wherein he falsely
claims to have the only title) and by maintaining of the kings inuiolate
peace (whereof I am a member) this controversy had been (without troubling
you) long since decided. But since for justice he calls and cries, which (though
supposed) is not wont to be denied any here, I was content to condescend to
his own request, assuredly knowing when by your grave censures the matter shall
be thoroughly scanned, to overcome him with his own weapons. All which
considered, you must either judge this man a very fool in that he speaks (and
as I mean to prove him no less) or else think, that he comes to importune
and mock you, procuring you come to judgment of a matter cleerer then the
brightest light. But because his impudency may be thoroughly known, and that
you may inflict due punishment upon him for it, Command him, I beseech you, to
bring hither the child, which with the testimony of all the town I will
prove to be mine. If this proof be sufficient (said Carpostus interrupting
him) I will also prove it by the uniform voice of all my town to be as well
mine. Why then grave Judges (said Sarcordus) we will no longer detain you
here about this matter. Let the child be brought and set between us both,
and let him be deemed the right Father to whom it will go. Carpostus (for that
was the thing he most of all desired) immediately answered. Bear witness all
good people what he says. And deprive him (grave Judges) of a Son, whom the
child shall forsake, and let not the offender and condemned person escape
unpunished: he, for his theft committed; me, for my folly and shame that is
spread abroad of me. When he had spoken these words, he turned him about to a
boy that he brought with him on purpose, and said unto him. Run to the Inn and
bring the child hither, who brought me straight ways thither, leaving
Parthenius still in the Inn, whose coats I did then wear, for Calasta my
nurce had taken off his to put them upon me, and in change of them, had put
mine upon him. But now when I was come near, the people made way, Sarcordus
standing on the one side, and Carpostus on the other. Then the boy that carried
me in his arms, brought me in sight of them both, and I with a merry
countenance (being called by the name of loving son) ran to my Father, not
turning so much as mine eyes to Sarcordus, who was with great grief and
anguish of mind calling in vain upon me. This being done to the great wonder
of all the town (for there was none there that durst not have laid his head,
but that I was Parthenius) Carpostus took me up and set me near to Sarcordus
(himself going away) but I ran by and by after him, making no account at all
of Sarcordus. At this sight, as they were all astonished, so were they not able
to say any thing else, but that Carpostus had bewitched me, and therefore took
him for some co^iurer and wicked person. But first they brought Sarcordus his
wife to see if I would seem to faune more on her (being (as they thought)
mother unto me) then on him, of whom (to be short) I made no more account then
of Sarcordus. Wherefore Carpostus said unto Sarcordus and all the standers by.
Why men of sense and reason dote you thus? Be assured the child knows his own
Father well enough. Command him therefore (I beseech you righteous Judges) to
offer no violence to me for carrying away what is mine own. The Judges not
knowing what to determine in so doubtful a case, Carpostus said. I know not
(grave Judges) why in a matter so manifest as this, you should suspend your
just judgment, but that without delay you should proceed to definitive
sentence, unless you seem to make any more doubt herein, which if you do, I
will clear it, if it please you to send the child back again to my lodging
by this boy, who shall incontinently return with him again; for whom I will
in the mean time remain here a pledge, because it shall not be said, that I
took possession of him before sentence given. That being granted him, he
willed the boy that brought me (but secretly in his ear) to carry me back,
and to bring the other child, not forgetting to put on his own coats, who did
it incontinently, and having brought Parthenius there before them all, without
any more ado, he ran to his Father Sarcordus, and to his known nurse
Sarcordus wife. The Judges seeing so strange an alteration, and thinking he did
what he listed with the child (for they took me and Parthenius to be both one)
commanded to lay hands on him for a notable Sorcerer. To whom Carpostus
(seeing whereabout they went) said. Though here I am (worthy Judges) at your
disposition and command, yet do me this favor (I beseech you) to suspend your
doom, until you see the end of this matter; it may be you will delight your
selves with the conueiance and rare sequel of it. And then he bad the boy
carry back the child, commanding him softly in his ear to bring me and the
other child back again, but both naked. And this he devised, because
Parthenius might not be known by his coats. But before we came, he requested
the Judges to command Sarcordus and his wife to go aside, or to put themselves
amongst the prease of the people, so that the child, when he was commight not
see them. They did so, and behold we were both brought naked thither, and
playing together, at the sight whereof the standers by marvelled very much,
and they that came to behold the fame of that which was past, wondering yet a
great deal more; and others, that came after us in the streets, looking upon
one another in sign of admiration spoke not a word, but opened their hands,
and sometimes lifted up their eyes to heaven in token of great wonder and
admiration. Then with a loud voice Carpostus (before we came) spoke thus. One
of these children is mine, the other is Sarcordus his. Let him therefore take
his own. But because the child by seeing him, may not know him, let him come
to claim him behind the people, and I will also hide me here. Sarcordus
being therefore come in manner aforesaid, and not able to discern which was
his, my nurse said. Now do you see (grave Judges and good people assembled to
behold the end of this debate) how I have this day (to delight you with a
rare novelty) presented before your eyes the strangest wonder in the world,
because you might not wonder at me, nor repute me for such a fool, as you
have taken me, for that which these few days past I have done with
Parthenius, believing he was my son, and because you might see, whether I had
just cause to claim him with assurednes for mine own or not. They were all
passing glad to see this strange conclusion, and took him for a very wise man,
in that he had so well contrived the matter to save his credit: And with great
reason (said Lord Felix) though all was done (in my opinion) by Calastas
counsel, albeit I cannot also otherwise think, but that Carpostus was very
wise by knowing how to govern himself so well against the whole town. When
he had said thus, Delicius proceeded in his discourse saying. They put on our
garments again, and to give either their own, was no less variance, and as
great difficulty as before; for if we of our selves had not made our selves
known to our nurses (either of us going to his own) we might have both gone
naked home again. But from that time we entered both into such a mutual league
of amity, that by no means they could part us asunder: for much force had
one God (I know not) that reigned in us, over each others soul, divining the
great and inviolable friendship that should be between him and me. I fear me
(noble Sir, and the rest) that you would a good while since have asked me what
was become of my dear brother Parthenius (for so we ever called one another)
and other questions that you have left of, not to interrupt me in my tale.
Delicius would have passed on farther but his falling tears would not permit
him. Wherefore Cynthia came to him, saying. Dry up thy tears (Shepherd) and
tell on thy tale, for by doing this, thou show the small confidence and hope
thou have in my Lady Felicias help, whereas I my self have also diverse times
told thee before that thy sorrows shall be remedied. Delicius then wiping his
eyes, said. Thou tellest me (O Nymph) by that which I show, the small trust I
have in Felicia; but I tell thee, that by thy speech, thou do manifest how
little thou art acquainted with my grief, and how less thou know of like
passions, to which knowledge I wish thou may never attain, since ignorance
in such matters is much more expedient. I could tell thee much about these
effects, if I thought not to offend this worthy company: but only one word
I will tell thee. That hope does not pardon the punishment, although it does
lighten it a little. But thou seem Shepherde (said Polydora) to know the
very secrets of our hearts, because (as thou have told true touching the desire
we had to know what was become of thy dear brother) thou did chance to say,
that we would not give thee leave for answers and replies: wherefore
dissembling thy grief for a while, tell out the rest as thou have begun. With
a good will, said Delicius. But let it not grieve you (worthy personages) if
you hear not now of my beloved brother, considering, that the great grief
which I suffer for him, must now suffice, and that the process of my history
shall in convenient place declare it amply unto you; and if not so, at some
other time you shall know it, when you shall see what great reason I have to
solemnize such a memory with these and many more tears. The fame of this
strange accident (I told you of) and of our great likeness within a few days
after came to the ears of old Synistius, governor of the kingdom where we
were borne, who was placed there by Rotindus king of Eolia, for the which cause
Synistius commanding, that we should be brought unto him (as well for our
great likeness, as for the great beauty which we were reported to have when we
were children) took us from our fathers, and not long after sent us to
Rotindus, who also hearing that rare report, which fame had blown abroad of
us, sent for us to keep Agenestor his nephew company, to whom he was
Grandfather by the mothers side, being then but one year yoonger then us both.
As it was strange to see what intensiue love every one did bear us, so were
the unspeakable favors and affection, which the young prince Agenestor showed
us, so great, that needs we must (to content him) lie altogether in one
chamber; for whose sake, like (...) panie, I will tell you what the song was,
and whatsoever else you shall command me, since such an one did sing it, whom
I shall never forget, nor the song it self, while I have either life or
memory.

IF to my musickes skill
Apollo might his praises all resign,
And if (unto my will)
My speech were so divine,
That Mercury for grief thereat might pine.
And if that eloquence
So famous of Minerua sweet, did seem yet
But r^ude irreuerence
To mine, and each one deem it
But harsh, and placed with mine, but base esteem it.
And if I were adorned
With hundred mouths of iron, and like wit,
Or if I had been borne
With Dimond toongs (admit)
Or saw my self in every part so fit:
The ruin, nor the fall
Of those, whom Jove from scaled heaven did throw,
Nor that great flood, when all
The drowned world did flow,
I would not tell, nor time in them bestow.
Only by me thy praise
(O Chastity) with honor should be told:
And with thy heavenly ways
I would no less unfold
Those goodly parts, that thou do still uphold.
Thou art a weeder out
Of vices, from the place of virtues grain:
And thou do go about
Our honors to maintain,
And do our souls from cancred vice restrain.
The only way and sign
Thou art, that does the soul to virtue lead,
A captain most divine,
That under foot do tread
Thy foes: Thy fort and tower no force do dread.
Foul leacherie does kill
Reason, if that it conquered has the same,
And captive to her will
Does make it (to her shame:)
So to the maid the Mistress subject came.
Thou chastity do free
Reason (if to thy gate she bend her pace)
In more supreme degree:
And she in every place
Is only free, that does thy law embrace.
The soul with sweetest balm
Thou fillest, and the senses do refine,
And therewith all, the palm
Of beauty most divine
Thy figure bears, where bravely it does shine.
The vain thoughts of the mind,
Which reason cannot with her counsel tame,
Nor friendly discipline,
Thy wisdom does reclame:
And apt to each good art the soul do frame.
Being sincere, and pure,
Thou ioinest us to things pure, and sincere,
And so thou do assure
Those, that thy robe do wear,
Friends unto God, a conscience free from fear.
In vain I here do waste
These words, wherewith thy praises I pretend:
Better it were (at last)
In action to commend
Thee, then with words; And so I make an end.
Having made an end of her sweet song, and perceiving that she came not
again, we rose up softly to see, who had so much ioyed the Forest, filling it
with so sweet harmony. But casting our eyes to the place from whence the
delicate voice came, a sudden noise and rushing of the river waters hard by,
made us suddenly look that way. The cause whereof was the passage of a most
fierce Shepherd that in great haste came wading through the river. He was of
stature so huge and high that no common tall man might reach with his head
above his middle, to whose high and maine growth each lim of his body was
proportionablie correspondent. In every part he was so hairie, that the skin
of his body might hardly have been discerned, if the hair (like to the
bristles of wild Boares) had not grown right forth. His eyes were terrible to
behold, and full of foggie flesh; his wearing of wild beasts skins (from
whom he rent and took them) was sodden hard for his defense against their
sharp teeth; his sleeves came no further on his arms, then almost to his
elbowes, and his hose but a little beneath his knees. On his head he ware a
broad Shell of a sea Tortuse, which served him for his morion. His scrip, that
hung down behind his shoulders, was made of a wild goats skin. Almost a
whole Pine tree, (big enough for the mast of some tall ship) served him for his
sheepe-hooke; the end whereof was poynted with sharp and tempered steel. The
cause of his passing through the river in such haste, was to follow (as we
afterward perceived) a certain Damsel, which was singing the song (which you
have heard) on the other side of the river. Whose fair sight filled us with no
less wonder, then the fierce show of the huge and monstrous Shepherd with a
pale and shiuering fear. As soon as the fair virgin had set eye on
Gorphorost (for so was this deformed fellow called) with incredible swiftnes
she began to fly away, and coming to pass near unto the place where we
were, we judged her to be some Nymph, resembling in face like a fair boy, or a
boy transformed in countenance like to a fair Nymph: for her habit was not
altogether manlike, nor in every point apparelled like a woman. Her
disshiueled hair (in brightness surmounting the fine Arabian gold) in curled
locks hung dangling about her snow-white forehead; and from the mids of her
head (which with a crown of Laurel and sweet colored flowers was graced) in
fair and loo^ tresses hung carelessly down. The which being spread abroad
upon her even shoulders, and with a sweet sight falling down beneath her fine
waste, were gathered up by the said Laurel crown, because they might not hide
such singular beauty, nor hinder the light of her radiant eyes. On her body
she wore a fine little doublet of a most perfect purple tynsell (the like I
think not to be imagined) the same being richly died, and wouen as curiously
as art could devise, and so fit for her sightly body, that it seemed, it was
endowed with understanding, desiring by no means to be severed from it; the
which at her fair and smooth neck (for some greater respect) was somewhat
carelessly loose. The purple color of this little doublet with the glimmering
beams of her snow-white face reflecting upon it, was represented with such a
heavenly grace, like to that orient blush, which a crimson vale (pierced by the
Sunnc bright beams) is wont to cast upon some white Palace. A little wind
gathered by the speed of her swift running, fashioned a delicate lap of the
same color of the doublet: the white and azure border whereof came down but a
little beneath the calfe of her fine leg, when, but half a light green
busquin, wrought all before with flowers of gold, was discovered to our
dazeled eyes, with certain Scarpines or shoes (such as Mercury (men say) was
wont to wear) to defend her pretty foot from the injuries of the hard
ground. Within her Iuorie quiver, that so seemly hung on her left shoulder,
her loose arrows went shaking up and down. The bow she carried in her left
hand, with three arrows in her right, made her in her flight more light and
nimble. And in this sort Parthenius and I beheld at once this sovereign
virgin; and both at once (as after it was known) were surprised with the
beauty of her angelical face: which made us so far besides our selves, that
both of them in a short time being ouerrun us a pretty way, we neither thought
upon her succor, nor once remembered to deliver her from that bruit beast, who
was almost at her fainting heels: which help admit, though awaked out of our
sudden passion and wonder we had offered to have lent her; yet had we neither
bin able to control Gorphorostes beastly forces, nor to com any thing near him
in running, nor yet to have overtaken saire Stela (for this is the Sovereign
name of the noble virgin and heavenly Shepherdess, that disdaines not my
company) in her swift and fearful flight. Needless it had been (said Lord
Felix) to tell her name, when as by thy fine description and praises, that thou
have given her, it might be easily coniectured who she was. O let him proceed
Lord Felix (said Doria) for me thinks I am enduring all this while the pains
and fear, wherein this fair Nymph was, until I see her free from the hands
of this monstrous beast: wherefore as thou love thy self, good Shepherd,
make haste, (if it be true at the least) that she escaped from him. Then said
Delicius. Now had the cruel Gorphorost blown up fair Stelas hair with his
fiery foming breath, when she, looking pale for fear to see him so nigh her,
and her-selfe in so apparent danger, encouraged her fainting spirits (well-nie
overcome by the violent pains of her swift course) and got a little again
before him; wherewith being (happily) come to the rivers side, where it yeeldes
his running streams into the sea, she said. Ye sacred Nymphs, if it be true
that you have any power in your waters, forsake not (I beseech you) a
distressed virgin, long since devoted to the purity of chaste Diana, since
you are so great friends to her, whom I have ever honored from my heart. When
she had thus said, she threw her-selfe into the river; and after her, fierce
Gorphorost without fear, lept in, where he had been in great danger of
drowning, if he had had less strength to wrestle with the fury of the swift
stream, or known as little, by swimming, to have helped himself. The ugly
Shepherd when he saw himself o^ ^he other side of the river, shaking off the
water from him, like to the dirtie swine when they come out of their wallowed
puddles, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, in a loud and menacing manner
began thus to exclaim. O ye partial Gods (if there be any, besides mine own
will and appetite) ye unjust Gods enuiers of my good, how would I peece-meale
rent you, if I had you in my hands, to teach you not to meddle any more in my
matters. And thou Neptune, who above the rest art termed to have an absolute
and sole power over the waters, cast out from thy habitations that, which of
right belongs to me; otherwise in these caves and dens I will every day
disquiet thee and thy company, turning these huge and steepie hills into thy
waters. As he was vttring these proud words, we came to the river, where we
saw a goodly Nymph put out her yellow head, and spoke these words against
Gorphorost. Thou huge and monstrous beast, that, in dishonor of the immortal
Gods art vomiting out blasphemies, hurtful to thy self, and not offensive to
them, hark what I will say unto thee. Thou have now incensed all the Gods so
much against thee, that (were it not to reserve thee for some greater torments)
they would presently afflict thee with due punishment. Trouble not thus our
waters, since the utmost of thy power is so little able to profit thy self,
unless thou will also make us thy principal enemies, and purchase our ill
wills; which (think not) shall be small, since we have her in our custody,
whom thou unworthily call thy Goddess: We keep her, but not for thee, who
by the fates is allotted to another. She remains in our palaces without any
harm, for it was not reason she should for thy fault, suffer any at all. And
with this get thee hence, hopeless for ever to see her in thy power, in whose
behalse the Gods were never so unjust, as to combine two such unequal persons
together. To this Gorphorost answered thus. The threatenings of these, whom
vainly thou termest Gods, and Goddesses (sweet Nymph, the happy gardienne of
my sacred Goddess) I little account of, who never yet acknowledged subjection
to any other, but to her, who (as thou say) remains now in your dwelling
places. And her justly do I confess to be mine only Goddess, and therefore
fear her more then all the rest. And it greeues me, if she thinks I went
about to hurt her, to whom (I confess) I never intended any such matter. For
if I ran after her, it was because she fled from me, and would not stay to
harken to my just complaints. And believe me (Nymph) because her tenderfoote
might not be harmed by some sharp thorn or flintie stone, thinking she would
have moderated her flight, I followed with a slow pace, entreating her still
to stay; and telling her, that since the swiftest Does I ouerran, and took in
a short race, she might not then think therein to go beyond me. And this I was
desirous to tell thee, to request thee (gentle Nymph) to hold me excused and
blameles to her. By doing whereof, I promise thee to keep thy waters ever
clear, and undefiled: And because she may understand how much it greeues me,
that I have offended her, I will purge me of this error in my cave, without
coming once out of it, until this new Moon shall have run out her full
course. When he had spoken these words, he went his ways, and the Nymph
refusing to harken to my cries, and to Parthenius his pitiful requests, diued
down again into the waters. Which thing (if it did not grieve us both) I
leave hereafter to your judgments: Seeing therefore how bootelesse it was to
call her, Parthenius turning to me (for I had first called the Nymph) said.
Brother, what would thou have with her? How is it possible (said I) but
that I must call her, since she has in her custody that power of beauty,
that wholly possesses my conquered heart. I came forth (dear brother) to
seek out my lost Father, and have met with her, that has found my soul. Woe
is me, that know not what shall become of me. And from henceforth now thou
may go seek out thy dear parents, which leave (sweet friend) I would not
give thee (for the Gods know how much thy departure greeues me) but only to
content and please thee: for here will I stay, until I know what the
immortal Gods will determine with me. Scarce could my loving brother stand
upon his feet, when from mine own mouth he heard that I was enamoured of the
fair damsel, because he had also no less then my self (as by a strange
chance I afterward knew it) yielded up to her his love and liberty. But
because it was either my good or ill hap to manifest my passion first,
Parthenius dissembled his, in lieu that I might carry the guerdon away. So that
on the oneside, he was very glad, that one thing offered it self, whereby I
might receive the first fruits of his true friendship; and was sorry on the
other, to see that his grief was remediless. Which perfect function of amity
I would in very truth have no less performed toward him, if he had first
opened his love of her unto me, as afterward I did, though yet for all this I
must remain his debtor. But because I might not perceive the great good turn
he did me, and he by disclosing it have lost the merit thereof, he did not
only dissemble it right-out, but by words and demonstration made as if no such
matter had been: And albeit he striued with himself not to love Stela, yet
was he not able to perform it, but (as I say) hid it in such sort, that it
might not be perceived. Whereupon to that which I had said, he answered thus.
The Gods never suffer me to profit nor pleasure my self with such a leave,
dear brother. For thou art my father and mother, and to forsake thee, I mean
not to seek them out: Let them pardon me whosoever they be, for since they
left me in my infancy, and perhaps without just occasion, it shall be no part of
impiety for me to deny them in their old age, being warranted by so just an
excuse. Many other friendly speeches passed between us both, and that whereon
we concluded was this: To go to the next town, because itwas late, and there by
some other course (if at the least some happy means did obuiate our desires)
to inform us what that Damsel was, and thereupon to advise us what was best
to be done. Coming therefore near unto a little town, not far from that
place, we espied this reverend old Parisiles, almost in the very same robes
that he now wears, who turned his eyes on every side, to see if he might
perceive her coming, for whom (it seemed) he had long looked and lamented. To
whom in the end a certain raunger, that a far off came crossing over the
lawnes, appeared, who being come unto him, spoke some few words together, but
what, we could not hear, for we had hid our selves a pretty way off: and few
they were. For by and by the sorrowful old man with a pitiful outcrie fell
into a great swoune. The raunger seeing him in such a trance, thinking he was
dead, and fearing least his sudden death (as he thought) might have been laid
to his charge, ran presently away as fast as ever he could, when as we all in
vain called and cried out alowd unto him; so that, for that time we could not
know the cause of the good old man's sorrow. One thing I have noted in thy
disoourse, said Lord Felix, that thou ever with reverence and humanity
entreatest old Parisiles, who (as not long since it seemed) would have killed
thee. And with great reason, answered Delicius, to whom I do not only wish
well, because he is Father to fair Stela, but honor him for his high deserts.
But returning to my discourse, seeing the ranger would not stay, we went to the
noble Parisiles, who was lying (as abouesaid) distraught of his senses, and
perceiving that he came not to himself again, we both went to seek out some
water to sprinkle on his face, each of us going a sundry way, to bring it the
sooner to him. Which, when after too long seeking (as we thought) we could not
find, we returned back again, and before we came to the place where we left
him, we heard him lamenting in this sort.

O World, false world, and like to hell below,
Alake of filt hinesse, and puddle mud:
A sea, where tears and miseries do flow:
A travel without ease, or hope of good:
A pit of sorrow, and of endless woe:
A region full of brambles, thorns, and brakes:
Ameadow full of adders, toades, and snakes.
A ceaseless grief, afalse delight, and pleasure
Of men that go on wheels, and dancing scope:
Of him, that counts thee his trust and treasure,
And of thy worldlings, false and vainest hope:
A heap of woes, that has no end nor measure:
A hideous hill of care, and dwelling place
Of monsters, and of pain an endless race.
A poison sweet, a honey full of gall:
A dungeon of despair, a dismal field
Of wretchedness, of servitude, and all
Infections, that ten thousand deaths does yield.
A hell, a filth, a misery, and thrall,
A care, a grief, a pain, a plague, a sore,
A slauerte, a death, and what is more.
Many that have endured thy yoke of pain,
Have gone about in colors to depaint
Thy wicked slightes, with which thou still do train
Distressed souls unto an endless plaint.
And weeping, where my cleerest light is hid,
There wretched man my life I mean to rid.
By this lamentation, whereunto we gave an attentive ear, we understood the
cause of his complaint, That the Woodman belike had told him, how Stela, flying
from Gorphorost, had cast her self into the river, but not that which
afterward succceded. We were no less glad to hear the news, of that we so
much desired to know, as to give him good tidings, whom it behooued us to make
as much beholding to us as we could, for serving our own turns. But as we
were now determined to go and talk with him, my brother said. Let us stay,
for if this be Father to thy new Mistress, it is not best that he should now
know us, when we our selves know not what we have to do, nor how our matters
(not yet well commenced) will fall out. And since he said he will go to the
river, there to be the minister of his own death, I think it best for us to
follow him, and demanding what he seeks, and whither he goes, to tell him what
has passed; which I also think best to be done, when it is somewhat dark,
because speaking to him then, he may not know us another time, whereas (if it
might afterward avail us) by knowing us to be the same men that brought him
these good news, we shall not want means to tell him that at our own
pleasure. We thought this to be good counsel, and did therefore put it so well
in practice, that the good old man being thereby comforted up a little, went
back again, and in requital of these good news, offered me, that was the
teller of them, his lodging that night. Which courtesy of his with thanks
repaying, I made an excuse that I had some business another way, and bad him
farewell, wherewith I went back again to Parthenius, and the old man
homeward to his house. The next morning (for there we passed away the same
night) we went to the place where Stela had cast her self into the river,
attending there her coming forth; and being come forth, to see, if we might
talk with her. But before we came, we espied the virgins old Father walking
up and down along the river banks: And going nearer unto him, to see if he
offered to cast himself into the river, we saw, how weary of walking he sat
him down, and then with as loud a voice as his grief would give him leave,
heard him in this sort singing to his dearest daughter.

DAughter, that in this dear
And christ all river have thy dwelling place
With Nymphs: O har ken here
To me a little space,
Parisiles, thy woeful fathers case.
Deny not him thy sight,
Who ever did for thee himself despise:
The absence of thy light,
And heavenly shining eyes,
Unto his soul a bitter death applies.
Which so consumes his breath,
That living thus, his life he does defy:
For such a life is death,
And he would rather die,
Then leave to live without thy company.
Joy now, (and do not stay)
An aged man consumed with grief, unless
That thou will have him say,
The love thou did profess
To him, was all but feigned, as he may guess.
Why do thou stay so long
A wretched soul with comfort to sustain?
O come and break this strong,
And mourning vale in twain
Of his affliction, misery, and pain.
My soul, thou woont'st with glee
To hear this voice: but either I am not,
As once I wont to be,
Or thou art changed, I wot,
Or thy poor father else thou have forgot.
But first I pray to God,
Then such oblivion in thy breast should be,
My vital period
May finish, not to see
My self forgot of her, that loved me.
Come then my heart, and clear
Thee of this doubt, this favor let me try:
If not, this river clear
Shall hide me by and by,
For there with thee I mean to live or die.
If the waves of the river, and the neighbor sea being moved to ruthe and
pity, seemed to stay, and the noise of them both with his doleful voice made
gentle and calmed, ceased a while, that his tender complaints might be the
better heard, how much more would you have judged our hearts (being wrought with
pity and compassion) to be mollified with the amorous plaints, wherewith the
pitiful old man did call upon fair Stela. For it might be well understood by
his impatience, how much he loved her, when as he thought every moment he
stayed there a thousand years. But there passed not much time, when the waters
being gently opened, out of the mids of them rose a fair company of
Nymphs, with garlands of diverse colors upon their yellow hair: in the mids
of which appeered fair Stela like chaste Diana amongst her gracious quire of
Nymphs. At whose sight old Parisiles, for the incomparable joy he had to see
his desired daughter, and we to see our new beloved Mistress, fell all down
to the ground, but raised up again with the sweetenes of a Set-song and a
consort of heavenly music, which the Nymphs had made amongst themselves, we
harkened to that which was sung, as follows.

PArisiles, thy doleful song and playning,
Thy piteous sighs, and weeping without measure
(To comfort thee) have made this goodly quire
Leave their aboades, and stately seats of pleasure.
Afflict not then thy self, but cease thy paining,
And let thy wearied soul to rest aspire:
Let plaints begun, retire,
And be in joy, and happy gladness ended:
And be not now offended
Parisiles, or careful for thy daughter;
For hither we have brought her
In good estate, for thee to see her, knowing,
That more then this to both we all are owing.
If that the Gods are just in any wise,
Then are they bound to help those that do pray
To them for help, and in their service live.
Then since that you your selves did ever give
To follow them, and choose the better way
In honoring us by deed and sacrifice,
The best we can devise
Of all good turns, that may your love requite,
Belongs to you of right:
Parisiles, the Gods in heaven do know
In sea, and earth below
Thy things, and have of them a greater care,
Then thou may think, and of thy happy fare.
For which thing, they themselves had first ordained
That Stela, the most monstrous Shepherd flying,
Should cast her self into this cleerest river,
For knowing, what her fates and stars would give her,
Their influence with all their help denying
By secret means her fortune, they restrained,
And such a sign that rained
Over her head, that threat'ned to destroy her,
And present to annoy her:
They therefore will she live within our bowres,
Until these lucklesse hours
Do pass, and while this sign and fate expires,
Unworthy her deserts, and high desires.
The Son of Goddess Cytherea shall
Here after be the cause of her despair:
(The cruel) wounding her with doubtful love:
And so this love, that shall so doubtful fall,
Great strife in her, and many wars shall move,
Not knowing which to choose, that is most fair,
Her breast (loves sweet repair)
Continu ally shall waver on two men,
Inclining now and then
Her love to one, then to another straight:
Poor soul she shall await
In this suspense, not knowing to define
To whether of them both she should incline?
And think not that the immortal Gods intended
To bar these loves, that here I am declaring,
Nor their success would ever have denied:
For being to a virtuous end applied,
Either of both they would not have suspended:
Alas, it is their fate such woes preparing,
Not one nor other sparing.
Both for one cause in one love shall be chained;
And both alike be pained:
But yet the Gods shall ever be procuring,
That, Stela then enduring
These ^ardest haps shall not with those be placed,
Whom Fortune always checkes, and has disgraced.
But thou must comfort thee above the rest,
If of these three, the hard and cruel fate
Cannot be shunned; their ioies that must adiourne:
After these woes Fortune shall make them blessed,
Showing her face mild and propitiate,
Gentle, and sweet: Then shall they cease to mourn,
For^e her wheel shall turn:
Annoyes to joys, their sighs to sweetest songs
Shall turn, and all their wrongs
Shall cease: Their woes, their miseries, and tears,
Their sorrows, greefes, and fears
Shall be one day converted into joy,
Which never after Fortune shall destroy.
Thy daughter then (Parisiles) embrace,
And so restore her to this place again,
The heavens must have their race:
Then let them run: And cease to mourn in vain.
This beuie of fair Nymphs, when they had ended their prophetical song, came
to the river side, and with a marvelous sweet consent did put into Parisiles
arms his well-beloved daughter: Between whom certain speeches being past, with
great thanks to the Nymphs, they took their mutual leave, the old man going
away al alone, though accompanied with a thousand perplexed thoughts, and
swelling tears, that for deprivation and loss of his dear daughter fell in
great plenty from his aged face. The Nymphs to their christalline aboades,
and Parthenius and I remaining not a little sorrowful (as you may guess) for
Stelas departure, and full of imaginations for that which we heard by the
Nymphs divining song, being then ignorant, and doubting whether the contents
thereof were meant by us or not. All which pains, greefes, and troubles
threatened therein, and many more feign would we have suffered, in lieu that
fair Stela had been the cause of them. With these and many other
considerations reuolued in our minds, we determined to stay there, to see if
the Nymphs (taking fair Stela with them) came sometimes forth to solace
themselves amongst those green and pleasant forests: where we stayed not long
before our desires had part of their contentment; for even the next day about
that hour when Tytan equally viewed all our Hemisphere, and certain days
after came out many fair Nymphs, to pass away the heat amongst those cool
and fresh shades, though their happy sallies (happy by fair Stelas company)
did little avail us, since every time that we made offer to come out of the
wood toward them, with fearful flight they ran back again to their
acquainted river. Parthenius therefore seeing the small occasion that was
offered us to talk with them, said unto me. With this beginning (dear
brother) we must not continue on our commenced purpose, which is not only an
open impediment to the good success of our determination, but a manifest
occasion to molest thy Mistress, and a let to the Nymphs from their wonted
pastime and delight. What remedy then (said I) shall we use, or what do thou
advise us to do, for I cannot by any means depart from hence with safety of
my life. As I will not counsel thee thereunto said Parthenius, so the
immortal Gods forbid that we go from hence, before we find out some good
means, whereby these Nymphs (their coyness laid aside) may admit us into
their sweet company. If there be any remedy for this (said I) then all my
sorrows, and sorrowful life shall be (I hope) both eased and ended; but alas my
grief will not give me leave to conceive it so. And if there be any (said
Parthenius) it is but only one. Thou know well my dear brother, by all
those times that we have seen them coming hither, how they do less disdain
the simplicity and plainnes of country Shepherds, then the suspicious
company of cunning courtiers, and that their turall baggepipe is more
delightsome to their ears, then the enticing and wanton Lute of the others.
The which duly considered, it shall be better for us (in my opinion) by
leaving of these costly habits, to cladde our selves in homely Shepherds
weeds; which probable invention being put in practice, may happily prove more
fortunate unto us, then any other course that we may well think of. His
counsel, which was forthwith put in execution, liked me so well, that we left
of our accustomed apparel, and put on this which you see, not consenting that
garments (whom nature made so like) should put any difference between us. And
so likewise we forgot not our sheepehookes, and scrips, and whatsoever else
belonged to a Shepherds calling. But as for sheep, we bought none, before we
knew how well this devise answered our deseignes, the which, time, and
occasions afterward would advise us best to do: for we agreed to say, that we
left them behind, in custody of our Swaynes, and that we came before to seek
out the best pasture for them. We had also fidles, and pipes, whereon we soon
learned to play, because we could play on the Fluet, and Vials and other
musical instruments. With this new habit we passed away certain days, in
singing and playing many sundry things: Al which felout so fit to our desires,
that not once, but a many times, the Nymphs kept us company, bringing Stela
that fair and shining Staire many times amongst them, by whose golden light
the course of our grievous life was then, and is yet most happily guided:
Wherein Fortune so highly favored me, that day by day (though much against my
will) I accompanied those fair Nymphs; not, that it was not a foueraigne
glory to me to be in presence of that clear Sun I spoke of; but because I
would have thought it a greater good, if my dear brother had also inioyed the
same. This is strange (said Lord Felix) to show thy self on the one side most
appassionate for fair Stela, and to grieve on the other, that thou inioyest
her sight al alone, desiring it for another. But stranger it would seem (said
Delicius) if you knew every thing that passed about this matter: But now let it
suffice you (Gentlemen and Shepherds) to know this much, and another day (it
may be) I will make an end of that I have begun. They were all importunate
with him to have him tell on, when Felicias coming made them leave of, who
being come unto them, said to Delicius. My friend Shepherd, since I enjoined
thee of late to a task that not so well contented thee, I am now come to deliver
thee from it, because I imagine how grievous it is to thee to pass therein any
further. To do the contrary good Lady (said Delicius) were unworthy your
gracious self, and not quadrant to that, which is expected at your hands,
wherein I mean not to give you the thanks you deserve, nor hope of any other
guerdon, then that which you your self have already taken, considering that
you do no more, then what to your own self you are bound to do. For all this
(said Felicia) let us (my sons) go home, for Phoebus now does hasten him to
his own, whose rosy beams, though silently they begin to decay, shall with
his Sisters silver lights, to guide our steps be carefully supplied. And we
might well pass away this fresh approaching night, and with great pleasure
spend it in so good company; but in the end we shall better take our rest in
the house, whereas for this day let us content us with the booty we carry
home. With a few such walks abroad (said Felismena) we shall be quickly
enriched: Though in very truth at our first onset, we have taken so brave a
prize and robbed so much good, as I think, we shall not need to take any
pains to lie in wait for more. Felismena had not gone away in Stelas debt, if
Felicia had not cut her off, saying. The fashion in this place is not to pay by
and by, but to trust something. But how comes this to pass, that I have
already taken Parisiles, Stelas, and Crimines words to be my guestes, and have
not Delicius consent to be one of them? Advise thee therefore Shepherd, if it
please thee to go in with us, for it was never my condition to force any
against their wills, whereby to give thee any occasion to complain of me, and
to say that like a forced captive I carry thee in. Your words good Lady (said
Delicius) are different from your deeds. For whosoever should hear you say,
that you did not perforce carry me in, would not (I think) believe your
words: for I frankly confess before them all, that you carry me in as a
prisoner, forced and taken. Wherein if they will not credit me, for themselves
(at the least) they must needs believe me: for I will gage my head, that all
will affirm no less, and say, that you have moreover forced and made them
captive to your will and command. They all laughed at Delicius answer, seeing
how well he had acquitted himself of Felicias jest, whereupon they all told
Felicia, that the Shepherd said true, and that she should not care for
satisfactions with words. And who shall judge this between us (said Felicia)
for I confess to, that you carry me no less constrained and forced to your
wills and desires. But leaving this doubt to be decided, let us go our ways.
Then all of them obeying the sage Felicia, followed her, and with the pleasant
discourses which they moved there amongst themselves, made the way seem less
and shorter; so that sooner then they would, some of them came to the royal
Palace. It was now well entered into night, when being come near to Dianas
Temple, and Felicias Palace, a great number of fair Nymphs (being richly
attired) came forth to meet them, and every one with a torch of virgin wax
in her hand to light them in, thereby the rather to manifest the great
magnificence and majesty of Felicia, then for any need of their light at all.
For the moon did shine so bright, that (it seemed) she endeavored nothing more
then with her sociable presence to behold and hearken to that noble company.
They that were never before in that rich Palace, marvelled to see the stately
and sumptuous buildings of it. But when upon the chief portall and entrance
thereinto, they saw two Nymphs made all of massy silver stand upon the
Chaptrees of two columns, with these verses: WHo comes into this place, let
her take heed
How she has lived, and whether she has kept
The gift of chastity in thought and deed.
And see besides, if she has ever stepped,
With wavering mind to foreign love estranged,
And for the same, her first afection changed,
May enter in DIANAS Temple here,
Whose grace and virtues sovereign appear.


Delicius said. This advise (Lady Felicia) speaks (me thinks) only of
women, but I would feign know, why it touches not as well men, as if there
were not some, in whom that is also found, which warranteth an entrance into
this place. If the Goddess of chastity (because it is the Temple of Diana)
delights only in the company and conversation of women, then must al men
consequently be forbidden to come in. And whereas it says, that she, that in
all those points finds her self guiltless, may come in, my desire is to
know, if any woman failing in any of them, happen to come in, what would ensue
thereof. Syrenus before Delicius passed any further, said. It is wittily
demanded, or else I understand it not: and truly my desire is no less to know,
what harm would befall to her, that with breach of her first faith and love
entered in, thereby to warn the faithless Shepherdess Diana. But now another
scruple (said Delicius) arises in my mind, which is, That when we were coming
toward this rich Palace, I asked one of these fair Nymphs, what every one of
this noble and virtuous company might be; who briefly satisfying me in every
point, amongst other things that she told me made me especially to marvel at
this, That some of these here, were married in this place: Whereupon I would
feign know, if in the Temples of the Goddess of chastity it be usual to
solemnize any marriage, because that mystery is as strange to mine ears, as
the reason thereof to my conceit. If by resolving thee in these demands (said
Felicia) I thought to prevent thee of any more replies, I would endeavor to
pleasure thee herein: but because (I know) thou will not therewith content
thee, but that with many doubts (that in my answers may perhaps occur) thou will yet urge me further, I am minded to leave it of for this time, and the
rather, because it is time to go in to take our wonted food and rest:
Whereupon they went in to supper, which by this time was sumptuously made
ready for them. Having supped, they went to bed without singing or playing on
their instruments, for there were some that desired more their rest then
recreation, and sleep then solace, thinking their late meriment past suffised
them for that day.

The end of the third book.
The fourth Book of the second Part of Diana of George of Montemayor.
AMongst many other times that Felicia carried her guestes to disport themselves
at the fountain of the Laurel trees, (a place more pleasant then any other)
on a day when they were going into the little meadow where that fair fountain
did arise, they saw two lovely Shepherdesses (though by their coye looks
showing a kind of signorie and stateliness above any other) that were sitting
hard by the goodly spring, both of them endowed with singular beauty, but
especially the one, that to their judgments seemed the yoonger. Right over
against them on foot stood a young Shepherd, who with the lap of his side
coat wiped away the tears that fell down thick upon his blubbered cheeks,
in requital whereof, and of his inward grief, the Shepherdesses did nothing
else, but by looking upon one another, affoorde him a gracious smile. Syrenus,
Syluanus, and Seluagia, knowing it was the same Shepherd, that showed them the
letter, when they were going from Felicias palace toward their own town,
withdrew themselves aside, and every one of them doing the like, Syrenus very
softly said. O how glad am I to see this young Shepherd here, for if he would
but sing, you should see that the sweetenes of his songs, which we have so much
commended to you, were no fained thing. But it greeues me not a little to see
him in these terms, that he is not like to make me now as good as my word.
Take no care for that (said Felicia) for he will not forget to do it, and
because you may hear him the better, come softly on with me, for I will bring
you to such a place, where they shall not see you, but where you may at
pleasure delight you with his sweet music. The Shepherdesses were talking
with the Shepherd, when Felicia brought them as near (unseen) as they could
be, but yet not so near, that they were able to tell what they were talking
together. More fair then courteous are those Shepherdesses (said Lord Felix)
that request not the Shepherd to sit down by them. It is not for that (said
Felicia) but for great respect of love and duty that he bears to the
yoonger, who in her presence could never find in his heart to sit, but only
when others were in company, from whom he thought it best to conceal his
passions. Why is he so sad (said Seluagia) for as I remember, and could
gather by his letter, his Shepherdess could not do, nor say any thing,
wherein he took not great joy and contentment. I, but Fortune has now turned
her wheel (said Felicia) for then, and ever since, for the reward of his
love, he only enjoyed the presence and sweet company of his Shepherdess, the
force from whence his joys and comforts sprung: but now, for some certain
days, he is forced to depart from her, which farewell breeds no less his
present greese and sorrow. And that which gives him greater pain, is that he
knows not when he shall see her again. But hark and give attentive care,
for now they command him to sing, whereupon they saw him take his Rebecke out
of his scrip, and with a playning voice began thus to sing.

PHillis, my fair young Shepherdess,
That from thee by and by
I must depart (O heaviness)
O that no, but woe that I.
O from the world that now I might depart,
Since that I must (my joy) forgo thy sight,
For now I live too long: Then kill my heart
Mishap, if thou will grant me so much right:
Or fatal sisters now consent,
That she or I might die,
I crave it to a good intent:
O that no, but woe that I.
Pardon, it is not I that do desire
Thy sudden and thy wrongful death not, I.
It is my love, my hot and burning fire,
That made my tongue so much to go awrie:
And fear it is that mooues my heart,
And thoughts of jealousy,
Since thou do stay, and I depart,
O that no, but woe that I.
Such iealousies they are not, thou must think,
That thou some other love wilt entertain,
For I do know that love can never sink
Into thy breast (unto my cruel pain.)
But jealousy thou will forget
Hereafter, and deny
That one did see another yet:
O that no, but woe that I.
But if thou do (fair Shepherdess) suspect
To bury me in Lethes lake, let grief,
Before thou should so ill my love respect,
Consume my life, let death be my relcefe:
Then thou should think but such a thought,
First (fair one) let me die:
Although it shall be dearly bought,
O that no, but woe that I.
To rid my self from such n cruel pain,
I would destroy my self, and purchase rest:
But then to kill thee, I do fear again,
Because thou dwell here within my breast:
Do then a noble deed (my life)
From thence with speed to fly,
That then I may conclude this strife.
O that no, but woe that I.
Bargain with me, let me this favor crave,
To leave my heart, that so thy harm does dread,
Thy place again then after thou shall have,
If thou may come to it, when it is dead:
For if thou once go forth, I will
To death with courage hte,
And then my vital powers kill.
O that no, but woe that I.
As if it lay within thy hands and power
(Sweet Shepherdess) forsake my woeful heart,
But yet thou can not go from thence one hour,
Neither can I, although I would, depart.
Nor yet I would not, though I might,
I say, I would not die,
But yet because I loose thy sight,
O that no, but woe that I.
If that I am in any thing to thee
Grateful, this favor then of thee I pray
Thou would, when I am gone, remember me,
And say, where is my Shepherd all this day?
Then would I count my grief but small,
If thou will not deny
This thing, or think of me at all:
Woe that no, but O that I.
Then say but I, although it be in jest,
And never meanst thy promise to maintain:
Thou shall thereby procure some little rest
Unto my parting soul, which I will feign:
Little I crave to ease my heart,
And pains, yet let me try
This favor, Then I will depart.
O that no, but woe that I.
As he thus made an end of his song, they rose up, and the younger (called
Phillis) made a sign to the Shepherd with her singer, to reach her up her
scrip and Sheepehooke that lay on the ground, at whose hands (though in most
dutiful manner he did it) she received them with no more thanks or show of
courtesy, then if one of her swains had given it her. And then with a word or
two of the Shepherdesses, but with his many tears the mournful Shepherd
took his leave: whereat Phillis being moved to some small sorrow and to no
less grief for his departure, took out of her scrip a fine little spoone
(the same perhaps that she her self did eat with) and gave it him, wherewith
the Shepherd did somewhat mitigate his helpelesse sorrow: and then they went
out of the meadow one way, and the Shepherd another, Might it not be well done
(said Felismena to Felicia) to talk with those Shepherdesses before they go.
Not now answered Felicia, for hereafter you shall know all, when their due
time shall come, wherein you shall then take as great delight to see and
converse with Phillis and Castalius (for so is the Shepherd called that was
with them) as now perhaps some little grief for their departure: whereas
besides it is not now so convenient, because I know, we should make them not a
little ashamed. The Shepherdesses therefore being now gone out, they went into
the little meadow to the christalline fountain, where, in set daunces and
sweet songs (accompanied with pleasanthistories and gracious speeches) they
spent the time till Felicia thought it good for them all to go to the Temple,
when she came to warn them. Who (it seemed) did never awake, or take care for
any other thing, then where, and after what manner she might best delight that
noble company. Whereupon she carried them sometimes to the goodly plain before
the Temple, other times to another pleasant meadow near to the wood, and
sometimes to the Laurel fountain. Truth it is that (to have all possible joy)
Don Felix and his fair Lady Felismena, Syluanus, and his loving Shepherdess
Seluagia needed not to seek it out in exterior things, since their inward
joy (to see themselves all four with mutual affection so happily beloved) was
so great, that all others (in respect of this) were but mere shows and
shadows. Syrenus took a singular pleasure to behold the contentment of them
all, whom so unfeignedly he loved. The Nymphs not only procured it for
themselves, but to delight them all in general. And Parisiles his anger being
now past with that which Felicia had told him, and shaking off his former
sadness, by enjoying the presence of his daughter, was no less joyful then the
rest. But Stela, and Crimine were in suspense, between solace and sorrow,
comfort and care, being cheered on the one side by the hope that Felicia
promised them, and by knowing that those lovers were only by her means
recured; but sad on the other, that by imagination they could not find out
some way or remedy for their pains and passions, which were so strange, that
though to their own content they craved it, yet they could not devise how to
their own wills and desires they might enjoy it. For both of them equally loved
Delicius and Parthenius: but Stela especially, who desired not to have Delicius
love her, if Parthentus forgot her; nor esteemed of Parthemus his love, if
Delicius had despised her. Only Delicius amids such sportes and pastimes (as
were offered there) was far from all comfort, by finding himself absent from
his dear friend Parthenius, without whose presence he cared not to enjoy his
sorrowful life. And the danger besides (which shall be hereafter spoken of)
wherein he knew his dear friend to be, was every hour so sensibly represented
to his grievous thoughts, that he was many times determined to go and deliver
him, or else to die in that resolution; but that he was prohibited on the one
side, and had no force on the other to forsake Stela, the joy and light of his
dark and mournful life. The seldom enjoying of whose woonted sweet sight,
and discontinued speech with her, by reason of old Parisiles, applied more
matter to the heavy burden of his grief: So that he (though all the rest did
sing and play) could never be persuaded to keep them company, from the which
but with faint and fained reasons he for the most part excused himself.
Whereupon (when opportunely he could do it) he closely conuayed himself out of
their company, whose coffeehouse (his young Shepherdesses with watchful eye
perceiving it) did not a little grieve the^. But sage Felicia seeing how little
her promised hope prevailed with the fearful Shepherd, on an evening before
them all said thus unto him. I would never leave to complain on thee
(sorrowful young Shepherd) if I knew not the great reason thou have to be so
sad: And therefore I beseech you that be here, not to be offended with the
course of his melancholic life; nor take it in ill part, if he cannot
pleasure you as you would; praying you besides to do me so much favor, not to
ask him any more, then he is willing of himself to tell you, and to attend
the time, when with his grateful conversation and sweet discourses he shall
fill your hands full. Of courtesy then good Shepherd, and for shame do no more,
then what thou shall see most auailing thy content, since we are so glad (by all
the means we can) to give it thee. Then answered Delicius. I can receive no
greater favor in any thing (most gracious and prudent Lady) unless it be the
enjoying of my Parthenius his presence) then in that, which you have already
done me: which especial benefits (since my ability is so small) must needs
remain without due requital. For though in sign of subjection, my willing
mind and person would be ever ready at your command and services; yet it
were but a frivolous and indiscreet part to promise you that, which by all
reason is already due unto it. Don Felix, Felismena, the Shepherds and the
Nymphs with one voice said, That they were not a little glad to see Delicius
take content in any thing, who gave them many thanks for it, craving pardon of
them for the great strangenes he used amongst them. At whose hands and of
Felicia and the rest obtaining a friendly pardon, he passed away his sorrows
all alone, going often into that thick wood to lament his hard and sinister
haps; wherein he could not choose but many times have lost himself, if the
shining turrets of Felicias palace had not brought him thither again, when he
would. Amongst many other days, that here and there some went to sport
themselves in diverse places, it fell out that the Shepherdes Syrenus, Syluanus,
and Seluagia, (for Felicia and Don Felix had gone one way, and the rest of the
company another) were one day all alone with old Parisiles in a quadrant of
the rich palace, to whom Syrenus said. Since it has pleased you worthy
Parisiles (the few days that you have been here) to content all our lovers
with your pleasant and amorous history of C^pid their idolatrous God, my
self, that have not to do with this blind boy, why have you refused to
gratify with some pleasant discourse touching a Shepherds state. The first day
that we enjoyed your happy company, you propounded diverse things concerning
the same, from that time surcharging me with (more then a mean) desire to
heat them discoursed by you: And especially the manner of the sacrifice of our
God Pan, and how at the first it was used to be done, and from what time it was
held in reverence, and all the rest that you propounded about this matter. So
that your tale shall come now in good time, and to very good purpose, since we
are here all Shepherds and alone. Whereupon I pray you (noble Parisiles) ease
my impatient mind of the burden of this desire. I cannot my friend Syrenus
(answered Parisiles) but obey thee, wherein thou crauest to be resolved, since
it is a thing appertaining to my office, to declare the rights and honors due
to our Gods, and also a convenient mystery for you to know, and a thing
especially belonging to Pan the great God of Shepherds.

As touching the first, you have great cause to make no small account of your
functions and estates, when not only Pan, but many other of our Gods have used
the like, besides many great Emperors, Kings, and worthy personages that have
not disdained this simple and contented kind of life, which was the first
charge and vocation, that our forefathers in the primitive world embraced,
whose names impertinent for you to know, and tedious for me to report, I mean
to leave untold. So that you must not marvel if I told you that the first, to
whom we offered sacrifice, was this God. I know well, that I should take my
beginning by declaring what God this is: but because he has none, I cannot put
it in any other thing, but in himself. For, to say that Pan, and Faunus is all
one (as almost all authors auerre) I have no reason to believe it, when by them
themselves I mean to refell it. For they say, that Faunus was the son of
Picus, Father to Latinus; Pan the son of Demogorgon, God of the earth. To say
also (as they affirm) that Pan and Syluanus is all one, it is false: for a
certain Autenticall author, after he had told that Pan the God of Shepherds
came, said that Syluanus also came, with a root of a tree, into the which
Cyparisus was transformed. Whereupon it is clearly gathered, that one cohereth
but ill with the other. That which they hit nearest of Syluanus, is, that he is
the God of the dregs of the Elements, whereof all material things took their
essence. Reverend Parisiles (said Seluagia) you have annulled that, which we
took for a sure ground, holding it ever for an infallible opinion, that all
three were but one, or two of them at the lest: Not only you (said Parisiles)
but almost all, who have been of greater reading and indgement. Indeed (said
Seluagia) to our sex and condition it is not granted to understand so much,
as to gainsay what you have affirmed, and how much more (since you your self
do say it) ought it to be believed? But yet one doubt occurreth to my mind
about this matter: For noble Parisiles, you said, that Pan had no beginning,
and afterward confessed he was the son of Demogorgon, how can this be? It
is wisely objected, answered Parisiles, and like one that notes my discourse
well. And in truth fair Shepherdess, thou propoundest a question to me, which
I know not how with the honor of my Gods, or with mine own to resolve. For
in sooth I must fail in one, when I am constrained to confess, that I
understand it not, or that our Gods are none, if we must believe our writers:
but because thou touchest me with contradiction in my speech, I will have thee
know, that when I said Pan had no beginning, it was but mine own opinion,
and true, if Pan signifies all. When I said, he was the son of Demogorgon, it
was according to their opinions that affirmed that Pan and Faunus were all one.
And to bring contradiction in their opinions, was a thing sufficient enough to
throw them down from their opinion, showing their affections to be repugnant
and contrary. It remains therefore for me to prove, that he is not the son
of Demogorgon, both which I dare verify with their own grounds. For Pan is as
much to say as all, to give us to understand, that he is God of all: They paint
him as you know. Demogorgon is as much to say as nature. Now then if Pan be
God of all, and nature be something, Pan is the God of nature; then by
consequence if Demogorgon be nature, Pan is God of Demogorgon his father. If
they will say that nature is not something, but all, they must then be driven
to confess that Pan and Demogorgon is all one, and not two things, which
cannot be two, since each of them is absolutely al. So that as our Authors
confound themselves with this God, they will show the like of all other Gods.
But well (said Syluanus) whom do you believe that Pan is? Let him be
whosoever he will (answered Parisiles) suffices you to honor this God Pan
under the name of the God of all. The first, that I knew did sacrifice to this
God was king Euander, and the first that built a temple to him in Arcadia at
the foot of a hill called in the old time Olympus, because Romulus (they said)
was nursed in that place. This hill afterward was called Palatine, and Lyceus,
wherein were four principal things. A Wood consecrated to Jupiter, of such
quality, that if any despising the law that forbad them to enter in, did go
into it, he died within one year after. An Altar in the top of it to the same
Jupiter, held in great reverence. A Fountain of so marvelous a nature, that
it seemed the Gods were more curious in it, then in any other thing; for the
water being gently stirred with an oken twigge, a vapor rose suddenly out of
it like a thick miste: The which, not long after being congealed into a
cloud, and mixed with others that were there raised up, was sufficient to have
made a great shower of rain. And at the foot of the hill lay a certain
place or space of ground called Lupercall, which some say took that name,
because there were no woolues that ranged up and down with their cruelty to
hurt the harmless sheep. Others, because Romulus and Remus were nursed there
by a certain woman called Lupa. Here therefore stood the temple of God Pan,
and hereupon the sacrifices they do him, took their name Lupercalles: They
were first called Lycea of the hill, where first they were made, and are
solemnized, as you know, the eighteen of January. They that celebrated those
sacrifices were called Lupercos: who in making them, ran naked up and down the
streets, covering their faces with maskes, and having in their hands certain
reins made of Goats skins, wherewith they smit the hands and bellies of
women with child, and of those that could not conceive, to make the
childebirth by these means more easy to them, and the others fruitful. They
went up and down naked (as some say) to show thereby (as it seemed) the
lightness of their God: and because Pan (as others say) abhorred garments,
whereupon they paint him without them. And because Romulus and Remus (as others
report) being one day with other yoongsters to celebrate these sacrifices, and
to exercise their persons in games agreeable to their youth, wherein they cast
off their garments for heat, news came that their flocks were stolen away:
who with the rest of the youth, full of rage and anger, not staying to put on
their apparel, pursued the thieves, and the victory obtained by Remus with
the Fabians, that were in his company, they got their flocks again. In
honorable memory of which valiant act, it was afterward ordained, that they
that offered sacrifice to Pan, should be naked. All which abouesaide has
continued until our times, except the going naked: for it was not used since a
certain Roman dictator refused the imperial crown that a Consul (made Lupercus)
did put on his head: for that which that Consul did, was so abominable in the
sight of the people of Rome, that, for his sake, they abhorred from thence such
an unseemly form of sacrifice. You see here therefore (my friends) how I have
resolved you (I think) in that which you asked me, wherein though I have
seemed somewhat long, yet shorter, then so ample a matter as this required. And
I think too brief (said Syrenus) considering how much you have laid open
unto us. Wherefore do us yet this pleasure (I pray you) to tell us why God Pan
so much abhors garments. With a good will, said Parisiles, for it is both
pretty and pleasant.

Hercules going on a day to recreate himself with his love Iole along the
shadowed woods and pleasant groves, to eschew the heat of the Sun, Pan from
a hill aloft beheld them, but especially cast an earnest eye upon Iole, a woman
of a most sweet and fair countenance. He saw her, and seeing burned in her
love, and said. I have not now, O ye deities of these mountains, to do with
you any more, nor to see you from this time forward. Farewell, farewell. For
she is only my delight. Iole had her shoulders and breast shining like gold
with her yellow hair that from her head fell dangling down upon them. The
sun now waxing pale, and shining but a little, began to give as little heat,
and the moist welkin with the evening dew of approaching night, came stealing
on apace with her sable colored horses, when Hercules with his company took
up a cave near to the vineyards of Lidia: wherein, while supper was a
preparing for the servants, Iole for her pleasure, or for some other merry
conceit that she had in her head, did put her apparel upon mighty Hercules,
vnripping the seames to make it fitter for him, and tearing that which was too
straight. On her-selfe she put the Lions skin, and took his club on her
shoulder, and in her hands, her husbands bow and arrows. In this sort they
supped, and laid them down to sleep, and with this habit each of them in a
bed by themselves (as time and place affoorded them) began to sleep: for it
was not lawful for them that night to lie together, because the next day they
were to offer up sacrifice to Bacchus. And now ( Pan burning in impatient love)
about midnight, which was very dark (for what does not a lover enterprise)
came into the cave, and found the servants, what with their great cheer and
wine at supper, and what with their sports afterward, fast a sleep, thinking
the same might be also the cause of their Master and Mistress sleep. His good
fortune therefore falling out so well, conducted him to the place, where Iole
was (happy man if he had known his good hap) where groping up and down, and
feeling the Lions pawe, with fear he lifted up his hand, (thinking it was
Hercules that lay there) as the musing traveler by the high way, his foot,
that has unawares trodden upon some snake or hidden adder he saw not. Going
therefore from thence he met by chance with the couch where Hercules in a
habit different from his person, lay a sleep, whom when Pan touched, and selt
Ioles soft and delicate garments, thinking he had found that he sought for, at
the beds feet began to mount up, and lifting up his clothes, in lieu of
finding a soft and tender skin, felt a hard flesh and full of hair. Hercules
awaked out of his sleep, gave the poor lover such a blow with his fist, that
he smote him from the bed to the ground, where he lay all along. Iole awaked
at the noise, and calling to her servants for light, found the silly God on
the ground complaining for the blow he had received, which made not only
Hercules and his men, but his beloved Iole laugh apace at the unfortunate
lover. You therefore see here (my friends) why the God deceived by the
garments, does so much hate them. It is well (said Syrenus.) But tell us I
beseech you, as you have begun, how we should know him to be the God of all by
his picture. They paint him with two horns, answered Parisiles, like to the
sun beams, and to the horns of the Moon, his face red like a fiery
flame, in imitation of the fiery Element. In his breast a star called Nebrides
in representation of the stars, which star I think was made of a wild
goats or Hearts skin, because Nebrides is as much in signification as a
wild Goat or Heart: which skins they used in Bacchus sacrifices: whereby we
may easily gather, that he is God of all above. From the mids of his body
downward, they paint him full of hair and bristled, to signify the trees and
wild beasts; with Goats feet, to show the hardness of the earth. And let this
suffice for this time.

With these and many other like curiosities, that the Shepherds demanded of
Parisiles, the night came on to his great contentment. The very same day (as I
said) Felicia carried with her Stela: And Lord Felix, Felismena, and the
Nymphs with Crimine, went by themselves to another place. To whom, after they
were set under the shadow of some thick Sallowes, Lord Felix said. So may all
thy fortunes succeed happily to thee (fair Nymph) and according to thine own
desire by seeing thy self in the greatest prosperity in the world, as thou will deigne to tell us why Stela and thy self go wandering up and down so
sorrowful in the company of this fair young Shepherd, and how long since it
is you had acquaintance with him. Thou command me Lord Felix (said Crimine)
to renew the sum of my sorrows and extremest griese. Alas, who can stop my
tears from their continual flowing by awaking such tormenting memories? Who
can quench my scalding sighs, that with such a heavy recital will come
smoking out of my balefull breast? How can I tell you my excessive misfortunes
in order, since there was never any in my innumerable passions? Let it content
you Lord Felix, and you fair Ladies to know that you have before your eyes
the most hapless woman of all our sex, and in your presence the very sum
and pattern of all disastrous virgins. Having thus spoken, a profound sigh
accompanied with abundant tears, hindered the rest of her doleful words:
whereupon they came all together to comfort her, Felismena saying. Believe me
(fair Nymphe) my Lord Don Felix would never have requested this at thy hands,
if he had thought to have given thee the least grief in the world, but that he
and all we were desirous (by knowing the cause of thy sorrowful life) to help
thee as much as we could in thy cares and troubles. O happy Lady (said
Crimine) how much art thou deceived and the rest, that think there is any
remedy for my mishaps. But for the love and friendship you show me, and for
that which I bear to you all, give attentive ear unto my words, and
understand my misfortunes; for I will satisfy you in that which Lord Felix
has demanded of me. And because you may know how far my mishaps have
extended, and to what end my miseries have driven me:

Know that I am forced to love one, that has no power to love me again; and
that it is not in my power, not to account her my dearest friend, that entreats
me like a cruel foe: Which thing because it may perhaps seem hard to you to
believe, you must understand that I love this Shepherd, that is our guide in
our travels, as much as I can, and can in truth as much as I will. I love also
Parthenius his friend as much as I will, and will truly as much as I can: for,
as it cannot be discerned which is Delicius, and which Parthenius, and the one
impossible to be known from the other, for like two drops of water they
resemble one another so much; so cannot I tell, which of them I love most,
loving both in equal balance of extreme affection. I thought once to be
content and happy by being beloved of one of them, whereof when I was
persuaded, I was not yet satisfied. I cannot with reason complain of them,
since both, or at the least Delicius (I think, nay firmly believe that my
suspicion is not in vain) has forced himself as much as may be to love me, by
working all the means he could, which never yet lay in his power to do. Whereby
you see that I have placed my love on him, that cannot (though feign he would)
requite it with his again. But you will ask me perhaps in whom the cause and
impediment consists, that they are not answerable to that, which both are so
justly owing me. To this I answer my greatest and dearest friend I have in
this world, because for her, both are alike wounded with Cupids invincible
flight, she dying no less in both their loves. And who this is, you may easily
guess, for she can be no other then Stela. And yet I swear to you by all that
a true lover can protest, that I never wished Stela any ill, though she is now,
and has ever been the cause why I am not beloved of these two peerless
Shepherds. For I could for mine own part do no more in her cause then she does
in mine: and though I hated her besides, yet it stood me in hand to be her
friend, when by her means I enjoyed Delicius sight, and hope by the same to
see Parthenius. But because you may know how we lost our liberties, and they
remained without theirs, I will only tell you that, which makes for this
purpose.

The same day (as they afterward told us) that Stela by the ordinance of the
Gods came to our company (for now you know that I am one of the Nymphs of the
renowned and famous river Duerus) Parthenius, and Delicius did see Stela, and
both of them equally loved her, though then it seemed not so; for Parthenius
concealed his affection, because Delicius had manifested his before: But when
Delicius told, that he was enamoured of Stela, they agreed to stay in a
forest hard by, to see if sometimes coming out of the river they might have
some occasion to talk with her. But when she came out, and they offered to come
toward us that went in company of her, we fled away, and ran back again to
our river. Who perceiving it was not possible to talk to her in that sort,
concluded to deceive us by wearing Shepherds weeds, and leaving of their
courtly apparel. Thus therefore attending daily for us, Stela and I came
forth, and as they saw us (though they made no show thereof) one of them
played aloud on his Baggepipe, to inuit us (I think) unto their music:
which when we heard, as it was a thing not used there many days before, we
came somewhat near, and hid our selves behind a company of thick Sallowes.
But they, who by stealth were looking on us, perceiving their devise to have a
good beginning, made as though they had not seen us, and between themselves
prayed one another to play or sing some song. In the end Parthenius getting the
upper hand, Delicius took his Rebecke, whereon he so sweetly played and sung
to it, that we thought Apollo had committed some new fault to become a
Shepherd again, and that it was even he that made that sweet melody. The
song was of great sentence, the invention witty, and the form of it curious,
wherefore lend an attentive care to the one and the other, if you desire to
delight you with it.

Never a greater foe did love disdain,
Or trodon grass so gay,
Nor Nymph green leaves with whiter hand has rent,
More golden hair the wind did never blow,
Nor fairer dame has bound in white attire,
Or has in lawne more gracious features tied,
Then my sweet Enemy.
Beauty and chastity one place refrain,
In her bear equal sway:
Filling the world with wonder and content:
But they do give me pain, and double woe,
Since love and beauty kindled my desire,
And cruel chastity from me denied
All sense of tollitie.
There is no Rose, nor Lilly after rain,
Nor flower in wonth of May,
Nor pleasant meade, nor green in summer sent,
That seeing them, my mind deliteth so,
As that fair flower, which all the heavens admire,
Spending my thoughts on her, in whom abide
All grace and gifts on hie.
Me thinks my heavenly Nymph I see again
Her neck and breast display,
Seeing the whitest Ermine to frequent
Some plain, or flowers that make the fairest show,
O Gods, I never yet beheld her nier,
Or far, in shade, or sun, that satisfied
I was in passing by.
The meade, the mount, the river, wood, and plain,
With all their brave array,
Yield not such sweet, as that fair face, that's bent
Sorrows, and joy in each soul to bestow
In equal parts, procured by amorous fire:
Beauty and love in her their force have tried,
To blind each humane eye.
Each mind and will, which wicked vice does stain
Her virtues break, and stay:
All aires infect by fire are purged and spent,
Though of a great foundation they did grow.
O body, that so brave a soul do hire,
And blessed soul, whose virtues ever pried
Above the starrie sky.
Only for her my life in ioies I train,
My soul sings many a lay:
Musing on her, new seas I do invent
Of sovereign joy, wherein with pride I row:
The deserts for her sake I do require,
For without her, the springs of joy are dried,
And that I do defy.
Sweet fate, that to a noble deed do strain,
And lift my heart to day,
Sealing her there with glorius ornament:
Sweet seal sweet grief, and sweetest overthrow,
Sweet miracle, whose fame cannot expire:
Sweet wound, and golden shaft, that so espied
Such heavenly company
Of beauties graces in sweet virtues died,
As like were never in such years descried.
Now as Delicius had ended his song, and Stela thinking that he had made an end
indeed of singing and playing (although it was not so, for Delicius was
requesting Parthenius to play on his Rebecke and to sing) she said unto me.
Tell me fair Crimine, Enjoys this solitary place oftentimes such like
voices, joined with such heavenly sweetenes? If it be so, I cannot but in some
sort complain of the amity lately commenced, and confirmed between us, in
that I have not spent the time in such pleasure and delight, as now by the
sweetenes of this music and fine song we have amply had. After that cruel
Gorphorost (my dear friend said I) whom the Gods confound for bereauing us of
a great part of our pleasures, began to dwell in these parts, this is the
first Bagpipe and Rebecke, that in this forest has been long since touched,
of so many Shepherdes and Shepherdesses, that have continually played and sung
in other times before when they fed their sheep here, and passed away the
heat of the day under these green trees: whereupon I marvel no less at the
novelty of this accident, then at the rare melody of the song, for I never
heard the like since I first dwelt in this place, nor that ever delighted my
senses so much. But because they begin to play and sing again, let us go a
little to them, for they seem to be mild and courteous youths, and such that
make a show to have some respect and reverence of us that be Nymphs. When I
had spoken this, we went toward them, who perceiving it, felt an extreme joy,
because they had now brought their desired purpose to effect. But to dissemble
the more with us, and because we might not take us to our woonted flight, they
sat still, without once rising to do us any courtesy, until we first spoke
unto them. When we were come unto them, and saw two such goodly young
Shepherdes, and so like in face and apparel, turning to Stela, I said. Behold
what two fair Shepherdes, but see thou not how like they be? There is not in
my judgment, silver to silver, gold to gold, nor water to water so like as
these be. Our Jupiter and Amphitrion could not be so much one, nor Mercury so
like to Sosia, when to enjoy Alomenas love, Jupiter in the likeness of
Amphitrion kept him out of his own house; and Mercury in the likeness of Sosia
made his man feel the hardness of his fist. Then turning by and by to the
Shepherds, I spoke thus unto them. Your unaccustomed and sweet songs (gracious
Shepherds) after the long suspense and silence of many, that have been long
since made in these fields, have forced us to come thus abruptly to enjoy the
sweetenes of them; if we therefore (being Nymphs) are of any estimation with
you jolly Shepherdes, we beseech you, that our presence be not of worse
condition and entertainment then these trees, which (without moving) were even
now harkening unto you, nor may displease you no more then our absence, and to
make no more difficulty to sing, now we are here, then when we were not. At
these words the Shepherdes rising up, and asking one another who should
answer, Parthenius said. Sweet Nymphs in grace and beauty non pareille, we
will not deny but that, in respect of your courteous speech to us, we are
bound to perform your gracious request (at will they cast out golden words
which sauoured of the glozings in the Court) and confess no less, that we are
constrained to obey you more for your own sakes, then for any thing else, be
it spoken with pardon of the rest of these goodly Nymphs: So that only tell
us wherein we may give you content, and we will do our best to please your
minds. Our minds said I, you have already understood. Then since it is so,
said Delicius, begin Parthenius to sing. It were better, said Partthenius, for
thee to do it: for in regard of the great sweetness wherewith (not without good
cause) thou have already delighted them, thy self being also more skillful in
music, whatsoever I shall sing after thee to my disgrace, will be but
yrksome, and unpleasant to their ears. Thou have no reason to say so, said
Delicius, for thy verses will give testimony of the truth of thy side.
Whereupon Parthenius would have begun, but not finding himself satisfied,
because I only entreated him, and not Stela, he said unto me. I would not
(gracious Nymphe) by obeying thy request to content thee, give any occasion of
dislike to thy companion, which mooues me to speak it, because I know not
whether it be her will that I should sing or no? There is not any thing
(answered Stela) that likes this fair Nymph, which does not also please me,
how much the more (if it were not so) for her own sake should it suffice thee
to fulfill her mind, without making any matter of my liking at all. Both of
them would feign have answered to these words, but that (I think) they were
afraid, one of them because he would not show himself on the sudden so
appassionate; the other, not to displease or make me blush, a thing that made
much for their purpose; and also because I now took them by the hands, saying
to Stela. The Shepherd has spoken very well, and has great reason, entreat
him therefore to sing, for he looks for it. Because then we will not delay the
matter any longer (said Stela) leaving that aside which might be said herein,
I request him with this warning, that if another time thou entreatest him to do
any thing, and if he will not do it, that he ask not counsel of me, since by
fulfilling thy will he shall satisfy mine. We will observe this charge (said
Delicius:) and see thou forgettest it not Parthenius. Then the one began to
touch his Rebecke, the other to play on his Bagpipe: And going about to begin
his song, Parthenius was a pretty while in suspense, not knowing what matter to
take in hand, for he would have said something of Stelas beauty, for whom he
felt no less secret pain, then Delicius public passion: But the force of
friendship on the other side diuerted him from it. And so partly for joy to do
that which touched the love of his friend Delicius, and with grief to go
against that, whereunto he was bound for himself, he would by praising
Delicius persuade Stela to incline to his own love, whose beginning was this,
entering after the self same sort as his friend did in the song before.

Never so true a subject to great love,
Put sounding Baggepipe to his mouth and tongue:
Nor ever Shepherd, that did keep
In any meade his silly sheep,
And never did so gracious members move
Shepherd so fair, so lusty, and so young,
In throwing of the bar, or steeled dart,
As this my dearest friend, and loving heart.
His songs and ditties, which he sung and played,
Has made the Satyrs leave the sweet pursuit
Of Nymphs, that they had chaced,
And in their arms embraced:
And them besides, with his sweet music stayed:
Forgetful of their fear (amazed and mute.)
The hardest rocks he makes both soft and tender,
And mildnes in great wildnes does engender.
Unto his person, beauty, and his grace
The Nymphs, and Napees fair to yield are glad:
The Niades, Hamadriades,
The Oreades, and Driades:
For such a feature, and so sweet a face
Paris, Alexis, nor Endimion had:
The fairest in the world he does despise
But only one, whom justly he does prize.
Because that she may only him admit,
Her only, and none else, he does obey:
She only does deserve
Him, he but her to serve:
She only him, he only her does fit:
For the one is even with the other every way:
For he for her was borne, (for her alone)
And she for him, or else was borne for none.
So that if she had not been borne at all,
He had not loved, for he his like should want:
And so she, to have loved
Her equal, it be hooued
That he was borne, For none but he should fall
Equal to her, he then might justly vaunt
That she was borne, only for him reserved,
And she that he, whom only she deserved.
Fortune did favor him above the rest,
By making him the gladdest man that lives,
If that perhaps she knew
His love so pure and true,
And faith so firm, within his constant breast,
(She that her lights unto each creature gives)
In whose brave beauty nature strained to show
More art, and skill then ever she did know.
The poor soul takes his grief, and holds his peace,
Which to reveal he wanted means of late:
Once did he go about it,
But stratght then did he doubt it:
With saying naught, his pain that does increase
He passes, not to loose his woonted state:
For though she be in all the world alone
The fairest, yet as hard as any stone.
Then (Shepherdess) this rigor lay aside:
And fly not him, that pains so much for thee:
It is a great defect
Such hardness to detect:
Let not so ill a thing with thee abide,
Where each thing is, as good as good may be.
And since in thee there should be not hing vicious,
Pay then the love, thou owe unto Delicius.
These two last staeffs so lively touched Parthenius that sung them, that
(being forced to crave that for another which he would have had himself) he
could scarce make an end of them: Which was clear and manifest, for after the
manner of those that sobbe, he redoubled some syllables, whereby he gave us to
understand, that he felt some sorrow in his distempered heart, which more
evidently we suspected, seeing how with some inward sighs he ceased without
making an end of his song. But yet we could not attain to the cause of his
greef, whereof (though earnestly we craved it on him) he told no more, then by
fained apparances (far from the truth indeed) we were able to conjecture: To
whom therefore with a modest smile I said, I would not be of thyqualitie
(gracious Shepherd) to praise thee in thine own presence, as thou have done
thy friend, although he excels thee not (perhaps) in any thing, since in sweet
voice and good grace thou art as like him, as in fair shape and figure. But
for all this Delicius is beholding to thee (for so me thinks thou call him)
but Because the praise in ones presence is held for no less then a gloze, I
would counsel thee to reserve it to some other time, when he is out of thy
sight and hearing. Thou must not condemn me (gracious Nymph answered
Parthenius) without hearing first what I can say, for it may be thou will judge
it (though thy accusation seem just to thee) clean contrary, when by good
reason I shall resolve thee herein, premising that this rule is not so
universal, That none must not be praised in presence, but that necessity may
oftentimes infringe it: whereby not only one may praise another in his
presence, but that he may do the same by himself, for his own behoof. What
necessity is requisite for that said Stela? To this when Parthenius held his
peace, turning to Delicius, she said unto him; If thy friend will not answer,
tell thou us what it is. Delicius, although he knew it, not presuming yet to
tell it, said: I say nothing, but that in my usurped name he sings of his
own praises and deserts. Parthenius going about to reply to this, I stepped in
between and said. Let there be no more time spent in courtesies; but tell us,
if it please you, from whence you are, (for your habites deny you to be of any
place heereabouts) and whither your way lies, and especially if you mean to
stay any long time in this country? And because we know already one of your
names, to oblige you the more to make us know the others, know that I am called
Crimine, and my friend and companion here Stela. Delicius then taking her by
the hand answered. Our incertaine and doubtful pilgrimage is to seek out our
Fathers, with certain tokens that we carry with us to know them (for being
children they left us young, as yet never knowing how they are called, or from
whence they are) which are no other but to seek out a fair young Shepherd,
and a grave old woman, both which at one time, but in different places, gave
us to certain nurses to be brought up. The name of my companion and friend is
Parthenius; Mine, as thou say by my friends song. Our tarrying here shall
be no longer then it shall please both you. If it be referred to our pleasure
said Stela, take us not for such simple ones, that we know not how to profit
our selves by enjoying so good conversation, and so sweet and unwonted
music. Yet would we not be so ill advised to prefer our pleasure before
your due piety, nor without content to hinder your good intent. The most
religious intent, sweet and fairest Stela (said Delicius) and that which
touches our souls nearest, is thy gracious command to have us stay still in
this country, because we may not leese so pleasant hours as these be. I will
not hinder so commendable a purpose (said Stela) although I would be glad, if
(now returned, and your fathers found) it liked you to live still here in these
parts, to spend those few hours, that we use to come abroad, in honest and
seemly recreation. Then I calling that to mind which Parthenius had sung, That
Delicius on a pride and bravery had despised all women for only one, whom he
loved more then himself, with smiling I answered. And now Shepherd I will
command thee to stay, at the least to see if I must also be put in the number
of disdained women, or if I am only beloved of thee. With these and such like
speeches we passed away the heat of the day, with this agreement in the end,
that they should stay a certain time therabouts, to inquire out some news of
their unknown parents in those parts, and not forget to pass away the heat
of the day in that same place, where we would not fail to keep them company.
Which being agreed on, Stela said unto me; Let us now go, if thou think
good, my friend Crimine, for it is a pretty while since we came forth, because
we will not give our keeper an occasion to blame us for our long tarying. But
because you may better understand this, which Stela said, you must know, that
by all means possible we procured to give Stela all the content and pleasure
we could, for which cause we did let her go with company to disport her-selfe
up and down in that green forest. But being afraid of fierce Gorphorost,
one of us ever remained at the rivers side under a palm tree, that stood
almost right over against that part, where there was but one passage, to the
end, that if the ugly Shepherd had come down, she might have warned us by
sounding of a cornet, to hie us home again with Stela. Taking our leaves
therefore of the Shepherds (no doubt without some inward sighs of theirs) we
returned to our dwelling places, and they stayed still in the forest. The next
day going very softly about the same hour, and by secret places to see how
they were occupied, we found them sitting upon the green grass, and Sleeping
in such sort, that they showed, that that was not their principal intent; for
the christalline tears, that trickled down their burning cheeks in
corriualitie, signified more store of sorrowful thoughts in their hearts, then
heavy vapors in their heads. The face of the one was right against the others,
as though they had been talking together, leaning their cheeks upon the one
hand, and with the other arm sustaining the weight of the arm and head, in
which sort they lay casting out sometimes profound and grievous sighs. Which
thing moving us to no small compassion, for now we were somewhat affected to
them, we determined to withdraw our selves, least being awaked, they might
(perhaps) have had an occasion to be ashamed to be seen in that sort: And from
thence a little way off, of purpose to awake them, but as though we had seen
nothing, we began to sing, taking for the ground and subject of our song, the
tears, that they had shed before us. That which we sung was this.

WIth sorrow, tears, and discontent,
Love his forces does augment.
Water is to meades delight,
And the flax does please the fire:
Oil in lamp agrees right,
Green meades are the flocks desire:
Ripening fruit, and wheatie ears
With due heat are well content:
And with pains and many tears
Love his forces does augment.
As their sleep was nothing else but an ecstasy, scarce had we begun, when
they awooke, and seeing that we left singing when we came near them, they
said. If your coming were an occasion to make an end of your singing, we
would be glad that you had stayed a little longer; wherefore let not our
presence be of worse condition to deprive us of this delight, then our absence
was by enjoying it, and since we refused not to do what you commanded us, nor
made it strange to acquaint you with the baseness of our simple Bagpipes,
disdain not then (fair Nymphs) by that which we entreat you, to show us the
highness of your excellent voices. Well well the truth of this is known (said
we again) but not denying your demands, since we have time for it, tell us
now if you mean to rest you here a few days. Rest (fair Nymphs) answered
Delicius? Why, we know not what it is, if we had it here. But we are determined
to have it as long as it shall please your good wills; which are ready to do you
all the pleasure we may, said I, but I will tell you one thing, which it may be
ye never yet heard. By the report and certain news of the fertility of this
Country, there are ten or twelve years past, since from the North parts
there departed a mighty huge Shepherd with a great number of sheep, and came
to feed in these grounds (certes not so fair and amiable a personage as either
of you) the Son of God Syluanus he says, and of a most strong and fierce
Shepherdess, that came with him, whether fayrer and more gracious then my
companion here, I am not able to tell you. This unseemly Shepherd was not
only like to his parents in face and fierceness, but in either of both, as
also in hideous feature he has the advantage of them. Seeing therefore that
fame was no liar, and how the situation of that part of the river (being no
less then a great I land) invited him for his habitation, without fear of the
wild beasts, which made it desert and inhabitable, he determined to live
there: Which I land, as it will in time I hope be clean eaten out by the river
(for by little and little it is every day made less) so I wish it had now the
full and complete time with the forcible waters to be quite consumed. The name
of this monstrous man is Gorphorost, whose incredible strength and bigness,
because you may understand, behold the depth of this river, and the maine force
wherewith it runs, with wading over himself a foot, by three and three, and
four and four he sets over all his sheep on the other side: which have
multiplied in such numbers (for since his coming he has almost killed all the
wild beasts that might destroy them) that there is scarce any place to
contain them: and so, not able to put a great part of them under the shades,
he lets them go freely amids the fields and along the river banks, without
fear of estraying or any other danger, being environed by the waters that
keep them in manner of a prison. We wished well to Gorphorost, and would have
pleasured him for killing the wild beasts, that annoyed not a little this
pleasant country wherefoeuer they went, if there with all not iniuring the
Shepherds of these places, he had not deprived us of their friendly company,
though to our selves, but only in these respects he did never any other harm,
who are rather bound unto him (though of his own virtue it proceeds not the not
offending of us) that he has bin a means, whereby this fair Nymphe is in our
company. The end therefore, for the which I have made this short admonition,
is, that we would not have you for our sakes suffer any harm by this rude
Shepherd, who for all this has forgotten a great part of his fierceness,
since he gave place and entrance to gentle love. Whereupon you may know how
great the force of that mighty child is. But if in these days (for I am
certain he will not come out for a solemn oath he made) some good means may
be found to make you live here with safety, we will not be a little careful
to seek it out for you: And if there be none, yet shall it please us better,
that with your absence you should be free from danger, then with your presence
(for our content) to hazard your lives, or safety any way. They thanked us
for our good will, and seemed not to take care for any thing, that might
happen, in lieu, that we failed not of our agreement with them; Parthenius
assuring us, that he could so well flatter, and please fierce Gorphorost, that
they might without any harm abide there still. With these words and some
amorous songs that we four did sing in course, we passed away the heat of
that day, and returned (as we were wont) to the river, they remaining still in
that pleasant forest, which served them for their dwelling place, and making
provision of necessary food for their sustenance from the villages
thereabouts. Not only Delicius, Parthenius, Stela and I failed not in those
first eight days to be at the appointed place of our meeting, but the fame of
the new Shepherds came to the ears of some other Nymphs, who coming thither,
and consorting with us, made many gracious and pleasant quiers, dances, and
songs to the tune of their Rebeckes and Baggepipes; sometimes lending a gentle
ear to Parthenius and Delicius sweet songs; sometimes applying our selves to
telling of tales: At which pleasant meetings old Parisies, who sometimes came
to see his daughter, gave no small content to every one with his wise precepts
and counsel touching the honor of the immortal Gods, and showing their
divine providence in all creatures, and by them the great power and might of
their eternal creator, by explaining the accelerate courses and motions of the
celestial globes, and the cause of their unwearied swiftnes. In which time
Delicius and Parthenius gained so greatly to their wills, the love of all my
companions, Shepherds and Shepherdesses, (who also resorted thither) knowing
what Gorphorost had vowed, that they were not meanly beloved of all, as well
for their sweet songs and playing, as also for their wisdom, demeanor, and
good graces. But above all fair Stela and I without comparison exceeded them,
though my love with Parthenius was more openly extended, whereunto I had then
most of al disposed my mind; and for no other cause, then that I knew Delicius
had employed his thoughts and love on Stela; and also because Ithought
Parthenius was most free. Between us both, like rude girls, we knew not how
to govern our selves in Cupids affairs. Between us both, being but a
littleprudent, we were ignorant how we should behave us in the effects of this
child, and therefore endured him impatiently, though harder and more violent
he was to Stela then to me, not because I had been a longer scholar in Venus
school, or had more experience in her blind Sons effects then she; but
because she desired, and forced her-selfe to wring out the worm out of her
heart, that every day without feeling it, crept more and more into the center of
it; for of such quality is this traitor love, that the more one endeavors to
shake him off, with greater force he takes place and seiseth on his conquered
soul: So that Stela the more she labored not to love the Shepherds, the more
courageously love assailed her, which made her night nor day take any rest, nor
find ease in any thing: all which I afterward knew by her own mouth, who at
the first dissembled the matter so cunningly, that I could gather nothing of
it. And so, meaning to take away the effect by remoouing the cause, she would
sometimes sly from company, refraining to com where the Shepherds were staying
for us, unless she was importuned by me. But after certain days that we four
were al alone together, I said. It is not reason young Shepherdes, that with
therest we live in doubt of knowing you, but that in some point we may perceive
a difference between you, when as oftentimes we cannot, no more then the rest,
call you by your right names, which I assure you troubles us not a little: So
that I would feign have one of you take some kind of mark to be known from
the other, but in such secret sort, to put us out of doubt, and make the rest
remain still therein: Our intent answered Delicius, has been hitherto
(gracious Crimine) to have our garments make no dissimilitude between them,
whom one will and shape has made so like. But to pleasure thee herein, and
that by taking it, no offense be ministered to thy companion, let fair Stela
set down the difference between us in outward show, since she has made it in
the inward soul. I know not Shepherd said Stela, what difference I have put
between you and Parthenius. Thy conceit fair Stela is not I think so hard,
as thy heart, but that thou may easily conjecture, how much love works in me
for thy sake. The putenesie of my thoughts (said Stela) has made me ignorant
of that, which I would had not been. The hardness of thy heart (said Delicius)
has made me prudent in that, which was not so much expedient for me. Do thou
then speak it in good earnest said Stela, That thou love me? Do thou then
ask it in jest (said Delicius) if I love thee? No said Stela: But then belike
I am she (as the matter falls out) to whom thou have adressed all thy songs and
tears. Delicius thinking to have a prosperous gale (whereof we also thought
him assured, for all this while she seemed not to be angry, but mild and
gentle, whereby she got that out of his heart (which the forrowfull soul had
kept so secret in his breast) with a pitiful eye cast on her, answered. Even
she indeed thou art, as the matter falls out, to whom I auow the term and
service of my life and voluntary subjection of my soul, that is, etc. Enough,
enough said Stela. I understand thee too well, and am now resolved of my former
suspicions. I never thought that the bold presumption of a miserable and
obscure man could so far extend as to entertain a thought so prejudicial to
my honor. Wherefore from this day let come who will to enjoy thy poisoned
conversation. When she had spoken these bitter words, with an austere and
angry countenance, she flung from thence without any company, and with no
less haste, then the timorous virgin, that walking by some hedge, and treading
with her fine foot upon some careless viper, appalled with feate, flies with
speed away: The tender hearted Delicius not able to power forth any
complaints, as one stricken dumb, remained no less astonished then the
Shepherde, seeing the faithful Mastie hard by his side stricken dead with a
fearful thunderclap, and the grass but even now green at his seete, burned
by the sudden lightning thereof. On whom I took so great compassion, that I
could not stay my tears, but turning my face to Farthenius to bid him help
his fellow, I espied him in a senseless trance, representing more the image of
a dead body, then the sigure of a live man, to whom it was no less then death
to see his dear friend in such a plight, and worse then death to his decayed
soul, knowing that he must now be deprived of the sight of his dear Stela,
the only reward and comfort of all his private passions. Seeing my Parthenius
in such a case, like a true lover I clasped my hands together, and then opening
them again, said. O dismal day! At which very instant I cast my self upon
Parthenius (for when Stela was risen up to be gone, I also rose up from my
place) and joining his pale face to mine, kissed him softly; he (poor
Parthenius) hanging down his head in my lap. At the voice that I gave,
Delicius (awaked as it were out of a deep sleep) sighed; and seeing
Parthenius in like case, fell again into another swoune, and remained in such
sort as my Parthenius did. I was a good while embracing my Parthenius (for love
and pity overcame my due regard of modesty) and held him in such sort as you
have heard, not taking away my face from his, but at the end craving help of
Delictus, I perceived he stood in no less need of the same. Believe me
(Gentlemen) if my pain might have been augmented, I must needs have felt it
by this second sight of Delictus: But my grief being extreme, and nothing able
to add more torments to my tortured soul, I felt them not, unless it were to
see my self all alone in such a case. But animared by the desire I had to
help them, I took a fine ashen dish out of one of their scrips, and ran to
the river for some water, and having brought it, besprinkled both their faces
with it: who being therewith, and with shaking them, a little awaked, with a
merier countenance then courage, I said unto them. What faintnes of heart is
this young Shepherds? Ye are but young Apprentises (it seems) in Cupids
service, since you will give him over at the first encounter by leaving your
lives in his hands. But feign would I know Parthenius (for then I imagined
nothing of his secret love) what made thee so much besides thy self (for the
cause of Delicius his grief, and of his sudden trance I know well enough.)
What, did Stelas sharp answer touch thee so near? No, answered Parthenius.
What was it then, said I again? Parthenius, who would not for all the world
have manifested the love he bare to Stela, answered: because I saw my dear
Delicius in some danger, whose chiefest desires and their full accomplishment I
rather wish with greater content, and in higher degree then mine own. It
grieved me not (Gentlemen) to hear him speak this, for now had the impatient
worm of jealousy begun to gnaw my throbbing heart. I believe thee said
Felismena, but know thou what I think of all these matters, and contentions
that thou have told, That thou were the only gayner, since thou enioyedst so
pleasant (though so small a time) being in such sort as thou were with
Parthenius. By our virgin rights I swear to thee (said Crimine) that I would
rather have been deprived of that delightful being with my Parthenius, so
that I had been excused of the great grief I had to see him in so pitiful a
case. For if thou have not tried fair Lady, yet happily thou may have heard
say, That a pleasure or delight is but half tasted which is distempered by one
bitter grief or sorrow. But leaving this aside, will you know (said
Felismena) whereupon I have thought? Whereon said Crimine? On this (said
Felismena) musing with my self, how thou could call the Shepherdes by their
own names, whereas thou saiedst, they could not be known one from another for
their great likeness, which caused thee to request some privy tokens to
discern them, which hitherto yet thou have not told us. So that I conceive not
how without knowing them distinctly (as if the difference were now made) thou
should name them so right, giving to each his proper name. Thou say well
fair Lady (said Crimine.) But that which is already told, may satisfy thy
demand. For Delicius alone was the man (I said) that loved (at the lest
openly) without telling whom, until this last accident befell, which we by his
speeches, and so soon as he had but opened his mouth easily gathered, so that
although we knew not them, when we came to them, yet by the manner of their
talk we were afterward cleared of that doubt. It is well (said Doria) And as
thou love thy self fair Crimine, proceed in this history of your love and
fortune, for I am partaker of some of the pain, wherein thou leftest the
solitary and sorrowful Shepherdes. To comfort them in their great grief,
said Crimine, I reasoned with them with some apparent and consolatorie words,
but the afflicted Shepherdes ceased not to power out abundance of tears, with
no small quantity of burning sighs: whereupon blaming them sometimes, and
sometimes encouraging them, I endeavored to cheer them up, but all was not
enough to disburden them of despair in that sorrowful place, if I had not
armed them with an apparent hope to restore Delicius to Stelas favor again,
by enjoying it more then ever he had before, though he would not have meanly
contented him with that alone, whereof he was deprived without requesting any
more. But thinking it was now, more then convenient time to go my ways, I
took my leave of the Shepherdes, promising them to do what possibly I could
in their affairs, in the which I only commended patience unto them for a few
days, telling them that a hard impostume in the beginning could not be cured,
until by time, and plasters laid thereunto, it be first mollified and made
tender; and that in the mean while I would not with other Nymphs forget to
visit them, though not so often as I desired, not to leave Stela all alone, as
also for avoiding of suspicion. In this space of time because Delicius and
Parthenius did lead so sad and uncomfortable a life, which by no kind of
pastime could be cheered, and also because the vowed time of Gorphorosts
coming abroad was near at hand, all our company was dissolved. Parthenius,
who was not only careful for that which touched him, but especially for that
which was needful for his friend, went sometimes walking up and down along
the river banks, and by singing many amorous and sorrowful sonnets, practiced
to enter into familiarity and friendship with fierce Gorphorost, because they
might by these means (whilst he kept him company, and told him many things
to please his loving humor) without any danger continue still in that forest;
and also, because holding him other times with tales and discourses, Delicius,
my self and Stela (if Stela perhaps grew afterward to be more gentle) might
in the mean time be secure in mutual company together. Parthenius therefore
beginning his walks in this sort, fierce Gorphorost came down from a high
hill, whom when Parthenius beheld, he sat him down upon a round bank made by
the water, and played on his Baggepipe so loud that Gorphorost might hear him.
But scarce had the sound thereof pierced his ears, when step by step (which
any other Shepherd with running very fast could not outgoe) he came to the
river banks on the other side: when Parthenius saw him nigh at hand, he left
his Baggepipe, and taking his Rebecke, began to sing in the praise of love (for
afterward he told us all the matter) the which, for that it made for his
purpose, as also for the sweetness of the song, delighted not a little the fierce
shepherd, who had forthwith passed to the other side where Parthenius was, if
he had not feared by coming upon him unawares, to have made him run away,
though he was now somewhat assured to the contrary: when he saw Parthenius
(being so nigh unto him) not once begin to stir, nor to leave of his singing,
whereon presuming a little, he spoke thus unto him aloude (for the distance of
the place by reason of the great river being between, and the noise which the
waters running with great force continually made, were an impediment that he
could not be so well heard.) So may this God be ever favorable unto thee
(jolly Shepherd) if thou will give me leave to come to thee, to enjoy part of
thy sweet music and songs: for by her, that has sole power over my heart I
swear, thou shall not now, nor at any time hereafter have any harm at my
hands. Parthentus hereupon made him a sign to come over, which he did out of
hand, and there they gave to each other a particular account of their lives,
Parthenius having ever a special care to conceal that, which by revealing it,
might be hurtful unto him. They passed away the time there a good while, when
at the last Parthenius played and sung such things, as pleased Gorphorosts
vain, wherewith the fierce Shepherd was not only most highly content, but no
less glad, that he had got a companion and friend, to whom he might impart his
uneven loves with Stela. In this sort therefore they spent that day, and took
their leave of one another, Gorphorost requesting him not to forget that place
of meeting. While Parthenius was a gaining Gorphorosts good will, (wherein he
had so much profited himself by his passing wit and discretion, that in his
arms to the other side of the river he oftentimes transported him, to show him
all his riches and habitation) I labored to pacify angry Stela, wherein I
took such pains, and was so forward, that I had put her (as it were) in
Cupids bosom, to make her know his sorce and signory; and in such sort, that
though she had no force to resist love, yet she encouraged her self to pass
away her pain without discovering it once unto me, being her chiefest
secretary, and dearest friend: Nevertheless I studied by all means possible
(by procuring Delicius pardon) to make her return to her former company and
conversation; whereupon, when most of our Nymphs were on a time in several
companies agreed to pass away the heat of the day, I said unto her. I
cannot but grieve (beloved Stela) that for so light an occasion we should
leese so many pleasant hours as we were wont to have. Truth it is Crimine
(said Stela) that I would feign enjoy them, if they were entertained with such
purity and honesty as at the first we found them: And I know not why thou
should term it light, when to thy self (as at the least to me it seemed) it
should be no less heavy to endure. What harm did thou get by it (said I)
or how could thou be agreeued, that so iollie a young Shepherd, so wise, and
discreet should love thee (I know) with such apparent tokens of true and
sincere affection; whom neither Apollo, when he fed Admetus herds, nor any
other did ever excel in any thing. And how more available (if not for their
deserts) were it for us to have their company, to no other end, but to pass
away the heat of these days, which well thou might dissemble, since in the
end thy will remains so free to do whatsoever shall like thee best. Should I
consent (said Stela) to have one love me beyond the limits of chastity? Why
this (said I) is not in thy power, because thou can not let it: for command
Gorphorost to leave of to love thee, and thou shall see how much thy desire or
command preuailes. I know it well (said Stela) but then must I suffer him to
manifest so dishonest a motion to me? Thou art in the fault (said I) by
provoking him first unto it, as if (it seemed) thou had no other desire. By
means whereof the careless and simple lover, thinking there was no such
hidden deceit in thee (as with thy fair words to draw that out of his breast,
which with fast and secret bonds he had enclosed there) and thinking to take
opportunity by the forehead, plainly laid open unto thee his unfeigned and
fervent affection; wherein thou were much beholding unto him, since otherwise
(perhaps) he would never have manifested it (by passing rather in the mean
time great pains for fear of offending thee) until thou did first command
him. Since it is then so (said Stela) that thou will lay this fault upon me, I
will take the blame and punishment upon my self, which shall be hereafter not
to see nor speak with him, nor to have any thing to do with him, because I
will not fall with him into more errors: And as for him let him taste the
fruit of his own boldness, which punishment as it will not (I think) be
grievous to me to suffer, so will it not be hurtful to him, to gather that
which he himself did sow: How easy a thing it is for thee (said I) I see
well, but how hard it is for him, I cannot conceive, assuring thee, that if
thou had but seen him at that present, thou would consider better of that
I say, who is yet in such a case, that thou art scarce able to know him; with
whose tears and burning sighs the hard dimonds and crystal may be mollified
and melted. And believe me Stela, if it had not been for me and Parthenius,
that did put him in some uncertain hope, because he should not despair, he
had before this time paid dearly for his fault, (if by doing thy command, he
made a fault) though yet in the end I greatly fear me that he cannot endure
very long, if thou do stay too long from visiting him, who now requires no
other thing for his only satisfaction and content. Truly (said Stela) thou
have termed them well (uncertain hopes) for so they are indeed, and of
uncertain they shall be for ever vain. When I perceived her hardness, and of
what small force my persuasions were, with mine eyes full of tears I said unto
her. Ah Stela how ill do thou requite my great love toward thee, how small
an account do thou make of the love, that thou owe me, and how ill do
thou think of the tender affection, which I have ever vowed unto thee? the
revenge of all which (if with speed thou do not prevent my ensuing sorrow) I
crave at the just hands of our impartial Gods. Speaking thus unto her, and
renting the fine veil that weakly covered my amorous breasts, with many
sighs, and so profounde, that my breath seemed to burst my inward soul, I
foulded mine arms, and leaning my head upon my knees (for then I was set
down) I made strange and pitious motions with my body. Stela stood
astonished at such a sight, not knowing whereunto she might attribute so great
extremes, and so was she in a great suspense, unable to speak or do any thing,
but weep for love and pity (not knowing wherefore) only thereby to keep me
company: and a little while after embracing me, she began thus to say. My
dear Sister and Mistress, if this offense which without reason (as I know no
less) thou have conceived against me, thou take in ill part at the first, I
do no less wonder at this new accident, that thy unwonted tears move me thus
to pity. Tell me wherein I am culpable, or how I have offended thee; and
beware thou put me not in suspicion that thy friendship to me is stained
and vnpure, when as mine has ever been toward thee virtuous, and sincere.
For thou say I requite thee ill, because I will not see that presumptuous
Shepherd. O my dear friend Stela (said I) how feign would I be as thou art,
that I might with that liberty that thou have, tell thee the cause of my
complaints, or that thou were as I am, to hear with my subjection, What reason
I have to make them, and to accuse thee. But in the end with the possibility
that I shall attain to, and as shortly as I can, I will tell it thee, to take
away that suspicion which thou have of me, and not to conceal any secret
matter from one another, an unlawful part to our right of mutual friendship.
The reason that justly moves me to complain of thee is, that thou will not go
see Delicius, and this is for another matter then thou think of, and
therefore be attentive, It is now clear enough to thee, what great love and
amity is between both the brothers, which has made Parthenius feel the
grief of his friend Delicius no less then he did himself, whereby he is in
as great dauunger of his life: For when Delicius falling down, had lost his
color, and was in such an agony, Parthenius was in no less to see his friend
in such a case, that thou would have thought the last period of both their
lives had been come, who had been long since delivered from their pains, if
by some small hope I had not revived them; yet thinking that either of them
would be glad to live, not for himself, but because the other might live: for
both of them knew well that one of their lives could last no longer then the
other enjoyed his, so that denying to go see Delicius, thou leauest Parthenius
in great danger. Thou will (perhaps) ask me, what I have to do with the good
or ill fare of this unhappy Shepherd, by seeling it so much as I do: feign
would I have another tell thee this, but in the end setting all virgin modesty
aside with thee, since it lies in my power to do no less, Thou must know, that
since these Shepherds came hither for their ill (I will not say for mine, for
though their sight cost me ten thousand lives, I cannot yet deny but that I
have been happy) I am not able to tell thee how I yielded to loves command,
being forced to love Delicius no less then Parthenius; for I never found any
thing, wherein I liked the one more then the other: with which doubt, not
knowing to what side to adhere, I was certain days in suspense; but
afterward knowing that Delicius was in love with thee, and Parthenius free, I
thought it best not to make my self subject to him who was already a captive,
but to the other, whose love has made so forcible an impression in my unarmed
heart, that without him my life is hateful to me. Thou see therefore by this,
fair Stela, how for that which concerns me so much, I wish some content to
Delicius. It can cost thee but a little (dear friend) to pardon him for the
good that I shall gain, when also no harm can redound to thee thereby, and
the rather since he craves pardon of thee with protestation never after to
offend thee. Thou demandest a hard matter at my hand (said Stela) but because
I see thy tears, which I cannot suffer to issue out in such abundance, whereby
thou do manifest the grief which thou feel, and because thou may not
have any occasion to complain of my friendship, I will do that which I thought
not to do; but on such a condition, that thou shall never complain on me
again, if by committing any other such fault, I deny Delicius my sight for
ever: whom I would also know, that neither he, nor any desert of his part
could obtain pardon for so great a fault, if he had not procured so good a
mediator: for it is not my will, that for his sake thou should thank me for
it. Embracing her then for this courtesy and gentle offer, that she made me, I
thanked her for it, and with her good leave went my ways (imagine how glad) to
seek out my Shepherds, and found Delicius all alone, for Parthenius was with
Gorphorost. Needless it is to tell you if Delicius was glad to see me come to
him with another kind of countenance, then I was wont some days before, for
as I promised him, so I performed, to go and see him: who perceiving now my
signs of gladness, said unto me. The only hope of my health, and comfort in my
cares, do thou bring thy noble heart so joyful, as thy gracious countenance so
full of content? Tell me quickly, without more circumstances, for thou know
that A good deed quickly done, is twice done, although it be but one: by which
words knowing him to be Delicius, I said. To morrow thou shall see Stela. What
do I live (said Delicius?) If between this and then thou do not die, said
I. In her good grace, said he? If thou will said I. O good words, said he. But
thou must do better deeds, said I. Doubt not of that, said he, but that I do,
and will make it the highest and best deed in the world to love Stela my
truest soul. O Delicius (said I) how do I conceive, that thy great love, or
the small dissembling thereof (I will not say small knowledge) will be
heere-after hurtful to thee. Let come what will (said Delicius) for I will
rather joy to suffer for loving too much (if there be any excess in love) then
to be harmed for loving too little. I will not counsel thee (said I) not to
love, for it would avail me nothing at all: But I must tell thee, that it is
expedient for thee not a little to dissemble thine affection, especially before
Stela, if thou will not be only odious unto her, but also deprived of her
desired presence. By performance whereof, know that she will make truce with
thee for her part and for thine. Not for my part (answered Delicius) although I
should yet pass greater harms by this occasion, which cannot be greater then
these which I have already suffered: But in the end she has made such truce
according to her will, that she has seemed the conqueror, since none is able
to come to resist her hand to hand. Well, well, said I, time consumes many
things, and it may be that amongst so many, the anger of thy Stela may also be
forgotten. God grant it (answered Delicius) but not to the prejudice of my
great love. Tell me (said I) what is become of thy brother, or where is he,
that he is not with thee? In faith (stepped out Doria and said) I was not a
little woondring with my self that all this while thou did not ask for thy
Parthenius, since thou were so pained and lost (or at the least as thou have
made show) so much in his love, which made me long to ask thee the cause
thereof. Lost saidest thou, nay rather found said Crimine, and happy in it.
But I will answer to that which thou have asked. If as soon as I came, I had
asked for him, Delicius would have thought, that my cheifest intent was to see
Parthenius, and not to help him, which (to get the good will of both) was no
good way at all. I could give thee other reasons (fair Nymph) but let this
suffice. But returning to that I was telling, when I asked for Parthenius,
Delicius said, he was gone to Gorphorost, and told me of the new friendship
lately begun between them both: whereof though I was somewhat afraid; yet I
could not thoose, but think well of his policy to tarry the safer and longer
time in those parts. I would have stayed for him until he had come, to have
counseled him, how he might have conuersed and behaved himself with that
fierce Shepherd. But I must needs go, because Delicius told me, that he would
not come so soon again; for that Gorphorost was determined to show him the
Island, and the Cave where he dwelt. The next day before our accustomed hour,
chalenging Stela for her promise, I carried her with me to the wonted place,
the which a Nymph (to whose lot it befell that day) watched (as I said) to see
if any danger was at hand. We going on therefore that way, and Stela seeing the
shadows to be but narrow, said: We go too soon, for the Shepherds be not yet
come: and admit they were, it is not decent nor convenient for us to go before
our accustomed hours, because they might not think, that being so desirous to
see them, we prevented our wonted time: If therefore (friend) thou think
good, let us go into the thickest of the forest here, to walk under the
shades, while it is fitter time to go. I told her I was content, and bad her
lead the way. But going in this sort from tree to tree, we might perceive in
the tender bark of a great and tall ash, from as high as a man of more then a
mean stature, might reach from the ground, certain verses written very small
and close together, and coming to the same to see what they were, I began to
read them as follows.

SInce all my fortunes are so overthwart,
And so unequal to my just pretense,
That where dame Nature (Mistress of her art)
Did make an end to frame each beauties part,
There all my ils and sorrows did commence:
Auguish, and woes, fierce torments, grief, and pain
With their brave force my soul do ouerrunne,
That they do work it to their only vain,
As blustering winds upon the clouds and rain,
Or as the snow that meltes before the sun.
And then since that my wet and wearied eyes
Were wont to be envious once to see,
Because they saw the seat, where nature lies
With all her treasures, and the chiefest prize,
Of beauty, that in all the world might be:
Now shall they only seek, and wish this hire
(Continually in bitterness to weep)
Now shall they burn in swelling tears like fire,
And now in lieu of seeing that desire,
My cheeks in them shall never cease to sleep.
Since th'absence of the Nymph, I love so much,
Has deyn'd to bear me company of late,
Then needs my life must languish, and be such,
That greefes and sorrows will not also grutch
To follow absence, as their chiefest mate:
And since my Star is hid, and gone away,
Whereby my life and senses I did guide,
I cannot choose but err, and go astray,
And live in senseless darkness every day,
Finding no light wherein I may abide.
And now exiled, shall my body fly
(Since hard mishap the same did so oppress)
But yet my soul shall evermore be nie,
And shall be never absent, though I die,
From the sweet body of my Shepherdess:
And so if that my vital powers quail,
Or body die by wandering here and there,
Impossible it is my soul should fail,
Or death or danger should the same assail,
Accompanying her body any where.
My soul for ever does in her remain,
My body but for absence does lament,
That though my wretched body now is feign
To wander here, yet does my love restrain
My soul to stay, that never would consent:
Then (miserable body) once begin
This sorrowful departure with no wonder
To feel with pain and grief: And never lin
To wail the cruel torments thou art in,
With soul and body parting thus asunder.
You shall my drenched eyes, no less then this,
Feel this great misery, that greeues me so,
Your company here shall not be amiss,
Since that you were the only fault, ywisse,
Of all my troubles, and tormenting woe.
Then seas of tears begin to drown your marge,
And weep for your attempt so rashly done,
Let weeping be your office and your charge,
And care no more to look so much at large,
Let it suffice, you saw another sun.
The intellectual and inward eyes
Shall only have this charge, and care to see,
And you my corporal, with mournful cries,
Bewail my harms, in which no comfort lies,
Only to you this office I decree.
And those which are impassible at all,
Shall see at length and in succeeding time
Impossible and strange things to befall,
And you, as passible hereafter shall
Weary your selves by means of such a crime:
For you they shall with double sight behold
That shining blaze, that brave and glorious sight,
Without the fear of hurt; and shall be bold
With great delight their senses to unfold
On that, which did your looks with harm requite,
They shall behold that now I am, and was
Condemned without the course of justice lore,
For if I did offend to love her as
My self, then I confess this fault did pass
To make me suffer, what I can no more.
And of this thing I mean not to repent
For happen will, what happen shall, to prove
Each amorous torment I am well content,
And with good will with mere and frank consent
I yield unto the harm that comes of love.
In loving her, I do all what I may,
Though to my mind it falls out amiss,
I promise to forget her every way,
And that my love for ever shall decay,
If she would leave to be what now she is.
Alas she cannot leave to be the same,
A thing it is, her mind that well does please,
Having no peer in cruel beauties fame:
Nor I cannot, but still maintain this flame,
Nor it is a thing convenient for mine ease:
And if she said to me, with little love,
That it were best for me to hate and scorn,
And should find ease, if I began to prove
The same, I answer, that it does behooue
Me still to choose the worse, to worser borne.
My piteous words she did condemn with fell
And angry looks, for telling her mine ill
(Infernal grief and to my soul a hell)
That with such cruelty she should repel
Me so, because I did obey her will:
She bid me tell her (O accursed day)
If that my torments were for her or no?
And if I loved her so as I did say?
She did command, Alas I did obey
Why angry then, if she will have it so?
Weep eyes of earth O weep, and weep no more
My misery, and whether it does tend:
Eyes of my soul, behold and then deplore
My wretched state, what I was once before,
And what I am, and what must be my end,
O woeful life, O poor afflicted heart,
Tell me (poor soul) how can thou not but fail
In Passions of such torments, pain, and smart?
With such a thought how do thou not depart
And perish when no succor can prevail?
O hapless lover wretched, and forgot,
Though happy once, and happy but of late:
To day thou die, but yet thy love cannot,
To day thy greefes begin their gordian knot,
To day thy joy does end, and happy state:
To day thy woes, and sorrows do appear,
To day thy sadness, and thy pains are known,
To day thy sweet content does finish here,
To day thy dismal death approaches near,
To day thy firmest love, and faith is known.
What do you now mine eyes, what do you rest?
Let out your floods, whose streams in grief do swell:
For it may be, you may within my breast
Quench out this burning flame, or at the lest,
Cool this great heat that burns like Mongibelle?
But woe is me, I strive but all in vain
Against the stream: For golden Tagus streams
Nor Duerus flood, nor Iberus again,
Can quench this heat or mitigate the pain,
How then my tears? Alas, these are but dreams,
And in such sort, because it does hoffend
My heart, that burns like to the smithie flame,
For it does more increase, and does extend,
And more it does with sparkling flames incend,
The more that water's cast upon the same:
And now since want of hedgrow fails me,
And that I feel increase, not want of pain,
I think it best for me to go and see,
If I can find some other hedge or tree,
To write that there, which this cannot contain.
With the taste of this sorrowful song I will now leave of, which me thinks
is of great substance, whether the affection I bear the Shepherde that wrote
it, makes me think so (for by the words thereof you may understand it was
written by Delicius) or that then the reading, and now the recital of it,
whereby the miserable estate of the poor youth was then and now represented
unto me, does make me judge it to be no less I know not: Assuring you, that
then for a little I would not have made an end to read it out, though I had
sought it in every place, if the tears which fell so fast from mine eyes to
see the grief of so fair and unfortunate a young Shepherd, had not let me.
Tell me no such thing (said Lord Felix) for if I thought thou had not as
well read the other, which he said he went to write in another tree, I would
entreat thee to recite this once again: but we shall have time enough (if it
please the Gods) to hear out the rest. But what will you say (said Crimine) if
I should tell you, that we never remembered to seek out the other. Therein I
believe thee not answered Lord Felix, for so small care should not (me thinks)
befall in women of so great respect, and in thee especially, who did love him
with such tender care and affection. Not to deceive thee therefore nor thy
imagination (said Crimine) know Lord Felix, that we sought and found it out. O
how have thou reioiced my heart, said Felismena! but take heed hereafter
Crimine what thou say: and if we shall continue friends, I pray thee
mock us no more in this sort, for thou had not a little troubled my mind by
making me believe, that thou had not sought it out. But state yet (said
Doria) for I am not of your opinion, that she should recite this other song so
soon as you would have her. Why said Lord Felix? Because I would first
know, said Doria, if it be such an one as the last, for if it be not, she did
well to leave of her tale at such a point; for it is not the condition of my
palate, to remain with an ill taste, when it has once a good one. Very true,
said Felismena. What answerest thou therefore Crimine to this? I have not
perhaps the same taste (said I) that she has; so that it may be that what is
sweet to her, may seem bitter to me, or contrary: for in tastes there is no
small difference. But for my self I can say, that the rest to come pleases me
no less, then that which is past. Then by this reason (said Lord Felix) thou
may tell it, which I believe thou will not otherwise choose to do with the
condition that Doria alleged unto thee. Since you have fair Ladies (said
Polydora) staide your selves more then I would in questions and answers, I will
also propound mine. Of which I dare lay a wager you will confess, that one of
them will seem better to you then all the rest. And for this I will not call any
other to be judges, but your selves; and in faith not to appeal in any time
from the sentence given. Thou take much upon thee (said Felismena) and more,
leaving it in the arbitrament of these that be contrary to thee. Nay rather
little (said Polydora) for I know well that for your credits you dare not but
pronounce it in my favor. Tell it then to try (said Lord Felix.) You all take
upon you (said Polydora) not meanly to be in love, and praising (not without
good cause) the song, and having heard Crimine confess, that she could not
make an end to read it for pity she had of Delicius, what is the reason, that
you have not asked any thing what he did, or what Stela felt, or what
impression it made in her? These are questions more woorthe the asking of
lovers, then to be so precise in demanding, if it were written or not, and if
she saw the other, or not? It would have grieved me (being no lover) if she
had not been condolent for him, who was put in such anxieties, and you that
affirm it to be so, seem not to be sorrowful for this passion; whereby it
seems you have no desire to help him with so much as a word. Polydora gave
them all great delight with her friendly anger, which she showed in jest, of
whom there was not any that thought not, but that she was in good earnest, if
in the end she had not laughed. Then all with one voice said, that the
verdict should pass on her side. Every one holding their peace to see what
Crimine would answer to it, she began thus to say. Thou have so highly
considered the matter Polydora that if thy demand had come jointly with the
quesions of these Gentlemen, I would (to have satisfied thine) (with pardon be
it spoken) have left theirs unanswered. And truly if love had not required of
Stela a narrow account of the hardness of her heart, then thine also had been
without an answer, because I think you would not give any credit to my
speeches, not seeming a possible thing, that where all virtues are laid up,
pity should there be wanting, in whom I assure you, was no more show of
mercy, then sign of heat in snow: Whereat if I took any grief, wishing the
Shepherd so much good, for the reason that I have alleged, thou may (fair
Nymph) conjecture. But I promise you now, that I have no occasion to complain,
for love has as well paid me for the offense, which then by her cruelty she
gave me, that I may justly complain of too great pity, which she used toward
him, since being such, it has been too cruel for me in this behalf. And for
this time I will cease, as well for that I weary my self and you, as also for
that Felicia and the rest come in very good time: who coming near unto them,
Felismena said. Lay thy hand of punishment upon me Lady Felicia, for I
confess I deserve it, affirming that thy coming has made me sorry, and
hereof I know well who is in fault. The same all the rest said. Say you so
(said Felicia) Then I swear to morrow you shall be all punished for it. With
this they went to supper and to rest. If I should set down in order the brave
daunces and songs, that after supper were played and sung, it would be an
endless piece of work.

The end of the fourth book.
The fifth Book of the second Part of Diana of George of Montemayor.
THe next day in the morning the three Nymphs, that were rescued by the
Shepherdes, being there when the Savages ran upon them, desirous to give them
all the pleasure and contentment they could, told them all what Crimine had
discoursed unto them before, even unto that very point, where Crimine by
Felicias and their coming was interrupted, which made Syrenus to say. Did
Felismena then say it grieved her for this, because Felicia came? Not for any
other thing, said the Nymphs. God never help me (said Seluagia) if ever I
go one foot from Crimine, before she have made an end of her history, and I
hope Syluanus, and Syrenus will do the like. We mean no less said they.
Dinner being done, Lord Felix, Felismena, and the Nymphs desirous to know the
rest of that which Crimine had begun the day before, consulted together to get
her out of the company she was in. Which sage Felicia perceiving, and what
they went about, bad Lord Felix be content, and told them that she would do
the best to fulfill their desires. A little while after, she went from thence
to pass away the time with Parisiles and Crimine, and left Stela with them
all, to tell out the rest, because Crimine could not tell that which followed,
so well as Stela, whereof Felicia informed Lord Felix. When dinner was done,
Delicius went as he was wont to walk up and down in the woods, spending
those miserable days in sorrowful thoughts and tears. So that Felicia,
Parisiles, and Crimine being gone, Lord Felix, Felismena, the Nymphs, and the
Shepherdes remained with fair Stela, to whom Felismena began thus to say.
From that very instant (most excellent virgin) when first thou did discover
to us thy vermillion and snow white face, we clearly knew, that for singular
beauty thou did get the prize and honor amongst the fairest wheresoever,
and till yesterday that Crimine showed the hardness of thy heart, we had not
known, that thy exceeding cruelty deserved the palm and victory amongst all
mortal women. Renowned Lady, said Stela (cutting her off) I think it will
not grieve thee, if I answer thy needelesse words after a rude sort, since
thou will give me that but in words, which thou have deserved in deed, I
speak it concerning thy more rare beauty. For, as for being cruel, I deny
not but that I have deserved a reward, though I am now more worthy of a
greater, for being on the contrary so pitiful as thou see. Thereof (said
Felismena) we know the first, and of the second being ignorant, do us
therefore the favor to rid us out of this false opinion of thee. All of them
with one voice likewise charged her with the same demand. For many respects,
said Stela, I cannot (worthy company) deny your earnest requests, for one,
because I was commanded thereunto by sage Felicia, to whom I owe all obedience
and respect of duty: for another, to fulfill your commands, which I will not
disobey: and for the third, because I take a pleasure in recounting mine own
passions, to try if with the grief which I shall have in telling them, death
will deliver me once from them; which though for this respect I chiefly desire,
yet life is pleasant to me, only for no more, but to enjoy the sight of my
young Shepherdes, to whom (mine honor reserved) I have sacrificed my dearest
liberty. Other reasons I omit that move me to satisfy your minds. And now
because you are informed to that point where my dear friend Crimine left, from
that I will take my beginning and proceed unto the present estate that we are
now in, aduising you by the way, that I durst never open my mouth with such
boldness to tell you of my loves, if of mine own part there had ever been the
lest stain or thought of impuritie in them. The which thing affirmed as well
by Crimine, as by that which I will rehearse, shall soon appear. And as I
will also tell you (which my companion could not, but that which she did openly
see) what I did, and spoke with my self alone, so cannot I report unto you
what she or the Shepherdes did, or spoke, when they were by themselves alone.
And if I shall tell you any thing that I have not seen, it shall be after
their own report to me. Give ear therefore, for now I begin.

CRimine could scarce pronounce the words of the song written in the tree, and
recited by her, for pity of Delicius (which we knew well by the tenor of it to
be his) for if they had held out longer, she could not have made an end of
them, but having read them, she said. Woe is me, how different are they in mind
that are so like in face (for now you know how Crimine died for the love of
Parthenius, and how she had told me it) Delicius burns in love, and Parthenius
is cold in the same. Me thinks it were good, that both of them should love like
faithful companions, or that Stela and I like good friends should hate. O
Stela thou might well agree with Parthenius, who in condition of cruelty is
so like unto thee, and should forsake Delicius, so like to me. I assure you
Gentlemen, that the pitiful verses that Delicius wrote in the tree, penetrated
deeply into my soul, but the words that were fixed in Crimines; sorrowful
breast, moved me without comparison to more ruth. The persuasions that Crimine
oftentimes used to me, to induce me to love Delicius were of great force, but
this last was so strong, that it wrought more effectually with me then all the
rest. Delicius his singular parts, and the rare deserts of Parthenius were of
great worth with me, by noting how worthy they were to be beloved; but the
jealousy I had of Crimine, perceiving how glad she was to be beloved of either
of them was more forcible in my mind. O love, love, how justly do they paint
thee like a blind boy, thy conditions being no other! For a boy with a broken
pate, that will not suffer his head to be bound up in a clout, but seeing the
same tied to another boys head, cries out for it: So was it with me and
Crimine. I rejected the love of the Shepherds, but knowing that Crimine loved
them, I died for their love, and wept in my inward soul that Crimine was so
much devoted to them. But mark my dissimulation, for to that, which she said
I answered thus. To this last (my sweet friend) which thou have alleged
(for as much as touches me) thou may well agree, not only with Delicius,
but with his friend, if thou will. This is not well (said Crimine) that thou
have yet so much liberty to grant me such leave, but in the end, I am well
content to take it: for I love not Delicius so little, that I would do him such
injury, neither do I see him so inclined to yield to my love again. And I see
no reason (said I) why I should not give thee leave or any body else in this
respect: let us leave this (said she) and go if thou think good whither we
were determined. Come on (said I) let us go whither we must, not whither we
should, for the sooner we go, the sooner we shall come back again. Being
therefore come to our wonted place, we found the Shepherds merry for the hope
they had to see me, wherein I deceived not my self, for if it was not so, I am
then sure I was well deceived, though somewhat sorrowful also for my long
staying. We therefore coming before the fair Shepherds, a certain fear
possessed both their bodies, no otherwise then if some fearful and ghastly
thing had suddenly appeered before their sight, so that it caused a notable
trembling in every part of them. Crimine went on six steps before (it might be
to bid Delicius take courage and a good heart) and afterward spoke out aloud to
them saying. By force (my friends) I bring this my companion hither to
establish a loving peace between you and her. Delicius would have answered,
but Crimine fearing least his love would have made a fault in something, cut
him off, following her speech thus. For confirmation whereof, there is nothing
more requisite, but that without remembrance of that which is past, we return
again to our former pastimes. Truth it is, that I will not dissuade Delicius
from asking her pardon, whom he has moved to anger, and her I beseech by the
faith of our friendship not to deny the same. Then said Delicius by and by,
his eyes full of tears, and his knees on the ground, not only for the offense
committed, but if in any thing I shall hereafter offend her, with all
humility I ask her forgiveness. If so for naught (said I) a fault should be
sold, it would be held but for a sport and pastime in lieu of satisfying your
wills, to give occasion of anger, howsoever by redeeming it only with pardon
craved and obtained. So that trust not to this Shepherd: for the second shall
not be forgiven thee so good cheap. Would thou have him live so precisely
fair Stela, (said Parthenius) and in such continual fear, that he dare not
only speak, nor so much as breath for fear of offending thee? I could not
choose but laugh at Parthenius words, and at the countenance wherewith he spoke
them: To the which I answered thus. Gracious thou art in sooth jolly Shepherd,
that art so ready to help thy companion, I do not meaneit so extremely, as
thou say, he understands me well enough: I imagine as much said Parthenius,
but am not ignorant, that thou art rigorous, and that in this sort we are both
in an ill case, if for speaking perhaps or doing a light thing ignorantly, one
should not be pardoned. If so small faults are so heynously punished, how can
the greater escape uncorrected? Wherefore set down this law (if thou will at
the least be accounted just) that the punishment exceed not the fault, putting
the fault and the punishment in an equal balance of moderation: We are more
bound to our Gods for mercy, which they show us, then for their justice,
whereby but a little they profit themselves. Tell me then fair Stela (as the
Gods preserve thee still in thy singular and rare beauty) if every time that
men offend, high Jove should send down his thunderbolts, how many do
thou think should he find unarmed? I impute it not Gentlemen, to any pride,
arrogancy, or necessity of mine own part, if lying, sometimes I say (fair
Stela) which are formal words of Shepherds, and commonly used of them, which
besides (although I might well leave unspoken) yet could it not be well
suffered, because they are not without mystery. It is well (said Doria) let it
be as thou will, and tell on, for we will not stay our selves upon so apparent
a matter as this. I answered Parthenius (said Stela.) That the error committed
is well manifested, but after what sort shall the ignorance thou speak of be
clear unto me? But I see thee Parthenius so free in thy speeches, and bitter
in thy reprehensions, that I shall be forced with my will, yea, and for very
fear, to do something for thee. Parthenius without more ado humbled himself
with Delicius, who was all this while at my feet, for of purpose I would not
bid him rise, desirous to see them both equally yield themselves unto me,
because I equally loved them both, and being in this sort, he said. If it be
then so, I beseech thee pardon him, since he craves it on thee with so great
humility. I am content (said I) and taking them both by the hands, I lifted
them up, which when I had done, Crimine said. Tell me Parthenius how falls it
out, thou art not with thy friend Gorphorost to day? Parthenius answered,
because I knew fair Stela would come hither to day. And not because I came,
said Crimine? Thou have no cause to ask me this question (gracious Nymphe)
answered Parthenius, since thou art assured, I would do it no less for thine,
but only because fair Stelas presence was so much desired, by reason of these
passed discontents. One thing I have marked, said Crimine, whereof I should not
be a little ashamed, if there were any other here besides Stela, that thou
do call her evermore (fair) and me (gracious.) Thou may urge me so far
said he, that I may confess my self ouercommed. Friend Crimine, said I,
their faults cannot take away the due praise of thy beauty, so that if thine
were deemed by right and indifferent judges, it should ever have the prize and
superiority. And whom said Crimine shall we appoint for such judges? My self
said I, and those, whom thou will besides, that are of better judgment and
skill, then these Shepherdes. Why, what say thou, said Crimine? I answered,
that which I said. This suffices me, said Crimine, and now I care not a whit
for that they shall say, since the sentence is given with a better vow and
voice in my favor. In these and other iestes (which I omit to tell you,
because I know you are desirous to hear the other song) we spent a pretty
time, wherein, after we had sung some merry and joyful ditties, we heard the
sound, that the Nymph our watch woman gave, to hie us home, because Gorphorost
was coming down the hills beneath; whereupon with the greatest haste we could,
we hied us away before he began to pass over the river: Who by chance espying
us, with humble requests began to persuade us not to fly away, since it was
not his mind to offend us in any thing: To whose bootlesse speeches, hating him
for mine own part as much as I loved the Shepherds, I would not abide to
listen; though Crimine requested me to stay a pretty way off, to see what he
would say, and if offering to come near us, he would not go back, with warning
him to the contrary, we might then be gone, and save our selves, being in so
sure a place as then we were. But I, that had no desire to condescend to
Crimines request, with my company entered no sooner into our river, when
Gorphorost came on the other side where my dear Shepherds were. To whom he
said. Parthenius (which of you two soever he be) although by thee, your
likeness was so fully made known unto me; yet I thought it was not so great,
that it might trouble me from knowing thee again. Now I confess, that I
cannot tell, which of you two is Parthenius. Speak therefore to me both of
you, and by your voice I shall discern that, which by your countenance and
apparel I cannot. Then they said both together: I am Parthenius. If I had not
seen you both move your lips (said Gorphorost) I would have thought it
had been but one voice. Do me therefore this pleasure to speak each one by
himself, and then by that means I shall know you. Delicius speaking first
said. I am Parthenius, do thou not know me? Gorphorost said yes, and that
very well. Then spoke Parthenius, and said. I am Parthenius, do thou not know
me? Now, said Gorphorost I know not thee, nor the other. But which of both
soever thou be, for the friendship between thee and me, I pray thee sing
those verses, which thou did sing the first time I saw thee, for I never
remembered to demand it sooner at thy hands, and when I heard thee first sing
it, I could not understand them well, being both so far asunder. Parthenius,
who (as you know) desired to give him all the content he could, taking out his
Rebecke, began to sing this Sonnet which he had made of purpose, because with
patience he might suffer the disdain that I did bear him.

A Sonnet.
IF tears we spill by loving, and bereave not
Our hearts of troubles, which for love we feign not,
Dainties they are of love, which we obtain not,
Dainties they are of love, which we conceive not:
If that by loving passions we desire not,
And sighs for love, wherewith we do complain all,
Dainties they are of love, which we disdain all,
Dainties they are of love, which we require not.
The false suspectes to be of all eschewed,
The ie alousies of every Mistress moved,
Dainties they are of love not well advised:
To feign not, without why, not to be loved,
To think not, without cause, not to be viewed,
Dainties they are of love of all despised.
O how glad would I have been, said Syluanus, to have heard this Sonnet, when
I poured out so many vain tears, and had so many disfavors of ungrateful
Diana. What comfort could thou have had, said Syrenus, since his purpose and
intent does maruellously import, that they are the pleasures and joys of love,
to feign (without any cause thereof) that they are not loved, so that to
understand, that they are not loved (having good cause to believe it) they
should be no sweetes nor dainties of love. Whereupon perceiving so clearly
that Diana did not love thee, thou should have had but small comfort by this
Sonnet. I perceived well enough, answered Syluanus; that I was despised, but
yet for all that, would not conceive, that I knew so much. It is well said
(said Doria) talk no more of times that are gone and past, since both of you
are content with this, that is present. And thou fair Stela for the love of us
all proceed in thy sweet discourse. In many other songs (said Stela) they
passed away a good time with sicice Gorphorost: and now that Titan went down
to visit the other earth, he took his leave of them, requesting Parthenius to
come and visit him sometimes, promising him, that when he came to pass over
the river, he would not fail to come and help him over. That night I slept
not soundly in my bed, nor with much rest, for so many imaginations of things
that I had passed the day before, and of many other more, ran up and down in my
troubled fantasies, that I could take no rest at all. For I thought of the
goodly behavior, graces, and beauty, and personage of the two Shepherds, each
thing in them seeming to me (being not men of flocks as I supposed) more
worthy of greater things then my self. The sorrowful words of Delicius
song written in the tree, filled me full of pirie, and the frantike jealousy
that (rooted in my heart) I had of Crimine for Parthenius sake, stung me
mortally. On the one side I endeavored not to love, and was unwilling on the
other, that any should love them besides my self. In the trouble of which
considerations having a good while turmoyled my wearied spirits, at the very
point when fair Aurora began to awake, a profound sleep began to take more
hold on me, then in the whole night before. I dreamed, but will not tell you
what, because I desire to forget it: let it suffice, that th'extreme fear of so
horrible a dream awaking me, eased me in some sort. Seeing my self free from
that danger, as if my bed had been in fault, the only cause of my sorrow,
and full of stinging vipers, and fiery flames, with a sudden sear I lept out
of it. At the noise whereof Crimine, who lay with me, awaked, and enquiring the
cause of my sursault, I answered her, that it was nothing but a starte in a
fearful and unacquainted dream: which should not be a small one (said
Crimine) since (my friend) it has altered thee so much, that there is no
color left in thy face, but such as in dead and pale bodies; and thine eyes
swelling with seares, not yet sully ascended up to issue forth, seem to
burst, for the great force and desire they have to weep. It was so said I, for
I would have thought they had opened my breast. Crimine with a gracious smile
(who is no less in all she does) began to jest a little with me, and unlacing
my body, and looking into my breast, said. Truly thy dream has not showed
thee any thing contrary to the truth, for it is open, and has been to receive
into it there all possibility of beauty. And yet if thou will give me leave,
I will tell thee more. She had little need to ask me leave, that took it of
her-selfe so frankly to tell me what she did. But tell me what thou will
(said I.) Although thy breast, said she is open, yet has Delicius his more
open to receive thee in. But rather thine said I, to lock up Parthenius in
it. That would not grieve me, said she, if this might be truly affirmed of
thee and him: but know thou what is come into my mind, that we spent too
short time yesterday in seeking out the rest of the song, that was written in
the tree: Why, what remained, said I? This would I know said Crimine. Do
thou not remember that the last verse of it said, that because that tree was
not able to contain any more, he went to write it in some other tree. It is
true indeed, said I. Now have thou come, said Doria, to the point, which we all
desired to know: but Stela said on, As thou love thy felse therefore (said
Crimine) let us go a little sooner to day, and we will seek out the place,
where he wrote the rest, and to read again that, which we found yesterday.
Let it be as thou please, said I. And so with this determination we went
betimes to the place where we had been the day before, and began again to
read the song, that we had read, but not without many tears, where by and by
not far from thence, we found out a great Sicamour, whose tender and white
bark served him for paper, for this which he wrote in it.

AH well away how firm and suer ar
Torments, and pains in each true lovers heart:
For when I thought, that I did wander far,
And changed place, this fierce and amorous war,
And wounding grief would from my soul depart.
Yet now in fine by proof too well I know,
That grief, and sorrows, absence does not kill,
As some do say; but makes them more to grow:
And wit so dearly bought with double woe,
Is bought (I needs must say) against my will.
I go from place to place, and never yet
My haunting grief, and cares do go away:
I am so diverse in my wandering wit,
That in one place I never rest, nor sit,
Yet still the same are sworn with me to stay.
My fainting legs my drooping body bears
From place to place, and yet fierce pain sustaines,
It is so seasoned with my swelling tears,
That since my Life of late my love for swears,
All comforts that I offer, it disdaines.
My cruel pain, wherewith my life is spent,
I would contemn, and would but little make,
If that my Mistress would in mind consent,
That I should bear this ceaselesse punishment
Only for her for her most sweetest sake.
But that which makes so wide, and deep a tent
Of grief within my heart, and makes it die,
As often as I think how she is bent,
Is, that to that she never will relent,
Where remedy, nor any help does lie.
After that love so strong and firm a fort
Had built within my breast, unto his mind,
Loving, a death I rather would support,
Then now to live after another sort,
Or for my self in liberty to find.
For speedy death I know must be my fate
With such a life, as now I do endure,
With mine own hands to end this hard debate,
To cruel death I will set open the gate,
And in my breast will lodge it most secure.
Who doubts that if but once she came to know
My grievous pains and passions which I feel,
But that to me some pity she would show,
Though in her breast, where pity yet may grow,
She had a heart harder then any steel.
Who doubts, if that she did but know the smart,
Her lover feels, his plaintes and endless moan,
But that she would with mild and gentle heart
Pity his case, although she had each part
Of it, as hard as craggie Dimond stone.
Orpheus, when descended into hell
For fair Euridice his wife, and past
The triple-headed-dog, that did not yell,
Nor bark, the Fiends that in Auernum dwell,
Made not so mild, at his sweet sound aghast,
As my tormenting passions, and my pain
Would move the hardest heart to heaviness,
And every heart in all the world again,
And not without great reason, nor in vain,
But that of my most cruel Shepherdess.
Ah woe how have I thus deluded been?
How have I lived deceived in this art?
Since that so simply I did ouerweene,
That there could be no difference between
Her fairest face, and her most cruel heart.
What man betwixt the cope of heaven and hell
Is there of wit so simple and so slender,
That could but think, or once imagine well,
That such a hard, and cruel heart could dwell
In such a dainty body and so tender?
What humane wit (O grief that I do see it)
Would ever think that cruelty possessed
Her heart, or such a Tygresse heart to be yet
Placed in her, whose outward show to me yet
Should promise peace, and in so mild a breast?
Who would have thought (it almost was in vain)
That from her tongue, distilling honey drops,
So fierce an answer should proceed again,
And words she vtterea with so great disdain,
Bittrer to me then gall, or wildest hops.
And, that I am deceived in this ground
Of my fair Nymph, I joy with all my heart:
Because I would not think, there could be found
In so great good a thing, that should redound
To so great ill, and to so bad a part.
It shall be therefore best for me ywisse
Not to suspect in her so foul a crime,
That she is hard, or that she cruel is,
But my mishap, that ever went amiss
Even from my birthday to this very time.
Because my pains should never be above
My ioies, and care before my sweet content
Should come: I am most constant in my love,
Sans widowhood, like to the turtle dove,
That loss of her companion does lament.
In living, and in loving too amain,
I think I go beyond her every hour,
But yet I am not like to her again,
In that I did not first a sweet obtain,
Before I tasted of a bitter sour.
All that my woeful mind should recreate,
The water, that is crystal pure and clear,
I cannot choose, nor otherwise but hate,
Because I would not see so bad a state,
And such a hapless body wander here.
Like as the snake, or adder that does bite
I fly, with hasty foot, and do not stay
In any place, where green may give delight,
For this does leese his hew, and vigor quite,
Where hope begins to fail and to decay.
If musing all alone by chance I stay
Upon my grief, that smallest joy denies,
And see some spring or fountain in the way
I fly, and softly to my self I say,
Let that suffice, that runs fro mine eyes.
And if in taking some poor little pleasure
(If pleasure in a hapless state I take)
And view the green, the countries hope and treasure,
I fly, and say, that hope of death must measure
My mind with joy, that does my pleasures make.
According to my life in great disgrace,
And miseries, even from my mothers womb,
I think (and as I am in such a case)
That if I follow death with happy pace,
Death will not yet unto my succor come.
I think sometimes (alas weak is my might)
To give my self some comfort and some rest,
But they do fly from me by day and night,
In me (poor wretch) they can take no delight,
And so my pains do double in my breast.
It wearies me (for grief does ever range)
To be so long together in a place:
Yet my unwearied greefes do never change
Their place, but still my seldom ioies in strange
And cruel manner from my bre^ do chase:
Here stay my song, and tell the world my smart,
And let this tree with thee have never end,
For with me shall my haunting grief depart,
For it will never leave my woeful heart,
Like to a trustic good and faithful friend.
Lord Felix, as soon as Stela had made an end of the song, turned him to
Polydora, saying. Art thou now satisfied? So much said she, that for a little I
would not stick to say that it is better then the first. But know thou,
what I think of it said Syrenus, That the first is finer and pretier, and this
more sententious and witty, and with this I am pleased: and it came finely in
when he said (and very well) that first the ill came to him before any good,
since without widow-hood he suffered like grief to the Turtle Dove; for he
esteemed it but a mean sorrow to be a widower, because it was a sign of
sometime enjoying the thing he loved. But it seemed a most grievous thing unto
him, not having at any time the possession of the thing he loved, to be
deprived of it. Truly said Felismena, thou art much beholding to him Stela,
being so hard unto him as thou were, to clear thee of all fault; and that none
might be laid upon thee, he said: Thou were not cruel, only attributing his
disgrace to his ill fortune. But in one thing (said Doria) he showed his
infinite love, more then in any thing else, when he said, he rested not in any
place. I might well have noted something said Syluanus, but that I would not
hinder so pleasant a discourse. Tell on therefore fair Stela, as the Gods
grant thee thine own desires. Having made an end of reading this, that was in
the Sicamour (said Stela prosecuting her tale) neither of us could speak for a
good while, Crimine, for pity, and I, for grief. But afterward Crimine said.
Do thou think Stela, that I had not reason to help thy great need? What had
become now of Delicius, if thy rigor and hardness had lasted till this time?
That which is now (I answered) and if any other thing had happened, I would not
have greatly cared. Say not so (said Crimine) for therein thou do offend thy
self. After this we went to the accustomed place to the Shepherdes, because we
thought it was no time. And being there in their sweet and gracious company,
my companion said. I am ever, when I am with you my friendly Shepherds, not a
little troubled in mind. They asked why so. Because to know you distinctly
said she, some outward token and sign must be apparent, whereby I may know
how to make a difference between you: whereas otherwise, I am as much
deceived, and know as little as they that have frequented your company less
then I; for if I turn but my head, I return to the self same doubt, if
(happily) in the mean time you have changed places. For the clearing whereof,
and for the friendship that is between us, I pray thee, Stela, give one of
them a token, whereby we may know how to be assured of either of them, and not
need to be troubled any more with this doubt. If thou have then so great a
desire (said I) what need thou require this at my hands, but that thou may
do it as well as I. Thou know now said Crimine, that it was first demanded
of thee, and if it had not been, it might suffice, that I request it again of
thee. I deny not this said I, but assure thee that of this great likeness and
deceit, which troubles thy mind so much, I take great pleasure. And it was so
indeed: for as I loved them in equal sort; so my desire was to have them, not
only like in their exterior shows, but all one in their interior souls. I
say as touching my self (so that I knew it) because I was then far from
knowing the love that Parthenius did secretly bear me, and not only desired
(as I said) to have them still like to one another, but that in truth they had
been both one. It must not ever be to thy liking (said Crimine) for it must
sometimes please mine a little. Let it be as thou will, said I; and choose
since it makes so much for thee. Good Lord (said Crimine) how froward art
thou Stela? Heereaster I will not request thee to do any thing, I will be
gone, and tarry thou here if thou will; if not, do what thou will, for I
know not now to what end it will come. Stay, stay, said I: Go not away,
and be not so angry, for all shall be done to thine own desire. In faith if
it were not for these young Shepherdes sakes (said Crimine) I think thou
should see me no more here. If then the matter be so, said I, hark but one
word that I shall say unto thee, and taking her aside I said unto her. I
would not by any means in the world give more favor to one then to the other,
by giving one a sign and the other none, lest his wings (to whom I give it)
grow bigger then the others. Thou must therefore either give me some time to
think of it, or else counsel me how I must do it. The wings to serve thee
(she answered) are now grown in Delicius, so that to him only thou may
give thy favor; for as Parthenius will not care for it so much at thy hands,
so it likes me best that thou give him none at all. Crimine thought not by
speaking these words, that she did cut me to the very heart, but God knows how
much I felt them, yet dissembling the matter the best I could, I answered.
Though it likes thee not, yet will I give to Parthenius his difference, as well
as thy self, and I was not then in jest. But when do thou mean, said she,
to make this difference between them? To morrow I answered. Shepherdes, said
Crimine alowde, turning to them, The difference that Stela will give you with
her own hands, and the means how we should know you, is deferred no further
then to morrow. When it shall please her, said they, for no other thing durst
they speak. Being come thither the next day, I said unto them. My friends
Shepherdes (for this name I cannot deny you, as long as your desires reach not
beyond that, which is lawful) although I have been urged by my well-beloved
friend to give you some token of difference with mine own hands, whereby we may
come to the better knowledge of you both; yet of mine own free will, by
leaving her request aside, I mean to do it. I deferred it yesterday to this
present hour, to think on it the better, and in what manner I should give it
you without showing any particular affection more to one then to the other; and
as with equal love I am soundly affected to you both, so was your great
likeness most agreeable to my mind. But as that which is just and due must
not be denied, so will I in such sort give you the marks of your difference,
to rid our selves out of doubt, and hold al others still in it. And
therewithal, you are not your selves (I think) able to judge, when I know not
my self, whether of you shall have the greater favor (if it deserves such a
name) and because you may know, that partially I decline no more to one part
then to another, until I have made the same, I will not have you make your
selves known unto me by word nor sign, by discovering to me which is which,
but that the lot may fall to whom it shall; and none refuse or gainsay that
which I shall now do, unless he will refuse and hazard my good will from
henceforth. When I had said thus, I took out of my bosom a little green
ribband, and put it with a bodkin in one of their coats near to his heart; and
then I went to the other, and clipping from him with a fine pair of Syssers
which I brought of purpose with me, a piece of dark green lace from that
part, where I had put the green ribband in the other, I sowed it on mine own
left side not far from the secret seat of both their loves: Whereby I meant
to give them to understand, that to the one I gave hope, and from the other I
took torment. Which being done I said. Now may you declare to whom I have
given the green ribband, and from whom I took the little piece of lace. Then
it was evident, that to Delicius I gave the first, and took the second from
Parthenius. Now that they had declared their names, and were known unto us,
Delicius being glad and joyful for the gift given him by mine own hand, with
a certain kind of merines said. Now does the cause come to my remembrance
(fair Stela) why Crimine has been so importunate with thee to make a
difference between us: O how glad would I be to know this, said I, because I
could never get it out of her. If thou will crave leave and pardon of her
(said he) for me to tell it, I would quickly give thee this contentment.
Because she may have it (said Crimine) it pleases me to grant it, though it
were to my cost. Thou must then know said Delicius, that though it has been
the greatest favor, that we have received at this present (as a gift of thine
own hands) yet that which was done to Parthenius in comparison of this was
most singular and great, being of greater quality in that kind. And this it
was, that when thou shewedst such rigor to me, Parthenius, to see me in such
an agony (as gracious Crimine thou know) was so much dismayed, that he was
in no less danger then my self. For as I spoke not a word, but lying in such
a pitious trance, wherein he equally bare me company, at last coming to my
self again, and turning my head aside to a certain cry that Crimine gave, I
saw her embrace Parthenius (a happy ecstasy for him, since it was the
occasion of so sweet a favor done him) and hold his head face to face in her
own lap. If any other thing passed between them, ask it of her, for I
could see no more by reason of my late dismayed senses, not then perfectly
restored. What think thou of this fair Stela, what a sovereign pity was
this? This he spoke with a gracious smile, and had no sooner made an end of
telling it, when a vermillion blush teinted al our faces, though it proceeded
of different causes. It made Crimine blush with a decent shamefastenes, mingled
with joy of so delightful a remembrance. It made Parthenius blush for grief
and anger at the passed act; and me for jealousy, incorporated with the
offense of so unworthy a deed against my love. So that Delicius, thinking to
make it but a jest, and to delight us with it, found that it was in good
earnest, and filled us full of sorrow, and from that hour Parthenius and I
liked not so well of Crimine, though we made her not know so much; for she was
the means whereby we all three met and talked together. Truth it is that now I
have forsaken the ill will that I did bear her, for diverse and sundry good
turns, which I received of her; and seeing what great reason there is to love
them (as every fair Nymph should likewise do) for mine own part I give her
leave and frank consent to love them as much as she will: as also, because I
see her not beloved of them, or (at the least) not so much as my self,
although in very truth (had they as perfect knowledge of her deserts as they
might have) they would never deny to do it. But leaving this aside, we
passed away many days there, which lasted us not so long as we would, for
the great content that then we began to take in each others company, which
for mine part, I would not have changed for any other mortal delight, and
desire in the whole world. In all which time neither Rebecke, nor Bagpipe were
heard, unless it were when other Nymphs came: for when true lovers are alone,
singing (I think) and music pleases not their musing minds so much as the
mutual contemplation and looking of one another; and that talking and amorous
conversation should be more pleasant and sweet to them, then the melody of
sweetest music. I cannot tell you by what means, but Delicius love to me
came to the knowledge of fierce Gorphorost, which made him believe no less,
but that I must needs love him again, since with meeting every day, we
entertained the time in discourse and pastimes: whereupon being not a little
enraged, he purposed, if Delicius desisted not from it, to execute his fury
upon him; which he had done indeed, but that he stayed his hands (as he said)
because he would not give me any occasion of offense, and was Loath to leese the
company of Parthenius, and also because indeed he could not know him from his
friend Parthenius, least thinking to be revenged on Delicius, he might hurt his
friend Parthenius. Wherefore to clear himself of this doubt, one day as
Parthenius, according to his woonted custom, went where he was, he said unto
him. I understand my friend Parthenius, that thy brother Delicius does love
Stela; which thing, if it be not more bitter to me then the wild Olife, I
leave thy judgment, since she is the only Goddess, to whom my soul is
subject, and I the only man that can deserve her. Of one thing thou may be
assured, that had it not been for thy sake, I would long since have made him
leave such follies, or else felt the hardness of my sheep-hooke. He might have
considered, if he had any wit, that he goes about to be a Corriuall with him,
who makes no reckoning of the Gods, if there be any at all. Advise him
therefore to leave that to me which is worthily mine own; if not, tell him
that by my justice he shall be punished, and not without reason. And because it
is not my will that the great likeness which is between you, might prejudice
or harm thee, take this sheepe-hooke, which for ransom of a iollie young
Shepherde, I had of a fair and gracious Shepherdess, the which carrying ever
in thy hands, I may know thee for Parthenius. If thou do mean Gorphorost
(said Parthenius) any harm to Delicius my dearest brother, begin first with
me, which shall I promise thee least of both grieve me: But because thou may
know they have not told thee true, I swear unto thee by the Gods, whom I
adore, and by her, whom I love more then mine own life, that Delicius loves
Stela no more then I do. For her I cannot tell thee, if she love him or not
(and he spoke in truth in the one and other.) The Sheepehooke thou give me,
as an impious gift for so vile an effect, I refuse to take, if by taking it, I
thought thou would give it me to the intent to know us one from another.
But yet because I know it is not sufficient for such a purpose, I will take it,
because it shall not serve thee to that end that thou pretendest, when as
Delicius shall carry it as often as my self; for by carrying it, and not
carrying it, thou may not know which of us is Delicius: whereby thou may
clearly perceive if his life be dear unto me or no? Gorphorost was amazed at
the great love that Parthenius did bear Delicius, but believed it was not so
great in deeds, as in words he showed it: wherefore he answered him thus.
Behold Parthenius, I have warned thee now for the great friendship that is
confirmed between us: for surely I make more account of thee, then thou
think, because thou art only he, by whose means I find with imparting my
grief unto thee, some ease in these my extreme pains. But if with this intent
thou will take the Sheepehooke of me, I am not content to give it thee, nor for
the worth of it (for I would give thee more then this) but because none of my
things should come to Delicius hands. Of one thing thou may be ascertained,
that love has taught me how to know him, and then thou shall see, how my
despised counsel shall avail to serve him more, then his own deceitful
opinion. With this Parthenius came away very sorrowful and full of
melancholic thoughts, not knowing what was best to be done in such a case. On
the one side, he saw it was dangerous for Delicius to be there; on the other,
he knew it was impossible for him to absent himself from me. He conceived by
that which he found in himself, the irrepugnable force of Cupid, and
considered (by that he knew too well) the unbridled fury of cruel
Gorphorost. But if they were desirous to kill him, they thought it impossible,
unless it were by treason, which rather then they would have done, they would
first have lost a thousand lives. That very evening at Sun set, all we sower
sitting under a leasie Sallow tree, fierce Gorphorost came out of his cave, and
by and by was on the top of a high rock, that hung over the river, right over
against that place, where I threw my self into it, when I fled from him. Who
after he had sit down a little while, and laid his scrip by his side, and his
Pine tree between his legs that served him for his Sheepehooke, staff, and
weapon, he took a Flute out of his scrip, made of a hundred Baggepipes, joined
together with wax. Putting it to his mouth and blowing it strongly to clear
it of filth within, the hills resounded again, the rivers ran back, the
wild beasts and fish were stricken in a fear, and the forests and woods
thereabouts began to tremble. And a little after that, he began to sing the
most amorous song of me that ever you heard, which I promise you had pleased me
well, if he had not made so cruel an end of it. For with cruel comparisons,
borrowed of the fields and Shepherds, he strangely praised my beauty, and
made me (on the contrary) most cruel, by offering me such things afterward
as he thought fittest to win me most of all unto him. But to see how he
proved himself fair being so fierce, it is a pleasant jest. By that which
most of all thou love, said Seluagia, I pray thee fair Stela recite it, if
thou do remember it, which if it like not (perhaps) these Gentlemen (a thing
different from their estate) shall woonderfullie delight us, if they will do us
so much pleasure to lend us a little patience to hear it, because it is
fittest (thou say) for country Shepherds. No (said Lord Felix and
Felismena) but she shall do us as great a pleasure, to see what so fierce a
Shepherd could say, loving this fair damsel so much, whom she hated more.
How can I deny your requests, said Stela, being so bravely coniured? Give
therefore attentive ear, for I promise you it will please you well.

STela mine only Goddess, and my good,
Whiter then is th'vntrodden snowie way,
And redder then the rose, but late a bud
Half blown, and plucked with deaw by break of day:
To see more gracious then the Plane tree shape,
And sweeter then the ripe and swelling grape:
More pleasant then the shade in summer time,
More then the sun in winters coldest prime.
More fresh then any cool and trembling wind,
More noble then the fruit, that orchards yields,
More iocund then the tender kid, by kind
When full, it skips and runs about the fields:
More flowrie then the rich and pleasant meade,
With painted flowers in mids of May bespred:
More soft then spotless down in Cygnets breast,
More then the milk, and cheese curds yet vnprest.
More shining then clear crystal and transparent,
And finer wasted then the Cypres tree,
Straighter then is the Poplar eminent,
Placed amongst those trees that lower be
More clear then ice, or any frozen rain
And (if in only this thou do disdain,
Because it is with more perfection filled)
More fair then any Orchard that is tilled.
And yet with this more fierce and more unstaid
Then Bull, that yet was never tamed with yoke,
Prouder then Peacocke with her tail displaied,
Harder then old and knotty stur die oak:
More then the rocks immooueable, and madder
Then angry snake, or cruel trodden adder.
More furious then the swiftest streams: then thorns
More sharp and pricking with thy singing scorns.
More deaf then is the sea, to my desires:
Then smoothest streams more full of deep deceate,
Stronger unto my pains then greatest fires,
More cruel then Bear, that gives the teate:
Then Sallow wand, or Osier that is weak,
If it be green, more hard and tough to break.
More contrary unto my joy, and rest,
Then hungry woolfe to tender lambkins breast.
And that which does increase my cruel pain,
And does revive my hot and flaming fire,
By knowing which, it has my comforts slain,
And hope, whereto in thought I might aspire,
Is, that thou art not only swifter, then
The Heart pursude of hounds into his den,
But swifter then the swiftest blowing wind,
Swifter then time, then thought within the mind.
Suer I am, if well thou had me known,
( Stela my life) from me thou would not fly,
Or sometimes yet from me if thou were gone,
Thou would return without my call or cry:
And if thou did stay there but somewhat long,
Then would thou think thou did thy self great wrong:
I know that this will grieve thee at the heart,
To see me pass for thee such pains and smart.
A Cave, that does contain the better part
Of this great hill, hewn out of quarrie stone,
Serves for my rock, the which is of such art,
That there the Summer sun is never known,
Nor winters cold is felt within that place,
But apples there do hang in marvelous grace
Hard by the ground, that shade in hottest weather,
And load the boughs, they hang so thick together.
Clusters of grapes do beautify my vines,
Some golden, purple red, all fair and full,
Of part whereof I make most dainty wines;
And part of them I keep for thee to pull:
And with thy hands most delicate and fair
Gather thou may ripe plums by goodly paires,
Under the shadows of their boughs, to ease thee,
And Apricocks, and cheries if it please thee.
Here have I damsens, nuts, and colored pears,
And peaches fine, that would each eye inuit:
And every tree, and fruit this Island bears,
All for thy service, pleasure, and delight:
And as my heart to please thee I have bowed,
And so have these the self same office vowed:
In Autumn (if thy husband I might be)
Chestnuts, and Medlars I will keep for thee.
As many flocks as here thou do behold,
Which in these banks I feed with mournful song,
And many more within these hills untold
And woods and vales estray, to me belong:
Many that lie in shades along this coast,
All which to tell were but a labor lost.
For poorest men they say, are wont to keep,
The number of their cattle and their sheep.
The praises which, I vaunt unto thee here,
I will not thou believe in any sort,
Thine eyes the same shall witness very clear,
If so thou please, and not my bare report:
I durst be bound, that if thou came to try,
Thou would affirm I told no tale nor lie:
Since that to milk them all I am unable,
Or ease their bags, trust me, this is no fable.
I have likewise shut up in shadowed places
(All by themselves) great store of gentle lambs,
And little kids, with spotted skins and faces,
Of equal age new weaned from their dams:
In many other houses large and wide
Great store of wanton calves I keep beside,
And milk does flow within my cave, whereby
My cunning in this manner I do try.
Profit thereof in diverse sorts I make,
Leaving the thinnest of it to be drunk,
Some part of it within a charne I shake,
And beat it there a while till it be shrunk:
Some part again for tender cheese I dress,
And into that, juice of an herb I press.
And yet some part whiter then Ermins skin
I turn to curdes, and put some cream therein.
Yet will I give thee greater gifts then these
(If thou do reckon these but poor and small)
Wild boares, and goats and bucks shall be thy fees,
Conies, and hares, and hounds to hunt withal.
Two turtle doves I took out of their nest
In bigness, color, and in all the rest
So like, that them hardly thou shall descrie,
Although thou markest them with narrowest eye.
I took them from that tree in yonder ground,
For thee to play withal when thou art weary;
Two little whelpe bears after this I found
And brought them home to sport and make thee merry:
Both these and them I nourish to delight thee,
If thou but with thy coming would requite me:
And finding them I said I would reserve them
For thee my Stela, who do best deserve them.
Come Stela then out of thy watery brook
And see how I am staying for thee here,
To my request vouchsafe a gracious look,
Calling upon thee with most heavy cheer:
Yet thy disdain (as I hope for the best)
Will not deny my pitiful request,
When that thou know my wealth without compare,
My self of person nimble, stout and fair:
I did behold my self not long ago
Within a fountain cleerer then the sky,
I viewed my self from top unto the toe,
And without doubt my person pleased mine eye:
Your Jupiter, and every heavenly creature
Enuies my stature, and my comely feature:
Your mighty God, to whom you sacrifice,
And honor so, whose Godhead I despise.
Behold again what curled locks of hair
Falling upon my shoulders, and my face,
And goodly beard does make me seem so fair,
And to my person gives a manly grace.
Think that my body is not foul therefore,
Because of bristled hair it has such store.
Foul is the tree when Autumnes course bereaues
Her boughs of fruit, of green, and comely leaves.
How looks the horse that has no crest, or maine,
Nor bushie tail to grace his body forth;
How looks the hawk that has no wings, nor train,
Fair is the wool of sheep and mickle worth.
The man looks bald that has no comely beard,
And as with sprites he had been lately feared:
Then foul I am not with my beard, and hair,
Since with the same I am more perfect fair.
Besides all this I come of no base blood,
For God Syluanus is my noble Sire:
Thy father he shall be, if thou think good;
Then pity me, and grant me my desire:
Hark then to me, scorn not to see my pain,
Let not my sighs and tears be spent in vain:
Only of thee, and humbly I do crave
Of this poor wretch some pity now to have.
I which do scorn the furious thunder blow
Of Jupiter, and other Gods despise,
Thee, Stela, for my Goddess I do know,
And come to thee with humble weeping eyes:
More then his bolts thy anger makes afraid,
And pearcing eyes my senses have dismayed:
Thou do deserve more honor, praise, and love,
Then Jupiter, or all the Gods above.
It would not half so much have grieved my heart,
That thou my love so strongly did deny
(Being so fair, and such one as thou art)
If (as from me) from others thou did fly:
But since Delicius (wherein thou do err)
Before stout Gorphorost thou do prefer,
His small imbracements, and too far unmeet
Thou love more, then mine so great and sweet.
But let him swim in seas of his delight,
And with thy favors let him now prevail:
If time, and place be granted to my might,
Soon will I make him strike his puffed sail,
Soon shall he feel my strong and sine wed arm,
And how it will his amorous senses charm:
O grief, that time and place do not afford,
To make my deed as current as my word.
If, with my hands his tender trembling flesh
I will dishiuer, and in mammocks tear,
And then his bones in pieces I will thresh,
And in the forest, cast them here and there:
And dye the rivers with his blood I will,
And throw his members from this steepie hill
Into thy lap, where, laughing, I will stand
To see, if there he joins hand in hand.
O woe is me, that thus tormenting grief,
And wrath does make my tongue to go awrie:
O thoughts, that feel no hope, nor hope relief:
In Aetnas flames I live, I burn, I die:
I burn (O grief) and die, thou will not end
To succor me, that am thy loving friend.
If thus thou handlest those, that languish for thee,
How will thou those entreat, that do abhor thee?
Gorphorost having cast these vain complaints into the air, rose up and like
a mad Bull, from whom the young heyfer has been taken away, unable to take
rest in any place, with monstrous skips went down the hill along into the
Island, whose pastoral song pleased us well, and the gifts he offered to bring
me to his love, and especially how he made himself so fair, if he had not
concluded it with so cruel menaces. Stay a little if thou love me (said
Syrenus) for I cannot but note one thing in this song, which has pleased me
wonderful well. And what is it (said Seluagia) that makes thee interrupt so
pleasant a discourse as this? I will tell you, said Syrenus, and promise you,
it will not please you all: for it inueighed delicately against women. How so,
said Felismena? I will tell you, answered Syrenus. For in how many comparisons
he fitly made of white and red, gracious, and fine, he never made any
exception, thinking thereby he greatly honored Stela, and that she was glad to
be compared to those things: but when he said she was fair, he spoke that with
a certain kind of reverence and pardon, saying. And if thou do not disdain
it (more fair then a tilled orchard) wherein he thought he offended her,
because in only being fair, he judged, that women with their wills would admit
no equality nor comparisons. But let them jest with you in what they will
else, beauty must be a religion not timorously touched. And now pass on fair
Stela in thy narration. Every one laughed at Syrenus words, and Lord Felix
said. It seems well Shepherd, thou art free, since of thy self thou take
leave to say what it pleases thee. To take this strife from you, said stela, I
will tell on.

Parthenius being afraid, as well for the resolute fury wherewith he made
his threats, as also for that which he said to him the same morning, not
knowing what to do, nor how to invent a remedy in such an exigent, oftentimes
busied his wits to seek out some one or other. But casting many doubts in such
affairs, and thinking with himself what remedy he might find out for
Delicius avail, not respecting what might befall to him, he resolved to do
that which you shall now hear. Staying on a night (as he was wont) for
Gorphorost, and being passed to the other side of the river with a merry and
smiling countenance, contrary to the meaning of his mind, he said thus unto
him. As I have been careful about thy affairs, so know friend Gorphorost,
that I have persuaded thy Corriuall to leave of his love to Stela, the which
not able to compass, I have obtained thus much of him to swear to me to
forsake this country, and to absent himself from her. Whereupon he only
requesteth but eight days respite for his departure, the which he prayed me in
his name to crave of thee: So that thou may now well give me thy
Sheepehooke; for here will I stay alone with thee in these parts, and in thy
company. Gorphorost being very glad to hear these news that Parthenius
brought him, thinking that if Delicius were gone out of the way, he might the
better obtain his purpose and my love, went by and by for the sheepehooke, and
having brought it, gave it him. Then Parthenius said. Behold Gorphorost, since
it is thy will to have him depart, and me to stay, thou shall swear to me to
do me no harm in the world; and because thou may understand that it is I, I
have requested the sheep-hook of thee, the which thou shall continually see me
carry about with me: and if thou pretendest any other matter, not observing
the laws of holy friendship, unfold to me thy inward thoughts, and I will also
depart my self O go not hence my Parthenius, answered Gorphorost, for I swear
to thee by Stela mine only Goddess, that now, nor at any time hereafter, thou
shall have no hurt at my hands, nor by my procurement. Parthenius satisfied
with this agreement and oath, went to put that in practice, which he had
purposed in his mind before (you shall hereafter see what his intent was
hereby) but when he found not Crimine, nor me with Delicius, because we were
now gone from him, he kept it till another day, when we were altogether. But as
we failed not at our accustomed hours, Parthenius brought forth the
sheepe-hooke which Gorphorost gave him, the very same that now Delicius has,
and which you did but lately see at the fountain of the Laurel trees, and
said. Before I make manifest my determination unto you, I will first have you
see what a fair gift Gorphorost has given me, though his intent was far
different from mine: But because with the rest, you shall also hear this, look
upon it well, and tell me your opinions, and then I will tell you more. Then we
three coming near together, because he had viewed it well before, looked upon
it very earnestly, every one of us casting our eyes upon that which pleased
us most. We would not have left looking once and twice again upon the curious
sheepe-hooke, although we turned it not a few times about, if we had not a
greater desire to hear what Parthenius had promised to tell us. Who, when he
saw us expecting what he would say, began thus to speak unto us. Since the
pitiful banishment of us from our dear and native country is sufficiently
manifest unto you (most sovereign Nymphs) and likewise the cause of our
amorous staying in these parts, it would seem but time ill spent and tedious
to make repetition of the same again. I will not say that my tarrying here to
this present time has been only commanded by the request of my dear
Delicius, for that your sweet company and sight was sufficient to have
forcibly detained here a worthier person then my self. But that which I mind
to tell you is, that as to this hour my being here has been perhaps
convenient; so from this day forward my departure is needful, and in such sort
that (all affection laid aside) you would judge there is no other possible
thing for our avail. Whereof because you may not be in suspense, and of my
late determination, if with attention you will give ear unto me, the
inexcusable necessity of my intended departure shall be clearly known unto you.
You are not ignorant of the odd and inconvenient love of fierce Gorphorost
with thee fair Stela, nor of the even and proportionable love, or of the sound
(to say better) and perfect affection of Delicius with thee again fair Stela.
But love that discouers all things, has suggested into the fierce Shepherds
ears (as by his song you might well perceive) that he has for rival (if it
may be so said) my dear brother. If he grieved thereat, your selves have
heard him sing it on the top of yonder rock: and being in his company that
same morning before, I heard it from his own mouth, where he said unto me,
that he purposed to be revenged on him, and only for the great love and
friendship he bare me, protested that he deferred the same. But now not able to
suffer it any longer, and not knowing by what means to be avenged of his
adversary, without executing the punishment on me, for the great likeness
between us, and for avoiding the harm that might come thereof, he gave me
this sheep-hooke, because by carrying it, he might know me from him, the which
for that it was offered me for a cruel act, I then refused: but afterward
seeing his great rage, by studying out a good means for both our auailes, I
took it. And this was my devise, I told him that Delicius by my counsel and
persuasion would go his ways; so that he might give me the sheep-hooke,
whereby he might know that I remained still in this country. For which
departure I craved eight days respit, which he willingly granted me. Now
therefore it behooues me to go seek out my Father, with whom or without him,
within a certain time I will return hither again, where Delicius in the
mean time may stay in my place, and visit Gorphorost in my name to dissemble
the better with him; whom before I will advise, and acquainte with all that I
have passed with him, because he may think it is I. This did Parthenius say
with ill uttered words, for the grief of taking his leave of Delicius and
me, whom he loved so much, would not let him frame them any better. None of
us three had then the courage, to answer any thing to Parthenius wounding
words, for the great grief that we conceived of his sudden departure: but
after we had all held our peace a good while, Crimine with watered eyes (for
then she had not the power to dissemble the great love she bare him any longer)
said. It is now no time, my friend Parthenius, by my forced countenance to
dissemble the inward pain and grief of my heart, if hitherto by deeds and
demonstrations thou will not understand and see how much I love thee, by words
therefore at this present let it be clear unto thee, That I love thee, and
loving thee more then mine own life, determine to go in thy company (at the
lest with thy consent) if thou will not carry me with thee, or else with mine
own hands (if not with thine thou will not) resolve to give me my mortal
stroke of death, which shall be more glorious and acceptable to me, then given
by my self when thou art gone. Then she being as it were cut off from her
boldness, with a tainted blush and a sorrowful sigh, held her peace. To whose
amorous words Parthenius wisely answered thus. Stela had scarce begun
Parthenius answer, when Felicia with the company she brought with her came,
saying to Felismena. Do thou not think that I have fulfilled that which I
promised thee yesterday, by coming hither to day at the woorst time? Yes
indeed good Lady, said Felismena. But why must we pay for that, said
Syluanus, which she has eaten: because we must pay her something for her
company, said Felicia. But more for your sakes then Felismenas I will be
gone, for I came to no other purpose but to accomplish my word, and hereupon
she went, they remaining still that were there before. Then Stela said.

But hark what Parthenius answered to Crimines words. I am not able to judge,
dear Nymph, if thy ill fortune be greater by having placed thy love in so
miserable a man; or my mishap greater, by nothauing liberty to give thee the
like again. On the one side I would gladly satisfy thy desire, and have on
the other no power to do it: yet I will not deny to do thee this pleasure to
carry thee with me, whereby I should not gain little, if I thought not to do
fair Stela, and my brother Delicius an ill turn: her, by bereauing her of so
sweet companion; him, by depriving him of her, by whose means he hopes to be
remedied, whereas thou know how ill it would fall out for him with thy fair
companion when thou art absent. I was not a little glad to hear him with such
modesty take an occasion to forsake Crimine, because my life molested with the
secret jealousy I had of Crimine, depended (me thought) upon his answer to
her again. And so turning to Parthenius, I said. For mine own part, good
Shepherd, I thank thee for thy good will thou have to do me so much honor,
by not consenting to carry away with thee my friend Crimine: But for that which
I owe her, and wherein I am bound to thee, and for the content of both, I agree
thereunto, though it be to mine own cost: wherefore deny not what she has
with such earnest affection requested. But before thou answer me to this, I
must needs tell thee that (it seems) thou have taken more leave, because thou
art going away, then was reserved, by taking so boldly upon thee to speak for
thy friend Delicius beyond the due limits of chastity, and common friendship,
which were promised me. But I will pardon thee, as I said, because thou art now
but a ghest, who are allowed to do and say what they list. But yet I would
feign know who it is that has taken thy liberty from thee, as thou say,
no doubt the only impediment to make thee condescend to the amorous request of
my friend Crimine. If thou think (said Parthenius) to have me so obedient
to thee as my friend Delicius, by satisfying all thy demands (pardon me fair
Nymph) thou art much deceived. This selfsame thing did thou ask him, which
cost us all dear, how much more then having no cause to ask it, when it can
serve thee to no purpose. One thing thou may know, that something thou must
not know. To that which thou reply to me of gracious Crimine, I have now
answered. Crimine not able to suffer these words any longer, with tears
trickling down her cheeks, and without speaking a word went her ways.
Delicius went after her to comfort her, and telling her that Parthenius was not
yet going, promised to requite the good turn in like manner as she had done to
him, by regaining Stelas lost favor: with hope whereof being something cheered
up, she went her ways. And in the mean time I said thus to Parthenius. How
feign would I (Parthenius) not have thee go thy ways, and as greatly desire
that Crimines tears would not move thee. For the first I think there is no
remedy (said he) because I desire it more then any can imagine: and for the
second thou need take no care, in that thou command and I must obey. I
know thou will not go (said I) without speaking to me. No, answered
Parthenius, for that were not possible. Why then God be with thee said I, for I
cannot leave my company. And with thee, fair Nymph, said he. Stay a little
said Felismena, for I must needs tell thee, that (in faith) thou did
Delicius great injury by never favoring him half so much, as thou did
Parthenius at that time; whereupon thou were inclined (it seems) more to him,
then to Delicius. Impatient jealousy was the cause heerof, answered Stela: But
harken on, for I was not herein one whit behind hand with Delicius, who
deserved much, because by a most amorous passage which ensued, he showed an
evident proof of love and humility: For after I had taken my leave of
Parthenius, and going somewhat in haste to overtake Crimine, I met Delicius by
the way, coming back from accompanying her: who when a pretty way off he
espied me in such haste, before I came to him, said. If I may not offend thee,
I beseech thee, (sovereign Mistress) when thou come nigh me, not to pass
by in such haste, because I may think that thou fliest not from me, if not,
thy will be done. Truly said all of them, it was highly considered of him,
who well deserved to be rewarded, but let us hear what thou did answer, or
do in hearing these words. With a soft and slow pace, said Stela, I came to
him saying. Thy request, being so reasonable and modest, I cannot choose but
grant, as all such besides, that savor of virtue and honest meaning (touching
thy self) I will never disobey, and will not only go softly bie, but stay
with thee as much as thou please, so that I may conveniently overtake
Crimine. I spoke all this of purpose, for as he judged (perhaps) that I showed
Parthenius love, by the words which I uttered when I departed from him,
(wherein I would not have preferred him before Delicius, since in love and
affection I did not) I therefore endeavored to make him not imagine any such
matter at all. Who in his own judgment not able to requite so great a favor,
fell presently down on his knees (though I did the best I could to hinder
him) and taking my hand between both his, with great humility kissed it.
Maruelling at such a sudden part, and knowing that such presumption proceeded
of deep love, with patience I said unto him. Though for this bold attempt thou
deseruest punishment, yet I will not give it thee, because I will not give thy
brother an occasion to be offended with me, by saying that I can pardon
nothing. Delicius came to himself again, and seeing that his boldness had put
him in no small hazard to leese me, he had such a color for shame and fear,
that it did not a little augment his brave beauty, which I noted too well.
Wherefore to encourage him, I said. Art thou content? Delicius answered. O my
sweere Mistress, I, but that I cannot thank thee so much as I would, and with
this I will stay thee no more. Both of us being gone from one another, I made
haste after Crimine, and he to Parthenius, who passed many sweet and amorous
speeches together upon his friends departure, because Delicius would not
consent thereunto; but when he perceived that he would needs go (by reason of
the imminent danger that they were both in, if he had stayed longer then the
time prefixed) he would not also agree unto his departure without his company:
But in the end being overcome by Parthenius, though much against his will, he
yielded to his determination. In this mean while, believe not Gentlemen, that
we were idle on the other side, for we were thinking of Parthenius bitter
departure, Crimine complaining sometimes before me of his cold affection; and
sometimes comforting herself with Delicius promise, with which speeches and
imaginations we went to bed. The hour being now come, when all mortal
creatures take rest, and Crimine lying by her self sole, and solitary to her
own thoughts, what she suffered and talked softly to her self, I know not,
but what I passed, my self can tell you. For thinking that my bedfellow was
asleep, and the candles being put out, and also the silent darkness of the
night (a faithful friend to thoughts and fancies) serving my mind so fitly,
diverse and sundry things were represented to it, which being well grounded in
my breast, I began thus to say to my self.

What God has brought these two new Shepherds into these parts, to make such
an alteration in me? What, am not I she, whom the only thought of a man was
wont to offend? What great content then does the thinking of these two young
Shepherdes give me? Am I not she, who delighted so much in hunting of beasts
and birds: Why do I then hunt now after thoughts and vanities? Am I not she,
that of mine own free mind offered my self up to Dianas service? Why with my
will then must I become a bond-maide to Venus? Hence hence from me such an
unseemly fault. O pardon me Delicius, and Parthenius, for yet I cannot choose,
but do that which you both deserve. O Gods, what a virgin color is in their
young and sweet faces, adorned with that little hair upon their vermillion
and tender cheeks, what beauty, what mildness, what discretion? I think
truly they must descend from some lineage of the Gods, if they be not such
themselves, wherein my surmise (I know) is not vain. The God Hymen not being
hateful to me, I could perhaps submit my self to this only fault. But I
beseech the Gods, the earth may first swallowe me up, and Jupiter with his
thunderbolt smite me to the mournful shades of Acheron, and perpetual night,
before I violate thee (O chastity) or break thy holy bonds. The chaste mind
that ever I have borne, shall accompany me to my grave. But I know, it offends
me not by thinking to which of both I should incline, if my firm intent
should turn to any side? which of them both excels the other in disposition,
feature, and beauty, to love the one more for that, and forsake the other for
this I cannot discern; who are so like, that if they themselves beheld one
another, they could not know the one from the other. Great is the goodness of
Parthenius, for even to the hazard of his life he offered it for safety of his
friend. What witty and ready answers for Delicius? What wisdom to make my
companion help his, and me not to forsake him, and that fierce Gorphorost
might not hurt him? Parthenius in the end deserved well my love, but yet (I
think) he goes not beyond Delicius, who needed not the favor of his brother
to help him, and could no doubt have done no less then he. And though he
never had occasion to show the sharpnes of his wit, his pithie words, and
witty answers (from the which he was cut off from the very beginning) yet how
clearly by all his sweet songs and ditties that he made, did he manifest it?
What verses did he carue in the tree, or rather in my heart, how modest, by
refraining (not to offend me) to speak of that, which concerned him most. O
God, and what great reason have I then to love him? But who believes not that
Parthenius, if he had also loved me, would not have done as much. Alas then for
me, to whether of them shall I incline? Must Delicius be despised, because he
loves me, and for desiring so much my love again? Must I consent that he die,
because he desires to live with me? Must he be guerdoned with unworthy death
for so high a desert of his great love? O hapless Delicius, I would I had
never seen thee, or thou not cast thine eyes upon me? Thou well deseruest my
love, if I had not vowed chastity, and if my importunate destinies had not
threatened me with marriage. But must Parthenius be rejected because he loves
me not as Delicius does? For this he is more worthy to be admitted into my
love. It imports but little that he love me not, so I love him that has so
many good parts in him worthy to be beloved. That which most of all forces me
to his love, is that I cannot suffer with patience that Crimine should love
him. But whither do I range in these wandering thoughts? what need I take such
care for them, after so many whom I have despised? Why do I thus torment my
self? Their beauty mooues me not (and yet the same might well do it) who are
but yet boys. They themselves move me not, but their young and flourishing
youth. But let them go hence in a good hour, now that of mine own free will I
have counseled them, and the rather since marriage is denied me. Let them go,
and seek forth some other loves, since none that are wise will reject them.
But alas for me this leave is too hard. With these last words, not able to
pass on further, though many other things remained still in my mind, I held
my peace, my tongue was silent, but my heart did still speak. And with these and
like words and praises (poor soul) without knowing what I did, and rude in
such affairs, I loved without the sense of love: I conceived the fire without
seeing it, and nourished a wound in my veins without feeling it. Three or
four days passed, in the which we went not to the Shepherds, because Crimine
came not forth, for seeing herself disdained of Parthenius, she endeavored to
forget him by her absence, which kindled her fire the more. So that I would
have been now glad, that Parthenius had loved Crimine in lieu of seeing him
and Delicius. For the which I many times importuned her, that we might go see
them, by putting her in mind of the hope that Delicius had given her: but for
all this she forced herself not to come before him. There remained now but two
days to come of the time prefixed for Parthenius departure, when, not able to
endure so long an absence, I spoke thus unto her. It might not a little rejoice
me (dear sister) if we went to see the Shepherds, because I promised to speak
with Parthenius before he went. Crimine desiring the same no less then I (as I
imagined) answered me saying. Thou may go good friend, although I will not
deny, that I desire to see mine enemy. But this hapless love is so cruel,
that I cannot choose in the end but tell thee the truth, that my going this
time will avail me as little (I know) as other times before. Behold thou can
not tell Crimine (said I) what Delicius has done for thee, in recompense of
the good turn he owes thee, and for the promise he made thee: and if this were
not so, remember that certain days past, my self having less occasion and
will to go, yet only to content thee I went thither. So that thou art bound
now to perform my request, when I was then so willing to do thy command. Thou
have ouercommed said she, I will nor cannot gainsay thy forcible reasons.
Whereupon we went to the Shepherds, whom when I espied gone aside (for on
purpose they were talking very earnestly together) I said to my companion.
They should now talk of some great matters, and it may be Delicius is talking
about thy affairs. Nay about thine, answered she again. And it was true
indeed. For both of them were in counsel together, as afterward we knew it.
Being come to the Shepherds, we found such an alteration in them, that it
seemed very strange to us. What will you more, but that Delicius seemed to have
changed the love that he did bear me, to bestow it on Crimine, when he had
greatest reason to love me. Who, at the last time when I spoke to him, got more
of me then ever he did before. I could not by any means know the cause of
this sudden change. Truth it is, that as I had perceived Delicius love to
Crimine to be but cold, as that I also held him for such an one, who would not
change without great occasion, and not able to conjecture it by any fault of
mine own, I have suspected, and Crimine thinks no less, but that Delicius by
some ways should know of Parthenius secret love to me; and by sayning that he
had forgot me, it was to give place to his dear friend in my love. Which if
it be so (as we believe) although we could never get it of him, it is
(Gentlemen) one of the noblest deeds of friendship that was ever seen to this
day. For in more then a whole year that we accompanied together, he never
solicited me for himself, but for his friend, beholding me ever with such
modesty, as if we had been both borne in one belly. But I pray thee tell us
(said Doria) what means he used to show that he did not love thee. That I
will, said Stela, because there remains now but little of my tale, for our long
peregrination with many misfortunes that we have passed shall be kept for some
fitter time: When we were come before the Shepherds, Delicius showed a certain
kind of greater liberty and boldness in his words, and more merrines in his
countenance then he was wont to do. Whereat both of us maruelling not a
little, and asking him the cause, he answered. Times are not ever all one, nor
equal Stela. The fire many times mollifies that which is hard. The finest
plaster (be it never so well tempered) if it be too much charged, falls down
again. So much water may be cast on the greatest fire, that it will put it
quite out. My great love served me nothing at all to make thee gentle, and thy
extreme disdain has auailed me to make me forget thee. I had grounded well
mine affection on thee, but thou have choked it with a multitude of torments,
sorrows, and cares. Great was the flame that burned continually in my breast,
but thou have quenched it with excessive water of thy cold disfavors, and with
the abundance of my tears. So that from this day thou may well match thee
with one, who is more virtuous, wise, and constant then I am, and who may in
just proportion be more answerable to thee in every thing then my self; for I
confess I am not sufficient for it. Yet I will not deny, but that I am now as
truly, and as much devoted to thy service as ever I was before, whereof thou
may make trial, if it please thee in whatsoever thou will command me,
though in another kind of respect then in these days past. We were all three
looking with what liberty he took his leave of my love, and marvelled more at
his change. Delicius had told Parthenius before of his determination, but he
never believed all till then, when he verily thought his companion did not love
me, because face to face so constantly he told me it, thinking if it had
been otherwise, it had not been possible for him to have used the boldness
nor courage by speaking to me in such sort. At this novelty I stood
astonished, and a certain kind of remorse and repentance (me thought) troubled
me for handling him, and mine own matters so ill: but dissembling it as well
as I could, I said. O how glad am I to hear these good words Shepherd?
From this time forward I will love thee more then ever I did. But I know not
(said Crimine) what I may say unto thee friend Delicius, neither can I sound
the cause of such a sudden alteration. Tell me if thou have any occasion to
complain of Stela? For here I will cause her to make thee amends without the
consent of such a breach. The Gods be contrary to me in all my desires, said
Delicius, if I have any just complaint of her, but only of my hap. And by them
I swear unto thee, that I do this, because I find it most expedient for me.
Wherefore if thou desire my good, thou should not speak to me about it. In
faith Crimine, said I, thou art very pleasant, how long I pray you, had you
leave to trouble your self with my matters, and such as like me not at all.
Because it should like thee well, said Crimine, I spoke it. If such things liked
me well, said I, smiling, there is Parthenius, who has no less good parts in
him to be loved then his friend, if they have not both (perhaps) agreed
together about this matter. This did I speak but in jest, but love did not
jest with me at all. I would not make this agreement, said Delicius, if it were
not for that, which I love most in this life, which I wish thou would love,
leaving him to sail with the greatest prosperity in the seas of thy happy
love. Delicius labored so much in the end, by showing himself also so
appassionate for Crimine (but truly but now) that Parthenius discovered
himself the next day to be my open lover, and for Delicius his sake had kept
it so long close, which was the cause (he said) why he could never be moved to
love Crimine. I had not then been a little proud and glad, as I should be now,
if I had then known, or did now know, that I was equally beloved of them both,
as I love them both alike. Crimine had no end of her joy and content, thinking
that she was in good earnest beloved of Delicius, the which he cunningly showed
by words and deeds. But now she is not I think in such glory and content
because he is as cold in her love again, although he ever makes her some show
thereof. The last day of respit, wherein Parthenius was to depart, was now
come, when the night before, Delicius said to Parthenius. Since it is thy will
(dear brother) to absent thy self from me (a hard and heavy chance) it
shall be needful for me to go to morrow to Gorphorost, and speak to him in
thy behalf, because with the instructions that thou have given me I may know
from henceforth how to converse with him, and as thou shall afterward advise
me how I may entertain his company. It may be he will keep me till night:
Think not therefore much if I stay so long. This agreement Delicius made with
Parthenius, because he had now determined to go and seek out his parents, and
to leave Parthenius with me, for he never meant to go seek out Gorphorost,
nor to speak with him at all; but only to absent himself secretly, as
afterward he informed us of it. He knew, or at the least suspected that
Parthenius would not consent to have him go without him, and therefore thought
it good to use this dissimulation, because he would not have him nor us pass
the hard trance of his grievous departure. Hereupon he went toward the river,
and near to the place, where he was wont to stay for Gorphorost, wrote this
with a knife in an Elm, in letters that might be discerned a good way off.

My dear friend Parthenius, thou shall feel by thy self, if thy absence
will not breed an extreme sorrow in me; but because this is forced and
necessary, I think it best for thee to tarry still, since thou have so great
reason for it. That which I commend to thy charge (for the friendship between
us both) is to make no change of place nor of thy fair young Shepherdess, for
this shall be the greatest pleasure that thou may do me. And as for the
rest, I promise thee to seek out my father and thy mother with all diligence,
carrying so good tokens with me as I do of them both. Within a year (if the
Gods spare me life and health) I will return and visit thee, with report of
that which I have done, and has befallen unto me. I pray thee once again not
to depart from hence. For if thou think to seek me, perhaps thou shall
leese me, because coming back again, I shall not know where thou art. The
Sheepehooke thou shall find at the foot of this Elm hidden under the sands.
The Gods remain with thee and accompany me.

But Crimine and I, knowing that Parthenius was to go that day away, went in
the morning betimes to take our leaves of him (or to say more truly) for
Crimine to entreat him in my behalf, for she had some suspicion of me, that I
was affected to him) who meant not to absent himself, but that since they
could not be there both together for the causes abouesaid, one of them should
go to some near place thereabouts, and come thither by turns, the one going
and the other coming in course; and that thus by the absence of either,
Gorphorost might be deceived by the Sheepehooke. But when we were now come
before Parthenius, and saw him all alone, we asked him for Delicius, who told
us that he was gone to Gorphorost to learn to keep him company after he was
gone. Which when Crimine heard, without tarying any longer she went to attend
her new love, where she knew Parthenius was accustomed to go, who tarried with
me walking up and down in a little green meadow within the forest. Crimine
coming to the Elm, saw what Delicius had graven so lightly in it, and
reading it, not able to endure any longer with patience, she began to weep,
and cry out alowde, accursing her misfortune, and as she determined to follow
him, she first thought good to tell Parthenius of it. But going to take out the
Sheepehooke, Gorphorost from a high hill espied Parthenius and me, and how all
alone hand in hand we walked up and down, and seeing him without the
Sheepehooke, thought surely it was Delicius. Whereupon he began to cry out
alowd, and with such fury as he made the earth to shake, saying. Now have I
espied thee wicked Impe, which I will make thy last sight and delight, and then
with an incredible swiftnes he came down from thence, and in an instant passed
over the river. I being fearful with the terrible voice, and warned of the
Nymphs watchword got me to the river. Parthenius, fearing more the harm that
might have befallen to his friend, then his own danger, stayed for him without
flying away, which though he would have done he could not, because Gorphorost
was so near. Crimine hearing the furious voice of Gorphorost, suspecting what
might happen, like a wise woman (for surely she is no less) came running to
the place where she had left us, to warn Gorphorost in time that it was his
friend Parthenius, least being deceived, he might have done him some harm. And
believe me, Gentlemen, with her mastered wisdom, she restored to us all our
lives: So that she came to Parthenius (for I was now gone) and stepped before
Gorphorost, saying. Stay Gorphorost, and behold him well: for this is
Parthenius, and because thou may think it is true, behold here the
Sheepehooke which thou did give him, for she had taken it out of the place
where Delicius had hidden it. Whereupon being somewhat pacified, although not
wholly pleased because he saw us walk hand in hand, and not assured who he
was, he took him, saying to Crimine. I will be better advised who he is, and
accordingly will do with him what it pleases me. And saying thus, he took up
Parthenius under his arm, and ran away with him as fast as he could.
Parthenius durst not ask Crimine for Delicius, although he saw the
Sheep-hooke, which he carried away with him that morning, because he thought he
was with Gorphorost. For if he asked for him, he had then given him to
understand that he was Parthenius. So that he would have rather suffered,
saying he was Delicius then not, least any harm might have happened to Delicius
by confessing himself to be Parthenius. With this incertainty Gorphorost cast
him into a dark cave, to the mouth whereof he rouled a great piece of a rock
instead of a door, as afterward we knew it. Crimine with that content and
sorrow as you may imagine, knowing Delicius was gone, and seeing Parthenius
carried away in that sort, came to our mansions to bring me news of what had
passed, and to tell me what she had resolved to do. When she came into our
withdrawing chamber, she found me almost breathles: for I was reuoluing in my
thoughts what had happened to me concerning both my loves. When I saw her, I
rose up from my bed, where I had laid me down, and going toward her (my
breast bathed in tears, and my hair torn with my hands) I cast mine arms
about her neck, not able to speak a word, but gave a sorrowful sigh, which I
fetched out from the profoundest part of my amorous soul. Crimine with a little
more force then I had, holding fast by me, as well as she could, came to the
bed, and there fell down with me upon it, where we lay a good while without
speaking or moving. We were not seen in these trances of the other Nymphs,
because they were most of them gone to solace themselves along the river banks.
After a little time therefore, as I began again to rent my clothes that
covered my breast, marking my tender flesh with my hard nails, Crimine, awaked
as it were out of a dream, held my pitilesse (or rather more pitiful) hands.
To whom at last I said. Let my hands alone, Crimine, for they do no more then
they are bound to do. For thinking perhaps to be pitiful, be not in lieu
thereof so cruel unto me. Let them pull out my heart to be openly known, for
that hitherto it has been ever secret. O Stela, O Parthenius, O Delicius.
Hearken to me, said Crimine, if thou will have me lighten thy greefes, and
augment mine own passion. Parthenius is safe by my means, and Delicius lost
for thy sake. Do thou affirm that to be true, said I. Is Delicius dead?
Lost, I have said, not dead, said Crimine? for what do thou call lost, said
I? To me (answered she) for thy sake, because to leave Parthenius to thee, he
has taken that journey in hand, which Parthenius was about to do, to seek out
his parents. Then somewhat appeased, I asked her farther, how she knew it,
which she told me in order as it was; affirming afterward how she had resolved
to follow Delicius. Have thou such courage, said I, as that thou dare alone
take upon thee such a dangerous journey. I will not go alone, said she, for
love shall accompany me which is afraid of nothing. Being stung with the
prick of jealousy, and not able to suffer, that she should go alone with one
whom I loved more then my self, I said. Since thou have so good a defense with
thee, I will also accompany thee. But let us first (I beseech thee) endeavor to
know, what is become of Parthenius; for if he be dead, I will not live, nor
come before Delicius with such unfortunate news, being assured that whosoever
shall first advertise him thereof, shall give him no less then death. Whom we
should rather inform (as soon as might be) if he were prisoner, to seek out
some means to deliver him from thence, which counsel we thought was the best.
We remained therefore in this determination, and such was our good hap, that
walking the second day up and down the river banks, at the narrowest place of
it there came a strong and lusty Shepherdess with a sling in her hand, and
being right over against us, did fling over to our side a certain thing like a
round ball, and then running away as fast as she could, got her into the Island
before her. We not coniecturing what that might mean, and desirous to know
what it was, went to take it up, that ran trendling in the meadow before us.
When we had it into our hands, we saw it was a piece of linen tied up fast
together, and within it a round stone, which we thought was put in, least with
the lightness of the linen, it had fallen into the river. This piece of linen
was written all over, and I think with the juice of Mulberies, for it seemed
he wanted ink and paper, looking upon the letter we knew it to be the hand of
Parthenius, whereby he willed us to be of good comfort, and told us the order of
his imprisonment, and how by the tokens which he gave Gorphorost, he was now
sufficiently resolved, that he was not Delicius, and that he used him very
well, but would nor dimisse him, because he kept him for a bait for Delicius,
knowing that it might avail him for the great friendship that was between
them; and also because if he did let him go, he might take Delicius (if
afterward he met him) for Parthenius, of whom he might not be deceived if he
kept him still in his cave. And therefore because Delicius might not come in
sight by any means, said, that he would take some order himself for his own
delivery. With these doubtful news, and happy adventure we went to seek
out Delicius. And truly if we had not carried that piece of linen cloth
written by Parthenius own hand to him, the grief of the imprisonment of his
dear brother had made an end of him by reason of the great sorrow that he felt
thereof, as yet he does, as you daily see.

Behold here therefore Gentlemen, what you desired to know of the Shepherd and
us, and for what cause we go up and down in his company. And the reason why my
father would have killed him, I suspect to be this, That the Nymphs our
fellows (seeing us all four waiting at one time) told him (perhaps) that the
Shepherds had carried us away with them: So that we found out this young
Shepherd with whom we go, and the infinite troubles that we have suffered, and
must still endure, until we see Parthenius so well beloved of us all three.
Wherefore I pray you do me this favor, to request no more of me at this time,
nor how we found him out, until with more joy we be altogether, if our
misfortunes shall have an end, as sage Felicia has promised us: for now you
see what content one takes in recounting of adversities, that are gone and
past, when she is free from them; and contrary what grief, when we still
suffer them. Of purpose (said Felismena) we took fit time for our
discourses, because we might have had opportunity to know all. But because thy
will is to the contrary, we will not gainsay it, to satisfy our own.
Whereupon with this that Stela told them, they knew what great reason
Delicius, Stela, and Crimine had to be sorrowful, who were partly no less for
pity of these four unfortunate lovers. The night being come, they went in,
and after they had supped they went all to take their rest, they at the least
that were capable of it.

The end of the fifth book.
The sixth Book of the second Part of Diana of George of Montemayor.
ALl that company coming forth, (except Felicta, and Parisiles with some
Nymphs that tarried still praying in the Temple) in a clear morning, the day
was but a little spent, when the air changed on a sudden with such thunders
and stormy tempests, that what with fear of the lightning, and with the
water that seemed to threaten them, they were now going in again, when they
heard a Shepherd singing a far off, and who (they thought) was coming
toward them. And hearing him, they said. It seems he cares but little for the
injury of the weather. They all agreed to stay for him: who not tarrying long
from coming out of the wood, where his way lay, and seeing so many together,
marvelled much, and left of his singing. But they woondred more when he came
nigh them, to behold his strange kind of habit. For he had on the skin of a
beast called Hiena, tied about his middle with a great wreath of leaves like to
Bryony, or the white vine, which runs winding about the bodies of trees like a
snake. On his head he ware a Laurel crown, and in his hand, in steed of his
sheepehook, he carried a great bough of a fig tree. All which when they had
well marked, they said unto him. Tell us, jolly Shepherd, is this thy common
wearing? No, said he, but as I now use to wear this or some such like, as the
quality of the time shall counsel me, arming my self ever against the
injuries of it. And therefore I clad me thus, as at this present you see me,
because I would not be smitten with the furious lightning, not thu^derclap,
which the virtue of any one of these does maruellously resist, and many other
things that came not so soon to my hands. We are glad to know it, said they;
but because the rigor of this day warnes us to put our selves under covert, do
us this pleasure (Shepherd) to come in with us here to Dianas temple. The good
report and fame of this house, and your noble company shall carry me in,
although in such a time as this, by the advice of a cunning and expert Shepherd
that dwells amongst us, it is not safe to be in stately and high buildings. Why
so, said Lord Felix? Because he said (answered the Shepherd) that the
thunderclap as it comes not right down but circularwise, encounters with that
which is highest, and therefore alights for the most part on high places, as
upon towers and castles: Whereas on the contrary, if there be any in the
field, (unless it smite upon his body) it can do no harm; but he, that in
high and lofty houses lodges (though the thunderclap smite him not) may be
killed or wounded with the stones, timber, or some other thing that may fall
from thence. And may also be burned or choked with the smoke of the fire, that
is kindled in the wood, all which by experience have been often seen. But
because of good will you inuit me, to do that which you request me, I will go
in, although I was determined to lay me down and sleep, if I had found out
some fit place for the purpose, because the thunderclap spares those (they
say) that are asleep. Thou will live too long said Seluagia, since with so
many defenses thou do arm thy self. Hereof thou may be ascertained, said
the Shepherd, for there is not any, who desires his life and health more then I
do. So me thinks, said Seluagia, and the cause of it must be, that thou art
not in love. Naie, rather the contrary (said the Shepherd) which my song did
even now speak of. Do thou love then said Seluagia? I love said he with the
greatest bliss and joy as thou have ever heard of. Not only heard, but seen
said Seluegia. For they are before thee. And this do I say, said he. And I
that, said she. Leave of these speeches said Lord Felix, and let us go in. And
do us so much pleasure, good Shepherd, to tell us by the way if thou be in
love. I am (said he). Are these loves thine own, said Lord Felix? They are mine
(said he) and none others. I say not so, said Lord Felix, but if they be
properly of thee thy self. I have not so many good parts, said the Shepherd,
to be enamoured of my self: and yet there is not any (I think) that loves me,
as much as I do my self. But leaving this aside, I love, as much as possibly
I may, a most fair young Shepherdess. Thy love is not perfect said Lord
Felix, because thou say, there is none whom thou love as much as thy
self. Why does this hinder it (said the Shepherd,) that it is not perfect? Why
not, said Lord Felix? Then by this I understand (said the Shepherd) that there
is none that loves in this degree: But rather believe the contrary, said Lord
Felix, for here thou see some, who would gladly hazard their heads for
them whom they love. This is an easy thing, said the Shepherd, to say it.
And easier said Lord Felix to do it. I promise you sir, said the Shepherd, if
death knocked at your door, and if it were in your election to go with it your
self, or to send your love, that it might be seen what I say. But rather
that which I affirm, said Lord Felix. I think it a hard matter, said the
Shepherd. With these demands and answers they came to the Temple, where they
rested themselves, and feasted that new guest, who was well entertained of the
sage Felicia, because she knew him worthy of it. After they had made an end
of their great dinner, all of them requested him to sing the song, that he came
singing when he left it off at their sight. He said, he was well content, and
glad if they would lend an ear unto it, not for his voice, which was not
worth it, but for the matter which deserved any good whatsoever: But
requesting, that some instrument might play to him, because his song might be
the better set forth, Doria by Felicias command, took a Harp, and tuning it
to the highest note that he would sing, the rest being all attentive to him, he
began thus.

Lovers, record my memory, and name,
For one that is more happy then the rest:
And solemnize my conquest, and my fame,
which I have got in being only blessed:
Extol my glory to the lofty sun,
Which with this famous triumph I have won,
To be the happiest man, that has been borne,
Of all, that have to love allegiance sworn.
What lover yet was found unto this hour
(Though in his love most favored he had been)
Of grief that had not tasted yet some sour,
And had not felt some pain, and sorrows seen?
Or who has with such sweet his love endured,
(Though of his Mistress he were most assured,
And though she loved him with truest heart)
That felt not yet a little jealous smart?
Amongst all these, I only am exempted
From sorrows, troubles, from mishaps, and pains:
With both hands full I live in ioies contented:
And more if I did tell, yet more remains:
Secure I am, that in my happy breast
Vile jealousy shall never build her nest:
And that I may with grief be never paid,
A strong and firm foundation I have laid.
Nothing in all the world shall break this chain
(If cruel death does spare me with her dart)
And yet if love in sepulcher remain,
Death shall not there dissolve it in my heart:
See then how that most strong it needs must be,
Since to my will I wrought the same in me.
And for you may not say that I do move it
With blazons, hark with reasons I will prove i
Who to himself could be so inhumane
(Unless he were deprived of his wit)
That swimming in a pleasant Ocean
Of ioies, would wish for grief, not finding it.
Such ioies I taste, as never more I could,
My love admits no sadness, though I would:
For (yet admit) that I would now procure it,
My love is such, that it will not endure it.
I have good fortune at mine own command,
Since I have favors at mine own free will:
My love to her, her love to me is pawned,
Which fortunes spite and time shall never spill.
But now if ought with grief my mind may move,
It is, to have Corriuals in my love:
But they my joy, and glory do augment,
For more they are, the more is my content.
If any care for these Corriuals do
(These faithful lovers) in my breast remain,
Then see, how that with earnest suites I woo,
And seek them for my Shepherdess again:
And (truly) if it lay within my power,
A thousand I would send her every hour:
But since I am so rude, and but a clown,
I cannot set her golden praises down.
If that with all the fair one should resort,
Showing her virtues, and each goodly grace:
Little should then my homely praise import,
Having the world at her command and trace:
For (saying naught) her praise she better would
Her self disclose, though I said all I could:
And how much more, since I want skill, and art,
Of her to blazon forth the meanest part.
But now behold how far from that above
I have estraied (my promise and intent)
My promise was, with reasons now to prove,
That cross, nor care my ioies could not prevent.
I know not, if by rashness, or advice,
It was my thought, that did my tongue entice?
For when I think to praise my Shepherdess,
Then straight my tongue does in her favor press.
It takes no heed, and has but small remorce,
To whom, what, where, how often, why, how and when
Her praises be, nor of her little force,
Nor virtues of this fairest one; But then,
All in a heat, her praise begins to babble,
And I to stay such fury far unable:
For thousand times I sharply chide the same,
But more I chide, the more it is to blame.
Counsel I give it, and with counsel threate,
That never it presume to meddle here,
By telling it, it is too base a seat
For her high praise, that never had her peer:
But shameless it replies: let this not grieve thee,
And boldly says: It Is true I do believe thee.
For I confess I never did suffice,
But such a want I hope my will supplies.
As to a fool, seeing her follies such,
Sometimes I yield at length, to leave the rain:
If then my Nymph so basely it does touch,
It does deserve no punishment, nor pain:
For howsoere she praise her: In the end
I fear not, that my love it will offend:
But to return fro whence my tongue did run,
Breefly I will conclude what I begun.
Another Cupid reigns within my breast,
Then Venus son that blind, and frantic boy:
Diverse his works, intent and interest,
His fashions, sportes, his pleasure and his joy
No slightes, deceites, nor woes he does inspire,
He burns not like to that unseemly fire:
From reason, will my love cannot entice,
Since that it is not placed in this vice.
For beauty I love not my Shepherdess
(Although she may be loved for passing fair)
Beauty in her the lest part does possess,
(Though hers does make all others to despair)
For mildnes, wisdom, and for virtues sake,
This zealous love I first did undertake:
And so my love is honest, chaste, and sure,
Not wanton, fleshly, filthy, nor vnpure.
I wish my flocks green grass may never find,
Nor cleerest springs, their burning thirst to slake,
Nor shades enjoy in heat, nor coolest wind,
And that they may no profit to me make,
That March may come with rigor, to their harm,
And sheds and sheltor want to keep them warm,
If ever any wicked thought had past
My love, but what was honest, cleene, and chaste.
The Juniper oil may never help my flocks,
With loathsome mangie being ouerrun,
Milk fail my sheep, decay my country stocks
And little kid by hunger be undone:
And let my masty lay him down to sleep,
So that the woolfe does kill him, and my sheep,
If in my love I ever had invention
Of wickedness, bad thought, or bad intention.
But think not that my love so chaste and pure,
Without the slain of vain and wanton thought,
And loving so sincerely, and so sure,
From virtue of mine own proceeds not:
Only from her alone it is proceeding,
That no foul thought does suffer to be breeding:
Dishonest motions in a fleshly soul
Her modest sight most bravely does control.
For plainly, and not vainly, I suspect,
That if some boldface yonker did bewray
His wanton love, or did to her detect
His thoughts, that did from honesty estray,
In looking on her only, I durst swear,
His words would freeze within his mouth for fear,
And that he could not only speak for shame,
But never durst again presume the same.
If in this song I purposed to touch
Her honesty, and virtues to explain,
I know I am not worthy for so much,
When thousand books cannot the same contain:
And more, that once I somewhat sung, and said
Before, and that my voice was then afraid,
For being so base: Now must it err, as lately,
Since that her praise is grown more high and stately.
Then loving, as you see, with such success,
I do not fear disfavors any whit,
Musing alone on my fair Shepherdess,
Favors do come by heaps, my mind to fit,
And so of her I never beg, nor crave them,
But in this sort continually I have them:
As many as my hands can hold and borrow,
Wherefore I live in joy deuoid of sorrow.
Loving in this samesort, there is no fear
Of jealousy, that is either true or fained:
A rival here sweet company does bear,
And all that in chaste love in one are chained:
Yet name of Rival fits not well this place,
Since chastity together all embrace:
Nor different minds we can be said to carry,
Since our intents in no one point do vary.
Come then all you that love, come by and by,
Leave every one his Shepherdess, and love,
Come love my Shepherdess, and for her die
In that that is pure, and comes from above:
And you shall see how that your fortunes far
It dignifies, to love this radiant star
Of virtue, and the time you shall auerre
Ill spent, that is not spent in loving her.
They could not hold their laughter at the Shepherds admonition, to whom
Syluanus said. By my faith, friend Shepherd, thou come too late with thy
counsel. For to leave of that, which we have already for this young
Shepherdess, I think there is no remedy: And if thou termest this time lost,
we are not sorry for it a whit. I would you were better advised, said the
Shepherd, but I do but my duty. It is well, said Felicia, that you (my
sons) are content with your lots, and he with his good fortune: of one thing
I assure you (leaving aside your love, because we will make no comparisons)
that this Shepherd loves (and with the greatest reason in the world) a
sovereign young Shepherdess, endowed with many gifts and perfections, the
lest whereof in her (as he said in his song) is peregrine beauty. And his love
to her is so infinite and pure, as he also said, that though he be many times
in her presence, yet never any wanton thought turned his mind awrie. Which in
truth proceeds from her excellent and singular virtue. And so no man (I
think) has gone beyond him in purer love then he, as by his song you might
well perceive. With what greater purity, said Syrenus, could any Shepherd love
his Shepherdess, then I did Diana? Indeed it was very great, said Felicia;
but in the end thou did presume to tell her of thy love. It is true, said
Syrenus: why then behold, said Felicia, how far the love of this young
Shepherde extendes, that he durst never manifest this sound and perfect
affection to his Shepherdess, thinking by doing so, he should greatly offend
her honor. Then let him tell us (said Lord Felix) if thou think it good,
reverend Lady, some part of his chaste loves, which thou commendest so much,
because we may pass away, with something, this gloomie evening. To this the
Shepherd answered. It would content me greatly to spend this cloudie evening in
so joyful a discourse, if I were able to end it. But now in my song if you be
remembered, I told you that I had another time sung of her, and that for her
great perfections and deserts, I came very short of her due praise. Being
therefore somewhat afraid, I am determined to hold my peace, and the rather
because I have no longer time to stay, for I am going to seek out a pretty
fawn, which my Shepherdess makes no small account of: So that I must be
forced to depart, sooner then I would, from such an honorable company. Take no
care for that, said Felicia, for I have taken order for it. But Delicius moved
with a certain desire to know, or rather with a secret instinct and motion
from above, said. If by entreatie I might obtain at thy hands (fortunate
Shepherd) to tell us some curious things, such as thou did touching thy
habit, and who did first show them thee, I should think my self much bound to
thee. More questions yet, said Felicia: What do thou mean? Gracious young
Shepherd, answered the Shepherd, those, and many more I learned in the fertile
fields, which the great river Duerus with his cristalline fluents does water in
the County of Saint Stephen, of a famous Shepherd that came thither from
foreign parts, to whose skill and knowledge, it seemed, nature it self with
all her secrecies was subject. If I should tell you of his graces, his virtues,
and courteous behavior, as to me it would be impossible, so to you it would be
tedious, not being able to make an end. We all know (for it cannot otherwise
be) that he is no Shepherd, although he faines it by his habit. Of one thing I
can assure you, that with whom soever he conuerseth, with great affection he
winnes the same unto him. O what great profit do we and our flocks receive by
his company with us? We, by easing us of our continual labors by his
industry; our flocks, by healing their common diseases. If there were any
gadding goat that estraying from his company, did put us to trouble in seeking
him, by cutting his beard, he made him keep still with the flock. If the Ram,
which for guide of the rest we chose out for the stoutest, we could not make
gentle, he made more mild then a lamb, by making holes through his horns hard
by his ears. If at any time we wanted tinder, lint, or a steel to smite fire
with at our need, he procured us light, with rubbing two dry Laurel sticks
the one against the other, or with the Mulberie stick against the Iuie, and a
great deal better with the Laurel stick against the Iuie, which being rubbed
very well, with casting the dust of brimestone upon them, with great facility
he got out fire. To instruct us, and sometimes to be merry with us, he used
many pretty iestes amongst us: for he would secretly hang upon the rackes in
our sheepe-folds, and other places the head or tail of a woolfe, by means
whereof, not only the lesser flocks, as our lambs, sheep, durst not once
take a mouthfull of fodder laid there before them, but also the greater, as
Oxen, Horses, and the rest would stand and eat nothing. We being ignorant of
the cause thereof, thought the cattle had some disease, and he perceiving us
to be grieved for it, took them away again, but so privily that we might not
see him. Whereupon the cattle falling to their woonted feeding, we held it
for a wonder, seeing them on the sudden so whole again. When we were in the
fields, misdoubting nothing, and our goats feeding apace, he would secretly put
an herb into one of their mouths called Eringius, wherewith he made not that
Goat alone stiff and number, and not to feed; but all the rest in company of
that, to leave of feeding. We maruelling thereat, and not able to make them
feed, asked some remedy of him for it. Who faining then to make some
characters upon the Goat, into whose mouth he had put the herb (because we
might think it proceeded of his own virtue) took it out of her mouth, and
then did she, and all the rest feed apace. These pretty deceits he used in all
things to make us wonder at him the more, and because we might not understand
that it was not the natural virtue of those things. The master Goat, whom we
call the leader of the rest, he took out of the flock by the beard, and in an
instant, the whole flock, standing like senseless things forget their food,
until he let him go again. I omit other infinite deceits, which we thought
impossible to be done by natural means, because he made no mention of them
(though he showed me their secrets) for that they were not things belonging to
Shepherdes. And many of these I have forgotten. He made monstruosities in the
trees, and corn, preserving them from that which might hurt them, and
hastening their fruit, yea, and changing their nature. He delivered the
trees from any kind of canker, and worm, and the corn from tempests, and
the birds that came to devour it, with a certain thing that he put in seed,
he took them with his hands. He ever provided us with good store of fish out
of that famous river, wherein, with casting the roll of Hartwoort, beaten and
mingled with lyme or chalk, to the which paste the fish coming with all their
force, and by tasting of the bait, did swim a pretty while as if they had
been dead, with their bellies above the water. And it was a strange thing to
see, how soon they came to the nets that he had laid for them; for I think
he did cast in the seeds of roses, mustard-seede, and wesell foot. I
remember not what herb he took in his hand, but putting it into the water,
the fish did swim above. It were an endless piece of work to tell you of the
instructions, which he gave us to take heed from what pastures we should
keep our flocks, and what we should seek out. But to see with what security
he slept in places where were great store of snakes, adders, and vipers, and
other venomous and stinging serpents, it was a marvelous and strange thing,
enuironing only himself with Oken boughs, from the shadows of which trees,
we see by experience these vermin ever to fly. And other things he did in our
presence, because we should see the hatred they had with this tree, for he made
half a circle of fire, and another half circle of these boughs, and in the
mids of it did cast a viper, the which not able to come out, but by the fire
or the boughs, to avoid these, came to the fire. He did eat the dead flesh
of a woolfe, for he said, and so we found it indeed, that it was more sauorie
then any other flesh: but he did not cloth himself with their skins, nor
hair, because he said, they bred lice. He told us of certain hours, and
times, and taught us the nature of diverse things. By the moon he
prognosticated the scarcity or plenty of all that month. By the Sallow tree,
white Poplar, Olive tree, and others the Solsticies showing to our eyes, how
they turned their leaves up and down in every one of them, whether it were
winter or summer. The hours of the day, with the beams that he marked in the
ground. Them of the night with certain little tables that he made. The highth
of the sun, by an herb of a blue color. The fuls and wanes of the Moon, by
the Antes and doors. For the Antes between the Moons take their rest, and in
the full, labor night and day. And that which made me to marvel most about
this matter (because, being so common a thing, I never marked it so much,
thinking there was not any thing in them worthy the noting) was that the door,
a little creature, so vile, and common, had such an instinct, that if we look
into it well, it shows us clearly the conjunction of the Moon and Sun. For
rolling up and down a little ball which she makes of ox dung, she fashions it
in a round figure, and buries it in a ditch, or little pit that she makes,
where eight and twenty days she keeps it secret, while the Moon is passing
toward the Sun; and then opening it, (by that teaching us the conjunction of
the Sun and the Moon,) she takes forth her young ones, and knows no other
ways of generation. And with this pardon me, if I have wearied you. If you
desire to know any more, another day, if we be al together, I will tell you the
little, that I have noted and gathered of that great store, which that learned
Shepherd bestowed among us. They all said, they were glad to hear, and desired
greatly that he would pass on farther. By that which I have now heard of
thee, (said Syrenus) and by that which not many days since I heard of a
Shpeherd called Firmius, if thou know him, who now keeps our sheep, this
wise Shepherd is called Coryneus. By that which now I hear of thee, and not
long since have heard, said the Shepherd, thou should be either forgotten
Syrenus, or despised Syluanus. Firmius I know very well: for he is one of my
greatest friends I ever had or shall have, and it is true, that this is the
learned Shepherds name, of whom I spoke. I confess, said Syrenus, that I am
the man forgotten, and now it greeues me not much, although it made me once
sorrowful, But because Firmius told me many things worthy to be remembered,
and by that which thou have now told us of his friendship, and acquaintance,
I guess thy name is Partheus. It is so, said he. I know not, said Seluagia,
how thou have made so large an account of Coryneus, leaving his young
Shepherdess called Dinia, because Firmius told us she was passing fair,
wise, and virtuous. Ah Shepherdess, I dare not name her with my unworthy
mouth, for if I would go about to set forth her praises, I think I should but
diminish them, since there is no judgment, nor conceit able to unfold the
least perfection in her: Let it suffice you to know, that she is a young
Shepherdess, whom I reverence for her singular virtues. And if I should speak
of every thing, I would not omit a daughter to them both, but yet twelve years
of age, that in beauty, virtue and discretion is the right type and figure of
her parents; to whom the fawn, that is lost, belongs, and whom I love so much,
that I dare not come before her sight, unless I bring it with me, or know at the
least where it is. And so, because I know what content I shall give my
Shepherdess, for that which the young Shepherdess shall have, I know not what I
were best to do to find it out, to present it to her with mine own hands. And
it is not without good cause indeed that she loves it so much, because you
would say the Gods had endowed it with understanding to serve Luztea, (for so
is this most fair young Shepherdess called.) Tell me Partheus, said Syrenus,
how long is it since thou did see thy friend Firmius? For if thou desire to
see him, I can soon lead thee to him, where he is. I thank thee (said
Partheus) for thy good will. It is not yet a month since I last saw him, the
thing that I desire most in the world, and truly it grieved me to see him in
such a case as he was in, because I think the love of the ungrateful
Shepherdess Diana will make an end of his life: for his own grief, thinking
it not sufficient to make him lead such a sorrowful life, has conspired with
a foreign grief to raise up a great corriual against him, a jolly young
Shepherd, wise, and rich, called Faustus. What is it possible, said Syluanus,
that Faustus loves Diana? It is so, answered Partheus, and that not a little.
Indeed he told us, said Seluagia, when we were coming hither, that he desired
to see Diana for the great report of her beauty: And now he has seen it,
said Partheus, and I think, will not praise the good market he made. I warned
him well before, said Syrenus. But these Shepherds move me to pity them, for
I know by experience in what troubles Diana will put them, and how ill they
will deliver themselves again. Syrenus and Syluanus would have asked him, how
Firmius did, when two Nymphs came in bringing with them the little faune.
Which when Partheus saw, he rose up joyfully to go to it, which fauned on him
with skipping and leaping upon his breast and licked his face. Partheus began
to speak very lovingly to it, as if it understood him. All of them rejoiced
to see it; for besides, that it was a most fair one, it was so finely set out,
that it invited all eyes to behold it. And because it would be too long to
recount the fables and histories, that were wrote in a little saddle cloth, and
collar it had on, I will not speak of it; but only that in the collar which
was the finest of all the rest, there was a posie that said thus: To Luztea
fair I do belong, this collar can avouch it,
Let no man therefore be so bold, without her leave to touch it.


But Parisiles having read it, said. The Mistress of it has a great opinion
(it seems) and confidence of her self, thinking it is enough for her to say
(because it is hers) that no body should touch it. Say not so (said Partheus)
for there is nothing in Luztea worthy of reprehension: whereas it is well
known, that she may say so, and the rather that she did not put it on her
self: for I would willingly tell you, why she suffered it to wear this
collar, but that it is not now time to know it. And none again should be
blamed in absence; and since you are also ignorant of the cause, it were better
(me thinks) by your favor, that you held your peace. This is no place said
Felicia, stepping in between them, for such words as these are. If I have
(Lady Felicia) in any thing offended, said Partheus, I crave pardon of thee,
and of this reverend old man, desiring you to hold me excused for answering in
her behalf, to whom I am so much bound, not enduring that any thing should be
spoken in her disgrace any ways. I promise thee Shepherd, said Parisiles, I
never meant any such matter, but to approve the virtues and deserts, that thou
have reported of her; for the opinion, which I spoke of is, that since she
would do no hurt to any, she also thought that none should offer any to her,
and for this cause she would show by the posie, that it was her own. It is well,
said Felicia, but leaving this aside, give attentive ear to that, which for
the profit and pleasure of you all, I will have you do to morrow morning. I
know well Partheus, it will be no pleasure for thee to stay here until the
next days light, because thou would gladly see thy Shepherdess, for the
good news thou carriest with thee. But because thy staying here shall be for
her profit, and her husbands, I hope thou will not think it grievous, nor too
long: And because thou may understand it so, know, that by my means this
faune was lost, by straying so far beyond his woonted fashion, and let this
suffice thee. It is expedient therefore (for let not any gainsay what I shall
ordain or think convenient) that thou Partheus carry with thee to Coryneus
and to his Shepherdess, this young Shepherd (pointing to Delicius) and shall
deliver him a letter from me, which I will write this night, and he shall take
order for that, which I purpose to do. It is needful for thee Syrenus, to
accompany them to thy fields, for that way does his lie, because there are
new matters in hand. When she had said thus after supper, and passed a little
of the night in their woonted pastimes, they went to bed, though Crimine and
Stela could not sleep all that night for grief of Delicius departure. And it
was to be thought, that he slept as little as they, for it grieved him to
depart and leave so good company, wherein he took the greatest joy in the
world, but he could not choose, but obey Felicias pleasure, for the great hope
and trust he had in her. The morning therefore being come, before the three
Shepherds took their leave, Felicia gave Syrenus a certain potion to make him
by little and little leese the contempt forgetfulness that he had of Diana, and
Delicius a letter to carry to Coryneus, admonishing him to call himself by
the name of Caulius, and to tell him nothing of his own matters, nor ask him
any questions concerning the same, because it was not good for him, until he
came thither again. The contents of the letter were these.

TO thee (noble Disteus) Felicia, servant and minister in the Temple of chaste
Diana, sends all the health I may. The Gods have determined to make a period of
thy infinite troubles, and to augment thine honor and estate, and have deyned
to humble themselves without any merit of mine, to make a mediatrix for thee.
It is therefore requisite, that with as much expedition as thou can, thou be
here with thy dear spouse Dardauea, accompanied with thy loving nurse Palua,
and thy fair daughter Luztea. This young Shepherd the bearer hereof shall
bear thee company, and is one, who shall best please thee. Be not desirous to
enquire more of him, then he will tell thee of his own accord. I will be no
longer, because I hope very shortly to see thee: And as for these words, I
doubt not, but thou will credit, and also her, that could write unto thee, and
the rest, so right by their own names. This being done, the three Shepherds
went their ways, having taken their leave of all the rest. Then that very
night Felicia in presence of them all began to speak in this sort to Lord
Felix, and his wife, Syluanus, and his Shepherdess. I know well Gentlemen, and
my sons, that I withhold you more then is convenient from going to your own
houses: but because it has fallen out so to all the rest, as afterward you
shall see, and because you may know the Shepherd that I have sent for, and see
the success of his coming hither, and of Parisiles, Stela, Crimine, and their
Shepherds, I have deferred it, since it shall not be any long time with the
sovereign wills above. All four answered, that what, or howsoever she disposed
of them, they took it for no small favor. A little after that, Lord Felix,
and Felismena, came to Felicia, saying. Because it is already manifest unto us
(most sage Lady) that nothing is hid from thy wisdom and knowledge, we pray
thee to resolve us in this (which troubles us not a little) because we do not
know it. Delicius, and his company these few days past told us as it were by
peecemeale parts, the abrupt process of their lives and loves from their
infancy unto the present estate they are now in; and though we know not who
they are, it skils not much, and we care not greatly for it in respect of the
earnest desire we have to know the cause why Delicius did forsake (if it be so)
fair Stelas love, who loved her so much as he did, and at that time when he
had received most favor of her. Whereof (as it seemed) Stela was either
ignorant, or else would not tell it. Because I know you will keep the cause
secret (said Felicia) that moved Delicius to do it, I will tell it you. You
must therefore know, that he left not of to love her, but fained to do it (as
he yet very finely dissembles the same) understanding how his dear friend
Parthenius loved her (by showing thereby the greatest part of friendship) he
gave place to his friends affection, and resolved to go without her himself. A
strange example of friendship said they all, although, it seems, it was no
less due to Parthenius. But Lady, we also suspecting this, as Stela does no
less, are desious to know, how he knew it, for by her discourse we could not
gather it, considering how he did so well dissemble it. I will tell you said
Felicia. You must remember well (as Stela told you) that for the rigorous
answer that Parthenius gave to Crimine, when she manifested her love unto him,
she determined not to go where the Shepherds were, to prove if absence could
work that in her, which it did in many: by reason whereof some days passed
on, in which they were not visited of them, because (without Crimine) Stela
durst not adventure, but for shamefastnes left of to go to their woonted
sports. In these so sorrowful days for Delicius, Parthenius, and Stela, and
Crimine, in the which these four did not see one another, as many times they
were wont to do, there came some Nymphs to keep the Shepherds company, and
to pass away the time with them, but they took no pleasure in their company,
although outwardly they dissembled it, as by singing, playing on their
instruments, and other pastimes. From the which sports Parthenius on a time
faining a little business, that he had to go into the wood, went from that
company, and entering into the thickest of it, in a secret place a good way off
sat him down, where musing upon many matters, and seeing how needful it was
for him to depart from his Mistress, by reason of the menaces of cruel
Gorphorost against Delicius, as it was told you, he was many times about to
kill himself, but would not put it in practice, only because he knew Delicius
would follow him therein; as also for that, the future bliss and hope of
seeing his Mistres any more would have ended. Being therefore a greater while
there, then was needful for the cause of his absence, from his friend,
Delicius asked leave of the Nymphs to go see why Parthenius stayed so long.
And so seeking and finding him, he came to him, where he lay flat upon his
belly with his mouth to the ground, who seeing him in this sort, and thinking
he was asleep, came so softly to him, that Parthenius could not perceive him;
and in very truth, being in such extreme grief of mind and deep
imaginations as he was, though he had come as fast, and as loud as he could, I
think, he had not heard him. As these two were therefore thus together, and
Parthenius now and then speaking to himself, thinking that no body heard him,
he uttered such lamentable words and complaints of himself and of his hard
fortune, that Delicius knew by and by he was a true-louer of Stela, and that
for his sake he dissembled the same so much: when Delicius, perceived this, he
went softly from thence again, because he would not be seen of Parthenius,
the better to do that which he had now determined. Whereby he might show that
in his love and friendship to Parthenius, he had no less integrity and degree
then Parthenius in his, or to endeavor (at the least) to be even with it. And
so without speaking or doing any thing, he went back to the Nymphs, saying,
that he could not find him, but hoped he would not be long away. After a
good while Parthenius came (to all their thinkings) very joyful, which made
Delicius not a little to marvel, knowing in what a miserable plight he had
lest him; whereupon he gathered, it was but a sayned gladness, because he might
not suspect his grief. From this point therefore, Delicius by little and
little (because he would not be suspected doing it on the sudden) began to show
himself very cold in Stelas love, being merrier then he was wont to be, and
saying it was needless to pass sorrows and greefes for one, that made no
account of them, nor cared a whit for him: which (he said) he clearly
perceived, since so many days she stayed without coming to see him; and that
he had done a great deal better, if he had employed his love on Crimine, then
on her, of whom (perhaps) he might have been rewarded: so that with this he
showed, that he made no great account of Stela, and to bear no small affection
to Crimine. But for all this Parthenius would never declare his love, for he
rather suspected that this was but a devise to try if he loved Stela, then
once thought that Delicius knew it, the which he imagined not at all. But as
Delicius could not by these means bring the truth out of Parthenius to light,
by forcing himself as much as he could, he sung and played many merry
things, like a man free from love, and without speaking any thing of Stela,
which was different from his wonted custom, which he did not only put in
practice, but determined to do more if they met together, as he did indeed,
when face to face he told Stela that he loved her not. And behold here, what
you desired to know. We are satisfied, said Lord Felix, and truly it was a
great part of friendship between them both. But yet you shall see and hear
said Felicia, of many other proofs of their mutual love. With these, and many
other speeches Lord Felix, Felismena, Syluanus, and Seluagia passed that time
merely away, while Felicia stayed them there: Parisiles, Stela, and Crimine
with a mean content, for the hope they had of their remedies to come.

But it shall not be amiss, that, leaving these Gentlemen here, we go on with
the three Shepherds, which went where Diana was, if you will, that we begin
to help Syrenus, who now with his potion that Felicia had given him, began to
feel a tenderness of love, entering in by the passage of the late passed
oblivion, and a certain coffeehouse of Firmius and Faustus loves, that
followed the same. Whereupon Syrenus, musing with himself, said to Partheus.
By that young Shepherdess, which has so great power over thee (because with
some thing we may lighten the wearines of our way) I pray thee tell this young
Shepherd and me something (if thouknowest) of that, which passed between
Faustus, and Firmius with Diana. Although it must be to mine own grief (said
Partheus) because I shall reduce to my memory a part of the troubles, which so
great a friend of mine as Firmius is, passed, yet (to pleasure you herein) it
lies not in my power (gentle Shepherdes) not to obey you.

Having intelligence from the place, where he was, that in the fields of Leon
my Firmius had made his abode, I went (leaving on a sudden the presence of my
sovereign Shepherdess for certain days) to visit him, and the very same
day I came thither, found him sitting under the shade of a high Sicamour, in
company of the fair Shepherdess Diana. To whom, because she had not been
well at ease, by reason of a conceit she took in leesing a paper that Firmius
had given her, he song this Sonnet.

IF that a small occasion had the power,
To make thee leese thy rosy hew and color,
Diana, say, how falls it out this hour,
That all my woes to pity make thee duller?
Has now a little piece of paper made thee
So mild, and gentle in so short a morrow,
And cannot yet my greatest love persuade thee,
To make thee take compassion of my sorrow?
How of my self am I my self ashamed,
That thou should reckon of so short a writing,
Which cannot judge, nor under stand thy graces?
And yet thou will not bend thee to requiting
Of that, that is written in my heart inflamed,
And which has always suffered thy disgraces.
I, that behind other trees hard by, was harkening unto him, would not
interrupt their pleasant conversation with my abrupt presence: but there wanted
not a means, that immediately hindered the same. For Faustus going up and down
to seek Diana (for now he knew she was gone to the field) by chance he light
upon the place, where they were; who with the grief he had to see her so
fortunate in beauty, as unfortunate by marriage, came singing this old dittie.
A fair maid wedde to prying jealousy, etc.


The which he had scarce begun, when he espied Diana and Firmius together.
Which sight (if it grieved him not) I leave to your judgments. But as the
beginnings are hurtful to a lover to amend them, by dissembling
notwithstanding his grief, he came and saluted them. Diana by and by caused
him to sit down by her on the other side. But before I pass any farther, you
must know that Diana, to discharge herself a little of the great passion that
made her complain of her discontent, of purpose bestowed favors on both,
though small ones; which manner of hers did arise of a desire she had in this
sort to pass away, and forget her asslicted life. Faustus (as I told you but
now) with the desire only to see that beauty so much blazed by fame, going
from his own fields came to those where Diana kept. With whom he spent some
days in good company very freely (especially for her part) for as it seemed,
he was in love with another young Shepherdess in his own country. Diana
liked well of his discretion and wisdom, and therefore loved him a little, as
Firmius no less for the like good parts in him. So that to see which of them
excelled each other, she set them many times together in contention, to try
them both in discourse and song. Wherein each of them to please her, as of
their own selves also willing to the same, studied for nothing else. Whereupon
arose a certain kind of emulation between them, not because they hated one
another, but because one endeavored to excel the other before the fair
Shepherdess. Whereupon it came into their heads, that there passed not one
day, nor yet I think there is any, wherein they strive not either in
wrestling, pitching of the bar, singing, dancing, and in other things, which
we Shepherds make account of, appointing ever judges to crown the Conqueror;
but the one never went so smoothly away with the victory, that the other went
clearly without it: for Firmius was never conqueror, nor Faustus conquered; nor
Faustus conqueror, nor Firmius conquered. Of this emulation and corriualitie,
there were none, but took great delight to see it, and especially Diana above
the rest; who to make them contend the more, on a day, after certain talk
that had passed between Faustus and her, smiling alone to her self, she said
unto him. As thou speak (me thinks Shepherd) with great liberty and
boldness; so are thy words full of suttletie and dissimulation. O that I might
see thee one day so far in love with me, that thou might once pay me this
overmuch liberty. From this hour therefore Faustus began to love Diana, and
leese his liberty: whereof he had now very little or none at all, when he
came to the place where Diana and Firmius were. But returning to this point
(because as I was not present at the other, I cannot tell it you) as he was set
down, Diana said unto him. Do us this pleasure Shepherd, to sing that again
which thou came singing. Who without more ado took out his Rebecke, and
began thus.

A Fair maid wed to prying jealousy,
One of the fairest as ever I did see:
If that thou will a secret lover take,
(Sweet life) do not my secret love forsake.
Eclipsed was our Sun,
And fair Aurora darkened to us quite,
Our morning star was done,
And Shepherdes star lost clean out of our sight,
When that thou did thy faith in wedlock plight:
Dame nature made thee fair,
And ill did careless fortune marry thee,
And pity, with despair
It was, that this thy hapless hap should be,
A fair maid wed to prying jealousy.
Our eyes are not so bold
To view the sun, that flies with radiant wing,
Unless that we do hold
A glass before them, or some other thing:
Then wisely this to pass did Fortune bring,
To cover thee with such a veil:
For heretofore, when any viewed thee,
Thy sight made his to fail:
For (sooth) thou art, thy beauty tells me,
One of the fairest as ever I did see.
Thy graces to obscure,
With such a froward husband, and so base,
She meant thereby, most sure
That Cupids force, and love thou should embrace:
For it is a force to love, no woondrous case.
Then care no more for kin,
And doubt no more, for fear thou must forsake,
To love thou must begin,
And from henceforth this question never make,
If that thou should a secret lover take?
Of force it does behooue
That thou should be beloved: and that again
(Fair Mistress) thou should love:
For to what end, what purpose, and what gain,
Should such perfections serve? as now in vain.
My love is of such art,
That (of it self) it well deserves to take
In thy sweet love a part:
Then for no Shepherd, that his love does make,
(Sweet Life) do not my secret love forsake.
Firmius, because he would not leave of his accustomed contention, took his
Rebecke, and sung thus.

IF that the gentle wind
Does move the leaves with pleasant sound,
If that the kid, behind
Is left, that cannot find
Her dam, runs bleating up and down:
The Baggepipe, reed, or flute,
Only with air if that they touched be,
With pity all salute,
And full of love do brute
Thy name, and sound, Diana, seeing thee,
A fair maid wed to prying jealousy.
The fierce and savage beasts
(Beyond their kind and nature yet)
With piteous voice and breast,
In mountains without rest
The self same song do not forget:
If that they staid at (Fair)
And had not passed to prying (Jealousy)
With plaintes of such despair,
As moved the gentle air
To tears: The song that they did sing should be
One of the fairest as ever I did see.
Mishap, and fortunes play,
Ill did they place in beauties breast:
For since so much to say
There was of beauties sway,
They had done well to leave the rest.
They had enough to do,
If in her praise their wits they did awake:
But yet so must they too,
And all thy love that woo,
Thee not too coy, nor too too proud to make,
If that thou will a secret lover take.
For if thou had but known
The beauty, that they here do touch,
Thou would then love alone
Thy self, nor any one,
Only thy self accounting much.
But if thou do conceive
This beauty, that I will not public make,
And mean not to bereave
The world of it, but leave
The same to some (which never peer did take)
Sweet Life do not my secret love forsake.
Diana, because she would have them sing more, when Firmius had made an end,
said. Shepherd, I will consider of this matter upon condition thou will tell
me, for what cause thou do publish it so much by words, that thou love me,
when as thy deeds show thy small affection. As Firmius did ask her how she
knew it, she answered him. If thy love Firmius extends so far as thou say,
thou would come to see me oftener; it greeues me in the end, of the favor
that not long since I did thee. Firmius not suffering Diana to pass any
farther, being as it were half mad with himself, for these cruel words, in
that she grieved and repented her of her favor done him, took his Rebecke and
sung this Sonnet.

Fair Shepherdess, what have with grief to fill me,
And how long do thou purpose to destroy me,
When will thou make an end with wounds to noy me,
Not stretching forth thy cruel hand to kill me?
Tell me the cause, why do thou so much will me
To visit thee, and with such words do joy me?
That to my death I rather would employ me,
Then by such present pangs and greefes to spill me.
Woe to my soul, since this does cause thy sorrow,
That such a little favor thou have done me,
Little it is, in sooth, if it be peased
With all my tears, that never yet have ceased
To fall, that to my death have almost won me:
They great, this small, those give I, this I borrow.
Firmius had scarce done, when Faustus asked Diana, how she knew that his love
to her was so small. Who answered. In that, hoping to enjoy thee inflamed in my
love, thou complainest no purpose of a few tears thou have spilt for my sake,
as if these were not as incident and requisite for love, as pasture for sheep,
and oil for the lamp. To which words Faustus taking up his Rebecke did thus
answer her.

THou do desire (My life) as thou do say,
To see me in thy loves inflamed (at lest)
And yet an uncouth means thou do suggest,
Which is, to give me care from day to day:
Do thou not see the fire to decay,
Wax cold, and quenched, within my loving breast
With swelling tears, which trickle without rest
Out of mine eyes, to see thy hard delay?
The meade with rain her goodly green redeemes,
The oil does in the lamp the flame maintain,
And love with tears augmented is no less:
But love, the lamp, and meadow (as it seems)
If that too much of these they do contain,
Is spent, is quenched, and drowned in excess.
As Faustus had thus made an end, Firmius said (for all that I could not then
hear, he told me afterward) we are well content Diana, that thou delightest
thy self with our sorrows (since thou will take no pleasure in any of our
other things) if thy sweet voice in lieu of that, might sound in our desired
ears with some happy song. Diana excused herself, requesting them to pardon
her, saying she could not therein pleasure them, since she wanted so much her
own content of mind. They endeavoring to comfort her, gave her some hope,
saying, that in the end sorrows and griefs are not perpetual, and that she
should remember that common song that says. Continual grief and sorrow never
wants, etc.


Because therefore you may see (said Diana) how ill this saying is understood,
tune your Bagpipe with your Rebecke, and walking toward our flocks, because
it is now time to gather them up, although I thought not to do it, yet will I
sing as well as I can upon this theme, and you shall take the tune of the
song, as of a woman so much tuned in miseries and mishappes as nothing more.
Firmius and Faustus made no delay: And then Diana like a desperate woman, with
a mournsull and sorrowful voice began thus, taking for her first verse that,
which they had already alleged for her comfort.

Continual grief and sorrow never wants,
Where feeding hope continues, not decaying:
But evermore despair, that grief recanteth,
From former course of mind does cause estraying.
The gloss.
Rivers arise and run into the seas,
And waters without number day by day,
And yet the same seem never to decay,
But new do spring, and run and do increase.
So endless woes arise and multiply,
Redoubled one upon another head:
(For one in truth is with another fed)
Still do they come and yet they never die.
For since their fertile roots each moment planteth,
Continual grief and sorrow never wants.
Torments of mind and vilest miseries
Are sworn to dwell within a hapless soul,
And there her ioies and pleasures do control,
As to my self my sweet content denies:
Then let not any Lover think to gain
The meanest thing, that lives in any hope,
But living so, to fall into a scope,
And wander in a world of grief and pain:
For miseries, men say, continue staying,
Where feeding hope continue not decaying.
Who knows it not, Alas I know it well,
That if a woeful soul is hoping still,
She seldom does enjoy her mind and will,
But that her hope must ever be her hell:
So of this hope, that flatters me, I find,
And do confess, that with the same I live,
But still in fear, and therefore I would give
It for despair, to ease my doubtful mind:
I wish not this false hope, my iotes that scanteth,
But evermore despair, that grief recanteth.
If any whit of goodness ever came
By vile despair, it comes to me in prime:
And it could never come in better time,
Then to be hoping still to have the same:
The wisest and most prudent man at last,
Wanting the good, that long he does attend,
(Which, nourished by hope, he did suspend)
Seeing the time, that fed his hope, is past,
And all his joy, by hope that is decaying,
From former course of mind does cause estraying.
The Shepherds importuned Diana to proceed in her song, or else, if it pleased
her, to take some new matter, for it was to be thought, that Dianas song
pleased them well: but they could not obtain it at her hands, for she rather
requested them to sing something whilst they were going toward their
flocks. Firmius then remembering that which a little before she had told him,
that he loved her not so much as he might, began thus to tune his voice.

Fair Shepherdess, Iean no more,
But feign I would
Love thee more, if that I could.
As this made also for Faustus purpose for the same cause, he likewise sung to
the same effect. And so Firmius and Faustus sung by turns, and answered one
another, as follows.

Firmius. OF mine own self I do complain,
And not for loving thee so much,
But that indeed my power is such,
That my true love it does restrain,
And only this does give me pain:
For feign I would
Love her more, if that I could.
Faustus. Thou do deserve, who does not see
To be beloved a great deal more:
But yet thou shall not find such store
Of love in others as in me:
For all I have I give to thee.
Yet feign I would
Love thee more, if that I could.
Firmius. O try no other Shepherd swain,
And care not other loves to prove:
Who though they give thee all their love,
Thou can not such as mine obtain:
And would thou have in love more gain?
O yet I would
Love thee more, if that I could.
Faustus. Impossible it is (my friend)
That any one should me excel
In love, whose love I will refell,
If that with me he will contend:
My love no equal has, nor end.
And yet I would
Love her more, if that I could.
Firmius. Behold how love my soul has charmed
Since first thy beauties I did see,
(Which is but little yet to me)
My freest senses I have harmed
(To love thee) leaving them unarmed:
And yet I would
Love thee more, if that I could.
Faustus. I ever gave and give thee still
Such store of love, as love has lent me:
And therefore well thou may content thee,
That love does so enrich my fill:
But now behold my chiefest will,
That feign I would
Love thee more, if that I could.
They would not (I think) have made an end so soon for want of copy of
their theme, but that Diana went away from Firmius, because her sheep were in
one place, and his in another. Faustus went with her, who had nothing else to
do, but walk up and down those fields in corriualitie with Firmius, and
waiting on Diana, and staying to see when she would come forth to them. If
Faustus, accompanying Diana, did any thing or sing, I know not, for seeing my
Firmius all alone, I made haste to him. I will not tell you, what joy we both
felt, what embracing and courteous and loving speeches passed between two such
deer friends, meeting so joyfully together. Partheus went prosecuting his tale,
when they heard a voice not far from the place where they were, and as they
thought to have gone thither, Syrenus said. Here abouts we found the Shepherd
Faustus; and truly if that which he now sings, be no less commendable and
delightful, then that, which he then sung, it would not grieve us to stay
here a little, and lend him a gentle ear. But approaching near, because the
song went very low, for that it was mournful, and full of lamentation, they
saw it was a Shepherdess, who espying them again, held her peace. They came
to her, and saluting each other, prayed her courteously, not to leave of her
singing. You may better say sorrowing, said Cardenia, for this was her name. Be
it as thou will, said Delicius, and overcome us by entitling it as pleases
thee, and let us overcome thee in doing that which we request thee. In being
conquered by such brave young Shepherds, as you are (answered Cardenia) I shall
carry away the victory. If I brought not so much company with me (said
Partheus) thy self being all alone, Shepherdess, I would endeavor, that with
thine answers thou should not get the palm so soon: But because thou may
advantage thy self with saying, that I took courage by the countenance which
I bring with me, I will hold my peace. Whereupon do thou repose such
assurance, said Syrenus, laughing, that we would favor thee, and not take this
fair Shepherdess her part? Let these amorous iestes cease for a while, said
Delicius. And gracious Shepherdess, deny not I pray thee our requests.
Because I would not be thought worthy of reprehension, answered Cardenia, by
denying that which such jolly and fair Shepherds have requested of me, I will
enforce my self to it. And because my sorrow (not my song) you may better
understand,

Know that it is not long since that Faustus a Shepherd rich in sheep, and more
in the treasures of nature, and good graces (whom the heavens favor) did once
love me. Who in very deed I think, went never about to deceive me, although
he has now opened the door of oblivion to his former love: because I am
informed (accursed be these ill news) that he is caught in the love of
deceitful Diana, whom (for my ill, and his own) he went to see: and yet I
fear that Diana, though she be so full of guiles and suttleties with others,
cannot prevail with them by entertaining my Faustus, because he goes beyond
her in deceit, and also because I have such an affiance of my hard and cruel
fortune, that Diana (only for my harm) will be enforced to leese her wonted
fashions. These words grieved Syrenus to the heart, who now by little and little
began to renew his old decayed love. And this is my grief, said Cardenia, that
the more I procure to lay his ingratitude before mine eyes, the more does his
love penetrate my soul. Wherefore hearken to that which you requested of me,
and which I came singing all alone complaining of my injurious Faustus.

FAustus in faith thou nill deserve
A Shepherds name, or keeping sheep,
Since thou so ill thy faith do keep.
O that inpassed time of late
My self had past with that as fast,
Then of this time I had no taste,
Having enjoyed so sweet a fate,
Once was I in a happy state,
Which want, mine eyes in tears must steep,
Since thou so ill thy faith do keep.
Joyful I was, and well content,
Because I saw (unto my will)
Thy love so well thou did fulfill,
Which answered mine in sweet accent:
But now I smell thy false intent,
Which is, with suttletie becleepe,
Since thou so ill thy faith do keep.
Thy faith and more thy solemn oath
Then to me firmly did thou give
Not to forget me, while I live:
But now thou have committed both
Unto the winds, that also loath
Their little worth abroad to sweep,
Since thou so ill thy faith do keep.
If thou do think that to beguile
Her that does love, it is a glory,
Alas I cannot be but sorry:
With thousand such thou may defile
Thy credit, and triumph each while
Of all that here do feed their sheep,
Since thou so ill thy faith do keep.
Behold my matchless love most dear,
And mark thy self, and who thouart,
For if thou will, with guilefull heart
Thou may deceive a thousand here:
Then greater does my love appear,
Then thy disloyalty so deep,
Since thou so ill thy faith do keep.
Musing I am, both night and day,
And sundry ways my fancies move,
How that I might forget thy love:
And then unto my self I say,
That since thou do me so betray,
My love shall in oblivion sleep,
Since thou so ill thy faith do keep.
But at the time when I decree
To practice it, then love does more
Renew his forces then before:
So that if love aboundes in me,
And that the same does want in thee,
What shall I do, shall not I weep?
When thou so ill thy faith do keep.
A remedy, and very short
In the end to take I will not fear,
Which shall be less for me to bear,
Then thus to live in such a sort,
And death it is, mine only port,
To which my shiuer'd bark does creep,
Since thou so ill thy faith do keep.
Her syllables were not so many which she pronounced by singing, as her tears
which she powered forth by weeping. The which by little and little she wiped
away with a christalline hand, which made the Shepherds not a little to
marvel, when they saw it, wherefore Syrenus said. If thou had not told us
any thing (fair and forlorn Shepherdess) thy sovereign hand had been
enough to have made me know thee. O that they were cut off, answered Cardenia,
since they were the cause of my miserable hap. All of them being moved to
compassion of her sorrow, sometimes accompanying her with tears, and sometimes
helping her with their comforts, at last Syrenus said unto her. It is not
possible but Faustus, if he knew thy firmnes and constant love, would mollify
his heart, and take pity on thee, when above all things thou deseruest to be
loved, though he had as much in him as a man might have. Speak not of his
deserts, said Cardenia, for in them he has not his equal, and as to the
first thou speak of, that if he knew in what estate I were, he would have
had some compassion on me, I answer thee, that since he went hence, I informed
him in what pain I remained for his absence. And being ignorant of that which
now (to mine own harm) I know, because he promised to come back again, as a
woman joyful to hear such an answer, I sent him this Sonnet.

THerest is sweet to him that wearied is,
Succor and aid poor wretches wish for fast:
The doom of death from him, that now is cast
With favor to revoke, is thought a bliss:
The shade in chiefest heat is not amiss,
Pleasant of sheep and Shepherdes to be past:
The water ioies the meade, with dryness waste:
The frozen ground with joy the sun does kiss:
But yet the glory, joy, and sweet content,
The wish of wishes, when the Shepherdess
Stays for her lover, these do far exceed.
Tongue hold thy peace, and thought tell my intent,
How great a lightening hope is in distress
Unto the breast, that loving flames does breed.
Not long after, seeing his tarrying there was longer then I desired, I wrote
this other unto him.

NOw do I know at last (though to my smart)
How far the grief of absence does extend,
But that this knowledge never any friend
Of mine may learn, and wish with all my heart:
Thus have I lived deceived with this art,
Esteeming small of presence in the end:
But woe is me that proof does now commend,
And tells me clear of this erronius part:
Come Faustus then, with speed and stay no more,
For staying wounds my soul and every sense,
Longer thy absence I cannot endure:
Mark well what they were wont to say of yore,
That by and by a hope, and confidence
After an absence does succeed most sure.
A little while after that the bitter news of his unjust change came to my
knowledge, being mad with the extreme passion of love, I wrote him this letter
and Sonnet.

FAustus, if thou will read from me
These few and simple lines,
By them most clearly thou shall see,
How little should accounted be
Thy fained words and signs.
For noting well thy deeds unkind,
Shepherd, thou must not scan
That ever it came to my mind,
To praise thy faith like to the wind,
Or for a constant man:
For this in thee shall so be found,
As smoke blown in the air,
Or like quicksiluer turning round,
Or as a house built on the ground
Of sands that do impair.
To firmness thou art contrary,
More slipp'rie then the Eele,
Changing as weather-cocke on hie,
Or the Camelion on the die,
Or fortunes turning wheel.
Who would believe thou were so free,
To blaze me thus ench hour:
My Shepherdess, thou live in me,
My soul does only dwell in thee,
And every vital power.
Pale Atropos my vital string
Shall cut, and life offend,
The streams shall first turn to their spring,
The world shall end, and every thing,
Before my love shall end.
This love that thou did promise me
Shepherd, where is it found?
The word and faith I had of thee,
O tell me now, where may they be,
Or where may they resound?
Too soon thou did the title gain
Of giver of vain words,
Too soon my love thou did obtain,
Too soon thou love Diana in vain,
That naught but scorns affoordes.
But one thing now I will thee tell,
That much thy patience mooues:
That, though Diana does excel
In beauty, yet she keeps not well
Her faith, nor loyal proves.
Thou then have chosen, each one says,
Thine equal and a shrowe,
For if thou have undone thy faith,
Her love and lover she betraieth,
So like to like will go.
If now this letter, which I send
Will anger thee: Before
Remember ( Faustus yet my friend,)
That if these speeches do offend,
Thy deeds do hurt me more.
Then let each one of us amend,
Thou deeds, I words so spent,
For I confess I blame my pen,
Do thou as much, so in the end
Thy deeds thou do repent.
FAustus, it needs must be a woondrous case,
And such a deed as one would not conceive,
A simple soul so slily to deceive,
Who quickly did thy faith and love embrace:
Thy firmness she had tried a little space,
And so she thought the same thou would not leave,
Which made her still unto thy liking cleave,
Because she thought it free from double face:
If of this conquest (Shepherd) thou do boast,
With thousand such in time thou may be crowned,
If thousand times thou mean to undermine,
If high renown is got for credit lost,
Only of me a subject thou shall find
With guiles to be a thousand times propouned.
To any of these I never had an answer, whereupon I think he never made account
of them, and of the last especially, because he had now quite forgotten me when
that came. Of one thing I will advise thee, said Syrenus, if thou will take it
at my hands. This thou may be sure of, said Cardenia, for I think there is
none, that would not wish to have some remedy of her ils, if there were any
means for them. The means said Syrenus, are easy enough for thee, that haste
such liberty, as I understood by Faustus. And it is to accompany us to the
place where he is, because our ways lie thereby. For I cannot believe, but thy
presence will make him, with craving pardon, acknowledge his fault. This
counsel Syrenus gave her, to remove such a block out of his way, as Faustus
was. All of them liked his advise well, but Cardenia best of all, and therefore
answered thus. It is therefore needful for you (my friends) if you will show
me so much friendship, and use this pity toward me to tarry for me, if it
please you, while I take some order for certain kine, which I keep hard by
here, and commit them to the keeping of a Shepherd, that (certes) loves me
more then Faustus, who, I hope, will take the charge upon him with a good will.
But I must in no hand tell him whither I go, because with patience he cannot
endure it: wherefore I will feign that I go to some other place. In the mean
time I will give you such entertainment as my poor ability can afford,
though not good enough for your deserts. Upon this request they determined to
stay, and she went to seek out the Shepherd, whom she found out by and by,
for she knew where he was commonly wont to feed. Carisus, for this was the
Shepherds name, seeing Cardenia coming to him contrary to her wonted custom,
went with no little joy to meet her, and saluting her, said thus unto her.
What novelty is this, my dearest Shepherdess, from whence comes so much good,
that this happy soul of mine deigneth to come to visit this miserable body
of hers? Cardenia, who would rather have heard those words in Faustus mouth,
then of Carisus, interrupted him, saying. Necessity, which, to leave my kine
in thy keeping, while I go hard by to see a kinswoman of mine, bringes me to
seek out such a Shepherd, that they may not feel my absence, and as I put no
greater trust in any for this matter then in thee, I come to know if thou will
take this charge upon thee. Carisus putting some strings on his Rebecke, that
he had in his hand, and tuning voice to this that follows, answered Cardemas
request thus, taking for his ground (because it made so fit for his purpose)
that common Castillian country dance, that says in Spanish.

GVarda milas vaccas
Carillo, por tu fe,
Besa mi primero,
Yo te las guardare.
I pray thee keep my kine for me
Carillio, will thou? Tell.
First let me have a kiss of thee,
And I will keep them well.
If to my charge or them to keep
Thou do commend thy kine, or sheep,
For this I do suffice:
Because in this I have been bred:
But for so much as I have fed,
By viewing thee, mine eyes,
Command not me to keep thy beast,
Because my self I can keep lest.
How can I keep, I pray thee tell,
Thy kye, my self that cannot well
Defend, nor please thy kind,
As long as I have served thee?
But if thou will give unto me
A kiss to please my mind,
I ask no more for all my pain,
And I will keep them very feign.
For thee, the gift is not so great
That I do ask, to keep thy neat,
But unto me it is
A guerdon, that shall make me live:
Disdain not then to lend, or give
So small a gift as this.
But if to it thou can not frame,
Then give me leave to take the same.
But if thou do (my sweet) deny
To recompense me by and by,
Thy promise shall relent me,
Here after some reward to find:
Behold how I do please my mind,
And favors do content me,
That though thou speak it but in ^est,
I mean to take it at the best.
Behold how much love works in me,
And how ill recompenc't of thee,
That with the shadow of
Thy happy favors (though delaide)
I think my self right well appaide,
Although they prove a scoff.
Then pity me, that have forgot
My self for thee, that carest not.
O in extreme thou art most fair,
And in extreme unjust despair
Thy cruelty maintains:
O that thou were so pitiful
Unto these torments that do pull
My soul with senseless pains,
As thou show in that face of thine,
Where pity and mild grace should shine.
If that thy fair and sweetest face
Assures me both peace and grace,
Thy hard and cruel heart,
Which in that white breast thou do bear,
Does make me tremble yet for fear
Thou will not end my smart:
In contraries of such a kind,
Tell me what succor shall I find?
If then young Shepherdess thou crave
A herdsman for thy beast to have,
With grace thou may restore
Thy Shepherd from his barren love:
For never other shall thou prove,
That seeks to please thee more,
And who, to serve thy turn, will never shun
The nipping frost, and beams of parching sun.
Cardenia that was musing more in her mind of the love she bare to Faustus,
then that she heard by Carisus song, after a while that she had leaned her hand
upon her sheepehooke, said. But what do thou say to my demand? But what
say thou, said Carisus, to that which I crave of thee? What crauest thou
said Cardenia, for truly I gave no attentive ear unto thee, I was thinking so
much of my departure. Is this the reward answered Carisus, that I looked for at
thy hands, for keeping thy kine? Yet do what thou will, and go whither thou will, for in the end I cannot choose (as ever more I do) but obey thy command,
and think my self sufficiently appaide (if thou will not condescend to any
other thing) that with thine own mouth thou have made me the herdesman of thy
kine: for since I have passed so many troubles for thy sake without any
guerdon, I will also pass away this grief without any further denial, so that
thou receiuest contentment hereby; and this shall be enough for the reward which
I expect, wherein I find no small joy and contentment. I thank thee Carisus,
said Cardenia, for thy good will: I pray God give thee more rest then I have at
this present hour. And with this, because I go to set other things in order, I
take my leave of thee: thou shall find my kine to morrow in the place where
thou know they are commonly wont to be. When she had dispatched this
business, she went to the Shepherds, that were nearer to her, then she was aware
of; for when she went from them, they followed her to see what passed between
them, whereat they took no small delight, and laughed not a little when
Carisus said in his song, that if she was ashamed to give him a kiss, he would
with her leave take it himself. Having therefore prepared all things
necessary for her journey, she went her ways next day in the morning in the
company of those three young Shepherds, whom we will now leave, since they
know (without us) how to find out this way, so often trodden by Syrenus,
coming back again to sage Felicias palace.

Where they were all very glad with the coming of Danteus and Duarda the
Portingall Shepherds, who came out of their country to do their duty to
Felicia, and to thank her, that by her favor and good means Duarda had
pardoned Danteus for the offense be had committed against her, by seeing him so
penitent from his heart; who brought a wandering pilgrim with them, that had
bestowed many days in vain, in seeking out his Master and Mistres. Whom as
Danteus and Duarda had met very much afflicted, after telling them part of his
long travel, they requested to go with them thither, where if in any place he
might hope for remedy and news, he could not choose but have it at her hands,
that never denied it to any, that had need thereof. Danteus, Duarda, and the
Pilgrim called Placindus, were received by Felicia and the rest with great
joy, making diverse sports, daunces, plays, and pastimes for their coming.
From the which Stela, and Crimine were ever absent, who could not be merry for
the absence of their beloved Shepherds: Parisiles was seldom or never in these
sports, for commonly he came not out of the Temple, where daily he made his
sacrifices and orisons. Felicia knowing that the end of all those lucklesse
Shepherds and unknown Shepherdesses misfortunes was near at hand (for
Crimine, and Stela returned again to their pastoral habit, because they
would not have Parthenius (if he came) find them in gorgeous and festival
attire, he being clad in sorrows and cares) took Parisiles, Stela, and
Crimine, on a day when dinner was done by the hands, and spoke thus unto them.
Now Fortune begins to smile upon you, Parisiles, and my daughters, and will
now lift you up to her triumphant chariot, and desist not to carry you in it,
until she has placed you higher then you may imagine. Happy was the hour
wherein you saw the young Shepherds Parthemus and Delicius, and happy that time,
when first they saw you, for that you by them, and they by you shall on joy a
supreme and joyful estate. And because you may know who these young fortunate
Shepherds are, presupposed they are the sons of Corineus and Dinia, of whom
Partheus began to tell you so many strange things: The right name of this
Shepherd, and Shepherdess is Disteus and Dardanea. Who these be, you shall by
and by know of this Pilgrim their servant, who has sought for them many years
together, besides many others that have made the same journey; amongst the
which, the young Prince of Aeolia wandreth up and down seeking out Delicius and
Parthenius, for the which no mean joy shall befall to all: So that whatsoever
you shall hear of Disteus and Dardanea, you must know that they are these
Shepherds, whose counterfeit names are these aforesaid, and parents to Delicius
and Parthenius. And I assure you, that if you three think that you have
deserved the crown of vnformnate and hapless weights, Disteus and Dardanea,
and their company may presume, that the palm of disastrous men should not be
denied them. But because you may know who they are, and for what cause wandering
from their country they pass away their life in so poor an estate, tarry for
me here, and I will bring you one hither, who shall tell you all the whole
matter, which I promise you, though it touch you, will not make you a little
glad to hear the strange discourse thereof. Parisiles therefore, Stela and
Crimine, remaining there all alone (you may now imagine, if desirous to see
him, that should tell that, which so feign they would have known especially
Stela, and Crimine, that without comparison cared not to know any other matter
then this) Felicia sent a Nymph to call Placindus to her, who was now gone to
view the sumptuous Palace, who being come before her, she said thus unto him.
O worthy example of a loyal servant, doubt not but that thy good deeds
(though lately) shall be rewarded by the highest, assuring thy self that the
deferring thereof shall more augment the requital: For otherwise if good deeds
were not requited by some ways, we might have just occasion to complain of
his divine power: I say by some means, as touching that he has promised us,
because otherwise he owes us nothing, but we are rather perpetually obliged to
his divine essence, not only that he has made us rational creatures (the
highest estate in nature) when it lies in his celestial power to fashion us to
that, which is accounted the lowest and most servile in the world: unto the
likeness whereof though he might have made us, who was besides no less able to
leave us without being, which is the greatest infelicitie, next after eternal
damnation. But leaving this aside, as well because larger time then that we
have, were necessary for it; as also because the place does not require it, I
will (according to this) tell thee in brief, that here in this house thou
have made an end of thy great journey, finding in the same that which thou
could not find in so many countries. Here shall thy travels end, and all the
troubles of these Gentlemen, and with greater prosperity you shall return to
your desired heaven. Here you shall shortly see how many of you wander up and
down like banished men, and more then you think of. In conclusion, in a few
days thou shall see in this Temple of chaste Diana thy loving Lord and Lady,
and thy deer Aunt. Placindus, at so joyful news, breaking off so sweet a
speech, and not knowing how to requte her, prostrate upon the ground, kissed
her hands. Felicia took him up again, saying. It is therefore needful for
thee (as a thing that concerns thy Lord and Lady) to tell the beginning of
their banishment, and the cause of thy long travel, to two fair Nymphs and a
reverend old man, whom thou shall find attending thy coming in a great broad
court before the Palace hall. Placindus to obey the sage Felicias command,
without any answer went to the place, where she appointed him. She that now had
caused Lord Felix, Felismena, Syluanus, and Seluagia, Danteus and Duarda, and
the Nymphs to be all together whiles she was speaking to Placindus, being gone
to them, said. Follow you me all. None then refusing, went after her, and came
where Placindus, Stela, and Crimine were just at that time that Placindus began
to tell his discourse. To whom Felicia said. Because thou may not want an
auditorie for so noble a tale, behold my self that comes with my company to
take part of it: Wherefore let us all sit down, and thou Placindus without any
more courtesies, do that, which I did of late request thee.

The end of the sixth book.
The seventh Book of the second Part of Diana of George of Montemayor.
THey were all now silent and set down in order, when Placindus, being place
in the mids, began thus to say.

Of the descent and famous pedigree of Eolus king of Aeolia, (whom afterward
they called the God of the winds, and of whom that country took the name)
sprung out two illustrous houses. Of the one a most mighty man called Sagastes
was chief: The other a virtuous young Gentleman called Disteus, made most
famous; who, though in possessions and revenues he was not equal to the
other; yet in virtue, wherewith his mind was bountifully enriched, far
surpassed him. Between these two houses was an ancient quarrel and emulation,
by reason that neither of them would allow any equality, both still contending
for superiority, which to him that desires to bear rule and command is a
great and heavy burden. Truth it is, that in the time of these two principal
men, Disteus his partiality went somewhat by the worse, because king Rotindus
that then reigned, favored not a little the contrary part, only for that
Sagastes resembled him so much in his bad conditions and disorder of life. For
both of them were proud, cruel, libidinous, enemies to virtue, and imbracers
of all kind of vice, whereunto Disteus was a mortal enemy: So that the king
with continual favors enriched Sagastes, and favored his followers, and with
perpetual hatred procured to impouerish Disteus, and persecute his friends.
There were but few in the whole kingdom that for fear did not whatsoever
Sagastes commanded, though they hated him in their minds, and none that by
their good wills would have denied to fulfill Disteus pleasure in all things,
who loved him dearly in their secret hearts. So that they obeyed Sagastes
openly for respect of the king, and loved Disteus secretly for his own
deserts: Who yet with virtuous and sincere love was not a little enamoured of
Dardanea Sagastes sister, a young gentlewoman passing fair and rich, she being
also adorned with all those gifts of nature, and mind, which only enstall
that noble sex in immortal praises. For in her did every virtue shine as in
their proper place. Her love likewise to him was chaste and pure, being only
grounded upon Disteus his noble virtues, and singular goodness, that was then
the common subject of every mouth; whose love though in her chaste breast it
was with all kind of honest affection entertained, yet might his comely
personage and goodly features have well procured a wanton thought in the most
modest mind. This noble Lady had been married but three months to a knight
of her own house (but in many degrees removed) (called Fenubius) when Atropos
before his just time did cut off his vital thread, and in the flower of her age
made her a young widow. Who bearing no small affection to Disteus when she was
a maid, would feign have married him; but neither by words nor signs durst
once declare the lest thought thereof unto him, because she would not for all
the world transgress the due limits of her honor and vertuos reputation; as
also because she thought it impossible to conclude a marriage in two such
contrary houses: Whereupon without more a do she was constrained to take such
a husband, as her brother did give her (for her parents died when she was but
eight years old) with whom she lived so content (or at the least fained it) as
if she had never thought of any other matter, a thing no less beseeming so
brave a personage, as she a most worthy example for them that take this
honorable estate upon them. Dardanea being therefore a widow, it fell out that
Sagastes upon a small occasion did (to her great grief) put away her steward,
who had been an ancient seruitor, and well esteemed of her parents, denying
to pay him that, which was his due for his late service. In regard whereof, and
for his other deserts, this noble Gentlewoman did not only satisfy Anfilardus
(for so he was called) but also bestowed bountiful rewards upon him, excusing
her self to him and saying, that his departure was much against her will.
There was not one in all the city of Sagastes party, that would give him
entertainment, because they would not offend so mighty a man: the which
Anfilardus perceiving, and how unjustly he was rejected, he labored to be with
Disteus, whose favor, because he deserved no less, as also because it was an
honor to Disteus to relieve Sagastes old servants, he soon obtained. Though
yet on the sudden so unadvisedly he entertained him not, without first taking
his word and faith of a Gentleman, not to go from him again, upon no wrong,
nor injury offered him. The which thing Disteus thought good not to forget,
because he might not (after he was placed with him) once offer to forsake him,
thinking the disgrace that resulted to him by such a departure would be
greater, then the honor that he got by receiving him. All this and more with
solemn oath did Anfilardus auow; of whose word, as also of himself (because
he knew him well) Disteus made no small reckoning. The which to accomplish,
Anfilardus never failed, though he had been often molested to the contrary.
But before he came to dwell with Disteus, he forgot not to ask Dardanea leave,
because he would not give her any occasion of discontent, if perhaps (by means
thereof) she felt any at all. But she consented the more willingly thereunto,
when she understood, that he was to be entertained by Disteus: For as her
brother could not choose but be offended thereat, so she therefore hoped, that
he would work the means to place him with her again; But Anfilardus told her
not of the faith and promise that he had given Disteus for his aboade and true
service, which if she had understood, she would not (doubtless) have given him
any such leave, knowing that Anfilardus would not do any thing repugnant to his
word and promise. It grieved not Sagastes a little to hear what the steward
had done, knowing, that only he himself deserved blame for it; but more, when
he perceived that neither fair entreaties, nor fierce threats could reclaim
him to Dardaneas service. Who therefore perceiving the remedy thereof
impossible, bethought himself of one more prejudicial to him then any other,
which was by gifts, and fair promises (or for that which afterward fell out)
to entice from Disteus, the woman whom he most tenderly loved, a nurse of his
(for from the teate she had nursed him and brought him up) and an Aunte of mine
called Palna, to bestow her on Dardanea in lieu and recompense of her late
departed steward: of which revenge he was so proud in mind (for he had
soon brought it to pass) that he thought he had done Disteus the greatest
injury he could, by bereauing him of his nurse, and besides wounded his mind
with greater grief, then the joy that he conceived at Anfilardus coming,
whose fact made none to marvel much, knowing well what great occasion he had
to do it. But mine Auntes departure filled every one full of wonder, thinking
that she had no just cause to make her blameless, but that she was a woman,
because Disteus (as they all knew) rewarded every one so well, that there was
not the meanest in his house, whom he iniuried, and gratified not, especially
Palna, whom he loved above all the rest, and honored as his mother, never
knowing her by any other name. Which thing grieved him so much, that it made
him almost besides his wits: for first he would have thought, that all the world
would have left him, before mine Aunt would have forsaken him. Disteus
therefore being very sad and pensive, and sometimes complaining of his Aunt,
Anfilardus came unto him and began thus to say. If my person had not been
exchanged (my good Lord and Master) for so dear a price, I had then great
reason to be glad and vaunt, that I am the servant to so worthy a gentleman:
but considering that in the cause of my gladness the effect of your sadness does
consist, let my joy be drowned with your discontent, and ever remain so cold,
that it may seem rather dead, then live without the sight of your wished good.
I would it had pleased the immortal Gods, that I had never enjoyed the
perfect knowledge of your goodness, because you might not then have tried the
unkindness of ungrateful Palna. I was maruelling at unstable fortune, that so
on a sudden deined to give me so sweet a potion: but because she would not
have me fall from the common opinion that I ever had of her, she by and by
distempered it with a bitter taste. Only one thing comforts me, and joys my
thoughts, that you (my Lord) shall know what difference there is between a man
and woman, though I wish you had not tried it by this example. And though in
truth you have reason to be sorry for Palnas change, yet you have no cause to
marvel at it, in that she is a woman, which name the ancient writers,
Philosophers, Poets, and Painters did not vainly impose to Fortune. Pardon me
(good sir) if I am so bold with one, whom you love so well, since I have just
occasion to do it, by reason of the great and grievous charge that she has
left me. For if I was then bound of mine own self to obey you to my power,
now by her occasion I am constrained to serve you more then my forces can well
attain to. And if I being placed in your service, she had remained still, the
little that I could do, might (perhaps) have seemed something; but she going
away for my cause (but not through my fault) for all that ever I can do, I
shall be yet obliged to more, being exchanged for her, whom you so greatly
loved. And the worst of all is, that if any thing (which not by my will, but by
some negligence I may commit) shall be open to the popular eye, it will be a
common by-worde in all the city, That it was a good exchange of Palna for
Anfilardus. Wherefore I beseech you my good Lord, that omitting this, you
would accept of my good will, which is sufficient enough, if in my deeds
there shall be any defect, and that my fault, which must needs proceed from my
small ability or ignorance, be not attributed but to the one or other. To this
did Disteus answer thus. As I neither can nor will deny (Anfilardus) that I
have not greatly felt the ingratitude of my mother ( Palna my nurse I mean) by
not thinking of that mutabilitie, which (thou say) is naturally incident to
women, by reason of the love that I did always bear her, and do yet (to
speak the truth) which is not so little, that in so short a time I may so
easily forget the great injury, which I have received at her unkind hands: So
must I needs confess, that it is a great lightening to my heart, that it was
done for thy sake, of whom I hope it shall be well considered, since the
greater part thereof is already requited with the good will, which at this
present thou have discovered, though thy works also have seemed of no less
effect: both which (when opportunity shall serve) I will not hereafter forget
to reward. The beginning whereof shall be this, That I promise thee (because I
perceive how heavily thou take the great grief which I have felt for her
absence) and swear never to show my self agreeued for it in thy presence,
although (perhaps) I be in mind, nor in thy absence to impart it to any but to
my self. They being in these speeches, I came to Disteus house, and speaking
with one of his men, willed him to tell his Master, how I was come with a
letter from mine Aunt unto him. The page did my errant, and as Disteus was in
suspense whether he might receive it or no, Anfilardus said unto him: Sir,
send for the messenger in, for by this you shall the more signify your
goodness, hearing with one countenance the just and culpable person, and not do
Palna so much glory as to make her know, that her absence has grieved you
very much. Disteus liked his counsel well, and thereupon commanded me to come
in. With thy good leave (Lady Felicia) and of all the rest, said Parisiles, I
would ask how being without, you might hear these speeches between them
within. From henceforth answered Placindus, you must understand, that we told
one another all the matters that passed, and with this advertisement I will
proceed. In the end I came in, where Disteus and Anfilardus were, and doing my
duty, began thus to speak. Your nurse Palna with her remembered duty to you
(my Lord) does most humbly beseech you to read this letter which she sends
you. Disteus took the letter, and dissembling his grief, as Anfilardus had
counseled him, said: If thine Aunt does write to me to the end to excuse
herself, she needed not have taken these pains, for she might have done
herein according to her own mind, as in that, which shall like me best, I
will do to mine own will and pleasure. Thou shall tell her that I will read
it, wherein, if there be any thing for me to do for her, I will hereafter
bethink me of it. I not perceiving this kind of dissimulation, marvelled not
a little to see how soon he had shaken off the love that he bare to mine aunt.
Truth it is, that as I was then ignorant of that, which afterward succeeded,
so I esteemed his coye answer for a point of wisdom, and was no less
ashamed at that she had done. With this answer I went my ways and they
remained all alone. Anfilardus praised not a little his fained answer, and
commended his wisdom, in that he would not call her mother, as he was wont to
do, nor name her by her own name, in token of contempt. But Disteus opening
the letter, saw it said thus.

Palnas letter to Disteus.
PAlna thy mother from thy milk, and from the love of her inward soul, to
thee her loving Son Disteus sends greeting. Because as I know thou would
condemn me for a very fool, if I went about to show, that I had just cause
to forsake thee, that were mine only comfort, and to whom I am so much bound;
so will I not excuse my self herein, which if I should do, and say, that I am
not worthy of reprehension, I might then seem in a manner to charge thee
therewith, since something must be attributed to so great a change. But if any
fault be committed, I am content that it be only imputed to me; for it shall
grieve me less, that the whole world should condemn me for it, then that any
should suspect the least defect in thee that might be. Wherefore let this only
serve to entreat thee by the amorous milk, that thou have sucked out of my
breast, to have so much patience, until the success shall manifest the cause
hereof; which to the end I will pass with the ill opinion that the world has
on me for leaving thee, to an effect that shall result to thy profit, whereby
thou shall affirm thy self satisfied, and me acquitted (with thee at the
least) whereas for the rest it shall not greatly skill. I know well thou will
object and say, That if there were any hidden thing, whereby I might have
procured thy content, I had no reason to conceal it from thee. I answer,
because I knew thou would by no means give me leave to depart, I would not
tell thee of my purpose, until (seeing the good success of it) thou might
know my great love to thee, since (without making thee privy) I have
enterprized so great and difficult a matter. And now because I have spoken
more, then I thought, I will conclude with this, That I am in good health, and
not a little glad, that my good Fortune brought me to Dardancas service, whose
beauty and golden virtues are the wonder of our age.


When Disteus had read the letter softly to himself (for he would not read it
aloud, before he had viewed the contents of it) he said to Anfilardus. I would
have read this letter unto thee Anfilardus, if I had thought it would have made
thee glad or sorry; and also because it is so obscurely written, that I can
scarce understand one clause thereof. The contents of it persuade me not to be
careful, nor trouble my wits by inquiring out the cause of her departure,
until time does manifest it, when as then (she says) she shall be as free
from fault, as I from complaint. With this also she writes me, that she is
content with Dardaneas service; for proof whereof, she extols her highly with
only two words, saying: That she is the wonder of our age. She that is of
such excellent beauty (said Anfilardus) enchased with all precious gems of
virtue, deserves no less, assuring you Sir, that Palna (if with so much truth
she iustifies that which she has done, as she has reason for that she has
spoken) may be blameles and excused to all the world: wherein I must needs
say she has been wise (having no good discharge and excuse of her fault) by
putting you in a doubtful love and hope of a thing you know not, to the end
that in (the mean while) you might forget and ouerpasse your anger by such
thoughts, and that she might not need hereafter to excuse her-selfe. I told
thee not long since (said Disteus) that though I feel Palnas absence very
near, yet I must dissemble it with thee; by means whereof, hap good or ill,
I will still show one semblant, provided that I know the cause of it, for
indeed I could never persuade my self, that this was no more but a dream,
since I had ever so great confidence in her love and fidelity: Whereupon I
think some just cause must needs move her to do it for my behoof and
benefit, as she writes unto me, which (though it were not so) I will not
(Anfilardus) otherwise conceive nor imagine. In that which touches the favor
you do me (said Anfilardus) by imparting to me the contents of the letter, I am
bound to kiss your hands: And in the rest, as in this, you show (my Lord)
your self what you are, and maintain the title of your noble mind. In these
and like speeches they spent a pretty time, though Disteus sometimes altered
his talk, asking him of Dardaneas qualities, beauty, and wit; for he took a
great delight to hear, that so many good parts in so high a degree were
jointly found in one woman: which Anfilardus did so bravely set forth, as one
that knew them well, and to whom he was so much bound, that the eloquence of
the golden mouthed Lord of Ithaca had been needless there. All which was to
cast an amorous and secret powder into Disteus foul, that he might thereafter
have been set on fire. On the other side, mine Aunt Palna with great respect of
duty and discretion discoursed sometimes unto Dardanea (but with far fet
circumstances) of Disteus his honorable disposition and noble virtues, which
she so wisely insinuated, as if she meant nothing less then to praise him
Disteus now gave leave to his imaginations, to be only employed in Dardaneas
beauty, so that he loved melancholy and sadness, and abandoned al sports and
public places. He now delighted only in solitarines, and not only the company
of strangers, but of his own friends and seru^ats was troublesome unto him, who
never suspected that any amorous thought had so forcibly reigned in him: but
rather attributed this alteration to the greef that he had for Palnas abse^ce,
which if they had not believed, they wuld not have left to ask him the cause
thereof, though it had bin but in vain, when he himself did scarce know it.
Disteus spent some days in these considerations, wherein his fancies being not
meanly occupied, he used these words. O God, how needless is it for thee (my
mother) to tell me what reason thou had to leave me for this excellent Lady.
O ten times art thou happy, that have before thee (as often as thou will) the
cleerest mirror of our times. Only heerem, from this day forth, I will not
cease to blame thee, for leaving me so late, if any fit occasion had been
offered thee to defend thee with the shield of Dardaneas bounty and beauty,
for both which all mortal men are bound to serve and obey her. Thou have soon
performed thy word, that at length I should see thy just cause. Pardon
therefore (good mother) my error by reproouing thee, although the same (if
thou do mark it well) was not my fault, but the great love, that I did ever
bear thee. But wretch that I am, what have I done by not answering thy wise
and loving letter, and thrice unhappy me, if thy nephew returned the sharp
answer from the venomous mouth of thy unworthy son? Ah then thou shall have
more reason to detest the unfruitful milk thou gave him, then he had to
condemn thee for thy just departure, and with greater cause to curse the
ungrateful nouriture that thou have bestowed on him, then he has now to blame
thy forced absence. O Disteus, inconsiderate youth, how rash were thou in
answering Palna thy grave and wise mother, and how ill have thou deserved to
advantage thy self by her gentleness and help. And thus, thinking he had done
a heinous offense by not answering her, in haste he called for ink and paper,
and going about to write, he was a good while in suspense, and knew not how to
begin: for feign he would have showed her how willing he was not only to
forgive her, but also to have craved pardon of her, both which he durst not
do, neither was it wisdom, before Palna had clearly made her justification.
And therefore he wrote in such sort, that my Aunt might take no offense
thereat, and did what became him, the tenor whereof was this.

Disteus his letter to Palna.
Because thou may have no defense, whereby thou may not be bound to show
that innocence (which thou say thou have) and may also understand, how I
have better played the part of an humble son, then thou of a loving mother, I
have strained my self to take pen in hand to answer thee. By and by after I
had read thy letter, I would have settled my self to this task, wherein I had
so many contraries of (I) and (no) that not knowing what to determine, or to
which of both to adhere, I have till now suspended it. If the love I bear
thee, did solicit me to do it; the anger thou gave me did forbid it. If the
faith which ever thou foundest in me did admonish me thereof; the disloyalty,
that then I saw in thee, did dissuade me from it. If my good mind toward
thee did force an (I) thy impiety to me did forge a (No.) So that if I was
bound by the one, I was restrained by the other: whereupon in this doubtful
pretense, not knowing what way to choose, that which persuaded me to write had
been ouercomed, if the desire that I had to hear of thy excuse, and the
weighty hope (I know not whereof) thou gave me, had not succored and helped
it, which did drive me from the doubt I had, and forced me to write unto thee,
though I must needs confess, that, albeit I read thy letter never so well, yet
I know not how to answer it, since in no clause therein I find good
construction: for that which seemed most clear, was most obscure; where, in
manner of a consolatorie letter thou tellest me, That thou art well, and
content in mind, as if my comfort depended thereon: Whereas thou had pleased
me better by affirming the contrary, because by being discontent, thou
might repent thee, and by repentance amend, and by amendment, come back
again unto me. But with that, which in proof of thy content thou say, That
thou art with Dardanea, etc. thou please me as little. For what have I to do
with any thing touching her, whereof thou do write unto me: So that I must
either affirm, that I understand it not, or think it was not to the purpose,
which shall be a greater inconvenience then the first, since it must redound to
condemn thee for a fool (a thing far unworthy thy self) if with this
change thou do not lay fault upon fault. The Gods take account of the intent
thou had to leave me: And as for other greetings in the beginning hereof, or
requests in the end I will not give thee, until I hear of thy excuse, if
thou have any at all.


After he had written this letter, he caused me to be sought out in all haste,
and, being come before him, requested me to carry it forthwith to mine Aunt.
The joy was not small that she received with the letter that came to her from
her son Disteus, although it was to her confusion and shame: For she that
does perfectly love, desires (though it be to her own harm) to see the things
of her beloved; but she was a great deal gladder, when she saw with what
mildness and humanity it was written. The solitary life that Disteus (as I
told you) did so much love and lead, was now grown to such a second nature,
that all company was irksome unto him, but only Anfilardus, as well for that
it was represented to his thoughts, that he had been Dardaneas servant, as
also because he ever answered sincerely to his purpose, by telling him
continually of her sovereign graces. This kind of sad and private lise of
Disteus came to the ears of his beloved Palna, which grieved her not a little,
thinking that it was only for her absence: for remedy whereof she wrote him a
letter, wherein she accused him of want of faith, since he fulfilled not his
promise, which was, Not to entertain nor make any show of grief, until he
knew the cause of her departure; and requested him by all possible means to
shake off all that sadness, by the exercise of his person in arms and courtly
sports, as he was wont to do. Disteus answered her again, protesting with
solemn oath that he was rather glad she was with Dardanea, from whence (he
said) the cause of his sollitarines did not proceed; but that, without knowing
the reason thereof, he found himself more altered in mind then he was wont to
be, after he had received her first letter, and had heard her name Dardanea;
and that on the one side he delighted in hearing it, and on the other (not
knowing the cause) trembled when he heard it: in the end he requested her, if
she would ever do him any pleasure, to work the means that he might see
Dardanea, for though he had seen her when she was a maid, yet was it not as it
should be, according to the great and renowned fame that now was bruted of her.
All this that he wrote to her, was her great joy, seeing how he drew toward
the end, that she pretended: but it troubled her mind not a little to think
how she might satisfy Disteus (though it was her only desire to show him fair
Dardanea) because she found no fit opportunity by reason of her regular
modesty and private life. The daily care and study that both of them had to
bring this to effect, discovered a secret way to put both their desires in
practice, which was, that on a night (whereon they had agreed because it might
be the more secret) if any fit occasion or opportunity were offered, mine
Aunte should send for me, as though she had some business for me; and that
Disteus in my apparel should go in my steed, whereof they both advised me,
feining that it was only to go see mine Aunt, who would not yet trust me
with such secret affairs. Mine Aunt stayed certain days, before she took
this business in hand, though opportunity was many times offered, and deferred
the time so long, that he began to complain on her, and thought that all were
but words and promises (for he that with earnest desire is attending that
whereon his mind does ever run, does hardly believe any thing) though
indeed it was not so: who (pondering the matter well) should have rather
considered, that some great obstacle occurred in her mind concerning the
performance of his request, which made such a stop in the means and
furtherance of it, that holding her for a great while in suspense, she knew
not what to do. And this it was, that if Disteus on the sudden had seen fair
Dardanea, the first sight of that excellent beauty, and the extreme joy
thereof might have caused some sudden alteration and trance in him, to have
made Dardanea suspect something: which mine Aunt would not for all the world
had happened, least her Mistres might have taken some displeasure at them both,
which thing made not a little for their good beginning. But as mine Aunt was
very discreet and wise, so did she obuiate this doubt with a sudden remedy;
for to prevent any such extreme passion, that by such a sight and joy hemight
have had, she thought to moderate it with some present thought of no less
grief and sorrow. And thus it was, that now performing that that was agreed
upon between them, he should come when the night began to wax somewhat dark
in my apparel; but sending for him in my name, she fained that it was to go
for a Chirurgian to heal Dardaneas arm, the which by opening a great chest,
the lidde by chance fell down on, and bruised very much. The grief that he
conceived by these heavy news, was so great, that he would now have changed
the joy that he expected by Dardaneas sight, in lieu that this mischance had
not happened unto her. For he felt it so sensibly, that he had almost no heart
to go, but yet encouraged himself, least I might have perceived it: and so
hiding his grief the best he could, he left off his garments, and putting on
mine, went straight to Dardaneas house. Where, without knocking at the door
(for so he was willed to do) he went up (as I was wont) into a broad chamber
that was next to Dardaneas withdrawing chamber, where he no sooner knocked, but
a waiting maid coming to the door, but not to the place where he stood,
went back again, and told mine Aunt that I was there, who willed her to bid
me come in, for so had her Mistress commanded, and true it was indeed.
Because you may therefore understand wherein Dardanea would have in ployed me,
you must know, that Sagastes her brother was in love with a young Gentlewoman
well descended and rich enough (called Marthea) but she requited him not with
like again, for his bad conditions and intolerable pride; and also because
she was more affected to another Gentleman, though not so rich nor so highly
borne in respect of him; but one that was virtuous, noble, and valiant, and of
whom she was truly beloved and served again. But yet for all this she showed
Sagastes a good countenance in recompense of the great and continual services
that he had done her: For how much does not interest and gifts prevail, which
are the only tamers of affections? So that being glad to be served by so
mighty a man, and because it is the fashion of women to glory in themselves
by seeing men howsoever (they care not) appassionate for them, she gave him as
many superficial favors as he desired, and more indeed, then her honor
required. Wherein Sagastes taking no little pride, believed that she loved him
from her very heart. The which opinion confirming in his breast with this also,
That he was in favor with the King, of great authority in the city, and more
nobly borne, and richer then her parents; thought that at the very instant
when he purposed to demand her for his wife, he should not have any denial:
Whereupon he did ask her Fathers good will, who thanked him for his, and for
his part gave his consent, but alleging that it was not amiss to leave some
part to his wife and daughter. Whereat Sagastes like a proud and disdainful
man by his angry countenance showed some impatience, who would not have had
the matter deferred any longer. But the love that he bare Marthea, did so
bridle it, that (contrary to his natural and woonted inclination) it pacified
him well at that time: And therefore answered, that it was well remembered. This
marriage pleased Martheas mother well, to see her daughter so highly advanced
(a property most natural to the ambitious and covetous minds of women) but
disliked Marthea altogether, for that which is abouesaid. Who answered them,
that as she was their daughter, and thereby bound to obey their command; so
they should have good regard to that they did, and for so weighty a matter as
this, crave some time and respit of Sagastes, wherein they might determine with
due consideration what was best to be done, and that then she would give them
her answer of the matter. And because Sagastes in the mean time might not
think himself disgraced while they were concluding this matter, to tell him
that she was resolved first to make an end of certain Pilgrimages and
devotions, which she had of late begun, and so in the mean time to feed him
with hope, whereby he might not think himself agreeued for staying so long.
This respit of time Marthea took to try, if in the end she could dispose her
thoughts to love Sagastes, and forget her beloved Beldanisus (for so was the
Gentleman called, who served her, and whom she loved.) And Sagastes was well
content, since that her parents had left the conclusion of the matter to
Marthea, in whom he had placed his liberty. She with the consent of her
parents (not giving him to understand any such matter) spoke unto him, as often
as he would, but fayning that she did it by stealth. But as Sagastes every
day, and more by night walked up and down before her door, Beldanisus could
not choose but perceive it (for what does not a true lover suspect and find
out) and this he surmised by the cold affection that Marthea had showed him of
late. Whereupon wrath and jealousy seizing upon his heart at once, he resolved
to be well revenged of him, though it cost him his life; and therefore certain
nights together lay in secret wait for him, accompanied with his brother and
three of his cosins, all three sufficient men to defend him in any broile. And
though sometimes they met him, yet they durst not assault him, not for fear,
but because there was ever so much people in the streets, that if they had
killed or wounded him, they had suffered (if it had been known) no less then
cruel death: So that they only attended fit time and opportunity to do it to
their own sasetie. By some of Sagastes servants, it came to fair Dardaneas
ears, that her brother used not to stay at home in the nights, whereupon
incited with desire and fear, she would feign know wither he went: And talking
with mine Aunt Palna her nurse about this matter, thought that there were no
better means to know it, then by my secret diligence to spy him out. Dardanea
therefore for this purpose commanded mine Aunt to send for me: and because
Disteus might have a sight of Dardanea, she caused him to come thither in my
name. I left you (if I remember) when they bad me come in, or else Disteus (to
say better) disguised like me. Mine Aunt being well advised in every thing she
took in hand, a little before Disteus came in, as if she had nothing to do,
did set the candle before her Mistress for two causes: The one, by the
opposite brightness of the light, to dazzle Dardaneas eyes, because she might
not know Disteus; and the other, to show Disteus the more light whereby he
might behold Dardanea better. He was now come in (and if joyful to see her,
or sorrowful for her mishap I know not) when the bright reflection of her
fair face smit against his greedy eyes, wherewith he was not only amazed,
but knew that her beauty was greater then the report that was spread abroad if
it, and that Fame had iniuried her by publishing it less, then it was indeed:
which not only he (in favor of his affection) but any other (free from like
passion) might easily have judged. And without all doubt he had been in danger
of some sudden ecstasy, if his mind had not still run on her mischance, that
mine Aunt had seyned: who, thinking that he had now seen her enough, which so
much he desired, came to him speaking somewhat aloude, to hold him still in
that opinion, saying. Placindus, my Lady must employ you about her business, and
therefore commands thee to go thy ways: And so of purpose she came to Disteus,
to speak with him alone. In good faith (said Parisiles) the coming of Palna
to Disteus was very pretty, for I was now half sorry with my self, not
knowing what Palna would have said, when he spoke aloud, that both might have
heard. For Dardanea knew that she would send him to spy out Sagastes, and
Disteus understood that it was to go for a Chirurgian. And so with great
discretion she spoke that out aloud, which answered both their intents, in that
he was sent to go his ways, and so to deceive them both by these means.
Dardanea, because she might not know, that it was Disteus; and Disteus, because
he might not then sinell out the deceit that Palna used with him, by making him
believe, that Dardanea was hurt: but she came to him (having told him that
Dardanea bad him go his ways) fit to the purpose, for then if he had passed
further, his speech might have marred all the matter, and discovered the fine
deceit. Truly (said Lord Felix) she must needs be wise in althings, and well
she manifested the same by setting the candle before Dardanea. For these
favorable notes, Gentlemen, which by the way you have gathered of mine Aunt,
to confirm them (said Placindus) I give you my word, that she was accounted
for such an one; and because I am her kinsman, I hold my peace, concerning that
which might be spoken more in her praise, and also because by the process of
my tale you shall see it. To proceed therefore: As she came near to Disteus,
turning to Dardanea, she said, Do you command him any other service, and I will
tell it him: No, said Dardanea, but he shall do me a pleasure if herein he do
his diligence. Mine Aunt then took Disteus by the hand to bring him forth,
whereat he seemed to make some small resistance, unloosing his hand from hers,
as though he would have put on his cloak that fell down: which when mine
Aunt perceived, with an angry countenance, she said softly unto him. You
shall come no more hither I promise you. Who hearing her sharp threatening,
with the tears in his eyes, answered. Pardon (good mother) the body, that is
loath to depart from the soul: whereupon they went out, and mine Aunt went
talking with him, and asked him, if he was now cleared of the fault, that she
made by her departure. Whereunto he answered not a word, for by contemplating
of that sovereign beauty, he was so much distraught in mind, that he heard
not what she said. But afterward being come to himself again, with a
profound sigh he said. O what shall become of thee Disteus: wherewith he held
his peace. She blamed him for this speech, and reproved him for that he had
done, telling him plainly, that these were not the means to deliver him from
his passions. Some speeches being past between them, she opened unto him the
whole deceit, which she had feigned of her Mistress breaking off her arm, and
why she did it, and telling him all, even to that point, when I, or rather he,
was sent forth, she said. You must now therefore, because my mistress
Dardanea commands this to be done, go by and by to your lodging, and give my
cousin his garments, and tell him what I said to you, that Dardanea does pray
him (not making mention of any other matter) and I cammaund him to go about
his errant with all diligence. But Disteus answered, God never grant, that
another fulfill that which was commanded me. In mine own person I will do
that, which my Mistress commanded me, being but disguised and counterfeit:
Do as you think good, said mine Aunt, but in such sort that it may be
thought that my nenephew did it. Leave that to me, said he, and take you care
for the rest: And with this they took their leave of one another. He went
straight to his house, where he found me waiting for him, and said unto me.
Here thou may safely stay Placindus this night, for I will go walk a
little up and down the city, and wear thy garments: And though thine Aunt
commands thee to go of an errant, which she gave me in charge to tell thee,
because my way lies thereabouts, I will my self do it. And because thou
may not be found with my garments on, if any come to seek me, thou shall
lock thy self in: for I will bid my servants (if any ask for me) say that I
am a sleep, and open the door to no body, unless he say he is Placindus,
because when I come they may then let me in. With this advise that he gave
me, he went into an inward chamber and took a buckler, and a good broad sword,
(that many days since was hung up against the wall, because it was somewhat
too heavy for his hand, though now Dardaneas love had added more strength and
force to his arm) and did put on a shirt of maile, and a good head-peece.
Being thus armed, he went to look when Sagastes came forth, and in this sort
went, least in the night any harm might have happened unto him. When he came to
Sagastes house, he heard a tuning of certain instruments, for it fell out
that he went that night to bestow some music on his Mistres Marthea. After
a little while that he had stayed there (which might be about eleven of the
clock) he heard them coming down; and because h^ ^oulde not be seen, as
though he stood there to watch them, he passed over the street, going his
ways. Sagastes had so great a presumption of the authority and countenance,
that he had by the kings favor in the city, that he thought none durst
offend him; and therefore went accompanied but only with a page that carried
his rapier, and the musicions weapons. Disteus (least by the brightness of the
Moon he might have been descried) followed aloof off to Martheas house,
where all of them staying, one of the musicions began to sound a cornet aloud,
I think, to awake the people and to call up Marthea; and after that every one
playing on his sever all instrument, as on a Lute, a Harp, a Recorder, a
Bandora and others with such concent and melody, that it seemed (as in their
song they said) to stay the course of the night. To which melodious notes not
long after a boy with a passing sweet voice, did sing this Dittie, which
Sagastes caused to be made for his own purpose.

LEt the silence of the night
At my will her duty show:
Harken to me every Wight,
Or be still, or speak but low:
Let no watching dog with spite
Bark at any to or fro,
Nor the Cock (of Titan bright
The foreteller) once to crow.
Let no prying goose excite
All the flock to squeake a row:
Let the winds retain their might,
Or a little while not blow:
Whilst thy ear I do inuit
On this ditty to be slow.
In the which I nill recite
Thy deserts, which ever grow:
Nor thy beauties so bedight,
Fairer then the rose or snow.
Nor how with thy grace (of right)
Thou do conquer others so:
Nor thy virtues exquisite,
Which no wight deserves to know.
For into seas infinite
With small bark it were to go,
And that labyrinth sans light,
Wherein Theseus they did throw.
I not having in this plight
Thread as he (his guide from woe)
I will only sing and write
How in happiness I flow,
That thy servant I do hight,
Praising Fortune and Loves bow:
Thanking him, that so did smite:
She, because she was not slow
In her throne my pains to quite:
Love, for (like a friendly foe)
Wounding thee with golden flight:
And for shooting many more
Into my soul, whose pains shall seem but slight,
If with thy grace their wounds thou will requite.
Sagastes would have the dittie make mention of this last point, because as
Marthea gave him to understand no less, so he believed not any thing to the
contrary. This song being ended, he began to do that he promised, which was
to praise God Cupid and Fortune, with so great delight of the hearers, as the
end of the first had taken it away from them. But their beginning (as it was
told me) was not without the unpleasant iarring of their discording
instruments. I believe it well (said Lord Felix) that this discord was not any
whit pleasant to them there when the recital thereof here is displeasant to
mine ears: and therefore I pray thee, without any more circumstances, tell us
what was sung besides, for I do greatly desire to hear how he praised
Fortune, an apter subject of blame, then fit to be praised. If it be your
pleasures (said Placindus) give ear to my words, and note the meaning of it,
for this is the song.

HE that does Fortune blame,
And of God Cupid speaks ill.
Full little knows he that his will
Is subject to the same:
And that he does procure his proper shame,
Held for a fool, and one of simple skill.
Who speaks he knows not what,
Is thought to be a very Sot:
For good of them who speaks not?
And I suspect that that
Same simple one, does lay a formal plat
To be reputed for an Idiot.
He knows not Fortunes might,
Nor knows the mighty God of Love:
She rules beneath, and he above;
For she does sit by right
Amongst the Goddesses with shining light;
And he amongst the Gods his might does prove.
The Boy I will omit,
Since that his great and mighty name
Gives him great praise and worthy fame,
Being (who knows not it)
The God of Love, whose praise I will forgit,
To sing of Fortune that most noble dame.
The fool on Fortune railes,
Because she never does repose,
The first and highest sphere, and those
Adjoining, never fails
In that, which all the world so much auailes,
I mean in motions which they never lose.
In their perpetual course.
Their essence and foundation lies,
And in their motions never dies:
Our life from them their source
Does take, and unto death should have recourse,
And cease, if they should cease to move the skies.
They use to paint her blind,
Because the highest, and the low
She reares, and after down does throw,
Respecting not the kind
Of persons, nor the merits of the mind:
The King she does not from the Collier know.
Fortune herein they take
For agreat Goddess (and with right)
For Goddesses do not requite
With partial hand, and makes
No difference of persons for their sakes,
And partially do never use their might.
They call her also mad,
Because her works they do not know,
Nor any path, where she does go,
But all her ways so bad:
That to exempt themselves they would be glad
From them, for fear of their ensuing woe.
But such are made indeed,
That make a reason so unfit,
For when did ever humane wit
Know what the Gods decreed?
Or how they meant with power to proceed,
Or their intents? which men could never hit.
t fitteth not my song
o deigne to answer with direction
en of such wit and small perfection:
hat offer her such wrong;
For Fortune does only to those belong
That have the use of reason and election.
The Ancient otherwise
Did think, for they did make of her
A Goddess, and they did not err:
To whom sweet sacrifice,
And temples in her name they did devise:
As in their books they do no less auerre.
When this song in the praise of Fortune was ended, then in dispraise of time
(for now as I told you the answer of his marriage was deferred for one
month, and every short hour seemed a long year unto him) he sung this
Sonnet. But I will go on with my discourse, and will not tell it you, because
I shall but trouble you (I think) with recital of it, as it has done me by
seeing it so imperfect, and not ended. In faith thou art too extreme in thy
opinions (said Lord Felix) and though I had diverse occasions offered me to ask
thee many questions, yet I have held my peace unto the end, because thou
might proceed without interruption, and it seems of purpose thou seek
many digressions to deprive us of that, wherein we take no small delight. Then
do us so great a pleasure, as to tell us the song that was begun, and why it
was not ended, and here we will endeavor (if we can) to supply the wants of
it. Since you offer me so fair (said Placindus) I will tell it you, but I
think it will be somewhat hard for you. Then lend a patient ear to the
unhappy Sonnet, which I think will not please you so well.

ALl you that have unworthily complained
Of Love, and Fortune, each a mighty power:
On Time, that does your sweet contents deuowre
Turn them: For more hereby is to be gained.
For time is false: For if content unfeigned
It gives thee, it passes in an hour;
But still it stays if it begins to lowre.
It comes not wished for, nor does stay obtained:
Time has no friend in any thing created,
For every thing it wastes and consumes,
And does not spare so much as any body etc.
The Boy was yet redoubling the foot of the last verse, when Beldanisus, who
served Marthea, came suddenly upon Sagastes, and marred all the music, having
left his brother and three of his cosins in reareward to help him, if any came
forth in Sagastes defense. Disteus that now, etc.

Stay a little (said Lord Felix) for it shall not be amiss (with leau of this
good company) that I cut off the thread of this discourse, when as so often it
has been broken off. And before I forget it, declare unto me but half of one
of those verses above, that begins thus: It fittteth not my song, etc.


The meaning whereof I do not understand no more then the words. To answer
your demand Lord Felix (said Placindus) it is requisite I had been brought up
in the Academies of the Grecian Philosophers, and (as it is in proverb) in the
Peripateticke schools. But since you will so feign know the exposition of it,
I will show it you written with his own hand, that made the verses, who at my
request did it, and I carry it always about me, because I like it well. And
here it is. But will you hear me read it unto you, or read it your self?
Thou have wisely asked me this question (said Lord Felix) for of this point I
have seen diverse good conceits, and from whence the cause proceeds I know
not, but let it go: For of conceits and opinions (they say) there is no
disputing. But I take more pleasure to read it my self, to stay and study
upon that which likes me best, and to understand it the better. Read it
therefore aloude (said Placindus) that every one may understand it, and that I
may tell you when you must leave. I read it, said Lord Felix, and therefore
give attentive ear, for thus it says.

It fitteth not my song
To deigne to answer with direction
Men of such wit and small perfection,
That offer her such wrong:
For Fortune does only to those belong
That have the use of reason and election.
For declaration whereof we must presuppose the learning and opinions of the
Peripatetickes, That Fortune is an accidental cause, which does seldom
happen, and comes only to them that work by election, ordained to some end.
It would be too long a labor to expound every particular part hereof, and
tell how it is understood, and if it be distinguished from the four causes,
which the Philosophers do assign; and if it be not distinguished (because
then there should be five) to which of the four it is reduced; and what
difference there is between Chance, Fortune and Fate, and many other things
touching this subject. But to fulfill our purpose, it suffices to understand:
That if one did dig, or turn up the ground to sow, or bury some thing, and
digging did find some treasure, this digging should be termed Fortunate, which
was the cause of finding the treasure. And it is called the Accidental cause,
because that digging was not ordained to find treasure, but to bury a dead
thing: For if it had been known that it was there, and he had dug to that
end, it could not be termed Fortune. It came to one that used election; for it
lay in his choice to dig, which he might have left undone if he would,
considering besides how finding of treasure does seldom happen. It must be
called good Fortune, if the effect be good, as finding of treasure; ill, if the
effect be naught, as when he found treasure, he found a viper that bit him. It
may be called great, if the effect be great; little, if the effect be little.
Whereupon it may begathered for our purpose or intent (for they use all in one
signification for this present disputation) that it may be called Fortune. So
that in fools and children, that have no reason, there is no Fortune.
Whereupon you shall understand, that if the stone, whereof they make the
aulters, or the wood, whereof they make the statues of the Gods, they
poetically call Fortunate, it is by a figure called Metaphora, or likeness, that
those stones and wood has in respect of others with fortunate men, and those
which are not. But there is one thing to be noted, that insensible things
participate of Fortune passiuely, as objects, by means whereof men are
fortunate.

Give it me again (said Placindus to Lord Felix) for you go too far, that
which is read is sufficient for the understanding of the foresaid verses.
Truly (said Parisiles) it is learnedly handled, and I think that the point
which Lord Felix desired to know, is sufficiently understood, and that he
clearly showed it by that which he read, considering the obscurity of the
matter. I am satisfied (said Lord Felix) but I should take great pleasure, if
now the sense of the verse (taken with the intent) were quadrant to my mind. I
am content (said Placindus) to tell it. Having said in the beginning (if you
remember) that whosoever speaks ill of Fortune was a fool, answering to his
reasons, he proves himself to have no reason, whereupon that it is inferred
in that staff which you ask, that since they have no reason at that time,
when one entreates of Fortune, it is not meet to talk with them, nor they to
meddle with things of Fortune, Since Fortune only comes to him that has
reason. Now that I am resolved (said Lord Felix) return to your History
again. You made an end in telling how Beldanisus had interrupted the music,
leaving his brother and cosens in the reregard: I brake it off at this word
Distcus that now. And since I interrupted your continued discourse, it is
reason that I help you to knit it, and reduce you to it again. Well then from
that place I will begin, said Placindus.

Disteus, that now had come somewhat near, desirous to taste of that dainty
music, even then when he saw violent hands laid on Sagastes (although he
hated him mortally, yet to do his Lady Dardanea service) he ran in, and stepped
between Eeldanisus and Sagastes (for he had now also drawn his sword) saying.
Keep out Lord Sagastes, and receive this small piece of service for my Mistres
Dardanea your sisters sake. Beldanisus was so wroth to see Sagastes taken away,
that like an angry Bear despoiled of her young ones, with enraged fury he
ran upon Disteus, to wreake his anger wholly upon him; and thinking he had
been but of small courage, and partly incensed with violent despite and
choler, without any fear he ran within him, and lifting up his sword with
all his strength did manfully discharge it upon him. But Disteus like a stout
and courageous Gentleman, knowing it was no time to dally when he saw such a
furious blow coming, before it was discharged, by closing with him took it
upon his buckler, wherewith he thumped him so strongly on the breast, that he
felled him to the ground; where, having knocked his head by the terrible fall,
he lay senceles for a space, and was not able to rise up again. Sagastes and
his page would have come in to help Disteus, but that Beldanisus brother, and
his cosens seeing swords drawn in Sagastes favor, two of them fell upon
Disteus, thinking it had been Sagastes, with intent to have made but a short
piece of work of it, because they could not stay long about that business (for
so the four had concluded between them) and the other two fell upon Sagastes
and his page, whom they thought to be Sagastes men. But it fell out clean
contrary, and in vain came they in so soon, for Disteus had now smitten
Beldanisus to the ground, where his brother seeing him lie, without a word,
thought verily that he was slain. Wherefore determining either to die, or to
revenge his death, with one of his cosens he assailed Disteus: who without any
sign of fear or cowardice manfully received them both. But yet he saw him
self narrowly beset, because they were both hardy youths; besides that the
wrath and desire of revenge, to see Beldanisus on the ground, made them
desperate. But they were not able to control Disteus his courage, nor to abate
his strength and dexterity, that had by this time wearied them, and ended
their lives, if they had not bin well armed with defenses. But when at his
pleasure he lifted up his good sword to smite one of them, he did so hardly
entreat them, that they thought it best not to come within his reach,
wherewith he had now broken their maile, and wounded them lightly in some
places. The two cosens made Sagastes and his page fly before them, and had
killed them, if they thought Sagastes had been there, being also ignorant in
what case Beldanisus and his cosens were. But now when Disteus had brought
them to an ill pass, Beldanisus came to himself again, (for he had no other
harm, but that only by the blow in his head he had lost his sense) and
knowing what a great shame and dishonor it was unto him, and seeing besides
how valiantly the man that came in between them, had behaved himself with two
of them, he fell fiercely upon him, of purpose to take just revenge of him,
assailing him more advisedly then before. Disteus though he saw himself
encountered by three, did not yet loose his manly courage, but as if the effray
had but then begun, wounded them cruelly, not escaping himself without some
small wounds and cuts in his garments, because their swords did not cut like
his, nor their arms had the strength as his had; the cheifest cause whereof
was, that Disteus did not let them wound him at their pleasure: albeit one of
the cosins did put him to much trouble: For as two of them did set him well a
work, he with a long tucke did thrust at him mortal stocados, whereupon
Disteus thinking that all the victory consisted by ouercomming him, he
endeavored to close with him; for he perceived well, that if he had thrust but
one to his mind, it had been enough for him. But the other two perceiving his
intent, prevented him of his purpose; whereupon the other in the mean time
reached him a desperate thrust, the which with a ready eye avoiding, he
requited with such a sturdie blow, that he felled him to the ground: And to
Beldanisus, who had wounded him in the shoulder, without any pause at all he
gave an overthwart blow on the left arm, that he cut the maile from his
sleeue, and the flesh to the bone. With these two blows they were put in such
a fear, that they thought it best to give back, studying rather to defend
themselves, then offend or hurt their enemy. Disteus seeing the victory in
his hands, did not cease to plie them still in such sort, that he made them by
one and one retire. But now by this time there was much people gathered
together, to part the effray, though by the darkness of the night one knew not
another. Whereupon Disteus, taking up his cloak, that he had cast down, got
himself out of the prease: and Sagastes to seek the man out, that had helped
him so well in that encounter, cared not to pursue his enemies, so that they
escaped then away unknown, without getting any thing of their purpose. Disteus
perceiving, that with so great desire they sought him, to do his feate the
better, and that which hereafter you shall hear, came to Sagastes page, and
putting a corner of his bandkercher in his mouth, because he would not be
known by his speech, said unto him. Let not thy Master take any care to know
who I am, for to morrow I will go my self to kiss his hands. The page went
with this errant, but Sagastes not content therewith, would have gone himself
to have spoken with him, if the page had not dissuaded him, saying. Sir, it is
no reason to molest him, that has done you no less a good turn, then the
saving of your life. It seems he would not now be willingly known, let him
therefore alone and trouble him not, since he has given you his word to come
to morrow and visit you. Thou say well (said Sagastes) and till then I
shall not be quiet in mind: for it has put me in a great wonder and confusion
to know who he might be, that so valiantly defended himself against three;
but in a greater, when I call to mind the words that he spoke, when he stepped
in to help me, That I should take it for a piece of service due to my sister
and his Mistress Dardanea. For they were such, that (had I not known Dardanea
well) would have put me in a great suspicion and jealousy of her. And besides
this, it comes also to my mind that if he be wounded (for he could not
otherwise escape) it shall be ill beseeming me, if I do not the best I can to
procure his health and revenge, although by the last he has sufficiently
accuited himself. Go tell him therefore from me what my desire and good will
is toward him, and that (before he be gone in haste to help himself) I will
not depart from this place. The page went, and being come to Disteus spoke thus
unto him. Sir, whosoever you be, my Lord Sagastes does kiss your hands, and by
me gives you to understand, that he prays the Gods may grant him but the lest
occasion and opportunity to serve you in any thing he may, and to requite the
great good turn, which he has this night received at your hands; who would
have come in person himself to thank you, but that the understands it is your
desire to co^ceale your self. He is also no less desirous to know who you
are, but he is loath to entreat you to any thing against your will, lest
perhaps, you would deny to do that you shall think good, although you have
forced him to be ever bound unto you. But for all this he would urge and oblige
you to fulfill your promise, to see him to morrow according to your word. He
prays you moreover to look well to your self, if you be wounded, and to take
some speedy order for your safety, saying, that until he see you go hence, he
will not depart from the place where he is. Tell thy Lord, answered Disteus,
that if I have done any thing for him, it was no more but a due debt which I
owe him, only for that he is brother to my Mistress Dardanea: and because he
may not be grieved in mind by not knowing who I am, tell him that I am
Placindus, nephew to Palna, free from wounds, and I must needs stay here all
alone about certain business that I have agreed upon, and that therefore he may
depart, since I am grieved in nothing, wherein his care may prevail me,
assuring him that to morrow I will stand to my word and promise. The Page
marvelled much that I had so valiantly helped his Lord and him, and as he
esteemed me in his mind for a tall man: so thought me to be ill brought up by
giving him so rude an answer. For Disteus of purpose would not answer him
with more humanity, though he could do it well, because there was no cause as
I told you to use him well, but only that he was brother to her, that was his
only joy. But the page thinking it proceeded of ignorance and want of good
education, mended (I think) the matter with his Lord touching my homely answer.
Sagastes woondred (and not without great reason) when he heard that it was I,
that had so manfully taken his part, and with that false opinion which from
that time he had of my valor, he went home, thinking still it was I, by whom he
received so great a benefit. Disteus also when he saw Sagastes gone, went home
to his own house, where he found me with fear for his long tarying, and
carefully attending his return. But when I saw him so ill entreated, I began
to change color, thinking he had been hurt, and therefore said unto him.
What means this Sir? How come you home in this sort? Trouble not thy self,
said Disteus, for I have no hurt: and now that thou have seen, how in thy
apparel (because I would not be known in Dardaneas house) I went to see thine
Aunt and my mother: So I also told thee that thine Aunt was to send thee of an
errant, the which because it lay in my way, I would also dispatch. The errant
therefore that Dardanea did will thee to do was this: But give good ear, and
loose not a word of that, which I will tell thee, because it behooues thee
much, and also because we may not both be taken in a lie. I say Dardanea
requested thee to go watch her brother, who (as it was told her) was
accustomed to go night by night out of his house, and to see whither he went.
But it fell out, that this night my self doing that, which was committed to
thy charge, after a good while that Sagastes came forth, I followed him, and
after this he told me particularly all the success, as you have now heard, and
somewhat more. When I heard of the singular favor and help that Disteus had
done to Sagastes, I was astonished to see that with so great zeal and courage
he had succored him, who was his mortal enemy, and therefore said unto him.
You have filled me Sir full of wonder, for it is beyond all sense and conceit
that you should be moved to put your life in danger for one, that would
bereave you of yours. Stay (said Disteus) and hearken how the matter falls out,
and thou shall know the whole cause, whereby thou shall understand how much
thou art beholding unto me. Thou must therefore know that to hear the music
the better (as I told thee) I came somewhat near, thinking that by wearing thy
apparel, I might not have been known, and because Dardanea might not think
of thee the worse, that being present there, thou did not help her brother
in so great danger, I thought good not for any love I bare him (whom I would
rather have pursued to death, then to defend him from it) but for thy sake
Placindus, to put my person in hazard. And therefore because it might be
thought, that thou were the man that came to help him, when I stepped in before
him, I said: Accept this small token of good will Lord Sagastes for my
Mistress Dardaneas sake, your virtuous sister. And now therefore that thou
know how al has happened, and that I charged thee not to forget the least
part thereof, give ear to the end, whereunto this particular discourse of mine
is adressed. To morrow thou shall go to my mother and carry her a letter
from me, and tell her what thou have done, touching that business which she had
given thee in charge, wherein all the whole matter shall consist. First,
because she may advise thee how to behave thy self with Dardanea, and with
any other that perhaps may ask thee how this matter passed. Secondly,
because she may set down some good order for that which is needful to be
done. After this, thou shall go and speak with Sagastes, to stand to thy word
(or rather mine to say better) where, (as thine Aunt shall instruct thee, and
as I have advised thee) thou shall speak unto him. Thou shall also carry this
sword with thee, because I think he will ask for it, for the good proof that
it made on the rapiers and daggers there. If he would know where thou had it,
tell him that when thine Aunt was with me, I gave it thee, and so I am sure he
will bestow some suites of apparel on thee in recompense of thine which were
spoiled and defaced in his defense. But thou must do me so much pleasure, not
to take them at his hands, but rather tell him, that thou carest not for any
other recompense, then that thou did it for Dardaneas service, being Mistres
to thine Aunt. In doing whereof, thou shall not only bind me, to bestow
this, and more on thee, but also her (when she shall know how thou did
adventure thy life for her sake) to requite this good turn, and ever hereafter
to make more account of thy manhood and fidelity: And, by denying to take any
reward at Sagastes hands, oblige her moreover to thine Aunt. The next day in
the morning I carried the letter that Disteus had written that night to mine
Aunt, and told her all that had passed.

As Placindus went on thus telling the pleasant discourse of Disteus and
Dardaneas loves, they all bent their cares to a certain noise that a horse and
his Master made, he to take him that ran up and down without his bridle, and
the horse unwilling to be caught, because he liked his liberty better. Which
when Placindus saw, with a merry countenance he aroseland said. I beseech you
sage Lady, and noble company, pardon me, for it shall ill become me if I go
not to help that Gentleman to get his horse again. And without more ado he
went and left them all laughing, and somewhat grieved to see how abruptly he
left them for so small a matter. To whom Felicia spoke thus. Think it not a
small occasion that has made him leave you thus, for it should ill beseem him
indeed (as he well considered no less) if he did not help him, that ran
after his horse, because he is a great friend to Disteus, called Martandrus,
who as you must know went out long since in company of Delicius and
Parthenius, to seek out Disteus and Dardanea: wherefore you should be the
rather glad of his coming at this time, because better then Placindus he can
tell you out the rest of these loves that Placindus has begun. If it be so,
said Lord Felix, and the Shepherdes, it shall not be likewise amiss for us
all to help him. And so rising up, they helped Martandrus to get his horse
again. But Martandrus, who (...) thou do bring me, I am not so: for I know
not whether I may reckon them in the number of good, or consort them amongst
the ill. On the one side, by giving credit to thy words, I see my brother free
from harm (which I pray the Gods may be true) and on the other, see not
wherein thou meanest to place mine honor with thy pretenses, which the Gods
also permit may not be hurtful. It likes me well to see my brother in health
and safe from wounds; but it would grieve me more to have mine honor (only in
thought) called in question. I am glad to know that my brother has been
defended in so great danger, but sorry that it was by Disteus. Thou might
have pleased me well Palna, and no less contented thy self, if with these
good news, thou had only told me that Sagastes was free from danger, and
not proceeded further to tell me, by whose means he escaped it. There was no
cause I think (for that which touches me so near, will not give me leave to
understand it otherwise) why Disteus help should be hidden from others, and
only made known to me. And because I find the thought thereof so highly to
offend mine honor: I will therefore not only speak of it, but, as though I
had heard it in a dream, quite forget it, commanding thee (if now thou
meanest not to go to thy Disteus again) never hereafter to open thy mouth in
any thing touching this matter, or that has but a taste thereof, upon pain of
my high displeasure, and abridging of that good will, which I have hitherto
borne thee. And that Placindus besides offer not to put foot in my house, or
else not to enter in that where Disteus dwells. When she had said thus,
without tarrying any longer to hear the fained excuse that Palna had already
prepared, in a great anger she went up to her chamber, where musing more
deeply upon the matter, the noble virtues of Disteus, and his bounteous mind
was presented to her tender thoughts, since for her man's sake and in defense of
his mortal enemy, he exposed himself to so manifest danger; and his approved
manhood and brave courage, whereby he got the victory of his enemies,
occurring jointly to her mind, and therewithal the golden praises which Palna
had so many times insinuated in her ears, all which she knew his general
fame did confirm, made her so content in mind, as that to a new borne
passion accompanied with sweet joy (but of what she knew not yet) she gave a
friendly welcome. Who being in these mild considerations, Sagastes came in
with Placindus (for as soon as he had spoken to his Aunt, he went to kiss
Sagastes hands) to comfort her, if perhaps she had known any thing of that
which was past: And as he found her all alone, and very pensive, he thought
that the late danger of his life had driven her into that sad and
melancholic mood, whereupon he deferred not to tell her all in order what had
passed, thinking she had not known it. To all which she gave an attentive
ear, for she took great pleasure to hear him tell it. But when he told any
thing of Placindus (whom as I said she knew to be Disteus) her color went and
came; but especially when he told that with valiant speed (when they had both
drawn forth their rapiers) he stepped in between them, desiring him to keep
out, and to accept that small token of duty and good will for the service he
owed to his Mistres Dardanea. The often changing of her color in her face gave
him no occasion of suspect, who thought it rather proceeded of fear, and of
thinking in what great danger he had like to been. After a few speeches past,
he took her aside, and charged her to gratify Placindus, telling her that he
would take nothing of him, and so he went his ways. Palna was not present at
any of these things, because she would not be an eye sore to her Mistres with
her presence, until her anger was somewhat past, who did not for all this
loose her hope; but meaning to handle the matter wisely, warned Placindus not
to go openly into Disteus house, excusing the matter to him, and that it was
to no other end, but that none might suspect, that it was he that helped
Sagastes: And because Sagastes and Dardanea (if they did know that he resorted
thither) would not bear him such good will as they were wont. Palna by no
means would make Disteus privy of Dardaneas answer and command, because she
would not give him so bad news, knowing that without great grief of mind
he could not suffer them. It is not needful (Gentlemen) to tell you here
what Sagastes did, until he knew who those were that assailed him: Let it
suffice that they were reconciled to Sagastes, who pardoned them because they
might do the like to Placindus. And Beldanisus could not choose but pacisie
himself, seeing that Marthea had cast him off, and was married to Sagastes. At
whose marriage, which with sumptuous and solemn feast and all kind of courtly
sports (too long to tell) was celebrated in the City, Disteus in disguised
sort was ever present: And in Tylt and Tourney (which for the greater honor
thereof Sagastes had ordained) got so much glory and reputation, that as his
heroical deeds and gracious demeanours were the common speeches of all the
kingdom; so did the praises of his valor and prowess importune so much
Dardaneas cares, that she was forced to love him a little more, especially when
by some secret means she understood that she was the only cause why all
those tryumphs were done in honor of her love and service. The which also in
particular by Disteus countenances and shows she not vainly gessed, although
with great regard of modesty and reverence he so behaved himself, that
whatsoever he did to make his fervent passion known, to his discredit, nor to
her dishonor did any ways redound. And now was she sorry and wished that she
had not so sharply chidden Palna, because she might have sometimes spoken to
her of Disteus, and durst not go forth to meet her in the way, because she
would not acquaint her with the secrets of her heart. And needless it was to
speak to her of it, who by secret and hidden signs conceived more then by
words Dardanea durst utter. For Palna like a wise and subtle woman made as
though she did not understand that, whereof she yet doubted, least thereby she
might have fallen into some new error, being not fully assured of Dardaneas
mind. And this she did to make her more gentle, and to discover her mind more
apparently, thereby to conduct her affairs to a better end. Disteus in the
mean time made all possible haste with Palna to bring him again to the sight
of his Mistres, or at least to manifest his pain unto her, or else to give her
a letter from him. All which Palna considering to be somewhat hard, did choose
the least, aduising him therefore to write, and promising him to find out some
way or other to conueigh his letter into Dardaneas hands, without any
suspicion or danger at all. For the better effecting whereof she devised
(because Dardanea might not think that they had any conference together, or
written to one another, and also because she might repose more trust and have
the better opinion in her) that he should also write to her, as if that letter
had been the first, wherein he should charge her to give Dardanea the other
letter that he wrote unto her, and to leave the care of all the rest to her
good endeavors, promising him to bring the matter to a good end; but upon su h
a condition, that he would have a little patience, if perhaps the answer were
deferred for some few days. Disteus, as Palna did counsel him, did write,
whose letters being received and come as fit to her mind as could be, she
durst not (for the reason abouesaid) deliver either of them to her Mistress,
as also because she would work her purpose more sure: which was, that knowing
when Dardanea had most need of her, or at such a time when she least thought of
such a matter, to withdraw her into an inner chamber next to her Mistresses to
read the letters, or to make as though he read them, because Dardanea at one
time or other (seeing her occupied) might take occasion to follow her, or set
some to spy what she did, thereby to come to the sight of them: Which fell out
so fit to her mind, as she could wish, for as often as she perceived her to go
out of her sight, she sent her waiting maid secretly after her, to see what
she did: wherein she was not to seek, who told her Mistress that she was
writing, and because she perceived her coming, did let certain papers fall
down by her. The desire that Dardanea had to know what she did write in so
great secrecy, was not small, and Palnas no less to have her see it. Whereupon
Dardanea went up and down musing in her mind by what means she might see it.
Palna (for this was her only desire) knowing her mind, did hide Disteus
letters, and with them another, wherein she answered him, with denial of his
demand to give his letters to her Mistress, and grave advise to forsake that
fond mind and purpose; and did put them in such a secret place, where she
thought they might not be easily found, to make her Mistresle think that by
no means she would have them come to any bodies hands. The more she made a
show to the contrary, the more did Dardaneas desire increase, although she
kept it secret to her self. Whereupon to come to the end of her desseignes,
one night after they had supped, she fained herself to be drowsy, and that
slumbring would not let her emploie that time in any other thing; and thereupon
withdrew herself to take a nappe, commanding that none should come in, nor
make any noise at al, and to make ready her pallet, that lay beside her bed,
and to shut up the windows close. All which being done she went in, and when
she thought Palna and her waiting maids were gone back again to their work,
she rose up, and opening Palnas chamber door very softly, sought for the
letters not so closely laid up, but that she found them out. Opening the first
that came to her hands (which was that which Disteus had sent to Palna) she
saw that it said thus.

Disteus his letter to Palna.
DIsteus to thee Palna sends health: After thou wentst from me (if unjustly I
know not) I only conceived one harm that thy absence procured me, by finding
my self deprived of her, whom I ever accounted for a mother, and this amongst
the rest I always thought the greatest. But how more dangerous it is for me
to have placed thy self with fair Dardanea, my heart only knows. For
seeking reasons to condemn thee for that, which in all men's eyes made thee
culpable, I found out good cause to give judgment against my self in that,
for which, I know not, if I deserve to be punished. I accused thy disloialtie,
and blamed thee for leaving me in such sort; but when I came to consider for
whom, I was not able to utter a word. O how many times would I have forgotten
this, and how many more have lost my life, not to have thought thereof. How
often did I endeavor to cast off such amorous fancies from me, thinking to
quench the flame that was kindled in me; and how many times did I find my
self enwrapped therein, the fire, that had already taken full possession of my
soul, reviving it self more in me. I will speak no more hereof, because all
is to mine own cost: but by the amorous milk that I have taken from thee,
most humbly pray thee, and for that great portion of amity and good will
which thou do owe me, to give this letter to my Mistress Dardanea, (happy
were I if she would accept it.) And with this I end, hoping that either my
passions or life will do no less.


Dardanea having now the letter in her hand that Palna sent to Disteus, she
first thought it best to see what Palna had written to him again in answer
thereof, and when she had opened it, she saw that it said thus.

Palnas letter to Disteus.
TO thee Disteus, thy servant Palna sends health. Thy virtuous and
magnificent mind has been no less manifest unto me by the late and passed
entertainment, which thou ever gave me, not being constrained thereunto, then
by this present letter, and by writing first unto me, not being bound to do it;
whereby the bounty of thy brave mind is apparent to me, and the worthiness of
thy high and noble blood (from whence thou art descended) well showen, and my
base condition not made unknown. I speak it not for that I have forsaken thee
for my Lady Dardanea, for of this I will never ask thee forgiveness, nor repent
me, but because (as I was bound) I wrote not first unto thee. And though I
have sufficient matter to excuse me, yet I will not allege it in mine own
behalf, because I do not desire to be pardoned. Thy sweet and loving letter
had affoorded me no small pleasure, if it had commanded me to do something,
wherein my poor ability might avail thee, though it had been to the cost of
my life. But I could not be but sorry, when I saw I could not pleasure thee,
of which fond request and oversight, in plainer terms (if by regard of due
obedience I were not restrained) I would flatly reprove thee: In denial
whereof (for I will not for all the world do any thing willingly, whereby I
might give my Mistress occasion of offense) I send thee thy letter again
which thou have sent me to deliver unto her. But because I may by something
pay that great debt which I owe thee, I would counsel thee (if I might) to
leave of such a thought, the contrary whereof shall be no less dangerous then
troublesome to thee, and without any profit at all. If in any other thing thou will try my good will and fidelity, I would take it for a special favor at
thy hands. The Gods keep thee in their protection.


Then she opened the letter that Disteus sent to her, to the grave style and
judicious conceate whereof, I pray you Gentlemen give an attentive ear.

Disteus his letter to Dardanea.
TO thee the comfort of all mortal men,
Of all men living the most comfortless,
Health (if discomfort any such can send)
If any left, does send with happiness.
I wish no ease of all my ceaselesse pain,
If that a thousand times when I did take
In hand to write to thee, I left again
My pen as often, when hand and heart did quake.
I launch't into the maine and broadest seas,
Knowing no port, nor friendly land, or coast
To sail unto (my shaken bark to ease,
With raging waves and furious tempests tossed)
For on the one side if I thought to write,
To make thee know my pain which thou have wrought:
Thy high deserts on the other came in sight,
To beat down such a far unworthy thought.
My wearied torments did command an I,
Thy souer aine highness did for bid a No,
And that command with reason did deny,
Such worthiness and glory it did show.
But after this proud boldness came in place,
Persuading me I should do well before
To write to thee: But fear did him disgrace,
And said I should but anger thee the more.
And therefore now as fear did over come
Brave boldness, and had thrown it to the ground,
And now that all my senses waxed numme
By fear, which did my feeble hope confound.
Courageously the God of Love came in,
And said, unworthy fear pack hence, away:
And come no more, for now thou shall not win:
I do command, Love does command I say.
And turning to me in this sort he said,
As by command, nor gently by request,
The fire (when once it is in flames displaide)
Hides not it self, but makes it manifest:
Even so it is impossible to hide
My fiery flames, from being sometimes known,
And though I would not, yet on every side
They issue out, that easily they are known.
Since then thy Nymph celestial must know,
Either too soon or late thy cruel flame,
Let first thy mouth declare to her thy woe,
Then to thy hand and pen commend the same.
I answered (God wot with fainting heart)
To write to her, it is my chief desire;
But if she chance to frown at this bold part,
O God defend my pen should cause her ire.
Thus Love at last perceiving what a faint
And hartlesse coward I was, in the end
He wrote to thee, by pitying of my plaint,
And in my name Love does this letter send.
And now because thy mind it may not move
To anger, by receiving of the same:
And if thou think thy honor I do prove,
Know from a God, and from no man it came.
Even from the God of Love, who is a God
Of highest birth, whose power does extend
In heaven, and earth, where he makes his abode,
Both paying tribute to him without end.
So that it is the mighty God of Love
That erres (if that in writing he does err)
Against Love therefore all thy anger move,
(If this to wrath thy modest mind may stir.)
Hark well (my dearest Mistress) what I say,
That if this letter breeds thy offense,
Be thou revenged of Love, which did assay
To write, and not of me for this pretense.
But by the way I tell thee as a friend,
That if with Love thou do begin to strive,
With nature and her laws thou do contend,
For making thee the fairest one alive.
For if she have of purpose given thee
Beauty, and grace, and in thy breast has framed
The only pattern of gentilitie,
That beauties Paragon thou may be named.
And to lay up her riches all in one,
Of all her treasure she has now despoild
The world, and made it poor in leaving none,
And to make thee the only one has toild.
Has she not reason then to be offended,
If by the gemme, where she her utmost tried,
She would have seen and known how far extended
Her passing skill, which thou do seek to hide?
Has she not reason to be angry, when
The pattern of her skill and only one
Hides from the world and buries in a den
Her treasures, which so feign she would have known?
For sure I know, if that thou meanest not
To love, thou buriest all her parts in thee:
And do thou think, that anything is got
By flying Love, and natures best decree?
And if thou think herein to do amiss,
Or hurt thy self by loving, yet at lest
Suffer thy self to be beloved. And this
Fond error drive out of thy tender breast.
O suffer of thine own accord and will,
For forced thou shall be to this for ever:
While thou and I do live, and shall be still
After thy death and mine, and ended never.
Then will me not (Dardanea) to forsake
My perfect love, which now I have bewraied:
For more thou do command the less I make
Account of it, and less shall be obaied.
And think thou art not wronged any whit,
Because what thou (fair Mistress) do command
Is not obaide, for here it is not fit
Where life for love and love for life is pawned.
Leave thou if that thou can the same thou have,
Yielding to nature, what so much on thee
She has bestowde, and change thy life that is past,
And leave moreover what thou mean to be.
Then shall thou see thy most unjust desire
Fulfilled, and will performed without defect,
Although thou did the contrary require,
As fearing colors with some vain suspect.
But now why should thou leave a perfect being,
By taking that which more imperfect is?
As first men's eyes the like was never seeing,
The second void of comfort, joy and bliss.
So that (sweet Mistress) it becomes thee not
To anger Love, and Nature to offend,
For thou art bound (whom they have not forgot)
Their laws to love, their essence to defend.
Since that thy beauties in the world resound,
And do in virtue hold the highest place,
And do in knowledge and in wit abound,
In modesty, and every other grace.
Make them illustrous then by thy requiting,
Take heed, Ingratitude is full of hate,
Hate to revenge is ever more inuiting,
And so revenge waits at obliuions gate.
And think not, that I speak these words in jest,
For to a cruel Goddess it belongs
This vice (which all the world does so detest)
To punish, and torment ungrateful wrongs.
And Nemesis the angry is her name,
Whose unresisted might who does not know?
Equal she is and never but the same,
Impartially to deal with friend or foe.
Alas I would she might not find in thee
So great a fault, as none more great then this,
Since from all other faults thou shall be free,
If but this fault alone thou will dismiss.
But thou may say, why should thy hapless fare
Trouble my mind, or thy good please my will,
Or what have I to do to take such care,
Whether thy fortune fallout good or ill?
To answer this, I cannot well reply,
Let it suffice thee, that the lest suspect
Of any harm thou have does make me die,
And worse then death torments me in effect.
Dear Lady, then I would not have thee prove
The cruel shaft of angrte Nemesis:
For first let each infernal power move
Their plagues against me of eternal Dis.
But now I would be glad if thou would taste
The sweet and golden flight of Cupids power,
Because my torments, which are gone and past,
Pity thou might and those I feel this hour.
For if thou knew'st my pains and pitious case,
With pity and tears thou would my life deplore,
Not for my merits, which are very base,
But for my love, which well deserves more.
Each thing that is created here so fit,
An equal having in a diverse kind,
In such like kind a payment does admit,
By measuring the debt that is behind.
But as fell love no equal does contain,
In such a diverse kind and different,
By self same thing it paies it self again:
Love must be paid with love of good intent.
Then since it is most evident and clear,
That I do prize thy love at such a rate,
Thou must requite my love again so dear,
If Nemesis ingratitude does hate.
But if thou do not purpose to requite
The love, that I have borne, and bear thee still;
And with like love to ease my heavy plight,
And grievous pains for thy procuring ill:
My hands of life shall then undo the chain,
But not of love (by death to ease my death)
And so requite me, when no other mean
Is left, to make me still enjoy this breath.
For sure if that my life be of this sort,
My life is death, and dying is my life:
My death is sweet, a pleasure, joy and sport,
Lining in such a world of amorous strife.
But now I cease, my tears fall in such store,
And painful soul for grief can write no more.
O how wisely have thou done Martandrus (said Lord Felix) by warning us to be
attentive, for this letter does well beseem the person of a discreet and
enamoured Gentleman, with what modesty and fear did he write it. And how true
is that (said Danteus) which is almost in the end of it, That all things in
this world in a different kind may be paid, as grass with sheep, sheep
with cloth, and finally all with money; but only love, the which, because with
no other thing it has neither equality nor proportion, cannot but with love
be recompensed again. For touching my self I know, that though my
Shepherdess Duarda would give me all that she has in the world; yet she could
not pay me that she owes me, if she denied me her love. Felismena preventing
Duarda that was about to answer him, said. Let us leave this for this time:
And as you love your self (Sir) tell on, because we may know what this Lady
did with such a letter; for I know not what she was able to answer again, but
to yield her self to his love, whereupon I think she durst not take in hand
to answer so wise reasons. Not so Lady (said Martandrus) for I assure you
that Dardanea is not such an one, that the high sense and style thereof could
put her to a nonplus; in proof whereof you shall see it by her answer. But
because we may not discontinue so sweet a discourse I will proceed.

This letter was of so great effect in Dardaneas tender heart, that now in
every point she perceived her self yielded to Cupids forces: The which her
cristalline tears that issued out of her clear eyes, did make so manifest,
that she was unable to stay them, although many times in vain she labored the
contrary. But as she could not satifie her self with reading it once or twice
over, the more she read it, the more her love increased: For knowing Disteus
his virtues and valor to be great, and therewithal considering the quality
of his person, and with what mild modesty and discretion he wrote this
letter, the well conceived words thereof were so forcible in her mind
imprinted, that they strangely disposed it to entertain most loving thoughts
of him that wrote them. Her kind and tender heart was no less pierced with
pity, and compassion when she understood in what extremities his love
consisted, since by the sequel of his letter she perceived how abruptly he
ended; whereby he manifested the forcible passion that he had in writing of his
pains and sorrows: To all which no mean motives in her conquered mind this
moreover occurred, that he offered to expose himself to any danger of death
for Sagastes his mortal enemy, only to do her service, that never yet had
showed him the least favor in the world. So that love assayling her on the one
side (which till then had not notably signorized in her) and her honor and
virtuous reputation (which she had ever religiously observed) pressing her on
the other, drove her vsetled thoughts into such suspense, and troubled her
doubtful mind, that being ignorant what course to take, or what remedy to
choose out for the best, since she would neither offend this, and could not
choose but obey that, she was between two contraries so mightily assaulted,
that to yield to one without prejudice to the other, she would in a manner
have lost her dearest life: which sorrowful thoughts hiding in her secret
breast, and the letters in her amorours bosom, she went to her chamber, where
casting her self upon her bed, and lying flatling upon her pillow, thus she
lamented to her self.

O what shall become of thee Dardanea, being assailed by two such opposite
enemies! O heavenly Diana! O invincible Venus! How have you both with your
divine powers seized on my yielding soul? How could you, being so great
Goddesses, make your habitation and seat in so humble a sublect, and in so base
and little a house as this is? And being so contrary and capital enemies, how
have you determined to your content, and my loss to deraigne a hard and
mighty battle in such a tender and weak field? Why will you execute your
unresisted forces in the feeble breast of a yielded and captive woman? Feign
would I not open the gates Diana, whose name I honor to thy contrary; but
pardon me, since I have not my wonted forces: for importunate Venus knowing how
strongly this tower of thinc was defended, and being driven many times from it,
has now employed all her force in the enterprise, and conquest of it. O noble
Disteus, if thy words be fained (which the Gods forbid) then is my death
certain. But why should I think so when as thou are Disteus, whose name
includes all generous virtues: and I Dardanea, whose mind such thoughts does
ill beseem. Alas poor Gentleman, how ungratefully does Palna thy nurse
requite thy favors which she confesses thou have bountifully bestowed on her,
since from thy first desire (a matter but of small consequence) she so bitterly
repelled thee by denying to give me a letter, which to her hands, next to my
heart thou did so earnestly commend. What will thou say, nay what shall I do,
since she that was the soul and only means, will have nothing to do with the
matter, which she her self did first begin. Could thou not (Disteus) or were
thou affraide to open thy greese unto me, or was I unable or too timorous to
manifest my passion unto thee? Tell me cruel Palna, what leave had thou to
send back again the letter, that was only directed to me, by not letting me
once see it. Was it not meet thou should do that, thy master commanded
thee, and that which was expedient for me? But alas thou art not in fault but
I, and therefore will I only take the punishment on my self, and excuse thee
from blame. For since I have entreated thee so sharply, when thou did speak
to me of Disteus, and in such things, which did not any ways offend my honor,
thou have then reason to use me cruelly in that, wherein my help and remedy
does chiesly consist.

And thus putting filence to her grief, she went musing what means she might
use, to make Palna give her the letter, whereby she might have some good
occasion to write unto Disteus, and in the end resolved to take Palna on the
sudden with the letters in her hand, and to see them against her will, as she
could not otherwise imagine: Whereby the means to answer him again might be
fitly offered her. This determination being put in practice, when Palna had the
letters in her hand (for as I said, she read them many times of purpose to be
seen) Dardanea came into her chamber, and she faining as though she would hide
them, Dardanea importuned her to see them, commanding her in the end to tell
her to whom, and what she wrote. But she that desired nothing more, making some
simple excuses, as though she were not content therewith, at last showed them:
which, when Dardanea saw, faining that she was angry with Disteus, she
commended her that she had so wisely answered him, though it sufficed not (as
she said) for so presumptuous and bold a part, and that she would therefore
answer him with another letter to supply the want of hers, to warn him, not
once in thought to imagine, speak, or write of it again. In the end whereof
she purposed to tell him, by what means the letter came to her hands, because
both of them might be blameless. The which thing she did put immediately in
practice, and so began to write: The letter being ended, she read it to Palna,
and thus it said.

Dardaneas answer to Disteus.
TO thee the most presumptuous without leave,
Counsel, not health, by these few lines I send,
That am more fearful then thou may conceive:
If that I thought mine honor to offend
By answering thee, constraind as thou may see,
Or answering not, it might the more extend,
Rather then I would thus much pleasure thee,
Or would vouchsafe to take my pen in hand,
First would I take a sword to murder me.
Mine end is good, and does with virtue stand,
And if thou do think otherwise then so,
Thou art deceived as much as any man:
For if my reason soundly thou will know,
And weigh my words but with attentive mind,
And note each sentence that herein I show:
By all the foresaid thou shall only find,
How I pretend to give thee sound advise,
And wholesome counsel fit for one so blind:
Which is, that thou leave of this enterprise
(If that thou can) and fly a thought so vain,
Or at the least conce ale it from mine eyes.
I know not, and the ground cannot obtain,
That made thee write to me this other day:
Nor yet from whence such boldness thou might gain.
But now I do remember thou did say,
That love, not thou, those loving lines did write,
Because it did thy mind too much dismay:
Fancies they are, like to the dreams by night,
Common to lovers (if there any be)
To manifest his childish toies so light.
Poor God of love, thy servants all agree
As many as do wait upon thy train,
To lay their faults most commonly in thee:
If childish toies I said: do not disdain:
For this God, whom thou do so much obey,
Is but a child, thy words do show it plain.
Thou seem to show the same by words, I say,
By deeds I know not, nor I do pretend
To know, though deeds by words thou do display.
Which last of all in men I comprehend,
Which are more words then works in plain effect:
In case this God of love their minds offend,
If that your hearts so plainly could detect
That, which your mouth expresses by her voice,
We should not hold your loves in such suspect.
But truth it is, I do no whit rejoice,
For nothing it concerns me at all,
To hear thee vaunt thee of thy love and choice:
And that as firm as any brazen wall,
And more then rocks upon the shorie sands,
In fortunes favor or in fortunes thrall:
That like an Oak against the wind it stands,
Like hardest Dimond to the beating steel,
Like Salamander in the flaming brandes.
And that again it turns like the wheel,
And wauers more then beams of shaken glass,
More then the waves, that tumble still and reele,
More changing then the weathercocke (Alas)
In towers, and more then Cynthia in her sky:
And more then men in love their lives that pass.
This hurts me little, nor I care not I,
Wherefore it shall be better for thy ease,
Not to love her, that does thy love deny.
Then seek some other with thy love to please
Against thy love that will not so rebel,
And where thou may swim in contented seas:
For (sooth) thy person has deserved well
To be beloved of some other dame,
For many gifts in which thou do excel.
There is no Lady, but would wish the same,
Nor scorn thy love, but ever think her blessed
That she might call thee by her lovers name.
And sooner shall thou want (to match thy breast)
A Lady fit (respecting thy desert)
For none come near (though yet accounted best)
Of purpose he ere thy praises I insert,
For thou did so much wander in my praise,
That only this for thanks I do reuert.
And words for words do give thee now in paise,
And if thou have extolled me much better,
So all thy gifts in every place I blaze,
Ungrateful thou did call me in thy letter,
And there the proof was false and very vain,
And therefore thou must yet remain my detter.
Although it were not so, thou said again
That I was bound to love, in being fair,
So worldling like thine argument was plain.
But see how reason does the same impair,
For brighter does each woman's beautte shine,
The more she shines in praise of virtues rare.
So that I shall make nature more divine,
In following Dianas honest train,
Then Venus steps, or her fond discipline.
To please her son I ever thought it vain,
Since him I cannot, and Diana please,
For she is chaste, dishonest is his chain.
To serve Apollos sister, sweetest ease
And greatest honor by her love is got.
Who serves fond love is drowned in doleful seas.
If after Venus son thou art so hot,
And do intend to follow his desires,
If so it please, then how may thou not?
I do not mean to love what he requires:
And let this God even work with me his fill,
He never shall consume me in his fires.
Let him not seek but her, that seeks her ill,
Let him not wound but those that love his wounds,
Nor subject those that care not for his will.
But now I know not to what purpose soundes
These reasons, that dissuade me to embrace
Cupid thy God, that reason still confoundes.
Since that unto my will he gives place,
And on the same his liking does depend,
Reason in me his colors do deface.
It Is therefore reason, to the which I tend,
And great it is, since it does satisfy
My mind, and does the same so well defend.
Thou writ'st, that if to love thee I deny,
That I would suffer thee to love me yet,
Against my will for love yet will thou die.
A pretty means procoeding from thy wit,
To pray me not thy dear love to prevent,
Yet will I nill I thou to practice it.
I grieve I cannot hinder this intent,
But if (in fine) perforce unto my pain
thou will love me, perforce I must consent.
If that from being loved, I could remain,
(As from all love) in faith I never would
Have left it to thy choosing to abstain.
For he that loved me with such rigor should
Be punished, that he should have thence no soul
To love me, if his love prevent I could.
But I Will do that which no man shall control,
Which is that none presume to manifest
His love to me so wanton and so bold.
Let therefore punishment thy mind suggest,
To move this fancy from thy idle mind,
A fancy first conceived within thy breast,
Of no good ground where hope thou can not find:
Hope is exiled where honor takes place;
Honor is dear to women of my kind:
Virgins I mean, and living in the face
Of all the world with honor and renown.
Which if it be but staind, each other grace
She has, with no recou'rie falls down.
If then these few persuasions cannot make
Thee change thy mind, nor now this present frown,
Nor trembling hands, which now for anger shake
By writing of these lines with little rest,
Nor fear of punishment make thee forsake
This fond conceit nurc'd vainly in thy breast,
When thou may never hope to have a day;
Then let mine honor move thee (at the lest)
To make thee hide this fire (if you may)
Wherewith thou say thy breast is so inflamed:
Mark this, and let thy wits not so estray.
If that thou say, that hardly is reclam'd
The fire of love, and hardly hid again;
To tell it Palna less thou shall be blamed.
But since thy hope incertaine is and vain,
And all thy harms most sure, then open the door
(To help thee) to oblivion and disdain.
And thus I end in hope to hear no more.
Martandrus interrupting Felismena that would have praised the letter, and have
noted some things in it, prosecuted his tale thus. Dardanea having made an end
of reading the letter, was not yet so quiet in mind, but that she gave true
tokens of that which remained in her breast. Whereupon, and by the gentle and
mild words in her letter, Palna understanding how fitly it made for her
purpose, did finely dissemble the matter, and praised her for answering his
letter so well, harping still upon that string, that she was obliged to her
honor and good name. But because the severe style of the letter might not
daunt Disteus, she secretly sent him another, wherein she advised him what he
had to do, after so good a beginning: which might be gathered by some words of
the answer: for proof whereof, he might perceive that she had written no
austere and sharp letter, wherein if any bitterness had escaped her pen
unawares, she did straight moderate it with a hidden temper of mildenes.
Aduising him besides to note, that when she warned him to surcease his love
unto her, she said unto him (if thou can) correcting her-selfe in a matter,
that made so greatly for her own mind; and to consider how greatly these
affairs did trouble her, who was continually thinking on them, and that she
was not persuaded that he loved her from his heart; but above all things, to
take heed how much it stood him in hand to keep this secrecy, which she
committed unto him. Palna moreover persuaded him to hope well, since Dardanea
took delight in hearing these affairs, whereof she made her her only
secretary. Finally not to be tedious to you with so long a discourse, a few
days after Palna used so great diligence, that she got that out of Dardanea,
which she kept so secret in her breast; but could never win her to speak
with Disteus, unless he would first promise and swear to marie her, which was
so joyful news to him, who thought he wanted nothing more to make him the
happiest man alive. So that this being done, Dardanea (though at the first she
made it somewhat coy) gave him leave to come to her house, where they inioyed a
little while each others company in sweet and pleasant conversation, with all
respect of reverence and modesty that was requisite in such a case: At the
end whereof (the pleasanter the biginning was, more bitter was the sequel,
since at the first love seldom affoords one little pleasure without
distempering it in the end with sorrow and care) it fell out that Disteus
having gone very early to Dardanea, and Palna not remembering to shut the door
after him, they lay together in one bed which was made ready for them in a
fair and large Summer chamber beneath, where they had before sometimes lain
together: For Palna (when Disteus was come in) was warned to shut a certain
door, which was a passage into all the house, because no maid nor servant
might come down and go through that way. But as she remembered not also to shut
the street door, which they thought was safe enough, Sagastes by chance came
in suspecting least of all any such matter. Disteus perceiving a greater noise
in the chamber then a woman's treading could make, covered himself the best he
could with the clothes of the bed. If Dardanea was not altered by seeing her
brother (judge you Gentlemen) though then it stood her in hand to dissemble
it. Sagastes sat him down in a chair at the beds feet, and asked her what
the matter was that she went to bed so soon. Who answered that she was not
well at ease, and was therefore minded to take some Physic. Sagastes hearing
this, would have been gone, but turning his face (for now he was on that side
of the bed where his sister lay) and seeing a little stirring in the bed, asked
her who was a bed with her. Dardanea answered it was her Niece (for she kept a
little child of one of her gentlewomen, the which (because she loved it well)
she called her Niece:) but Sagastes thinking it was more then a childs
stirring, did thrust up his hands between the sheets to feel the feet,
Disteus as softly as he could drawing them up. But as Sagastes thrust up his
arm so far, that Disteus knew he could not keep himself any longer hidden,
with both his hands he lifted up the clothes of the bed, and cast them so
happily on Sagastes, that they covered him all over, and therewithal leaping
out of the bed, as though he would have laid hands on him, Dar danea made him
signs to be gone. Disteus followed her counsel, who being in his shirt ran
out a pace, whom Sagastes (after he had unfolded himself from the clothes)
laying his hand on his rapier followed with might and maine not knowing him.
Disteus by dark and secret places thought to convey himself away, but as the
night was somewhat clear, he could not: So that what way soever he went
Sagastes, followed him. And if he was sometimes out of his sight as in some
narrow and by lanes, the people told him which way he went. Disteus therefore
running in this sort, and Sagastes after him, he took a house, because he
would not be known of the people that made a great clamor to see a man run
away in his shirt, and another following him with a naked rapier in his hand.
Scarce had he recovered the house, when Sagastes came to the very door. But
Disteus kept him out by shutting of a door at the stairs foot, and sought
something to defend himself being naked; yea, and to hurt his enemy if he
could. Sagastes labored to burst the door in pieces to come in, and cried out
so loud to them within, to open him the door, that if they did not, he would
so cruelly punish them, that they should know what it was to harbor an
unknown thief, of whose fact he made them no less guilty then the
principal: Whereupon the Master of the house that by this time was come to see
what a noise there was, (fearing Sagastes threats) came to lay hands on his
guest and to deliver him into Sagastes hands. But perceiving it was Disteus,
whom all the city and country so much loved, he fell down on his knees,
beseeching him to convey himself out of a window at the backside of the
house, because he durst not but open his door to Sagastes; and therefore gave
him an old cloak and a sword, for he had no time to give him any more.
Disteus by this counsel which he held for good, and by necessity, as the case
required, being forced to fulfill his friends request, yielding him great
thanks for his courtesy, went out. Sagastes was melting in his own heat and
anger, that they would not open the door, and swearing he would kill as many
as he found in the house. Whereat the Master of the same, (after he had showed
Disteus the way to escape) feyning as though he had not known what the matter
was, came down, and asking who knocked, opened the door. Sagastes caused him
straight to be taken and bound, and searching every corner of the house, but
not finding him, whom he sought, came to him again, swearing by the life of
the king, that if he told him not where the man was, or who he was that came
into his house, he would presently hang him up at his own door. At which
words the good man being afraid, told him (as he heard) that it was Disteus.
Sagastes did easily believe it, for he thought none durst have been so bold
to injury him in such sort but only he: So that seeing he had escaped him,
without staying any more, he went to Disteus house with a great number of
people following him. But no sooner did Sagastes run out of his sisters house
to follow Disteus, but she locked her door and told Palna what had happened,
requesting her best and speedy advise in that matter, and to bethink her of
some remedy, that was best for them. Palna at these unexpected news was in
such a maze and confusion, that she could not answer her a word: But weighing
the danger that Disteus was in, and love encouraging her (for she accounted
him as her son) she answered. Do you dear Mistress what you think good;
for I mean in every peril to follow my son Disteus, for whom I shall arm
my self with no less courage and constancy to suffer grief and sorrow, then
I did to give him contentment and pleasure, so that in few words my
resolution is to know what is become of him: For if his person (which the Gods
forbid) has suffered any harm, I will not enjoy mine, nor live in this world
without his company. Wherefore you must pardon me (good Lady) for laying all
fear aside, I will either die or know what is become of my beloved Disteus. It
greeues me that I am forced to leave you in such a trance and extremity all
alone, and in a time of so great need, but dear Lady there lies no more in my
power to perform. Dardanea with more tears and sighs, then well ordered
reasons said. Time will not give me leave to answer to that which thou have
spoken, nor to make thee know my mind, and whether the love which I bear to
Disteus my loving husband and almy joy, be of less weight then thine toward
him, who was thy nurse child and all thy comfort. It would grieve me thou
should have such an opinion of me, if I knew not to manifest it by and by.
For this thou may at least believe of me, that since for the greatest I had
courage enough; for the lesser, I will have no less. Lady, said Palna, here
is but little time, as you said, to use many words, and therefore determine
what you mean to put in practice, for I will do all that you command me, upon
condition that it be not to forsake my son. I will not command thee any such
thing (answered Dardanea) but that which I have determined to do, is that as
well for the great love I owe unto my loving Lord (for without him I will not
live) as for the fear I have of my brother, I will not stay here. Then if it
be so (said Palna) I think it best for me to carry Disteus some garments, and
for you to get the best jewels you have together, and then for us both to go
to my Nephews house: for we being escaped and hidden, we shall not only
prevent this present danger; but time and mature consideration shall discover
to us what course is best to be taken. Whereupon putting this in practice, they
went to Placindus house: To whom disclosing the foresaid loves (for to that
time they were known to none but Palna) and telling what happened the same
night, they prayed him to go and enquire what was done. Sagastes understanding
it was Disteus as I told you, went to seek him at his own house, where
finding the door open, knew he was not come, and therefore stayed for him
there until he came. But when he had awaited there a good while in vain, he
suspected he had taken some of his friends houses, and therefore went home
again to his sisters lodging, vowing to be well revenged of Disteus; though he
would feign have that night satisfied his unruly anger, which was not a little
augmented, when he found neither Dardanea nor Palna, maruelling very much to
see how quiet all his sisters servants were, and how strange they made it
all, when Sagastes demanded the matter of them. Disteus that was going home to
his house, when he saw a far off a great number of people before his door,
it made him think (as it was true indeed) that Sagastes was waiting for him,
whereupon he went to my house; whereby he made me know what great affiance he
had in my friendship, which I accounted no small credit unto me. I doubt not
Gentlemen, but any (that has been attentive to my tale) will ask me, how
Sagastes came first to his enemies house, since Disteus went before out of the
man's house, which he was constrained to take for refuge. Whereunto it may be
easily answered, that Disteus going (as you know) almost naked, and therefore
leaving the open and common streets to go about by lanes and secret places,
came later then Sagastes. But when Disteus unlooked for came into my house,
without calling, but shutting the door after him, least any had followed him,
he came into my study: And his hap was so good that he found me al alone. I did
not a little wonder to see him in such sort, and therefore demanded the cause
of his coming and in such a manner. Who answered me that he had no time for so
large a report, but prayed me to give him some apparel, and a horse, and what
else was needful for him, which I only denied him not, but also preparing my
self to bear him company, he would in no wise let me, for he meant to
conceal (until he could no longer) his secret love and affection from me. He
therefore being apparelled, and furnished with the best offensive and defensive
weapons he could choose out, went to help Dardanea, least her harebraine
brother in his fury might have laid violent hands upon her, or else to die in
the quarrel, before she should suffer any harm at all. Going therefore about
this matter, he met with Placindus, that was coming to seek him out, by his
Aunts commandment, whom he asked if he knew any thing. Placindus told him,
how he should find Dardanea and Palna in his house, and that he should go
thither quickly, because Dardanea was the most sorrowfullest woman in the world
for his danger. Disteus went thither out of hand: but knowing that place to be
nothing so convenient and secret, as their present necessity required, because
(by missing Palna) Sagastes would out of hand come thither; he brought them to
my house, willing Placindus to lie still and take his rest, because he might
thereby make them believe, that he knew nothing of the matter. All three might
come secretly to my house, because as siths that was not far from Placindus
lodging, so were they both out of the concurse of people and walk of
neighbors; and also because Sagastes was gone to the King to complain of the
injury that Disteus had done him, whom he requested to command a search to be
made in all suspected houses that were thought most fit to harbor him, and
Dardanea and Palna. The King not only granted hereunto (for as you know he
desired to have the least occasion, whereby he might throw down Disteus
party, to pleasure Sagastes) but took this matter upon him as his own, and
swear to behead Disteus, and as many as were culpable, and every one that
afterward helped him And therefore (to favor him the more) made Sagastes
himself judge in his own cause, because he might take the greater revenge at
his own pleasure. Who, when he saw so good a means for his desire, without more
ado beset Disteus house with a privy watch, having first searched it all
through, where missing him, he went straight to seek out his sister. They
employed all diligence and labor they thought needful to bring their purpose
to effect; but my house they ouerslipt, because as it was not pliable enough to
Disteus his party, nor I my self held for his friend, so was I free from all
suspicion that I kept him. But when they could not find him, he commanded a
proclamation to be made, that every one upon pain of his head, that harbored
them, or knew where they were, should bring them forth: and afterward
apprehended Anfilardus and Placindus, and as many as they suspected could tell
of them, threatening them to cruel torments, yea, and putting some in practice,
though all in vain to their purpose. It could not choose but kill Disteus his
heart to see the ruin of his house, and the imprisonment of his friends and
family, who did nevertheless comfort himself not a little, because it was
for his Lady and Mistress sake, whom he had now in happy possession, the
which thing he forgot not by many sweet and loving words to manifest unto her:
who could not for all this be comforted, (though she made him not privy to her
inward grief) when she thought of the unjust and ill name (a thing that
grieved her more then death) that was spread abroad of that, which she esteemed
more then life, and when she entered into consideration and fear of the
imminent danger wherein her beloved husband was, by means of the great
searching and awaites that Sagastes had laid in all places to find them out:
Wherefore taking him aside, she said thus unto him. I know well my Lord, that
my Fortune would not leave me without some sorrowful occurrent in so sweet an
estate, nor to do less with me then ever turn most bitterly against the
pretense of my content. It greeues me to see thee take and taste some part of
my sorrow, wherein yet I do comfort my self again, that I shall not be the
last in offering up my life for the least danger for thy sake, since I was the
first in sacrificing my soul to thy will, obtesting almighty God that as I
had no force with my feeble judgment to gainsay thy desire, I had also
sufficient valor with my life to deliver thee from these most wrongful
turmoyles. I see thee here in great extremities (for mine own I account but
small) and therefore my opinion concurring with my desire is, that since for
many days we are neither safe here, nor in any other part of the kingdom are
like to be no less, thou would resolve to convey us into any place, where
we might in more safety over pass this cruel storm of Fortune, assuring
thee my dear Lord, that if I saw thee free from danger, I would not take care
for the rest. I might well pass over this new bond, my sweetest Lady answered
Disteus, with many more already past, wherein after that I was thine, thou have
so much obliged me, since I was never able yet to discharge them, the which
(unless the unspeakable love which I have borne thee, and wherein I mean to
die does not with favor come in part of their account and satisfaction) must
still remain (the more my grief) in their former force, when as the
disproportion of my small ability can never counteruaile their increasing
value. I have remembered and weighed that with my self, which thou did
command me, but would not hitherto tell thee so much, fearing to give thee any
occasion of sorrow by absenting thy self from thy friends and kinsfolks, and
from thy house, and quiet rest, to carry thee to some uncouth place amongst
strangers to live in poverty and unrest. If you regard this my Lord, said
Dardanea, you do also forsake this and much more. But admit I leave all this,
and you nothing at all, in not leaving you, I might well think I left nothing
at all. No more of this said Disteus, but were it not fonfeare of thy trouble
and harm, I would desire no other heaven in this world then to have thee
continually in my presence: But let us make my mother privy of it, who will
counsel us as she has done, what is best for us, and direct us in all our
matters. They therefore calling Palna unto them, and telling her their minds,
she said. And know ye my good son and daughter, that Martandrus and I were
also talking of the same matter, who is no less troubled in mind, fearing
there will be a search made in his house, whereby great harm may befall us,
and no good to him at all. I would not tell you of it, because you might not
think he did it for any fear that concerned him. When she had said thus, she
called me before them, and Disteus began to say thus unto me. If I knew thee
not to be a faithful friend Martandrus, I would not have put the weight of so
great affairs in thy trust and secrecy, nor omit with words (since I cannot
with deeds) to gratify that which thou have done for me. But as I have
experimented, and do yet try the contrary, I hope, thou will not blame me,
if I make not some outward and apparent show of thanks for it: But for the
present remedy of our dangerous estate, we are determined to fly the fury
of our king with the absence of our persons; for which escape we crave not
only thy advise, but assistance, and how it may be done without our
discovery. Concerning that supposed debt (said I) which you my good Lord
confess you owe me, I will not answer you, but only touching that, which you
have committed to my charge, since it has pleased you to make mine the
greater, by having amongst all others, chosen me out for your only friend,
which I esteem more then all that I did ever for you in my whole life, all
which were it ten times more, is nothing in respect of this favorable trust
which you repose in me. As for the rest let every one of us think what we have
to do, and how to take the best course. Al four of us therefore laying our
heads together in counsel, after a great while every one having told his
opinion, as mine was thought the best, so was it allowed and chosen, which was,
That since Sagastes had placed watchme^ in the city gates, and especially by
night, that none might pass, unless he were known what he was, the best way to
get out was, that I should cause three carts to come that evening from my
farm (for they knew I had a Farm but three miles out of the city) to bring
certain provision from thence for my house, and other things, though I had no
need of them: So that the carts might come thither at Sunset, and go empty
back again the same night when it began to wax dark, because seeing them to
go home again without any thing, they might not suspect our drift, and yet
(though they had looked narrowly into the Carts) might as little have suspected
any such matter; for under them I had devised to bind certain great sackes at
length, with their mouths open, in each a piece every one to put themselves,
and to send the Carters after they had unladen (because they might not be
privy to it) to some place or other, while in the mean time I dispatched our
secret affairs, having made means before in my Farm that it might not be
known of any: All which was done in such sort, that there was not as much as
any suspicion of the matter. The same night that I carried them to my Farm, we
all went to counsel what way we might best devise for three of them to go out
of the kingdom to some solitary place, where they might not be pursued, and
live unknown. And our conclusion was, that Disteus should take one of those
Carts, and make himself a Carter, and Dardanea and Palna in poor apparel go
out of the kingdom, and in the best manner they could, in habits clean
different from their estates pass into Tynacrta, and that from that place,
where they made their aboade, write to me of their success. Still did Sagastes
set watch and ward in every place (for it was his chiefest desire to catch
Disteus) that none of them might escape, whose eruell purpose yet (and not
without reason) the fury of his anger did change. For as he knew that all men
loved Disteus, and that all his friends (if without just cause he apprehended
and punished him) would discover themselves and bandie against him, and by
these means (perhaps) draw himself into great danger: So was he not a little
content to see the head of the contrary side taken away, and his capital
enemy absent, whereby he thought to do well enough with the rest. But yet he
knew not that his sister was likewise gone with him, but thought she was in
some of her kinsfolks houses. So that Disteus being absent, Sagastes might
confiscate his goods and condemn him for a traitor, since he appeered not at
the Kings call, by whose command Sagastes seized indeed upon all Disteus lands
and his Sisters goods, which were not a few. Here is no time to tell you,
Gentlemen, of the tears, that were spent between me and my noble guests at
their departure: But that Disteus prayed me by my self or by my friends to
help Anfilardus and Placindus the best I could, and to get them out of prison,
for this was the only thing (he said) that did trouble him. So that they being
gone from me, and I from them in body, Disteus went, as I told you, to
Tynacria, where (as afterward I understood) buying a little flock of sheep
to dissemble his noble condition with this base estate, they were some days
there, perhaps with more hearts ease then in Eolia, because they enjoyed there,
without any fear and danger, their sweet contents, and were well beloved and
reverenced of all the Shepherds thereabouts, who endeavored to do them all the
pleasure they could; sometimes with rural sports and games; other times with
dances and pastoral music. To all which Disteus so well applied himself,
that in a short time he far excelled them all. And so for this respect, as
for his affability and mildnes, by knowing how to converse with all, that
Shepherd thought himself unhappy, that had not some private friendship with
Coryneus (for so he named himself after he had changed his habit:) and
Dardanea that named her self Dinia, was no less acceptable to all the
Shepherdesses, and Palna called Corynea, like her son, was reverenced of them
all. When all three went from me, Dardanea was gone two months with child:
but what God sent her, or what became of the child she brought forth, I know
not, for they had not dwelta whole year in that country, when they went away
for what cause, or whither, I also know not. The cause whereof (considering the
time wherein they went away) I suspect was this. That in this mean while King
Rotyndus married with the Kings sister of that Province where they were; whose
wifes brother a little while after being dead, an uncle of hers (called
Synistius) aspired to the kingdom, as Competitor with her. For the which cause
Rotyndus making war against him, with little loss of his men got the
victory, whereupon a peace was concluded between them; and the government of
the kingdom, by the intercession of Agenesta his niece (for so was the Queen
called) given frankly to Synistius. So that Disteus as soon as the noise of
this war was bruted abroad, went as I conjecture (because he would not be
known) from that country with his petty family. From which time I could
never hear more of them, though many days have passed since Ansilardus and
Placindus went out to seek them: And omitting mine own travels (Gentlemen) and
many troubles that I passed in the like enterprise, because they make not any
whit to the purpose of your demand, I will only tell you, how these two
servants of theirs went out so soon, being (as I told you before) imprisoned,
and I so late, being, as you have also heard, at liberty. When King Rotyndus
married his Queen, in joy of the feast, all the prisoners were let go,
amongst whom Anfilardus and Placindus came out, and six months after (to make
Sagastes suspect it the less) by venturing their lives (for upon pain of
death it was commanded that none should go seek out Disteus) they went to the
place, where I told them they were. At which place when they could not find
them, they concluded, by seuering themselves to seek them out, appointing to
meet at that place a year after, to know how they had sped; and because the
one might not go that way, or take in hand that the other did. Whereof as of
all things else, though they for the space of six years from time to time
informed me; yet I know not how nor by what sinister means it came to pass,
that in more then twelve years after, the end of the foresaid time expired, I
never heard any news of them, nor of their master. Whereat being greatly
grieved in mind I endeavored to seek out some good means (or rather fained
occasion) to go about the same errant, whereunto by the Kings most straight
edict I could never directly accommodate my self, in regard of which journey,
if hope might have persuaded me to find them out, I would not have neglected
both that, and all pains abroad and affairs at home whatsoever. But being in
this impatient desire, two brave young youths (most highly favored of
Agenestor Prince of Eolia, with whom they were both brought up) were also
determined to seek out their parents, knowing that those were not the same,
for whom they had till then taken them. These young Gentlemen Delicius and
Parthenius (for so they were called) leaving aside how much for their rare
gifts and virtues they deserved the love of all, of purpose I endeavored to
make my special friends to this effect, that as they were in great favor with
the King and Queen, by their means and intercession to the Prince, I might
find such favor with them all, that if Disteus and his company were perhaps
found out they might get their pardon, and be restored again to their former
estates and reputation, which we thought might easily be obtained, since King
Rotyndus, by the good examples of his virtuous Queen Agenesta (whom God
preserve for many years) and by her holy life and conversation, had almost now
forsaken his old conditions. Whereby (gentlemen) we may note, how the good
examples of a virtuous wife, do oftentimes work to amend and correct the
lewd disposition of a vicious husband: And therefore it is said, that the
wise is the mirror of the husband, and the woman to the man, because the man
looking into her, as into a clear glass, may frame his life and mind to her
modesty and semblance: And contrary, the man is the woman's glass for the
selfsame cause and reason. Wherefore Rotindus loved not now Sagastes so well,
as in times past, and liked less his lewd conditions, which sauoured nothing
of virtue, whereon if any humane thought or action be not grounded, it is not
durable any long time: for as vice is nothing, being the privation of virtue,
so is that of no stabilitie and permanence which is grounded upon it. The fame
of Delicius and Parthenius departure, and the end thereof was in a few days
spread over all the city, whereat though most were sorry, yet some, who envied
their deserved favor (for noble virtue is ever accompanied with base envy)
were not wanting that ioyed to see that day. This fit occasion therefore for
the effecting of that which you shall hear offering it self to my semblable
desseignes, coming unto them, I used these words. As I cannot be sorry,
Gentlemen, and my dear friends, for your departure, since it is a thing that
concerns you so much: So am I not a little glad, that it has so happily
fallen out for my determinations, if in this journey my poor company (for
only yours herein I desired) shall not be any ways troublesome unto you: And
because you may know the forcible cause that mooues me heereunto, I will (upon
that fidelity and trust, which with all men, but especially with me you have
always used) most frankly tell it you. As it is not unknown to you (I think)
what great friendship has been between Disteus and me, and (for my part)
shall ever be while my soul shall rule this earthly body: So must you know
again, that I concealed and kept him close, until I found out the means to
put him in some safety of his life; and (not content with this) would (if he
had given me leave, or if it had not been prejudicial to his secret
departure) have accompanied him to the extremest danger of mine own: since
which time I have had a great desire to seek him out, the which for two causes
I have left of: The one, because two of his servants, who had no little care of
that business, have many days since gone from hence to seek him out. The other
depending of this, because it behooued me to remain here still to procure his
pardon, and leave (if he had been found) to come to his own again. When
Anfilardus and Placindus went hence, there was an agreement between us, that
they should advise me of all they knew; the which thing being not performed
certain days after, I conjecture that they are either dead, or not at
liberty. With this hope (or to term it better despair) I have (though
meanly) to this point fed my thoughts: The which being of late so mightily
increased; and Fortune presenting to my desires so good an occasion for my
secret departure; and occasion taking away all suspicion that I go to seek
Disteus, but only to accompany you, tells me, that there remains nothing
else, but your favorable acceptance of my company into yours, only to pass
out of the city, and afterward if it please you, to divide our selves, or
do as likes you best. To this (like discreet and advised youths, being
faithful to me their friend, and loyal to Rotindus their king) they answered
thus. As Disteua and Dardaneas misfortunes (although we know them not)
(Martandrus) have not a little (as yet they do) most justly grieved us, for
their rare virtues and goodness, that through out this kingdom we have always
heard of them; so if our service might in any thing avail either you or them,
we would most willingly show the arguments of our good will, which couets
nothing else but fit means, to make some trial thereof; yet not denying that
small service wherein our slender abilities do consist, provided, we do not
any thing in private or public against that, wherein we are bound to our
sovereign Lord the king, without whose countenance and woonted favor we are no
body. But we have thought of a better and more convenient way, whereby more
then your request shall be performed, and wherein we will not fail in our
duties to our king, nor to you, nor in friendships holy laws. And it is, That
as the young Prince (as it is well known unto you) does not meanly love us:
and is not well content (by as much as I can perceive by him) with those
extremities which are done to this Gentleman; so by these, as also by the
Queens means I hope, to get leave of the king for you not only to depart in
our company, but to seek them out, assuring your self, that after they are
found all shall be well enough: for though we come not so soon again, yet we
will leave a supplication in his behalf with the Queen and the young Prince;
which favor if we cannot obtain, we will furthermore so handle the matter,
that you, nor any else shall take no harm or blame for this. For by committing
the matter into the Queen and Princes hands, we will travel and take such
pains therein, as though from us and from no other, it only came. Do Gentlemen
(said I again) as it please you best, and heorewithall believe me that (for
their sakes) I would not be sorry for any harm that might redound to me, so
that it might fall out to their good. They are much beholding to you (said
they) but I more bound to them, said I. In the end; after a few days they
got leave to seek whom they would, the which being bruted over all the city
gave no small content to Disteus his friends. And thus without staying any
longer, I went with Delicius and Parthenius out of Eolia, all three of us
providing necessaries for so uncertain and long a journey, wherein (after a
while dividing our selves) such has my fortune been, that in two years space
since I went out, I never heard any news of them, but only those which
Placindus (when I found him here) has told me of Delictus, and the best of
the Lady Felicia, that has assured me, that shortly I shall see them all
here, whereof I have no doubt, since she has said it. That which has
happened to me in so long a travel, and the troubles that I passed, as well
for that I account them light for so good a cause as this, and that by the
favors of the Gods, I shall soon enjoy their wished company, as also for
that which you commanded me to do, it makes so small to the purpose, that I
will with your good leave omit to report. So that Sir (speaking to Don Felix)
you plainly see, who Corineus, Dinia, and Corinea are, and the cause of their
exile, and of our long journey. And pardon me if I have been too long, since
your demand required no less.

Parisiles and all the rest yielding him great thanks for that he had told
them, answered him, that the fault was rather greater, by making so short an
end to so pleasant a history, and that he did not prolong it with recital of
his travels and adventures, which befell to him in seeking out Disteus. Let it
not trouble you now (said Felicia) for not only this, but the success of
Disteus life and his mishaps and theirs that did participate his company and
fortunes in this journey, with those occurrents that befell to Plactndus in his
travels, and that which happened to others that went out to seek Parthenius and
Delicius, shall have their fit time, wherein you shall take no small delight to
hear them. With this hope (said Lord Felix) we will content us, although it
will be later, then we desire. Whereupon returning now to the Temple, and eight
days being past, Felicia said to Syluanus and Seluagia. It is now time my
son and daughter, that the friendship, which to this hour you have borne
Syrenus, be showen: and because you may know, and that it may be made manifest
unto you, what great need he has both of his friends and of you, you must
understand, that when you shall come to your fields, you shall find many
Shepherds doing their last duties to Delius as this day dead, who (as I told
you) was many days since very sick. And as of purpose I sent Syrenus before
now, by virtue of a new drink, which at his departure I gave him, to rekindle
that quenched flame of Dianas love in his breast (a thing no less convenient to
his weal then consonant to my will) so would I not, that in the mean time,
while he was with us, the two foresaid Shepherds (being not a little enamoured
of her, and not worthy to be cast off) should be preferred before him, both
which have been, and are yet not a little entered into her good liking. Now
therefore is the time, wherein he needs most of all your help, and no less
requisite for you to go find him out; assuring you, that it will not a little
grieve you to see Syrenus matched with such dangerous corriuals as these two
Shepherds are. Syluanus and Seluagia (though Delius death did a little grieve
them) forgot not most humbly to thank Felicia, not only for her good will,
and friendly advise, but also for the approved affection and desire she had
to help their beloved friend Syrenus; And thereupon said unto her. We cannot
but obey your command (good Lady) although we would be feign here, when
Coryneus and his company comes. Well well (answered Felicia) this Shepherd is
not so nigh, nor cannot come back so soon, nor you so far off, but that you may
be certified when they are to come. Since it is then so (said Lord Felix) with
your leave (good Lady) I will take Felismena with me, and accompany these
Shepherds, in whose amorous strife and riualitie which you but even now spoke
of, I shall take no small pleasure and delight. The same affirmed Martandrus,
Placindus, Danteus, and Duarda with one voice. If it please you so (said
Felicia) on Gods name let it be: but it behooues you (Gentlemen) and thee fair
Felismena no less, least the bashful Shepherds estrange themselves from your
company, to borrowe for a while their pastoral habit, and condition: the
which being no sooner agreed upon, but put in practice, they went to Syluanus,
charging him to carry all in remembrance that passed between the corriuals,
the better to report it afterward, when they should meet all together.

Whosoever therefore is desirous to see the funeral of Delius, the riualitie
of Syrenus, Firmius, and Faustus, and be at all their meetings, and takes any
pleasure to know who Stela is, and would feign know what her troubles, and
those of Crimine, Delicius and Parthenius, have been, and to what end they
came, as also the love of Agenestor, prince of Eolia and of Lustea daughter to
Disteus and Dardanea, let him attend me in the third part of this work, which
shall come to light out of hand.

La vita il fin, e'l di loda la sora.
THE FIRST PART OF ENAMOVRED DIANA, made by Gaspar Gil Polo.
To the most noble and virtuous Lady. Don^a Maria de Austria y fuentes.
IF you were (my singular good Lady) that heavenly muse and divine fire from
whence this little creature has borrowed life and light, being most happy
that it was borne under such a constellation, whose beams and influence have
guided and endued it with those perfections, which now it presumes by virtues
thereof to possess: Reason and duty then it were to offer up unto your
woorthines all the service it may, and humbly to crave of the same, That since
now it comes abroad to every ones view, it may in the forhead carry the
imprinted golden character and warrant of your noble and renowned name:
wherewith being protected, it fears not any malignant spirit that may bite
it. And little though this be which my zealous and dutiful affection, which I
have ever borne to you and your honorable house (from whence many gallant
personages, and rare and learned wits have sprung out) can present to such
great bounty and virtue, the which nature having placed in a most beautiful
and christalline figure, in every part spread forth their beams with love and
admiration: Yet respecting the mind of him that offers it, and the good will
wherewith like books have been received by Kings and great Lords, I hope
fair Lady, you will not condemn me of too much presumption by dedicating this
unto your high patrocinie, when as the affiance which I have in your gentle
Graces, noble mind and sweet perfections inforceth me heereunto, the which
duly to be recommended and recounted, require a finer wit and fitter place.
Which if at any time hereafter my happy fortune shall grant me, in nothing
else so justly it shall be employed, then in the deserved praise and service of
your Ladyship, whose illustrous person and house our Lord defend and prosper
many years with increase of all happiness. From VALENCIA the ninth of
February 1564.

The first Book of Enamoured DIANA.
AFter that appassionate Syrenus by the virtue of the mighty liquor which sage
Felicia had given him, was now delivered out of Cupids hands, Love (working
after his accustomed manner) wounded anewe the heart of careless Diana, reviving
in her breast forgotten loves, because she should be captive to one that was
free, and live tormented for the love of one, who from the same was most
exempted: her grief being thereby the more augmented, when it occurred to her
thoughts that the small regard that in times past she had of Syrenus, was now
an occasion of his forgetfulness, and of that great contempt that he did bear
her. She was not only with these griefs, but with many more so fiercely
assaulted, that neither the holy bond of matrimony, nor the reins of seemly
shame and modesty were able to stay or mitigate the fury of her immoderate
love, nor remedy the sharpnes of her cruel torments, until with lamentable
complaints, and pitiful tears she mollified the hardest rocks, and savage
beasts. Wherefore being by chance on a summers day at the fountain of the
Sicamours, about that time when the Sun was elevated to the Meridian point,
and there calling to mind the great content, that in that very place she had
many times received of her beloved Syrenus, and counting her passed delights
with her present greefes, and knowing that the beginning of her sorrows, and
the fault was only in herself, she conceived thereof such grief and anguish
of mind, and was with such dangerous affrightes sursaulted, that even then she
thought desired death would have made an end of all her troubles. But after she
had recovered some small vigor, yet the force of her passion, and the violence
wherewith love reigned in her breast, was nevertheless so great, that it
compelled her to publish her torments to the simple birds, which from the
green boughs were listening to her, and to the branchie trees that seemed to
take compassion of her grief, and to the clear fountain, that with the
solemn murmur of the Christalline waters accorded with the notes of her
doleful song: And so to the sound of a sweet Baggepipe, which commonly she
carried about her, she began to sing these verses following.

LOng have I felt a silent pain of sorrow,
Cruel, by that my senses it importunes
To such extremes, that I am forced to borrow
This last relief against my heavy fortunes,
To publish them unto the winds, that stay them
Through out the world with pity to convey them.
Then gentle Air, perform this due of pity,
Let every region know my grievous anguish,
Breath out my pains, and tell in every city
The life of her, that in Loves want does languish:
Forgotten of a Shepherd that disdaines her,
Who once did die even for like love that pains her.
O that this ill (death to my vital powers)
Hardly maint ain'd amids these cruel fashions,
Springs of my late oblivion and those hours,
Which I bestowed, and thought not of his passions:
And that the fault, that heertofore did blame me.
Causes my pain, and with my pain does shame me.
Heart break in two for grief when thought assailes thee
Of those fell torments which thou once did lend him,
Thou love him now, but little it preuailes thee
To pardon that, wherewith thou did offend him.
Who cried once for that which now I cry for,
And died once for that which now I die for.
These present greefes of passions that confound me
With ceaselesse pain, torment not in such measure,
As thoughts of my late cruelty do wound me,
Or when I think, I lost so dear a treasure:
For they are heaven, to think that now I prize him,
And these are hell, to think I did despise him.
For if my little love (more fitly named
Injurious hate) (whereof I now repent me)
Were not in fault (alas too lately blamed)
Of all these present greefes, that thus torment me;
Then with complaints I would not cease t'importune
Ungentle love, and rail on cruel Fortune.
But I so proud for my admired beauty
That flattred me, of sense was so bereaved,
That careless of my fault, and forced duty
I owde to Love, I never once perceived,
That Love did take reuengement at his pleasure,
And Fortune change without all mean or measure.
But Loves revenge wrought never such a wonder,
Nor to so great despair did ever drive one,
As thus on every side to break a sunder,
And ruinate a hope that might revive one:
And Fortune in her change made never any
So great, as from one life to deaths so many.
Syrenus then, how art thou now assured
Of thy revenge, which thou have deeply taken
In my disgrace, which I my self procured:
That since of late my love thou have forsaken,
No remedy for any grief is left me,
That of my woonted comfort has bereft me.
For heretofore as thou have even, and morrow,
Seen me disdain thy sight with so small reason,
So may thou now take pleasure in my sorrow,
And with thy scorns my feeble comforts season:
For now to love me, lies not in thy power,
Though I must love thee till my dying hour.
So far from Cupids force thy haps have blessed thee,
And in thy liberty thou take such glory,
That (gentle Shepherd) I do not request thee
To cure mine ill (which cannot make thee sorry)
But to beguile these pains by Love or dained,
With one poor favor, though it were but fained:
And though mine ils, which thou art not contented
To remedy, nor do pretend to cease them,
When to thy careless thoughts they are presented,
Whose hot revenge have vowed to increase them:
Yet turn thine eyes, and see how mine are flowing
With riuolets of tears, that still are growing.
Behold my ruin, and my life decayed,
My little hope, which in despair I borrow,
My tears, my sighs, my senses all dismayed,
Though not to take compassion of my sorrow,
Yet see how with them all I am affreighted,
In thy revenge to be the more delighted.
For though with grief, wherewith I still am calling
To mollify thy heart, and have no power,
Nor that my tears, which evermore are falling,
Cannot excuse my death one little hour,
Then will I die for love of thee and never
Enjoy this breath without I love thee ever.
Enamoured Diana had not so soon made an end of her delightful music, if on
the sudden she had not been interrupted by a certain Shepherdess, which
behind a tuft of Hasels was hearkening unto her: Who therefore espying her,
gave a pause to her sweet voice by cutting off the substance of her song, and
was not a little grieved (which by a natural blush that tainted her fair
face, might easily be coniectured) that her song was heard, and her grief
unknown; especially perceiving the same Shepherdess to be a stranger and
never seen in those parts before. But she, who from a far off had heard so
sweet a sound, with silent steps drew near to enjoy such dainty melody; and
understanding the cause of her dolorous song, made on the sudden so goodly a
show of her excellent beauty before her, as the Nocturnall Moon is wont to
do, when with her shining beams it pearseth and ouercomes the foggie thicknes
of the dark clouds. But seeing Diana to be somewhat troubled in mind at her
sight, with a merry countenance, she thus began to say unto her.

I have not a little (fair Shepherdess) with my interrupting presence (which
to small purpose has thus disturbed thee) offended the great content, which I
had to hear thee; but the desire I have to know thee, and to give thee some
lightning for thy grief, that causes thee so pitifully to moan, may serve
(if it please thee) for my excuse, and make me blameless herein. For the
which grief, though it is bootelesse, as some say, to seek any comfort; yet
by a free will and reasons deuoide of passion there may be sufficient remedies
applied. Dissemble not therefore with me thy sorrows, and think it not much
to tell me thy name, and the cause of thy sad complaints, since for this I will
make no less account of thy perfections, nor judge thy deserts to be of less
value.

Diana hearing these words, stood a while without answering her again, having
her eyes fastened on the rare beauty of that Shepherdess, and her mind
occupied in a doubtful construction of that, which she should answer to her
gentle offers and loving words, and in the end answered her thus again.

If the great pleasure, which I take in beholding thee (unknown Shepherdess,
and courteous without compare) and the comfort, which thy sweet words do
promise me, might find any small kind of confidence or hope in my afflicted
heart, I would then believe that thou were able to remedy my sorrows, and
would not doubt to manifest my pains unto thee. But my grief is of such
tenor, that when it begins to molest me, it seiseth in such sort on my heart,
that it stops up all the passages against remedy: Yet know (Gentle
Shepherdess) that I am called Diana, known too well in all the fields and
villages hereabouts; and so let it content thee to know my name, and not to
enquire further of sorrows, since thou shall profit thee no more, then to make
thy self compassionate and condolent for my tender years, seeing them
oppressed with so many cares and troubles.

Thus are they deluded (answered the Shepherdess) that make themselves slaves
to fond Love, who but beginning to serve him, are become so much his vassals,
that they desire not to be free, and think it impossible to be manumitted from
his servitude. If love be thy grief (as by thy song I am sure it is) then know
(fair Shepherdess) that in this infirmity I have no small experience: For I
my self have been many years a captive in like bondage, but now am free;
blind I was, but now have found out the way of truth: I have passed in the
amorous Ocean many dangerous storms and tempests, and now am safely arrived
in the secure haven of content and rest: And though thy pain be never so
great; yet has not mine, I dare boldly say, been less: And since for the
same I found out a happy remedy, banish not hope from thy mind, shut not up
thine eyes from the truth, nor thine ears from the substance of my words.

Are they words (said Diana) that shall be spent to remedy my love, whose
works exceed the compass and help of words. But yet for all this feign
would I know thy name, and the cause that has brought thee into our fields;
the which if thou will vouchsafe to tell me, shall so greatly comfort me, that
I will for a while suspend the complaints that I have begun, a thing perhaps
which may not a little avail for the lightning of my grief.

My name (said the Shepherdess) is Alcida: but the rest which thou demandest
of me, the compassion which I have of thy voluntary grief, will not suffer me
to declare, before thou have embraced my wholesome remedies, though (perhaps)
vnsanerie to thy distempered taste.

Every comfort, said Diana, shall be most grateful to me that comes from thy
hands, which nevertheless is not able to root out the strong love in my
breast, nor to remove it from thence, without carrying my heart with it burst in
a thousand pieces: And though it might, yet I would not live without, because
I would not leave to love him, who being once forgotten of me took so sudden
and extreme a revenge of my unjust cruelty.

Nay then (said Alcida) thou give me no little hope and confidence of thy
recovery, since now thou love him, whom thou have heretofore hated, having
learned thereby the pathway to oblivion, and acquainted thy will with contempt,
and the more, since between these two extremes love and hate there is a mean,
which thou must embrace and follow.

To this Diana replied and said. Thy counsel (fair Shepherdess) contents me
very well, but I think it not sure enough for my safety, nor the best in
common reason for my avail. For if my will were put between love and hate, I
should sooner yield to love then to hate; because being nearer to it, mighty
Cupid with greater force would assail, and overcome me.

To this Alcida answered. Do not honor him so much, who deserves it so little,
calling him mighty, who may be so easily ouercommed, especially by those that
choose out the mean above said: for therein does virtue consist, and where
that is, all hearts are armed with force and constancy against love.

Thou might better term those hearts cruel, hard, untamed, and rebellious,
said Diana, which pretend to repugne their proper nature, and to resist the
invincible force of love. And yet when they have oppugned it as much as they
list, in the end they have little cause to brag of their stoutnes, and less
help to defend them with their foolish hardines. For the power of love
ouercomes the strongest holds, and makes most way through, where it is most
resisted: of whose maruels and memorable deeds my beloved Syrenus did on a day
sing in this very place, at that time when his remembrance was so sweet, as
now most bitter to my soul. The which Sonnet, and all his other Ditties, which
he then made and sung, I well remember, having ever a great care not to forget
them for certain causes, which persuaded me to register the words and deeds of
my dearest Syrenus in perpetual memory: But this which entreats of the mighty
force of Love, says thus.

THat mighty Love, though blind of both his eyes,
Does hit the Center of the wounded heart:
And though a boy yet Mars he foiles with dart,
Awaking him, where in his net he lies:
And that his flames do freeze me in such wise,
That from my soul a fear does never start
Most base and vile: yet to the highest part
(Strengthued by land and sea) of heaven it flies.
That he, whom Love does wound or prisoner take,
Lives in his greefes, and with his gives content:
This is his might that many wonder at.
And that the soul which greatest pain does shake,
If that it does but think of Loves torment,
The fear of such a thought forgets that.
No doubt, said Alcida, but the forces of love are well extolled: But I would
rather have believed Syrenus, if after having published the fury of Cupids
arrows to be so great, and after having commended the hardness of his chains,
he had not also found out the means to set himself at liberty: And so I
marvel that thou will so lightly give credit to him, who makes not his word
and deed all one. For it is very clear, that the Songs and Sonnets are a kind
of a vain and superfluous praises, whereby lovers sell their ils for dangerous
things, when that so easily of captives they become free, and fall from a
burning desire to a secure oblivion. And if lovers feel passions, it
proceeds of their own will, and not of love, which is not but a thing
imagined of men; a thing neither in heaven, nor earth, but in his heart, that
entertaines it: whose power (if any he have) only by the default of those he
usurps, who of their own accord suffer themselves to be ouercommed, offering
him their hearts for tribute, and putting their liberty into his hands. But
because Syrenus Sonnet may not so easily pass without an answer, give ear to
this, which as it seems was made in countermaund of that; and long ago it is,
since I heard a Shepherd called Aurelius, sing it in the fields of Sebetho, and
as I remember, thus it said.

Love is not blind, but I, which fondly guide
My will to tread the path of amorous pain:
Love is no child, but I, which all in vain,
Hope, fear, and laugh, and weep on every side:
Madness to say, that flames are Cupids pride,
For my desire his fire does contain,
His wings my thoughts most high and sovereign,
And that vain hope, wherein my ioies abide:
Love has no chains nor shaftes of such intent,
To take and wound the whole and freest mind,
Whose power (then we give him) is no more,
For love's a tale, that Poets didinuent,
A dream of fools, an idol vain and blind:
See then how black a God do we adore?
Do thou therefore think Diana, that any one endued but with reasonable
understanding, will trust to things in the air as thou do? What reason have
thou so truly to worship a thing so unruly and false, as the supposed God of
love is, who is fained by fond and vain heads, followed by dishonest minds,
and nourished in the brains of idle wantons? These are they, who gave to Love
that name which makes him so famous through out all the world. For seeing how
fond men for loving well did suffer so many sursaults, fears, cares,
iealousies, changes, and other infinite passions, they agreed to seek out some
principal and universal cause, from whence, as from a fountain all these
effects should arise. And so they invented the name of Love, calling him a God,
because he was of many nations and people feared, and reverenced, and painted
him in such sort, that whosoever saw his figure, had great reason to abhor
his fashions. They painted him like a Boy, because men might not put their
trust in him; Blind, because they might not follow him; Armed, because they
might fear him; with flames of fire, because they might not come near him;
and with wings, because they might know him vain and inconstant. Thou must
not understand (fair Shepherdess) that the power which men attribute to Love
is, or may be any ways his: But thou must rather believe, that the more they
magnify his might and valor, the more they manifest their weakness and
simplicity. For in saying, that Love is strong, is to affirm, that their will
is weak, by suffering it so easily to be ouercommed by him: To say, that Love
with mighty violence does shoot mortal and venomous arrows, is to include
that their hearts are too secure and careless, when that so willingly they
offer themselves to receive them. To say, that Love does straightly captiuate
their souls, is to infer, that there is want of judgment and courage in
them, when at the first bruntes they yield; nay when sometimes without any
combat they surrender their liberty into their enemies hands: and finally all
the enterprises which they tell of Love, are nothing else but matter of their
miseries, and arguments of their weakness. All which force and prowess admit
to be his, yet are they not of such quality, that they deserve any praise or
honor at all. For what courage is it to take them prisoners, that are not able
to defend themselves? What hardines to assail weak and impotent creatures?
What valor to wound those that take no heed and think least on him? What
fortitude to kill those that have already yielded themselves? What honor with
cares to disturb those, that are merry and joyful? What worthy deed to
persecute unfortunate men? Truly fair Shepherdess, they that would so much
extol and glorify this Cupid, and that so greatly to their cost serve him,
should (for his honor) give him better praises. For the best name that amongst
them all he gets, is to be but a cowarde in his quarrels, vain in his
pretenses, liberal of troubles, and covetous in rewards. Al which names, though
of base infamy they savor, yet are those worse which his affectionate
servants give him, calling him fire, fury, and death, terming (Loving) no
better then to burn, to destroy, to consume, and to make themselves fools,
and naming themselves blind, miserable, captives, mad, inflamed, and
consumed. From hence it comes, that generally all complain of Love, calling
him a Tyrant, a Traitor, unflexible, fierce and vnpitifull. All Lovers verses
are full of dolor, compounded with sighs, blotted with tears, and sung with
agonies. There shall thou see suspicions, there fears, there mistrustes, there
iealousies, there cares, and there all kinds of pains. There is no other
speech amongst them but of deaths, chains, darts, poisons, flames, and other
things which serve not but to give torments to those, that emploie their
fancies in it, and fear when they call upon it. Herbanius the Shepherde famous
in Andolozia, was troubled too much with these terms when in the bark of a
Poplar, with a sharp bodkin, instead of his pen, in presence of me wrote these
verses following.

HE that in freedom iets it proud and brave,
Let him not live too careless of himself:
For in an instant he may be a slave
To mighty Love, and serve that wanton elfe:
And let that heart, that yet was never tamed,
Fear at the last by him to be inflamed.
For on that soul that proudly does disdain
His heavy laws, and lives with lofty will,
Fierce Love is wont t'inflict a cruel pain,
And with most sharp and dire revenge to kill:
That who presumes to live without his power,
In death he lives tormented every hour.
O Love, that do condemn me to thy iaile,
Love, that do set such mortal coals on fire,
O Love, that thus my life thou do assail,
Entreated ill, tormented by thine ire:
Henceforth I curse thy chains, thy flames, thy dart,
Wherewith thou bind'st, consum'st, and kill'st my heart.
And now let us come to Syrenus Sonnet, whereby he seems to make men believe,
that the imagination of Loves enterprises suffices to overcome the fury of
the torment. For if his operations be to kill, to wound, to make blind, to
burn, to consume, to captiuate, and to torment, he shall never make me
believe, that to imagine things of pain does lighten the grief, which must
rather (as I think) give greater force and feeling to the passion: For when it
is more in imagination, it remains longer in his heart, and with greater
pain torments it. And if that be true which Syrenus did sing, I much marvel
that he receiving so deep a taste in this thought, has now so easily changed
it, by means of so cruel oblivion, not only of loves operations, but also of
thy beauty, which ought not for any thing in the world to be forgotten.

Alcida had scarce finished these last words, when Diana lifting up her eyes
(for she suspected somewhat) perceived her husband Delius coming down from
the side of a little hill bending his steps toward the fountain of the
Sicamours, where they were together: whereupon cutting off Alcidas discourse,
she said unto her.

No more, gentle Shepherdess, no more; for we will find fitter time hereafter
to hear out the rest, and to answer thy weak and common arguments: For behold
my husband is coming down yonder hill toward us, and therefore I think it
best to turn our talk to some other matter, and with the tune of our
instruments to dissemble it: and so let us begin to sing, because when he is
come near unto us, he may not be displeased at the manner of our conversation:
whereupon Alcida taking her Cytern, and Diana her Bagpipe, began to sing as
follows.

Prouencall Rythmes.
Alcida. WHile Titan in his Coach with burning beams
Over the world with such great force does ride,
That Nymphs, and their chaste companies abide
In woods, and springs, and shallowe shadowed streams:
And while the prating grasshopper replies
Her song in mourning wise,
Shepherdess sing
So sweet a thing,
That th'heauens may be
By hearing thee
Made gentle, on their own accord to power
Upon this meade a fresh and silver shower.
Diana. Whiles that the greatest of the Planets stays
Just in the mids between the East and west,
And in the field upon the mowers breast
With greater heat does spread his scorching rays:
The silent noise this pleasant fountain yeeldes,
That runs amids these fields,
Such music mooues,
As wonder proves,
And makes so kind
The furious wind,
That by delight thereof, their force they stay,
And come to blow as gently as they may.
Alcida. You running rivers pure and christalline,
That all the year do make a lively spring,
And beautify your banks and every thing,
With Cowslips, Lillies, and sweet Colombine,
The cruel heat of Phoebus come not near
To heat this fountain clear,
Nor that such sweet
Liquour, with feet
Troubled be not
Of sheep or goat:
Nor that the tears, which fatthlesse lovers wast
In these fine waters never may be cast.
Diana. Green flowrie meade, where natures curious die
Has showen her colors diverse in their kind,
With trees, and flowers, whereto they are combinde,
Which paintes thee forth so fair unto the eye:
In thee thy boughs of verdure may not know
The blustering winds that blow,
Prosper, and give
Flowers, and live:
Not to be lost
By heat or frost:
Nor angry heaven in fury do not sloile,
Nor hurt so fair a meade, and fertile soil.
Alcida. Here from the hurly burly, and the noise
Of stately courts sequestered, every one
Reposedly lives by himself alone,
In quiet peace, in harmless sportes and ioies:
In shades sometimes, laid down on Floras pride
Near to some rivers side,
Where birds do yield
Sweet notes in field,
And flowers fine
Odours divine:
And always with an order souer^ne
The meadow laughes, the wood the hill, and plain.
Diana. The noise made here by silent gentle winds
In flowrie boughs, the leaves that softly shake,
Delights more, then that the people make
In great assemblies, where their sundry kinds
Of proud demeanours, and high majesty's,
Are foolish vanities:
Their solemn feasts
Breed but vnrestes,
Their honors name
Blind errors frame:
And all their holy words clean different
From that, that in their hearts was ever meant.
Alcida. Ambition here no snares nor nets regardes,
Nor avarice for crowns does lay her bates:
The people here aspire not to estates,
Nor hungers after favors, nor rewards:
From guile and fraud, and passion, as we see,
Their hearts are ever free.
Their faith's not vain,
But good and plain:
Their malice small,
They just to all,
Which makes them live in joy and quiet peace,
And in a mean sufficient for their ease.
Diana. To new found worlds, nor seas, that rage and swell,
The simple Shepherd never sails in vain:
Nor to the furdest Indias, for his gain,
Thousands of leagues, and duckates there to tell:
Unto the field he comes as well content,
With that that God has sent;
As he that spendes
Rents without ends:
And lives (perdie)
As merrily
As he that has great flocks upon his hills,
And of good ground a thousand acres tils.
Delius from a far off heard the voice of his fair wife Diana, and perceiving
that another answered her, made great haste to go see who was in her company:
wherefore hiding himself behind a great Mittle, near to the fountain, he
listened to their singing, as one that still sought occasious of his woonted
jealousy. But when he understood that their songs were far from that which he
suspected, he was well pleased in mind: But yet the great desire he had to
know the other, that was in company of his wife, made him draw near unto the
Shepherdesses; who courteously saluted him, but especially Diana, whom with a
smiling and angelical countenance she most sweetly entertained. And being set
near unto them, Alcida said.

I think my self (Delius) greatly bound to Fortune, who has not only
favored me, by presenting to mine eyes the excellent beauty of thy Diana, but
also by making me know the man, whom she has only chosen, and thought most
worthy to possess so rare a gem, by yielding her liberty so frankly into his
hands; which choice no doubt (as she is wise) cannot be but deemed most high
and sovereign: So I marvel much again, that in lieu thereof, and of that
entire love which she bears thee, thou make so small reckoning of her, as to
let her go one step without thy company, or be a minute out of thy sight. If
she be so firmly rooted in thy heart, which I may well presume, how can that
love thou owe her be so small as only to content thy self with her lively
figure engraven therein, and not feed thine eyes with the continual sight of
her singular beauty.

The Diana (least Delius by his answer might have hazarded his blunt wit and
rude education) took him by the hand and said unto her.

Delius has but little reason to think himself so happy (as thou say) to
have me for his wife, or so much in his presence, as by means thereof to
forget his flocks, and granges, matters of more consequence, then the poor
delight which he may take by viewing that beauty, which thou do unworthily
attribute unto me.

Do not to so small purpose (said Alcida) preiudicate thy comely graces, Diana,
nor offer such injury to the general voice the world has of thy perfections,
since it is no less beseeming a fair woman to have some small conceit and
opinion of herself, then a point of rash judgment to term her proud and
arrogant, that does moderately acknowledge the same. Therefore hold thy self
(Delius) for the happiest man in the world, and with pride enjoy this favor
that Fortune has bestowed on thee, who never gave, nor can give any thing,
that in felicity may be comparable with the husband of Diana.

These words so sweetly delivered by Alcida, and that fair face, and eyes of
hers, which (all the while she was talking) Delius both marked and gazed on,
made so deep an impression in his heart, that at the end of her gentle and
discreet words, he was so greatly enamoured of her, that, like a senseless and
astonished man, he had not one word to answer her again, only giving, with a
new burning sigh, a manifest token of the green wound, that Cupid had made in
his conquered heart.

But now about this time they heard a voice, the sweetness whereof delighted
them maruellously. They gave therefore attentive ear unto it, and casting
their eyes from whence it resounded, they saw a Shepherd coming with a weary
pace toward the fountain, and going like one that was surcharged with grief
and anguish of mind, singing as follows.

I Cannot be by Loves wrath more tormented,
Nor Fortune can to me be more unstable:
There is no soul in hope so little able,
Nor heart that is with pain so much contented:
Love does enforce my fainting breath, that strives
The better to endure my hard reiection,
And yet with hope my suffrance, and affection,
And life will not consume, that yet re^tueth:
O vainest heart, sad eyes, whose tears have spent me,
Why in so long a time, and with such anguish,
End not my plaints, and spirits deadly languish?
O woes, suffices it not what you have sent me?
O Love, why do thou thus my torments nourish,
And let Alcida in her freedom flourish?
The Shepherd had scarce ended his song, when Alcida knowing who he was,
trembled like an Aspen leaf in every part of her body; wherefore she rose up
in great haste to be gone before he came to them, requesting Delius and Diana
not to tell him that she had been there, since it was as much as her life was
worth, if that Shepherd whom she hated more then death, did either find or had
any knowledge of her. They promised her so to do, though very sorry for her
sudden and hasty departure. Alcida as fast as she could hye her, recovered a
thick wood not far from the fountain, and fled with such celeritie and fear,
as if she had been pursued by some hungry and cruel Tygre.

Immediately after the Shepherd wearied with extreme travel and trouble, came
to that place, which Fortune (it seemed) condolent for his grief, had offered
him, and that clear fountain, and Dianas company for some lightning of his
pain: who being faint after his painful journey, and seeing the Sun in the
pride of his heat; the place very pleasant; the trees casting forth cool
shades; the grass fresh and green; the fountain clear and cristalline, and
Diana passing fair; thought good to rest himself a while, though the earnest
care and haste of that he went seeking, and the ceaselesse desire he had to
find it, gave his wearied body no place of rest, nor ease to his afflicted
mind: The which Diana perceiving, showed her self as courteous toward him,
as Delius jealous eye (who was present) would give her leave; and yet
entertained the strange Shepherd with sweet words, as well for his own
deserts, which she deemed not small; as also for that she perceived him
tormented with the like grief that she was. The Shepherd cheered up by Dianas
friendly welcome and seemly favors, of a miserable man, thought himself
happy by finding out so good a chance. But they being thus together, Diana by
chance casting her eye aside, could not see her husband Delius, who newly
surprised in Alcidas love, when Diana took least heed of him, and while she
was entertaining the new Shepherd, pursued amain the Shepherdess that fled
away, and took the very same way with a strong resolution to follow her even
to the other part of the world. Diana not a little perplexed to see her husband
wanting so on the sudden, called and cried a good while together on the name of
Delius, but all in vain to get an answer from him in the wood, or to make him
leave of his fond pursuit, who rather running after her as fast as he could,
thought at the last to sease upon his beloved Alcida. Whereupon when Diana
perceived that Delius appeared in no place, she showed her self a most
sorrowful woman for him, and lamented in such pitiful sort that the Shepherd
to comfort her, said thus unto her.

Afflict not thy self thus without reason (fair Shepherdess) and believe not
thine own imaginations so greatly preiudicially to thy rest and quiet: for the
Shepherd whom thoumissest, is not so long since wanting, that thou may have
any cause to think that he has forsaken thee. Pacify then thy self a
little, for it may be that when thy back was turned, he having some desire to
change place, secretly got away, unwilling (perhaps) that we should see him go
for sear of staying him, being invited by the cool shades of those green
Sicamours, and by the fresh and pleasant wind that is gently blowing them; or
else perhaps discontended for my coming hither, thinking my company
troublesome, whereas now without it he may merrily pass the heat of the day
away.

To this answered Diana. By these words (gracious Shepherd) which thy tongue
has uttered, and forced cheer which thou dissemblest, who cannot conceive the
grief that consumes thy life? Thou show well that love is thy torment, and
art accustomed to deceive amorous suspicions by vain imaginations. For it is a
common trick of lovers, to work their thoughts to believe false and impossible
things, because they would not credit things that are certain and true. Such
comforts (gentle Shepherd) avail more to quote out the sorrow of my grief by
thee, then to remedy my pain. For I know well enough, that my husband Delius
is fled after a most fair Shepherdess, who went but even now from hence,
and in regard of the great and fervent love wherewith he beheld her, and
sighs, which for her sake came smoking from his heart, I do verily believe
(knowing moreover how steadfastly he performs that he imagines or takes in
hand) that he will not leave following that Shepherdess, though he think to
come never in my sight again. And that which greeues me most is, that I know
her disposition to be so rigorous, and her heart so great an enemy to Love,
that she will not only show him no pitic, but with great despite contemns
the most sovereign beauty, and greatest deserts that may be.

At these very words the sorrowful Shepherd thought that a mortal dart
pierced his chill heart, and therefore said. Unhappy me most wretched Lover,
what greater reason have not these hearts (not made of stony flint) to be
sorrowful for me, when through out the world I seek the most cruel and
pitilesse Damsel that lives on earth? Ah fair Shepherdess, thou have good
cause to be sorry for thy husband, for if she whom he follows, be so cruelly
conditioned as this, then must his life be in great danger.

By these words Diana clearly perceived, what his grief was, and that the
Shepherdess that ran away at his coming, was the very same, whom in so many
parts of the world he had sought. And so she was indeed; for when she began
to fly from him, she took the habit of a Shepherdess, by that means not to
be known nor discourered. But for that present time Diana dissembled with the
Shepherd, and would tell him nothing of the matter, to keep her word and
promise which she had given Alcida at her departure: And also because it was
now a good while since she was gone, and ran with such haste through the
thick wood, that it was impossible for him to overtake her. All which if she
should tell the Shepherd, she thought would serve for nothing else but to add
a fresh wound to an old sore, and to trouble his mind more, by giving him
some little hope to attain to his purpose, when by no means he was able to
obtain it. But because she desired to know what he was, the sum of his love,
and the cause of her hate, she said unto him.

Comfort thy self (Shepherd) in these thy complaints, and of courtesy tell me
their cause: for to lighten them, I would be glad to know who thou art, and to
hear the success of thy mishap, the report whereof will be no doubt
delightful to thee, if thou be so true a lover as I do take thee.

He then without much entreatie, both of them sitting down by the clear
fountain began thus to say. My grief is not of such quality, that it may be
told to al kind of people, though the good opinion I have of thy deserts and
wisdom, and the confidence which thy virtues and peerless beauty do
suggest to me, urge me to lay open before thee the total sum of my life (if
so it may be called) which willingly long since I would have changed for death.

Know therefore fair Shepherdess, that my name is Marcelius, and my estate
far different from that, which my habit does testify: for I was borne in
Soldina, the chiefest city in Vandalia, of parents for birth and blood
renowned, and in all wealth and power abounding. In my tender years I was
carried to the king of Portugalles court, and trained up there, where, not only
of all the chiefest Lords and Knights I was beloved, but especially of the king
himself; insomuch that I had never his good will and leave to depart from
thence, until at the last he committed to my government a charge of certain
men of war, which he had in the coast of Africa. There was I a long time
captain of the towns, and fortresses that the king had on the sea side,
remaining with my chiefest garrison in Ceuta, where the original of all my
hard haps was first commenced. For in that town (to my great harm) dwelled a
noble and renowned Knight called Eugerius, who had also a charge by the King,
and government of the same town, whom God (besides that he had adorned and
enriched him with the gifts of nature, and Fortune) had blessed with a Son
called Polydorus, valiant without compare, and with two daughters, called
Alcida and Clenarda, women of most rare and excellent beauty. Clenarda was
very skillful in drawing of her bow and in shooting; but Alcida which was the
eldest, endowed with incomparable beauty: whose virtues so inflamed my heart
with burning love, that they have caused me to lead this desperate kind of
life, which I now pass away, wishing for death, which every day I call upon
and attend. Her father was so tender and charie over her, that few times he
suffered her to be out of his sight, which thing was no small impediment to the
opening of my grief and great love I bare her, except sometimes when it was my
fortune to see her by an appassionate eye, and many sighs (maugre my will)
came forciblie out of my breast, I signified my pains unto her. At one time
among the rest, I wanted not opportunity to write a letter unto her, which fit
occasion by favorable fortune granted me, I omitted not but wrote to her this
letter following.

Marcelius his letter to Alcida.
THat majesty so princely, grave, and sweet,
That modest blush, that gentle seemly grace,
Those looks so chaste, and hauiour so discreet,
Those golden virtues, that thou do embrace
(Besides thy beauty, which the world resoundes
With famous name) from heaven that brought their race,
In such a narrow straight, with bleeding wounds
Have set my heart ( Alcida heavenly fair)
That every thing my woonted rest confoundes;
For that which breeds my love, is my despair,
And so restraines my soul, that feign it would
Say naught, although it cost my vital air.
What man of flint, that ever did behold
The burning beams that thy fair eyes do cast,
But waxed dumb, and died with mortal cold?
Who ever saw those beauties rare and chaste,
More perfect then the starrie sky above,
Or any living now or gone or past,
That presently felt not a fervent love?
The cause whereof his senses so would use,
As not to let him speak for his behoue:
So much I pass by silence, that I muse
That sad complaints my heart do never kill,
Nor break my breast with anguish so confuse:
My ioies are none, my woes continue still,
My pain is firm, and all my hope is vain,
I live alas, and die in grievous ill:
And take revenge upon my self again,
That which I most eschew, does take me straight:
And what I most desire, I lest obtain:
For that, that lest behooues me, I awaite,
Not comfort for my grief, that never ends,
Ioying in pain, wherewith my soul I freight:
Yet my delight and life so far extendes,
As thought of that great distance does abide,
That twixt thy beauty, grace, and me dependes:
For in my soul I do conceive a pride,
That I have put it in so high a place:
Where constancy and hope my heart do guide.
But yet thy gentle, and sweet Angels face
Against my soul such mortal war do threate,
That thousand lives dare not abide the chase.
To fear me yet the passage's not so great,
Nor way so steep, nor craggie, that shall stay
My forward steps with aanger, or deceate:
I follow then my ruin and decay,
The path of pain, and seek not to decline
From grievous plaints, that force me every day.
Yet endless joy my heavy heart does shrine,
And glads my life, by wished pain oppressed:
That glories strangely in these greefes of mine.
Paine's my delight, my plaints my sport and jest,
My sighs sweet soundes, my death my glory makes,
My wounds my health, my flames my happy rest,
Nothing I see, which stirs not, and awakes
My furious torment and her endless wheel;
But happy fortune by the same it takes:
These ils (sweet Mistress) for thy sake I feel,
And in these passions live, and die tormented
With equal pain, and suffrance, well contented.
Let then a man despairing of relief,
Who to thy love his doubtful life assigns,
Move thee to some compassion of his grief,
By reading of these hart-breake written lines,
Since that he craves no help for all his moan,
But only that his torment may be known.
This was the letter I wrote unto her; the penning whereof, had it been as
fine, as the purpose fortunate, I would not have changed my skill in posie for
famous Homers. It came to Alcidas hands, in whose heart (when finally she knew
the sum of my grief, though at the first the contents of my letter with my
too great presumption did somewhat offend her) it made deeper impressions then
I imagined, or hoped for. Then I began to manifest my self for her open Lover,
by making many brave Iustes, and encounters at Tilt and Tourney, running of
wild Bulls, and juego de Cannas, by celebrating for her sweet sake and service
Moresco sportes on horseback in the day time, and maskes and stately dances in
the night, causing consorts of sundry music to delight her, and making
verses, impresas, and Anagrammes of her love and name, and many other gallant
shows and inventions more for the space of two whole years together. At the
end whereof, Eugerius thought me worthy to be his son in law, and by the
request of some great Lords in those parts, offered me his fair daughter
Alcida for wife. We concluded that the espousall rites should be solemnized in
the city of Lysbone, because the king of Portugal might with his presence
honor them: and therefore dispatching a Post with all haste, by him we
certified the king of this marriage, and requested his majesty to give us
leave (having commended our charges and affairs to persons of trust) to
celebrate it there. Whereupon the report of this solemn day was published
through all the city, and places far and near, which caused so general a
joy, as was due to so fair a dame as Alcida, and to so faithful a lover as my
self. Unto this passage my good fortune conducted me, thus high she reared me
up to throw me down afterward headlong into the depth of miseries, wherein
(wretched man) I still remain. O transitory good, mutable content, vading
delight, and inconstant firmenes of mundaine things! What greater joy could I
have wished for, then that I had already received, and what greater cross am
I able to suffer then this; which I now carry about me? Oh fair Shepherdess,
entreat me no more to molest thy ears with so large and lamentable a history,
nor to pierce thy compassionate heart with recital of my ensuing calamities.
Let it content thee, that thou have known my passed felicities, and desire not
to search out farther my present greefes, because I assuredly know, that as my
long and pitiful history will be tedious to thy ears, so will my continued
disgraces alter thy reposed mind.

To which Diana answering said. Leave off (Marcelius) these excuses, for I
would not desire to know the success of thy life, only thereby to rejoice my
mind with thy contents, without sorrowing for thy calamities, but would
rather hear every part of them, to bewail them also in my pitiful heart.

How greatly would it please me, fair Shepherdess (said Marcelius) if the
good will I bear thee did not force me to content thee in a matter of so great
grief. And that which greeues me most, is that my disgraces are such, that they
must needs fill thy heart full of sorrow, when thou know them; for the pain
that I must pass by telling them, I reckon not so great, but that I would
willingly suffer it in lieu of thy contentment. But because I see thee so
desirous to hear them out, although they shall force me to make thee
sorrowful; yet I will not seem to leave thy will herein unsatisfied.

THen Shepherdess, thou must know, that after my unfortunate marriage was
agreed upon, the Kings license being now come, her old father Eugerius, who was
a widower, his son Polydorus, and his two daughters Alcida and Clenarda, and
the hapless Marcelius, who is telling thee his grievous accidents, having
committed the charges left us by the King to sufficient and trusty Gentlemen,
embarked our selves in the port of Ceuta to go by sea to the noble city of
Lisbone, there to celebrate (as I said) the marriage rites in presence of the
King. The great content, joy, and pleasure which we all had, made us so blind,
that in the most dangerous time of the year, we feared not the tempestuous
waves which did then naturally swel and rage, nor the furious and boisterous
winds, which in those months with greater force and violence are commonly
wont to blow: but committing our frail bark to fickle Fortune, we launched
into the deep and dangerous seas, heedlesse of their continual chaunges, and
of innumerable misfortunes incident unto them. For we had not sailed far, when
angry Fortune chastised us for our bold attempt, because before night came on,
the wary Pilot discovered apparent signs of an imminent and sudden tempest.
For the thick and dark clouds began to cover the heavens all over, the waves
to roar and murmur, and contrary winds to blow on every side. O what
sorrowful and menacing signs, said the troubled and timorous Pilot? O
lucklesse ship, what perils assail thee, if God of his great goodness and pity
do not succor thee? He had no sooner spoken these words, when there came a
furious and violent blast of wind, that puffed and shook the whole body of
the ship, and put it in so great danger, that the routher was not able to
govern it, but that tossed up and down by this mighty fury, it went where
the force of the angry waves and winds did drive it. The tempest by little
and little with greater noise began to increase, and the rauing billows
covered over with a fomy forth mightily to swell: The skies powered down
abundance of rain with throwing out of every part of it fearful lightnings,
and threatened the world with horrible thunders. Then might there be heard a
hideous noise of Sea monsters, lamentable outcries of passengers, and flapping
of the sails with great terror. The winds on every side did beat against the
ship, and the surges with terrible blows shaking her vnsteadie sides, riued
and burst asunder the strong and soundest plaunchers: Sometimes the proud
billowe lifted up us to the skies, and by and by threw us down again into
deep gulphes, the which also with great horror opening themselves, discovered
to our fearful eyes the deep and naked sands. The men and women ran on
every side to prolong their ensuing and haples death; and did cast out, some
of them doleful sighs; other some pitiful vows; and others plenty of
sorrowful tears. The Pilot being appalled with so cruel Fortune, and his
skill confounded by the countenance and terror of the tempest, could now no
more govern the tottered routher. He was also ignorant of the nature and
beginning of the winds, and in a moment devised a thousand different things.
The mariners likewise aghast with the agony of approaching death, were not able
to execute the Masters command, nor (for such lamentations, noise and
outcries) could hear the charge and direction of their hoarse and painful
Pilot. Some strike sail, others turn the maine yard; some make fast again
the broken shrouds; others mende and calke the riuen planks; some ply the pomp
apace, and some the routher; and in the end, all put their helping hands to
preserve the miserable ship from inevitable loss. But their painful diligence
did not help them, nor their vows and tears profit them to pacify proud
Aeolus and Neptunes wrath: but rather, the more the night came on, the more the
winds blew, and the storm waxed greater and more violent. And now dark night
being fully come, and angry Fortune continuing still her severe punishment,
the old Father Eugerius being past all hope of help and remedy, looking on
his children and son in law, with an appalled and altered countenance, felt
such great sorrow for the death that we had to pass, that his grief and
compassion for us, was more bitter to our souls, then the thought of our
proper and present misfortunes. For the lamenting old man, environed on every
side with care and sorrow, with a pitiful voice and sorrowful tears, said
thus. Ah mutable fortune, common enemy to humane content, how have thou
reserved so great mishap and misery for my sorrowful old age? O thrice
blessed are they, who fighting in the mids of bloody battails, with honor
die in their young and lusty years, because not drawing forth their line to
wearied old age, have never cause with grief to bewail the untimely death of
their beloved children. O extreme sorrow! O balefull success! who ever ended
his days in so heavy a plight as I poor distressed man, that hoping to have
comforted my natural death, by leaving them to the world, that might have
suruiued, not only to perform the due of my last obsequies, but to continue
my line and memory, must now (miserable man) perish in their dearest company.
O my dear children, who would have thought that my life and yours should end
at one time and by one misfortune! Feign would I (poor souls) comfort you;
but what can a sorrowful father tell you, in whose heart there is such
abundance of grief and want of consolation? But comfort your selves my
children, by arming your invincible souls with patience, and lay all the
burden of your sorrow upon my back, for besides that I shall once die for my
self, I must suffer so maine deaths more, as you have lives to leese.

This did the old and sorrowful man abruptly deliver with so many tears and
sobbes, that he could scarce speak, embracing first one and another, and then
altogether for his last farewell, before the very point of danger and death was
fully come. But now to tell thee of Alcidas tears, and to recount the grief
that I endured for her sake, were too difficult and long a narration. Only one
thing I will not omit to tell thee, that that which did most torment me, was to
think, that the same life which I had offered up for her service, should now
be jointly lost with hers.

In the mean while, the forlorn and tossed ship, by the force and violence of
the fierce western winds, which by the streights of Gibraltar, came blowing
as they were mad, sailed with greater speed then was expedient for our
safety, and being battered on every side with the cruel blows of envious
fortune by the space of a day and a night (unable also to be guided by the
skill and ceaselesse labor of the mariners) ran many leagues in the long
Mediterranean sea, wheresoever the force of the waves and winds did carry
her. The next day following Fortune seemed a little while to wax more calm
and gentle, but on a sudden turning again to her acccustomed cruelty, she
drove us into such danger, that now we looked not for one half hour of life.
For in the end a fierce and mighty tempest came so suddenly upon us, that the
ship driven on by the force of a boisterous blast, that smit her on the
starboord, was in so great danger of turning bottom up, that she had now her
forepart hidden under the water: whereupon I undid my Rapier from my side
(espying the manifest and imminent danger) because it might not hinder me, and
embracing my Alcida, leaped with her into the Sciffe that was fastened to the
ship. Clenarda, that was a light and nimble damsel, followed us, not
forgetting to leave her bow and quiver in the ship, which she esteemed more
then any treasure. Polydorus embracing his old father Eugerius, had also leapt
in with him amongst us, if the Pilot of the ship with another mariner had not
been before him: But at that very instant when Polydorus with old Eugcrius
were next to them, preparing themselves to leap out of the ship, a mighty
great blast of wind smiting on the larboord, brake the cockboate from the
ship, and drove them so far asunder, that those miserable men that were in her,
were constrained to tarry there still, from which time (unless a little while
after) we lost sight of them, and knew not what became of the ship, but do
verily think, that it was either swallowed up by those cruel waves, or else
smiting upon some rock or sands near to the coast of Spain, is miserably
cast away. But Alcida, Clenarda, and I remaining in the little Sciffe that was
guided by the industry of the Pilot, and of the other mariner, went floting up
and down a day and a night attending every minute of an hour apparent death,
without hope of remedy, and ignorant in what coast we were. But the next
morning finding our selves near to land, we made toward it amain. The two
mariners that were very skillful in swimming, went not alone to the wished
shore, but taking us out of the boat carried us safely thither. After that we
were delivered from the perils of the sea, the mariners drew their Sciffe to
land, and viewing that coast where we arrived, knew that it was the Island
Formentera, woondering not a little that in so small time we had run so many
miles. But they that had so long and certain experience of the casual
effects, which outrageous tempests are wont to cause, marvelled in the end not
much at the preposterous course of our navigations. Now were we safely com to
land, secure from the dangers of passed fortune, but yet surcharged with such
sorrow for the loss of Eugerius and Polydorus, so ill entreated by greef and
care, and so weakened by hunger and cold, that we had no less sure hope of our
safety, nor recovery of our lives, then joy of our passed perils. I pass over
with silence, fair Shepherdess, the great complaints that Alcida and
Clenarda made for the loss of their father and brother, because I would quickly
com to the period of this lacrymable history, and to the haples success that
befell to me since I came to that solitary Island: For after that in the same I
was delivered from Fortu^es cruelty, Love envying that poor content of mine,
became my mortal foe so extremely, that sorrowing to see me escaped from the
tempest, with a new and greater grief (when I thought my self most safe) he
tormented my scarce revived soul. For alas, wicked love wounded the Pilots
heart (whose name was Sartofano) and so enamoured him on Clenardas beauty, that
(to come to the end of his desire, by imagining and hatching in his wicked heart
a strange and inopinate treason) he forgot the law of faith and friendship.
And thus it was: That after that the two sisters had with bitter tears and
lamentations offered up the sorrowful effects of their loving hearts as
obsequies to the ghostes of their deceased parents, it fell out that Alcida,
wearied with the long grief and troubles that she had passed, laid her self
down upon (...) sand, and being overcome with deep melancholy, fell fast
asleep. The w^ when I perceived, I said to the Pilot.

My friend Sartofano, unless we seek out something to eat, or if in seeking,
our hard fortune will not conduct us where we may find some food, we may
make full account that we have not saved our lives, but rather changed the
manner of our death. Wherefore I pray thee, my good friend, to go with thy
fellow mariner to the first village thou can find in this Island to seek
out some victuals for the sustenance of our hungry bodies.

Whereunto Sartofano answered. Though Fortune has sufficiently favored us by
bringing us safe to land, yet think not (Marcelius) to find any thing here
to eat; this being an Island, of towns desert, and of people inhabited: But to
comfort you again, I will tell you a remedy, how to save our selves from
dying for hunger. For, see you yonder little Island right over against us, and
so near to this? There is so great store of venison, conies, and hares, and
many other wild beasts, that in great heardes they go together without fear
or danger at all. There also dwells a certain Hermit, whose celle is never
without, bread, oil and moale. I therefore think it best that Clenarda (who is
cunning in shooting, and having her bow and arrows here so fit for the
purpose) pass over in the boat to the Island to kill some of those wild
beasts, whom my fellow and I will transport whilst you stay here to bear
Alcida company: for it may fall out that we will return before she awake, and
come hither again with good store of fresh and sauorie provision.

Although Clenarda and I liked Sartofanos counsel well, least of all
suspecting his subtle and secret treachery, yet she would never consent to go
into the Island without my company, for sear of committing herself alone to
the rude mariners; whereupon she requesting my company, I made many excuses
to stay behind, telling her that it was not meet to leave Alcida alone and
sleeping in so solitary a place: Who answered me again, that since the
distance of the place was but small, the game much, and the sea somewhat calm
(for by that time that we were a little while on land, the tempest began to
cease) we might go hunt and come again before Alcida (who had not slept so
long before) awaked. In the end she showed me so many persuasions, that
forgetting what I had to do in such a case, without more adoo I agreed to go
with her; which thing grieved Sartofano to the heart, who had rather had
Clenardas company alone for the better effecting of his wicked purpose. But yet
the Traitor for all this wanted not suttletie to prosecute his devilish
pretense. For Alcida being left asleep, and both of us got into the Sciffe,
and lanched into the deep, before we came to the Island all unawares and
unprovided of weapons (for I had left mine in the ship, when I skipt out of it
to save my life) I was assailed by both the mariners, and unable to help my
self, bound both hand foot. Clenarda seeing their treason, for sudden grief
would have lept into the sea; but she being stayed by the Pilot, and carried
from the place where I was to the other end of the boat, he said thus in
secret to her. Trouble not thy self (fair gentlewoman) to see us so rudely
entreat this Traitor, but quiet thy mind, for what is done, is all for thy
service. For know (fair Mistress) that this Marcelius, when we arrived at the
desert Island, had some private talk with me, and prayed me to persuade thee to
go a hunting into this Island; and when we should be at sea, to steer the
boat directly from that place, telling me, that he was greatly in love with
thee, and that he would leave thy sister in the Island, only and without
impediment to enjoy his pleasure of thee: And the denial of his company with
thee to this place, which faintly he used, was but dissembled to color his
wicked intent the more. But I considering with my self what a vile and
barbarous a part it was to offer violence to so singular beauty, and to so
good a Lady, to prevent this inhumanitie from thy great goodness, even at the
very point when he would have committed his treason, resolved to be loyal
unto thee, and so have bound Marcelius as thou see, with determination to
leave him in this case at the shore of a little Island which is near at hand,
and afterward to return with thee to the place where we left Alcida: This is
the reason that makes me do thus, and therefore consider well what thou meanest
to do. When Clenarda heard this smooth tale, which the wicked Traitor so
cunningly had told her, she believed it so truly, that presently she bare me
mortal hatred, and was well pleased, it seemed, that I was carried to the
place, where Sartofano did mean to land me. For with a frowning countenance
she beheld me, and for very anger could not speak a word, until she had a
pretty while rejoiced in her secret heart to think of the revenge and
punishment, that should light upon me, not telling me one word of that brave
deceit, wherewith she was so much abused. All which when by her joyful
countenance I perceived, and that my bonds did not grieve her, it made me say
thus unto her. What means this sister, do thou esteem so lightly of both
our pains, that so soon thou have ended thy complaints? Perhaps thou art in
good hope to see me by and by at liberty to be revenged of these villainous
Traitors? Then like a fierce Lioness she told me, that my imprisonment and
bonds where for no other cause, but for the cruel intent I had to leave
Alcida, and to carry her away, and the rest, whereof the false Pilot had
wickedly informed her. When I heard these words, I never felt like grief in my
life, and instead of laying violent hands upon these Traitors, with vile and
outrageous words I railed upon them; and with good proofs so well persuaded
her of the truth, that she perceived by and by that it was a manifest piece of
treason, sprung up of Sartofanos vile and filthy love: Whereupon she made so
great lamentation, that she fell forthwith into the pitiful discourse of
their deceit, which was forcible enough to have mollified the craggie rocks
we passed by with ruthe and compassion, though it wrought nothing in the hard
hearts of those two wicked monsters. Imagine then now how the little sciffe that
floted up and down the wide seas, was in a small time carried a great way from
the Island, when unfortunate Alcida awaking, and seeing her self all alone,
and forsaken, turned her sorrowful eyes to the maine sea, and not finding the
sciffe, how in every part of the shore thereabout, she went seeking up and
down and found no creature at all. Ah thou may conceive (fair Shepherdess)
what anguish of mind she felt in these crosses of unjust Fortune! Imagine
besides, what plenty of tears she powered forth, in what extremities and wants
she was, how sometimes (perhaps) she would have cast her self into the sea,
and how often in vain she called upon my name. But alas we were gone so far,
that we could not hear her pitiful outcries, and might only perceive (how by
shaking a white scarffe up and down in the Air) she incited us to turn back
again, which the wicked Traitor Sartofano would never agree to. But making
the greatest haste away that he could, he brought us to the Island of Yuica,
where disimbarking us, they left me fast bound to an anchor that was pitched in
the ground. That way by chance came certain Mariners of Sartofanos
acquaintance, companions like him self, whom though Clenarda never so much
informed of her estate, innocence, and misfortune, yet it auailed her nothing
to make them take pity on her, but they rather gave to the Traitor sufficient
provision, who went to imbarke himself again with Clenarda, whom poor soul
(at her peril) she must needs follow; from which time hitherto I never saw
nor heard any news of them. There was I left all alone bound hand and foot,
and pinched with intolerable hunger. But that which most of all grieved me, was
Alcidas want and sorrow, who was likewise left alone in the Island Formentera,
and in lieu thereof regarded not mine own, which was presently remedied. For
at the noise of my loud and lamentable outcries, certain Mariners came to
me, who being more pitiful then those before, gave me some meat to stanche my
extreme hunger. And at my incessant request, they armed for my sake a
Fregantine, and carrying with them some store of meat and wine, with weapons,
and other necessaries embarked themselves in my company, and within a short
time, with swift and speedy oars it came to the Island of Formentera, where
Alcida was left a sleep. But for all that I could do by seeking up and down
in it, and hallowing in every place, and calling aloud on Alcidas name, I
could neither find her, nor by any sign perceive that she was there. I then
thought that she had desperately thrown her self into the sea, or else that
she had been devoured of wild beasts. But yet seeking up and down the
plains and shoares, and all those rocks and caves, and most secret corners of
the Island, in a piece of a rock, made in form of a quarri^ found these
verses with a sharp point of steeled knife, engraven, which said thus.

O Sandy desert, and dry barren meade,
Thou that have heard the sound of my lament,
O swelling seas fierce wind to changing bent,
Changed with my sighs, that are in sorrow bread
Hard recke, wherein for ever may be read
My torment herein graven, and permanent:
Truly report my pains which you present.
For that Marcelius here has left me dead,
My sister stolen, he has forgotten me
His faith, his sails, and then my hope forlorn
Commend I to the winds, and witness ye
That love I will not any man that is borne,
To escape those seas where calmes are never any,
Nor combat foes, that are so fierce and many.
I cannot tell thee (fair Shepherdess) how deep a wound my soul felt, when
I read these letters, knowing that for another fault and vile deceit, and by
the hard event of cruel fortune I was so suddenly abhorred of Alcida:
wherefore resolving with my self not to lead a life replenished with such woes
and miseries, I would forthwith with one of their swords have pierced my
heavy heart, had not one of those mariners who suspected such a thing, by
maine force hindered me from it. With comfortable words therefore they brought
me back again half dead into their Fregatte, and being moved at my
importunate and pitiful prayers, for a piece of money carried me toward the
coast of Italy, and landed me in Gayeta in the kingdom of Naples. Where
enquiring of every one that I knew and met, after Alcida, and publishing
certain tokens of her, at the last by certain Shepherds which came thither in
a ship of Spain, I heard some news of her, which ship passing by Formentera,
found her there al alone, and took her in; and that she had taken upon her the
habit of a Shepherdess; with as strong a resolution to hide her-selfe from
me, as strange to live unknown in those disguised weeds. Which when I
understood, I also apparelled my self like a Shepherd, the better to find her
out, and wandering up and down, and seeking her thoroughout all that kingdom,
could never find her, nor hear which way she was gone, until a long time
after I understood that she knew how I had notice of her, which made her fly
the farther from me, and to pass into Spain in a ship of Genua. Then I
embarked my self presently to follow her, and hither I am come into Spain,
where having trodden the greatest part of it in seeking her up and down, have
not yet found any one, that could tell me any news of this cruel one, whom
with so great grief and trouble of mind and body I am continually seeking,
and can never find.

This is (fair Shepherdess) the tragedy of my life, this is the cause of my
death, and this the process of al mine ils: In which so sad discourse if I
have been too tedious, the fault is thine, since my unwilling tongue, by thy
importunate requests was constrained to tell it. And that which now I crave of
thee (gentle Shepherdess) is, that thou would not trouble thy self to
apply any remedies to my sorrow, nor comfort my cares, nor to stop the
tears, which with so just cause are due to my cordial grief. Marcelius
having ended his sorrowful history, began to make a most doleful complaint,
and to sigh so forciblie, that it was great pity to behold him. Feign would
Diana have told him tidings of his Alcida, which was not long since in her
company; but to perform her word, which she had promised not to discover her
unto him, and also for that she saw it would but have tormented him more, by
giving him notice of her, who extremely hated him, held her peace: And rather
wished him, to comfort himself by entertaining an assured hope and confidence
of his future gladness, since she herself doubted not before it was long to see
him very joyful in the presence of his beloved Mistress. For if it was true
(as he believed) that Alcida went wandering up and down in the company of
Shepherdesses and Nymphs of Spain, she could not then (said Diana) be long
vnhidden from him, and so she promised him to cause an inquiry and search to
be made in the strangest, remote, and solitary places, and in the fields
most frequented by them, but especially charging him to have a regard to his
own life, and promising him to perform that which she had offered. For which
unexpected courtesies, Marcelius yielding her infinite thanks, would have taken
his leave, saying, that after a few days he thought to return thither
again, and to give her a full account of al those accidents that in seeking
out Alcida might happen unto him. But Diana staying him, said. I will not be
so great an enemy to mine own content, to let thee go out of my company,
but would rather (because I see my self forsaken of my husband Delius, as thou
art of thy Alcida) have thee stay and eat (if it please thee) a little of my
simple cheer to refresh thy self, who have (it seems) no small need thereof.
And after when the shadows of the trees and hills wax greater, we will both go
home to our village, wherewith that rest (which continual grief will suffer
us to take) we will pass the night away, and in the morning betimes hasten us
toward the Temple of chaste Diana, where the sage Lady Felicia makes her
abode, whose secret wisdom will minister remedies to our painful passions.
And because thou may the better enjoy the rural conversation and country
plains of the Shepherds and Shepherdesses of our fields, it shall be best for
thee, not to change thy pastoral habit, nor to discover thy self, but to
name thy self, and in apparel and fashions live wholly like a Shepherd.
Marcelius being willing to do that, which Diana told him, did eat a little of
that which she had taken out of her neat scrip, and quenched his thirst with
the sauorie water of the clear fountain, both which were so needful for him,
as for one that traveling all the day before, had neither eaten nor drunk:
and then they went on their ways toward the village. But they had not gone
forth many paces, when in a little thicket not far from the path way, they
heard the resounding voices of certain Shepherds, who sweetly sung to the
tune of their merry Bagpipes, and because Diana was delighted much in music,
she prayed Marcelius to go to the place where they were, who being come near
unto the wood, Diana knew the Shepherds Taurisus and Berardus, two great
corriuals in her love, and commonly wont to go together in company, and sing in
emulation the one against the other. Whereupon Diana and Marcelius not entering
into the place where the Shepherds were, but yet hiding themselves behind
certain Oaks so nigh, that they might hear the sweetenes of the music,
listened to the Shepherds songs, being not perceived of them at all, who though
they knew not the cause and effect of their songs, was so near at hand, yet
divining (as it were) that their enemy was harkening unto them, by clearing up
their pastoral voices, and making most delicate and different stops with them,
they began to sing this Eglogue following.

Taurisus. NOw that the sun does hide his golden beams
Behind the hills, whose shadows do increase:
And laboring men unyoke their weary teames
And leave of work, their wearied lims to ease:
My sheep forsake your pastures, and attend
Unto my fainting voice and hollow cries,
Which without stint or pause of time, I send
Disorderly unto the careless skies:
Hark how my poor and miserable heart
Is in the deepest of a burning flame,
And how my bowels and every inward part
Are melted with the scorching of the same:
That flame I mean and heat, wherewith my senseless soul does trace
The Angelical and peerless beauty of Dianas face.
Berardus. Before the sun in radiant Coche does glide
Down to the West, to leave our Hemisphere,
And suffers not the deaw of evening tide
To fall upon the meadows any where,
Thou simple Sheep that often have heard my voice,
And gentle lambs which all the summer long
With merry glee do in these meades rejoice,
Now lend a gentle ear unto my song:
My ruthful song and verse shall not entreat
(Though all the same within my breast I bear)
Of any flames, or coals, or burning heat:
But of that mortal cold and frozen fear,
Wherewith does bridle and correct the senseless soul apace
The Angelical and peerless beauty of Dianas face.
Taurisus. When that my painful thoughts and pensive mind
Do but imagine of her comely graces,
Then burns my soul so strangely, that I find
My vital spirits to leave their proper places:
Love does enforce this suffrance, weak by kind,
And hope, that is flowne away with feathered paces,
To make my flames still burning in my breast,
Which gives me not one hour of wished rest.
Berardus. When I consider of my base estate,
And high perfections of my Shepherdess,
Then does my heart retire with fearful gate,
And pinching frost my timorous soul possess:
Love will I live in hope of happiness,
And so I do sometimes, but fortunes hate
To quaking fear subiecteth every power,
Which makes me not enjoy one happy hour.
Taurisus. In such ill time, I saw the burning light
Of those clear stars, whose like was never seen,
That face, that grace, those virtues infinite,
With which Diana reigns as fairest Queen:
That my desires are kindled by those bright
And shining beams, that I do never ween
To hope for ease of these excessive flames
That burns my soul, and breeds a thousand blames.
Berardus. In such ill time I saw those dainty hands
Of whitest Iuorie, framed for thousand smartes,
And those two eyes, where little Cupid stands
Wounding the freest minds with mortal darts:
That my small forces with his mighty bands
Confounded, foiled, and fearfully departes,
And then remains so weakened with his ire,
That shiuering fear does conquer my desire.
Taurisus. Did ever see a lightning from the skies
With mighty force to rend an aged Oak?
So strong is that and terrible, which lies
Within my breast, all smoothered in the smoke:
Did ever see the violent force of brooks,
That from the highest rocks fall headlong down?
So proud, so fierce, and angry in her looks
Diana seems, when she begins to frown:
But her pretenses are too far
To make me sad by base and servile fear,
For greater that the dangers are,
The greater is the firmenes which I bear.
Berardus. Did ever see the snow in any hill
To lie, and melt before the sunnie beams?
So do I waste with sighs and tears distill
Before those lights that from her beauty streams:
Did ever see in any bloody broile
Some simple Shepherd put to fearful flight?
With no less fear (poor man) I do recoile,
Leaving my sheep (whilome my best delight)
And in this cold and frozen fear
I merit more, and in my trembling breast
More comfort and content do bear,
Then in that heat so bold and manifest.
Taurisus. My grief (Berardus) which I feel, is of such sutell Art,
That it does trouble still my soul and every part consume
Thereof, which never to resist, durst once presume for fear,
But even as gently as it may, and must with meare consent
Yield up her life into the hands of him that is bent to tame
The proudest hearts: And joyful in his burning flame I lue:
And as they do of comfort give me store
For more content, so would I wish for more.
Berardus. The Gods (Taurisus) and the heavens have made so passing fair
This star Diana, whose golden gleames of glittring hair and face
Do with their lights illuminate my life, and chase away
The darkest clouds, restoring to mine eyes a day so bright,
That if I am beholding her the shining light and blaze
Of those two stars, mine eyes and senses do amaze and blind,
That casting them unto the ground, my hopes I find so bare,
That, though I would, not once I dare complain
Or see, or sue, or tell her of my pain.
Taurisus. This lovely Nymph would never list
Unto my woeful cries,
But in her rigor does persist
And from my succor flies:
And pitilesse to see my death would never turn her eyes.
O cruel eyes, O cruel pain,
O beauty, cruel foe:
Yet does my faith so firm remain,
That all my cares and woe
It does encour age in such sort, and fears does overthrow,
That like a sturdie rock it stands
Against the cruel raues
(Though fencelesse in the naked sands)
Of beating winds and waves.
And how much more with conquering hand my heart she does control,
By so much do I add more heat unto my burning soul.
Berardus. The woods and mount aines do not bear
Woolues of such cruelty,
Whose howling threats I fear not theare,
And yet aiealousie
Does make my heart to quake for fear,
And yield most cowardly.
I am not able to defend
My weak and feeble breast
From thousand fears, where they pretend
To build their strongest nest:
And with their entrance drive away my hopes, my joy and rest.
There they command and govern all,
And proudly tyrannize,
And there my soul to endless thrall
And body sacrifice.
O cruel Love, whom cruel death must needs at last succeed,
O why with such consuming tortures die I not in deed?
Taurisus. Near to this Crystal fountain on a day
I saw Diana sitting with her spouse,
And as by chance I crossed the woods that way,
Espied them behind these hasell bows:
Dying with grief impatience, and despite
To see (which I would not have seen) that sight.
Nothing he spoke, but with his clownish hand
Did rudely touch, and claspe her round about:
(Her tender corpse, the smallest in this land,
Too dainty and fine for such a homely lout.)
And so he sat, and did not stir
In this unseemly sort with her.
But when my jealous eyes so bas^ thing espied
With mortal rage I burned and cruel enute died.
Berardus. To walk the woods in sweetest month of May
When winter hides his hoarie head for shame,
Diana with her husband on a day
The glory of the fairest women came.
A veil of Lawne upon her golden hair
With silver pins enfolded every where,
A thousand sportes and pastimes did I see
How she found out, his mind to recreate:
And as I lurked behind a Poplar tree,
How lovingly she dallied with her mate:
Whom I did see reach forth his hand
Unto her neck as white as swan,
Wherewith he did undo her veil and loose her shining hair,
Which sight did kill my heart with fear enwrapped in despair.
The Shepherds after they made an end of singing, began to gather their flocks
together, that went feeding up and down the wood. And coming toward the
place where Marcelius and Diana were, they could not otherwise choose but see
them, for they had no handsome shift to hide themselves, although they would
feign have stepped aside. At which joyful and unexpected sight, they received no
mean content and gladness. And though Berardus was somewhat altered and appalled
thereat, yet inflamed Taurisus to see the cause of his grief before his eyes,
kindled more and more his hot desire. They curteoufly saluted the Shepherds,
and requested them not to deny them their company to the village, since good
fortune had made them all so happily meet together. Diana, whose custom was
never to be coy nor discurteous, was well content to do it. So that Taurisus
and Berardus prayed the other Shepherds that were with them, to come after by
little and little with their flocks, that they had now gathered up together,
toward the village, whilst they in company of Diana and the other Shepherds
went on before; which they willingly performed. Taurisus by the way as he went,
prayed Diana to answer verse for verse to the song that he would sing, which
she denied him not to do, and so they sung as follows.

Taurisus. THe cause why that thou do deny
To look on me, sweet foe impart?
Diana. Because that does not please the eye,
Which does offend and grieve the heart.
Taurisus. What woman is, or ever was,
That when she looks, could be moved?
Diana. She that resolves her life to pass,
Neither to love nor to be loved.
Taurisus. There is no heart so fierce nor hard,
That can so much torment a soul.
Diana. Nor Shepherd of so small regard,
That reason will so much control.
Taurisus. How falsit out Love does not kill
Thy cruelty with some remorce?
Diana. Because that Love is but a will,
And free will does admit no force.
Taurisus. Bebold what reason now thou have,
To remedy my loving smart?
Diana. The very same binds me as fast,
To keep such danger from my heart.
Taurisus. Why do thou thus torment my mind,
And to what and thy beauty keep?
Diana. Because thou call'st me still unkind,
And pitilesse when thou do weep.
Taurisus. It is because thy cruelty
In killing me does never end:
Diana. Nay for because I mean thereby
My heart from sorrows to defend.
Taurisus. Be bold so foul I am no way
As thou do think, fair Shepherdess:
Diana. With this content thee, that I say,
That I believe the same no less.
Taurisus. What after giving me such store
Of passions, do thou mock me too?
Diana. If answers thou will any more
Go seek them without more adoo.
It greatly contented Taurisus that Diana sung with him, whereby though he
heard the rigorous answers of his Shepherdess, yet he was so glad in his
mind, that she deigned to answer him, that it made him forget the grief,
which by the cruelty of her words he might have otherwise conceived. But now
timorous Berardus forcing his heavy heart, and casting a pitiful eye on Diana
(not unlike the sorrowful Swanne, that a little before her death singes
sweetly in the clear and crystal brooks) lifted up his faint and fearful
voice, which came forth with great pain out of his panting breast, and to the
sound of his Baggepipe sung these verses following.

ENd now my life, with daily pains affrighted,
Since that for all that I have wept and grieved,
My tears are not requited,
And trusty faith not any whit believed.
I am in such a hapless state of sorrow,
That I would be content (and so relieve me)
Unjust rewards and scorns of her to borrow,
Only that she would credit and believe me.
But though my life is thus with woes despited,
And though to be most constant, never grieved,
My pains are not requited,
And trusty faith not any whit believed.
After that Berardus had ended his song, both the Shepherds cast their eyes
upon Marcelius, and because he was unknown to them, they durst not entreat him
to sing. But in the end bold Taurisus prayed him to tell them his name, (and if
it pleased him) to sing them a song, wherein they would think themselves
beholding to him for either courtesy. At which words Marcelius looking upon
Diana, and making her a sign to touch her instrument, without giving them any
other answer, with one song pleased them both, and satisfied their desire.
Whereupon fetching out a great sigh, he began thus.

AH such an one I ever was, since that
My Shepherdess so cruel I did see,
That now I know not who I am, nor what
My hap shall be, or shall become of me.
I know right well that if I were a man,
Grief had my life consumed long ago:
And if a stone, I am most certain then,
That dropping tears had melted me like snow.
Marcelius is my name, who knows not that?
And I am hers, since first I did her see,
That now I know not who I am, nor what
My hap shall be, or shall become of me.
Now did the light begin to give place to darkness, and the country villages
with their domestical fires began to smoke apace, when the Shepherds being
near to their town made an end of their singing. Every one went to his own
house, as men not meanly glad for their passed conversation: but Diana found
no rest at all, especially when she remembered that her beloved Syrenus was not
in the town. She lodged Marcelius well in M^libeus house, cosen to Delius,
where with great kindness, and their best country cheer he was welcomed: and
after coming home to her own house, she called her husbands and her own
kindred together, and told them how Delius had forsaken her at the fountain
of the Sicamours by following a strange Shepherdess, that by chance came
thither. At which words she seemed to make so grievous complaints, and indeed
to be so sorry, that in the end she told them all, that early in the morning
she was purposed to go to Dianas Temple, to enquire of sage Felicia some news
of her husband Delius. They were all well content, that she should go, and
offered her all the favor and help they could in her journey, but the intent
thereof was for no other end but to see Syrenus, whom she knew assuredly to be
there. Wherefore with many thanks she remained very glad, that her
determination had so good success; and so with hope of her future joy, she
gave some rest that night to her wearied body, and felt in her heavy heart a
touch of unwonted pleasure and content.

The end of the first book.
The second Book of Enamoured DIANA.
Unjust and lawless love is of such force, that, to augment his cruelty, it
has the help of all things in the world, his enterprises being favored and
maintained by those things, which are of most might and valor, but especially
aided so much by Fortune, and by her mutabilities, as for bestowing his pains
and torments abroad, he needs no better friend nor furtherer. All which is
verified by Marcelius disgraces, since Fortune wrought so hard a conceit in
his betrothed Alcidas breast, that she was forced to give credit to such a
suspicion, that (though most false) she held for an assured, or at least an
apparent ground of his inconstancy, whereof ensued the hating of her husband,
who loved her deerer then his own life, and who in any thing had never
offended her. Hereupon it may be gathered, how strong and certain a
presumption ought to be, to make a wise and discreet person give faith and
credit to it, since this, that had but a color of certainty was so far
indeed from the truth of the matter. But now though Love and Fortune so ill
entreated Marcelius, yet in one thing they highly pleasured him, which was,
that Love wounded Dianas heart, and Fortune conducted him to the fountain,
where he found her, whereby they might go both together to sage Felicias house,
and pass away his sorrows with less annoy in her comfortable and delighfull
company. But the time being come, when the red morning with her golden
habit did overcome the stars of the passed night, and the birds with their
chirping noise gave warning that day was come, Enamoured Diana, wearied with
the long and tedious night, rose up, to walk the path of her desired journey:
and committing the charge of her flocks to the Shepherdess Polyntia her
friend, she came out of her town accompanied only with her rural Baggepipe,
(the deceiuer of her sorrows) and with her scrippe stored with some few
victuals. She came down from the side of a hill, which led from the town to
a thick wood, where in the bottom of it she sat her down underneath a row
of green Sicamours, attending for Marcelius company, as she had promised the
night before. But in the mean time, whilst he came not, she began to tune her
Baggepipe and to sing this song following.

AWake a little, light of cleerest day,
With calm aspect, with mild and gentle grace,
A poor soul to beguile in sorrows plight:
Stretch out that light Apollo from thy face,
That ioies the desert Champians in decay,
And driest plants with life and secret might:
In this most pleasant wood, that does inuit
To sweetest rest,
Tormented thou shall see my breast
With careful grief (my heavy lot)
To see it self by him forgot,
Who for my scorn a thousand plaintes did waste,
The fault is Cupids taste,
Who gives and takes on purpose discontent,
Where he perceiues he may the more torment.
What beasts with mildness do not complaints acquaint,
What stone by sighs is not to softnes wrought,
The which a wearied breast does yield with pain?
What Tigres, or what lions are not brought
To ruth and pity, hearing a complaint
Which has almost undone my soul in twain.
But to Syrenus I recount in vain
My sorrowful mishap,
Who does as little care for that,
As furious winds in raging seas
The tears, that all to little ease,
The mariners with careful heart do shill:
For more they cry, the more it rages still.
Thy love Syrenus was not fine and good,
Which in these fields to me thou did once bear,
When as my error might offend it so:
Remember (Traitor) what thou then did swear,
Near to the river sitting in this wood:
What then does now thy hardness seem to show?
Shall not a small oblivion long ago
Be helped by extreme love?
And such, that shall be far above
My passed hate, and fault before?
Then since I cannot love thee more
Nor satisfy the same with greater heat;
For remedy, my death I will entreat.
Live yet in pain, the which I feel at last
For thee who make my sorrows less appear,
Though more it hurtes my wretched soul, I see,
Because to have thy present figure here,
Gives to her thought a sweet delight some taste,
Who paining for thy sake does think on thee.
But bend thy heart a little unto me,
Ardent in my request.
Thou see I live in pain oppressed,
Sustained by this desire alone,
In all my life to hear but one
(No) if thou will, in that I most do love:
But from a man so fierce what shall I prove?
Tell me, the favors how can thou requite
In that time past, Syrenus, when thy heart
Thou had more tender, now in hardness dead:
When (Traitor) for my cause, with enuies smart
A thousand Shepherdes thou did kill outright:
O joyful time, and life that I did lead:
The vale shall witness, and the pleasant meade,
Where I of Roses white
And sweetest flowers, with delight
Brave garlands for thy head I had
Compacted, and sometimes did add
(Only for thy content) some of my hair,
Which grievous thought my life does now impair.
Now free, thou do abhor me, in the end,
Who, for thy sake her self in pain consumes:
But yet take heed of Cupids fine deceates:
For that proud heart, that overmuch presumes,
From cruel love his senses to defend,
The more he yeeldes, the more to strive he sweates:
O that thou were so wounded in his heates,
As now my self I see:
But ever it is unto me
The best advise, no good to crave:
For whatsoever it would have,
Though heaven, and earth the more it does importune,
It ever was denied by Love, and Fortune.
My song, in pine I will no wise ingraue thee,
Nor hardened Oak, but rather will commend thee
Unto the winds, where they will toss and wave thee,
And to the deaf and desert Champian send thee:
Because my torments, of their hope deprived,
And memory of them, which makes me sorry,
May be forgot, and never be revived,
Now that my life is lost and chiefest glory.
The delicate voice and excellent graces of Diana, surmounted far the praises
of the fairest and most skillful Shepherdesses of her time. And the quauers and
fine conceits wherewith so sweetly she brake her voice, and adorned her songs,
made her to be the more admired: For they were so rare and singular, that they
rather seemed to be fetched from some maiesticall court, then known in the
homely country. The which ought not to be so much wondered at, nor thought so
strange, since Love is able to make the simplest Shepherds discourse of high
and learned matters, especially if it find a lively wit and spirit, which in
those pastoral cottages is seldom wanting. But as the enamoured Shepherdess
was now ending her song, about that time that the clear Sun began to lessen
the shadows of the high hills, despised Marcelius taking his leave of his
pastoral lodging, to come to the place where he had appointed to meet Diana,
came down from the hill above, at the foot whereof she was sitting to attend
him: whom when she had espied a far off, she held her peace, because he might
not understand the cause of her grief. When Marcelius was come to the place
where Diana stayed for him, he said unto her. The clear light of this day
(fair Shepherdess) which with the more resplendant beams of thy shining
beautic did arise, be as joyful and happy to thee, as to me most sorrowful,
if in thy good company I pass it not away. Truly I am ashamed to see, that my
slownes has made thee stay here all alone so careful for my coming; but
this is not the first fault that (fair Diana) thou must pardon me during the
time that I shall converse with thee. As that pardon should be vain (answered
Diana) where there is no fault; so thou art not to be blamed for any such small
care, but rather the earnest desire that I had to rise so early, and to come
hither, where I have passed away the time in sundry fancies, and in thinking
of the effects which belong to a troubled mind. But here is no time nor place
for us to stay, since the desire I have to be at Dianas Temple is great, though
the way is very short: as also for that the morning being somewhat fresh, we
may before the Sun begins to power down his beams with greater heat, begin
to take our journey, the better to refresh our selves, and in the heat of the
day to rest our wearied bodies. When she had said thus, they both went on
their way, crossing over a thick wood that was before them, and for lightning
of their journey, began to sing that which follows.

Marcelius. INconstant love and cruel, which have lately
Settled my happy thoughts, my love and fire,
In such a place so famous, high and stately,
Where mortal men's deserts cannot aspire:
Well have thou showed thy power
By quailing of my sorrow,
To double it each hour
And make my torments greater even and morrow:
Thou might have left my heart in former sadness,
Because lesser harm it were to die with anguish,
Then to receive a gladness
So full of pain: And so by fits to languish,
Diana. Thou must not think it strange, and must not wonder
That thus the mighty Boy of pain and pleasure
After one small delight, does send a hunder
Nay thousand pains and torments without measure:
For firm repose to any
He yet did promise never,
But cruel deaths, and many
Sobs, sighs, and tears, complaints, and chains for ever:
The Lybian sands, and Aprils fairest flowers
Pass not the greefes, with which fierce love does murder
Each heart, and into showers
Distraines the eyes: And yet proceeds further.
Marcelius. Before that ever Love my soul inflamed,
His slightes, wherein he most of all abounded,
I knew right well, wherewith men's hearts he tamed
And captives made, and after deeply wounded:
Our lives with great offenses
Not only he annoieth,
But yet our wits and senses
And soundest judgments wholly he destroieth.
And so torments a soul, and so encumbers,
That one poor joy it hardly does recover:
So by ten thousand numbers
Most grievous thoughts surcharge a wretched lover.
Diana. If Loves deceites and his dissembling proffers,
Wherewith he takes us, are so known and tried,
Why then presents the soul it self and offers
So easily to be taken, and applied?
If that the heart so tender
The troubles intertaineth
That Cupid does engender,
Why after then laments it, and complains?
Reason it were in love he should be pained,
That to his darts does yield, and is consenting
With fetters to be chained:
For ill affoords us naught but pains tormenting.
They sung this song and many more, the which having ended, they were now out
of the wood, and then they began to walk over a pleasant and flowrie meade,
which caused Diana to use these words. They are no doubt marvelous and strange
things, which the industry of man has invented in populous and great cities,
but yet those, which nature has produced in the wide and solitary fields,
are more to be admired. For who would not wonder at the lively green of
this wood? and not be amazed at the beauty of this goodly meadow? For, to
behold the diversity of colored flowers, and the pleasant melody of
chirping birds, is a thing so full of content and delight, that the glorious
pomp and wealth of the brauest and most famous Court is not comparable to it.
There is indeed (said Marcelius) in this pleasant solitude great store of
content and joy, and namely for those that are free from passions of love,
since they may lawfully, and when they list, enjoy such rare sweetenes, and
abundant pleasures. And I am certain, that if Love, (which is now so much my
mortal enemy, remaining in these sequestered places) had in the village where I
was of late, given me half the grief, which now I feel, my life durst never
abide it, since with such like delights I could not have mitigated the
cruelty of my torment. To this Diana answered not a word, but putting her
snow white hand before her eyes, and therewith supporting her golden head,
she stayed a great while very sad and pensive: and after sending forth now
and then a sorrowful and painful sigh, said thus. Then woe is me
(unfortunate Shepherdess) that can find no remedy sufficient to comfort my
sorrows, when those, which take away from others a great part of their pain,
do bring to me a continual and burning grief. I can now (Marcelius) no
longer hide the pain which I suffer, the force whereof, though it compels me
to publish it, yet for one thing I am bound to thank it, that it constraines
me to tell it in such a time and place, where thou art only present, since thy
noble mind and experience in like passions will not (I hope) condemn it for a
mere and trifling folly, especially when thou know the cause thereof. I am
(to be plain with thee Marcelius) tormented with the like grief that thou
art, and am also forgotten (as thou art) of a Shepherd called Syrenus, of whom
in times past I was greatly beloved. For cruel Fortune, which ouerturneth
humane intents, married me to Delius (enforced more by the hard commandment of
my parents, then by mine own will) and to my great grief, made me a bondslaue
to such a husband, the intolerable thought of whose continual jealousy
(besides the sufferance of many other greefes more) is only sufficient to kill
this miserable soul. Whose injurious suspects I could be content yet to
suffer, if I might but enjoy the presence of Syrenus; who, taking a just
occasion by my forced marriage to forget me, forsook our town, (because he
would not see me) and (as I understand) is in the Temple of Diana, whither we
are now going. Whereupon thou may imagine what kind of life I lead, being
always troubled with the jealousy of my husband, and tormented with the
absence of my lover. Then Marcelius said. I cannot choose but pity thy grief,
now I know it (gracious Shepherdess) and am sorry that I have not heard it
till now. God grant I may never enjoy any happy content, if I wish it not as
well to thy heart as to mine own. But because thou know how general Loves
arrows are, and with what small partiality they hurt the stoutest hearts, and
most free and virtuous minds, then blush not to manifest his wrongs, since it
shall never the more be an empeachment to thy good name, but an occasion to
make me esteem the better of thee. And that which comforts me herein is, that
I know, that the torment of thy husbands jealousy (a greater corsiue to the
heart then the absence of the thing beloved) will suffer thee to take a little
rest, since Delius, who is following the flying Shepherdess, shall now be
separated from thy company. Enjoy therefore the time, and occasion that
Fortune presents thee, and comfort thy self, for it shall be no small ease
unto thee, to pass away the absence of Syrenus, being now free from the
importunous trouble of thy jealous husband. I would not esteem these iealousies
so hurtful to me (said Diana) if Syrenus had them as well as Delius, because I
would then think that they had their foundation and beginning of love. For it
is manifest, that they that love, would be glad to be loved again, and must
esteem the jealousy of the thing beloved, to be good and lawful, since it is
a manifest token of love, springing from love, incident to love, and ever
accompanied with it. And for my self I am able to assure thee, that I never
thought my self more in love, then when I was a little jealous, and never
judged my self to be jealous, but when I was ascertained that I was most in
love. To the which Marcelius replied thus, I never thought that a pastoral
plainnes was able to allege such wise reasons, in so difficult a question;
whereupon I must needs condemn that for an old approved error, that
maintains, that only in cities and in the court the finest wits, and
exquisite conceits do dwell, when I find them as well to be amongst the thick
woods, and in country and plain cottages. Yet for all this I will gainsay
thy opinion, whereby thou would seem to prove that jealousy is the
messenger and companion of love, as if love could not be where jealousy is not
joined with it. For though there are few lovers but are a little jealous; yet
we must not therefore say, that the Lover that is not jealous, is not a more
perfect and truer lover. For he rather shows (being exempt from jealousy)
what valor and force he has in love, and the quality of his desire, which is
pure and clear, and not troubled with the miste of jealous imaginations. Such
an one was I (with modesty be it spoken) in my most happy and passed times,
and so highly then prised my good Fortune, that with my public verses I did
manifest the same. And amongst many other times that Alcida marvelled to see me
so much in love, and free from jealousy, I took in hand on a time to write
this Sonnet to her to that effect.

A Sonnet.
THey say Love swear, he never would be friend,
If mortal Jealousy were not in place:
And Beauty never be in any face,
Unless that Pride did on her thought attend:
These are two hags, which hideous hell does send,
Our sweet content to trouble, and disgrace:
The one the joy of love to pain does chase,
The other pity from the heart defend.
Beauty and Love were both for sworn, by me
And thee, by making my unsure estate
In joy and happiness so fortunate:
Because smce first thy figure I did see
Being so Fair, yet Prouder wast thou never
Nor I in Love, that could be Jealous ever.
The pleasure that my Alcida took when I rehearsed this Sonnet to her, was so
great (perceiving thereby the integrity of my love) that a thousand times she
would sing it, knowing that I had well pleased her fancy with it. And truly
(fair Shepherdess) I hold it for a great error, that such a horrible monster
as jealousy is, should be accounted a good thing, as to say, that it is the
token of Love, and that it is not but in an enamoured heart. For by this
assertion we may say, that a fever is good, because it is a token of life, for
it is never but in a body most likely to live. But both are manifest errors,
since jealousy affoords no less pain then a fever: For it is a plague of
the soul; a frenzy disturbing the thoughts; a madness that weakens the body;
an anger consuming the spirits; a fear abasing the mind, and a fury that
fills the will with folly. But because thou may the better judge of jealousy
to be most abominable, imagine the cause of it, and thou shall find that it
is nothing else, but a little fear of that which is not, nor shall be, a vile
contempt of ones own deserts, and a mortal surmise, which calls the faith and
sincerity of that which is beloved, in doubt and suspicion. The pangs of
jealousy with words (gentle Shepherdess) cannot be decyphered: for they are
such that do infinitely exceed in quantity and quality the pains, that are
incident to love. For all the rest (saving they) may be converted in the end to
a great sweetness, and content. And as the burning thirst in the hottest day
makes the cold and fresh fountain water to taste more sweet and sauorie, and
as the danger and garboiles in war and sedition, make us esteem the more of
quietness and peace; so the torments of Love serve us for greater pleasure,
whenever any small favor is granted unto us, and when we enjoy but the
least content and happiness. But this frantike jealousy powers such bitter
poison into men's hearts, that it spoils and drives away all delights that
harbor in it. To this effect I remember that an excellent Musition in Lisbone
did sing this Sonnet on a day before the King of Portugal, which said thus.

A Sonnet.
Wen cruel absence wounds a soul with pain,
Then thought is fed with fancies in their kind:
For further of the good remains, the mind
Receives more joy, when that it comes again:
He that on hope his ground does yet sustain,
For all his grief a remedy shall find,
And for his pains rewards shall be assigned:
Or dies at lest in love content and feign:
A thousand pains away one joy does chase,
And to a thousand scorns revenge presents
The only viewing of an Angels face:
But when a soul vile jealousy torments,
Though thousand joys do afterward succeed,
Yet bitter grief and rage the same does breed.
O how true was his opinion, how sure was this conclusion? For in very truth
this pestilent jealousy leaves not one part of the soul whole, nor the least
corner of the heart unsearched, where any small delight may hide it self. There
is no content in Love, where there is no hope; and hope will never be there,
where jealousy is a mean between them both. There is no steadfast pleasure
where jealousy is, no delight which is not consumed with it, and no grief but
jealousy torments us with it. The enraged fury of poisoned jealousy is so
extreme, that it grieueth the heart infected with it, to hear the praises of
the thing beloved, and would never have the perfections of that which one
loves neither seen nor known of any but of himself, offering great injury
by means hereof to the woorthines of that gentilitie, that holds him in
captivity. And the jealous man does not only live in this slavery and pain,
but to her also whom he loves, he gives such incessant grief, that more he
could not give her, if he were her mortal enemy. Wherefore it is very
clear, that a jealous husband (like thine) would rather have his wife
seemefoule and loathsome to the world, and that she might be never seen, nor
praised; no, not by the most virtuous and modest minds. What grief is it for
the wife to have her honesty condemned by a false suspect? What greater
punishment, then without all reason to be locked up in a secret corner of her
house? What heart break sorrow with austere words, and sometimes with unseemly
deeds to be continually checked? If she be merry, her husband thinks her
dishonest; if she be sad, he imagines himself lothsom in her eye; if she be
musing, he judges her full of fancies; if she look on him, he thinks she
deceiues him; if she looks not on him, he thinks she hates him; if she use
any daliance with him, he thinks it to be but fained; if she be grave and
modest, he thinks her a counterfaite; if she laughes, he thinks her to be
loose; if she sigh, he counts her naught: And in the end jealousy conuerteth
every thing that is poisoned with it, to an endless grief and misery.
Whereupon it is very clear, that there is no pain in the world like to this,
and never out of hell came fouler Harpyes to contaminate and putrify the
sweet and sauourie food of an enamoured soul: wherefore care not greatly
Diana for the absence of jealous Delius, for it auailes thee not a little to
make thee suffer the pain of Love more gently. To this Diana answered. Now am
I thoroughly ascertained, that this passion which thou have so lively depainted,
is a most ugly and horrble thing, which deserves not a place in amorous hearts;
and also believe, that this was the very same grief that tormented Delius.
But I must tell thee by the way (Marcelius) that I never meant to defend the
like grief, and that never it found harbor in my breast: for as I never thought
amiss of Syrenus worthiness and deserts; so was I never tormented with such
like passion and folly, as thou have told of, but I had only a certain kind
of fear to be rejected in respect of another. And in this suspicion I have not
been much deceived, for to my great grief I have tried Syrenus forgetfulness.
This fear, said Marcelius, cannot be properly termed jealousy, which is
rather an ordinary passion in the best and wisest lovers. For it is verified,
that that which I love, I esteem and hold it for good, and think it deserves
to be beloved: which being so, I am afraid least another might know the
goodness, and worthiness of it, and so love it like my self. And so it falls out,
that a lover is put between hope and fear. That which the one denies him, the
other does promise him; and when the one does cast him down, the other lifts
him up again. And in the end, the wounds that fear makes in this contentious
quarrel, hope heales again, until one of the two remains conqueror. And if
it happen that fear ouercomes hope, the lover then becomes jealous; but if
hope conquers fear, then the lover lives in a joyful and happy estate. But
in the time of my good fortune I had ever so strong and sure a hope, that fear
was unable, not only to overcome it, but durst never attempt to assail it;
whereby, I ever enjoyed so great delight, that in exchange of that, I never
cared to be troubled with continual griefs. And I was so greatly in her favor,
that I sustained my hope in such firmnes, that there was no grief that came
from her part, that I accepted not for a singular joy, and pleasure. I
accounted her cruelties, courtesies; her disdaines, daliances; her angry
answers, amiable promises. Diana and Marcelius going on their ways, had these
and diverse other speeches together. And having passed over the green meade in
sweet communication, and going by the side of a little hill, they entered into
a pleasant wood, where the thick Sicamours did spread abroad fresh and cool
shadows. There they heard a passing clear voice, which joined with the tune
of a sweet harp, sounded forth strange melody; and coming near to hearken
to it, they might perceive, that it was the voice of a Shepherdess, that sung
in manner following.

A Sonnet.
AS many stars as Heaven contains, strive
To frame my harm, and lucklesse hap to show:
And in the Earth no grass nor green does grow,
That to my grief may any comfort give:
Love unto fear subjected, ever drive
A soul to coldest ice: O bitter woe,
That he, whom Fortune did contrary so,
Continually with jealousy must live.
The fault I must (Montanus) lay on thee,
And all my grief: on thee I do complain
(O cruel soul) that pity do disdain;
For if thou had but taken part with me,
I would not care though against me did conspire
Heaven, Earth, and Love, and Fortune in their ire.
After that the Shepherdess had sweetly sung, enlarging the raines of her
bitter and doleful complaint, she powered out such abundance of tears, and
gave so many sighs, that by them, and by the words she spoke, they knew that
a cruel deceit of her jealous husband was the cause of all her grief. But
because they would know better what she was, and the cause of her passion, they
went to the place where she was, and found her sitting al alone in the shadow,
which the thick boughs made on every side upon the fine and green grass,
near to a little spring, which rising out of the foot of an oak, ran by
diverse ways through that little wood. They courteously saluted her, and she
(although it grieved her that they had interrupted her lamentation, yet judging
by their countenances that they were Shepherds of good regard) was not greatly
discontented at their coming, hoping to have had the fruition of their good
company, and therefore said unto them. To my remembrance (fair Shepherd and
Shepherdess) I never received so great contenment that might be compared with
this in seeing you now, since the time that I was unjustly forsaken of my
cruel husband; which is so great, that though continual grief compels me to
ceaselesse plaints, yet will I make a pause of them a little while to enjoy
your peaceable and discreet company. To this Marcelius answered. I pray God
I may never see my torments cease, if that it greeues me not to see thine, and
the same may thou also believe of fair Diana, whom thou see in my
company. The Shepherdess hearing Dianas name, running unto her, did with the
greatest gladness that might be, embrace her, showing a thousand loving signs,
and making the most on her in the world, because she was desirous long since to
know her, for the great report that she heard of her wisdom and beauty.
Diana maruelling to see herself so entreated by a Shepherdess, whom she knew
not, requited her yet with like courtesies again, and desiring to know who she
was, said unto her. The great favors that thou have done me, and the pity
which I take of thy complaints, make me desirous to know what thou art,
wherefore tell us (fair Shepherdess) thy name, and discourse unto us the
cause of thy grief, because that after thou have told it, thou shall see how
our hearts will help thee to pass it away, and our eyes ready to bewail it.
The Shepherdess then with a gracious speech began to excuse herself, from
telling the substance of her own fall, yet urged in the end by their
importunate requests, she sat down again upon the grass, and began thus to
say. By the report of Seluagia that was borne in my town, and in thine too
fair Diana, which is now married to the Shepherd Syluanus, thou have been
told (I think) of the unfortunate name of Ismenia, that is now beginning to
tell her sorrowful tale. And I think that she told thee at large when she
was in thy town, how against my will I deceived her in the Temple of Minerua
in the kingdom of Portugal, and how by my own deceit I was overtaken; then
perhaps she has also told thee how I fained to love Montanus her mortal
enemy, to be revenged of Alanius, who for the love that he did bear her,
forgot me quite, and how this fained love with the riper knowledge of his
virtues, and accomplishments fell out at last so true, that by means of it, I
suffer this intolerable sorrow and grief, which even now I complained of.
Therefore passing on farther in the history of my life, thou shall understand,
that when Filenus father to Montanus came sometimes to my fathers house about
certain of his affairs, and bargains that he had with him for flocks of
sheep, and had espied me on a time, although somewhat aged, yet he was so
extreemely enamoured of me, that he became almost out of his wits. A thousand
times a day he wooed me, and every hour reckoned up to me his greefes, but
all in vain, for I would neither harken unto him, nor regard his words. Yet
because he was a man of more sufficiency, and of fewer years then many other
in his case, I did not altogether forget him, and the rather for his son
Montanus sake, whose love had made me now his captive before. The old man knew
not of the love, that Montanus did bear me, for he was always so careful and
dutiful a son, and so discreetly handled the matter, that the father had not
any notice thereof, fearing mightily (if it had been known) his fathers
displeasure, and that with bitter and angry words he might have justly
corrected him for it. And as wisely did the father conceal from his son
Montanus his own folly; for, the better to chastise and amend what he thought
amiss in his son, he was very vigilant not to discover his own and greater
faults. Although for all this he never ceased with continual suites to
solicit my love, and importuned me to take him for my husband. He discoursed
to me a thousand odd matters, and made me as many great offers: he promised me
many costly garments, rich jewels, and sent me many letters, thinking by those
means, if not to overcome me, at least to mollify my hard refusals. He was a
Shepherd in his flourishing age no less commended for all youthful sports, then
cunning in all pastoral exercises, one that could tell a smooth tale, and with
great wisdom and discretion bring his purpose to good effect. And because you
may the better believe me, I will rehearse unto you a letter that once he wrote
unto me, the which although it altered my mind nothing, yet it greatly
contented me, and thus it said.

Filenus letter to Ismenia.
Fair Shepherdess, The cause was Love,
Who (to acquaint thee with his pain)
This fault and blame in me did move
To write to thee: But to be plain,
Who would not be both shent and blamed,
In thy sweet loves to be inflamed?
But if my letter do offend
Thy modest ears, as to too bold:
Then understand, that in the end
The fear I have to be controld,
My soul with pain and grief has filled,
And has the same already killed.
I have to thee ten thousand times
My torments told, wherein I live,
Sometimes by speech sometimes by rimes,
Which first to me thy self did give,
The which no more thou do requite,
Then mock, unto thy great delighte.
With open mouth thou laugh'st at me,
And make it thine only game
To see me die for love of thee:
And I do joy to see the same:
Although thou laughest at my pain,
Which laughter is to me no gain.
And so when that in me I find
The grievous ill, which makes me die,
I think (when that comes to my mind)
No remedy thou will apply.
Because to see thou ici'st thy fill,
How much my comforts thou do kill.
A remedy thou do disdain:
And then my soul with hope to feed
I see it is as much in vain,
When as it is by love decreede
To have my life lie in thy hand,
And death in thy desire to stand.
I saw thy shining beauties beams,
Fair Shepherdess, upon a day
Near to great Duerus Crystal streams,
Making the fields so fresh and gay,
And goodly banks to joy and flourish,
The which thy beauties feeds and nourish.
And there I saw thee lean and stand,
Among those banks not long ago,
Upon thy sheepehooke with thy hand,
With naked neck as white as snow,
And to thine elbowe (seeming grieved)
With naked arm, that was vnsleeued.
Where if there had been any one,
That well had viewed every part,
Admit he were as hard as stone,
And had not loved thee from his heart:
Reason would move me then to say,
That he his folly did bewray.
And therefore thus when I had known
Thy goodly gifts, and beauty rare,
From thinking of them one by one
No time, nor rest I did not spare:
Thus I began loves force to try,
And in his torments thus to die.
But if against me thou do move
Saying, It is to me a shame
Being an old man thus to love
So young amaide, and so to blame:
O give me no advice at all,
But remedies for which I call.
For I will never think this part
Of mine has made so great acrime,
By loving thee with all my heart,
As bauing lost so long a time,
Before I ever came to know
Thy beauties which adorn thee so.
Alas I know that I am old,
And that my prime long since did fall,
Which now I wish I had not told:
But that which greeues me most of all,
Is that my loving pain appeeres
Not equal with so many years.
Because since first I came into
This life, I would in all that space
Have loved thee as now I do,
Since first I saw thy sweetest face,
And as I must with Cupids power
Unto my last and dying hour.
And let it not thy mind dismay
To see my hair so gray and white,
For it is ill to take away
The place from any, that of right
Belongs to him in any reason,
Though it comes out of time and season.
And though my valor not my heart,
And force, not will thou do exceed,
It is not yet so just a part
That any man should leese his meede
For being old, or be unpaid
Because a soldier now decaide.
The buildings newer that they are,
And lately built in any sort,
By no proportion may compare,
For statelines and princely port,
(The which antiquity does show)
With those of Rome built long ago.
And so in things of woorthines,
Of prime or goodness any way,
Of profit, joy or happiness,
Commonly unto this day
They say (and yet do say most true)
That the old is better then the new.
Love wise in that he went about,
Till now gave me no sense of pain,
Because he saw it did fall out,
That for the most part did remain,
In aged men, and like to me,
More firmness as we daily see.
To love thee more then I can tell,
I am resolved till I die,
And in my firmness do excel
Of all loves torments which I try:
But old again and not to prove
In all my life, the sweet of love.
Young youths that most of all do feign
Themselves to burn in Cupids heat
Are false and double, but to train
Believing women to deceate:
For when they say, That they do die
Then do they live most merrily.
And so their false and changing love,
And pains alleged in the same,
And all the torments which they prove
Is but their pastime, sport and game,
It is their jest and common fashion,
It is no will, nor any passion.
Besides, Ismenia do not fear
That I am like to one of those
Young lovers, that do every wheare
Their favors openly disclose:
For sooner they receive not one,
But straight to many it is known.
For though I do receive at lest
Three hundred favors one by one,
Yet in my love I do protest
To be as much a very stone
In hiding favors which I gain,
As that I am in suffering pain.
But yet as far as I can see,
Resolved as thou art in mind
To kill me with thy cruelty,
Suer I am that I shall find
Much to endure to be revealed,
Little enough to be concealed.
For now ungrateful Shepherdess,
The greatest favor which I miss
And feign the same would here possess,
Of all the rest is only this
To die, because I would no more
Complain against thee, as before.
Time only will I thee accuse,
O time that art so great a friend
To greefes, and make her refuse
My love, who loves her without end.
For he that has most part in thee
Is little worth in love we see.
Alas that ever I did love
Too late a thing so passing fair,
And reason therefore that I prove
To die for her in deep despair:
Since when her birth day did appear
I was not borne that very year.
If I had been, fair She pherdesse,
With thee, when I was in my prime
As now thou art, then more or less,
I had not wanted any time,
Delights and pastimes to present thee,
Nor thy sweet favors to content me.
For as for playing on a Pipe,
Or Rebecke with most sweetest sound
To touch with many a dainty stripe,
And dancing best in all the town,
Amongst the youths to win the prise
All in my favor did arise.
And therefore marvel not a whit,
If that in song I do excel
Famous Amphion, as unfit
(Compared with me) to bear the bell,
Since that my singing has surmounted,
Better then he was ever counted.
Of fields that goodly grain do bear
I plowe more acres then the rest:
And all my mountains every where,
And plains that are for pastures best,
With flocks of sheep and goats I cumber,
Marked with my mark that have no number.
But now what boots my present store
(O cruel hap) for my delight?
Or that that has been heretofore?
Since now it is forgotten quite.
Nay which is more, scorned and despised,
And unto cruel death devised.
Then (sweetest foe) let this avail
To make thy hardest heart relent,
Strike down of pride thy puffed sail,
When to thine eyes age shall present,
That in the same thy brave perfection
Shall vade, and be in times subjection.
O Shepherdess, thou art more hard
Then sturdy rock consumed in time:
But yet perhaps for thy reward
When thou have lost thy golden prime,
Then freedoms want shall be thy pain,
Wherewith thou do me now disdain.
Wherefore let Love take such de spite,
Revenging one so much unkind,
That when all hopes forsake thee quite,
And comforts for thy troubled mind,
Then he may give thee store of grief,
And make despair thy best relief.
These and many other letters and songs he sent me; the which, if they had
wrought their effect so much as my delight, he might then perhaps in his own
conceit have thought himself a happy man, and I have been by this time an
ill married wife. But there was not any thing able to blot Montanus image out
of my heart, who apparently also satisfied my will with like words and deeds. We
passed our lives away certain years in this joy, until we thought with holy
marriage to accomplish our happy days, and rest. And though Montanus would
have told his Father of it before, to have showed the duty of a good son,
yet he would not do it, when I told him, how hardly his Father would think of
it, by reason of the doting desire that he had to marry me himself: Having
therefore greater respect to the contentment of his own life, then to the
duty he owed his Father, without making him privy, we performed our unlucky
marriage. Which was done by the consent of my Father, in whose house there were
great feasts made in solemnity of it, besides other pastimes, as dancing,
plays, and such great sports, that the noise of them was bruted in all the
country towns about. Whereupon the loving old man understanding his own son
had deceived him of his love, he became so incensed against us both that he
hated us like death, and therefore would never after that see us, if he could
otherwise choose. On the other side there was a certain Shepherdess of that
town called Felisarda, that died almost for the love of Montanus, whom (in
regard of his great love to me, and of her bad conditions and declining age) he
could never abide: When she perceived that Montanus had married me, she had
almost hanged her self for grief, so that by our unfortunate marriage we got
us two mortal enemies. The wretched old dotard, because he would disinherit
his son, purposed to marry a young and fair wench, to have had children by
her. But though he was rich, yet did not any Shepherdess of our town love
him, Felisarda only excepted, who, because she thought by these means to
enjoy the dishonest love of Montanus (the which she bare yet fresh in memory)
married with old Filenus. And being now his wife, she practiced diverse ways to
win Montanus to her love, and especially by means of a maid she had, called
Sylueria, sending him word, that if he would condescend to her will, she would
make an atonement between his Father and him, offering him besides many great
rewards, and gifts. But she could never corrupt his mind, nor pervert his
chaste intent: Seeing her self therefore so much contemned, she began to bear
such mortal hatred to Montanus, that by and by she instigated his Father
against him; and not content with this, wrought more over this vile piece of
treachery against him. For she in such sort overcame Syluerias mind with
flattery, gifts, good cheer, and other favors, that she was content to do
whatsoever she commanunded, although it had been to the prejudice of Montanus,
whom sometimes she respected greatly, for that she had been a long time
servant in his Fathers house. Both of them agreede secretly together upon that
they had to do, and upon the hour of putting it in practice: Whereupon
Sylueria went out of her town, and coming to a forest near to the river
Duerus, where Montanus was feeding his sheep, she came to talk with him
secretly, as though she had been troubled much in mind about the weightiest
matter in the world, saying. Ah, Montanus, how wise were thou in despising thy
wicked Stepdames love, though I my self by her importunate request did what I
could to bring thee to it. But since I know what has passed, she shall never
make me any more the messenger of her dishonest lusts. I have seen, and know
certain things by her, which touch thy Fathers credit and thine too near, and
such, that, if thou knew them (though thy Father is so cruel to thee) in
such a case thou would not care to leese thy life for safeguard of his
honor. I tell thee no more but this, because I know thee to be so wise and
discreet, that I need make no longer discourse unto thee. Montanus was amazed
at these words, suspecting by and by some dishonest trick of his Stepmother:
But because he would be thoroughly informed of the matter, he prayed Sylueria to
tell him all that she knew concerning that matter. The more she was entreated,
the more she denied, making it very dainty, and no less dangerous to
discover so secret a thing; but in the end satisfying his request, and her own
desire, she told him a notable and cunning lie, saying. Because it is a thing
that so greatly touches thy credit, and Filenus my Masters good name, I will
therefore tell thee truly what I know, hoping that thou will tell none in the
world, that this secret treachery was discovered by me. Thou must therefore
know, that Felisarda thy stepmother is working a great disgrace against thy
father, with a certain Shepherd, whose name I will not tell thee, because thou
may hereafter know him, if thou will: for if thou will come this night,
and follow me where I will lead thee, thou shall find the adulterer and the
trayteresse together in Filenus house: for so they have appointed, because
Filenus lies this night at a Farm he has, by reason of some business there,
and cannot come home again before to morrow at noone. Wherefore look well about
thee, and at eleven of the clock at night come to me, for I will bring thee
in, where thou may do that, which may turn to thine own credit, thy
fathers honor, and perhaps greatly to thine own profit by obtaying pardon at
thy fathers hands. This tale Sylueria told so smoothly, and with such cunning
dissimulation, that Montanus was resolved to put himself in the greatest
danger to be revenged of him, who should offer any dishonor to his father.
And so the vile and wicked Sylueria very glad that this deceit which Felisarda
hatched, had so good success, went home again, where she told Felisarda her
Mistress what was agreed on between Montanus and her. Now had the dark
night ouerspred the earth with her black mantell, when Montanus being come to
the village, took a dagger with him which his uncle Palemon the Shepherd had
given him, and just at eleven of the clock went to Filenus his fathers house,
where Sylueria was staying for him, as she had appointed. O wicked treason, the
like never seen, nor heard of before! Oh traiterous wickedness, such as was
never thought of before! She took him by the hand, and going very softly up a
pair of stairs, led him to the chamber door where Filenus his father, and
Felisarda his stepdame were a bed together, and when she had set him there,
she said unto him. Now thou art come to the place Montanus, where thou must
show that thou have courage and no abject mind, that is requisite in so good a
cause: go into this chamber, and there thou shall find thy mother a bed with
the adulterer. When she had said so, she ran away, as fast as ever she
could. Montanus being thus deluded with Syluerias falsehood, gave credit to her
words, and in a fury plucking his dagger out of the sheath, brake open the
chamber door with a thrust of his foot, like a mad man with these loud
exclamations rushed into it, saying: Here must thou die (traitor) by mine own
hands: now shall the strumpet Felisardas foul loves help thee nothing at all:
And speaking these words, he was so wroth, that he knew not who he was that lay
in the bed, and thinking to have slain the adulterer, he lifted up his arm
to stabbe his Father as he lay a bed. But yet good Fortune awoke the old man,
who knowing his son by the light that was there, thought verily that for the
austere words and unkind disgraces, which he had done him, he came to kill him;
wherefore lifting himself quickly out of the bed, with holding up his hands
he said. O my son! what cruelty is this that makes thee the butcher of
thine own Father? For Gods sake remember thy self, and spill nor now my
innocent blood, nor end my life before the appointed hour from above does
come. For if I have heretofore used any rigor against thee, here upon my
knees I crave pardon for it, with protestation, that from henceforth I will
entreat thee as lovingly and gently as any father in the world may use his
son. When Montanus perceived the treachery that was wrought, and the danger
that he had almost incurred, by killing his own Father, he stood there so
astonished, that his heart and arm so failed him, whereby the dagger fell out
of his hands and never felt it. Being thus stricken in a maze, he could not
utter a word; but ashamed and confounded in his own enterprise, he went out
of the chamber, and out of the house wonderful sorry for the treachery that
Sylueria had buzzed into his ears, and for that which he had almost done, but
that his fortune was the better. Feltsarda, who knew all the matter before, and
how it would fall out, when she saw Montanus come into the chamber, she lept
out of the bed, and ran into another inward chamber, and locking the door
after her, saved her self from her son in laws fury. But when she saw her
self free from danger (for now Montanus was gone out of the house) she came
into the chamber again where Filenus was yet shaking for fear, and then she
incensing the Father against the Son, with loud vociferations began thus to
say unto him. Now Filenus, thou know well what kind of Son thou have, and
now can tell if it be not true which I have so often told thee of his wicked
conditions and nature. O cruel wretch! O vile Traitor Montanus! why do not
the heavens confound thee? Why does not the earth swallow thee up? Why do not
the wild beasts devour thee? Why do not men persecute thee to death? Accursed
be thy marriage, thy disobedience, thy loves, and thy Ismenia, that has
brought thee to this barbarous cruelty, and to commit so horrible a sin.
Traitor as thou art, thou do not punish Alanius, who to thy shame and
disgrace, has too familiar company with thy Ismenia using her dishonestly,
and whom she loves more then thy self; and carest not to kill thy own Father,
who with tenderness of thy life, and credit has ever made account of thee.
Because he gave thee good counsel, would thou therefore kill him? O woeful
Father! O unfortunate gray hairs! O grievous old age! What fault did thou
ever commit, that thine own son should kill thee for it, even he, whom thou
have begotten, brought up, and for whom thou have passed a thousand cares?
Pluck up thy heart now; leave of thy fatherly love; give place to justice; let
him be duly punished: for, if he, which perpetrated such wicked cruelty, has
not his descrued punishment, disobedient sons will not be afraid to do the
like, nor thine own hereafter to murder thee once again with his own hands.
Old Filenus full of fear, grief, and despite, hearing the speech that his
wife told him, and considering his sons treason, took so great displeasure
at it, that taking up the dagger that Montanus had let fall, early in the
morning he went to the market place, and there assembling the chiefest men of
the town, and the Justices together, after many tears and sobs, said thus
unto them. I inuoke God for witness (most worthy Shepherdes) that the
discourse, which I must tell you, torments my soul so much, that I am afraid
it will fly out of my body before I have told it out. Let not any therefore
think me cruel or unnatural, by coming to publish my sons wickedness openly
in this place, since it is so strange and detestable, that the greatest
punishment that I am able to give him, is not sufficient for the enormitie
thereof. The which for that I am unable my self to remedy it, I will lay open
before your eyes, that you may see, how just and needful a thing it is to give
him condign punishment, and to forwarne all other sons by his grievous
example. Needless it is to tell you, with what tender love and affection I
have brought him up, how carefully I have kept him; with what diligence I have
instructed him in commendable qualities; what thoughts I have suffered for him;
what good counsel I have given him, and how mildly I have chastised him. To my
great grief he married Ismenia; and because I found fault with him for it, in
lieu of being revenged of Alanius the Shepherd, who (as all the country
knows) lives dishonestly with his wife Ismenia, turned his anger toward me,
and this night would have done me to death. For this last night he found the
means to get into the chamber where I was a bed with my wife Felisarda, and
with this naked dagger would have killed me: And had done it, but that God did
cut off his strength, and abated it in such sort, that being half astonished
and afraid, he went out from thence, not able to put his damnable intent in
practice, leaving the dagger (that fell out of his hands) in the chamber. This
is the true report of that which this last night passed, whereof you may be
better informed by my loving wife. But because I certainly know that my son
Montanus would never have committed so foul a deed against his Father, if his
wife Ismenia had not persuaded him to it, I therefore beseech you all to
consider well of this matter: First, that my son may be sufficiently punished
for his wicked attempt; and then, that false Ismenia, especially for the
treacherous counsel she gave her husband, as also for her dishonest love, and
life that she leads with Alanius, may likewise receive due correction. Filenus
had scarce ended his tale, when there arose such a noise amongst the people,
that all the town seemed to have suncke: And the hearts of all the Shepherds
and Shepherdesses were so much altered at these words, that they conceived a
mortal hatred against Montanus. Some said, that he deserved to be stoned to
death; others, to be thrown into the deepest place of the river Duerus;
others, that he should be cast forth to be devoured of hungry woolfes, so that
there was not one almost amongst them all, who allotted not his doom and
manner of his death. It moved them also not a little to despite to hear that
which Filenus falsely reported concerning my life: but they were so incensed
with anger and hate against Montanus, and his pretenses, that they had no
leisure to think of mine. When Montanus understood how his Father had openly
before all the town accused him of this deed, and of the hurly burly and
awaite, that was laid to catch him, he fell into a wonderful desperation.
And besides this knowing what his Father had told of me before them all, he
took such a deep conceit and grief thereat, that the like was never heard
of. From hence did all my sorrows rise, this was the cause of my perdition,
and here did my painful life begin. For my beloved Montanus knew that in times
past I had loved Alanius, and was beloved of him again; and imagining that old
and mortified loves might oftentimes be revived, and seeing Alanius (whom now
for his sake I had quite forgotten) to be in love with me as much as ever he
was, by making daily suites to me for my love, with those kind of pastoral
feasts and sports, that lovers are wont to please their Shepherdesses withal,
he vehemently suspected, that the false report which his Father Filenus had
told of me was true; and the more he thought of it, the more he believed it to
be so indeed: In so much that waxing almost mad and desperate for the
treachery that Sylueria had wrought him, and for that which he suspected I had
done him, he fled from the town and country thereabouts, and since was never
more heard of. And I then, who knew of his departure and the cause thereof, by
the report of certain Shepherds his friends, whom he fully acquainted with his
unfortunate estate, left also our town to seek him out, and while I live will
never leave seeking, until I have found my dear husband, to acquit my self
of this crime which he suspectes, although I should die by his own hands for
my labor. It is a good while since I have gone up and down wandering and
enquiring after him, and for all that I have sought in the cheifest towns, and
amongst all the Shepherdes and cottages, Fortune never yet gave me any notice
of my Montanus. The greatest accident, that in these my travels chanced unto
me, since I forsook my town, was, that I found the trayteresse Sylueria, who
knowing the voluntary exile of Montanus, went up and down following, to tell
him the plot and drift of the secret treachery that she had done him, and to
ask him forgiveness for it, being very penitent that she had committed such
abominable wickedness. But as yet till then she had not spoken with him, and
when she saw me, she told me openly how the matter stood, which was no small
ease unto my mind, to know the manner how we were betrayed. I thought with mine
own hands to have killed her, though I was but a weak woman, yet I did it
not, because it lay in her only to help my grief by confessing her own
wickedness. I prayed her, to seek out my beloved Montanus in all the haste she
could, to certify him of the matter, and how it stood, and so I left her to
seek him out some other way. I came hither to day to this wood, where being
invited by the pleasantnes of the place, I rested me to pass the heat of the
day away. And since that Fortune (for my great comfort) has brought you
hither, and that it is now the hottest part of the day, I beseech you let me
enjoy your gracious company, while the heat of the sun shall last. Diana
and Marcelius were glad to hear the history that Ismenia told them, and to
know the cause of her grief. It pleased them also well to hear the discourse
of her life, who then gave her some comfort to ease her grief, promising her
all the favor and help, that they might possibly bestow on her for remedy
of her pain and travels. They prayed her also to go with them to Felicias
palace, because it was most like that there she should find out some kind of
comfort to make her glad again. And they both thought good to pass the time
away there, while the heat of the Sun did last, as Ismenia requested them.
But because Diana was very skillful in that ground, and knew very well the
woods, fountains, forests, and the pleasant and shadowed places of it, she
told them, that there was not far from thence a more delightful and pleasant
place then that was, for it was not yet full midday: So that all three of them
rising, went a little way, and came by and by to a forest, where Diana led
them, which was as pleasant, cool, and delightful a place, as any of those
hills, or fields that ever was with fame renowned in the pastoral Arcadia:
There were in it fair and green Sicamours, Sallowes, Ashes, Byrch, and Beech
trees, which round about the brinks of the chrystalline fountains, and in
every part thereabout, being softly blown with a cool and sweet wind, made
a pleasant and gentle noise. There the air did so sweetly resound with the
tuned melody of the little birds, which went skipping up and down the green
boughs, that it cheered up the mind with a gracious kind of welcome. It was
covered all over with green and small grass, amongst the which were many
fair and colored flowers, which painting the place with knots in many places,
did with their sweet sinell recreate the most sorrowful and melancholic
spirits. There were the Hunters wont to find Heardes of fearful Hearts,
wild Goats, and of other little beasts, in which games and sports they took
no small pastime and delight. They came into this forest following Diana their
guide that went in first, for she went before to seek out a little thick
grove of trees, that she had marked out in that place (where she was wont to
resort) to rest and refresh herself many times. And they had not gone far,
when Diana coming near to the place, that she thought the most pleasant of
all the wood, and where she minded to have passed away the heat of the day,
putting her finger to her mouth, she made signs to Marcelius and Ismenia to
come on softly without making any noise. The reason was, because she heard
amongst those thick trees certain Shepherds singing. By their voices they
seemed to be Taurisus and Berardus, both extremely tormented in pursuit of her
love, as it is said before. But because she would be more sure of it, stealing
on nearer unto them between certain bushes, she was harkening to them, to see
if she knew them, and she perceived that they were the very same, and that they
had in their company a fair young gentlewoman, and a gallant and worthy
gentleman, both which (although they seemed to be somewhat troubled in mind,
and wearied by much travel) showed nevertheless in their gesture and
disposition notable tokens of valor and virtue. After she had viewed who they
were, she went back again because she would not be seen. And now was
Marcelius and Ismenia come, and all three together began to sit them down
behind certain Hasels, where they might not be seen, but where they might
distinctly hear the Shepherds songs, whose voices resounding over all the
forest, made a singular sweet melody, as you shall hear in the Book that
follows.

The end of the second Book.
The third Book of Enamoured DIANA.
THe treachery and malice of an injurious and envying stepdame is commonly
wont to enterprise so detestable acts, that it would discourage the stoutest
heart, not only to do them, but make it tremble to think of them. And that
which is worst, is, that Fortune is so great a friend in changing good and
prosperous estates, that she shows them all the favor she may in their
unjust attempts: for she knows that most of them endeavor to stir up
strange novelties, and mutinies, and to be the occasion and means of much
sorrow and trouble. The cruelty of Felisarda was great, when by her vile and
subtle slightes she made the father so mortally abhor his own son, and a
husband to forsake his loving wife; the one deceived by an ^pparant show of
love and duty misconstrued; the other by a false report, and with a vain and
simple suspect stinged: but yet her hap was the better, that brought her
malicious and wicked purpose to that effect, that she herself desired. And I
speak not this, to make men think the worse of all such kind of women, but
because every one may live advisedly by taking good heed of such as Felisarda
was, which are but few (I hope) since so many of that noble sex are the
glory of the world, and the lanterns of life, whose sincerity, faith,
discretion, and virtues with golden verses deserve to be eternized. For proof
whereof, Diana and Ismenia may give sufficient testimony, Shepherdesses
adorned with singular beauty, chastity, and wisdom, whose histories do
blazon forth their infinite and worthy praises. In following the discourse
whereof, you must understand, that when Marcelius and they were sitting behind
the Hasels, they heard that Taurisus and Berardus did sing as follows.

Berardus. THe cool fresh wind, Taurisus, that inuiting us
Amongst the trees, the leaves is gently shaking,
Our senses ioying, and with ease delighting us:
The Cotes, and Sicamours sweet shadows making:
The Cristall fountains, that in cop^ous swelling
Do flow, our thirst with sauourie liquours slaking:
The colored flower, whose sweet and fragrant smelling
To banish melancholy greefes suffices,
Which makes the heart from sweet content rebelling,
His might, that all despises,
Cannot subdue, nor malice, nor the bravery,
Of that most cruel king, whose sway does weary us,
Whose punishment, and slavery
Is absolute, unjust, and mere imperious.
For amorous greefes, to hels of pains that ferrie us,
No remedies have yet been salutiferous,
But still the poison fuming
Infects my soul with torments most pestiferous.
Taurisus. He that in love is evermore consuming,
Is never glad, for such an evil tires him,
Living in grief, in grief his death resuming:
Love gives him pains, and most with torments fires him,
When most he seeks his pastime and his pleasure;
For then with furious thoughts he most inspires him:
Those few times when a soul entoies her treasure,
Grief does succeed in place, whose balefull souenaunce
Makes it return to playning without measure:
Love will enjoy his covenants:
And whom he conquers, kills, or prisoner takes,
He thinks by him to get most famous glory:
His prisoner now, that quaketh,
He giu^ to Fortune, with his Fortune sorry,
Or sels to grief, whom evermore it shakes,
And paints in him her dire and tragic story,
And him that's burning in his hottest fires
He quite consumes, the cruel he retires.
Berardus. The whole man waxes sick as he intreates him,
He turns each heart from former joy to sadness,
Still killing him, that living is, and threats him,
That is most free, with bonds, the scourge of gladness:
Since then (my soul) thou know too well how cruel
This Tyrant is, be patient, and content thee,
That such a place contains thy amorous fuel:
(So high a place) Take greefes, and now present thee
To all those harms, and pains he shall enure thee:
Enjoy thine ill, and in thy greefes maintain thee,
Because by how much more thou shall procure thee
A means, to rid thy self from that that pains thee,
The more thou shall enwrap thee in his briers,
And shall be furdest from thy chief desires:
Taurisus. Love finds in me so well disposed matter,
And such a mind to amplify his glory,
That among all those, whose mournful flocks do scatter
On both Hisperias plains, in love so sorry,
My daily greefes are ever more augmented:
Salt showers of tears mine eyes have ever rained:
And more, then wretched Biblis malcontented,
When turned to a fountain she remained.
Strange is my good, my pain is proper to me,
Feign would I see Dianas face, but twenty,
And twenty deaths in seeing her undo me,
I die for want near to the fount of plenty:
Her presence does with pains and torments fill me,
Her absence does with desperation kill me.
Berardus. The woods do murmur, and the meadow smileth,
And iugging nightingales are sweetly singing:
But death to thousand woes my hope exileth:
Taurisus. The blooming trees smell sweet, that now are spinging,
The grass grows green, with many a painted flower:
But I remain (O woe) in sorrows stinging:
Berardus. My woes my wits have slain in such an hour,
That now I have no power
To say by heart ten verses all along:
Taurisus. My tongue does cleave even in my very song,
Wherefore (my friend) prolong
The time no more, but sing that sweetest dittie,
Which interrupted with thy sighs of pity,
And tears, in every city
And country town, so highly did commend thee.
Berardus. Singing with thee, it shall no whit offend me,
But ease and pleasure lend me:
Then answer me. But now what shall I sing?
Taurisus. Sing that that says. The radiant star does bring?
Or that: Loves tears do spring. etc.
Or that: I know not well how it does say,
Which thou sung'st on a day,
Dancing with fair Diana on a green.
Berardus. No Tigresse nor no lioness have been,
But with compassion moved
Of all my torments, able to despair one:
But not that cruel fair one,
The fierce deuouresse of my life approved.
Taurisus. The fierce deuouresse of my life approved,
My peerless Shepherdess,
As fell in heart, as she is fair in face:
How then in such a case
Can I escape (O grief) but die without redress?
Berardus. Can I escape (O grief) but die without redress
With deaths of racking passions?
But when I see Diana fair, her sight my griefs asswageth,
Yet then my soul enrageth:
The more I have to do with love, the less I know his fashions.
Taurisus. The more I have to do with love, the less I know his fashions,
His servants he neglects
And he, that flying seeks to escape his mortal chain,
With thrice redoubled pain
He wounds, and with his furious plagues his wretched soul infecteth.
Berardus. Fair Shepherdess, whose face the heavenly powers
Have graced with more beauty, then the Roses:
And sweeter then the purple golden flowers,
That deckes our meades and virgins breasts with poses:
So may the heavens power down in copious plenty
Upon thy flocks their favors most abounding:
And thy fair ewes, with double twins not empty,
In numbers swarm, in profit still redounding:
That to my soul, which my demerit pesters,
Thou would not show stern looks, nor angry gestures.
Taurisus. Fair Shepher desse, that with thy neighbor dwelling,
Do clear thy fields bedight with Daffodillies,
The driven snow in whiteness far excelling,
In beauty Gilloflowres, and stately lillies:
So prosper may thy fields in every season
In corn, and fruit, which thou may taste at pleasure:
Thy pears, and plums, and apricocks so geason
By handfuls may thou pull in plentious measure:
That thou would look upon thy swain so sorry:
For of thy sight depends his cheifest glory.
About this time the young Gentleman, and Gentlewoman that were harkening to
the Shepherds songs, did cut them off, and gave them many thanks for the
delight and recreation, which with so sweet music they had given them. And
after this the Gentleman turning to the Gentlewoman said. Did thou ever
(sister) in the magnificent and stately Cities hear music that pleased the
ear, and delighted the mind like this? Truly (said she again) these
pastoral and country songs, being full of simplicity and plainnes, please me
more, then the delicate voices set together with curious skill, and full of
new inventions and conceits in the brave palaces of Kings and Princes. And
when I think this melody to be better then that, you must the rather believe
it, because I have been present at the best music that in any City of the
world or Kings Court, was ever heard. For in that happy time, when Marcelius
was a suitor to our sister Alcida, he did some nights sing to the tune of his
Lute so sweetly, that if Orpheus made so solemn music, I did not marvel
then if the Birds, and Beasts did follow him, and that he brought back his
dear wife Euridice from dark hell. Ah Marcelius, where art thou now? Ah
where art thou Alcida? Ah most hapless woman that I am, how often does Fortune
surcharge my memory with objects of grief, when she sees me enjoy the least
content and pleasure in the world? Marcelius heard the talk of the Gentleman
and the Damsel, which were with the Shepherds behind the shrubs and bushes,
and when he perceived that they named him and Alcida, he began to be somewhat
altered. He scarcely believed his own ears, and was doubting with himself
whether it was another Marcelius and Alcida whom they named. He rose up by and
by out of his place, and to clear himself of all doubt, coming nearer, he
knew that they were Polydorus and Clenarda, brother and sister to Alcida:
Whereupon he ran suddenly to them, and with open arms, and abundance of tears,
sometimes embracing Polydorus, sometimes Clenarda, he stood a great while
before he could speak for inward grief. Polydorus and Clenarda wondering at
this novelty, could not conjecture what accident it was, because Marcelius
going in a Shepherds habit, was unknown unto them, until his sobs and tears
giving him leave, he said. O dear brother and sister, care not now for my
ill fortune paste, and to come, since I am the happiest man in the world in
seeing you. Ah, why is not Alcida in your company? Is she perhaps hidden in
any part of this thick wood! O let me know some news of her, if you can tell
me any, to ease my cruel grief, and to satisfy my desire! In speaking these
words, they knew Marcelius and embracing him very affectionately, and weeping
for pleasure and grief, they said unto him. O happy day! O unexpected joy! O
dear brother of our souls, what cruel Fortune has bin the cause, that thou
do not enjoy the company of Alcida, nor we her sight? Why do thou dissemble
thy self with this new habit? O cruel fortune, in the end there is not full
content of any good. Diana and Ismenia on the other side, seeing that Marcelius
had so on the sudden gone to the place where the Shepherds did sing, went after
him, and found him talking with Polydorus and Clenarda, as you have heard.
When Taurisus and Berardus saw Diana, the joy, that at so sweet and sudden a
sight they took, cannot be told. And so Taurisus showing a marvelous kind
of gladness in his heart, and words, said unto her. This is no small favor of
fortune (fair Diana) to make her, that continually flies our company, by
unexpected and happy chances to come so often where we are. That is not the
cause of Fortune (worthy Shepherds) said Diana, but rather because you are
so excellent in singing and playing on your instruments: for there is no place
of pleasure where you are not, and where your sweet music and songs are not
heard. But now, since I am come hither, though ignorant of your being here,
and that the parching Sun is now in the highest way, I shall be very glad to
pass away the heat of the day in this pleasant place, and in your good
company: and though it stands me upon to go quickly to Felicias palace, yet
will I not think the time long to stay here with you to take part of the
cool and green grass, and to harken to your delightful music. Prepare
your selves therefore to sing and play, and to all kind of honest mirth, for
it will not become this place, and brave assembly to be without such kind of
pleasure. And you Gentleman, and fair Gentlewoman, surcease your tears a
while, because you shall have time enough hereafter to tell to each other your
Fortunes and adventures, and to bewail, or rejoice at the ill or good success
of them. All of them liked well of Dianas speech, and so they sat them down
upon the fine green grass round about the Fountain. That was the
pleasantest place in all the wood, and more then any of those, that were
celebrated by the clear Bagpipe of Neapolitan Syncerus in famous Parthenia.
There was in this place a broad quadrant forty paces of every side, and
compassed about with a great number of thick trees. So that in a manner of a
walled castle, they, that went to recreat themselves in it, could not go but by
one way into it. It was covered all over with green grass and sweet flowers,
never trodden down with the feet of sheep or goats, nor mangled with their
slicing teeth. In the mids thereof was a goodly clear fountain, which,
issuing forth at the foot of an old Oak, rose up four square and deep;
not made by skillful hand, but placed there by provident nature to such
purposes, as with the abundance of the waters it made there a delightful
meeting, which the Shepherds named the fair Fountain. The brinkes of this
fountain were of white stone so even, that none would have thought, but that
it was made with artificial hand, if the natural stones growing there, did
not deceive his sight, which were fastened in the ground as hard, as the
craggie rock, and flint in the wild mountains. The water that came out of
that sweet fountain, issuing out of two narrow pipes, did water the grass
and trees about it, making them continually to spring, and fertile, and keeping
them in a pleasant and fine verdure. This fair Fountain for every goodly
pleasure about it was so much visited of the Shepherds and Shepherdesses, that
there was never wanting about it pastoral mirth and joy. Who likewise had it
in such veneration and account, that when they came to it, they left their
flocks without, because the clear and sweet waters might not be troubled,
nor the fine little meadow fed, nor trodden down by the hungry and careless
sheep. About this fountain (as I said) they all sat down, and taking
necessary food out of their scrips, did eat it more sauourly, and with
greater content, then the greatest Lords their variety and number of dainty
dishes. At the end of which repast, as Marcelius on the one side, and Polydorus
and Clenarda on the other, were greatly desirous to hear, and make relation of
their passed fortunes, Marcelius first began to say to the other two in this
sort. It is great reason (brother and sister) that I know something of your
adventures and accidents, since last I saw you, because seeing not your Father
Eugerius, nor your sister Alcida in your company, it makes a great alteration
in my heart, not knowing the cause thereof. To whom Polydorus answered.

Because this goodly place might not be injured (me thinks) with reports of
dole and sorrow, and that these Shepherds with hearing of our hard haps might
not be also grieved, with the fewest words (that possible may be) I will report
the many miseries and disgraces that we have received of Fortune.

After that I was hindered by the mariners from leaping into the sciffe, having
attended fit time and occasion have delivered my father Eugerius (being faint
and half dead) out of the dangerous ship, and that of force I was constrained
to remain (to my great grief) with my fearful father in it, the sorrowful
old man was overcome with such bitter anguish and pain, as may be imagined of
a loving father, who in the end of his aged years, sees the violent perdition
of his own life and of his loving children. He took no heed now to the maine
blows, which the cruel waves did beat against the ships sides, nor to the
rage of the angry winds that did bluster on every side, but casting his eyes
to the little boat wherein thou were Marcelius with Alcida and Clenarda (which
at every flote of the hoisting billows seemed to turn over) the more he saw
it going from the ship, the more his heart burst in pieces. And when he lost
sight of you, he was in danger of yielding up his decayed spirits. The ship
driven on by the cruelty of Fortune, went floating up and down the maine seas
five days together, after that we parted; at the end of which time, the Sun
going down toward the West, we were in ken of land. At sight whereof the
Mariners were very glad, as well for recovery of their lost hope, as also
for knowing the coast whither the ship was driven. For it was the most fertile
country and most abounding in all sorts of pleasures, as far as the Sun does
heat with his beams: In so much that one of the Mariners taking a Rebecke
out of a chest, with the which he was wont to cheer up himself in long and
dangerous voiages, began to play and sing to it in manner following.

WElcome thy friends from swelling seas that rore
With hideous noise, and tossed by Neptunes toil,
O fortunate and fair Valencia shore,
Where nipping frost does never hurt thy soil,
Nor Phoebus with his woonted parching beams
Does burn thy meades, nor heates thy crystal streams.
Thrice happy he, who living without fear
In swallowing seas and billows to be drowned,
Enioies thy golden beauties every wheare,
Of thy sweet meades green banks and fruitful ground,
Thy ground bedeckt with flowers so fine and fair,
Maintainde with heavenly deaw and pleasant air.
With greater toil the ship does cut the seas,
Then weary plowmen does thy gentle fields,
Then happy Earth, the joy and wished ease
Of traueled souls, that to thy succor yeeldes,
(...) Nereas Song.
IN those most happy fields and plains,
Where Guadaljar in goodly veins
With crystal streams does glide,
Leaving the sweet and pleasant fields,
Unto the sea his tribute yeeldes
And runs with hasty tide.
Fair Galatee full of disdain,
And joyful of the woes and pain
To Lycius that she gave,
Played upon the sands and shore,
The which the sea sometimes before
Does wash with wallowing wave.
Gathering amongst the sands alone
Fine shells, and many a painted stone,
As she went up and down:
And singing many songs so sweet,
The which the roaring billows yet
Did alter much and drown.
Near to the water side she hies,
And there the waves that fall and rise
She viewed with great delight;
And fled, when that they came amain,
And sometimes could not, but was feign
To wet her feet so white.
Lycius, who had in suffering pains
No equal in those fields and plains,
His torments there suspended,
Whiles that he viewed with great content
His Shepherdess so excellent,
For beauty most commended.
But now comparing his unrest
With all the joy that she possessed,
The Shepherd half decayed
With doleful voice his sad complaints
To shores and champaines he acquaints,
And in this manner said.
O fairest Nymph, if that thou please,
Play not about the roaring seas,
Although thy chief delight
Consist therein, yet Galatee
As thou do Licius, so the sea
Eschew with hasty flight.
And now (sweet Nymph) leave of to play,
For it does grieve me day by day
To see thee on the sands:
O do not now torment me more,
For seeing thee upon the shore
I fear false Neptunes hands.
And this does fill me full of doubts,
That I must credit these my thoughts,
Because it is most clear,
That if he die not now for thee,
He will no doubt thy lover be
When that he sees thee here.
And this is sure: For love does know,
Since first my soul he wounded so,
That I should never want
A stronger rival, and more stout,
Then I, who daily would seek out
My true love to supplant.
Leave then the barren sands and shore,
Forsake the cliffes, come there no more,
Fly from that dangerous coast:
Take he de no monster of the sea
Surprise thee not (fair Galatee)
Where many have been lost.
Fly now, and see how I endure
Ten thousand greefes to see thee sure,
Because with double pain
Ie alous I am of thy content,
And for thy dangers imminent
Great cares I do sustain.
In seeing thee so merry and glad,
My jealous thoughts do make me sad,
And think of Europe fair,
Deceived by a milk white bull,
As on the sea banks she did cull
Fine flowers to dress her hair.
And more, my ordinary cares
Make me to think, how unawares
Disdainful Alnade was
Dishiuered and devoured by
A huge sea monster, that did lie
Hard by where he did pass.
But well away, that I do see
Signs of no fear nor grief in thee,
For this my sorrow knows,
That he, that's not of love afraid,
Can with no dangers be dismaide,
And fears not where he goes.
O then (my peerless Nymph) take heed,
Lest Cupid do revenge with speed,
To see himself contemned,
For being such a God of might,
He will not suffer, but will smite,
When he is once offended.
Come go with me unto the woods,
Where every plant sprout forth her buds,
And to the goodly fields,
Where we will spend the pleasant hours,
Amongst the fair and redolent flowers,
That naught but pleasure yeeldes.
If waters please thee, I will bring
Thee to so fair and fine a spring,
That to be first in praise
Amongst the rest, thy body white
To wash within her waters bright,
For thee it only stays.
Disporting in this naked place,
Thou have no veil to hide thy face,
Nor shade from parching sun,
Pity it were thy beauties blaze,
Which enutous Titan fears to gaze,
By him should be undone.
Here hear'st thou no melodious voice,
But still a huge and fearful noise
Of monsters hideous raues,
And seas, that rore like tumbling thunder,
Tossed with the winds, that beat asunder
The proud and raging waves.
What joy and pleasure can thou take,
To see the tossing billows shake
A ship upon the sand?
And then to see the broken plankes,
And carcases in pitious ranks
Come swimming to the land.
Come to the frithes, and forests tall,
Where nature has been liberal
With many a pleasant seat.
Come to the cool and sweetest shades,
Where in green paths and open glades
We pass away the heat.
Fly, fly, those proud and swelling seas,
Come, come and thou shall see what ease
We take, and how we sing
Ditties so sweet, that in suspense
We hold the rocks, and every sense
Of every living thing.
And though that some be full of pity,
Love forces them to such a dittie,
For love is full of pain:
Yet all the Shepherdes will I move,
To sing no mournful songs of love,
Only to please thy vain.
There may thou read in euety tree,
And every meade that thou shall see
The loves in knots disguised
Of jolly Shepherdes, and the names
Of chiefest Nymphs, and country dames
In curious sort devised.
But it will make thee sad, I fear,
To see thy name engraven there,
By knowing it was carved
By him, whom thou did ever blot
Out of thy mind, and have forgot,
And with disfavors starued.
And though thine anger will be such,
Yet will thou marvel not so much
To see thy carved name,
As thou will wonder then to see,
That he does love and honor thee,
That there did write the same.
Not to be loved, and to love,
It is agreeuous grief to prove:
But what a grief or pain
Could it in thee (fair Nymph) procure,
To be beloved with love so pure,
And not to love again?
But now despised I reckon small
Fair Galatee my torment all
So that thou will forsake
These swallowing sands, and seas so high,
Where monsters bellow out and cry,
And daily prays do take.
What better pastime can thou find
Near to the seas of blustering wind,
Then in our woods and mountains
To listen to the nightingales,
And gather flowers in our vales,
And bathe in crystal fountains.
I would to God thou liuedst here,
In our fair fields and rivers clear,
And for to love them more,
I would to God thou would but see
Before I should report to thee
How they excel the shore.
Because I know, the more I praise
These woods, meades, springs and lovely lays,
The less thou will believe me;
And wilt not come where thou do know,
That part of my content does grow
Which most of all does grieve me.
Poor Lycius would have spoken more,
To win her from that hapless shore,
But that she bad him cease:
For with an angry face and scoule
She turned unto the wretched soul,
And bad him hold his peace.
Then went she to her sportes again,
He to his plaintes and woonted pain:
And in the self same sort
He still remains in woonted sorrow,
She in the sea banks even, and morrow,
Contented with her sport.
The fair maids song, and our supper ended al at one time, which being done,
we demanded of Clenarda what had happened unto her since our last departure from
her, who told us what villainy Sartofano offered unto her, in what case Alcida
was left, of thy imprisonment, her captivity, and in the end all that thou
know at large. We bewailed bitterly our hard Fortunes, which when the
Fisherman heard, he comforted us up as well as he could, and told us
especially how that in these parts there was the sage Felicia, whose wisdom
was enough to remedy our greefes; giving us also notice of Alcida, and of
thee, to the which our desires principally tended. And so passing away that
night the best we could, as soon as morning came, leaving the mariners there
that came with us in the ship, we three alone went our ways, and not long
after came to the Temple of Diana, where the wise Lady Fecia keeps her court.
We saw there the admirable temple, the most pleasant gardens, the sumptuous
palace, there we knew the great wisdom of the most grave Lady, and other
things that filled us so full of wonder, that we have scarce any breath to
tell them again. There we saw the fairest Nymphs, examples of chastity,
many Lords and Ladies, Shepherds, and fair Shepherdesses, and especially one
Shepherd named Syrenus, whom every one there made great account of: To him and
many more besides, did sage Felicia give diverse remedies for their loves and
greefes. But the pleasure, which but hitherto yet she has done us, is, to
keep our Father Eugerius in her company, commanding us to go toward these
parts, and that we should not return until we had found out some content or
good Fortune. And for the great joy that we have received by thy sight, I
think we have good occasion to go back again, especially for that we have
left there our Father all alone and comfortless: I know well that in seeking
out Alcida is no small ease to his careful thoughts; but because Fortune has
not these many days given us any news of her, we shall take the better
course to return back again, then to suffer our old Father to be deprived so
long of our company. After Polydorus had made an end of his discourse, every
one was astonished to hear such strange accidents; and after Marcelius had
wept for Alcida, he made a brief relation to Polydorus, and Clenarda of that
which had happened to him since he saw them last. When Diana and Ismenia heard
Polydorus make an end of that sorrowful history, they desired to go the
sooner to Felicias court, the one because she knew assuredly that Syrenus was
there; the other, because she conceived a certain hope (hearing of the
wonderful wisdom of Felicia) to have also some redress for her greefes.
Being therefore possessed with this desire, Diana (although she was minded to
recreate herself certain hours in that pleasant place) altered her
determination, esteeming more of Syrenus sight, then of the green hew of that
goodly and fine wood. Whereupon rising up, she said to Taurisus and Berardus.
Sit ye (merry Shepherds) still, and enjoy the delight and sweetenes of this
pleasant place, for the desire that I have to go to Dianas temple, will not let
me stay any longer here. We are right sorry to forsake so delightful a shade
and so good company, but we are forced to follow our Fortune in this behalf.
Will thou be so discurteous (fair Shepherdess) (said Taurisus) to depart so
soon from our doleful eyes, and to let us so small a while enjoy thy sweet
sight and speeches? These Shepherds have great reason (said Marcelius to Diana)
to dema^d such a gentle request, and it is therefore as great again that their
demand be not denied them in reward of their constant faith and true love,
which deserves to enjoy thy company a little while in this pleasant place,
especially when thou have time enough to be at Dianas temple before the Sun
will hide his light. All of them were of his opinion, and therefore Diana would
not seem discourteous to any of them, but sitting down again in her place,
she would not rather please herself, then displease so brave a company as
that was. Now then loving Shepherds (said Ismenia to Berardus and Taurisus)
since fair Diana does not deny us her presence, it is not reason that you
deny her your songs. Sing jolly Shepherds, that in your songs and roundelaies
show so great cunning, and so perfect love, being for the one commended in all
the towns and countries heereabout, and moving the hardest hearts with the
other to love and pity. True (said Berardus) all hearts, saving Dianas, and
began to weep, and Diana to smile. Which when the Shepherd saw, to the sweet
sound of his pipe with the swelled tears standing in his eyes, he sung a
gloss upon this Dittie.

MY grievous sighs and sorrowful tears
In stones do make their lively print,
But not in thee harder then any flint.
The gloss.
Let not thy Graces rare,
Be with my service any whit offended,
Since that my grievous fare,
And torments past, to thy devotions tended,
Where never yet with grief of thee lamented,
Nor with my sighs thy cruelty relented.
Thy heart was never changed with my cries,
With which I was importunate always
To wearied earth and skies:
Though thou do see not only nights and days
Spilt and consumed with many fears,
My grievous sighs and sorrowful tears.
In thy conditions strange thou art,
That do not cease with stranger deaths to kill me:
But strangest is my sorrowful heart,
That suffering pains wherewith thou do so fill me,
And huing in so strange and cruel passion,
It dies not in most strange and cruel fashion.
For if an ill a little time relents,
(Although it be the hardest to sustain)
It opens yet some vents
To ease, and does not give such mortal pain:
But grief that has no end nor stint,
In stones do make their lively print.
Love is a dainty mild, and sweet,
A gentle power, a feeling fine and tender,
So that those harms, and pains unmeet,
Which I do pass, thou only do engender:
Only to him his torments love deuiseth,
That scorns his laws, his rites, and love despises.
And this is now my mortal pain and death,
That, love (since first thy beauties I did see)
Like to my proper breath,
Wherewith I live, has ever been in me:
In me it lives, in me it makes his print,
But not in thee, harder then any flint.
Berardus song pleased Diana well, but perceiving by it, that he made her heart
harder then the stones, she would for her credit have answered him again, and
therefore said. It is a merry jest (by my life) to call her hard that is
modest, and cruel, that is careful to keep her honesty, I would to God,
Shepherd, my soul were no more sorrowful, then my heart is hard. But O grief!
Fortune has made me captive to so jealous a husband, that I was many times
constrained to show discurtesie to gentle Shepherds in these hills, dales, and
fields, because I would not have added more sorrow to my troublesome life
with him. And yet for all this, the knot of marriage and reason oblige me to
seek out my rude and ill conditioned husband, although I look not for any
thing else at his hands, then sorrow, care, grief, and many more annoies in
his froward company. Taurisus taking now occasion at Dianas complaints,
which she made of her unfortunate marriage, began to play on his Baggepipe, and
to sing, speaking as it were to love, and descanting upon this common song that
says.

The Song.
A Fair maid wed to prying jealousy
One of the fairest as ever I did see,
If that thou will a secret lover take,
Sweet life, do not my secret love forsake.
The gloss.
Beware good Love, beware it is not well
To let blind Fortune have a greater part
In women, that in Beauty do excel,
More then thy self, since such an one thou art:
For Beauty being commended to thy power
To grace the same,
Thou do thy self dishonor every hour,
And art to blame,
By suffering, that this thing should ever be,
A fair maid wed to prying jealousy.
Thou do but ill, since thou did ever make
Beauty thy friend, who therefore had prepared
Sorrows for him, (that viewed her) for thy sake,
Which otherwise she would have kept and spared:
And so my firmness, and my faith so pure,
And all my pain,
A simple sight did not the same procure,
Nor did maint aine,
But sight of her, and it was only she
One of the fairest as ever I did see.
O Love! thou kilst so many without end,
(For murdring is thy pastime and delight)
That once I hope thy self thou shall offend,
For want they shall on whom to work thy spite.
Oh then how seemly shall thou seem to groan,
And wounded see
Thyselfe with thine own griefs, and then thine own
Captive to be.
For thou at last thy self shall not forsake,
If that thou will a secret Lover take.
Then may thou give to Lovers double smart,
And then I will forgive thee all the care
And amorous pains, thou did to me impart,
When that thy self (fond Love) thou do not spare:
And if I blame thy deeds or do reprove thee,
Then shall thou say,
(But to thy self) that reason yet did move thee
To make away
Thy self, and for thy self thy death to take,
Sweet life do not my secret love forsake.
All of them liked well of Taurisus song, but Ismenia especially. For though it
touched Diana most of all, because it spoke of those women that were ill
married; yet the comment upon it (which were complaints against love) was
common to all those that were tormented with it. And therefore Ismenia, who
blamed Cupid for her pains, did not only like of those reprehensions that
Taurisus gave Love, but she herself to the sound of her Harp, sung a song to
the same effect, which Montanus was wont to sing, when he was a suter unto her.

A Sonnet.
Having no cause, why in the deepest sound
Of amorous seas my frail bark do thou swallow?
O Love! I Will make thy cruelty to sound
Swifter from East to West then flying swallow.
Though gales of winds do bluster in my stern,
Yet from the gulf my ship shall never part
Of thy brave might, so furious and so stern,
Until my sighs do help to blow a part.
If being in a storm, my face I turn,
Then my desire is weakened by thy might:
Thy force controuces my force, that strives in vain:
I never shall arrive with happy turn
Into the port, and therefore, if I might,
I would let out my life in every vain.
Marcelius deferred not his answer long after them, with another song made to
the same purpose, and of the same form, saving that the complaints that he
made, were not only against Love, but against Fortune, and himself.

A Sonnet.
STep after step I follow death in sight
Through every field, and hill and trodden vale,
For every day my spirits he does cite,
And warnes my self, to shrowde me in his vale.
O death, that once thou would consume this light,
That still deducts my life in blisselesse bale:
Now that my hope has past away so lgiht,
And ioies condemned to torments without bale.
That Goddess, whose continual frowns I bear,
And love, that all my ioies asunder tears,
And I my self, are foes unto my heart:
She praying on me like a hungry bear,
He chasing me like to the wounded Heart,
And I, that do increase my bootelesse tears.
The desire that Diana had to go to Felicias palace, would not suffer her to
stay any longer there, nor harken to any more songs, but when Marcelius had
ended his, she rose up. And so did Marcelius, Ismenia, and Clenarda,
understanding Dianas mind, although they knew that Felicias house was nigh at
hand, and that they had time enough to be there before night. After they had
taken their leave of Taurisus and Berardus, they went from the fair fountain
that way that they came in, and walking through the wood at their leisure,
enjoying the pleasures and delights of it, at last they came out of it, and
then they began to go through a great and wide plain, passing goodly to behold,
where they went thinking how they might recreate their minds with some mirth,
while they were going on their ways, and every one told his opinion concerning
that matter. But Marcelius, who had ever the figure of Alcida engraven in his
heart and thoughts, took no greater delight nor other joy, then to mark the
sweet behavior of Polydorus and Clenarda, and to harken to their talk. And
therefore to delight himself fully with this desire he said. I believe not
(fair Shepherdesses) that all your pastimes are comparable to the delight that
you may have, if Clenarda would discourse unto you any of those things that she
has seen in the fields and banks of Guadalajar. I passed that way in my
peregrinations, but took no pleasure in those delights, because my mind went
musing on other matters. But because we have two large hours (our journey
being but half an hours work) to go to Dianas temple, we may therefore walk
on softly, and she (if it please her) may tell us something of that goodly and
pleasant country. Diana and Ismenia seemed to be very glad, showing by their
amiable countenances, that they longed to have her begin, although Diana was
very desirous to come betimes to the temple; but because she would not make it
known to them, she concealed the great passions of her desire, by
accommodating her will to their pleasures. Clenarda then entreated by
Marcelius, following on her way, began to say in this manner. Although I
shall offend your dainty ears, and offer great injury to the worthiness of
the kingdom of Valentia, with a rude and disordered relation, to recount the
ornaments, rarities, and pleasures of it; yet because I will in some part
fulfill your gentle requests, I will say something that I have heard and seen
therein: I will not make any particular narration of the fertility of the
yielding soil, the pleasantnes of the flourishing fields, the beauties of the
shrubby hills, the shadows of the green woods, the sweetenes of the clear
fountains, the melody of the singing birds, the coolenes of the fresh and
calm winds, the riches of the profitable flocks of sheep and goats, the
fairenes of the populous towns, the good nature of the loving people, the
strangenes of the sumptuous temples, nor of many other things more, for which
that country is famous through out the world, because it requires larger
time, and a better tongue: But because you may know the cheifest glory of that
country, I will tell you that, which I heard renowned Turia the principal
river of that land sing. Polydorus and I came on a day to his banks, to ask
the way to Dianas temple of the Shepherds thereabouts, because they could
best tell it in those parts, and coming to a cottage where certain herdsmen
were, we found them sweetly singing. We asked them that we desired to know,
and they very lovingly informed us at large of all we demanded, and afterward
told us, that since we came in so good an hour, that we should not depart
from thence, until we had heard a most sweet song, that the famous Turia
would make not far from thence after half an hour. We were well content to
hear it, and so we stayed to go with them. After we had stayed a little while
in their company, we went up along the river banks, until we came to a wide
field, where we saw a great company of Nymphs, Shepherds, and
Shepherdesses, every one attending when famous Turia would begin to sing. Not
long after we saw old Turia come out of a deep cave, with a great pot (very
curiously wrought) under his arm, his head crowned with a garland of Oak and
Laurel, his arms all hairie, his white beard long and slimie: And sitting
down on the ground, leaning upon his pot, and pouring out of it abundance of
christalline waters, he cleared up his hoarse and hollow voice, and sung as
follows.

The Song of Turia.
WAter (fair Springs, and purest running streams)
This fortunate and most abundant soil,
Comfort the meades and trees, and pleasant air,
Defend the flowers from Titans burning spoil,
So with the favor of the highest beams
I will maintain my banks so fresh and fair,
That these shall have great envy of my crown,
The Father of floods, Rosne, Myncius, and Garoune.
Whiles that you go thus hastening of your course,
Winding your streams by many a crooked way,
And joy Valencia fields that sweetly smell
With sauourie liquours in the hottest day:
My weak and feeble breath I will enforce
With my divining spirit to foretell,
And sing of those good haps, that shall befall
By favor of the heavens unto you all.
Shepherds, and Nymphs, within these lovely dales
Whose names resound unto The Arcadian fields,
Give ear to me: But of the painted flowers,
Nor pleasure, that the springs and meadows yeeldes,
Nor woods, nor shades, nor warbling nightingales,
I will not sing, nor of the country powers:
But of those famous men and worthy peers,
That shall be here not after many years.
And now I see two Shepherds first in place,
Calixtus, and Alexander, whose fames
Surmounting the great Cesars chief renown,
From Atlas unto Maurus sounds their names:
Whose lives the heavens adorning with their grace,
Shall make them both to wear a reverend crown:
And save from loss with their industrious heed,
As many flocks as in the world do feed.
Of whose illustrous stock I see arise
That man, whose heart base fear cannot rebuke,
Well known for arms, and many martial feats,
The Roman Caesar, and Valencian Duke:
A mind that mounts above the hautie skies,
Whom yet a cruel fate with murder threats,
That that rare strength, brave heart, and noble breath
Must have an end by raw and bloody death.
The same likewise must in a moment end
The glory of Don Hugo de Moncades,
With valor, good success and happy praise,
Leaving the Moors subdued by Spanish blades:
For Charles his blood most willing he shall spend,
After the winning of a thousand days,
And fight he shall with strong and conquering hand
Against the French and barbarous Affrican.
But ill it does be fit to talk of those,
Whom furious Mars does kindle with his heat,
When learned lamps do gravely come in place:
For here they shall arise, and shine in great
And glorious blaze, as far as Europe goes:
The darkest corners shall their lights embrace.
Viues shall live as long as Daphnes lover
Above the world with golden wings does houer.
Whose highest skill and learning shall inherit
John Honorate, and clime to honors hill,
Teaching the mighty Emperor of our land:
The Muses with great wonder he shall fill,
Whom now (me thinks) I see with greatest merit
Bearing a Bishops Crosier in his hand:
O that such famous Shepherds, all my sheep
And lambs might feed, and plains and pastures keep.
About that time Nunnez with praise shall flourish,
Who for deep learning in his tender years,
Shall be compared unto the Stagarite:
Demosthenes gives place where he appeeres
And does declame, whose eloquence does nourish
His own and strangers: But O vile despite,
And most ungrateful place, whom thou shall make
For Ebrus banks, thy country to forsake.
But who shall tell you of that musical,
Which many a Poet straining forth his voice
Along my banks so sweetly shall resound?
Here do I see how all of them rejoice,
With favors that Apollo gives them all,
For singing with a spirit most profound,
They shall enlarge this happy countries name,
From Pole to Pole with endless golden fame.
And now I see that man, whose name shall be
Bruted with living praise in every part:
Whom I may well for golden verse compare
To Phebe, to Mars in arms and martial art,
Ansias March, who (flowring meade) of thee,
Love, virtue, and death, shall sing with verse most rare
Taking for honorable and his just emprese
To celebrate the virtues of Terese.
Well shall he show himself to be the son
Of Peter March, who both in peace, and war,
Learned in verse, in arms most mighty here,
Shall make his country famous very far:
Whose noble lineage (when that they are done)
Where in renowned valor does appear,
Shall give a Iayme, and Arnau in those days
Poets, whom heaven shall favor many ways.
Giorgio del Rey with verse most high and stately
My banks shall honor, and with garlands crowned
By all my fairest Nymphs, that shall embrace him,
His name with double echoes shall resound:
The gentle Planets favoring but lately
His fellow Poets, in such sort shall grace him,
That Italy shall wonder at his verse,
And die for spite his sweet songs to rehearse.
Now Fraunces Oliver, that with thy voice
Lifting thee up unto the Azur'd heaven,
Do wound the same: And thee renowned Figueres
Whose verse shall be most pleasant, fine and even,
And thee Martin Garcy, that may rejoice,
That (mauger death) thy fame time never wears:
And Innocent of Cubels I do see,
Who well deserves a crown of Laurel tree.
Shepherdes, you shall have here a man of worth,
That with the virtue of his secret skill,
And herbs, shall help your languors and your smartes,
And mend your lives with verses at his will:
Then Nymphs strew flowers and sweetest herbs power forth
Unto great layme Royg with thankful hearts,
Crown him with Bay, with Parsley, and with Time,
For famous skill in physic, and in ryme.
And great Narcis Vinnols, that to the sky
With lofty verse did blaze his worthy praise,
Make him a crown of Laurel fair and green,
Whose fame shall not (though all the world decaies)
Another for a personage most high,
Whose verse shall reach as high as may be seen:
He shall be matched with him that loved Laura,
His name, the famous Crespi Valladaura.
Me thinks I see an Earl most excellent,
The noble Lord surnamed of his Olive,
Which, while the world shall last: amongst his own
And strangers, it shall flourish and survive:
His comely verse shall shine most orient
With perfect light, which he deriues alone
From heat that from his Centelles do arise
Shining as bright as stars in cleerest skies.
And Nymphs, when that the heavens shall joy you all
With John Fernandz, as now but with supposes,
There shall no place be void in all this land,
Where sow ye may not Lillies and fine Roses:
And thou (light fame) stretch out thy flight, and call
Thy mighty powers, and use them here at hand:
And give him that surname most souerayn
Thou gave unto the famous Mantuan.
And now I do behold that Poet rare,
Iayme Gacull, who in Valencian ryme
Did show his pregnant and his lively wit,
Which mounted to the highest clouds in time:
And Fenollar, whom I well to compare
To Tityrus my thoughts cannot omit:
For sounding here his sweetest verse along
These banks, the world shall hear his solemn song.
Pinedas songs so copious and so fine,
Shall also make my sweet banks to resound,
By whose brave verse Pan conquered needs must be,
Tygres made gentle: and they shall rebound
His famous name, which never shall decline,
Unto the highest spheres in dignity.
I hope by him more honor to obtain,
Then proudest Smyrna did by Homer gain.
Behold the stayed, mild, and sweetest grace,
Wherewith Vincent Ferrand, a man most grave,
Shall show his highest judgment, and his skill:
Being in his time a Poet rare and brave.
His verse shall hold king Aeolus in his place,
And stay my streams from running at their will,
Hearing the sweetest sound and harmony,
Of all his verses gracious, grave, and hie.
The heavens will not, nor reason will consent,
That I should speak with humble style and plain
Of that choice squadron, and without compare,
Above man's reach an office to obtain:
Ferran, Sans, Valdellos, and excellent
Cordero, and Blasqo a wit most rare,
Gacet, more shining lights then fair Aurore,
Of whom my spirits now shall sing no more.
When of so great a Master I do think,
As excellent Borja of Montese,
Who shows his valor, as his wits divine,
As well in verse, as any high emprese:
Me thinks, my fields, my rivers, and their brinks
Shall with more hap and greater glory shine,
Then Tybur has, though he within her womb
Was borne, that built the stately town of Rome.
And thee who of same father, place, and name,
And of the self same highest lineage bred,
Most excellent Don Joan, whose surname shall
In Pindus, and Parnase be honored.
For every one to rear his verse shall frame
With pen above the globe celestial.
The Muses that do dwell in Helicone,
Make for thee there a crown and stately throne.
The Roman people with their heroes
Was not so proud, when they did all despise,
As my most fertile soil, and I shall be
When that great Aguilon shall once arise,
Whom both in war, in counsel, and in peace,
In verse, and valor, his dexterity
Shall to the highest top of honor rear,
Where Marius yet, and Fabius never were.
Now Seraphin Centellas I do see,
Who lifting up his high and lofty song,
And military art unto the sky,
Builds for his verse a fort most sure and strong.
And shows himself so brave a man to be
In courage, skill, and true nobility,
That now begins my sweet content of heart,
To see his valor, and his great desert.
But now I fear me that I cannot praise
Don Luys Milan, even as I do desire,
Who shall in music to such skill attain,
That to Orpheus wreathe he shall aspire:
His vain shall be so stately in his days
In heroicke verse, that I believe in vain
That they will name before this Adamant
Cyno Pystoya, and Guido Caualcante.
Thou that shall get so great a part, and taste
Of Pegasus fount, that mighty deaw and sweet,
And whom the dwellers of Parnassus hill
Shall with a standard of brave poesy greet:
(Noble Falcon) here words I will not waste
In praising thee, for fame shall that fulfill:
And shall be careful that thy learned name
In all the world with praise she will proclaim,
Praising always the famous Emperor
Charles the great King, Fame makes the world to know him;
And though above the stars she does commend him,
Little it is to that that she does owe him,
You shall behold him to excel so fur,
With favor that the Muses all will lend him,
His surname shall the world so much delight,
That Hesiodes name shall be forgotten quite.
He that declares the stately Roman laws,
He that a fine and dainty verse compoundes,
He that the wise Lycurgus does excel,
And all the Poets of Verona grounds,
Comes next in place, whose golden chariot draws
Fame with her trumpe, his praises to foretell:
And this is Oliver, whose memory
Controules the old and newest history.
Knowing fair Nymphs, your good days to begin
Make thousand outward signs of inward joy,
For now (me thinks) I do behold even then
Two famous men who shall their minds employ,
The one to war, the other still to win
Salvation for the souls of sinful men.
Ciurana and Ardenol, who shall raise
Their highest verse to heaven with endless praise.
What? Will you see a judgment sharp and sure,
A general skill, a grave and settled mind,
A lively spirit, and a quick conceate,
A sweet consort, poetical and fine,
That savage beastesto mildness does enure?
Of Philip Catalan behold the great
Wisdom and wit, who therefore has no mean
A portionin the fountain Hyppocrene.
Here shall you see a high and lofty wit,
Who shall bring honor to our pleasant fields,
Endowed with a brave and noble spright,
Cunning in all things that good letters yeeldes,
The learned Pellicer, whose brain shall fit
For poemes, making them his chief delight:
In which his skill and met hode shall be great,
His judgment deep, a sweet and quick conceate.
Behold the man whose noble breast contains
Knowledge most rare, and learning general,
Orpheus seems with him to be combinde,
Apollos favors on his head do fall:
Minerua gives him wit in plentious veins,
And Mars a noble heart and valiant mind:
I mean Romani, coming now addressed
With all the best, that learning has professed.
Two suns within my banks shall now arise,
Shining as bright as Titan in his sphere,
And many spring tides in one year shall be,
Decking my banks and meadows every where:
The hurtful snow, nor hard untempered ice
Shall hide my plains, nor cover any tree
When echoes in my woods or greenes rehearse
Vadilles and Pinedas sweetest verse.
The meetres of Artiede, and Clement, so
Famous shall be in their young tender years,
That any thinking to excel the same,
But base to them and humble shall appear:
And both amongst the wisest sort shall show
Quick and reposed wits with endless name.
And after give us from their tender flowers
Fruits of more worth amongst more learned powers.
The fount, that makes Parnassus of such prize,
Shall be John Perez of such worthy fame,
That from swift Tana unto Ganges source,
He shall dilate his admirable name:
To stay the hasty winds he shall suffice,
And rivers running with most swiftest course,
Filling them all with wonder, that shall throng
To hear his verse, and grave and solemn song.
The man to whom a worthy name is due
Of right, for his ability and skill,
Whom all my sacred Nymphs in time shall know,
And all my Shepherdes shall with praises fill
For verse most high: amongst the learned crew
His honor and his praise shall daily grow:
Almudeuar it is, whose shining wing
Unto the stars his golden praise must bring.
In vulgar tongue the famous Espinose
Shall make the history of Naples clear,
After he has revived the memory
Of the Centellas highly linag'd here
With such a lofty style: That fame bestows
His praise abroad, the which shall never die:
And make this Poet, second unto none,
To be renowned in worlds but lately known.
But now I feel a certain joy of mind,
That makes mine aged heart to leap apace,
But only thinking of that great content,
That Bonauida brings into this place:
In grauest learning he shall leave behind
The rest, whose glory he shall still prevent:
^is fine and pithie verse, with Laurel dressed,
In every age shall sound from east to west.
Now Don Alonso comes in place, who shall
The Rebolledos surname much increase
In all the world, to raise his worthy name
Above great Maro he shall never cease,
And seem to have no humane wit at all
But singing with most lofty verse: the same,
His fine conceit, his art and vain so high,
It seems he shall have robbed from the sky.
For end of this most sweet and pleasant song
And last conclusion of this general skill,
I give you him, by whom dame Nature shall
The Circle of the world with wonder fill:
My simple praises should but do him wrong
And all his virtues most heroical,
His valor, wit, nobility which graceth
His bounty, faith and zeal which he imbraceth.
This is Aldana monarch of such might,
That jointly soldiers and brave verses makes:
That (with great reason) the most famous men
As far as Phoebus with his light awakes
Do doubt if he be Petrarke Tuscans light,
Or Petrarke he: But yet admiring then,
To see that where fierce Mars does show his face,
Apollo mild should have so great a place.
After this captain there is none whom I
With my poor verse may honor and commend,
For next unto the golden sun that star
That brightest shines, in darkness must depend:
And yet besides the short time does deny,
To praise each one for poesy and war:
Farewell, farewell, for unto you the rest
Hereafter I will sing with cleerer breast.
This was the song of the river Turia, to the which the Shepherds and Nymphs
gave great ear, as well for the sweetness of it, as also for that the most
famous men which were foretold in it, should be afterward in the kingdom of
Valentia. I could tell you many other things, that I saw in those happy
fields, but the trouble that you have taken by my tediousnes will not permit
me. Marcelius and the Shepherds marvelled much at Clenardas report, who having
made an end of it, they perceived that they were near to Dianas Temple, where
they began to discover the high turrets of it, most stately reared above the
tops of the trees. But before they came to the great Palace, they saw a fair
Nymphe gathering sweet and fine flowers, whose name, and what succeeded by
seeing of her, you shall know in the book that follows.

The end of the third Book.
The fourth Book of the third Part of Diana.
THe complaints that men do ordinarily attribute to Fortune are very great,
which would not be so many nor so grievous, if they considered well the good
that comes oftentimes by her mutabilities. He that now rejoices (having
been in a miserable estate before) that Fortune is changed, has no reason to
check her, nor to call her wavering, when some contrary event does happen. But
though she has both in good, and in ill inconstancy incident unto her, as
part of her proper nature; yet a wise man (how much soever he is touched with
her) should not live with affiance in the possession of worldly felicities, nor
with despair in suffering adversities; but should rather moderate himself
with such wisdom, to entertain pleasure as a thing not permanent, and grief
and sorrow as things that may have an end in time. Of such men God has a
particular regard, as of sorrowful and painful Marcelius, delivering him
from all his cares, by the means and help of most wise Lady Felicia; who,
divining (as it were) in her mind, that Marcelius, Diana and others, should
come to her Palace, caused in a manner that fair Nymphe to go forth into that
sweet meadow, to give them certain news and signs, that strange things
should come to pass, which by her divine wisdom she did foresee were very
expedient and necessary to be done. When Marcelius therefore and the rest were
come to the place, where the Nymph was gathering flowers, they courteously
saluted her, and she them again. She asked them whither they were going, and
they said to Dianas Temple. Then Arethea (for so was the Nymphe called) said
unto them. My Lady Felicia, whose Nymphe I am, will be very glad of your good
company for the apparent signs of your good deserts, which by your personages
you seem to testify. And now since that the Sun hides it self in the West,
I will go back with you thither, where you shall be welcomed and feasted in
the best sort that may be. They gave her most hearty thanks, and went with her
toward the Temple, recovering great hope by the words and promises of the
Nymphe: and although Polydorus and Clenarda had been before in Felicias house,
yet they never remembered that they had known or seen her before: And the
reason was, because of the great number of Nymphs that the wise Lady had ever
at her commandment, diversely employed in diverse parts of her Court. Therefore
they asked her her name, and she told them that she was called Arethea. Diana
asked her what news she knew in those parts? And she answered. The latest
news that is here, is, that not two hours since there came to Felicias house
a strange Lady in habit of a Shepherdess; the which, being seen by an
ancient old man, that is also there, he knew her for his daughter; and because
she had been a long time wandering up and down the world, and thought to be
dead, the sudden joy was so great that he received at her sight, that it caused
a great wonder amongst all those that were in the house. The old man's name (as
I remember) is Eugertus, and his daughters Alcida. Marcelius hearing these
words, remained so senseless with joy and fear assayling him both at once, as
any wise man may conjecture, and at last said. O happy travels, and fortunate
troubles, which come to their end with so prosperous accidents! Ah ah, and
desiring to have passed on farther, his heart was so overcome, and his tongue so
tied, that in a trance he fell down to the ground. Diana, Ismenia, and
Clenarda, being next unto him, took him up again, and with comfortable words
of hope recovered his dismayed soul: And so coming to himself again, he
thanked them many times. Polydorus and Clenarda were not a little glad at those
news, seeing now that all their sorrows should have an end by the happy
coming of their sister Alcida. And Diana and Ismenia were also very joyful,
as well for their companions good hap, as also for the hope they had of their
own good fortunes and help to receive it at her hands, who wrought such
miracles and woonders. Diana, because she would know something of Syrenus, said
thus unto her. The great hope of content that thou have given me (fair Nymphe)
by telling me of that, which is in Felicias Palace for Alcidas coming, is not
small; but yet greater should I have, if thou would tell me what Shepherds
of account are there also. There are many worthy Shepherds (answered Arethea)
but those that I do best remember are Syluanus and Seluagia, Arsileus and
Belisa, and one other more principal then these, called Syrenus, whose virtues
and deserts Felicia has in great estimation; but he is such an enemy to love,
that he makes all the rest that are there to wonder at him. Alcida is of like
quality and condition, in so much that ever since she came thither, both of
them have not been asunder, discoursing of hate, oblivion, and disdain. And
so I am very certain, that Felicia made them come to her Court to marry them
together, being both of one mind, and their conditions being so semblable one
to the other. For though he be but a Shepherd, and she a noble Lady, Felicia
yet by her supernatural powers can give him valor, force, riches, and
wisdom, which is the truest nobility of all the rest. And Arethea following
on her speech, turning to Marcelius, she said thus unto him. By this (Shepherd)
thou see how thy joy is in hazard to fall to another lot; defer not
therefore the time, because if thou come betimes, thou may prevent Syrenus
of his match. But when Diana heard these words, she felt the greatest grief
that might be, and had showed it by tears and outcries, if bashfulnes and
modesty had not been an impediment to it. Marcelius suffered the like pain
for the same cause, and was so tormented with it, that he thought to have dyed
for very anguish of mind. So that on knife wounded Marcelius and Dianas heart,
and one jealousy molested their souls: Marcelius feared Alcidas marriage with
Syrenus; and Diana the marriage of Syrenus with Alcida. The fair Nymph knew
Marcelius and Diana very well, and those that were with them, but she disembled
it very cu^ningly, as Felicia had told her how, telling Marcelius first a true
tale, to give him an unexpected joy; and after a fained matter, to kindle his
desire, and Dianas more; and also because by these bitter news, the gladness
that they afterward received, might be greater and more sweet. Being now come
to a broad and most fair Court, which was before the palace gate, they saw a
reverend old Lady coming out of it, apparelled with a long gown of black
velvet, having a veil on her head of white tynsell which hung down over her
shoulders, being accompanied with three most fair Nymphs, representing a most
venerable and divine Sybill. This Lady was Felicia, and her Nymphs were
Dorida, Cynthia, and Polydora. When Arethea was come before her Lady and
Mistress (but first telling her company that she was Felicia) she kneeled
down and kissed her hands, and so did all the rest. Felicia seemed to be very
glad of their coming, and with a merry countenance said unto them. Worthy
Gentlemen, Lady, and famous Shepherds, although the joy that I have of your
coming is great, yet the same that you shall reap by my sight hereafter shall
be no whit less. But because you are somewhat weary with your journey, go and
take your rest, and forget your griefs, because you cannot want the first in
my house, and the second with my great knowledge shall be soon amended. They
all humbly thanked her, showing themselves very glad of their loving
entertainment, and at last Felicia left them. She made Polydorus and Clenarda
to stay there, saying, that she had to talk with them; and the rest being
guided by Arethea, went to a chamber in the rich Palace, where they were
seasted that night, and served with all things needful for their rest. This
house was so sumptuous and magnificent, and so full of all kind of stately
riches, and of curious and costly gardens, that there was not any other
comparable unto it. But I will not trouble my self in making any particular
recount of the beauty and riches of it, since that was declared at large in
the first part of this work. I will only tell how Marcelius, Diana, and
Ismenia, were lodged in two chambers in the Palace, hanged all about with rich
Tapistrie, curiously wrought with gold and silver, lodgings unacquainted to
simple Shepherds. They were there entertained with a dainty and plenteous
supper, served with plate of gold and cristall, and when they went to sleep
laid in stately beds, whose bodies yet (though with travel and pain they
were not a little wearied) with the softnes and sweetness of them, and with the
hope also that Felicia had given them, were invited to a sweet and reposed
sleep. On the other side Felicia in company of her three Nymphs, and of
Polydorus and Clenarda (telling them by the way, that they should say nothing
of Marcelius, Dianas, and Ismenias coming thither) went to a most pleasant
garden, where they saw Eugerius passing the time away with his daughter
Alcida. Don Felix and Felismena, Syrenus, Syluanus, and Seluagia, Arsileus and
Belisa, and another Shepherd were sitting together a pretty way off them about
a fountain. Alcida had yet on the same pastoral weeds, that she came
apparelled with that day to the palace, but she was presently known by her
brother and sister. The joy that the brother and two sisters had to see
themselves altogether, and the gladness that the father had to see himself and
them so well and happily met, moreover the great affection wherewith they
embraced each other, the loving talk that passed between them, and the sundry
questions that they asked of one another, cannot be with words nor writing
declared. Alcida was rapt with joy to see her brother and sister; but was
gladder to see Polydorus, then Clenarda, for the great presumption that she
had, that Marcelius went away with her, leaving her in the desolate Island all
alone. But Felicia purposing to clear all these mistes and errors, and to
make an end of so many hard fortunes, spoke thus unto them. Though Fortune has
never so much (fair Alcida) by many kinds of injuries showed herself thy
mortal enemy, yet thou can nor deny, but that with this content, that thou
now enioyest, thou art fully revenged of all her wrongs. And because the false
imagination and deceit, wherein thou have lived hitherto, hating (without
cause) thy loving Marcelius, if thou live still in it, is enough to alter thy
heart, and to give him much sorrow and grief; it shall be therefore very
needful for thee to shake off this conceit and injurious fuspicion out of thy
mind. That which thou think of Marcelius, is clean contrary, because it
was not his fault when he left thee in the Island, but the deceit of a vile
traitor and of Fortune, who now to satisfy the injury that she has done
thee, has brought thee hither unto me, which thou shall find to be as true as
my mouth (never accustomed to feign and lie) has plainly and sincerely told
thee. Thy sister Clenarda can make a large report unto thee of all that has
passed about this matter, harken to her, and believe her words, because I
swear unto thee, that all that she shall tell thee, is most true. Then
Clenarda began to tell the whole matter and how it happened, purging Marcelius
and herself, and reciting at large the treason and villainy of Sartofano, and
all the rest, as you have heard before. Which when Alcida heard, she thought
herself very well satisfied, and then the long hatred, which she bare to
Marcelius, went out of her heart with the deceit, the only occasion of it. And
then the smothered love, and hidden fire began to revive in her breast, being
clearly rid of her old suspicion, as also by the operation of those charming
words that Felicia made in her soul, and being in that mind, she said unto
Felicia. Mine error I acknowledge (most honorable and sage Lady) and the
great benefit that you have done me, by delivering me from it. But if I love
now Marcelius (the miste of unjust suspect being driven from mine eyes) and he
being absent as he is indeed, I shall never the more for this happiness attain
to the top of that joy which I hope for at thy hands; but shall rather be
afflicted with so great grief of mind, that to remedy the same, I shall
stand in need of new favors at thy gracious hands. It is a good token of
love (answered Felicia again) to take thought for the absence of the beloved,
but let not this grieve thy mind, for I will be careful for thy contentment:
Now has the Sun hidden his beams, and it is good time to take some rest.
Go therefore with thy father and sister to repose thy self, because we will
to morrow take order for these affairs. When she had thus said, she went out
of the garden, and so did Eugerius and his daughters, repayring to the chambers
that Felicia had appointed for them in her palace, which were separated from
that where Marcelius lay, and the rest of his company. Don Felix and Felismena
with the other Shepherdes and Shepherdesses tarried a pretty while about the
fountain, and then went to supper, appointing to meet there the next morning
following one hour before day, to take the fresh air of the morning. So
therefore as the hope of the pleasure of the next morrowes meeting made them
pass away the night with sleeping but a little, they rose up all so early in
the morning, that before the appointed hour they were ready at the fountain
with their tuned instruments. Eugerius with his son and daughters advertised
of the music, did also rise up, and went thither. They began to play and
sing, and to make much sport and pastime by the light of the Moon, which with
a full and bright face gave them as clear light as if it had been day.
Marcelius, Diana, and Ismenia, lay in two chambers one joining to the other,
whose windows looked into the garden: And although they could not see the
fountain through them, by reason of the high and thick Laurel trees which were
about it, yet might they hear well what they said. So therefore when Ismenia
(lying awake) heard the noise they made, and the merriment and songs of the
Shepherds, she awaked Diana, and Diana knocking at the wall that was between
both their chambers awoke Marcelius, and so all of them went to their windows
where they were neither seen nor known. Marcelius gave attentive care, if he
might perhaps hear Alcidas voice. Diana did diligently listen to hear her
Syrenus. Ismenia only had no hope to hear her Montanus, because she knew not
that he was there. But yet her Fortune was better then she was aware of, for at
that very instant a Shepherd sung to the sound of his Baggepipe this Sextine
that follows.

THe fair, the fresh, the red, and rosy morning
Does follow still the long and tedious night,
And after darkness comes the sun shine day,
When Nymphs go forth to walk the freshest meades,
The air resounding with their sweetest songs,
And cheerful notes of many chirping birds.
I am less happy then the pretty birds,
That are saluting of the merry morning,
With rattling forth their sugared notes and songs:
For in the morn I mourn, as in the night,
Be this a desert or most fragrant meade,
Be this a cloudie or most shining day.
In such a hapless hour, and dismal day
So dead I was, that never can these birds,
Which in the dawning joy both hill and meade,
Nor the Vermillion face of freshest morning
Drive from my soul a dark and deadly night,
Nor from my breast a lamentable song.
My voice shall never change her woonted song,
And for my self it never will be day:
But I will first die in eternal night,
Though more and more do sing the warbling birds,
And fairer rise the bright and purple morning,
To shine upon, and cherish this fair meade.
O irksome garden! and O doleful meade!
Since she, that cannot hear my plaining song,
And with her beams of beauty stains the morning,
Does not give light unto my needful day:
O trouble me no more you prating birds,
For without her your morning is but night.
In that time of the still and silent night,
When in the towns, the hills, the vales, and meades,
All mortal men take rest, the beasts and birds,
I most of all do force my grievous song,
Making my tears even with the night, and day,
At noone, at night, and after in the morning.
One Morning only conquer must my Night,
And if one Day illustrate shall this Meade,
Then will I hear with joy the Songs of Birds.
By this time Ismenia that was harkening at the window, knew that he that did
sing, was her husband Montanus, and took so great delight to hear him, as
grief in hearing of that which he sung. For she thought, that the pain that
(he said in his song) he was troubled with, was for another sake and not for
hers; but she was by and by driven out of this doubt, for she heard him (when
he had made an end of his song) give a marvelous great sigh, and said. Ah
wearied and sorrowful heart! how ill did thou abuse thy self and her in
giving credit to a simple surmise, and how justly do thou now suffer the
sorrow, that thine own lightness has procured? Ah my beloved Ismenia! how
better had it bin for me, that thy zealous love had not caused thee to seek me
through the world, because when I had come back again to our town (and
knowing mine own fault) I might have found thee in it? Ah wicked Sylueria, how
ill did thou requite him, that ever did thee good from his cradle? Alas I
would have thanked thee for the discovery of the treachery, which afterward
thou toldest me, declaring to me the truth of the matter, but that it came too
late, which then auailed no more, nor now, but for my greater pain and
grief. Ismenia hearing this, thought herself the happiest woman in the world,
and was so glad a^ this good fortune, as may be possibly imagined. The tears
trickled down her cheeks for joy, and like one that was now near unto the
end of her troubles she said. Now is the time of my happy days come, and
this house is only made to help those that live in distress and woe.
Marcelius and Diana were wonderful glad for Ismenias joy, and had by this,
great hope of their own. Ismenta would by and by have gone out of her chamber
into the garden, and even then when Marcelius and Diana were persuading her to
stay, thinking it better to attend Felicias will and pleasure, they heard new
songs about the fountain, and Diana knew that it was Syrenus that sung them.
Ismenia and Marcelius held their peace, because they would not trouble Diana,
who giving an earnest ear to the voice of her beloved husband heard him sing
this song following.

Syrenus. Lovers, with pride enjoy your full content,
To see your selves in favor and in grace,
For I do joy to see my torments spent,
And joy to see them in obliuions place:
I joy to see my captive heart so free,
I joy to see my self in liberty.
For after suffering worlds of endless thrall,
The favors of a proud and scornful dame
So lately come, and seldom do befall,
That even the best, and greatest of the same
Is, not to need them, nor to be possessed
Of trifling toies a fond and fained jest.
Now laugh mine eyes, and thank Dianas vain,
Thank her that brought you to this happy turn,
Her crew ltie and hate your life did gain,
By her disdain, by her unseemly scorn
Your liberty, in bondage led away,
You have redeemed, thrice happy be that day.
For if by suffering torments for her sake,
Ten thousand times more beautiful she wear,
And dearest love to me if she did make,
Yet such content, as now in hating her,
I should not have: And this does joy my heart,
That my disdain does bear so great a part.
O sovereign God! that once I might but know
Grief without hope to sease upon thy soul,
And that the God of love would wound thee so,
And so thy scornful heart with pains control,
That fully unrevenged I might not be,
For that great wrong which thou have done to me.
For then I would (and less it were not meet)
Be to thy grief so cruel and so fierce,
That if with tears, and lying at my feet,
Thou did thy pains and torments all rehearse,
And at my hands thy life if thou did crave,
Answer I would, Thy life I would not save.
God grant thou may for ever seek me out,
And (Shepherdess) that I my self may hide:
That thou might say: O turn thee once about,
And look on me: and that I may deride,
And answer thee, whom now I have forgot,
Hence (Shepherdess) away and vex me not.
That thou may say for thee I die in paining,
And on my knees to thee I come a creeping,
What novelty is this, O what disdaining?
And I may go, and leave thee thus a weeping,
And answer thee for pains that I did borrow,
I joy and laugh to see thee in this sorrow.
If this thou doubt'st with solemn oath I swear,
That while I live, I will do this and more:
For now no pains, nor torments I do fear,
And suffer not, as I did once before:
And I did never love so much thy name,
As from my heart I now abhor the same.
And glad I am he has forgot thee quite,
That for thy sake was once so great a fool;
And for thy love did suffer such despite,
And such fond lessons in blind fancies school:
And it is meet that he should suffer shame,
That in these follies was so much to blame.
For cruel Love with Fortune does agree,
And tickle Fortune like to Cupid wauers:
Then (jolly Shepherdes) I would counsel ye
Not to gape after Loves, and Fortunes favors:
And if ye mean a sweet life to procure,
Freedom embrace, and captive Love abjure.
O that thou heard'st me now (ingrate Diane)
To under stand, what I do say more clear,
And how much more my soul does yet retain
In plainer terms, if thou were present here,
To tell thee, that I might unto thy face
Degorge my mind unto thy great disgrace.
But yet it is the best (to joy my heart)
For thee to shun the presence of my sight:
For I shall loose (no doubt) no little part
Of that great joy, that pleasure, and delight
Of my revenge, for it would pity me
And grieve me too I think in seeing thee.
Then do I wish, that I may never see
Thy grievous presence, nor thy face again,
Because unto my soul it needs must be
A greater torment and more cruel pain,
To see thee, when I swear, I love thee not,
Then when thou had my dearest love forgot.
It happened to Diana as to those which hearken to their own harms; for in
hearing Syrenus disdainful resolution, she conceived so great grief in her
mind, that I am not able to express it, and therefore think it better to
leave it to the judgment of wise men. Let it suffice you to know, that she
thought to have dyed at that present time, and therefore it was very needful
for Marcelius and Ismenia to comfort her up, and to encourage her with such
good reasons, as were sufficient for such an extreme grief; one of them was in
telling her, that the knowledge and skill that Felicia had (in whose house they
were) was not so small, but that it had remedied woes of greater pain and
consequence, as she had showed but a little before by Ismenia as disdained of
Montanus. As they were thus talking together, the golden morning beginning to
discover it self, the Nymphe Arethea came in to that chamber, and with a
cheerful countenance said unto them. I wish as fortunate and good days to
you (noble Gentleman and fair Shepherdesses) as are due to your deserts and
virtues. My sage Lady Felicia has sent me hither to know, if you have slept
more contentedly this night then you were wont to do, and to bring you along
with me into the garden, where she has to speak certain words with you. But
you Marcelius must leave of these Shepherds garments, and put on this apparel
that I bring here, fitter for your calling and degree. Ismenia would not stay
for Marcelius answer, for joy of the good news, but said. The gladsome tidings
that with thy sweet sight thou have brought us this morning (O happy Nymphe)
God requite for us, since it lies not in our power to recompense so great a
debt and courtesy. The content that thou would know of us, is not little,
with being only in this house, and how much happier have we been in it this
morning, when Marcelius and I have recovered our lives welnie lost before, and
Diana no small hope to the attayning of her desires? But because we must obey
the command of so great and wise a Lady as Felicia is, let us not delay the
time to go into the garden, and let her wisdom dispose of us at her best
pleasure. Then Arethea took the apparel that Marcelius should put on from
another Nymphe that brought it, and with her own hands helped to put it on,
which was so rich, and garnished so bravely with gold and precious stones, that
it was of infinite value. They went out of that quadrant, and all of them
following Arethea, by one of the Palace gates they went into the garden. This
Orchard of the one side was environed with an arm of a goodly river, of the
other side of it stood most sumptuous and stately buildings belonging to
Felicias Palace, and the other two sides compassed about with two walls,
curiously plaistered with Iesmines, Woodbind, and other herbs and flowers
passing delightful to the eye. But of the pleasantnes of this place, it is
more copiously entreated of in the fourth book of the first part. Now after
they were come into it, they saw how Syluanus and Seluagia separated from the
other company, were together all alone in a little meadow that was near to the
gate. There did Arethea leave them, willing them to stay for Felicia there,
because she was to go again to the Palace to tell that she had done the thing,
that was given her in charge. Syluanus and Seluagia that were there, knew Diana
by and by, and marvelled much to see her there. Seluagia knew Ismenia also,
which was of her own town, and so there was great courtesy between them and
many embracings, joyful to see each other there after so long a time. Seluagia
then with a merry countenance said unto them. Fair Diana is welcome, whose
disdain was an occasion to make Syluanus mine. And welcome also fair Ismenia,
who with thy deceit did give me so much pain, that for remedy of it I came
hither, where I have changed it into a happy estate. What good fortune has
brought you hither? That (said Diana) which we receive of thy sight, and that,
which we hope for at Felicias hands. O happy Shepherdess! how glad am I of the
content that thou have gotten here: God confirm thy fortune so prosperous,
that thou may enjoy it many years. Marcelius offered not to speak any thing
amongst them, because he neither knew Syluanus nor Seluagia. But whilst the
Shepherds were occupied about their congratulations and courtesies, he was
beholding a Gentleman and a Lady, that hand in hand went walking up and down
an Alley in the Garden, being very merry one with the other. He took a
certain pleasure in beholding the Lady, and his mind gave him, that he had
seen and known her before: Wherefore to clear himself of that doubt,
coming to Syluanus he said. Although it is a point of discurtesie to interrupt
your friendly greetings, yet would I feign know (gentle Shepherd) what Lord
and Lady those are that walk there together. Their names (said Syluanus) are
Don Felix, and Felismena, husband and wife. Then Marcelius hearing Felismenas
name, altered his countenance and said. Tell me, I pray you, whose daughter
Felismena is, and where she was borne, if thou do perhaps know, because I
care not so greatly to enquire of Don Felix. I have heard her oftentimes tell
(said Syluanus) that she was borne in Soldina the cheifest city of all
Vandalia, her father being called Andronius, and her mother Delia. But I pray
you Sir, do me the favor to let me know what you are, and why you made this
demand? My name (said Marcelius) and all else that thou seek at my hands,
thou shall know hereafter. In the mean time do me this courtesy, that since
thou art acquainted with Lord Felix and Felismena, crave leave of them that I
may speak a few words with them, because I would ask her a question that may
redounde (perhaps) to much joy and good on both sides. It likes me well (said
Syluanus) and then he went by and by to Don Felix and Felismena and told them,
that a Gentleman not far off would feign entreat with them in certain
affairs if they thought it not troublesome unto them. They stayed not a
minute, but came to the place where Marcelius was. And after courteous
salutations, Marcelius said to Felismena, I enquired (fair Lady) of this
Shepherd thy country, name, and parents, who told me that which by thine own
report he knows concerning the same, and because I know a Gentleman which was
borne in the same city, who is also son to a Lord (if I be not deceived)
whose name is like to thy Fathers; Tell me then (courteous Lady) if you have
any brother, and what his name is, because (it may be) he is the same, whom I
know. With this Felismena gave a great sigh and said. O noble Gentleman! how
much does thy demand penetrate my heart? Know therefore, that I had a brother,
borne with me at one birth, and being but a child at twelve years old, my
father Andronius sent him to the king of Portugales court, where he lived many
years. This is as much as I can tell of him, and that which I told Syluanus
and Seluagia that are here present, on a time at the fountain of the
Sicamours, after that I had delivered the three Nymphs, and killed three
Savages in the meadowe of the Laurel trees. From that time hitherto I have
heard nothing of him, but that the king sent him as Captain into the coast of
Africa: and because I have a good while since wandered up and down the world,
following mine own destinies and fortune, I know not whether he be alive or
dead. Then Marcelius could not stay himself any longer, but said. I have
indeed (sweet sister Felismena) bin dead hitherto, because I have wanted thy
good company, and now am revived, in that I have been so happy a man to see
thee. And in speaking these words he lovingly embraced her. Felismena
remembering well Marcelius kind of gesture and his countenance in her mind,
did now clearly see that he was the same indeed, and so was undoubtedly
resolved, that he was her own brother. The joyful greeting that passed
between the brother, sister, and cosen, was great; and the gladness that
Syluanus and Seluagia took to see them so happily met together, not small.
There were many loving speeches exchanged, many tears of joy and sorrow powered
out, many demands and questions, hopes revived, determinations concluded, and
many words and things of joy and rest mutually spoken and done. They spent in
these congratulations one whole hour, which was little enough for the large
history and accidents that they had to discourse of after so long an absence.
But because they might better and more safely talk of those matters, they sat
themselves down in that little meadow under a rank of Sicamours, whose
wreathed boughs laden with leaves, made a delightful and cool shadow,
defending them from the heat of the radiant sun, which was with some heat
mounted up the Hemispheare. Whilst Marcelius, Don Felix, Felismena, Syluanus,
and the Shepherds were talking together of these matters, at the other end of
the garden near unto the fountain (as it is said before) were Eugerius,
Polydorus, Alcida, and Clenarda. Alcida had that day left of her pastoral
weeds as Felicia had commanded, and was now apparelled and adorned very richly
with costly garments and jewels that she willed should be given her. But as
Syrenus was also there, Montanus, Arsileus, and Belisa, singing and sporting
together, they marvel ouslie delighted Eugerius and his son and daughters,
that were harkening to them. And that which did most of all please them, was a
song which Syrenus and Arsileus did sing one against another in dispraise and
favor of Cupid: For they sung with an earnest will and desire in hope of a
brave crystal cup, which Eugerius had promised for a reward and prize to him
that did sing best. And so Syrenus to the sound of his Rebecke, and Arsileus to
the tune of his rural Baggepipe, began to sing in manner following.

Syrenus. OEies that are not now as once tormented,
When first my star enueagled and disguised you:
O joyful thoughts, and quiet mind absented,
O careless heart, now will I once advise you,
That since you made Diana discontented,
To see, love, think on you, let this suffice you,
That I do hold your counsel best of many,
In vain to see, nor love, nor think of any.
Arsileus. O eyes that have to greater light attained,
Looking upon that sun, your only treasure,
O toyfull thoughts, in thousand ioies distrained,
O happy heart, the seat of secret pleasure:
Although Belisa would have once disdained
To see, to love, or think on me at leisure,
Yet hold I this a heaven, as like was never
To see, to love, and think on her for ever.
Syrenus would have replied to Arsileus answer, if he had not been interrupted
by Eugerius, who said. Since you must (jolly Shepherds) receive your reward at
my hands, it is good reason that you sing in such sort, as may best content me.
Sing thou Syrenus first those verses which thy muse shall dictate unto thee:
and then thou Arsileus shall sing as many again, or those which thou shall
best think good of. It pleases us well (said they) and then Syrenus began
thus.

Syrenus. LEt now the goodly spring tide make us merry,
And fields, which pleasant flowers do adorn,
And vales, meades, woods, with lively colors flourish,
Let plentious flocks the Shepherds riches nourish,
Let hungry woolues by dogs to death be torn,
And lambs rejoice, with passed winter weary:
Let every rivers ferrie
In waters flow, and silver streams abounding:
And fortune, ceaseless wounding,
Turn now thy face, so cruel and unstable,
Be firm and favorable:
And thou that kill'st our souls with thy pretenses,
Molest not (wicked love) my inward senses.
Let country plainnes live in ioies not ended,
In quiet of the desert meades and mountains,
And in the pleasure of a country dwelling:
Let Shepherds rest, that have distilled fountains
Of tears: prove not thy wrath, all pains excelling,
Upon poor souls, that never have offended:
Let thy flames be incended
In hautie courts, in those that swim in treasure,
And live in ease and pleasure:
And that a sweetest scorn (my woonted sadness)
A perfect rest and gladness
And hills and dales, may give me: with offenses
Molest not (wicked love) my inward senses.
In what law find'st thou, that the freest reason,
And wit, unto thy chains should be subjected,
And harmless souls unto thy cruel murder?
O wicked love, the wretch that flies further
From thy extremes, thou plagu'st, O false, suspected,
And careless boy, that thus thy sweetes do season,
O vile and wicked treason.
Might not thy might suffice thee, but thy fuel
Of force must be so cruel?
To be a Lord, yet like a Tyrant minded,
Vain boy with error blinded,
Why do thou hurt his life with thy offenses,
That yields to thee his soul and inward senses.
He erres (alas) and fowly is deceived
That calls thee God, being a burning fire,
A furious flame, a playning grief and clamorous,
And, Venus son (that in the earth was amorous,
Gentle, and mild, and full of sweet desire)
Who calls him, is of his wits bereaved,
And yet that she conceived
By proof, so vile a son and so unruly,
I say (and yet say truly)
That in the cause of harms, that they have framed,
Both justly may be blamed:
She, that did breed him with such vile pretenses,
He, that does hurt so much our inward senses.
The gentle sheep and lambs are ever flying
The ravening woolues and beasts, that are pretending
To glut their mawes with flesh they tear asunder:
The milk white doves at noise of fearful thunder
Fly home amain, themselves from harm defending,
The little chicke, when puttocks are a crying:
The woods and meadows dying
For rain, of heaven (if that they cannot have it)
Do never cease to crave it:
So every thing his contrary resists,
Only thy thrall persisteth
In suffering of thy wrongs without defenses,
And lets thee spoil his heart and inward senses.
A public passion, natures laws restraining,
And, which with words can never be declared:
A soul twixt love, and fear, and desperation,
And endless plaint, that shuns all consolation,
A spendlesse flame, that never is impaired:
A friendlesse death, yet life in death maintaining:
A passion, that is gaining
On him, that loves well and is absented:
Whereby it is augmented,
Aiealousie, a burning grief and sorrow.
These favors lovers borrow
Of thee fell Love, these be thy recompenses,
Consuming still their soul and inward-senses.
Arsileus, after that Syrenus had ended his song, began to tune his Bagpipe,
and after he had played a little while upon it, answering every staff of his
Competitor in order, he sung as follows.

Arsileus. O Let that time a thousand months endure,
Which brings from heaven the sweet and silver showers,
And ioies the earth (of comforts late deprived)
With grass and leaves, fine buds, and painted flowers:
Echo return unto the woods obscure,
Ring forth the Shepherds songs in love contrived:
Let old loves be revived,
Which angry winter buried has of late:
And that in such a state
My soul may have the full accomplishment
Of joy and sweet content:
And since fierce pains and greefes thou do control,
Good love do not forsake my inward soul.
Presume not (Shepherds) once to make you merry
With springs, and flowers, or any pleasant song,
(Unless mild love possess your amorous breasts)
If you sing not to him, your songs do werie,
Crown him with flowers, or else ye do him wrong,
And consecrate your springs to his behestes:
I to my Shepherdess
My happy loves with great content do sing,
And flowers to her do bring.
And sitting near her by the river side,
Enjoy the brave springtide.
Since then thy ioies such sweetness do enroule,
Good love do not forsake my inward soul.
The wise in ancient times a God thee named,
Seeing that with thy power and supreme might
Thou did such rare and mighty woonders make:
For thee a heart is frozen and inflamed,
A fool thou make a wise man with thy light,
The coward turns courageous for thy sake:
The mighty Gods did quake
At thy command: To birds and beasts transformed:
Great monarchs have not scorned
To yield unto the force of beauties lure:
Such spoils thou do procure
With thy brave force, which never may be toulde
With which (sweet love) thou conqu'rest every soul.
In other times obscurely I did live
But with a drowsy, base, and simple kind
Of life, and only to my profit bend me:
To think of love my self I did not give,
Or for good grace, good parts, and gentle mind
Never did any Shepherdess commend me:
But crowned now they send me
A thousand garlands, that I won with praise,
In wrestling days by days,
In pitching of the bar with arm most strong,
And singing many a song,
After that thou did honor, and take hold
Of me (sweet love) and of my happy soul.
What greater joy can any man desire,
Then to remain a captive unto love,
And have his heart subjected to his power?
And though sometimes he taste a little sower,
By suffering it, as mild as gentle dove,
Yet must he be, in lieu of that great hire
Whereto he does aspire:
If lovers live afflicted and in pain,
Let them with cause complain
Of cruel fortune, and of times abuse,
And let them not accuse
Thee (gentle love) That do with bliss enfoulde
Within thy sweetest ioies each loving soul.
Behold a fair sweet face, and shining eyes,
Resembling two most bright and twinkling stars;
Sending unto the soul a perfect light:
Behold the rare perfections of those white
And Iuorie hands, from greefes most sure bars:
That mind wherein all life and glory lies,
That joy that never dies,
That he does feel, that loves and is beloved,
And my delights approved
To see her pleased, whose love maintains me here:
All those I count so dear,
That though sometimes Love does my toies control,
Yet am I glad he dwells within my soul.
There was not one there amongst them all but took great delight in the
Shepherds songs. But Eugerius coming to give his verdict, praise, and reward
to him that had sung best, could not so soon conclude of the matter: he stepped
aside to Montanus to hear his opinion, whose judgment was, that one had sung
as well as another. Then Eugerius turning to Syrenus and Arsileus, said. My
opinion is (cunning Shepherds) that you are equal in the subject of this
contention, and that, if old Palemon were revived, and made an indifferent
judge between you, he could not confess (I think) any superiority in your
skill. Thou art Syrenus worthy to bear away the cristall cup; and thou
Arsileus deseruest it as well, so that I should offer you great wrong, if I did
not define who is conqueror, and who is conquered. To resolve my self
therefore of this doubt with Montanus opinion, I say that to thee (Syrenus) is
allotted the Cristall cup, and to thee (Arsileus) this Calcedonian cup of no
less value, which worthily thou have won. To both of you therefore I give
cups of like value, both of them of account amongst Felicias treasure, and by
her bountiful hands bestowed on me. The Shepherds were well pleased at the
wife judgment, and rich rewards of bountiful Eugerius, to whom they gave
many thanks. But Alcida by this occasion calling to mind her passed times,
said. If the deceitful error, wherewith I have been blinded so long, had
endured till now, I would not then consent that Arsileus should be rewarded
equally with Syrenus: But since I am now free from it, and wounded afresh with
the love of my betrothed Marcelius, for the pain which I suffer for his
absence, I like well of that which Syrenus did sing; and for the joy and sweet
delight which I expect, I also commend Arsileus song. But take heed careless
Syrenus, that these complaints which thou make of Diana, be not like to those
wherewith I blamed Marcelius, because thou may not repent thee of thy hardness
of heart and disdain, as I have done. Syrenus smiled at this and said: What
greater blame may be laid upon that Shepherdess, who after she had forsaken
me, married her self to a jealous, perverse, and unfortunate husband. Then
Alcida answered. Unfortunate indeed he has been enough, since he cast his
eyes upon me: and because it comes fit to the purpose, I will tell thee that,
which yesterday (by reason of Felicias discourses and affairs with me) I could
not declare unto thee, when as we were talking about Dianas matters: and to
this end especially, because thou might forget all injuries past, and shake
off thy wrongful oblivion, when thou shall understand of the strange and
unlucky accident, that by my contempt befell to miserable Delius. I have told
thee before, how I was talking and singing with Diana at the fountain of the
Sicamours, and how jealous Delius came thither, and sorrowful Marcelius after
him in a Shepherds habit, at whose sight I was so grieved, that I fled from him
inco^tinently into a wood that was hard by. But when I came to the other side
of the wood, I heard a far off a voice that still cried, Alcida, Oh Alcida,
stay, stay: which made me to think that Marcelius followed me; and because I
would not fall into his hands, I ran as fast as I could away. But by that which
afterward happened, I knew that it was Delius, husband to Diana, that came
running after me. And because I had run a great way, and began to be weary, I
then went so easily, that he followed me in sight. I knew him, and stayed to
know what he would have, not thinking once of him, nor of the cause of his
coming. And when he was before me, what by the faintnes of his running, and by
the anguish of his mind that troubled him, he was not able to utter one word.
At the last with rude and ill formed reasons he said, that he was in love with
me, praying me after his homely manner to love him again, and many other
things (I know not what) which showed his little wit, and simple behavior. To
tell the very truth I laughed at him, and the best I could, endeavored to
comfort him, and to make him forget his folly, but it auailed nothing; for the
more I dissuaded him from it, the more fool he was. In faith (Shepherd) I
swear unto thee, that I never knew man in my life so assotted with sudden
love. But as I went on my ways, and he following me at an inch, we came to a
village a mile distant from his town, and there, when he perceived my rigor,
and that I had flatly denied him, for very grief and anguish of mind he fell
sick. He was lodged there by a Shepherd that knew him, who as soon as morning
came, certified his mother of his malladie. Delius mother came thither with a
heavy heart in great haste, and found her son tormented with a burning
fever. With much sorrow she lamented his case, and did importune him to know
the cause of his grief, but no other answer would he give her, but sob, sigh,
and weep. The loving mother pouring forth many a bitter tear, said unto him.
Oh my dear Son! what an unfortunate chance is this? Hide not the secrets of
thy heart from me, behold I am thy mother, and (perhaps) I know some part of
them already. Thy wife told me last night, that at the fountain of the
Sicamours thou did forsake her, running after I know not what unknown
Shepherdess, tell me if thy grief does grow thereby, and be not afraid nor
ashamed to impart it to me; for ill may that malladie be cured, the cause and
beginning whereof is unknown. Oh sorrowful Diana! thou did this day go to
Felicias temple to learn some news of thy husband, and he was nearer to thy
town, and weaker then thou were aware of. When Delius heard his mother speak
these words, he answered not a word, but gave a great sigh, and then redoubled
his painful agony. For before he complained only of Love, but at these
words with love and jealousy he was most greeuouslie molested. For when he
remembered that thou (Syrenus) were here in Felicias palace, and hearing that
Diana was come hither, fearing least her old and mortified love might be
rekindled again in her, he fell into such a frantike madness, that, being
assaulted with two most fierce and cruel torments, he ended his life in a
furious trance, unto the greatest grief of his sorrowful mother,
kinsefolkes, and lamenting friends. In very truth I could not choose but be
sorrowful for his death, knowing my self to be the chiefest cause of it, but
I could have done no less for safeguard of mine own content and honor. Only
one thing grieved me not a little, that not contenting him with any comfortable
deed, I gave him not (at the least) some gentle words, whereby he might not
then (perhaps) have come to so sudden a death. In the end I came hither,
leaving the poor soul dead, and his kinsfolks weeping for him, not knowing
the cause of his death. Thus have I digressed (yet to the purpose) to make thee
know what harm a cruel disdain and forgetfulness procures, and also because
thou should understand of Dianas widowhood, and consider with thy self, if
now it were good for thee to change thine intent, since she has changed her
condition and estate. But I marvel much that Diana departing from her town
yesterday (as Delius mother said) to come to this place, is not yet here.
Syrenus gave attentive ear to Alcidas words, and when he heard of Delius
death, his heart began somewhat to alter and change. There did the secret power
also of sage Felicia work extraordinary effects, and though she was not
present there, yet with her herbs and words, which were of great virtue, and
by many other supernatural means, she brought to pass that Syrenus began now
again to renew his old love to Diana: which was no great marvel, considering
that by the influence of his celestial constellation he was so much inclined
to it, that it seemed Syrenus was not borne but only for Diana, nor Diana but
for Syrenus.

The provident and most wise Lady Felicia was now in her magnificent and rich
palace, environed about with her chaste Nymphs, working with sovereign and
secret verses the remedies, and content of all these Lovers. And as she saw by
her divine wisdom, that by this time Montanus and Alcida being by their
imaginations deceived, had now acknowledged their errors, and that hard hearted
Syrenus had mollified his obstinate and rigorous disposition, she thought it
now high time utterly to confound old errors, and to ease the long travels
and troubles of her guestes, by exchanging them into joyful and unexpected
happiness. Going therefore out of her sumptuous palace, attended on by Dorida,
Cynthia, Polydora, and many other goodly Nymphs, she came to the delightful
garden, where the Lords, Ladies, Shepherds and Shepherdesses were: The first
that she saw there, were Marcelius, Don Felix, Felismena, Syluanus, Seluagia,
Diana, and Ismenia, sitting in one of the corners of that little square meadow
near unto the great gate, as is aforesaid. When they saw the reverend Lady
coming toward them, they all rose up, and kissed those hands, in which they
had placed their cheifest hope and remedies. She courteously saluted them
again, making a sign unto them that they should all follow her, which most
willingly they did. Felicia attended on by this amorous train, crossing every
part of this great and pleasant garden, came at the last to the other part of
it to the fountain, where Eugerius, Polydorus, Alcida, Clenarda, Syrenus,
Arsileus, Belisa, and Montanus were. They all rose up, in honor of the sage
Matron. And when Alcida espied Marcelius, Syrenus Diana, and Montanus Ismenta,
they were all astonished at the sight one of another, and verily thought they
were in a dream, standing like enchaunted persons, and not believing their
own eyes. The wise Lady commanding them all to sit down again, and showing
by her countenance that she was to entreat of important affairs, sat her down
in the mids of them all, in a chair of Iuorie, graven with gold and precious
stones, and spoke in this sort. Now is the hour come (renowned and fair
assembly) wherein with my hands I mean to give you all your long desired and
happy contentment: for by diverse strange means, and untrodden ways I have
made you come to my Palace for no other intent and purpose. Since you are here
therefore altogether well met, where the matters and means of your happy love
and life to come must be determined, my desire is that you would follow my
will, and obey my commands herein. Thou art Alcida, by the true testimony and
report of thy sister Clenarda, cleerelie delivered from the suspicion of thy
deceived imagination. And I knew well enough that, after thou had forsaken
that cruel disdain, the absence of thy Marcelius did not a little grieve
thee. Come hither therefore, and offer thy self unto him, for this absence
shall not be long, which has rather been so short, that at that time when
thou complainedst to me of it, Marcelius was in my palace. Now thou have him
here before thee, as firm and steadfast in his first love, that, if it pleased
thee, and thy Father, brother and sister, he would think himself the happiest
man alive, to solemnize this desired marriage long since betrothed. The which
besides that it must needs cause great joy and gladness, being between such
principal and noble personages, shall make it more perfect and absolute, by
reason of Felismena his sisters presence, whom Marcelius after many years
past, has happily found out in my Palace. Thou Montanus by Sylueria herself,
that betrayed thee, art rid from thy erroneous opinion. After which time thou
did weep continually for the loss of thy faithful wife Ismenia, who now is
come to live and die in thine arms, and to comfort all thy sorrows, after
that through out all Spain, with many a weary journey, and many dangers, and
troubles she has sought thee out. But now last of all it rests to remedy
thy pains (fair Diana) before which time I mean to advertise thee of that
which Syrenus and some of these Shepherds do know by Alcidas report, although
it will be but a sorrowful tale in thine ears, and a grievous corosie to thy
pitiful heart. Thy husband Delius (fair Shepherdess) as it pleased the
inexorable destinies, has ended the course of his life. For the loss whereof
I know well (Diana) that thou have great cause to lament, but yet in the end
all men are bound to pay this tribute to Nature, and that which is so common a
thing, ought not extremely to grieve any one. Weep not (fair Diana) for thou
breakest my heart asunder in seeing thee power forth such dolorous tears, dry
up thine eyes, comfort thy sorrows, and cheer up thy self. Put on no morning
weeds, and make no long moan, for too much lamentation and sorrow is not
allowed in this house, when as also the heavens have reserved for thee some
better hap, then that which thou had of late. And since there is no remedy
for that which is lately done, it belongs to thy wisdom to forget what is
past, and to my skill and power, to give order to things present. Here is thy
old lover Syrenus, whose heart by my operations, and by the reason that binds
him to it, is become so tender, gentle, and changed from his former hardness,
that now for his great contentment, it only behooves him to conclude a
marriage with thee. That which I request of thee is, that thou will obey my
will in a thing which so greatly concerns thy happy and joyful life: The
which, although it may seem to offer some injury to thy husband that is dead
to marry so soon again; yet being a thing practiced by my decree and
authority, cannot any ways be deemed ill. And thou Syrenus since thou have
begun to give place in thy heart to honest and virtuous Love, make now an end
to yield up thy thoughts and deeds to it: and let this merry and happy
marriage be put in effect, to the fulfilling of which, all the favorable stars
are inclined. The rest of you, which in this delightful garden enjoy your
happy content, rejoice in your minds; make merry pastimes; play upon your
tuned instruments; sing sweet Ditties, and exercise your selves in delightful
sports and conversation, in honor and memory of these joyful meetings, and
happy marriages. Sage Felicia had no sooner ended her speech, but all of them
were very willing to do as she commanded them, liking well of her motion, and
maruelling at her singular wisdom. Montanus took his wife Ismenia by the
hand, thinking themselves thrice happy and fortunate; and between Marcelius
and Alcida, Syrenus and Diana, at that instant a holy and virtuous marriage was
solemnly celebrated with great love, firmnes, and sumptuous accustomed
ceremonies.

All the rest exceeding glad for these happy accidents, sung and reioiced with
marvelous applause. Amongst the which, Arsileus for the great good will that
he bare to Syrenus, and for the friendship between them both, at the sound of
his Rebecke, sung this Caroll in memory and joy of the new marriage between
Syrenus and Diana.

LEt now each meade with flowers be depainted,
Of sundry colors sweetest odours glowing:
Roses yield forth your smells, so finely tainted,
Calm winds, the green leaves move with gentle blowing:
The crystal rivers flowing
With waters be increased:
And since each one from sorrows now has ceased,
(From mournful plaints and sadness)
Ring forth fair Nymphs, your joyful songs for gladness.
Let springs and meades all kind of sorrow banish,
And mournful hearts the tears that they are bleeding:
Let gloomie clouds with shining morning vanish,
Let every bird rejoice, that now is breeding:
And since by new proceeding,
With marriage now obtained,
A great content by great contempt is gained,
And you deuoid of sadness,
Ring forth fair Nymphs, your joyful songs for gladness.
Who can make us to change our firm desires,
And soul to leave her strong determination,
And make us freeze in Ise, and melt in fires,
And nycest hearts to love with emulation:
Who rids us from vexation,
And all our minds commands?
But great Felicia, that his might with stands
That filled our hearts with sadness,
Ring forth fair Nymphs, your joyful songs for gladness.
Your fields with their distilling favors cumber
(Bridegroom and happy Bride) each heavenly power
Your flocks, with double lambs increased in number,
May never taste unsavory grass and sower:
The winters frost and shower
Your kids (your pretty pleasure)
May never hurt, and blessed with so much treasure,
To drive away all sadness,
Ring forth fair Nymphs, your joyful songs for gladness.
Of that sweet joy delight you with such measure,
Between you both fair issue to engender:
Longer then Nestor may you live in pleasure:
The Gods to you such sweet content surrender,
That may make mild and tender
The beasts in every mountain,
And glad the fields and woods and every fountain,
Ab^uring former sadness,
Ring forth fair Nymphs, your joyful songs for galdnes.
Let amorous birds with sweetest notes delight you,
Let gentle winds refresh you with their blowing,
Let fields and forests with their goods requite you,
And Flora deck the ground where you are going:
Roses, and vilets strowing,
The Iasmine and the Gilloflower
With many more: and never in your bower
To taste of household sadness,
Ring forth fair Nymphs, your joyful songs for gladness.
Concord and peace hold you for aye contented,
And in your joyful state live ye so quiet,
That with the plague of jealousy tormented
Ye may not be, nor fed with Fortunes diet:
And that your names may fly yet
To hills unknown with glory,
But now because my breast so hoarse, and sorry
It faints, may rest from singing,
End Nymphs your songs, that in the clouds are ringing.
When Arsileus had made an end of his song, there was such a general
reioicing, that it would have cheered up the most sorrowful hearts that ever
were. Sweet and delightful songs resounded in every part of the garden, the
tuned instruments made more then earthly Harmony, and it seemed that the
blossomed trees, the gliding river, the pleasant fountain, and the chirping
birds rejoiced at that feast. After that they had a pretty while delighted
themselves in this kind of exercise, Felicia thinking it time to go to dinner,
commanded that it should be brought to the fountain where they were. Whose
command the Nymphs obeying, presently busied themselves severally to provide
for dinner; and setting the tables and cupbordes of plate under the shadow of
those green trees, every one sitting in order as Felicia appointed them,
began to taste of those delicate and dainty meats that were served in, and
most of them in plate of great value. Dinner being done, and returning to their
former pleasures, they made much sport and merriment with many feasts and
pastimes, which shall be set down in the Book following.

The end of the fourth Book.
The fifth Book of the third Part of Diana.
THese Lovers were so well pleased with their happy estate, every one seeing
himself in his desired company, that they quite forgot their former troubles.
But we, that a far off behold and mark the pains and troubles that their
contentment cost them, the dangers that they were in, and the mishaps and
crosses that they had before they came to this happiness, must be well advised
and take good heed, that we put not our selves into like inconveniences,
although our after reward and repose were more certain then theirs; and the
rather being so uncertain and doubtful, that for one that has good hap, a
thousand there are, whose long and painful lives with desperate death have
been rewarded. But leaving this aside, let us entreat of those feasts and
pastimes, which were made in Felicias garden for joy of the new espousals, and
oblivion of old injuries and deceits, although it is not possible to set them
down in particular. Felicia, at whose command all were obedient, and in whose
direction the whole order and substance of the feast consisted, willed the
Shepherds (for their first pastime) to dance together, to the tune of certain
songs that they themselves should sing: And so sitting down with Eugerius,
Polydorus, Clenarda, Marcelius, Alcida, Don Felix, and Felismena, she declared
unto the Shepherds her will and pleasure. Then they all rose up, and Syrenus
taking Diana by the hand, Syluanus Seluagia, Montanus Ismenia, and Arsileus
Belisa, began to foot so brave and sweet a dance, as any that the fairest
Driades and Napees with their yealowe hair like threedes of fine Arabian gold
hanging loose and blown abroad with the wind, were ever wont to dance in the
green and pleasant forrestes. There was no courteous contention amongst them,
who should begin to sing first: For Syrenus, who was the chiefest man in all
that feast, being somewhat ashamed of the small regard he had of Diana till
that time, the thought whereof (he also suspected) was likewise a hinderance
unto him from justly excusing himself, resolved in song to tell Diana his
mind, which shame would not permit him to acquaint her with in familiar
talk. Therefore without any more adoo (the rest answering him as it was
decreed) he sung as follows.

I Should have did, and never viewed thee
(Fair Shepherdess, unworthily forgot)
Since that I durst presume to live, and be
Before thy sweetest sight, and love thee not.
A happy love, and fortune I should prove,
Both which my pains and sorrows should abate,
If by remembering of thy dearest love,
I should forget the grief of former hate.
For now the fear of death, and leesing thee,
I fear will be my guerdon and my lot,
Since that I durst presume to live, and be
Before thy sweetest sight, and love thee not.
Diana was of a contrary opinion. For having satisfied her old oblivion and
disdain that she had of Syrenus with a renewed and entire love of him again,
and seeing herself sufficiently recompensed for her passed pains and greefes,
she had now no cause to lament the small care she had of him in times past, but
rather finding her heart filled with all content and joy that she could wish,
and free from all pain, by manifesting her gladness and blaming Syrenus
needless excuse, she answered him with this song.

MY soul does leap for joy to have
My wished love again,
For there is no other joy to crave,
Nor grief to give me pain.
I do not think of sorrows past,
Our love it may offend:
Of any present grief to taste,
For hate that has an end.
Rejoice (my soul) such bliss to have,
Since with so high a gain,
There is no other joy to crave,
Nor grief to give me pain.
While Diana was singing her song, there came a most beautiful Shepherdess to
the fountain, but newly (as it seemed) come to Felicias Palace, and being
told, that the Lady was in the garden, she came thither to see her and to
talk with her. Being come to the place where Felicia was, she kneeling down
before her, kissed her hands, and said unto her. Pardon (good Lady) my boldness,
for coming into this presence without leave, since the desire I had to see
you, and the need which I have of your skill and wisdom, was so great, that
I was forced hereunto. I bring with me my heart surcharged with grief, the
remedy whereof is only in your hands, but it is so great, that it requires
some fitter time, occasion, and place to tell it at large, because it is
against good manners to interrupt this merry company with matter of sorrow
and grief. Melisea (for so was this Shepherdess called) was yet on her knees
before Felicia, when she perceived a Shepherd coming along in an Alley of the
Orchard toward the fountain, and in seeing him, said. This is an other
grief (good Lady) so troublesome and painful unto me, that for the delivery
of the same also, I have no less need of your gracious help and favor. By
this time the Shepherd (whose name was Narcisus) came in presence of Felicia,
and of those Lords and Ladies that were with her, and making low obeisance,
he began to make a great complaint against the Shepherdess Melisea that was
present there, saying, that he suffered great torments for her sake, and
received not from her again one favorable or gentle word: Insomuch that in
pursuit of her love and company to that place, he had come very far, and she
not suffered him so much as to declare his grief to her cruel and disdainful
ears. Felicia commanded Melisea to rise up, and cutting off their troublesome
contentions, said. It is not now time to harken to long and tedious
complaints, wherefore be content for this time Melisea and give Narcisus thy
hand, and go both into that dance, and for the rest we will hereafter find
out a remedy at fitter time. The Shepherdess would not gain say the Ladies
command, but hand in hand with Narcisus she went to dance with the other
Shepherds. And at this time happy Ismenia that was ready to sing, showing by
her outward countenance signs of inward content, which after so long sorrow
she inioyed, sung in this sort.

SVch joy I feel does in my soul surmount,
That now again I think it nothing strange:
If that a pleasure of so great account
Does cost two thousand torments for exchange.
Rtill did I look but still my comforts stayed,
But when my soul did once enjoy the same,
With their content and sweet delight I paid
My staying, and their tariance did not blame.
Let pains therefore within my soul surmount,
Sorrows and plaints to me shall not be strange,
If for a pleasure of so great account,
They give me thousand torments in exchange.
All the while that Ismenia was singing, and before, and after, she never cast
her eyes off her beloved Montanus. But he, who was somewhat ashamed of his
fond conceit wherein he had lived so long, to the great grief of his wife,
durst never look on her but by stealth, and at every turn of the dance,
when she could not see him again: the reason whereof was, because when
sometimes he went about to look her in the face, he was so much confounded
with shame of his folly that was yet so fresh in his memory, and was so much
overcome with the light of those two radiant eyes of her, which with great
affection continually beheld him, that he was forced to cast his down to the
ground. Whereby seeing that he lost a great part of his delight, by not looking
on her, whom he accounted his chiefest felicity, and making this the occasion
and matter of the song, he sung to his beloved Ismenia in manner following.

TVrne thy fair eyes (wherein my shame
I see) fair Shepherdess, aside:
For looking on me with the same,
To look on thee, I am denide.
With thy two suns so do thou give,
And cast me beams with pearcing eye,
That though by seeing thee I live,
Yet when thou look on me I die:
Eyes that are of such art and frame,
Thou must beware to keep aside,
For looking on me with the same,
To look on thee I am denide.
Like as the snow unto the sun,
And as the mark unto the fight,
As clouds are with the winds undone,
As wax before the fires light:
So do thy fairest eyes with shame
Confound me, and my soul divide:
For looking on me with the same,
To look on thee I am denide.
Behold what mighty love is bent
To do, and fortune does ordain
To make my sorrows still augment
By the sweet guerdon of my pain.
Thine eyes do feed my amorous flame,
And sight of them my life does guide:
But if thou view'st me with the same,
To look on thee I am denide.
Melisea, who was all this while dancing against her will with Narcisus, whom
she could not abide, with a disdainful song thought to be revenged on this
grief, and just to the purpose of those pains and griefs, wherewith the
Shepherd said he died every day for her sake, making but a mock and jest of
them, did sing thus.

Young Shepherd) turn aside, and move
Me not to follow thee,
For I will neither kill with love,
Nor love shall not kill me.
Since I will live, and never favor show,
Then die not for my love I will not give:
For I will never have thee love me so,
As I do mean to hate thee while I live.
That since the lover so does prove
His death, as thou do see,
Be bold I will not kill with love,
Nor love shall not kill me.
Narcisus took no mean grief to hear the cruel song of his dearest Love,
but encouraging himself with the hope that Felicia had given him, and forced
by the constancy and fortitude of his enamoured heart, he answered her with two
staves, which he adjoined to a certain old song, that said thus.

IF to beloved it thee offends,
I cannot choose but love thee still:
And so thy grief shall have no end,
Whiles that my life maintains my will.
O let me yet with grief complain,
Since such a torment I endure:
Or else fulfill thy great disdain,
To end my life with death most sure.
For as no credit thou will lend,
And as my love offendes thee still,
So shall thy sorrows have no end
Whiles that my life maintains my will.
If that by knowing thee, I could
Leave of to love thee as I do,
Not to offend thee, then I would
Leave of to like and love thee too,
But since all love to thee does tend,
And I of force must love thee still,
Thy grief shall never have an end,
Whiles that my life maintains my will.
Melisea was so hardened in her cruelty, that Narcisus having scarce ended the
last words of his song, and before another did sing, she replied in this manner.

ME thinks, thou take the woorser way,
(Enamoured Shepherd) and in vain,
That thou will seek thine own decay,
To love her, that does thee disdain.
For thine own self, thy woeful heart
Keep still, else art thou much to blame,
For she, to whom thou gave each part
Of it, disdaines to take the same:
Follow not her that makes a play,
And jest of all thy grief and pains,
And seek not (Shepherd) thy decay
To love her, that thy love disdaines.
Narcisus could not suffer Meliseas song to pass without an answer, and so
with a mild grace he sung these new verses upon an old song, that said.

SInce thou to me were so unkind,
My self I never loved, For
I could not love him in my mind,
Whom thou fair Mistress do abhor.
If viewing thee, I saw thee not,
And seeing thee, I could not love thee,
Dying, I should not live (God wot)
Nor, living, should to anger move thee.
But it is well that I do find
My life so full of torments: For
All kind of ills do fit his mind,
Whom thou (fair Mistress) do abhor.
In thy oblivion buried now
My death I have before mine eyes,
And here to hate my self I vow
As (cruel) thou do me despise:
Contented ever thou did find
Me with thy scorns, though never (for
To say the truth) I ioyed in mind,
After thou did my love abhor.
The contention between Narcisus and Melisea, delighted them all so much, that
the general rejoicing of that feast had been greatly augmented by it, had it
not bin diminished with the manifest appearance of the rigor that she showed
Narcisus, and with the pity that they had of those pains, which he suffered
for her sake. After Narcisus had made an end of his song, all of them turned
their eyes to Melisea, thinking she would have replied again. But she held her
peace, not because she wanted nipping and cruel songs to encounter and vex
the miserable Lover with, nor will to reply; but because she would not be
troublesome to all that merry company. Seluagia and Belisa were afterward
requested to sing, who excused themselves, by alleging their in sufficiency.
Nay that were not well (said Diana) that you should go from the feast without
paying your shot. And this must not so smoothly pass away (said Felismena)
without the consent of us all here, who mean to participate the sweet
delight of so delicate voices as yours are. We will not be slack (said they
again) to do you any service (little though it be) in this solemnity; but
pardon our singing (I pray you) for in all other things we will be willing to
do our endeavors. I will not for my part give my consent (said Alcida) to
exempt you from singing, or at the least that some others shall sing for you.
Who can better do it (said they) then Syluanus and Arsileus our husbands: The
Shepherdesses say well (said Marcelius) and it would be best (me thinks) if
both did sing one song, and one answer another in it, for it shall be less
troublesome to them, and more pleasant to us. All of them seemed to take great
delight at that kind of singing, because they knew, how the readiness and
liuelines of their wits would be showed and tried by it. And so Syluanus and
Arsileus seeming to be well content, leading their dance about again, sung in
manner following.

Sylu. SHepherd, why do thou hold thy peace?
Sing: and thy joy to us report.
Arsil. My joy (good Shepherd) should be less,
If it were told in any sort.
Sylu. Though such great favors thou do win,
Yet deigne thereof to tell some part:
Arsil. The hardest thing is to begin
In enterprises of such art.
Sylu. Come, make an end, no cause omit
Of all the ioies that thou art in,
Arsil. How should I make an end of it,
That am not able to begin.
Sylu. It is not just, we should consent,
That thou should not thy ioies recite,
Arsil. The soul that felt the punishment
Does only feel this great delight.
Sylu. That joy is small, and nothing fine,
That is not told abroad to many,
Arsil. If it be such a joy as mine,
It can be never told to any.
Sylu. How can this heart of thine contain
A joy, that is of such great force?
Arsil. I have it, where I did retain
My passions of so great remorce.
Sylu. So great and rare a joy as this
No man is able to withhold,
Arsil. But greater that a pleasure is,
The less it may with words be told.
Sylu. Yet have I heard thee heretofore
Thy ioies in open songs report:
Arsil. I said, I had of joy some store,
But not how much, nor in what sort.
Sylu. Yet when a joy is in excess,
It self it will unfold,
Arsil. Nay such a joy should be the less,
If that it might be told.
The Shepherds would have sung one verse or two more, when a goodly company of
fair Nymphs (as Felicia had appointed) came to the fountain, and every one
playing upon her several instrument, made strange and delightful harmony.
One of them played on a Lute; another on a Harp; another made a marvelous
sweet countertenour upon a Recorder; another with a piece of a fine quil made
the silver stringed Cyterne sweetly to sound; others the stringes of the base
Vial with rosined hairs; others with Virginals and Violins made delicate
changes in the air, and filled it with so sweet music, that in a manner it
astonished them that heard it, and made them to marvel no less at it. These
Nymphs were strangely apparelled, and passing fair to behold, every one in
her proper colors, their locks of golden hair hanging loose to the wavering
wind, with fine coronets on their heads, and sweet flowers tied together with
threads of gold and silver. The Shepherds seeing this melodious quier of angels,
left of the dance that they had begun, and sat down, giving attentive ear to
the heavenly music, and concent of the sundry sweet instruments that they
played on, which joined sometimes with clear and delicate voices, moved
strange and rare delight. Then came out by and by six Nymphs apparelled with
crimosin Satin, embrodered with flowers and leaves of gold and silver, wearing
rich caules upon their heads, which were filled and wrought with Rubies and
Emerauldes, from the which hung down upon their fairest brows Diamantes of
incomparable value, with pendants at their ears, of the rarest Pearls and
richest Diamonds that could be found. They had crymosin Buskins on their legs
that were finely printed and gilt, with their bows in their hands, and their
quiuers of arrows hanging behind their shoulders. In this sort they began to
dance to the sound that the instruments made, but with so brave a grace, that
it was a rare sight to behold them. And being in the mids of their dance,
there lept out on the sudden a stately white Heart, marked all over with little
black spots, which seemed very pleasant to the eye: his painted horns with
gold were large, high, and branchie. In brief it was such an one, as Felicia
could best devise to make that company sport. When the Nymphs espied the
Heart, they ran round about him, and dancing nevertheless without missing
one strain of the music that played still, with a brave concord they began
to shoot at him, the which leaping from one side to another after the arrows
were once flien out, with many nimble and pretty skips did the best to defend
himself. But after they had a pretty while sported themselves with this
pastime, the Heart began to break out from them amongst the orchards and
courts, the Nymphs pursuing him amain, until they chased him out of the
Garden, who with their joyful cries and pleasant hallowing made a delicate
noise, which the other Nymphs and Shepherds seconded with their voices, taking
a most singular delight in this dance. And with this sport the Nymphs made an
end of their music. In the mean time sage Felicia, because there should not
want some profitable lesson to be gathered out of those pleasures for the
direction and instruction of life, meaning to try their conceits about the
obscure mysteries and significations of that dance, said to Diana. Can thou
tell me (fair Shepherdess) what is meant by the chase of this goodly Heart,
besides the thing it self? To whom she said again, I am not so wise
(gracious Lady) that I am able to expound mysteries, nor to dissolve your
hard questions. Why then will I tell thee said Felicia, what matter is
contained under that invention. The Heart is man's heart, made fair with delicate
thoughts, and rich with quiet content. It submits it self to humane
inclinations, which shoot mortal arrows at it, but with discretion remoouing
it self into diverse parts, and applying it self to honest exercises, it must
defend it self from so many hurtful arrows, that aim so cruelly at it. And
when it is pursued of them, it must fly away speedily, thereby to save it
self, though those humane and frail inclinations which shoot such arrows,
will not cease to pursue it, and will never leave to accompany it, until it
escapes out of the orchard of life. How can I understand (said Diana) so
difficult and Moral a conclusion, as this, when as the questions and Riddles
which we Shepherdesses exercise and disport our selves with (to this but
plain and easy) I could never yet dissolve nor expound. Make not thy self so
unskillful (said Seluagia) since I have known the contrary in thee, and that
there was never any Riddle so hard, but was easy enough in thy understanding.
In good time (said Felicia) for now we may well try her cunning, which pastime
will afford no less delight then the other before. Propound her therefore every
one of you a Riddle, for I know Diana will acquit herself with you all. It
liked them all well; but Diana, who had not such confidence in her cunning,
that she durst oppose her skill to such difficult questions as she thought they
would propounde, but because she would obey Felicia and please her Syrenus,
who seemed to take a pride and delight therein, she was content to take in hand
the charge that they imposed upon her. Syluanus, who was very ready in
propounding of Riddles, made the first, saying. Because I know well (fair
Shepherdess) that thy pregnant and lively wit is able to discover hard and
hidden matters, and that thy skill is no less sufficient to compass and
attain to intricate and high things, I will therefore (by thy favor) ask
thee a question, by answering which, I know thou will manifest thy delicate and
ripe wit. Tell me therefore what this Riddle means?

A Riddle.
Near to a Shepherd did a damsel sit,
As lean as withered stick by scorching flame:
Her body as full of eyes as might be in it,
A tongue she had, but could not move the same.
her wind she drew above, and eke beneath,
But from one part she never yet did change,
A woeful Shepherd came to kiss her breath,
Then made she plaints most sorrowful and strange:
The more the Shepherd put his mouth unto
Her mouth in stopping it, she cried amain,
Opening her eyes, and shutting them again.
See now what this dumb Shepherdess could do,
That when her mouth he did but touch or kiss,
He waxes dumb, but she still speaking is.
This Riddle (said Diana) although it be somewhat hard, shall not trouble my
wit much, for I have heard thy self propound it on a day at the fountain of
the Sicamours; and because there was no Shepherd there that could tell the
meaning of it, thy self did expound unto us, saying, that the Damsel was a
Bagpipe or a Fluite played upon by a Shepherd. And thou appliedst all the parts
of the Riddle to the effects that happen commonly in music. All of them
laughed to see how Syluanus memory had deceived him, and how Dianas so readily
found it out; wherefore Syluanus to acquit himself, and to be revenged of his
shame, smiling said. Marvel not at my weak memory; for this forgetfulness
seems not so ill as Dianas, nor so hurtful as that of Syrenus. Thou have now
paid us home (said Syrenus) and better thou should have done, if our
obliuions had not been changed into so perfect affections and happy estates
as now they are. No more (said Seluagia) for all is well spoken. But answer me
Diana to that, which I will ask thee, for I will try if I can speak in a
darker language then my Syluanus did: The Riddle is this.

A Riddle.
I Saw a hill upon a day,
Lift up above the air:
Which watered with blood always
And tilled with great care,
Herbs it brought forth
Of mickle worth.
Pulling a handful from that ridge
And touching but the same,
Which leaving near unto a bridge,
Does cause much sport and game,
(A thing scarce of belief)
Lamenting without grief.
Diana looking then toward her husband, said. Do not thou remember (my
Syrenus) that thou have heard this Riddle that night, when we were together in
my uncle Yranius his house? And do not thou remember also how Maroncius son
to (Fernasus) did propound it? I remember very well (said Syrenus) that he did
put it there, but told not (as I think) the signification of it. But then I
remember it (said Diana.) For he said, that the field was that part of the
horse from whence they pull out his longest hairs, wherewith the Rebeckes
being strong, make a tuned noise, although they suffer never the more any pain
or hurt. Seluagia said, that it was so, and that Maroncius Author of the
Riddle, had told it for a fine one, although he had many more better then that.
There are many pretty ones, said Belisa, and one of them is, that I will now
put: wherefore call thy wits together Diana, for this time thou shall not
escape scot free: and it is this.

A Riddle.
WHat bird is that so light,
Her place that never changes:
She flies by day and night,
In all the world she rangeth:
Over the sea at once she flies,
Mounting above the lofty skies.
She Is never seen by eyes,
And who does seek to show her
Has been accounted wise:
Yet sometimes we do know her,
Only the walls by viewing well
Of her close house, where she does dwell.
Thy Riddle Belisa (said Diana) has been more unfortunate then the rest
before; for I had not declared any of their significations, if I had not heard
them before now, and this which thou have put, as soon as I heard it, I
understood it, which of it self is so easy and manifest, that any indifferent
conceit (I think) is able to dissolve it. For it is very clear, that by the
bird which thou speak of, ones thought is understood, which flies with such
swiftnes, that is not seen of any body, but coniectured and known by the
outward signs and gesture of the body, wherein it is included. I confess my
self ouercommed (said Belisa) and have no more to say, but that I yield my
reasons to thy discretion and wit, and my self to thy disposition and will. I
will revenge thee (said Ismenia to Belisa) for there comes an obscure problem
to my mind, that has posed the wisest Shepherds, which I will propound, and
thou shall see how I will gravel Diana, who shall not be so fortunate (I
think) in expounding it, as she has been in the rest, and looking upon
Diana, she said.

A Riddle.
TEll me what Master he may be,
Whose Master is his man?
Bound like a senseless fool is be,
Witty, it nothing can.
Unlearned, yet he does abound
In learning grave and most profound;
When that I take him by the hand,
Although I hear him not,
His meaning yet I understand,
Though him I have forgot.
So wise is he, though words nor motions showing,
Yet thousand things he tells me worth the knowing.
I would have been well contented (said Diana) and thought my self happy to
have been ouercommed by thee (beloved Ismenia) but since in beauty, and in
other perfections and graces thou go far beyond me, I shall gain no great
praise and glory by overthrowing thy purpose, whereby thou thoughtest to have
entrapped me with thy Riddle. It is now two years, since a certain Physician
of Leon came to attend my Father in his sickness, and as he had a book one day
in his hands, he gave it me, and I began to read. And the great profit
occurring to my mind that is commonly taken in reading of books, I told him,
that they were like doombe Masters, that were understood without speaking.
Then to this purpose he told me this Riddle, wherein some rare matters and
excellent inventions of books are particularly set down and noted. In good
sooth (said Ismenia) there can none of us Shepherds overcome thee, wherefore
our courage is quailed in passing any farther in this contention, unless these
Ladies here mean to give thee afresh assault with their weapons, and to make
thee yield. Alcida, which till that time had held her peace, taking great
delight in hearing the music, and looking on the daunces and sports, and to
behold and devise with her beloved Marcelius, being also very desirous to have
one part in that sport, said: Since thou have (gracious Diana) subdued all the
Shepherds with thy skill, it is not reason that we should also pass safely
away without our Riddles, the which although I know thou will as easily
dissolve (and mine especially) as thou have done the rest; yet because it may
perhaps delight thee, I will propound it. When I sailed on a time from Naples
into Spain, by the way the master of the ship told it me, and I committed it
to memory, because me thought it was a pretty one: and this it was.

A Riddle.
Show me a horse of such a kind,
That in the strangest fashion
Does never eat, but of the wind
Does take his sustentation:
Winged before, and winged behind:
Strange things he does, and wondrous deeds:
And when he runs his race,
Upon his breast with haste he speedes.
His reins with marvelous grace
Come from his sides that never bleedes.
And in his course he does not fail,
If rightly he does wag his tail.
When Diana had heard this Riddle, she was a pretty while thinking with her
self how she might expound it, and having framed the discourse in her mind,
which was necessary for the answer, and considered well of every part in it;
at the last, she said. As it is great reason (fair Lady) that I remain
conquered at thy hands: So it is no less, that whosoever renders himself to
thy gentleness, he yield himself also to thy discretion, whereby I esteem him
not confounded, but happy. And if by the horse of thy Enigma, a ship be not
understood, I confess then that I cannot declare it. Thou have overcome me
more (said Alcida) with thy answer, then I have done thee with my Riddle; for
to confess it plainly unto thee I understood it not, before thou had
subtly expounded it. By chance I have hit it, said Diana (as I think) and
not by any skill, speaking at random, and not thinking to hit it so near.
Howsoever thou did it (said Alcida) it cannot otherwise be but that it
proceeded from thy ready wit and ripe judgment. But I pray thee now (fair
Shepherdess) divine what my Sister Clenardas Riddle is (which I know is no ill
one) that she shall put thee, if she can at the least remember it. And then
turning her self to Clenarda, she said unto her. Propound to this witty
Shepherdess (good sister) that Riddle, which one day in our city (if thou
remembrest) thou did put to Berinthius and Clomenius our cosins, when we were
merry together in Elisonias house. I am well content (said Clenarda) for I
remember it well, and was purposed to tell it: and this it is.

A Riddle.
TEll me (good Sirs) what Bird is that that flies
Three cabits high, and yet does never rise,
With more then thirty feet that mount and fall,
With wings that have no plume nor pens at all:
Beating the air it neither eats nor drinks,
It neither cries, nor sings, nor speaks, nor thinks.
Approaching near unto her cruel death,
She wounds, and kills us with the stones she throws:
A friend to those that spend their dearest breath
In spoils, and thefts, in mortal wounds and blows:
Wherein she takes her pleasure and her fill,
Hiding the men in waves that she does kill.
I should never expound this Riddle (said Diana) if I had not heard the meaning
of it by a Shepherd in my town, who had sometimes sailed. And yet I cannot
tell whether I remember it or not, but I think, he said that a Galley was
understood by it, which being in the midst of the dangerous waves, is near
to death, and being accustomed to robbing and killing, casts the dead
carcases into the Sea. By the feet he told me, that the oars were meant, by
the wings the sails, and by the stones that it threw, the pellets. We must in
the end (said Clenarda) go one equal with another, for one deserves no more
praise then another. Truly thy great knowledge Diana makes me to wonder much,
and thou can receive no reward sufficient enough for so great deserts, but
only by being Syrenus wife. These and other courteous speeches they passed,
when Felicia, beholding the fine wit, the comely grace, the passing behavior,
and sweet actions of Diana, and maruelling much at them, took off from her
finger a very rich ring, set with a stone of infinite value, which she did
ordinarily wear, and giving it her for a reward of her witty answers to
those Riddles, said. This shall serve for a token of that, which I mean to do
for thee (fair Shepherdess) keep it therefore well, for in time of thy need
the virtue of it may not be a little profitable unto thee. Diana and Syrenus
both re^dred humble thanks to Felicia for so great a gift, with devoutly
kissing her reverend hands. Who after he had sufficiently and courteously made
an end of his thanks, said. I have noted one thing in all these Riddles, which
is this, that the Shepherdesses and Ladies have propounded the most of them,
and that the men have held their peace in such sort that they have clearly
showed, that in dainty and witty conceits they have not so fine a vain as
women have. Don Felix then jesting said. It is no great marvel that in
sharpnes of wit they excel us, when in all other perfections they come nothing
near us. Belisa could not digest Don Felix his merry jest, thinking (perhaps)
that he meant it in good earnest, but looking upon all the women, said. We will
agree ( Don Felix) that men excel us, but therein we show our goodness, and our
virtues in our voluntary subjection to their will and skill. But yet know
this, that there are women which for their virtues and deserrs may be paragoned
to the woorthiest and wisest men, for though gold lies hidden and unknown, yet
it loses not therefore any part of that value and prize of that which is
current. For the truth and force of our praises is so great, that it makes you
publish them to your selves, which seem to be our enemies. Florisia a
Shepherdess renowned for great knowledge and wisdom, was not ( Don Felix) of
your opinion, when in our town on a day at a certain marriage (where was a
confluence of many Shepherds, men, and women, that from towns far and nie
had come to that feast) to the tune of a Rebecke, and of two Harpes, which
three Shepherds sweetly plaiedon, she sung a song in the praise and defense of
women, which not only pleased them, but also delighted all the men there, of
whom she spoke but little good. And if you are too perverse and obstinate in
your opinion, it shall not be amiss to rehearse it to you, to make you leave
of your blind error. They laughed all heartily to see Belisa so choleric,
and made no small sport thereat. In the end old Eugerius and his son
Polydorus, because they would not be deprived of that merry song which they
expected at Belisas hands, said unto her. The praise (fair Shepherdess) and
defense of women is justly due unto them, and no less delightful to us to
hear it with thy delicate voice repeated. It pleases me well (said Belisa) if
it like you, for there are many sharp and stinging inuectiues, if I could
remember all the verses in it; but yet I will begin to recite them, because I
hope that in singing them, one will reduce another to my mind. Then Arsileus,
seeing that Belisa was preparing herself to sing, began to tune his Rebecke,
at the sound whereof she sung the song, that she heard Florisia in times past
sing, which was this.

Florisias Song.
Fly storming verse out of my raging breast
With furious anger, malice, and despite:
Indigned spirits, once at my request
Power forth your wrath and pen prepare to write
With scornful stinging and inuectiue style,
Against a people brutish base, and vile:
Avile, perverse and monstrous kind of men,
Who make it but their pastime, and their game,
With bar barous mouth and with uncivil pen
To slander those, who lest deserve the same:
Women Imeane a work manship divine,
Angels in shape, and Goddesses in mind.
Thou wicked man that do presume too hie
Of thy perfections, but without desert,
False man I say, accustomed to lie,
What evil can thou think within thy heart,
Or speak of her, whose goodness more or less,
Does fill the world so full of happiness,
But only this, that woman was the cause,
Though not alone, of one exceeding ill,
In bringing forth (constrained by natures laws)
A man, whose mischiefs all the world does fill:
Who after that he is conceived and borne,
Against his mother proudly liftes his horn.
Whom if she had not borne, poor silly dame,
With fewer greefes her life she might have lead,
For then he should not slander thus her name,
And such a crow she should not then have bred,
That being hatched, her dam would thus despise,
And daily labor to pluck out her eyes.
What man in all the world did ever know,
(Although the tendrest father he had been)
Those cares, and greefes, that sorrow, and that woe,
Which wives have for their husbands felt, and seen?
And how the loving mother for her son
With sorrow has been oftentimes undone?
Behold with what affection, and what joy,
What gentleness, and what intensiue love,
The mother dothintreate her little boy?
Which after does a Traitor to her prove:
Requiting ill her pains and love so kind
With pouring sorrows still into her mind.
What jealous fears, what fearful iealousies,
Do haunt the mother for her cruel son?
What pain, when that in any pain he lies,
What grief, when that with grief he is undone?
What perfect gladness, and what sweet content,
When that he is to any goodness bent?
Alas how pensive and how sad they are,
If that their husbands suffer any pain:
What sorrow, when they travel somewhat far,
What moan, when that they come not soon again:
A thousand greefes to hear their loss of wealth,
Ten thousand deaths to hear their want of health.
But men that are so full of false deceate,
Our daily sorrows never do requite,
Or think of them, though they be never so great,
But rather such their malice and despite
Is; that our loving cares both great and small,
Unjust suspects, and iealousies do call.
The cause of which surmise is only this,
That as these wicked and detested men
Of custom are inclined to stray amiss,
And in false love their wits and wealth to spend,
Do think it now a burden to their lives,
To be beloved so truly of their wives.
Then since in loving them we ever find
Our selves a paid with hateful scorn and blame,
I think it best, for easing of our mind,
Quite to forget their nature, sex, and name:
Or else to leave our ioies in looking on them,
Or if we look, not once to think upon them.
But yet it is a pretty jest to see
Some kind of men, whose madness is so great,
That if the woman will not wholly be
At their desires, then in a frantic heat
They call her Tygresse, cruel, and unkind,
And trasteresse unto a loving mind.
Then shall thou see these men unseemly call
The modest women, whom they would have naught,
Coy and disdainful to converse withal:
And her that is chaste, vnmanner'd and untaught.
Those that be wise and sober, full of pride:
And cruel those, whose honesties are tried.
I would to God that those dishonored names
Did fit them all, as well as all the rest,
Then none of them should bide so many shames,
Nor be deceived by men, that love them lest:
For being cruel, proud, and rusticall,
They would not love, nay could not love at all.
For if the thing, which they so feign would have,
By any means they cannot once obtain,
Then do they wish for death, or for their grave:
But yet the same no sooner they attain,
But make it but a sport and merry game,
And straight forget that ere they loved the same.
They feign themselves most sorrowful and sad,
And wearied with a long and painful life:
They still do tell the pains that they have had,
And other lies, which are with them so rise:
They call themselves unhappy, poor, and blind,
Confounded slaves, yet all but words of wind.
O how they can make Oceans of their eyes!
And term their flames their torments and their pains,
And breath out sighs, like vapors in the skies,
And belch out sobs like Aetnas burning veins:
(...) In many things the greatness of their mind
They show, contemning base and doubtful fear:
As those, whose tender love has been so kind
Unto their husbands, when they living were,
That all their moanes and sorrows for their death
They ended soon, by stopping of their breath.
And if for virtue, and his chaste intent
Hippolytus deserved any praise,
On the other side behold that excellent
And noble Roman Matrone in her days
With stabbing dagger giving up the ghost,
I mean fair Lucrece, for her honor lost.
It was no doubt great valor in the youth,
As never like has been in all the rest,
Who vowing to his father faith and truth,
Denied his stepdames foul and fond request.
All which admit: Hippolytus is but one,
But thousands of Lucrecias have been known.
Gifts have we more (our beauties set aside)
For in good letters famous have we bin:
And now to prove our judgments often tried,
And sharpnes of our finest wits therein,
Let Sappho and Corynna well suffice,
Who when they lived, for learning got the prise.
And learned men doetherefore banish us
Their schools, and places where they do dispute,
For fear (if we should argue and discuss)
With praise we should their arguments confute:
Too proud therefore, they would not by their will,
That women should excel them in their skill.
And if some authors, scorned in their loves,
Have written ill of women, in their hate,
Not this our credits any whit disprooues,
And can as less diminish our estates:
Since they themselves have writ as ill of men,
Believe not then their lying toongs and pen.
Yet this does cause some small and little change,
And alteration in our great deserts:
For they must needs (and sure it is not strange,
Considering their vile malicious hearts)
In what soever they do write or say,
To speak the woorst of women that they may.
But yet among these Authors thou shall find
Most famous women, and most excellent:
Peruse their works but with indifferent mind,
And thou shall see what numbers they present
Of good and honest Dames, before thine eyes,
Of loving, faithful, holy, chaste, and wise.
They do adorn the world with goodly graces,
And with their virtues give it golden light:
The shining beauty of their sweetest faces
Does fill each heart and eye with great delight.
They bring all comforts, gladness, peace, and joy,
And drive away all sorrows, and annoy.
By them (false men of bad and wicked minds)
You get great honor, glory, and renown:
And for their sakes, inuenting sundry kinds
Of verses, get sometimes the Laurel crown:
And for their love, in Martial feats again
To golden praise and fame you do attain.
You therefore that employ your wits and time,
In searching out the course of others lives,
If that you find some woman touched with crime
Amongst so many widows, maids, and wives:
Condemn not all for one poor souls offense,
But rather hold your judgments in suspense.
And if so many Dames so chaste, and fair,
Cannot subdue your proud and hautie hearts,
Behold but one, whose virtues are so rare,
To whom the heavens so many goods imparts,
That only she possesses in her breast
As many gifts, nay more then all the rest.
The brauest men, and most heroical,
And those that are most perfect in conceate,
I see this Lady far excel them all,
With her divine perfections, and so great,
Which Orpheus did sing upon a day,
As on his harp most sweetly he did play.
Saying: That in that happy land, where white
And chalkie cliffes are steept in British seas,
A morning star should rise exceeding bright,
Whose birth will silver Cynthia much displease,
In that her golden light, and beauties gleames
Shall far surpass her brothers borrowed beams.
And such a Lady shall she be indeed,
That she shall joy each heart with happy chance:
Her worthy house, wherein she shall succeed,
With titles of great praise she shall advance:
And make the same more glorious and more known,
Then ever did the Affrican his own.
Make triumphs then for birth of such a dame,
And let each heart be glad that has been sorry:
Retoice Meridian springs from whence she came;
You lineage her, she honors you with glory,
Her name from East to West, from North to South
Is well esteemed and known in every mouth.
Come then you Nymphs, resign to her your powers,
Fair Nymphs that follow Cynthia in her chase,
Come wait on her and strowe the ground with flowers,
And sing in honor of her matchless grace:
And Muses nine that dwell in mount Parnasse
Let verse nor song without her praises pass.
Thou dare not Rome (in seeing her) presume
With Brutus stately Island to compare,
But sooner wilt thy self with grief consume,
To see how far she does excel those fair
Ladies of Rome renowned in their days,
In cuery thing wherein they got most praise.
In bounty Porcia she shall much exceed,
In wisdom pass Cornelia Pompeies wife,
In honor Liuia, so have her stars decreed,
And chaste Sulpitia in modesty of life:
Her beauty and the virtues in her breast.
Eugeria stains, and conquers all the rest.
This is the Thought that honors my desire,
This is my Parnasse and Aonian spring,
This is the Muse that gives me holy fire,
This is the Phoenix with her golden wing,
This is the star, and power of such might,
That gives me glory, spirit, plume and light.
Petrarke had left his Laura all alone,
Folchet Aldagias praise with lofty style,
Guilliaum the Countess of Rossiglion,
Raymbald his Lady Morie Verdefueille,
To grace his verse, he would be sides refuse
The Countess of Vrgiel for his Muse.
Anacreon Euripile defied
And Americ, Gentile, Gascoignes light:
Raymbald the Lordof Vacchieres denied
Of Monferrato Beatrice to delight
With sweetest verse to win her noble grace
Sister unto the Marquis Boniface.
Arnoldo Daniel had as much repented
Bouilles praise his Lady long agon,
Bernard had never with his verse contented
The fair Vicountesse of Ventideon.
(Though these were Dames of beauty and renown,
Gracing each Poet with a Laurel crown.)
If they had seen this Lady in their time,
Who all their gifts and beauties does possess,
They had strained forth invention, verse, and rhyme,
To celebrate so high a Patroness.
On her their thoughts and pens they had employed,
Happy so rare a Muse to have enjoyed.
This did Orpheus sing with sweetest verse,
And Echo answered to his silver voice,
And every time he did the same rehearse,
The land and sea did presently rejoice
To hear the joyful news of such an one,
By whom their honor should be so much known.
Now then from this day forth and evermore
Let wicked men their false opinions leave,
And though there were not (as there is) such store
Of worthy Dames (as vainly they conceive)
This only one with honor shall recall,
And amplify the glorte of us all.
The praise and defense of women, and the brave grace and sweet note wherewith
Belisa sung it, pleased and delighted them all passing well. Wherefore Don
Felix acknowledging himself ouercommed, Belisa was well content, and Arsileus
her husband not a little proud. All the men there consessed all to be true
that was said in the song, and sung in the favor of women; and all that to be
false that was said and sung in the dispraise and disgrace of men, and
especially those verses which inluriously inuayed against their falsehood,
deceits, and dislembled pains in love; with affirmation rather of their firmer
faith and truer torments, then they outwardly expressed. That which most of all
pleased Arsileus, was the answer of Florisia to Melibeus, because it was no
less pithie then pleasant; and also because he had sometimes heard Belisa sing
a song upon that matter which delighted him very much. Wherefore he prayed her
to rejoice so noble and merry company as that was, by singing it once again.
Who, because she could not deny her dear Arsileus, although she was somewhat
weary with her last song, to the same tune did sing it: and this it was.

Poor Melibee of love and hope forgot,
Told to Florisia greefes that he hadpast,
She answered him: I understand thee not,
And less believe thee (Shepherd) what thou say.
He says: Mypeerelesse Shepherdess,
Behold the pain wherewith I die,
Which I endure with willingness,
And seek that grief, which I would fly:
My hot desires do burn and die I wot,
Hope is my life, but fear the same does waste:
She answered him: I understand thee not,
And less believe thee (Shepherd) what thou say.
He says: The pale and pinching care
Has been so pleasant to my mind,
That how much more falls to my share,
The more I do desire to find:
I crave no guerdon for my painful lot,
But as I love, to be beloved as fast:
She answered him: I understand thee not,
And less believe thee (Shepherd) what thou say.
He says: My death should now redress
My pains, but for the grievous ill
Which I should feel (fair Shepherdess)
In leaving of to see thee still:
But if I see thee sad, a harder knot
Of greefes I feel, and greater death do taste:
She answered him: I understand thee not,
And less believe thee (Shepherd) what thou say.
He says: In seeing thee I die,
And when I see thee not, I pain,
In seeking thee, for fear I fly,
I have to find thee out again.
As old Proteus was wont to change his cote,
Figure, and shape which long time did not last:
She answered him: I understand thee not,
And less believe thee (Shepherd) what thou say.
He says: I do pretend to crave
No more good then my soul can get:
Because with that small hope I have,
(Me thinks) I do offend thee yet.
For suffering for thy sake the smallest jot
Of wounding grief a thousand ioies I taste:
She answered him: I understand thee not,
And less believe thee (Shepherd) what thou say.
Whilst Belisa was singing both her songs, Felicia commanded a Nymphe to
ouersee and set in order a gallant sport and pastime, which was prepared
before, and which should presently ensue, which she so well executed, that even
then, when the Shepherdess had ended her song, they heard a great noise and
hurly burly in the river hard by, as it were the beating of oars in the water.
Whereupon all of them went toward it, and being come to the river side, they
saw twelve little ships coming in two several nauies from the river beneath,
bravely depainted with diverse colors, and very richly set forth. Six of them
bore sails of white and crimosin damask, and their displayed flags in the
tops, and streamers in their poupes of the same colors: And the other six,
their sails, flagges, and streamers of murrey satin with yellow shrouds and
tackling to the same. Their oars were bravely gilt all over; and they came
decked, strowed, and adorned with many sweet flowers, and garlands of Roses.
In every one of them were six Nymphs apeece, apparelled with short moresco
gowns: they of the one fleet with crimosin velvet laid on with silver lace
and fringe; and they of the other, of murrey velvet embrodered with curious
workmanship of gold, having on their arms a sleeue of gold and silver made
fit unto them, and carrying their targets on their arms after the manner of
the valiant Amazones. They that rowed these five ships, were certain Savages,
crowned with garlands of Roses, and bound to their seats with chains of
silver. There arose amongst them a great noise of drums, trumpets, shagbotes,
cornets, and of many other sorts of music; at sound of which two and two
togigither with a marvelous sweet concent keeping just time and measure,
entered into the river, which caused great wonder in them that looked on.
After this they parted themselves into two nauies, and out of both of them one
ship apeece of defiance and answer came out, the rest remaining beholders on
either side. In each of these two ships came a Savage apparelled with the
colors of his own side, standing bolt upright in the forecastle, carrying on
his left arm a shield, which covered him from top to toe, and in his right
hand a lance, painted with the self same colors. They both at one time
hoysted sail, and with force of oars ran one against the other with great
fury. The Nymphs and Savages, and they that favored each party, made great
shootes and cries to encourage their sides. They that rowed, employed all their
force, the one side and the other striving to sail with greater violence, and
to make the stronger encounter. And the Savages being welny met together, and
armed with their targets and lances, it was the greatest delight in the world
to see how they were encouraged to this encounter, and how they sped in it: For
they stood not so surely, nor had not so great dexterity in their fight, but
that with the great violence that the ships met one another, and with the
pushes that they gave with their lances upon their targets, they were not able
to stand on their feet, sometimes falling down upon the hatches, and
sometimes into the river. Wherewith the laughter of them on the shore
increased, and the rejoicing and triumphs of them, whose side had done best,
and the music to encourage them on both sides. The iusters, when they fell
into the water, went swimming up and down, until being helped by the Nymphs
on whose side they fought, they made a fresh encounter, and falling into the
water again, redoubled the laughing of the beholders, and the sport with
exceeding glee and meriment. In the end the ship with white and crimosin sails
came on so fast, and with such force, and her champion so steadie in his place,
that he stood still on foot, bearing down his adversary before him into the
river. Which when the Nymphs of his squadron perceived, made such triumph,
with hallowing, and ringing such a strange peale of music, that the other
side was half abashed, and dashed from any farther enterprise: But especially
one proud and stout Savage amongst the rest, who, being somewhat ashamed and
angry at their foil, said. Is it possible that there is any in our company of
so small courage and strength, that is not able to abide so feeble and light
blows? Unlock this chain from my legs, and let him that has proved
himself so weak a iuster, row in my place, and you shall see how I will make
you conquerours, and confound our enemies in their own foolish triumph. He had
no sooner said the word, but delivered from his chain by a Nymphe, with a
brave courage he took his lance and target, and manfully stood upright in the
prow of the ship. Then the Savages with valiant minds began to row on both
sides, and the Nymphs to make loud voices in the air. The contrary ship
came with the same force as before, but her Savage had little need to set his
staff in rest to get the victory; for the champion that had braued it so
much, before they met, with the great force and haste that the ship carried
him, could not possibly keep himself on foot, but that with shield and
spear he fell into the water, giving a manifest and clear example, That the
proudest and most presumptuous fall most often into greatest disgraces. The
Nymphs took him up again (who went swimming up and down) although he little
deserved it: But the five other ships spoken of before, remaining aside by
themselves, seeing their captain ouercommed, what with choler, shame, and
desire to regaine the victory, and their lost honors, came all rushing out at
once. The other five of white and crimosin did the like, and then the Nymphs
bestirred them in throwing perfumed pellets and muskebals of white and red
wax, and painted egshels full of orange and rose water, making such a shrill
shoute, and fighting with so good order and valor, that there they bravely
figured a ship yielding it self, as if it had been so in good earnest. At the
end whereof the ships with the murrey colors showed themselves ouercommed with
striking sail, and yielded to the other Nymphs, who like valiant conquerours
leaped into them by and by, and then with the same music as before, came to
the river banks, where they disimbarked the conquerours, and those that were
vanquished, with the Savages their captives, making a goodly show with their
several and singular beauties. When this sport was finished, Felicia with
Eugerius, and the other company following them, went back again to the
fountain, where they were no sooner come, but they found a Shepherd, that
during all the time of the fight by water, had been in the orchard, and had
sitten near unto the fountain. He seemed very comely and gracious in all
their eyes, but especially in Felicias, who knew him incontinently, and said
thus unto him.

Thou could not have come at a better time (Turianus) for remedy of thy
greefes, and for increase of this solace and sport. We will hereafter take care
for thy grief, and help it at fitter time, as for the rest, thou must show
this goodly company, how much thou can delight with thy sweet singing. For
now I see, thee with thy Rebecke out of thy scrip, as though thou would
please this fair company, sing something of thy Elumia; for thou shall for
this service see thy self hereafter well satisfied and contented. The Shepherd
was amazed to hear Felicia call him by his name, and the Shepherdess his love
by hers, and that she promised him some lightning of his pain: Wherefore
meaning to requite such offers with rather obeying her command, then only
with simple thanks to gratify them, all of them being set, and keeping
silence, he began to play a while on his Rebecke, and to sing that which
follows.

Prouencall Rythmes.
WHen that with thousand parti-colored flowers
The springtide comes in every pleasant mead,
And glorious Titan, free from winters showers,
With golden beams the fields does ouerspread,
The Shepherds rich, and frollicke in their bowers,
With pipes and songs their flocks to fields do lead:
The nighting all with war bling throat
Does iug forth many a pleasant note,
that makes the woods to ring:
The fountames clear, as Crystal glass,
About the which, upon the grass
The Nymphs do sit and sing:
But let Eluinia turn her eyes from all those sweet delights,
Then does continual winter rage with stormy days and nights.
When that the freezing Northren winds disgrace
The fragrant flowers, the slately trees and tall
Of all their pride, and covers every place
With flakes of snow, which never cease to fall:
And nightingals their songs leave for a space,
And desert fields, that have no green at all:
The days are yrkesome short, and sad,
The cold nights blow, as they were mad,
With many a bitter blast:
The clouds as dark as any pitch,
And thick as loathsome mud in ditch,
The air do ouercast:
But let Eluinia walk the fields or where it please her best,
There merry springtide does return her praises to protest.
If that the angry heavens sometimes throw down
A fearful lightning or some cruel thunder,
The silly Shepherd, far from wood or town,
Begins to fear, to tremble and to wonder,
And if the hayle fall thick upon the ground
Like little stones, do beat and burst asunder
The fruit, and leaves in every place,
And spoils the flowers of their grace,
A strange, and pitious sight:
The Shepherd runs away amain,
Leaving his sheep upon the plain
With swift and fearful flight:
But let Eluinia walk the fields her beauty every where
Does clear the heavens, and rids the Shepherds heart from trembling fear.
And if by chance I sing or pipe on hie,
Under the shade of Elm or little hill,
The Song thrush and the heavenly Lark reply
Unto my songs, with sweetest notes at will:
And when the fresh and Western winds in sky
Breath forth an air, so pleasant and so still:
When every joy, and sweet content,
And every day in pleasures spent
Does give me new delights,
And free from fear with lively cheer
In happiness I spend the year,
The pleasant days and nights:
But if Eluinia once do frown, I am much more afraid
Then if a burning lightning had my senses all dismaide.
If that Diana goes forth to chase
The savage beasts, with bended bow to tame,
With troops of Nymphs that wait upon her grace
Whose thoughts chaste sports and exercise do frame:
And with the same with great delight do trace
The woods and lawnes in seeking out some game.
Hamadriades and Napees fair
With strowing Roses, do prepare
The way before their Queen:
The Nymphs that follow sweetly sing,
And hills and dales with triumphs ring,
And woods both fresh and green:
But if she come unto the wood, where my Eluinia chaceth
She makes her silent, quails her pride, and beauties all disgraceth.
And when her body whiter then the snow
She washes in the fountain crystal bright,
If thither Cynthia should but chance to go,
And see those parts so dainty and so white,
For shame she would cast down her eyes I know,
And so depart, confounded at that sight:
For in those fountain waters clear
So brave a figure does appear,
As like was never seen:
So fair a face, such golden hair
With rarest grace are shining there
As like has never been:
And bold Acteon if he did but see there alone,
Had not been turned into a Heart, but to a Marble stone.
A thousand times my song I will reply thee,
In every place where I do feed my sheep,
But hence away, for pity now go hie thee
Unto my Love, and tell her how I weep.
See if thou can but move her heart
To some small pity of my smart,
And of my little rest:
Go to my fair and fatal star,
Tell her what wounding thoughts do war
Within my painful breast.
O happy man if that thou might this grace of Fortune try,
To see Eluinia change her mind, or else thy self to die.
How much the sweet voice and gentle grace of this enamoured Shepherd pleased
them all, I am not able to express, whose song was so melodious, and personage
so fair and comely, that he seemed to be Apollo, who had sometimes taken upon
him a Shepherds shape for the love of a country wench, for they could not
judge any more like unto him for perfection in beauty, and sweetness in song:
whereupon Montanus maruelling much, said, Eluinia (gentle Shepherd) is not a
little beholding to thee, of whom thou haste so sweetly song, not only for
the favor she has got, to be beloved of so gracious a Shepherd as thy self;
but by having her beauties, and virtues with thy delicate comparisons and
dainty verses so highly commended. And she being beloved of thee, it cannot be
otherwise imagined, but that her perfections of body and virtues of mind are
most rare and excellent. And that which does not a little help to the
accomplishment of her gifts, is the delight and dexterity that she has in
hunting, for which thou did compare her with Diana; because it is one of the
brave qualities which make both Nymphs and Shepherdesses to be thought more
beautiful and gracious, and most worthy of golden praises: For I my self did
sometime know a Shepherd in our town, and my Ismenia and Seluagia knew him
also very well; who being enamoured of a Shepherdess (called Argia) was with
none of her passing graces more captiuated, then with her singular cunning in
shooting and delight that she had in her bow, which was continually in her
hand, and her quiver of steely headed arrows at her back, wherewith she
hunted, wounded, and killed, the nymble footed Does, wild beasts, and simple
birds. For which delight her loving Shepherd (named Olympius) did sometimes
sing a pretty Sonnet, made of the skill, beauty, and cruelty of that
Shepherdess, fayning a challenge and contention between her, the Goddess
Diana and Cupid, whether of them three should shoot best, a fine and delicate
conceit, which sometimes to delight me, I ever have by heart. With this Clenarda
stepped forth and said. It is reason Montanus that we enjoy part of that delight
with thee in hearing it: And nothing can please me better, then to hear thee
sing it for the great love and devotion that I have to that exercise. I am
content (said Montanus) if I shall not seem troublesome with it. That cannot
cause any trouble (said Polydorus) which with so general delight shall be
heard. Montanus then playing on his pipe sung Olympius Sonnet, which was this.

DIana, Love, and my fair Shepherdess,
Did in the field their chiefest cunning try,
By shooting arrows at a tree near by,
Whose bark a painted heart did there express:
Diana stakes her beauty merciless,
Cupid h^we, Argia her liberty:
Who showed in her shot a quicker eye,
A better grace, more courage, and success:
And so did she Dianas beauty win,
And Cupids weapons, by which conquered prize
So fair and cruel she has ever bin,
That her sweet figure from my wearied eyes,
And from my painful heart her cruel bow
Have stolen my life and freedom long ago.
This Sonnet was marvelous delightful to them all, and the sweetness, wherewith
Montanus sung it, a great deal more. And after they had discoursed of every
particular part and matter of it, Felicia seeing the night came on, and
thinking she had feasted and sported her guests that day sufficiently, made a
sign by her countenance, that she would say something; whereupon they left of
their mirth and talk for a while, and with attentive minds harkened unto her:
and silence being kept, with her accustomed gravity, she thus began to speak.

I am undoubtedly persuaded (noble Lords and Ladies, and you worthy Shepherds)
that, since the time that you came to my house, you have no cause to complain
of my favors bestowed on you, nor of the diligence and service of my Nymphs
employed for your sakes. For the desire which I had to please you all, was so
great, and the delight which I take to help distressed men to their
contentment, so proper to my nature, that (me thinks) if I had done a great
deal more for you, it had bin but little in respect of that which your virtues
deserve. Only Narcisus with the cruelty of Melisea, and Turianus with the
disdain of Eluinia, remain discontent amongst you all. Whom it shall now
satisfy to comfort themselves with hope of their future felicities, since that
my word (which was never stained with deceit and lie) has assuredly promised
them a speedy and full contentment by those means which shall be most
expedient for them. I see old Engerius glad with his son, his daughters, and
his son in law, and not without cause, since for love of them he has passed
so many dangers, and suffered such extreme pain, sorrow, and anguish of mind.
Felicia having ended her speech, Eugerius wondered greatly at her wisdom, and
the rest were satisfied and well content with so gentle and courteous
instructions, whereby they gathered out of them profitable lessons to lead from
thence forth a virtuous and happy life. And so all of them rising from their
places about the fountain, and following the sage Lady, went out of the
garden into the Palace, every one to their several lodgings, accommodating
their minds to the joyful feasts and princely sports of the next day
following: The which, and that which happened to Narcisus, Turianus, Taurisus,
and Berardus, with the delectable history of Danteus, and Duarda the Portugale
Shepherds (which for certain respects is omitted here) and many other things
of great delight, pleasure, and profit, are handled in the second Part of this
Book.

All these three Parts were finished the first of May 1583.

Boto el amor en Y^go.
Faults escaped.
Page 7. line 35. read debt. page 40. line 3. read See. p. 60. l. 18. r. Ash
color velvet hose. p. 62. l. 45. r. be not divided. p. 73. l. 42. r. nurse. p.
80. l. 20. r. brake with. p. 88. l. 34. r. Ill. p. 99. l. 40. r. Vique. p. 104.
l. 36. r. temerous. p. 139. l. 31. r. such beauty. p. 145. l. 13. r. away. and
l. 46. r. hap. p. 149. l. 10. r. And she. p. 153. l. 1. r. heads. p. 163. l.
22. and 23. or to mistrust, p. 174. l. 11. r. all goods. p. 190. l. 29. r. not
them. p. 195. l. 1. r. turn amain. p. 208. l. 39. r. mids was green to show
that in the mids of. p. 213. l. 22. r. sure. p. 228. l. 11. r. But rude. p.
230. l. 31. r. leg, where. p. 253. l. 24. r. As aires. p. 257. l. 19. r. a
gloze. and l. 47. r. with our. page 282. l. 1. r. was now. page 284. l. 25. r.
loath. p. 286. l. 35. r. with rural. p. 309. l. 39. r. dorre. p. 311. l. 1. r.
were wrought. p. 331. l. 32. r. virtuous. p. 340. l. 3. r. she spoke.


