The co^futacyon of Tyndales answer made by sir Thomas More knight lord
chau^cellour of England.

Prentyd at London By wyllyam Rastell. 1532 CVM PRIV(...)

The preface to the christian reader.
OUr lord send us now some years as plentuouse of good corn, as we have
had some years of late plentuouse of evil books. For they have grown so
fast and sprongen up so thykke, full of pestylent errors and pernyciouse he
resyes, that they have enfected and killed I fere me mo sely simple souls,
the^ the famyne of the dear years have destroyed bodies. And surely no little
cause there is to dread, that the great haboundaunce and plentye of the tone,
is no little cause and occasyon of the great derth and scarcite of the the other.
For sith that our lord of his especyall prouydence, uses temporally to 4.
Regum. 4.
death is in the pot / our lord likewise agaynwarde to revenge yt wythall,
begins to wythdraw his gracious hand from the fruits of the earth,
mynyshynge the fertylyte both in corn and catell, and bringing all in derth
myche more then men can remedy or fully find out the cause. And yet bysyde
this somwhere he sends war, sykenesse, and mortalyte / to punyshe in the
flesh that odyouse and hateful souls, which else were in parell of
peryshynge by false

Now all be yt that these bold shameless heretyques, have of long while
neither let nor ceaced, falsely to insymulate and accuse the church of god
/ calling all good christian people idolatres for honourynge of saints and
reverent byhauour used at their images: yet that have they done so far
against their own conscience (by which them self well wot that the church
uses to saints and images none honor but ordinate / not honoring images but
for the saints sake, nor saints but for ye sake of god / and neither image as
saint, nor saint as god) and this knows I say Tyndale him self so well, and
thereby so far has rayled against his own conscience / that now at the
last in his answer to my book, he retreateth so far bakke, that

But we on the the other side say plainly unto them, that the things wherwyth
they corrupt the world, are of infydelyte and faythlesse idolatrye, the very
most cursed kind. The chyefe evil in an idol was, yt yt bare the name of
god, either yt self or the devil that yt represented / and being so reputed
and wurshyped for god, robbed the reverence and devout honor fro god.

Now when Tyndale calls his heresies by the name of faith, and makes men
serve the devil while they wene to serve god: what abomynable idolatrye is
this?

If yt be idolatry to put trust in ye devil, and serve the devil with faith:
yt is worse then idolatrye to make men wene they serve god with faith while
they dyspyte him with a false bylyefe.

And if it be very infydelyte to do as the Turks do, bid men believe in
Machometes alchoran: yt is more infydelyte to do as Tyndale has done,
purposely mysse translate Crystes holy gospel, to set forth heresies as
evil as the Alchorane.

And if it be idolatry to do as ye payne^s did, make an idol god: yt must
needs be myche worse idolatry to do as these heretykes do, that call god the
cause of all evil, and thereby make god not a vain idol but a very devil.



And what more abomynable infydelyte then to abuse the scripture of god to the
color of their false bylyef^?

And what can be a worse bylyefe, then to believe that the sacraments that god
has ordained by his holy spyryte be but inuencyons of man, or as Tyndale says
of confession, but inuencyon of the devil?

And what can be worse bylyefe then to believe that gods word is not to be
byleued, but if yt be put in writing?

Or what can be a worse bylyefe, then to believe y^ mennis good wurkes be they
never so well done, be yet nothing worth, nor the man never the better for
them, nor no reward for them coming toward man in heaven?



Or what can be a wurse bylyefe, then to believe that a man may as sleyghtely
regard whytson sonday^ as hokke monday / and as boldly eat flesh on good
frydaye, as on shroue tuysdaye?

And what can be a wurse bylyefe, then to believe yt none other sin can dampne
a man, but only lakke of bylyefe?

And if yt be idolatrye to do as the Paynems do, give wurshyppe unto an idol:
how myche is yt wurse then idolatrye to do as Tyndale does, forbed us to give
wurshippe to the very body and blessed blood of god in the holy sacrament of
the auter?

These pestylent infydelytees, and these abominable kinds unto me, nor fulfill
all my commandments but set my

And who does more properly fall in the danger of this commynacyon and threte,
then they that despise Crystes sacraments, which are his holy ordynaunces,
and a great part of Cristes new law and testament. And who shall less set by
his commandments / then they that upon the boldness of only faith, set
all good works at naught, and little force the danger of their evil deeds,
upon the boldness that a bare faith and sleyght repentance without shryfte
or penance suffyseth / and that no vow made to god can bind a man to live
chaste, nor let a monk fro marriage / all which things with many pestylent
errors beside, these abomynable books of Tyndale and his fellows teache us.

Of these books of heresies there be so many made with

Beside the books of latin, french, and douch, in which there are of these
evil sects an innumerable sort: there are made in the english tongue, First
Tyndales new testament father of them all by reason of his false translatyng.
And after that the five books of Moses translated by ye same man / we need
not dowt in what manner, when we know

Then have ye his introduceyo^ into saint Poules pystle, with which he
introduces and brings his readers in to a false understanding of saint
Poule / making them among many other heresies believe, that saint Poule were in
the mind that only faith were always suffycyent for salvation, and ye mennys
good works were nothing worth, nor could no thank deserve nor no reward in
heaven, though they were wroughte in grace. And these things teaches Tyndale
as the mind of saint Poule / where saint Poule says him self that they
which so mysse constre him to the deprauynge of mennys good works, be well
worthy damnacyon.

Then have we by Tyndale the wykked mammona / by

Then have we Tindales book of obedience / whereby we be taught to dysobaye the
doctrine of Crystes catholyque church, and set his holy sacraments at naught.

Then have we fro Tyndale the first pystle of saint John^ in such wise
expowned, that I dare say that blessed apostle rather then his holy words were
in such a sense by leued of all Christian people, had lever his pystle had
never ben put in writing.



Then have we from George Iaye otherwise called clerk, a goodly godly pystle /
wherein he teaches diverse other heresies, but specially that mennys vows and
promyses made of chastyte, be not lawful nor can bind no man in conscience,
but he may wedd when he will.

And this man considering that when a man teaches one thing and does him
self a another, the people set the less by his preaching: determined
therefore with him self that he would of his preaching, she^ himself ensample.
And therefore being prest^, he has ^ygyled a woman and wedded her / the pore
woman I wene unware that he is priest. How be yt if yt be not done all ready /
yt is well lykely

Then have ye an exposycyon also upon the.vii. chapyter of saint Poules pystle
to the Corinthyes / by which exposycyon in likewise prestes, freres, monks,
and nounes be taught that euangelycall lyberty, that they may run out a
caterwawynge, and so wow and wedde and lawfully live in lechery.

That work has no name of the maker but some wene yt was friar Roy / which
when he was fallen in heresy, then found yt unlawful to live in chastyte, and
ra^ne out of his order, and has sins sought many a false vnlyefull way to
live by / wherein he made so many chaunges, that as Bayfeld a another heretyque
and late burned in smythfeld told unto

Th^n have we the examynacyo^ of Thorpe put forth as it is said by George
Constantine (by whom there has been I wot well of yt sort great plentye sent
into this realm) In that book the heretyke yt made it as a communycacyon
between the bishop and his chapellayns and him self / makes all the
pattyes speak as him self lyketh / and lays nothing spoken against his
heresies, but such as him self would seem solempnly to soil. whose book when
any good c^ysten man redeth, yt has either learning or any natural wit /
shall not only be well able to perceive him for a folysshe heretyke, and his
arguments easy to answer / but shall also se yt he shows him self a false
liar in his rehersall of

Then have we Jonas made ^ut by Tyndale / a book y^ who so delight therein shall
stand in parell yt Jonas was never so swalowed up with the whale, as by the
delight of that book a man's soul may be so swalowed up by the devil,
that he shall never have the grace to get out again.

Then have we by Tyndale also the answer to my dy^loge / whereof I shall
nothing n^w nedeto say, byc^^^^ the confutacyon of that answer is the matter
of my present boo^e.



Then have ye a book of Luther translated into english in the name of
Bryghtwell, but as I am informed the book was translated by Fryth / a book of
such sort as Tyndale never made a more folyshe, nor more full of false lies.
And surely Frythes prologe, if yt be his as yt is said / is right sutely and a
very mete cover for such a cup, as brings the people a draught of dedely
poysen.

Then have we the practyse of prelates / wherein Tyndale had went to have made
a special show of his high worldely wit / and that men should have seen
therein that there were nothing done among princes, but that he was fully

Then have we now come forth the book of friar Barns as god has of his justice
synnys requytte the tone, so mote

But to speak of friar Barns book, surely of all their books that yet came
abroad in english (of all which was never one wise nor good) was never none
yet so bad, so folysshe, nor so false as his, as it has sins his coming ben
plainly proved in his face / and that in such wise, that when the books that
he cyteth and alleges in his book were brought forth before him, and his
ignorance showed him him self did in diverse things confess his ouersyghte^
and clearly knowleged that he had myssetaken and wrong understood the
places. And was in such wise finally confounded with shame / that he was in a
mameryng whyther he would return again over the sea, or tarry still here and
renounce his heresies again, and turn again

Then have we ferther yet beside Barns book, the a b c for children. And
because there is no grace therein / left we should lakke prayours, we have the
prymer, and the ploughmans prayour, and a book of other small deuocyons, and
then the

The Psalter was translated by George Iay the preste^ yt

In their calendar before their devout prayers, they have set us a new saint
/ sir Thomas Hitton the heretyke that was burned in kent, of whom I shall tell
you more after. Him have they set in on saint Mathy is even, be the name of
saint Thomas the martyr.

A long work would yt be to rehearse you all their books, for there be yet mo
then I know. Against all which the kings high wisdom polytyquely provided,
in that his hyghnes by his proclamacions forbode any manner englysh books
prented byionde y^ see to be brought into this realm,

But yet so is yt as I said before, that of these ungracious books full of
pestylent poysened heresies, that have in other realms all ready killed by
scysmes and war many thousand bodies, and by sinful errors, and abomynable
heresies many mo thousand souls: have now a few malycyouse myscheuouse persons
brought into this realm / and labor and enforce them self in all that ever
they may, to corrupt and infecte all good and virtuous people.

Nor no man is there any where living more studyouse and besye to do him self
good / the^ those enuyouse wreches be laboryouse and fervent to do all other
men harm, in body, substance and soul.

There be fled out of this realm for heresy a few ungracious folk / what
manner folk their writing and their living shows. For the captayns be
prestes, monks, and freres that neither say mass nor matens, nor never come
at ^hirche / taking still of faith and full of false heresies, would seem
Crystes apostles and play the deuels dysours / spekyng much of the spirit with
no more devotion then dogs / diverse of them, prestes, monks, and freres,
not let to wedde harlottes and then call them wives. And when they have ones
vyleyned the sacrament of matirmony / then would they make us violate the
sacrament of the auter to, telling us as Tyndale does, that yt is sin to do
the blessed body of Christ in that sacrament any honor or reverence, but only
take yt for a token.

Now when their chyefe captayns be such / we shall not need to dowte of what
sort we shall reken the remanaunt. These fellows that naught had here, and
therefore naught carried hense, nor nothing finding there to live upon / be
yet sustained and mayntened with monye sent them by some evil dysposed
persons out of this realm thither / and that for none other intent but to
make them sytte and seek out heresies, and spedyly send them hither.

which books all be yt that they neither can be there pre^ted without great
cost, nor here sold without great adventure and parell: yet ceace they not
with money sent from he^se, to pre^te the^ there and send them hither by ye
whole fattes full at ones / and in some places lokynge for no lucre, cast them
abroad by night / so great a pestylent pleasure have some dyuelysh

Myche they cry out against the clergy / saying that the prestes love to
reygne in mennys conscience. But they them self show that when they have made
the devil reygne in a mannys conscience, so far forth that he has no
conscience

Thus rejoiced Tyndale in the death Hytton / of whose burning he bosteth in his
answer to my dyaloge, where he writes thereof, that where I said that I had
never fou^den

Of this man they so hyghly rejoice / that they have as I said set his name
in the cale^dar before a book of their english prayours, by the name of saint
Thomas the martyr, in the vigyle of the blessed apostle saint Mathye, the
xxiii. day of February / and have put out for him the holy doctor and
gloryouse martyr saint Polycarpus, the blessed bishop and the dyscyple of
saint John^ theuangelyste / for that was his day in deed, and so is it in some
calendars marked.

Now to thentent that ye may somwhatse what good christian

First ye shall understand that he was a priest / and falling to Luthers
sect, and after that to the sect of friar Huskyn, and zwynglius, cast of
matens and mass and all dyuyne service / and so bycame an apostle sent to an
fro between our english heretyques beyond the sea, and such as were here at
home.

Now happed it so that after he had visyted here his holy congregacyons, in
diverse corners and luskes lanes, and comforted them in the lord to stand
styffe with the devil

In his examynacyon he refused to be sworn to say troth / affermynge that
neither bishop nor (...) had authoryte to compel him to swear. which
point all though it be a false heresye / yet is it lykely that he refused the
oath, rather of frowardness then of any respect that he had either in
keeping or brekynge. For never could I find heretyke yet, that any conscience
had in any oath. And of troth Tindale in his answer to my dyaloge, techeth
them

His father and his mother he would not be aknowen of what they were / they
were some so good folk of lykelyhed, that he could not abide the glory^

He would not be a known that him self was priest, but said that he had by
the space of.ix. years ben beyond the sea, and there lived by the ioyners
craft. How be it he said that he had allwaye as his leysour would give him
leave, and as he could find oportunyte in places where he came, taught the
gospel of god after his own mind and his own opynyo^, not forcyng of ye
determynacion of ye church / and said that he intended to his power so to
perceuerstyll.



Of matrymony whyther it were a sacrament or not he said he wyste nere. But he
said yet that it was a thing necessary and of christian people to be observed
and kept. How be it as for the solempnysacyon of marriage at church he agreed
it for good^ but said it neded not. The man meant by lykelyhed that it was good
enough to wed upon a cusshyon when the dogs be a bed, as their prestes
wedde I wene where their persons be known. For else they let

The extreme vnccyon or anelynge and confyrmacyon / he said be no sacraments
of the church, nor be nothing necessary to the soul.

The sacrament of order he said is no sacrament of the church, nor was never
ordained by god in the new testament, but only by man.

The mass he said should never be said. For he said that to say mass
after the manner of the church, is rather sin then virtue.

As for confession made to a priest, he said nothing profyteth the soul /
nor penance enjoined of the priest unto the penytent confessed, is nothing
necessary.



To vow and enter into any relygyon approved by the law, he said avails not
/ but he said that all that enter into relygyon sin in so doing.

He held also that no man has any fre will after that he has onys sinned.

He held that to say any divine service after ye ordinance of the church,
avails nothing / and that all dyuyne service may be left vnsayed without
any sin.

He held that all the images of Christ and his saints, should be thrown out
of the church.

He held also that what so ever the (...) or the general con^sayle make,
beside that that is expressly commanded in scripture / every man may lawfully
break it without any

He held also yt yt is not lawful neither for the king of England, nor for
any other criste^ prince / to make any law or statute for the punysheme^t of
any theft or any other crime, by which law any man should suffer death. For
he said that all such laws be contrary to the gospel, which will no man
to dye.

As touching the blessed sacrament of the auter, he said yt is a necessary
sacrament / but he held that after the consecracyon, there was none other
thing therein, but only yt very substance of materyall bread and wine / and
so he said he fermely byleued, and that he would hold that opinion to the
death.

Finally holdyng all these abomynable heresies, with yet

And so was he after myche favor showed him, and myche labor charitably taken
for the saving of him / delivered in conclusyon for his obstinacye to the
seculare hands, and burned up in his false faith and heresies, whereof he
learned the great part of Tyndales holy books / and now the spirit of error
and lyenge, has taken his wreched soul with him strayte from the short fire
to ye fire everlasting.

And this is ^o sir Thymas Hytton the dyuyls stynkyng martyr / of whose
burning Tyndale makes boste. wherefore sith Tyndale aloweth his cause / he
must needs defend his artycles. And now wot I ^ell that some of those artycles

But ye se that of this holy martyr / Tyndale has not so great cause to
glory, but that he may scrape out his name again out of the cale^dare, and
restore the blessed bishop saint Policarpus again into his place.



Of Bayfeldes burning has Tyndale no great cause to glory. For though
Tyndales books brought him to burning / yet was he not so constante in his
euangelycall do^tryne, but that after that he was taken, all the while that he
was not in utter dyspayre of perdon / he was well content to have forsworen yt
again, and let not to utter his evangelical brethern both it England and
else where, causynge uttered and dysclosed diverse of his companyo^s, of whom

This good mind it seems that Constantyne had then and therefore was there
good hope of his amendeme^t. And peradventure the man had amended and standen
still in grace, if some evil co^sayle ^ad not comen at him / of which there
was left unsought no deuelyshe inuencyon or mean to send him / in so much
that one of the letters I fortuned to intercepte my self written unto him, by
one John^ Byrte otherwise calling him self Adryane, otherwise John^
bokebynder, and yet otherwise now I can not tell you what.

Of troth George constantyne after he had confessed unto a faithful
servant of mine to be declared to me, that Necton had of his delivery many of
those heretycall books:

The grace and peace of our savior Jesus be with you good brother Co^stantyne.
Sir as for ye matter that ye would have brought to pass, will not be in no manner
wise / the person is not at home that should receive the stuff, and deliver it
according to unto your mind. Therefore if ye have not spoken so far in the
matter that it may be none preiudyall or hurt unto you: I would ye should go no
ferther in the matter / but even as a man armed with faith, go forth in your
matter boldly and put them to their proves. As for one is none you know well
by the law of god or man. If there be

Lo here have ye herd an apostolycall pystle, counsaylynge the man to go bakke
with the troth, and arm him self with faith, and make him strong to lie
loud and forswere him self if need were / for Byrt wyste well I were not
lykely to leave and believe him at his bare word.

Here will Byrt peradventure preche, and bring us in the mydwyues of Egypt
that saved the children of Israel from Pharao, for which god gave the^ new
howses. wherein Byrt and I will not myche dyspute. For all be it that god has
given him no house ^et, nor it is not all one with a

How be it as for Constantyne as I said before, seemed in prison here very
penyte^t, and utterly minded to forsake such heresies and heretykes for ever.
In proof whereof he not only detected as I said his own deeds and his fellows,
but also studied and devised how those deuelysshe books which him self and
other of his fellows had brought and shypped, might come to the bys^hoppes
hands to be burned. And therefore he showed me the shypmannes name

I here also that Tyndale hyghly rejoices in the burning of Tewkesbery / but I
can se no very great cause why but if he reken it for a great glory that the
man did abide still by the stake when he was fast bounden to it. For as for
the heresies he would have abiured them again with all his heart, and have
accursed Tyndale to, if all ye might have saved his life. And so he gave
counsel unto one Iamys that was for heresye in prison with him. For as Iamys
has synnys confessed / Tewkesbery said unto him, save you your self and
abjure. But as for me because I have abiured before, there is no remedy with me



Now was his examynacyo^ not secret, but folk enough thereat both spyrytuall
and temporal, and of either part right wourshypfull / so that his malycyouse
mind can in that point little take effect. And yet did the same Iamys also
confess afterward, that Tewkesbery had read unto him wyclyffes wykke^
against the blessed sacrament. And over that was there founden about him by the
shyryffes officers in the prison, a book of heresye of his own hand writing,
that is to wit the book of Marten Luther, wherein he teaches men under the name
of christian lybertye, to ro^ne in to the deuyls bondage. And in his house was
founden Tyndales book of obedyence, which he well allowed, and his wykked book
also of the wykked mammona, saying

Another is there also, whom his unhappy books have brought unto the fire, Tho.
Bylney thas was before abiured / which was the man of whom without name I
spoke so much in my dyaloge / which being conuycte by.xx. witnesses and above,
did yet stykke still in his denial / and said they were all sorsworen, and had
utterly belyed him.

But god which is very troth, and brings at last always the troth to
light, would not suffer such obstynate untruth at length to pass unpunished
/ but of his endless mercy brought his body to death, and gave him yet ye grace
to turn and save his soul. For so was it that after diverse sermons, which
he had after his abiuracyon, and against the prohybycyon given him upon his
abiuracyon, made



They could not say nay but that upon this his humble request and prayour / he
was there in presence of all the people assoyled, before that he was carried out
of the court / which them self well wyste would never have been, but if he
had revoked.

yet was there a another thing that they could not deny (For all be it they
said they were not thereat, yet they had herd it in such wise, that as they
said they byleued it to be true) and that thing was such, as it self alone
must needs make them sure that he had revoked his heresies.

The thing was this. He labored and made great instaunce certain days after
his judgment / that he might

Moreover where as in the presence of that holy sacrament holden yet upon the
paten in the prestes hands / Bylney before he received it said y^ colecte,
Domine Jesus Christ: when he came at these words, ecclesiae tuae pacem and
concordiam, he diverse times repeted those words with tunsyons and knok kings
upon his breast / and there unto god confessed and asked his mercy, that he
had so greuousely erred in y^ point, and so sore offended him in co^tempnynge
his church. And no marvel was it, though he had a special remorse

But thus ye se ye Tyndale has no great cause to glory of his martyrs / when
that their living is openly naught, their opynyons such as him self will
abhor, they ready to abjure again if it might save their life, their sects

And yet gloryeth Tindale ungraciously in their destruccyon / r^kenynge that
their paynefull death does great worship to his books, which are of such
sort that never were there worse nor more abomynable written.

And yet his books being such / some folk there are that with such folysshe
favor and such blind affection

Of which sort some have asked what have I to do to meddle with the matter /
saying that being lay man, I should leave it to the clergy to write in / and
not having professed the study of holy scripture, I should leave the matter hole
unto deuynes. Surely first as touching lernyng, if that these matters were very
dowtfull and things of

For so help me god as I nothing find effectual among them all, but a
shameless boldness and unreasonable raylynge, with scryptures wrested awrye,
and made to mynyster them matter unto their jesting, scoffing, and outragyouse
rybaldry / not only against every estate here in earth, and that against them
most that be most relygyouse in living, but also against all the saints in
heaven, and against the blessed body of Christ in the holy sacrament

Now as for me, y^ cause is of my writing, not so much to debate and dyspute
these things with them, which (though I trust therein to give them no great
place) many men may do much better yet then I / as to give men warning what
myschyefe is in their books, because many good simple folk byleuynge that
these men neither say nor mean so evil as they be borne in hand / and
longyng

Now if they will ask, is there no body to give them warning but I. yes there
be that be mete there to, and there be that in deed do so / and yet among
other that part apertayneth to me. For I well know that the kings hyghnes,
which as he for his most faithful mind to god, no thing more effectually
desires then the mayntenaunce of the true catholyque faith / whereof he is by
his no more honorable then well deserved tytell defensor,

Now seeing ye kings gracious purpose in this point: I reken that being his
unworthy chancellor, it appertains as I said unto my part and dewty, to
follow the ensample of his noble grace / and after my pore wit and learning,

wherefore I recon my self of duty depely bownden, to show you good reders
the parell of these books / whereof the makers have such myscheuouse mind, that
they boste and glory when their ungracious writing brings any man to death.
And yet make they semblauns as though they were sorry for yt. And then Tyndale
cries out upon the prelates and upon the temporal princes, and callethe
them murderers and martyr quellers / dyssymulyng that y^ cruel wrech with
his wreched books, murderethe the man him self while he gives him the poison
of his heresies, and thereby compellethe princes by occasyon of their incurable
and contagyouse pestylence, to punyshe them according

which thing as sore as these heretyques reprove / affermyng that yt is against
the gospel of Christ, that any heretyque should be persecuted and punyshed,
and specyallye by bodylye pain or death / and some of them say the same of
every manner crime, theft, murder, treason, and all: yet in Almayn now contrary
to their own eua^gelycall doctrine, those euangelycalls them self ceace not
to pursew and punyshe by all the meanys they may, by purse, by prison, by
bodylye pain, and death, diverse their euangelycall brethren that vary fro
their sect / as there are of those cou^terfayte euangelycalls mo sundry sortys
of dyabolycall sects,

And this at the last be they dreuen them self, contrary to their own
formar doctrine / because they find and prove well by experyence, that though
their sects be but false heresies all, yet can not the tone sort long dwell
with the the other / but that if they begin onys to be matchys, they shall not
fail at length to contend and strive to gether, and by sedycyons, the tone
dreue the the other to ruin. For never shall y^ cuntre long abide without debate
and ruffle / where scysmes and factyouse heresies are suffered a while to grow.

Believe me not if any man can reken a place where ever he found it otherwise,
in Affryque ye Donatystes / in Greece ye Arryanes / in Boheme the Hussytes / in
England the wyclyffystes / and now in Almayn the Lutheranes / and after

But now says Tyndale and friar Barns both, that I do them wrong, in that I
call their books sedycyouse. For they counsel they say the people in their
books, to be obedyent unto their souerayns and rulers, all though they should
suffer wrong / and how can our books then (say they) be sedycyouse?

Surely to make men heretykes, and then bid them be meke (when heresye
spryngeth as saint Austayne says of pride) stands as well with reason / as
to make a man drunk, and bid him be sober / make him stark mad, and bid him
be well auysed / make him a stark thief, and bid him se he stele not.

How be yt beside ye sedicion that every scysine and dyuisyon must needs move
and provoke among any people yt are of diverse sectis, all though they were
all o^edient unto one prince / and cause them thereby though they rebelled not
against his person, yet to break the peace and quiet of his cuntre, and tun
in to the daynger and parelle of his laws: let us yet ferther look and
consider in what manner and fashyon they counseyle the people to obey their
princes.

They bydde the people for a countenance to be obedient. But they say therwyth
that the lawys and precepts of their souerayns do nothing bind ye subjects
in their conscyencys, but if the things by them co^maundede or forbeden, were
before commanded or forbeden in scripture. And all y^ words of scripture
whereby they be commanded to obey their

Now when they falsely tell them that they be not bounden to obaye their
governors lawful commandments / and then holyly counseyle them to obey
their unlawful tyranny (for by that name call they the lawys) what effect
wene ye they would that their aduyce should have? They know them self well
enough and the manner

Let us yet consider ferther a point of their good holy counsel concerning
the peoples obedyence.

Friar Barns in his frantyke book, byddeth the people that they should not
rebel in no wise. But he byddeth them therwyth that for all the kings
commandment, they should not suffer Tyndales false translacyon of the
scripture go out of their hand / but rather dye then leave it. Now knows he
well that the false malycyouse manner that Tyndale has used in the translatyng
therof^as I have proved both in my dyaloge and sins again in this book /
and as Tyndale does him self in his own answer openly confess in the tytles
of penance and priest: was done to set forth his false heresies wythall. And
therefore it appears

Now no man dowteth I think, but that Tindale him self would no less were
done for the mayntenaunce of his false translacyon of the euangelystes, then
would his euangelycall brother Barns / but that folk should against the
kings proclamacyons keep still his books, and rather then

where as I before in my dyaloge did say that Luthers books be sedycyouse, as I
now say that Tyndales be to, and mouynge people to their own undoing to be
dysobedye^t and rebellyouse to their souerayns, in affermyng that they be not
nor can not be bounden by any law made by men: Tyndale answers me for Luther
that I say vutrewly / and then says he ferther in this wise: A christian man is
bounden to obey tyranny / if it be not a gaynste his faith nor the law of god,
till god deliver him thereof.

Now let I pass myche raylynge that he consequentely makes upon princes /
and shall for this time only counsel you to consider these few words of
his, which he lays forth for a rule of peoples obedyence to their prince.
For his rule is that they shall obey their tyranny, till god

But in the the other point, I may be bold to say that no good man may take him
well, where he says that a christian man is bounden to obey their pryncys
tyranny, if it be not against his faith nor the law of god. And yet will I
well agree yt if these words were spoken of a good faithful ma^nys mouthe^ and
where any need required yt: they were very well said / as they were when the
apostles said, we must rather please god then man. But when Tyndale that is
an heretyke puts for a rule of the peoples obedyence

But if any prince would by any law or commandment, compelle his people to
any of those things: then Tyndale here plainly teaches them that they may
and must styffely wythstande his tyranny. So that finally concerning
obedyence / Tyndales holy doctrine is, that the people should in the defense of
his false heresies, not let to dysobaye but stubernly to wythstande their
prince.



Now to thentent that ye may the more clearly perceive the malycyouse mind of
these men, and that their pestyle^t books be both odyouse to god and dedely
contagyouse to men / and so myche the more perylouse in that their false he
relyes wylyly walk forth under the counterfayt vysage of the true christian
faith: this is the cause and purpose of my present labor / whereby god wyllyng
I shall so pull of their

And for because the matter is long, and my leysour seld and short: I can not
as I feign would send out all at ones, but if I should keep still all together
by me longer then me thinks conuenye^t.

I send out now therefore of this present work, these three books first. In
the first of which I answer Tyndales preface made before his answer to my
dyaloge / which preface of his is in a manner an introduccyo^ into all his
heresies. The second book is against his defense of his translacyon of the new
testament. The third against two chapyters of Tyndales answer / ye tone,
whythet the word

Now shall I (god wyllyng) at my next leysor go ferther in his book, and come
to the very breast of all this battle / that is to wit the questyon which is
the church. For that is the point that all these heretyke by all the means
they may labor to make so dark, that by their wyllys no man should wit what
they mean. But I trust to draw the serpent out of his dark den / and as
the poets feign that Hercules drew up Cerberus the mastyffe of hell into the
light where his eyes dased: so shall I with the grace of that light which
illumyneth every man that comes in to

Then after that I have so clearly confuted Tyndale concerning that point, and
shall have plainly proved you the sure and steadfast authoryte of Crystes
catholyke known church, against all Tyndales tryflynge sophystycacyons /
which he would should seem so solemn subtyle insolubles, which ye shall se
proved very frantyke folyes: after this done I say, before I go ferther with
Tyndale, I purpose to answer good young father Fryth / which now suddenly
comes forth so sagely, that.iii. old men, my brother Rastell, the bishop
of Rochester and I, matched with father Fryth alone, be now but very babys, and
as he calls

And yet shall I for all that go ferther with young father Fryth, and to which if
god will every part of his fresh painted book / and so shall I plukke of I
trust the most gloryouse feathers from his gaye pecoks tail, that I shall
seue him if he have wit and grace, a little less delyghte and liking in him
self then he seems now to have / which thing has hitherto made him for to
stand not a little in his own light.

I pray god heartily send that young man the grace to bestow his wit and
learning such as it is, about some better busynes then Tyndale mysse bestows
it now. For now is Frythys wit and learning, nothing but Tyndales instrument

Finally after that I shall have answered Fryth / I purpose to return again
unto Tyndales book, and answer him in every chapyter yt he has impugned in
the.iiii. books of my dyaloge. wherein I trust to make every child perceive his
wyly folyes and false crafts, with his open shameless lies put in and mengled
among them / where with he feign would and weneth to blind in such wise the
world, that folk should not espy the falshed and folly of his erectable
heresies.

I think that no man dowteth but that this work both has been and will be
some pain and labor to me / and of troth so I find it. But as help me god
I find all my labor in the writing not half so greuouse and paynefull to
me, as the tedyouse redynge of their blasphemouse heresies / that wise and well
learned men should set their pennys to the book / which

Lucae.15.
Our savior says that ye children of darkness be more polytyke in their kind
then are the children of light in their kind. And surely so seems it now. For
these false faythlesse heretykes, whose hertes are in the deep dark don geon
of the devil / are more wyly and more besy therwyth in setting forth of their
heresies, then are the faithful learned folk in the defense of the troth.

And as the true dyscyples of Christ were in slumber and fell in sleep in
Crystes company, while Judas the traitor was waking and watchynge about his
detestable treason: so while these Iudasys watch and study about the making

But now leuynge other men to do as god shall like to put in their minds: I
shall for my part perform that I have promised if god give me life and grace
thereto. For as for leysore shall not I trust one time or other lakke to
suffyse, for so much and for much more to. which when I have as I before said
all together performed: I would in good faith wysshe that never man should need
to read any word.



The very tryacle were well loste^ so that all venom and poison were utterly
lost therwyth. And better were it not to be syk at all / the^ of a great
syknesse to be very well heled.

And if it might be provided that every man should be so well tempered, that
no man should by dystemperau^ce fall

How be it though every shop were full of tryacle: yet Ephesians. 5.
Let not fornycacyon be so much as named or spoken of among you. And yet sith
that

And therefore as I would advise any man neither to read these heretykes books
nor mine, but occupy their minds better / and standing fermely by the
catholyke faith of this xv.C. year, never onys muse upon these new fangled
heresies: so un the the other side if it mysse hap any man to fall

Forthermore for as much as according to the words Lucae.17.
It will none otherwise be, but that some stu^blyng blokkys will allway be by
malycyouse folk laid in good peoples way / though best were to stop your
^aris utterly and give none herynge to any false euchauntors that would bywych
you wylyly, to make you delight in those books: yet since some that be plain and
simple may fortune to be secretly mysse led by false wyly shrewes except they
be well armed before / I doubt not by gods grace but if they read first ye
things that are written against them, they shall them self be able to
reiecte and confou^de any devil that would draw them to them. And therefore
as I am sure that evil and ungracious folk shall ever find the meanys yt
such

A,MEN.
The preface of Tyndall, with the answer unto the same.
Tyndall.
THe grace of our lord, the light of his spyryt, to se and to iudg^ true
repentance toward gods law, a fast faith in the merciful promises that are
in our savior Christ, fervent love toward thy neybour after then sample of
Christ and his saints be with the (O reder) and with all that love the
truth, and l^nge for the redemption of goddys elect. Amen.

More.
TIndall here begins with an holy salutacyon, and so does Luther to and so
does fre^e huskyne to / and id does every

For if men consider yt where Tyndal here prays holy.+ly for the light of
the spyryt to see true repentance / he then techeth him self a sudden
sleyghte repentance / forbedyng both confessyo^ and all doing of penance:
they shall if they be good men set little by his holy salutacyon. And when they
consider that where he prays god send them a fast faith / him self techeth
a false faith against ye sacrame^tys, and meneth that they should be fast in
the same: there will should stand up and preche upon a stole and make a
mowynge

And as lewd sermons as they make in such noughty games, would god yt these
me^nys ernyst sermons were not yet much wurse. But surely as evil as ye the other
be / yet is there more harm and more dedely poison to in this one sermon of
Tyndalys, as ye shall here or yt come at ye end: then in an hundred sermons of
friar Frappe, that first gapeth and then blessyth, and looks holyly and
precheth rybauldrye to the peopell that stand about.

For there is not the worste thing that friar Frappe precheth in a lewd
sport: but fader Tyndall here writes much worse in very great ernest, and
much worse then does the the other abusyth the scripture unto yt.

The the other when he precheth that men may lawfully go

The the other rybawde in his fond sermon medleth but with fleshly vices and
worldly wantonness. But Tyndall here with an ernest high professyon of godly
spyrytuall doctrine teaches us a falls faith and many mortal heresies, and
would with scripture destroy the scripture / and amyd dys his ernest holiness
falls in to mokkes and mowes, and makes mad apysshe jesting against the
holy cerimonyes

And ^ow where as he saluteth us with the light of the spyryte, and entendeth
to bring us in darkness of the devil / where he speaks of true repentance,
and then would put away two parts thereof, that is to wit both Romans 16
that by their sweet blessings waste out and emptye the poor wydowes houses.
For by such holy salutacyon, as by sweet blessing praynge for them so good
things as they seem to do: they win their hartys to assent after to their
heresies, and so expel and kill true faith in their hearts / and god so taken
from them they make the^ wydows, and so waste

But now when he speaks of fervent love after the ensample of Christ and his
saints / as ernest as the matter is, who can forbere laughing when he sees
ye lecherouse fleshly love of those freres and their nuns / whereof till
Tyndall can tell us some like ensamples of Christ and his sayntis, that any of
them were wont to break their vows of chastyte and fall to such fylthy
lechery / till he can tell us that, we may well tell him that his holy prayer
of fervent love here in his prologe / goes quyte against his purpose and
shameth all his hole book after.

wherefore good Christian reders who so shall happen to read his pernycyous book,
take wisdom with you as I dowte not but ye will / and be not so led with a
few painted holy

And Tyndall him self (which thing is worse then the deed doing) maynteyneth
in his book their deed for well done.

Tyndall.
Our savior Jesus in the.xvj. chapter of John^ at his last souper when he
took his leave of his disciples warned them saying, the holy ghost s^all come
and rebuke the world of judgment, Tyndale (...) now y^ (...) ghost sent ^owne
from heaven to ^e^uke y^ judgment of all crystendome this. ^v.C. year passed.
that is he shall rebuke the world for lack of true

More.
How sone might a pore simple soul be led to think, that all those that
believe not as Tyndall does, were in a wrong way and in a false belyeff / when
he heryth Tyndall here lay against them the words of our savior him self
spoken unto his dysciples in his last soupper.

But now they that be learned and know the place in the

For as the dyuell there falsely wrested ye scripture of god and leyd yt
against god: so does Tyndall here wreste the word of our savior against him
self and his hole church, I say his hole church not the clergy only, but the
hole co^gregacyon of all christian people.

For yt is well known that Christ spoke those words against the Jews and
Paynyms that refused him and his true faith / showing that ye holy ghost at
his coming should reprove their false judgment and their unsavory taste, that

And this promise has our savior both made in the gospel and also
fulfilled in deed. For the holy ghost has not failed to teach his church all
such kind of truth from the beginning hitherto, nor never shall ceace so to
do, as well by his own holy secret word unwritten in the scripture, and yet
by him self written in christen mennys hartys / as by his holy scripture
either wryte^ in tables of stone or in bestes skynnes / according to his own
words spoken as well by ye mouth of ye prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 11.
as of the blessed

These truths had the apostles, the martyrs, the confessors, the holy
doctors of Crystis church, and the comen christian people of every age from
Christ's death hitherto. And in this comen known church of christendom /
except such as at sundry times have fallen there from as Arrius Pelagius,
Donatus, wyclyff, and Husse, and such other / and now Luther, and Tyndall, and
friar Huskyn, and their fellows) has ever the true judgment remained and the
right sauored taste / and never lost any of those heretyques these necessary
truths, till the dyuell had through pride, envy, and malice, made them set
naught by the church. And then did he cast them forth with in such a fever
that they clean lost their taste / and then did they as Tyndall does

And by those truths and this faith always from the beginning kept in
Christ's church / be we now very sure yt this new faith of Luther, Tyndall,
and friar Huskyn is very fond and false, and that their mouths are all out of
taaste / sith that from Christ's death hitherto all holy men, all good people,
all true christen nacyons, have sauored always those meatys to be good and
wholesome, which these fond fellows affirm now to be bitter and peryllous
meat / and have always affyrmed for unsavory meat and evil, such as now
these mad men affirm to be well seasoned and good / and have always hitherto
reputed for shameful and fylthy lechery, the flesshly cowplyng to gether of
freres and nonnes, that these losels now do boldly put forth and auowe

If Tyndall grant that I say true in this / then shall he be feign to
grant that the words which he allegeth against us spoken by the mouth of
our sauyoure be not spoken agayst us that believe as all Christ's church has
byleued ever hitherto / but that they be spoken against him self and his
felowys yt believe ye contrary. And on the other side if Tyndall deny me this,
and will say that all good men and gods electes have always byleued as he
and his fellows do teach / and that they have always taught and done ye same:
let Tyndall then tell us one good honest man, what speak we of honest man? let
him tell us of any one so very a stark rybawlde in all this.xv.C. year before
Luthers days and his, that ever taught that it was lawful for a friar to
wedde a nun. If Tyndall show you not this as I wotte well he can not: ^^
Tyndale takes here saint Poule at his pleasure For saint Po^le speaks not
there of b^rne again nor new created with y^ spyryt / but that sen^uall me^ as
those that be carnal^ and co^tenciouse be not mete for the perfect doctrine of
spyrituall ieuelacio^s. and the^ by that place Tyndales spirytual^ s^rte be not
spirytuall nor mete ve^^els to receive and give ^ut the doctrine of y^ spyrite
/ for there be no people so carnal and so ^^t^cic^se as they
than be ye very sure that

Tyndall
And this same is it that Paul says in the second chapter of the first
epistle to the Corynthians / how that the natural man that is not borne again
Saint Poule in that place spekyth not of any search that spirytuall me^ should
make of the cause of godd is co^mau^dementis / but Tyndall fayneth y^ thing to
find by y^ se^che of y^ cause some dyscharge of the co^maundme^t.
he never leueth serchyng till he come at the botom, the pyth, the quycke, the
life, the spyryte, the marye, and very cause why, and judges all thing.

More
ye consider well that Tyndall in these words would ye should wene that these
folk of whom saint Poule speaks in that place / be such as can not savor the
doctrine of Luther, friar Huskyn, and him. But then consider again vppone

How knows Tyndale that none of all these that has

But yet will Tyndale none of that. For he lyketh not their judgment / but he
says that ye spyrytuall judges all things. And where as saint Paul in the
place alleged by Tyndale says that the holy ghost the spyryte of god sercheth
even the deep things of god, by cause that unto that holy spyryte which is god
there is nothing of god unknown: Tyndale takes that high power unto his
wursh^ppefull spirytuall sort / saye^g the spyrituall judges all th^nges, and
his spyryte sercheth the deep secretys of god. And with this not satisfied / he
amplifyteh and enhaunceth their holy search upon heyth / and says that the
spyryte of their spirytuall sort search the deep secretys of god so far that

what an hepe of high vehement words has Tyndale here heped up to gyther?
who would not wene that he were with some holy medytacyon carried up in Ennoke
and Helyas chare. But yet good christian reder for all his holy tale / remember
again the friar and the nun, Luther and his wife Tyndales own master and
maystres, the chyeff head and author of his high spyrytuall faith. For Lutherye
wot well (if Tyndale and his fellows be spyrytuall and electys) must as their
first author of their new spyrytuall sect, be nedys one of the very chyef. Let
not therefore Tyndall (good reder) with his gay gloryouse words carye you so
fast and so far away, but that ye remember to pull him bakke / by the

Thus good reders examyne him / and then shall ye perceive how fondly such an
high pure spyrytuall process, accords with such a baas foul fleshly
living. But Tyndale has an hope that while he paynteth his prologe with such
gay colors of spirytuall virtue: there can no man in the mean while remember
and consider what ungracious fruit their deceytfull doctrine and false faith
brings forth. And therefore to carye the reder farther of / from the
remembrance thereof / he lets goo by their fylthy lechery and holyly speaks
of love.

Tyndale.
Take an example in the great commandment, love god with all thyn heart / the
spyrytuall sercheth the cause and lok^^h on the benesytys of god, and so
co^ceyueth love in his heart.

More.
In this example of the great commandment of loving of god / there can lack
no causes, but without any far search there offer them self I now at hand,
except men will fully will forget them.

But yet all be yt that in many things a man may peradventure well and with
fruit enserche the cause of gods co^maundementys / yet may the spyryte of a
man that were as spirytuall as Tyndale is or Luther either, and take friar
Huskyn to them / go some time to far in the serchyng of the deep secretys of
god, and wade so far therein / that he shall Pro^er. 25
He that is that the sercher of the majesty shall be oppressyd of the glory
and he shall find the deep secretis of god so deep that ye secret botome will
not be found out for him / and specially in that thing in which Tyndall and
his fellows be as I shall hereafter show you most presumptuously besye / that
is in goddys fynall electis and predestinatys whereof saint Paul cries
himself, R^ ^. 11
O altitudo diuitiaru^ sapientiae and sci^tiae dei^ O y^ he^th and depenes of
the riches of the wisdom and science of god.

And as for that that Tyndall says, that what so ever god commands the
spyrytuall man to do, he never (...) searching till he come at the botome, the
pyth, the quycks, the lyffe, the spyryte, the mary^ and the very cause why^ and
judges all things: I say as I said before it may peradventure R^^^^. 1^
(...). ^
that they fall upon fallacyes and false causes / whereby like as Saul was
deceived in saving of the bestes for sacryfyce, which bestes god had
pr^cysely commanded him to destroy / and Eve was so by gyled that she thought
she might well ete the apple which god had precysely commanded her to
forbere: so does I say to, these men that are in this new fashyon spyrytuall,
the dyuell their evil spyryte and them self with their incessaunte

As for ensample, lo where as god has in holy scripture euydently commanded,
Psalm. ^ 5 Ecc.c. 5 Esaiae. 19 Ionae. 2
that who so make a vow shall perform and keep yt, as is wryte^ by the holy
Psalmiste, Uowe ye and pay your vows to our lord / and where as our blessed
lady thought her self bound thereto, and all ye holy saints synnys Cristes
days unto Tyndals time, have without any varyance written and affyrmed ye
same, and not only they but also all christian people both good and badde, have
this.xv.C. yer^ abhorted as an abominabyle mo^ster, and accounted yt in comen
talking for such a prodigyouse crime that ever monk or friar should wedde an
nu^ne, as they thought should

And thus lo good reder these new spyrytuall men with their deep search
interpret and expowne holy scripture, and find out therein such godly
virtues as this is which the

Take ensample says Tyndale in the great commandment, love god with all
thine heart, the spyrytuall serchyth the cause and looks on the benefytes of
god, and so conceyueth love in his heart.

In these words I lay no fawte. But all be yt a man might assygne other
causes of our love toward god then Tyndale does / as for ensample his own
excellent nature

But yet me thinks that this consyderacyon of love affyrmed by Tyndale /
does confound both Tyndall and Luther and all their hole sect, in that they
hold that yt is not laufull to love and serve god neither for avoiding of
pain, nor for obteynyng of reward / calling this manner of love and service
seruyle bond and mercennary. This is their

yet am I not sure whyther Tyndale will say that I do him wrong in that I
join service with love, where he s^eketh

Now if Tyndale grant us that conclusyon / we will then wade with him a little
forther, and join thereunto that if yt be lawful for us to serve god for his
benefytys, which we have received: yt is also lawful for us to serve him for

Then if we may seru^ god for his benefytys to come / yt seems no dowte but
that we may serve him for to get heaven, which is of all benefytys the
greateste.

At this point will Tyndale happily stykke with me / and he well say styfly
that faith we may use and serve god therwyth, to thentent therewyth to get
heaven / for faith his fellows and he affirm to be the thing which only does
iustyfye us. But then they say plainly that if we serve god with any other good
work, fasting, prayer, or almose deed, to thentent that we may therwyth please
god the better

In this point they stycke styffely / and when they be answered that all
though we serve god with good works wrought with his gracyous help, to
thente^t to please him the better thereby / as himself has in many places of
holly Mar. 9
and where he byddeth us give unto ye poor to thentent that they may receive
us in to the eternal tabernacles, Lucae. 16.
and where he shows that at the day of dome men shall have heuyn for their
charytable alms deeds done here in earth: now when we tell them thus, and
that we do never the less knowledge and confess therwyth that we neither do
nor can do any good work without the special grace and help of god, and that
our deades be commonly Romans 8
the passions of this world be not worthy the glory that is to come that shall
be reveled and showed

yet when we ask them whyther we may not laufully for the same intent serve
god with hope to: to that thing they care not to grant / but then they
confound the termys of faith and hope, so as I neither wot how nor themself
neither. Then if we ask them farther whither it be not laufull to serve god
with charity to (which now they leave and fall all to lusty love) with intent
to get heuyn the rather: to that they let not to grant also / but they say
the cause is for that faith they say has always charity therwyth. But all be
it that in that point their affyrmacyo^ is false, as by reason and pleyne
scripture has been often proved unto them: 1. C^r. 13 Iac^bi. 2


For now seems me that if we laufully may (as Tyndale will grant we may)
serve god with ye virtues of faith and hope and charity, or of any one of them
with respect unto goddys benefytes received and also to come / and to thentent
thereby the rather to be saved and come to heuyn, we may then laufully with like
respect, purpose, and intent, serve god with any other virtue that proceeds
of faith, hope, and charity, or of any such one of them with which it is
laufull for us for such respect, intent, and purpose to serve god: then will
not Tyndale deny but that prayer, fasting, alms deed, and contynence and
clennesse of body, penance, trouble of the mind, with sufferauns of
trybulacyon or afflyccyon

And thus have I now plainly deducyd upon Tyndals own words the full
confusyon of his own comen conclusyon, so many times by him and his fellows
objected, and among them all never onys yet well prouyd nor never able

Tyndall
And when he is commaundyd to obey the powers and rewlers of the world / be
looks on the benefytes which god shewyth the world through them and therefore
does it gladly.

More.
In this obedyence Tyndale is yet content to have a respect to the benefytes
that god works and shewyth the world through the powers and rewlers of the
world, and puts that for either the only or the chyefe cause of his
obedyence, as he puts it for the only or chyefe cause of goddys

This thing meanyth Tyndale as it apperyth by his words here in the cause of
his obedyence, to the powers and rulers of the world / and as it apperyth in
diverse other places of his works and Luther his masters to. But god all
though he will that the governors and rulers of the

Tyndall.
And when he is commanded to love his neighbor as himself / ^e serch^^^ that
his neighbor is created of god and bought with Crys^es blood, and so forth.

More.
Loo this is very louyngly spoken, and he says very well /

Tyndale.
And therefore he loves him out of his heart. Out of (...) ^erte not in his
he^^e.
And if he be evil forbereth him and with all love and pacye^ce draueth him to
good as elder brotheren wait on the younger and serve them and suffer them /
and when they will not come they speak fair and flater and give some gaye
thing and promise fair, and so draw them and smite them not / but if they may
in no wise be help, refer

More.
Uses Tyndale and his spyrytuall master this manes of love, this forberynge,
and this manner of pacye^s to ward the pope and the clergy, and toward
princes and other te^porall rulers? we se perde through all their books in what
lowly loving fashion they serve and suffer them, and how fair they speak, and
how plesauntly they flater all holy catholyque christian people saving only
their own sect, with as venemouse words and as poysen speech as the dyuell
can dyuyse them, with all the means they may to sow dyuysyon

But Tyndale would now yt we should for the while forget all that he and his
master writes else where, and him self in many placys after in this same
book / and that we should only mark these holy loving words that he writes
here in his present prologe / in which he says that they which be spirytuall
do never smite their younger brothere^, that is to say, such as be not in
faith and virtue grown up as they be, nor will not with them come forward
therein, but be evil and will be no better / but the spyritualles as their
elder brothere^ does flater them and promise fair and give them gay things,
and so draws them forward



Now if he say that they be not the spyrytualles, but such as Luther is and
friar Huskyn and him self, and such other as so search the causes that they
care not as Tyndale says after, whyther the priest say mass in his gown or
in his cope, and will as sone gape for sand as holy salt, and Tyndale takes
gre^^^ ^easu^e in often bringing in the^e words, And so forth.
and wait on them and serve them and suffer them and so forth / and when they
will not with you come forth, why do you not then speak them fair and flater
them and promise words and other malyciouse ways the wurste that the dyuell

And lo thus has Tyndale co^nyngly declared the great commandment of love,
and by him self and his fellows as ye se so louyngly put in ure, that they
would help the the other part to all the myschyefe they might / and would that
on the the other side what so ever they do them self be it never so myscheuouse,
no man should ones chyde them nor give foul words / but in their deuylyshe
dedys forbere still and

And when Tyndale has thus connyngly declared the great commandment of
love, and has so spyrytually set it out to the show: then concludes he well
and worshypfully that by this commandment of love in such a wise way
understood, his spyrytuall sort judges all the laws of god, and
understand the true use of them / and by the same in likewise understand they
all the laws of man which are right and which tyranny. For by this then
understand

Tyndale.
If god should command him to drink no wine as he commanded in the old
testament, that the priest should not when they mynistred in the tem^^e and
forbade diverse metes: the spyrytuall because ^e ^noweth that man and ^uer all
other creatures, and they his seruauntis made to be at (...) that yt is not
commanded for the wine or meat yt self that man (...)

More.
Now comes he to those things which he takes for indyfferent / that is to
wy^ of their nature neither good nor evil, but taking their goodness or
their evil of commandment or prohybycyon and of the mind of the doer with

But now this truth^ laboreth he to make a falls ground to byelde his lies
upon. For by this he would have us wene that we were at lybertye to construe
and interpretate all commandments either of Crystes church or of Cristes
own mouth immedyate, after our own sweet will, when so ever ^e can find out
any false gloss of the commandment to flater and begyle our self withal.
Leuitici. 1^.
As here if god should command him to drynk no wine as he commaundyd in the
old law while they mynystred in the temple: he would

But what avails him all this tale. For we deny not but that the word and
precept of god receyuyth interpretacyon. But we say that the authoryte thereof
lies not in every mannys head at adventure / and that all though some things
be plain and open enough, yet it is peryllous for any man except certain
reuelacyon of god, to take himself for so far forth renewed with ye spyryte of
god, that he boldly lene in such things to his own wit lest his will blind

For if a man leave these ways and boldly cleue to a cause of his own
serchyng: he is well lykely to break the commandment.

As here Tyndale presupposes if god would himself forbedde all men wine upon
certain days, or command them certain days to fast: here would Tyndale
anon

But now by this facyon if god gave Tyndale a commandment whereof Tyndale
cowde find no cause at all / he would not do it at all.

If our father Tyndale had been in paradyse in the stead of our father Adam / he
should never have nedyd any serpent or woman either to tempte him to eat the
apple of the tree of knowledge. For when god had forbed him the eating thereof
upon pain of death, as he forbedeth us lechery upon pain of dampnacyon: then
would he have serched for the cause of the commandment. And when his wit
would

And surely now to, by this spyrituall rule of enserchyng of the cause of
fasting and forberyng meat, and finding the cause to be none other but for
tamyng of the flesh and sobernes / who so ever think himself to the synnys
of the flesh not much inclyned as some of nature are not, nor by moderate
drinking of wine any thing dysposed to drunkenness: shall interpret
himself dyscharged of the commandment,

For this end we se that their spyrytuall doctrine has all ready brought it in
Saxony / for there is now the lent all turnyd in to shroftyde. And there it
well apperith all though it were true that Tyndale says, that fasting were of
god ordained for none other cause but only to tame the flesh: yet was it
need for the church to do as it has done by the spyryte of god, ordain and
appoynte certain common fas^yng

And surely if fasting were not profitable done of any other devotion but
only served for tamynge of the flesh, and then the custom taken away of
common fasting days, in which folk fast together in obedyence of the
commandment, and those common days taken away / folk were only left to
their own lybertye and pryuate secret conscyens,

But Tyndale with his spyrytuall fellows are fallen in to this folly by the
liking of their own lust, in favor whereof they synfully study to find
out falls gloses, to be open glotons without reproach / and also with the praise

Tyndale and his master be wont to cry owte upon the pope and upon all the
clergy, for that they meddle philosophy with the things of god / which is a
thing that may in place be very well done, sith the wysdom of philosophy all
that we find true therein, is the wysdom given of

And all be it yt Tyndale be loathe to here thereof, because he would not that
any man should do true penance with

And to thentent that we should well know that fasting not only for tamyng of
the flesh, but also for pain to be taken for our synnys, was pleasant unto
him: Leuit. 23. Zachar. 8.
he taught his people by his prophets that they should fast, and appointed
them certain days.



Also unto ye obtaynyng of great spyrytuall gifts of god and high reuelacyo^s,
how special a thing fasting is / both our savior declares him selse in ye
gospel of Matthew, Matthew. 17.
where he says yt that kind of deuylles which he did cast out of the child
is not cast out but by prayour and fasting.

And of all these things we have in holy saints lives so many examples, that
it were over long to rehearse them. But for as much as we se well yt Tyndale
makes but mokkys of all such matters, and all their holy reuelacyons and
miracles takes but for tryfels: we shall send him to look 1. Cor. 11
If we judged our selfs, we should not be judged of our lord. And surely if we
judge our self truly, we shall be content to punysshe our self.

And that fasting is one of the good works that bysyde other good and great
godly purpose serves for satisfaccyo^ of sin and procuryng of remyssyon,
grace, and pardone / and that it serves not only for the tamynge of the
flesh as Tyndale here would have it seem: ye shall se to manyfestly proved by
many plain placys in every part of scripture.

First the fastes that Moses fasted first for the law, and after for the sin
of the people and the sin of Aaron also /

Item in.xxi. chapter of the thryde book of kings when Achab had herd these
words, he tare his garme^tis and put on his body a shyrte of here, he fasted
and slept in a sack, and went hanging his head low done / and our lord said
to Helyas Thesbites, have thou not seen how Achab has humbled him before me?
And therefore because he has humbled him self for my sake, I will bring no
evil in dutynge his life. Does yt not manyfestly appear by these words that
king Achab fasted not for tamyng of his flessh t^ keep yt from wyldnes, but he
fasted for ye self same cause for which he ware here and slepte in a sack,
that is to wit to humble him self before the face of god, and to do penance in
punyshynge him self for his sin to move thereby almighty

And so may ye se this place of scripture euydent and plain against Tyndale,
and that very repentance requires of the repentaunte person not only tamynge
of the flesh against the sin immynent or to come, but also punyshement by
fasting and other afflyccyon for the sin all ready done.

And now Christ has to christian men promised of our sins

Forthermore in the first book of Esdras and the.viii. chapyter yt is written
thus in the person of the people: we have fasted and prayed to god for this (yt
is to wit for help against our enymyes, and yt is comen prosperousely to
pass.

ye may here clearly se this pestylent opinyon of Tyndale with few words
confuted. For this fast was not for tamynge of the flesh, but for avoiding
of their pa^ell.

Again in the second book of Esdras and the first chapter thus said
Nehemias: when I had herd such tidings, that is to wit how the walls of
Jerusalem were thrown done, the yates burnt, and the chyldern of Israel in
great affliccyon and mysery: I sat down and wept and mornyd many days, I
fasted also and prayed before the face of the god of heaven.

Lo this fast was not for to tame the flesh / for the man was in heaviness far
from such wanton things: but he fasted as he wept and mornyd, to move god to
mercy.

Also the great priest of god Eliachym says in the.iiii. of

I suppose no man is of so simple wit and understanding, but he may at the bare
rehersall of this brief text well perceive yt Eliachim did not esteem fasting
as Tyndale does, another took yt not only for a tamynge of the flesh, but for
a mean also to purchase grace with remyssyon and pardon, and also to obtain
aid and help of god in that great necessyte.

Is not the.iiii. of Hester also clean contrary to the doctrine of these
deuelyshe prechers of fleshly liberty: Go and assemble (says that good queen)
all the Jews that thou fyndest in Susan, and pray ye for me. Eat ye not
nether drink not in.iii. days and.iii. nyghtes. And I likewise

would she that they should forbere mete and drynk to the intent that by their
fasting they might tame her flesh? nay nor for the tamynge of their own
neither. But that by their devout fasting and her maidens and her own / they
might provoke our lord to pyty^ them and preserve them from that immynent
parell that they were then all in.

what says Toby? Prayer (says he) joined with fasting is good. He says not
this only for y^ng lusty folk for tamyng of their flesh in auoydyng of
inte^perau^ce, for good christian fasting goes sometime far above the
natural temperaunce / but he teaches all men that may without harm to join
with prayer yt pain of fasting, as a thing

In the.xxxiiii. chapyt^r of Ecclesiasticus yt is written: The man that fasteth
for his sins and again commyteth the self same sins, what avails him
this humilytye.

whereby yt is well understood that he which fasteth and amendeth him self /
his fast auay^eth and is prof^table. And wherefore? not only for tamyng of his
flesh for that may be tame enough and yet the man bad enough but yt avails
for remyssyon of sin and for merit in heaven. For as holy saint Austayne
says: To say that the fast of a christian man shall have no reward in heaven
is not the opinion

The prophet Iohel in the second chapyter: And therefore now says the lord
turn to me with all your heart in fasting, weeping, and weylynge. Tere your
hertes and not your garments, and so forth.

Lo here the prophet exhorts to fasting as he does to hearty morning and
weeping, not for a countenance of sorrow, but to be sorofull and to take pain
in deed / not in their clothes where they feel yt not, but in their bodies and
inwardely in their hertes where they feel yt thoroughly / so that they may thereby
not only tame their flesh, but also turn again to god, that he may take
pytye upon the^ and turn again to them.

Read we not in the third chapitre of the prophet Jonas,

I could here allege unto you christian reders other te^tes out of the holy
prophets and other places of scripture / as the first chapyter of Iohel,
the.ix. of Danyel, the.xxxvi. of Hyeremy, the.xx. of Iudicu^, with an hundredth
places mo very strong for us in this matter of fasting / but these few may
seem to many for a thing so manifest and clear. How be it I will allege unto
Tyndale the word^s of our savior

Here may ye clearly se good christian reder, that the holy and blessed apostle
Paul with many other mo / did not fast in this place for the subduynge of the
flesh and tamynge of bodyly lusts. For they fasted here for other folk,
that is to wit for the prestes to whom they had given holy orders, and for the
people whom they had commyttyd unto their charge / that god for their devout
prayours and fasting should give encreace of his grace and favor among them

Finally what will Tyndale say to the words that are written in the.vi. of
Matthew, and spoken by the mouth of our savior Jesus Christ, where he says:
when ye fast make not your self sad like hypocrytes, for they waste out
their faces to ye intent it might be perceived that they fast. Forsothe I
say unto you they have their reward all ready. But when thou fastest anoint
thy head and wash thy face, that it appear not unto men that thou fastest but
unto thy father which is in secret. And thy father that sees in secret,
shall reward the openly.

Lo does not our lord here promise to reward all them that for no desire of
mannys praise or itch of vain glory, but of mere humylyte and true repentance
of heart punysshe (...)
And it seme^^ well that he did, for he would not of lykelyhed have told it for
any great thing that he fasted for the sin of Aron, and also for the sin
of the people so strayghtly forty days that in the while he neither ete nor
drank / if he never had in the while ben neither an hungered nor a thirst.

How be it if Tyndale will bring all these fastes in questyon: yet of the
Nineuites and ye other above rehearsed the^e is no manner of dowte but yt they
fasted in hunger and thy^^^^. And it were in deed a mad thing to think that
when that their prayours were at that time lykely to be let

Nay says Tyndale in his book of obedyence as for pain taking, god is no
tyrau^t / and therefore rejoices not in our pain, but pytyeth us / and as it
were mornyth with us and would we should have n^ne, saving that like a good
surgeon he puts pain of trybulacyon unto the sores of our sin / because
the sin can not otherwise be rubbed out of the flesh and cured.

we say not neither that god rejoices in our pain as a tyrant, all be it
that Luther and Tyndale would have us take him for such one as had more
tyrannouse delight in our pain, then ever had any tyrant / when they by the
taking

But we say yt god rejoices and delyteth in the love of ma^nys heart, when he
fyndeth it such as the man inwardly delyteth, and in his heart owtwardly to
let ye love of his heart so redownde in to the body, that he gladly by fasting
and other afflyccyon puts the body to pain for goddys sake / and yet
thinks for all that, that in comparyson of his duty all that is much less
then right naught.

we say also that god rejoices and delyteth in justice / and for that cause
he delyteth to se a man so delight in the same, and to take his sin so
sorowfully that he is content of him

These ensamples might teache us many things if th^^^ were sprete in us.

what things ye evil sprete yt inspirith Tyndale teaches him I can not tell.
But of any good spyryt he lerneth no ferther in these ensamples, then that in
necessyte Moses ye 1. Reg^^. ^1
And yt Achimelech the priest in like wise for necessyte dyspensed with Dauyd
and his servants, that they might eat of offered hallowed bread / and yet with
great dyffycultye, but if they were clean from any late co^myxcyo^ and carnal
knowledge of their wyuys. And of that point might Tyndale if he had a good
spryte in him / learn at the least wise one thing against the boldness of his
wedded harlottes monks and frerys, that from their fylthy lechery go so
boldly not to ye hallowed bread, but to the body of god in form of bread. But
Tyndales spryte techeth^hym to be bold therein, and to

Tyndale.
And likewise of the boly day, he knows that the day is sauau^t unto man /
and therefore when he fyndeth, hat^ yt is done because he s^olde not be let from
herynge the word of god, be obeyth gladly / and yet not so superstycyously,
that he would not ^elpe his neighbor on the boly day let the sermon alone for
^^^^ay^or that he would not work on the holy day need requyrynge yt, at such
^yne as men ^e not wont to be at church.

More.
Here Tyndale teaches us high spyrytuall doctrine, yt christen men should not
be to superstycyously holy on the holy day / wenynge that they might do no
bodyly work

But yet all be yt that Christ said unto the Jews that the sone of man is
master and lord even over the sabooeh day, to use yt as him self list,
which never lysted to use yt but to the best: yet can I not well se that
Tyndale is in such wise master and lord of the sabbooth day, nor no man
else, Mar. 2
that he may use yt as his man, though yt was of god instytute for man and not
man for yt / that is to wit for the spirytuall benefyte and profit of man as
our savior says also him self. But yet he calls yt not servant unto
Exodi. 1.^
For ye scripture says that god has sanctyfyed the sabbooth day unto him
self.

And that was the cause why that Criste showed unto the Jews that him self
was lord of the sabbat day, because he would that they should thereby know
that he was very god / sith that they had learned by scripture that the sabbat
day was sanctyfyed only to god him self for ma^nys profit and no man lord
thereof but only god. A governor of people is made for the people and not the
people for the governor / and yet is there no man among the people wont to
call the governor his man, but him self rather the governors man. The very
manhood of our savior him self was to some purpose ordained for mankind, as
the incarnacyon of his godhed was ordained for man / but yet uses

But I fereme more of his meaning, lest he would bring holy days and workynge
days all in one case. For as for doing our neighbor good, and also the
workyng for our own necessyte / the necessyte may be such that the church
denies yt not. But who so do interpret his necessyte over large, or dyfferre
unto the holy day the worldly works which he might and should have done upon
the workyng day before, or may as well do yt after, and yet will work yt on
the holy day, and thereby will for his part bring yt Nume. ^5
gatherynge wood on the holy day yt he might have done on the workynge day /
was by gods own judgment stoned unto death.

And I like Tyndale in this matter ye worse, both for his words in his other
books, and for the custom of his sect now grown in Germany, and also for the
only cause that he fyndeth out here for the keeping of the holy day, of which
he puts no mo but the only hearing of the word of god / so that by the
cause which he fyndeth out, a christian man yt were either in deserte or among
infydeles where he could here no prechyng, should have no more respect unto
Crystmasse

Tyndale.
And so through out all la^es, and even likewise in all ceremonies and
sacraments / be sercheth the sygnyfycacyons and will not serve the visyble
things. It is as good to him that the pres^e say mass in his gown as in his
other apparel, if they teach him not somewhat, and that his soul be edyfyed
thereby. And as sone will he gape^while thou put sand as holy salt in his
mouth, if thou show him no reason thereof / he had as seyffe be smered with
unhallowed butter as ano^nted with vncharmed oil, if his soul be not tought to
understand somewhat at thereby and so forth.

More.


And here perceive yet the false wylynes of the devil in vtterynge of his
dreggys and poisoned draught. He covers his cup a little and shadoweth the
color of his enuenemed wine, that yt may be dronken down gredely ere the
parell be perceived. For he makes here as though he found

But I shall first show you that he plays the deuyls dysor even in this
point, all though he meant no ferther / and then shall I farther show you what
myschyef he means more, and prove yt you by express words of his own.

First I say yt is a lewd and a knauysshe raylynge upon the sacraments of
our savior Christ, to lyken and compare them in any manner wise unto such
scornful things, as the anoyntynge with holy oil unto butter smeryuge, with
other such like knauysshe toys which no wreche

Now where he says that his holy spirytuall sort will always so vyllanousely
esteem the sacraments, but if men tell them the reasons and bytokenynges of
them to the edyfyenge of their souls: yt will be great besynes and much a do
to edyfye and buyld up the souls of such a sort, which the devil has by
the blaste of his mouth thrown down so deep and frusshed all to fytters. But
I pray god to who^ nothing is impossyble / to byeld them onys again upon ye
rokke of his faith, from which they show them self so far fallen down yt
they be full unlikely to rise. For truly if they stood theruppon their hertys
would abhor to vttre such frantyque fantasyes. For as touching the
sygnifycacyo^s



But unto Tyndale and his holy spiritual sort, this gere is yet to groce for
their subtle thynne wits.

For that all christian people have this faith and sygnyfycacyon of sacraments,
Tyndale can not deny them / but if he list to bylye them.

But why trow you can not this sygnifycacyo^ serve. Tyndale? verily because he
byleueth yt not / for he byleueth not that any ceremonye or sacrament either is
in the work thereof any mean to get any grace at all. And in almost all the

But in the mean while for as much as in his preface here he makes as though
he cared but for the declaracyon of ye tokens and sensyble signs of the
sacraments and ceremonies: I have showed him the great and chyef sygnifycacio^
of all / that is to wit that they betoken the insensyble grace that god gives
them in to the soul through the merytes of Crystes holy passion. And this is
the very chyef sygnifycacyon that all holy doctors note and mark in the
sacraments / as apperyth by the dyffynicyons that in their books they give
thereunto.

But now will not Tyndale set a straw the more by the anoyntynge with holy
oil / then by smerynge with

Now can men and do also for the more part of these things give good causes
and plain open reasons, both of the sygnyfycacyons and of the spyrytuall
profit and bodyly both. And if that of any such sacraments or ceremonies
given of old by god unto his blessed apostles, and by them delivered unto his
church, and therein ever synnys fro hand to hand contynewed / it has pleased
the spyryte to let his people have and enjoy the profit without declaracyon

when our lord in ye old testament descrybed so seryously all the apparel of
the priests / did he tell the people therwyth all the causes why. Exodi. 28
Of sum we se that he did, as why he would not have Aaron asce^de unto the
awlter by degrees But of all his apparel, Exodi. 2^. Exodi. 26. ^, 27.
^euiti^i. 16. Exodi. 29
and all the fasshyon of the tabernacle, and the awlter, and the arche of the
testament, and the ceremonies of the expiacyon or purging of the tabernacle,

Now if our spyrytuall father Tyndale had been there, yt in every commandment
will never cease searching till he come to the very botom and so judges all
thing / when he should in all those things have serched and sowght and cowlde
find few things other then allegoryes, of which diverse men dyuersly divine,
and all which he little sets by, and says they prove nothing / and the
very causes and sygnyfycacyons he cowlde not have founden though he would have
mused out his brain: then would he not have set a ry^^he by all that god had
devised nor would have kept it at all, lest he being so spyrytuall should have
served as he says visyble things. Is nothere a wise work

But he will happily say that in the old law this was less matter / for that
was the law that was all in shawdoes and darkness of fygures. But now in the
law of light in which the veyle is taken away and all set open: Tyndale can
not abide it to be ignorant of any sacrament or cerymonye of any thing set
thereby, but if he search and find the uttermost sygnyfycacyon thereof. Surely
as lyghtsome as it is, and as open as all thing is now that the veyle of the
temple is withdrawn: yet will not Tyndale find out the proper causes and
sygnyfycacyons of these sacraments and ceremonies of the old law, this seven
year seuentene times told.

But go me to the new law and to those sacraments which I^^an. ^
he cowlde not enter in to ye kyngedome of heuyn: he told him there the
necessyte of baptysme, but not the proper sygnyfycacyon of the water why it
pleased god to put it for the sacrament, by which we should enter in to heuyn.
Nor when he sent his disciples to go forth and baptyse: he showed them not as
far forth as the gospel tells, for what proper sygnyfycacyon god Co^^s. 2
where he lykeneth the baptysme to a kind of beryenge with our lord in his
sepulcre, and the rysynge out thereof to a kind and manner of risyng again with
our lord in his resurreccyo^ in to a new manner and kind of clean life. And
when he shows that the bread is made one of

But yet though these things be meruelously well said and other things mo
both have been and may be founden, that may be well alleged for good and
conuenyent sygnyfycacyons of those two sacraments: yet does not ye apostle
tell us that those sygnyfycacyons be the very things and the

And therefore Tyndale takes and evil way to stykke upon that poyute so
styffely, that he lets not with open blasphemy

But no reason can content him / for he says plainly, that who so ever do not
understand all the sygnyficacions of all the outward signs in the
sacraments: yt were as good to leave the sacraments vnmynystred unto him as
mynystred. where upon yt follows whereso ever at an Ester the people should
be houseled, all be yt that they

Now follows yt also that if the sacrament were as good vnmynistred as
mynistred to who so ever is not taught the proper sygnifycacyons of the
outward token in the sacrament, as Tyndale here under a blasphemous jesting
fasshyon tells us: then follows yt I say that there was never child
crystened synnys crystendome first begane, but that yt had been as good to
have left it vncrystened, and never to have let water touch yt, bycau^e yt
could not be taught what the water sygnifyed. And let him say what he will,
but how so ever he cover and color yt for the while / surely so would he have
yt. For while he goth about to give all our salvation to faith alone, and to
take all grace and all merit utterly from all outward works, and yet sees
that he may not boldly at the beginning utterly despise baptysme

Lo thus ye se to what a dyuelyshe end Tyndals tale comes, with his
rebauldouse raylynge upon ye sacraments,

But to thentent that ye shall not be so deceived by him: I shall show you
farther that he means yet much worse / and that he means utterly as he
plainly says / yt of the.vii. holy sacraments five be none at all, and that
thoder twain be nothing fr^tefull neither. And ye shall farther well
perceive, yt Tyndale him self in neither another of the twayn,

Tyndale.
That they call confirmacyon, the people call byshoppynge. They think that if
the byshope butter the child in the forhed, that than yt is safe.

More.
If I should here call Tyndale by a another name, yt were no nyk name at all /
and yet would there some then say, that yt were not honest so to do / and this
will some such folk say,

Now where as there be for ye sacrament both of co^fyrmacyon and of holy
orders, open and manifest places in holy scripture, Actuum.8 Hebre. 6 2.
Timoth. 1
as well in the actys of the apostles as in the pistles of saint Paul / by
which placys yt apperyth plainly that by the apostles hands laid upon them
which were before baptized, they had the holy ghost given in the^ / and by
thandes of saint Paul laid upon Tymothee in making him pressed, he received of
god a special grace with that holy order / Act^. 6
Tyndale tells us in his book of obedyence that all this is nothing, and
that the laynge of the apostles hands upon them was but a manner of the
country, as a man puts his hand here upon a boys head and stroketh yt when
he calls him good sone. were not the time well lost that were spent upon
Tyndale in allegynge holy scripture to him, yt can find in his heart thus to
give yt a mokke instead of an answer? he says that the scripture and the
sacraments be not both of one authoryte / but he makes them both a like when
he mokketh them both a like.

Of matrymonye.

Tyndale.
Matrimonye (says he) was or^eyned of god for an of^yce, wherein the husband
serves the wyffe, and the wife the husband. It is ordained for a remedy and
to encreace the world, and not to sygnyfye any promise that ever I herd or
read of in the scripture It has a promise that we sin not in that state, if
a man take his wife as goddys gift, and the woman her husband likewise / as
all manner of ^^eate has a promise that we sin not if we use them mesurably
with thanks to god. If they call matrymonye a sacrament, because the scripture
uses the symylytude of matrimonye, to express the marriage or wedloke that is
between us and Christ: so will I make a sacrament of mus^erd seed, leven, a
net, kayes, bread, water, and a thousand other things.

More.
This holy sacrament of matrymonye was bygonne by god in paradyse, and which
when he bygan, he there instytuted Ephe. 5
And though in those which for his sake forberyth yt he coupleth him self to
their souls with more grace: yet in that couplyng of matrymonye (if they
couple in him) he coupleth him self also to their souls with grace,
according to the sign that is to wit the marriage which he has set to
sygnyfye that grace / and with that grace if they apply to work therewyth, he
helps them to make their marriage honorable, and their bed undefiled. And
with that grace also he helps them toward the good educacyon

And to this effect wayed that holy blessing that god ^ene. ^
gave our first father and mother in paradyse / which blessing reason will yt
we take and understand to have been given by god, according the kind of them
that yt was given to / that is to wit to work not in the body only of
reasonable folk, but much more effectually to exercise his strength in the
reasonable soul. where as Tyndale will that goddys blessing was no better to
mankind then to the kind of dogs and cattes / whereby should yt allmoste
follow that in generacyon used only for respect of goddys commandment, had been toward god no more meritoryouse then to those other kinds of brute
bestes, the gettyng

And where saint Paul for those holy sygnifycacyons says that matrymonye is
a great sacrament, Tyndale dare say nay to his teeth / and says he can make as
good a sacrament of leven, of kayes, of mus^^^d seed, or else of a net. He
should rather yet lest the grace get out perde make yt of a sakke. But there
is no grace therein says he. And why say we. Because says he that god has
none promysed^ whereby wot you yt say we. For I never read yt in scripture
says he. where read you then in scripture say we that god has made you a
promise that he never made promise nor never none would make, but he would
first send you word by writing. what Tyndale can say to this I can not
tell. But till he can say better to this then ever him self or his master
either could

Luther yet in his book of Babilonica, where he says as Tyndale now says that
matrymonye where saint Paul says yt is a great sacrament, has no grace nor
is no sacrament: he answers sayn^ Paul well and pertely and says, that
saint Paul said yt peradventure of his own head not of gods spirit. Then
when the kings grace had answered him, and that he saw that for aught he could
do me^ would believe saint Paul better then him, and that still folk took
matrymony for a sacrament, and that they though that to faithful folk god
with that holy knot gave grace toward the keeping and ordained yt him self so
to do: he swore then in great anger and made a great vow that he would plainly
prove the contrary, and ran out of religyon

Of the sacrament of aneylynge, these be his words.

Tyndale.
Aneylynge is without promise, and therefore without the spyryte, and with out
profit, but all to geder unfruitful and superstycyouse.

More
Here is a short sentence and a false erronyouse judgment given by Tyndale,
upon all cryste^ people that have

His other motyue is falsede, which is the antecedent of the same argument /
that is to wit that this sacrament Iacobi.5
he shall induce the priests to come and pray for him and anoynte him with
oil, and the prayour of ^ayth shall hele the syk man / and if he be in sin
they shall be forgyuen him. Nay says Tyndale here we may se that the
aneylynge does nothing / for saint Iamys says that the prayour of faith shall
hele the man. This is a sure argument. Lo, because saint Iamys gives the great
effect to the faithful prayour: therefore the oil does nothing at all. If it
do nothing at all toward the remyssyon of sins: why would saint Iamys have
it there, that might saving for the sacrament as well be thens as there /
except that Tyndale wene that saint Iamys were so wise in natural

This place in saint Iamis did so preace upon Luther / that he was feign to
say that the epistle was never of saint Iamys making, nor nothing had in it
of any apostolycall spyryt / but he that so said was full of an apostatycall
spyryte.

Of the sacrament of penauns.

Tyndale.
Penauns is a word of their own forgynge, to deceive us with all.

More.
Here ye se that the sacrament of penauns he sets at less then nowght / for
he says it is but a thing forged and contryued to deceive us with. But every
good christian man

Of confession.

Tyndall
Shryft in the ear is verily a work of Satan, and that the falseste that
ever was wrought, and that most has deuowred the faith.

More.
If the devil should him self sit and devise to speak spyghtfully / what
could he say more like him self against this part of the holy sacrament of
penau^s, the^ he now speaks by the mouth of this his holy spyrytuall man.



ye may se now to what perfeccyon this gere grows with Tyndale.

Luther yet that was Tyndales master, as lewd as he is played never the
blasphemouse fool against confession so far yet as Tyndale does. For Luther
all be it he would make every man and every woman to, suffycye^t and meately to
serve for a confessor: yet confesses he that shryfte is very necessary and
does much good, and would in no wise have it le^^e. But Tyndale amendeth the
matter, and says it is the very work of Satan / and they therefore serve
Satan and work his work if they shryue them self secretly and speak softely
at ye priests ere. But by lykelyhed he means

Of satysfaccyon.

He will that we shall for our sins no more but only repent. For as for
going about to punysshe our self any thing for our own synnys, by penauns
doing, with fasting, prayour, almeyse deed, or any bodyly afflyccyo^ that god
may have the more mercy upon us, which thing all good christen people have
ever used to do, and which the church calls satysfaccyon: this thing
Tyndale calls as ye shall here.

Tyndale.
Sin we through fragilyte never so o^^e, yet as soon as we repent and come in
to the right way again, and unto the testament which god has made in

More
The beginning of these words seem very godly, for ye magnyfyeng of the great
mercy of god. But consider ye head, the mids, and the tail to gether and ye
shall sone perceive that he bosteth mercy, but to mak^ a man have so little
care for his sin and makes him self so sure of sudden and short remyssyo^,
that he shall forse full little how sone he fall thereto, when he believes that
how often so ever he sin or how sore, there needs him no more but only bare
repentauns, and then all forgeuen and forgette^ sin and pain and all even by
and by an hundred times in a day. Neither purgatory need to be fered when we
go hens, nor penauns need to be done while we be here / but sin and be sorry
and

For as for that he tells his tale, as though men did reken their penauns for
a thing suffycyent to satysfye for

But because he will that men repent the doing of their sin, and then no more
but faith: I would wit of Tyndale what calls he repenting, a little short
sorrow, or a great sorrow and a long? If a little pretty sorrow and very shortly
done: I would as feign he said true as I fere yt he lies. If a great seruent
sorrow with grefe and trouble of

will ye se that it is so? Go me to Martyn Luther the first master of Tyndale
in this matter, though now his scoler passes him. while that friar lies with
his nonne, and woteth well he does naught, and says still he does well: let
Tyndale tell me what repenting is that. He repents every morning, and to
bed again every night / thinks on goddys promise first, and then go
sin again upon

Of the sacrament of order.

Tyndale.
By a priest in the new testament, understand nothing else but an elder, to
teach the younger, to bring them to the full knowledge and understanding of
Christ, and to mynystre the sacraments which Christ ordained.

More.
By the words, he means that ye holy order is no sacrament, nor is nothing
else but an elder to teach the yo^ger, and to mynystre the sacraments such
as Christ ordained. And in this wise he says we be all prestes both me^ and
women to. For he says in the same book precysely and in this book to, that
women may consecrate the holy body of Crist.

And what would yt avail to dyspute with him, sith he mokketh and skoffeth out
the words of saint Paul written unto Tymothe / in which the sacrament of
order is so plainly proved, that all the world can not deny yt, but if they
make a mokke at saint Paul as Tyndale does.

Now in that he says the sacraments that Christ ordained / he means
nothing else but his plain heresies against all the sacraments save twain
/ that is baptysme

Of the sacrament of baptysme, these be his words.

Tyndale.
The sacraments which Criste him self ordained, which have also promises and
would save us if we knew them and byleued them / them they mynyster in the
latin tongue. So a^ they also bycome as vns^rutefall as the the other.

And after he says forther: Baptism is called volowy^ge in ma^ny

More.
All this great scoffing arises only, because that chyldern be crystened in
latyne. For which only cause he says that the baptysme is utterly frutelesse
/ ye and by his tale worse then frutelesse to. For he says they be now in like
cause as ar the the other sacraments, which he says have no promise in
scripture, and therefore are (he says) supersticyouse. And lo thus first ye se
that as long as ever any chyldern have in England ben crystened in laten /
there was never chyld^ the better for the cristendome. And then if this lie be
true: there is yet never a christian man nor never a christian woman

How be yt I would every other thing were as ethe to mende as this is / for
this matter may be sone eased. It may be now upon this fault fou^den, be
provided upon Tyndales counsel that all the English chyldern shall be
crystened in english, and then they shall understand all the matter well
enough ye wot well, and speak for them self to.

But then fyndeth Tyndale two great fautes for which he says that all the
baptisyng of the child is fruteles. One he says because of the false believe
that the plungyng in the water saves them / a another for yt the promise is not
taught them.



Now sith he says the^, that the baptysme is frutelesse at the founte for
these causes: I would wit of him whyther it

But now is yt good to se somewhat of Tyndales mind concerning these two
things, that is to wit the faith set on sensyble tokens in the sacrament, and
the prechynge of the promyses.

First for the visyble signs, there be two things to be consydred. The One
that Tyndale beryth us in hand that the

For the first point these be his words.

Tyndale.
They make us believe that the work self without the promise saves us, which
doctrine they learned of Aristotle.

More.
In this point he plainly bylyeth the clergy, which doctrine he learned of
the devil. who takes baptysme but for a sacrament ordained of god for mannys
salvation, by which god has promised that he shall be saved except sin

How be yt Tyndale has here a another rule and that as false as the the other, by
which as I was about to say he rekeneth the outward tokens of the sacrament
to be of none effect, but only bare tokens of that grace that is wrought with
the word, and that the word of Cristes promise.

For he says yt the sacrame^tis be as yt were a precheour, and do only
preach gods promyses / and therefore for to mynystre ye sacraments, is (he
says) nothing else but to preach gods promyses. And for this he alleggeth
y^ words of saint Paul in the fyfte chapyter of his pystle to the Ephe. 5
Criste cleansed ye co^gregacyon in the founteyne of water through the word. And
also the words of saint Peter where he says in the first of his first
pystle: 1. Petri.1
ye are borne of new, not of mortal seed but of immortal seed, by the word of
god which lives and lasted ever. He alleggeth also the word of saint Iamys
in the first chapyter of his pystle, Iacobi.1.
where he says: Of his good will bygate god us with the word of truth, that
is says Tyndale with the word of promise. He says also: Thou seeste that it
is not the work but the promise that iustyfyeth us through faith. He says also
that as ye priest purges by prechynge of the promise, so do the sacraments
and none otherwise / because he says that the sacraments be but signs and
tokens that betoken and preach the promises. And so he means that as the
priest prechyng to preche, do there stand still and preche nothing at all

And it it to be considered that this is his opinion as well of the blessed
sacrament of the auter as of the holy baptism. whereby what mind he has of
that blessed sacrament, he leueth little doubt to them yt have either lernyng
or wit.

If this opinion of Tyndale were true that the priest

Ephe. 5
For the words of saint Paul to ye Ephesyes, Criste cle^sed the congregacyon
in the fountain of water through the word, is the thing that all we say to /
that is to wit that by the holy words of baptysme comy^ge to the water god
cle^seth the soul according to the words of saint Austyne accedit verbum ad
elementum and fit sacramentu^. S. Austinus
But Tyndale because saint Paul says there / in the fountain of water through
the word, we^eth that he sets the water but for a sign / as if ye one
would say, a man does in his body fast, watch, give alms, and pray through
the devotion of the soul, Tyndale would then say that the body were set but
for a

His text also of saint Peter is nothing in this world for his purpose. For
when saint Peter says: ye are borne of new, not of mortal seed but of
immortal seed^ by the word of god which lives and lasts ever: what
means he other then that by our savior him self which is the living word
of god that lives and lasts euer^ we be borne again by the sacramental
water and the sacramental word, which both he there understands, for he
there expressly speaks of neither another, but of the word that is gods
son.

The words of saint Iamys also, I^^^bi.1.
that god of his good will begat us with the word of troth, how prove these
words that the water of baptysme serves but for a sign.

The word of troth says Tyndale is here understood the word of ^ys
promise. How proves Tyndale that? by^ause that Crystes promyses be true, must
it therefore nedys be that saint Iamys in that place meant the word of promise /
as though there were no more true of all that ever Christ spoke but only of
his promyses. why may not in that place the word of troth with which god has
of his good will bygoten us, be understood our savior Christ him self / by
whom god has bygoten us in deed, and which is the very troth it self as him
self witnesses of him self, where he says: Ego sum via, veritas, and vita,
I am the way, the troth, and the life. Thus may ye se that this text
proves Tyndales purpose nothing at all.

But now suppose that the very words of saint Iamys serve but only for
signs.

This opinion has Tyndale taken of Luther, which gives to the sacrament
nothing at all / but he says that god gives all the grace by the faith
alone, and not by the sacraments any thing at all. Now the church believes
and techeth that god has not so bounden him self to his sacraments, but that
where he gives the gift of faith to any that can not come to baptysme, there
he of his power may and of his goodness will give unto that man the gift of
such grace to come to heuyn without baptysme. But where god gives grace by the
baptysme / there it is hard to set ye baptysme at so short, as to say that it
serves but for a bare sign / and without the sygnyfycacyons preched at the
font stands in no more stead then a precher that precheth not.

Albe it that god may cure a sore without a medycyne, and

And surely when our savior set this order therein, that who so were baptized
in water in the name of the father and the son and the holy ghooste he should
be saved / and that except a man were borne again as well of the water as of
ye spyryte, he should not enter in to the kingdom of heuyn: god set it to
serve for a more effectual thing then for a bare sign void of any fruitful
effect. For this were yet at the ^ai^ wise no less, then if a lord would say
to a poor fellow: take the here this badge or this lyuery gown of mine / and

And so like wise though it were true that the sacraments did nothing work
in them self, nor had no power in them self no more of god then of nature to
purge and cleanse the soul: yet were it more then a bare token or sign of
grace, in that it has by goddys promise his own special assystens, which at
ye sacraments mynystred does infou^de his grace.



And in to this mind they were led by the words of holy scripture, and
partly for the excellence of the sacraments of the new law in respect of the
sacraments of the old law / between which two kinds of sacraments seems to
Omnia in figura contingebant ^^is, Corin. 1^.
all thing unto them came in fygures.

Then sith the sacraments of the old law had god by his promise assyste^t
with them in remyssyon of sins, Leuiti. 4.5. and. 6
as by the plain words of many places of scripture does appear: it seemed to
those old holy virtuous doctors, that the sacraments of the new law for the
preemynence over them, should of goddys especyall influens have some effectual
virtue, force, and power, as an instrument of god in ye workynge thereof. To
which mind they have been moved not only for the cause before remembered / but
also as I said A^t^um.8
that by the putting of the apostles hands upon them that were crystened,
the holy gooste forthwyth came in to them, and by miracle showed him self by
their spekyng in diverse tongues. And when they read saint Paul writing to
Tymothee: 1. Timoth. 4
Neglecte not that grace that is in the, which is given the by prophecye, with
the putting upon of the hands of ye preesthed / and unto him also those
words: 2. Timoth. 1.
I warn the that thou resuscytate and ^tyrre up the grace of god that is in
the by the imposycyon or putting upon of my hands: these placys were very
plain for their mind, when they here read that grace was by god infused with
the receyuyng of the holy order of preesthode, by the outward sacrament of
putting the bysshoppys hand upon him.

It seems also yt the words of god spoken by the mouth of the prophet
Ezechiel souneth to ye same / where he says: I have washed the with water,
Ezecl. 16.
and I have cleansed thy blood. By which words yt seems to be sygnyfyed that
the outewarde washing of the water of baptysme, should be an effectual
instrument of the inward washing of the soul. And by the mouth of the same
prophet, Eze^^. ^. ^6
in prophecyeng of the sacrament of baptysme our lord says also: I shall shede
out upon you clean water, and ye shall be cleansed from all your fylthynes.
These words show that the water shall was^^e the fylthe. And what fylthynes
means he but ye fylthynes of the soul? and that does no water wasshe but the
water of baptism. And where to would our lord by ye mouth of his prophet call
it clean water / but for ye difference yt it has

Those holy doctors considered also the yet more open words of y^ prophet
zachary: Zachar. 14
There shall go forth he says quykke lively waters out of Jerusalem, the one
half of them to the oryentall see, the other half to the very uttermost see.
These words verily descrybe the holy water of y^ sacrament of baptysme, the
water that welleth out of holy church which strecheth to two sees of sins,
that is to wit both of sin orygynall and of all the actual sin that the
man has done, all were he never so old ere he were baptized. And why calls
the prophet this water quykke and lively / but for the dyfference between it
and other waters yt

By these places of scripture and diverse other / many good holy men of old,
all be yt ye no man othe^wyse thought nor thinks, but that the pryncypall
work and the hole works in the clensyng of the soul and infundyng of grace
is god him self, and that he does yt for the merytes of Crystes passion as he
has promised to do, and that upon our part is required in such as have use
and reason at the time

And they that think otherwise / that is to wit they that think that the
sacraments be but as yt were the lyuery gown whereof I gave you the ensample,
and has no sp^cyall power nor influe^ce given of god, by which it any thing
may work in cle^syng of the soul: all they have none other

For as for my part, I would not let to deny an hole hepe of those reasons in
matters of the sacraments, which hang all upon gods will and pleasure and
his omnipote^t power. For all be yt yt we se no lykelyhed how that bodily water
can work upon the spyrytuall substance of ye soul / yet god can make yt fire
which is a bodily substance as well as is the water, to work not upon soulys
only discharged of their bodies in purgatory, but also upon ye evil angels

which argument for ought that I perceive among the^ is to mine understanding
so symply soyled / that till I here either better or perceive them better: I
like as yet that argument better then I like all their solucyons that they
make thereto.

For some of them be feign for their solucyon, to grant almost that their
pain in the fire were but a detaynynge therein by some stre^ger power then them
self / and then were the pain but as a prysonement and restraynt of lybertye,
if the fire burn them not. And then why more in fire then in water, if they be
for the fire never the warmer. And un the

And surely sith experyence teaches us that the soul which is of yt self a
spyrytuall substance, god has of his high wisdom and power founde^ the
mean so to put it in a body and so to knyt yt thereto, that not only by fire
or frosen water put about yt, but also without any outward thing put unto
yt, by the only boylynge of the distempered humors within yt self, ye soul
is in such gryef, pay^e and torment, that it would be as feign out of the body
as the body would be rydde of it: sith we find this thus, I dowte nothing at
all but that god can by mo means then men

when our lord heled Naaman Syrus by his prophet He lyzeus in the water of
Iordane / no man dowteth but tha^ god did the deed. ^. Regum. 5
yet were yt a great boldenes to afferme that the water there did work
^othynge therein at that time, and yet had the water no such nature of ytselfe.

No more had also the water of which yt is written in the gospel of saint
John^, Johan. 5
where at the mouynge thereof who so next were let down thereto was there
cured by the angel of god / and yet is yt well lykely that god gave an
influence of his power at the time, by which the water self was made an
instrument of that health.

And likewise where the woman was heled by the touch Lucae.8.
whereof saint Luke speaks in the.viii. chapyter: the words of our savior him
self seem to show some influe^ce gone forth from him self in to his garment,
such as by his might with the touch of his garment used as an instrument
therein, was able to give health unto that good faithful wom^n.

when our savior as is written in y^.ix. chapyter of saint John^ did take the
dyrt of the ground, John^. 9
and did spytte there upon and made thereof a plaster, and laid it upon the
blind ma^nys yien and so gave him his syghte: I think that god gave an
influence of his power in to that plaster, whereby he cured his yien. yet might
he have done it by his only word or by his only will, without any such
outward thing laid there unto. But it pleased him to let them se

Now if they will say that it is not like in curing the body and clensynge of
the soul: I say it is like, saving for the reason by which they say that
the bodyly water can not work upon the vnbodyly soul. And therefore thereto I
say, that by no natural power nor by no power except only goddys / could
these bodies that is to wit those waters, garment, and plaster, have in such
wise wrought upon the bodies wherein they were workynge instruments of these
meruelouse cures. And then I say by his power may the bodyly water as well be
a workynge instrument

For as for that reason by which some doctors reken the matter the more easy
in the sacraments, because the out ward sensyble things thereof work as they
reken upon the soul, as part of the holeman by touching the body thereof /
as the fire touching the body payneth the soul and all, all be it I repungne
not thereat: yet I nothing ground my self thereon, sith I never found among
them all one reason yet, whereby me thought it proved otherwise, but ye god may
make the bodyly corporal water, able to work upon the vnbodyed incorporyall
soul. which if it may / sith god has set the sacraments as meanys by
which we come to clensyng of the soul and to salvation / all be it that no
man denies but that the power of god is chyefe, and that

How be it in this matter whyther that the sacraments have any influence of
power given them by god, whereby they may be workers and instruments in the
purgynge or clensynge of the soul / or else that they be but in such wise

Now where they say that all the salvation stands in promise of god, and
nothing in the sacraments at all / because that they be but the tokens
thereof: by this reason they will within a while take a way the reverence from
the very promise to. For of troth the promise of god works not our salvation
no more then do the sacraments, but god

Now say these men allwaye that god saves us by his promise, as though they
were sure that if he were not surely bounden by his promise, he would not now do
it at all / and saving that his promise is onys passed him somewhat as

In men such change and such repentance happeth, that where one of his good
will sometime byndeth him self to give / the the other may thank the bond if
ever the promise be kept. But gods high prouydence so foreseeth what he
promised / that he can never forthynk yt. And his inestimable goodness is so
great / that he gives not because he promyseth, but he promyseth because he
will give / and would give though he never promised as he determined to give
before he promised / and would yet promise if he had not promised / not that his
promise should be y^ cause of his gift, but that we should by his promise have
knowledge of his gift and comfort of the hope.

kind neither synnys nor before. And thus ye may se what

But would god yet that this were the worst piece of Tyndales techyng concerning
Crystes promise. But he frames crystes promyses after his own fasshyon. He
says that we make promyses in sacraments where christ made none / but he
makes promyses that Crystes made never such. For Christ promyseth heuyn if
men labor for it: Tyndale would make us wene we need no labor at all. Christ
promyseth forgeuenes through the sacrament of penau^s if men amend and will do
penauns: Tyndale of the sacrament puts two parts away, and almost the
third to, and promyseth forgyuenes for a very short skant repenting at ye
first thought by and by / and to do penauns he takes for idolatrye. Christ
promises us heuyn if we do good works

Finally where as Christ has made a promise, one of the grettest, most
solemn, most assuredly made, and thereto most fruitful and most necessary
that ever he made / that is to wit that he would be with his church of christian
people all days unto the end of the world, and that he would send also ye
holy ghoost unto them that should teache them all thing and led them in to
every treuth: Tyndale first (lest he should

And on the the other side if he had here all this while any church / and then
the holy ghost have not taught yt church the truth: then has Criste broken
that promise, by which he promy^ed that the holy ghost should teache his church
all things and lead them in to all truth. For how had the holy ghost taught
it all things if he have suffered the devil to teache it some things. And let
Tyndale when he will answer this point. Mark well and remember that we speak
here of bylefe and faith / not of works and deeds, lest after his custumable
fasshyon lettynge the bylefe go by: he answer us with raylynge upon mennys
manners, and so

And how has the holy ghost led the church all this while in to all truth
/ if one holy truth be, that freres when they list may wedde no^nes
notwithstanding their vows, and the holy ghost has almost this fyftene
hundred year together, suffered all his hole church (neither good nor bad
except) to believe that breche of such vows is dedly sin, and such manner
marriage pleyne incestuose lechery, and to da^pne Tyndales faith in that point
for very false heresye.

And thus good christian reders here ye plainly se what manner of fashyon Tyndale
techeth Crystes promyses. For where as he seueth all at nothing saving only
Crystes promyses made to man: he techeth men again to break their promise made
to god / and so brings all his matters in conclusyon to that point, that if he
lied not as he does /

Of the sacrament of the auter.

For as much as he sees yt the mass is the special thing in which the
sacrament of the auter is honored, and in which yt is most fruitful, in so
much as there the very body and blood of our lord is not only received by
the priest him self and for him self, but is also for his own synnys and
other mennys to, offered up to god as an holy host, oblacyon, and sacryfycye
/ representyng the same sacryfyce in which our savior both being the priest
and the sacryfyce, offered up him self for the sin of the world unto his
father

Tyndale.
What helps yt that the priest when he goes to mass ^^sgyseth him self
with a great part of the passion of Christ, and plays out the rest under
silence with signs and profers, with noddynge, beckynge, and ^owynge, as yt
were ^acke a ^a^^s / when nether he him self nether any man else woteth what
he means, nor whereof no man can give a good reason as he says sone after.

More.
Here he mokketh and plays him self as ye se in mokkynge these holy
ceremonies used, as well in thapparell of

If Tyndale say true in this / then did god by his own commandment make his
chosen people of Israel to fall in to superstycyon instead of devotion, with
the ceremonies used about the sacrafyces in the old law, because they
understood them not.

After this he mengleth his lies therwyth, saying that christian men think
that they have done habundauntly enough for god, ye and deserved above measure,
if they be present ons in a day at such a mummynge.

More.
what may not such a man be bold to say that is not a shamed to lie so
shamefully? for he knows yt all ye readers well know that he lies when they
read yt / and yet he is not ashamed to wryt yt. what man would be so folysh to
think that he has done enough for god?

yet lays he a another incommodyte that the infydelys will mokke us and
abhor us, in that they se nothing but such apes play among us, whereof no
man can give a reason.

Lo what an high reason has Tyndale here found out, y^ such holy ceremonies
whereof Crystes church has received

But now would I wit of wise. Tyndale whyther if men could and did give a good
reason unto Jews Turks and Saracens and Paynyms / as for ensample such causes
as Tyndale tells some for great hid mysteryes that no man Rationale
diuinorum/showing what sygnyfyeth the albe, the amys, and stole, and so forth:
would the^ all the Jews, Turks, Saracens, and other infydelys hold them self
satisfied and mokke no more? if they so would / the^ were they all much less
infydeles the^ Tyndale is / for he has sought out such things, and yet
mokketh still. How be yt that is little marvel. For in deed he brings all
such things forth but for to make mokkes at them.

But then would I wit of wise Tyndale farther, whyther if all these infydeles
that he speaks of, as Jews, Turks, and Saracens were present at the mass /
and no such ceremonye at all used thereat, but only knelynge, knokkynge on
breasts, and holdyng up of hands at the sight, leuacyon, and receyuynge of
that blessed sacrament / and that thereuppon

Lo thus ye se good cryste^ readers, that by Tyndales reason we must cast of
clean all our hole faith / lest such infydelys as him self is, should make
mokkes there at as he does. what cryste^ ears can abide such blasphemouse
folly?

yet would some unwise man wene peradventure, that Tyndale does for all this
not mean any thing against these holy ceremonies of the mass / but only
mokketh the priest because he speaks not all the secrets of the mass a loud
/ and also because he teaches not all y^ paryshe what all those cerymonyes
mean.

Surely there needs no man to dowte, but he that can find in his heart to make
such mokkes upon the devout obseruaunces used so many hundred years about the
mass / has a lewd bestely mind against the very sacrament yt self.

But yet to the end that every man may se yt the more clearly: ye shall perceive
by his own words that according to Luthers babbling in his book of Babilonica
/ Tyndale teaches plainly that the blessed sacrament is in the mass

Tyndale.
There is a word called ^n latyne ^^cerdos, in greek hiere^s, in hebrew
coha^/that is a mynyster, an offycer, a sacryfycer, or a priest / as A^^on was
a priest and sacryfyced, for the people, and was a mediator be^wene god and
the^ / and ^^ the english should yt have had some other name then priest. But
Antecrist^ has deceived us with unknown and strange terms, to bring us in
to confusyon and superstycyous blyndnes. Of that manner is Criste a priest for
eu^r, and all we prestes through him / and need no more of any such priest on
earth to be a mean for us unto god.

More.
C^^^. 14
was a solemn figure: Tyndale tells us here that because Crist is a priest
for ever, and that all we be prestes through him man and woman / ye must
understand we need therefore he says no more of any such priest on earth, that
should be a mean between god and the people, to offer up any sacryfyce to god
that Christ has (...) us in to the inner temple within the veyle and unto the
mercy stole of god, and (...) coupled us unto god / where we offer every man
for him self the desires and petycyons of his heart / and do sacryfyce and
kill the lusts and appetytes of his flesh, with prayour, fasting, and all
manner of gol^y living.

More.
with these gay glytterynge words would Tyndale so blere our eyes / that he
would make us to reken our self taken in so nere to god and so coupled with
him, that eue^ upon god almyghtyes mercy stole we offer every man so
suffycyently for him self ye desires and petycyons of his heart, and so
suffycyently sacryfyce and kill the iustes and appetes of his flesh, with
prayour, fasting, and all manner of good living: that we need now no priest
as mean between

This is the goodness that he brings all his holy process to. And where as
in other places all is naught among us, and all is but sin: yet here lest we
should need the sacryfyce of the mass, we be all gods good sons, and kill
and sacrifyce full well the lusts and appetytes of our flesh, with prayour,
fasting, and all manner of godly living.

How be it when Tyndale says that we offer our desires of our heart at god
almyghtyes mercy stole / and that we kill and sacryfyce the lusts of our
flesh with prayour, fasting, and all godly living: he means none of us
peuysshe, popysshe popystes, but the lively lyghtsome Lutheranys. For they
perde as ye se by Luther him self and his holy

I marvel yet in what place of scripture Tyndale fyndeth / that men sacryfyce
their sins. we find that men offer sacryfyce for sin and that men kill
sin / and then peradventure offer them self clean depured from sin. But to
offer up sin in sacryfyce / me seems it is a very stynkyng sacryfyce, and
of such a scryptured man not very scrypturely spoken. But therefore Tyndale
turns those.ii. words out of their right frame, to iugle and blere our yie^
wythall. For he says not that we kill and sacryfyce our flesshely lusts /
lest we should have spyed that it were no metely sacryfyce. But he says that
we sacryfyce and kill

But Tyndale cares not how he set his words, so that he may make us to
believe, that we need no priest to offer up daily ye same sacryfyce that our
savior offered onys, and has ordained to be by the prestes perpetually offered
in his church. For this is his labor to take out of our bylefe / and this is
Luthers labor, of whom he learned it in his book of Babilonica. And for this
cause be they wroth with the holy canon of the mass, because the sacrament is
in the mass called as it is in deed, a sacryfyce, an hooste, and an o^^rynge.

This would they have us leave of for the only spyghte

And all be it that Tyndale tells us many times as the man is somewhat
shameless, that we will not believe saint Hierom, saint Austyne, saint Ambrose,
saint Gregory, and the other old holy doctors of Crystes church: yet knows
Tyndale that in this one point among many other, they be quyte against him
euerychone. And because it would here make a long work to rehearse many of
their words: therefore that Tyndale shall not deny but that I therein say
truth, I shall allege him Luther his own master / which in his book of
Babilonica plainly confesses

But yet shall ye se ferther that as fair as he covers

Tyndale.
The sacrament of Crystes body after this wise preche they: ye may (...)
pe^^ceyue (...) th^^ (...) Tyn^^^^.
Thou must believe that it is no more bread but the very body of Christ,
flesh, blood, and bone, even as he went here on earth, save his cote. For
that is here yet I wot not in how many places.

More
Is not here a fair mokkynge manner in rehersynge of that holy sacrament? But
yet to cover his infydelyte / he makes here a color, as though he were angry
that they teache no more. But he is angry in deed that they teache so much / or
ellis could he never find in his heart to speak so mokkeshly

For every man well knows that where he makes after as though they which
teache the people this / did not teache them also ye profit of the receyuyng nor
the promise of god: he does untruely belie them. For who is there so symply
taught, but that he well understands yt the receyuyng of ye holy body of our
lord in such wise as men are taughe to receive it / is wholesome to the soul
and that by goddys ordinance? And therefore is in Tyndale but a shamelesselye,
whereof every man well knows the contrary. would god him self believed as well
of this holy sacrament, as the sympleste learned priest in a country teaches
his paryshe. which if he did / his heart I dare say would not serve him so
folyshely to ieste thereat. For he speaks there of prechynge of promise, for no
other cause but only to bring in his worshypfull

How be yt he is in deed comen to that point all ready, as ye shall perceive by
his words in his book made against

What auayseth says he to teach folk this, that the very body and blood of
our lord is in that sacrament / the devil knows that Criste dyed on a
frydaye and the Jews to / and what are they the better. we have a promise.
(...)

why steppeth he from thexample of the same sacrament. why says he not the
devil kn^weth this to be true, that

yet to thente^t that ye may perceive clearly, yt he is plain of Luthers
heresye / that the sacrament of the auter is very bread still: ye shall
understand that where as I in my dyaloge That that is broken, and that the
priest ^ateth with his teth / is yt not bread what is yt else.

And after those words he goth forth in jesting and mokkynge god wot full
like him self.

And sone after in a another place he says in defense of Luthers heresye,
because he would have folk set less thereby and have less reverence thereunto:
It were a perilouse case if men and women touched yt, because the (...) has
not oyled them.

And afterward he says: At Oxforde about the sacrament was no small question
of late days, whyther yt were bread or none / some affermyng that the flower
with long lyenge in water was turned in to starch.

More.


But now shall ye yet more plainly se, to what point he goth about to bring
you.

Tyndale.
It is the sacrament of Crystes body and blood, and Christ calls yt the new
and everlasting testament in his blood, and commands that we should so do in
the remembrance of him / that his body was broken and his blood shede for our
sins. And Paul commands thereby to show or preach the lords death. They
say not pray to yt, neither put any faith therein. For I

More.
No man can desire better knowledge of him then he shows of him self in
these words. For here he shows plainly that though to blere our yies wythall
he calls it the sacrament of Crystes body and blood, and his new and
euerlasty^ge testament in his blood / and says that we be commanded by saint
Poule thereby to preche the lords death: yet he wyl^ not in any wise y^ men
shall pray thereto nor put any faith therein. And it is no dowte but he y^ has

And therefore unto all his other gaye gloryouse words he has a false gloss /
by which he means that the blessed sacrament is nothing else but a token and
a figure ordained for a remembrauns of Christ, and not the very body and blood
of him self.

It is also to be noted whereupon he grou^deth this holy precepte of his, that
men should not pray to the sacrament nor put any faith therein. He says
because that ye scripture does not command it / therefore it is dyshonoure to
the sacrament to do it. Does not these words alone teache us suffycyently,

ye may se now yt Tyndale uttered not all his false ware at onys. For first he
bygan with images / then with relyques, then with saints, that we may
wurshyppe none of all these. And now at last he techeth us that we may not
worship Crystes own body in the blessed sacrament of the autre, nor put any
faith therein. Put ye no dowte but he will say the same by his soul within a
while, and sone after that by his godhed to / and at the last by the godhed of
the father and the holy ghost both, and vttrely deny all three.

God is good lord which makes this blasphemouse fool speak in the end of
his blasphemy a few true words, with which him self destroys all his whole
abomynable doctrine. For he confesses as ye have herd / that though he may
not believe in Crystes church, as though ye church were his savior: yet he
must believe Crystes church / that the doctrine which they preche of Christ is
true. And with these words of his own, will I strain him fast and sure. For
I ask no more but these few words of his own, to ye confoundyng of all that
ever he techeth against our faith. For now has he with these words destroyed
theffecte of his heresye / wherwyth he would draw all to an unknown church of
electes. For sith we must believe the doctrine and

And now sith he has bounden him self to confess that the church of Christ
is and must nedys be a church known here to men, and none such can he name
but only the catholyke known church of all Christian nacyons, from which he
has and does labor to flyt and fle unto a dark unknowen church of electes /
the strength of which heresye his own words here have confounded: he must
nedys confess that Crystes church is the church that we be of, and out of
which him self is down fallen by unfaithfulness in to ye deep dongeon of the
devil. And now sith of his own confession

Now sith ye plainly perceive good cryste^ reders, that this malycyouse man
entendeth to turn pore simple soulys

And surely there was never sect of heretyques yet, that there was so great
madness to believe as these. For of other heretyques that have been of old /
every sect had some one heresye or else very few. Now these heretyques come
in

The old heretyques did stykke upon scripture when yt was yet in a manner new
received / and they contended upon the understanding at such time as there
had few christian writers expowned the scripture before them, so as they might
the better say to the catolyque church, why may not we perceive ye scripture as
well as you: but these new heretyques be so far fro shame / that in the
understanding of scripture, and in the affyrmynge of all their heresies / they
would be byleued by their only word, against all the old holy doctors that
have been synnys the death of Criste unto

This long dygressyon have I made you / to let you plainly se the sommary
purpose and effect of Tyndales doctrine

But now that Tyndale has commended unto you the high spirytuall wisdom of
unfaithful heretics / he begins on the the other side to rebuke and reprove
the true faith of all good faithful people.

Tyndale.
But the world capty^ateth his wit, and about the law of god makes hy^

More.
Now that Tyndale has done with his own spyrituall part, and has as ye
have herd holyly declared how high spyrytuall wisdom they use in searching
the very botome of the cause in every commandment that god gives / and
according to the thing which they take for the cause, so order them self
either keep the commandment or break yt: now comes he to thoter part /
that is to all that are no heretykes, whom he before called natural and not
borne again nor renewed with ye spyrtie, all which folk he calls here the
world / and says that the world captyuateth his wit, and about the law of
god makes him wonderful ymagynacyons / unto

Here he means that him self and his fellows spyrytuall heavenly men / be not
captyuate unto the law of god, as we pore worldely me^ of mydle earth be. For
they be no ferther bounden to the law, but as the cause of the law sought out
by them self, leads them to and fro / and therefore they be in an
euangelycall and in manner angelycall lybertye to do what they list / so yt
they give the law some cause that may serve their lust, as they have given to
the law and commandment of vows / from which they have set them self in such
a spyrytuall lybertye, that munkes and freres may lawfully lie with nuns and
live in lechery, and call yt wedlock.



But we sely sowles of the world here, be captyuate and

But Mary on the other side, these new spyrytuall men, have with their new
lybertye made them self wonderful ymagynacyons to which they cleave so fast,
that.xv. John^ Baptystes can not dyspute them out of their hedys. For they have
to the great wonder of the world made them an ymagynacyon, that frerys may
live in lecherye with

Now every man well woteth that saint John^ the Baptyste did dyspute against
these ymagynacyons of theyrs, both with his living and his techynge. For
against their lechery his living dysputed with chastyte / and against their
heresye of penance, he dysputed with prechynge penance. For he bad them, not
every boy go forth and take him self for an apostle and go preche, but he
cried upon them to do penance / and not only bad them repent and do
penance, but also bad them if they would avoid hell and ye wrath that else
was to come, Matthew. 3.
they should do worthy Lucae. 1.
He lived in watch and prayours, in fasting and forberynge meat. He drank no
wine, but was cont^^

Tyndale.
He byleueth that he loves god because he is ready to kill a Turk for his sa^e
that byleueth better in god then he / whom god also commands us to ^^ue and
to leave nothing vnsoughte to win him unto the knowledge ^f the ^routhe,
though with the loss of our lives.

More.
Here Tyndale follows his master Luther that would

For though we should love infydelys to make the^ faithful and be glad to
suffer for them / if our suffrauns would bring them to the faith, yet are we
not bounden to love them ^boue the householde folk of Christ, and famylyars of
our own christian faith / and namely so far, that while they come, not to
learn ye christian faith but to kill the christian men, a prince that has the rule
of us should suffer them to ^yll on and sto^de still by and preche.

I (...) ^ot therefore but how holyly so ever it pleases father Tin^^le here
preche in favor of ye Turks / a prince may assemble his host, and of good
zele with great thank

And therefore we shall not I trust greatly need to fere ye great word that
Tyndale in the Turks favor speaks, against those that will go and fight
against them / where he says that the Turk byleueth better in god then such
a christian man. wherein if Tyndale said true as god be thanked he lies: how
byleueth then Tyndale him self in god, which (as his charytable books well
declare) would be well content that heretyques and infydeles, should with
sedycyo^ or open war kill up the clergy of the catholycall church, and the
great part of such good people bysyde, as would be adversaries to their
pestyferouse heresies.

Tyndale.
He supposes that he loves his neighbor as much as he is bound, if he be
not actually angrye with him / whom yet he will not help freely with an
halfpenny, but for advantage or vain glory or for a worldly purpose. If any
man have displeased him, he keeps his malice in and will not cha^e him self
about yt, till he se an occasyon to avenge yt craftily, and thinks that well
in^ugh. And the rulers of the world he obeyth thinks he, when he flatereth
them, and byndeth them with gifts and corrupts the officers with rewards,
and begyleth the law with cauteles and sotyltyes. And because the love of god
and his neighbor, which is the spyryte and the lyffe of all laws, and
wherefore all laws ar made, is not written in his heart: therefore in all
inferior laws and in all worldly ordynaunces, is he betell blind.

More.
All this gere is but a fardell full of lies / and that woteth

For though men in the catholyque church do sin / yet to take yt for no
sin, but for holiness and virtue / this is neither the doctrine nor manner and
gy^e of the catholyque church of Christ. But this is in very deed the belye^ or
at the le^te wise the gyse and custom of Tyndales church and Luthers and friar
Huskens. For they have the love of god and their neighbor, the spyryte and
life of all laws so well and wisely

Tyndale.
And if he be commanded to absteyne from wine, that will he observe vnt^ the
death to / as charterhouse munkes had lever dye then eat flesh. And as for the
sobernes and chastysynge of the members will he not look for / but will

More.
As for the munkes of the charterhouse, would god we were no ferther from very
virtuous devotion, then those good men be from unlawful superstycyon / among
whom god be thanked we se many live to very great age, and never herd I yet
that any dyed for lack of eating flesh / and yet herde^ I never that any of
them have eaten any, saving some such as have comen from their cloisters in to
Luthers church / as Otho did in Almayne, which run out of the charter house
and left fysshe and fell to flesh all together, and took a wife for
sobrenesse and chastysynge of his monkely members as Tyndale speaks.


And the holy day will he keep so strayte, that if he mete a flee in his bed
he dare not kill her / and not ones regard whe^fore the holy day was ordeyne^
to seek for gods word / and so forth in all laws.

More
Tyndale I think has not known many keep the holy day so strayte / y^ would
fear to kill a flee as it pleases him to ieste. But yet^ a^ I lever y^ men
^old keep it so strayt as he speaks / their keep it so losely as they do. But
they y^ keep i^ ^o losely / be neyth^r afe^d I warr^^t you to kill a fle nor to
do ^^rs neither. And who so ever would keep it so strayt, as (...) of a^^e in
his bed: would keep it bett^r then do the (...) of Luthers c^^^che, that let
not on the holy (...) to (...) to (...). For as for herynge of goddys word, in
many places in Almayne among their

First in many places they sange the service in their mother tongue, men and
women and all / and that was a pretty sport for them for a while. But after a
little use thereof, the pleasure of the neweltye passed, and they set somewhat
less thereby then by a three man's song. They changed also the mass / and
sone after that many cast it up cle^e.

Then was all their lust laid upon prechynge, specially because every man
might preche that would / saying that they followed the counsel of saint
Paul / while one would bid the precher hold his peace a^^ let him speak a
another while, 1. Ceri. 14
affyrmynge that the spyry^^ (...) reucled him

Tyndale.
And in ceremonies and sacraments there be c^pt yuateth his wit and
vnderstandyng^ to obey holy church, without asking what they mean or
desiring to know / but only cares for the keeping, and looks ever with a
pair of narow eyes and with all his spestacles upon them lest ought be

More.
The ceremonies and sacraments Tyndale makes his mokkynge stokke / but let
him beware by time lest god mokke him again.

Better is it good (...) reader to do the thing yt Tyndale here reproves /
that is to wit a (...) his wit and understanding and ob^^ (...) in the
ceremonies and sacra^^^^^^, and (...) well without ferther search: then to do
as (...) done, that with his curyouse search has s^ (...) pryed upon them,
with betle bro^es and his bryt^^ spectacles of pride and malice, that the
devil has stry^en him stark (...)

Tyndale.
For if the priest should say mas^e, baptyze, or here confession without a
stole about his neck / he would think all were marred, and doubt whyther he
had power to consecrate / and think that the virtue of the mass were l^ste
and that child not well baptized or not baptized at all / and that his
absolucyon were not worth a myte.

More.
This is another ferdell full of lies, and that he woteth well enough. For if
the priest left of his stole / folk would

Tyndale.
He had lever that the byshopes should wagge two fyngers over him / then that
another man should say god save him and so forth.

More.
Blessing of bysshopes Tyndale iesteth upon in mo places then one. And for as
much as he knows well that all christian people have and ever have had a good
faithful believe in blessing, both where a man or woman bless them

For in his book of obedyence, the laynge of the bishops hand upon the
priest in geuynge the sacrament of holy orders, he resembles to the layeng of
a man's hand upon a boys h^d when he calls him good son. And ye
blessing as he calls yt here the waggynge of two fyngers / so he calls yt
there the waggynge of the hand in the air.

How be yt we need not much to marvel though Tyndale

And though that I entende not to prolonge this work

Grego. Nazi.
Saint Gregory Nazianzene the great famous old doctor, writing in his
second oracyon made against the great emperor infydele commonly called
Iulianus apostata, writes that when that man was fallen from the faith of
christ unto paganysme and gentylyte / geuynge him self therewyth not only to
the persecucyon of christian men, but also to the following of every kind of
superstycyouse folly: he took with him on a time certain necroma^cyers, and
went in to a cave to conjure up spyrites, to inquire of them certain things
whereof he was very curyouse to know. And when he was in the pyt among them
with their coniuracyons,

Lo what a force and strength has that fasshyon of blessyng that Tyndale
sets a^ so lyght^ wherein many a man daily fyndeth great profit, in
au^ydynge of temtacions of our goostly enimye the devil, and in many a soden
fere of

And I little doubt but as Tyndale follows Iulianus apostata in falling from
the right faith: so would he at a need follow him also in blessing to. For as
little as Tyndale sets by blessing now: yet if he might ones mete y^ devil
in the dark, he would I warraunte you cross and bless a pace. And I beseech
our lord to give him grace so to bless him self by time, that he mete not the
devil in eternal derkenes, where who so myshape to mete him, ca^ have no
grace to cross and to bless him self / but shall instead of crossynge and
blessing, fall all to cursynge and desperate sorrow and furyouse blasphemynge
without comfort and without end.

Tyndale.
Wherefore beloved reader in as much as the holy gooste rebukes the world for
lack of judgment / and in as much also as their ignorance is without excuse
/ before whose faces enough is set to judge by, if they would open their yies
to se, and not captyuate their understanding to believe lies / and in as much
^s the spyrytuall judges all thing even the very botome of gods secrets,
that is to say the causes of the things which god commands: how much more
ought we to judge our holy fathers secrets, and not to be as an ox or an ass
without understanding.

More.
It appears well that the holy ghost according to the words of our savior
at his last souper, which words Tyndale would falsely wreste a wrye / did
rebuke the Jews and the gentyles for lack of judgment, and that he taught
the church of Christ the true judgment / by which ever synnys before our
days, were either false or folys, and

Now he that would in the declaracyon and understanding of the scripture of
Christ and his apostels, believe such a few flesshly blind apostatas against
so many holy blessed doctors and saints: what excuse could his ignorans have
before god? were not he a very ox and an ass with out wit or understanding?

Tyndale.
Judge therefore christian reader, whyther the pope with his be the church.

More
when Tyndale speaks of the pope with his / here uses he a little sophystrye.
For he leueth us in dowte what he means by these words, the pope with his.
If he mean the pope with his cardynals / then speaks he little to the
purpose. For I never called nor no man else, the pope and the cardynals the
hole catholyke church. But if he mean by the pope and his, the pope and all
the christian reames and countrees that have not by scysmes and heresies departed
and severed them self from ye corpse of crystendome: he that then judges the
pope and his to be the church of christ, judges as it is in deed.

Now if Tyndale bring in questyon whyther the pope be of all those christian
countrees the chyefe spyrytuall head under god and general vycare of christ:
this questyo^ will

And for conclusyon both the Latin church and the Greek

Tyndale.
Judge whyther their author yte be above the scripture, whether all that they
teach without scripture be equal with the scripture, whyther they have erred
and not only whyther they can.

More.
Judge here good reader whyther that Tyndale play ye part of an honest man,
when the power and authoryte which the church ascrybeth unto god and his holy
spyryte / Tyndale would make you believe that they do take and ascrybe it unto
them self.

For no man says that any man is above the word of god / but we say boldly
that his word unwritten is egall and as strong as his word written / and that
he is as well to be byleued without writing as with writing / and that him
self and his holy spyryte, understands his own Matthew. 28. John^. 16
And we say that he keeps, and ^uer has kept, and ever shall keep that
promise. And therefore we say yt he teaches his church all truth / I mean all
truth necessary as him self meant for their salvation, that is to wit all
such thing as he will upon pain of damnacyon have them bounden to believe. I
say also that upon this it must nedys follow, yt all be it our lord does
suffer his church to err in the knowledge of a ^^^te or deed done among men:
yet will he never suffer yt to err and be deceived in the knowledge of his
law, to which he will have it bounden, and in the time in

Then say I ferder that yt consequently follows also, that god shall much
less suffer his church to take for good and pleasynge to god the thing that
is very naught and odyouse unto god and damnable to yt self. For then should

Of these points Tyndale denies us three. One is that any thing is certainly
to be byleued, except only the scripture, and yet that must be as Luther
says euydent open and plain / of which ye contrary has been so often proved
unto him, so euydent, open, and plain, that if Tyndale were not euydent, open,
and plain shameless, his heart would never serve him for very shame to speak
any more of yt point. The t^ther point is, that he denies the catholyke
known church to be the church of Christ, and puts yt in question which is
the church / and finally puts for the church of Criste here militaunt in
earth the only secret unknown folk that are predestynate. The Third is that
he puts also

Tyndale.
And against the myste of their sophystr^ye take the ensamples that are paste
in the old testament, and autentyke st^ryes, and the present practyse which
thou see before thine yies.


we be well content that these things try the myste of both parties / so
that Tyndale take with him one thing or twain more, which I marvel wherefore
he now leueth out, saving that he sees well that they will clearly dyssypate
and dyscusse the myste that he feign would walk in. For else why leueth he
clean out the new testament now. we must pray him that we may take in that to.

And for asmych as we do on both the sides agree upon the text of scripture,
and that the questyo^ much lies whyther Tyndale and his fellows understand it
right or else the hole church of all christian nacyons: we shall pray him to
be content that we may lay forth in y^ behalf the mind of the old holy
doctors and saints, which wrote of these

Tyndale.
Judge whyther yt be possible that any good should come out of their domme
ceremonies and sacraments in to thy soul. Judge their penounce, pysgrymages,
pardones, purgatory, praynge to posts, domme blessings, domme absolucyons,
their domme paterynge and halowynge, their domme strange holy gestures, with
all their domme disgysynges, their satisfaccyons and iustefyenge. And because
thou syndest them false in so many things / trust them in nothing, but i^dge
them in all things.

More.
Judge good christian reader whyther yt be possible that he be any better then a
best / out of whose brutyshe bestely mouth, comes such a filthy foam of
blasphemies against crystes holy ceremonies and blessed sacraments, sent in to
his church out of his own blessed bloody side. And for because ye find this
fellow so frantike and so false in the ray

Tyndale.
Mark at the last the practyse of our fleshely spirytualtye, and their ways
by which they have walked above.viij. ho^dred years / how they stablyshe their
lies first with falsyfyenge the scripture, then through corruptyng with their
riches whereof they have infynyte treasure in story, and last of all with the
sword.

More.
ye mary mark I pray you. For this is much to be marketh lo, yt Tyndale can
not bear the flesshelynes of our spyrytualtye, because the flesshelynes of
their church is spyrytuall.

If Tyndale did not lie now, as blyssed be god he does /

I would also that he had told us how much more then xv.C. years the church
has had false sacraments / lest that yt he calls now more, he shall
hereafter call yet much more. For thereto shall he be feign to fall, or else to
call these.viii.C. bakke again, and confess the sacraments true / or finally
(which he is most lykely to do) babble on still against all reason against all
good men and against all scripture / and so that he be talking never care
what, whereof, nor

Tyndale.
Have they not compelled the emperors of the earth and the great s^rdes and bye
officers, to be obedyent unto them, to dispute for them / and to be their
tormentours / and the samsumyms them selfs do but ymagen myschyef and inspyre
them.

More.
Here is all the great anger that greueth this good man / that either lord,
king, or emperor medleth any thing for the mayntenaunce of the faith, or set
to their hands to the repressynge of heresies.



Tyndale.
Mark whether yt were ever trewer then now. The scrybes, pharyseys, Py^late,
Herod, Cayphas, and Anna / are gathered to gether against god and

More.
Mark now good cryste^ reader when Tyndale has told us that the right faith
is heresye and heresye right faith / and when he weneth that he has made men
so wise, that we would at his word take white for black and black for white,
and god for the devil, and the devil for god: then when he weneth that he
has made men so blind, he byddeth look and mark that all emperors, kings,
princes, lords and prelates, and every kind of christian people that any thing
do or say against heretyques / all they be Pylates, Herodes, Cayphas, and
Annas, and are gathered against Christ says Tyndale, that is to wit in deed
against

For surely good reader though men may have faith and yet lack charity, as
saint Paul says, and saint Iamis to, 1. Cori. 13 Iacobi.2.
every one of which two is worthy more faith and credens, then fyften hundred
thousand Tyndales that tells us the contrary / but though a man may as I
say have faith and lack charity: yet if he lack faith, he may well have
love, but he can not have no charity.

And therefore sith Tyndale is thus run out of ye right faith / never trust
his false love lakkyng charity. For surely

And even in this place he makes a manner of mocyo^ thereof, showing him self
to have some trust to work wonders at length. For he makes as though ye
princes yt would repress heresies were as Absolon with his army and achytophell
therein, that preserve king David / as though friar Luther and his wife, with
his fond fellows and their le^mans, were like to king David and his host. And
then has Tyndale a trust that some Chusye that is some chyeftayn of Luthers
counsel, which he means as yt seems shall be him self / shall by his high
wisdom make as though he were a faithful

Tyndale.
Mark whyther yt be not true in the highest degree, that for the sin of the

More.
Tyndale is a great marker / there is nothing with him now but mark, mark,
mark. It is pytye yt the man were not made a marker of chases in some tenys
play. For in good faith he should be therein much better occupied than he is in
this / when he sytteth and marketh all other mennis fautes and leueth his own
unmarked / which every other man marketh well enough.

He byddeth the people mark that their princes are hypocrytes in the highest
degree / and so he teaches their

Tyndale.
Wherefore yt is time to a wake and se every man with his own eyes and to
judge, if we will not be judged of Christ when he comes to judge. And remember
that he which is warned has none excuse, if he take no head. Here with fare
well in the lord Jesu Christ, whose spyryte be thy gyde and doctrine thy lygth
to judge with all. Amen.

More
Tyndale never spoke better then he does even here. For

But mary now god has (lawd and thank be to him) brought these fellows and
their heresies in a another case. For he has suffered them of his high goodness
to show the^ self at last, and to fall in to such open bestely fawtes,
frerys and nuns crepyng to bed to gyther, and then to preche and teache
their shameless lechery boldly about for god and laufull matrymony, that they
have thereby now set out their gere so syghtely, that every man may well and
plainly se such open rybawdry with his own eyes, and well and easily judge
the thing for sin and bestely bychery, and the defense thereof for a
shameful shameless heresye, and the prechers thereof for more then monstruose
heretykes. And therefore of this be Tyndales words well verefyed / that every
man

And therefore when Tyndale closes up his preface with a solemn threte /
bidding men to remember now that he which is warned has none excuse if he
take none head: he says as true as the gospel but all against him self. For
this open heresye of frerys fylthy matrymony gives us so plain and open
warning of their worldly flesshly deuylysshe spyryte, so plain against all
holy scripture and all good honest men: that we never could have excuse before

And therefore good christian reders, sith holy scripture has warned you of such
techers as Tyndale is yt techeth such bestely weddyng with contempt of their
holy vowys made before to god / and sith that all holy men that have the very
broad way to lead men to hell: so is those holy saints exposycyons with the
virtues that they taught and

Thus ends the first book.

An answer unto the first chapyter of Tyndales book, why he tra^slateth this
word church in to this word congregation.
IN the beginning of my dialoge I showed that Tyndales translacyon of the new
testament was well worthy to be burned

For every man well sees that there was never english book of heresye sent
hither syn^ys (as there has been many, some partycularly against the blessed
sacrament of the auter, as was the deuelyshe dialoge of the father and ye
son,

So was yt now that among other tokens of Tyndales

Now showed I there the causes why Tyndale did evil in translatynge the
scripture in to our tongue with such manner chau^ges / and showed also the
things that might well make every man perceive that he meant therein the
setting

Now comes Tyndale and for answer thereof, and to dysproue all that I lay
against him in the translatynge of diverse of these words: shows that the
latin text and the greek may be his excuse and defense / for as much as ye
words in ye laten text and the greek, do as he says sygnyfye such things
as he has expressed in his english translacyon, by those english words
that I find the fault in.

But yet to the intent ye may the better perceive how wisely the man defends
the matter, in such wise as he shows both lakke of lernyng, and more lakke
of wit, and most lakke of grace: he does at the last confess him self
that he made the chaunges for the setting forth of his heresies / which was
the point that I laid to his charge, as the very thing for which his
translacyon was very well worthy to be burned.

Now let us first consider how he defends his change of this word church
in to this word congregacyon.

First to enduce the matter as though he went about to make every thing very
open and plain: he tells us a

Then he says it has a second sygnyfycacyon, but that is he says but mysse
taken and abused by which it sygnyfyeth the clergy / whom it pleases to him
in his raylynge manner to call a multitude of shaven, shorn, and oyled / in
mokkage and reprefe not so much of the prestes, as of the holy order of
presthode.

A third sygnyfycacyon he says it has / by which it betokens

Tyndale.
Not wythstandynge yet yt is some time taken generally, for all that embrace
the name of Criste though their faythes be naught, or though they have no faith
at all. And sometimes yt is taken specially for the elect only / in

More.
Lo now ye have herd how many manner of wise Tyndale teaches us that this word
church is taken. In which yet he has left out one sygnyfycacyone or twayen
yt this word plainly sygnyfyeth. One is that this word church beside all the
sygnyfycacyons that Tyndale has here showed us: does syginfye that part of
the church that in synodis and cou^sayles do represent the whole church. As
when we say that there is a law made by the church that heretics shall not be
sufferd to preach / like wise as a parliament rep^senteth ye hole reame, and is
by the comen speech so called to / as when we say yt the realm has made a law
that heretics shall be burned.

The church also sygnifyeth sometime a much less number that is to wit / the
only rulers or hedes of the church. as where we be commanded to complain to
the church / yt is not meant to all ye whole town nor to all the clergy thereof,
of, but to rulers and governors. Sith Tyndale has taken upon him to show us
here his high doctrine, how many manner of wise this word church is taken: yt
bylonged rather unto him to have taken in these sygnifycacio^s, then some of
them that he has taken as ye shall se anon

But first I marvel me much that Tyndall has either clean left out or else
put in so darkely, yt he would not have yt perceived that sygnyfycacyon of this
word church, that is one of the pryncypall sygnyfycacyons thereof, and whereupon
the greteste wayght of all our matter depends. And yt

For as for that he says in his fore remembered note: he seems but to set a
specifycacyon of his third sygnifycacion, as though he would mean yt for ye
hole number of cyteseyns, or else for the only number of the electys with in
some one city, as he there puts London for his example. And if

How be yt of troth Tyndale handeleth his third sygnyfycacyon very secundely,
and fares as one that would feign walk in the dark. For the places of
scripture seem to speak of only christian people in this place and that. But his
descrypcyon of ye church in that sygnifycacyon goes far otherwise. For when he
says that yt sygnifyeth not only the clergy but the hole congregacyon,
multitude, or company gathered in to one / as a man would say the church of

Nor now also if Tyndale would speak of the church of London, where all the
hole town is christian people: there would no man understand thereby the hole
body of the cite, but the clergy only / nor no man Tyndale except in
speaking would so mean. But this darkness uses Tyndale / because he would
have it seem yt this word church, which in the english tongue has ever had
a good sygnyfycacyon and an holy in mennys hertes: should seem to have sometime
the contrary. Out of which darkness I shall draw Tyndale anon I trust / and
according to my poetry wherein he mokketh me, pull up cerberouse in to the
light.

But now let us first consider a little his first sygnyfycyon, where he says,
yt sygnyfyeth a place whereunto christian people were wont in the old time to
resort at times conuenyent, for to here the word of doctrine, the law of god,
and the faith of our savior Christ, and how and what to pray, and whense to
ask power and strength to live godly.

why says Tyndale here in the old time / for all this we do in the new time
to, how so ever Tyndale list to lie.

Then goes he ferther and lies on lustely, saying that of Crystes promyses
nor of his mercy we know no thing at all / as though no man had here herd
ever any thing spoken, that mankind is redeemed by Crystes passion, and that he
has ordained his holy sacraments, and promised men grace that with faith and
devotion receive them. Is not this man shameless so boldly to bear us all in
hand, that

For every child that is of competent age / has herd yt god gives by his
holy ordinance (which ever includes his promise) grace with all his.vii.
sacraments / where as Tyndale of seven takes it a way fro five, and from
almost one and an half of the the other twain to.

Every boy byleueth, and byleueth true / that god has promised reward to good
works. And Tyndale will not believe y^ promise at all / but denies it
plainly, as plainly as god says it him self in many places of the very
gospel.

But then on the the other side Tyndale tells us, that god has promised always
to every man the bliss of heaven for only faith alone. And here every boy
byleueth and woteth

Now towchynge the mercy of our lord / who can speak of Crystes passion and
speak nothing of his mercy? This man is to mad to talk with. Goddys mercy is
so great that no man can speak inoughe thereof. But the world waxes such now
a days / y^ as it is need to pray for mercy, so were it need to preche of
goddys justice, and put the people in mind of his wrath and indygnacyon
lykely to fall upon us, if we give ear to such dedely do^^ryne as Tyndale
techeth / and I pray god of his great mercy to give that man a better mind.

yet goes he ferther and says, that of the law of god we think as did the
Turks and the old Hethen people / that it is a thing which

what cares Tyndale what he say / that cares not to write this, wherein
every man's earys that would him well, glowe for very shame that here him.
where herd he ever any man say, that any man may fulfill the law of god of
his own power. Mary this we say and say trowth, ye man has such power
given of god that he may work with gods grace in the keeping of the law.
But this can not Tyndale bear / for their heresye is, that man toward ye
keeping of goddys precepte, has no fre will at all / and now dyssymylynge his
own heresye he dedely byleyth us.

Now of prayour he says, we thynhe that no man may pray but at church / and
that it is nothing else but to say a pater noster to a post / and that the
obseruaunces and ceremonies of the church are vain things

Those lies come in by lumpes lo. I dare say he never herd in his life man
nor woman say, that no man may pray but at church.

As true is it also that men say their pater noster to the post / by which
name it pleases him of his reverent cryste^ mind to call the images of holy
fayntes and our blyssed lady, and the figure of Crystes cross, the book of
his bitter passion.

Though we reverence these in honor of the things which they represent / and
in the remembrauns of Christ do crepe to the cross and kiss it and say a
pater noster at it: yet say we not the pater noster to it but to god / and
that

As for that he says of the service, ceremonies, and obseruau^ces of the
church, which he calls here vain ymagynacyons, howlynge, buzsynge, and
cryenge out like halowynges of the foxes or baytynge of berys, and thus he
says it is now / but of old time he says yt the officers appointed there
unto, preched the pure word of god only, and prayed in a tongue that every man
understood.

As for prechynge of the pure word of god: I must wit of Tyndale whyther he
mean the word written or unwritten or both. If he say they preched the word
of god both written and unwritten and only that: then I say so do we now to.
Peradventure he will say that the precheours now lay thereto the ^ide holy
doctors: I say that therein they lay but gods word / for they lay them
for the better understanding

Then if Tyndale will say that our preacheours preche Aristotle, philosophers,
and poets: thereto I say that they sometime speak of philosophers in things
of nature or of moral virtues. And if this new apostle now saint Tyndale take
this thing for so great an heyghnouse crime: the^ Titi. 1
And in his epistle to Titus he took yt for no sin to allege the poets
versys / but in ye disprayse of them of Crete for vsyng of Tyndales fasshyo^ in
lyenge, and also in geuynge the world warnyng to beware of such as Tyndale is
/ whose evil words and sermons do corrupt and mar mennys good manners as
his does, where he would make men wene that good manners were nothing worth.
And thus if Tyndale grant the tone part / that is to say that of old time
they preched both the word of god written and unwritten: then he wynneth
nothing /

Now if he will not say they preched both of old time / but that of old time
they preched only the tone, that is to wit the word of god written: then must
we wit of Tyndale which he calls the old time. For this I wot well and so
does Tyndale to, that first of all, Christ our savior him self preched more
then his word written, and promised also without writing, and was byleued
then without writing, that he would send the holy ghost that should teach his
church all truth without writing / and Christ full trewly fulfilled his promise
without writing / and yet will not Tyndale now believe him without writing /
and after Cristes death did his apostles preach much more of gods

But now if Tyndale be not content to stand to yt old time / and will say
that he spoke of old time but not of so ^lde: then ^yth he compares the old
time with this time that is now, we must ask him which time is that which he
takes for ye old time in respect of this new time now. we call an old man
ye wot well at fourscore year, and at an hundred year very old. will Tyndale
stand to y^ time? will he stand at two hundred, iii. hundred, iiii, v, vi,
vii, viii? Nay surely he will none of all those hu^dredes. For he says in his
preface that all this eyghte hundred year and above / the prechours have been
false, and have falsyfyed the scripture. Now seems me that eyghte hundred year
is in respect of now a metely old time. And sith he says yt by all this old

Now will he make many shy^^es / and ^^ the last he shall be feign to fall
both into his own poe^^y, and also in to his grammar again / and come forth
with his.iii. degrees of compacyson, old, elder, and eldest. And sith neither
the oldest (...) of Christ and his apostels a^ay^ serve him, because the (...)
beside scryp^t^^e the ^^orde of god (...) t^n / nor (...) ty^^ of eygh^^ (...)
y^res now la^ste passed, because they preched as Tyndale says diverse
sacraments,

Now if this made Tyndale bold to set Origene as short as his old shone,
because saint Hierome found some fautes in his works: he must remember
again that many a good man, and among those saint Pamphilus the blessed
martyr / found in Origenes doctrine so much er^dycyon, devotion, and virtue,
bysyde that they verily thought those errors none of his / nor never were
there any such fa^tes

But granted now that those fa^tes were his which were imputed unto him, yet
is this none of the^. But saint (...) so will I bring in with him some other
that I have named /

But now will I for ye mean while touching this point wheruppo^ ye great
wayghte of all the matter hangs, go nerer unto Tyndale a another way.

It is ye wot well agreed between us / or if he would be so mad to say nay,
ye will yet your self agree this in his stead: that ones of old time Christ
him self and his apostles did teach and preach many words of god unwritten.

Now thus I say, sith many things were tought first unwritten if any of them be
yet left unwritten / then say I that Tyndale is at the least wy^e temerariouse
and over bold,

To this will Tyndall answer, that sy^^^^ that time all gods words,
promyses, and sacraments that he would

(...)

Now to say that if he should have left some unwritten, it would have made
dowtes and debates and be occasyons of errors and heresies / and the writing
does put all things out of dowte, and therefore god has left none unwritten:
we se that this makes neither more sure nor less. For as well did men believe
before the writing those things that are now written, as ever they did synnys /
and we believe now the promyses as well that are unwritten as any

For first the credence to be given to the hole book in which they be written
/ hangs all upon the same faith upon which dependen the things that are
unwritten. For as I believe the tone so believe I the the other. And as one may by
his own frowardnes lakke the grace to believe ye things unwritten: so may a
another by his own malice lakke the grace to believe any part of the hole book
of holy scripture that is wryte^ / and take it all for fantasyes. And in good
says I am aferd y^ so do they which say they believe nothing else but it. For
as for part of ye book they bring in que^^y^^ / (...) book of the Machabees,
by cause it makes questyon / as against their purpose concerning purgatory.

Now in that parts which they grant for scripture: yet takes it not away
all the dowtes. But unto such folk as Tyndale is and Luther, that be so
contencyouse: it mynystreth rather much matter of dowte and of debate, and that
much more then do the things that are observed without writing.

For first they refuse to observe them, because they say they find them not
there written / and so ryseth that questyon first upon the writing.

Then if it be founden there: then dyspute they whyther it be fully founden
there / as whyther we find there both ye

So that as for necessyte of writing all or any part concerning

To this will Tyndale happily say (for else can not I se what he can say) that
god has caused all his words spoken to his church to be written in holy
scripture / and has in the same scripture given us plain warning that he so
has done / and thereby has he delivered us from diverse dowtes though not
from all. For all be it ye diverse dowte^

Surely if Tyndale tell me this tale as in deed he does / for both Luther and
he and friar Huskyn and Swynglius, and all the rabble of that rascayle / never
ceace to say this / and they find folys that believe them better upon their
bare words, then they would more honest me^ upon their obligacyo^s / but now
as I say if Tyndale tell me this tale: I shall by his leave be bold to deny yt
him / and pray him onys to prove yt if he can find how. For this I wot well,
they have among them made great boste a great while / and always promised that
they will byeld up that tower / and

But to thentent that they shall not bygyle you: let us with one word or
two put them in remembrance what things they be that they must needs prove,
and that by plain scripture to / for other proof them self will none admytte.

Tyndale must prove me first therefore by plain and euydent he has caused to
be also secretly set in and written

Remember now good reader that these be the things which Tyndale has to
prove. And when he proves these few things / then believe him hardely and so
will I do to. But surely who so believe him with any less / under stands
nothing what the matter means.

Now yet ones again let us consider Tyndales old time / in which he says
the true pure preaching was used that is now quyte gone. I would ask him when
ended that old time of his / and when began his new. He says yt has been
thus as yt is more then this.viii. hundred years / and me thinks.viii.
hundred is a very long now. But yet consider good reader if the true
preaching was left and gone.viii. year a go and more: then can he not say nay
but that the true faith went quyte away therewith / without

Now till Tyndale therefore have proved us these few points yt are for their
falsehed impossyble to be proved: the church shall not need for his fond
raylynge any thing to fere, to use the devout sacraments and ceremonies
taught

But now does all good cryste^ people very well perceive by Crystes own
promise in the very written gospel / that the church of Christ is taught by
his holy spyryte, yt these sacraments and ceremonies do please god. And they
perceive and se also that the holy saints which have used them before our
days / be now long a go rewarded in heuyn with god. And they perceive also
that in ye use thereof / their minds risen and be lift up a lofte in
devotion to god / and b^ these things and such like they perceive well

And it is thyrdely very profitable to the very tamynge ^f the flesh ^lso.
For what thing is there that better (...) flesh then the grace of god. Did
not god (...) ^a^le when he thryes prayed unto him to 2. Cori. 12
with which our lord suffered (...) angel^ of Satan to vex him, lest his
heart (...) wax proud in beholdynge the (...) of his reuelacyons / which
though (...) for some other kind of trybulacyon, (...) the very flesshely
mocy^n (...) not then our lord I say (...) S^ffyseth unto the my (...) then
sy^h (...) can better ^ame the flesh (...) god / which not only can tame it
but also (...) so resysted by the soul, that the (...) to ^^ryte and (...) why
shall (...) as the spyryte of good has (...) which obedyently done with
devotion and with desire of grate, do stand in the

Now where he says that of old time the officers appointed thereto, prayed in
a to^g that all folk understood / of which point Tyndale makes much a do,
and many times he speaks thereof, because he would feign have his false
translacyon brought in to the church to be there said and songen a goddys
half: I will not say nay but th^^ in Greece and great part of Italy, they
both said in the beginning the service of the church i^ their own tongue.
But so did they not neither in Affryke, nor in

And surely if all the service were in english: yet would yt not thereby be much
the more understood / which was all the matter that saint Paul spoke. For
many that now do understand the laten tongue, do little yet understand ye
sentence, farther then the bare stories and collettes.

But like wise as in some words that remain still untranslated

And therefore where as Tyndale says that there is nothing

But in their church in Almayne, there is a another manner of howlynge and
halowynge and cryenge out. For where as we with holy words and true faith
hawle and halowe out the false fox, and bayte out the rugged bear the devil:
you Tyndale in your chyrches of heretyques, cry out as loud as we and louder
to / for ye cry out men and women and all. (...) with your heresies hawle out
all saints and bayte (...) holy sacraments and (...) out god and all.

If (...) that is peradventure mysse used in some places / where happily

As for song I se not why he should utterly dysprayse in gods service /
which was a thing not only used in the old law but the new to, as well
appears by saint Paul in his first epistle to the Corinthyes. As for harpes
and instruments of musyke / the scripture shows yt openly both in the
psalms and many other places of scripture / bysyde dawnsynge to, Psalm. 150 1.
Paralip. 13 2. Regum. 6
which is more then men use here now.

But Tyndale can be pleased with no fasshyon neither cathedral church, nor
paryshe church, nor chapel, nor monks, nor freres, nor no^nes, neither
Grenewych, Syon, nor charterhouse. If the quere be loud: then they cry out.
If they sing any thing: yet they halow and bayte. If they do but say so^^e:
yet they buzse / so that I se well no fasshy^ can please Ty^^^le but his own:
for as he, neither cries out, nor haloweth, nor bayteth, nor b^zseth in any
seruy^e saying. For as they say yt know him: he says none at alles neither
matens, euyns^nge, nor mass / nor comes at no church but either to gase or
talk.

But good cryste^ people whom he belyeth and says that they wene no m^n may
pr^y but at church: they pray both at c^yrch and at home / but yet more gladly
at ^^yrche. For

(...) Matthew. 21
Danielis.5
much worse then king Balthazare abused the hallowed vessels of the temple,
to serve his own proud execrable glotony.

And when they have thus robbed ye chyrches: then lodge they formore dyspyghte
their frerys and their nonnes in them / and of an hallowed church they make a
stynkyng stewys. And this is yet one sygnifycacyo^ more that Tyndales master
has made a church to sygnyfye scilicet a bordele for brothelys anglice a
stewys / which sygnifycacyon also Tyndale has here left out.


IN the second chapyter Tyndale says, that he changed this word church in
to this word congregacyon in the new tes^^ment where he found this word
ecclesia in latin / because that the clergy had he says brought the people in
to the igno^^uns of the true sygnyfycacyon of this (...) church, making them
understand thereby no thing but the clergy.

(...) is (...) false what so ever Tyndale say. For all be it that men call the
clergy by the name of ye church, not given them self the name. The word is
english / and

And the spyrytualtye again ward do plainly declare, and ever have declared
in their prechynge / that the name is general and comune both to the
temporalte and them / and at large they declare the diverse parts of the
church, and therein reken them self but for one. And this name so used by the
temporaltye of their own humylyte and reverence

But now that thing y^ good folk have of good mind bygonne, and many hundred
yerys contynu^d / Tyndale as one of a another sort would have utterly changed
/ and rather then ley men should have any such reverent mind to prestys as to
call them the church he would take it from the^ both / and putting away from
both that holy name of church, would call them both by the name of
congregacyo^, a word without any sygnyfycacyon of crystendome any more then
of Iewys or Turks.

Tyndale
To this an^wereth Tyndale and says, if this word congregacyon were a more
general term then this word church: yt hurts not, for the circu^staunce
does ever declare what thing is meant thereby.

More.
If the setting of the cyrcu^staunce make all well inoughe he needs not much
to care what word he chaunge^^ nor how. For he may set such cyrcumstaunces
of (...) deuyce / that he may make men perceive what h^ means. For so he
may translate the world in to ^ ^o^eball if he join therwyth certain (...),
and say this rownderollynge foteball that (...) upon (...) sail upon, in
the people whereof there is no (...) stabylyte, and so forth a great long
tale / with (...)staunces

These circumstaunces in deed make men to perceive and understand, what
Tyndale means by this word congregacyon put in his t^anslacyon in the stead
of church. And they p^^cyue clearly by these cyrcum^^aunces, that he changed
that word of purpose to set forth those he^esyes

^

Tyndale.
For whereso ever says he that I may say a congregacyon / there I may say
a church also / as the church of the deuy^l, the church of Satan, the church
of wreches, the church of wykked men, the church of ly^rs, and a church of
Turks thereto.

More.
This is lustely said of Tyndale add like a man. But yt pleases him not to
consyde^ that I said yt this word congregacyon is indyffere^^ unto Turks and
christian men and unto all other companyes and a company of christian men, so that
yt as well sygnifyeth a company of Turks as of christian men / and that this
word church does sygnifye a company of christian people, and is not indyfferent
to a company of Turks and of christian men. And I said and yet I say, that this
is true of ye usual sygnifycacyon of these words

This was and is the thing that I said and say. Now in saying this / I do not
say untrue, though Tyndale be at his lybertye to call a church what him
list. For never ^ayed I the contrary, but ye Tyndale where so ever he may
say a congregacyon there he may say a church to. For though none english
men be wont to speak so, nor in the comune spech the word sygnyfyeth not so,
nor of ye church that he should in his translacyo^ have meant of, no good man
will say so: yet may Tyndale say so, the church of Satan,

But now though Tyndale may thus say for his pleasure which I deny not: yet
can he not say that this is the proper sygnyfycacyon of that word, which is
the thing that a translatour must regard. But it is a certey^e figure and
manner of speaking, by which men use among to express a thing by his
contra^y / as a man might say this is the wisdom of a fool / this is the
troth of a false shrew / this is the faith of an heretyke. Thus may Tyndale
abuse the holy name of church to any lewd thing that he list / but this is
not the part of a tr^nslatour.



Tyndale.
M. More must nedys (...) have ecclesia translated through out all the new
test^ment by thi^ (...) church) that church is as comen as ^^clesi^. Now is
eccle^i^ a greek ^^rde, and was in use before the time of (...), and taken for
a cong^eg^cyon among the Hethen, where no (...) (...) or of Christ. And also
Luke him self uses ecclesia for(...) of Hethen people^ thryes in one
chapyter, even in (...) Demetrius the goldsmyth o^ syl^^rsmyth had gathered a
(...).

More.
Let us now bygynne at the first piece and ye shall se what he has / M. More
must needs grant that church is as comen as ecclesia, if he will have this
word ecclesia through out all the new testament translated by this word
church.

First I say that master More must not nedys grant this to Tyndale never a
whytte. For if he turn it from a condycyonall proposycyon in to an affyrmatyue
antecedent and consequent: it shall sone be showed him that his consequent were
possible to be false and his antecedent true. For it might be that this word
ecclesia did sygnyfy m^ things then the writers of the new testament had
occasyo^ to speak of within y^ same. And then though I would grant unto
Tyndale that this word ecclesia should thorowout the new testament be
translated by this word church: yet must eccle^ia, because it should not yet
sygnyfye those other sygnyfycacyons of ecclesia that were not spoken of within
the new testament. And thus where Tyndale would upon such an antecedent
bind me by and by of necessyte to his consequent: it appears that though I
granted him the tone / I must not nedys for all his great word grant him
the the other at all.

But now though I must not nedys yet will I grant him of courtesye / that if
I will have ecclesia translated through out all the new testament by this word
chyr^he^ y^ then I must nedys grant this term church to be as comen, and
sygnifye as large and as many th^^ges as this term ecclesia. But now when I
that must not nedys grant ecclesia through out the new testament translated by
this word c^^^che y^ then Tyndale in all his gay tale tells us nothy^^e to
purpose. But that argument is now like as if he would have argued thus: If
master More will graun^^ me that every horse is a goose: then must he nedys
gr^^nte me that every mare must have a gander to get her (...) ^ole. For I need
not to grant him the thy^^^ that he ^^pposeth.

Now tell I Tyndale that in no wise I ^yll not have it so / and that I never
told him that (...) have so. ^u^ I say plainly that if he sh^l^e tho^^ ^o^t
(...) the (...) stament translate this word e^clesia by this word (...)

And for because that Tyndale either evil perceyueth my words, or else evil
remembered them / or finally which is most lykely, would wyllyngly make the
reader to take them wrong: I will desire the reader to look upon the place
him self, which is y^.viii. chapyter of the third book / and there shall he
find that I find the fault, not in that he translateth this word ecclesia
sometime in to this word congregacyon, but that he changes this word church
in to this word congregacyon, that is to say, that he translateth this word
ecclesia in to this word co^gregacyon, in such places as he should have
translated yt in to this word church / that is where so ever he has put this
word congregacyon for the company of christian people / for that company is in

This is the fault that I find, and tell Tyndale in that chapyter good and
plain causes wherefore, which Tyndale here lets slyppe.

But I would in no wise that as Tyndale takes me / ecclesia should always be
translated by this word church, for that were also wrong. For truth it is
that ecclesia sygnifyeth in the greek tongue a congregacyon, without respect of
either good or bad christian or vncrysten. For Tyndale says therein truth, that
the word ecclesia was used a thousand year before crystendome byganne as the
books prove. But yt will be hard to prove and warraunt that this word church
was used for any congregacyon before cri^tendome began, ecclesia is little worth
/ sith it proceeds not in likewise in this word church

And yet tou^chynge this word ecclesia/as conning as Tyndale would seem therein
with his greek and all: he seems bu^ porely to perceive yt. For ye shall
understand that this word ecclesia in the greek tongue did not sygnyfye every
man ^^^^^^upany or congregacyon, nor sygnyfyed not all the cytesay^^ of a^y
city, with that respect that they were cyte^^^^^s of ^hat^yty, or that they
were gathered for playeng or (...) any such other ca^se: but only these
congr^ga^^^^ (...) ^ere gather^d to g^ther to common upon (...) either about
the comen (...) peace or wa^re or some other commodyte, or for pryuate folks
besynes in such places

Now for as myche as christian people did resort to gether among them self to
prayour and preaching, and making of good ordynaunces delivered them by the
apostles: this name of ecclesia was applied unto y^ co^gregacyon of the christian
company. And though yt began of such assembles together: yet afterward yt
obtained also, both among the Greeks and Latins crystened, to sygnyfye the
christian folk whyther they were at church or at home, and to sygnyfye also the
universal number of all christian people through out all the world / where as it
sygnifyed no such manner of thing among the paynyms before, but only their
several assembles concio. And yet took the laten chirch the greek word
ecclesia of the greek church that began before them / and never used this
word concio, which sygnyfyed among the latin paynyms, both the congregacyon
or assembly, and the oracyon also that any man pronounced among them in the
same assembly.

Now may ye perceive that Tyndale with all his greek told you but a lame tale.
For he tells you not what manner of congregacyon ecclesia did sygnyfye in the
greek / but mysse takes yt to sygnyfye every manner of congregacyon at
adventure.

And by this ye may also perceive how little yt makes for his purpose, that
saint Luke whereof Tyndale so bosteth ecclesia thryes in one chapyter of the
acts, the co^gregacyon that was gathered in Ephese against saint Paul. For
that was such a congregacyon as I tell you, that ecclesia properly sygnifyed
among y^ paynyms / saving that they gathered to gether upon a rumor and not
after their customable calling.

Now though the church was then newly bygonne to be called by the same name of
ecclesia, and that after thexample of the the other assembly, and the name not
taken from the the other assemblye, nor they^ assembly for such matters called by
none other: how would Tyndale have had saint Luke tell the tale but by such
words as then represented the matter? But that makes nothing for his purpose,
but (...) ecclesia, did there sygnyfy that congregacyon of the Ephesyans which
were paynyms / and therefore in that place ought not to be translated by this
word church, which sygnifyeth only a christian co^gregacyon and not a
co^gregacyon of paynyms: so should ecclesia in like wise whereso ever yt
sygnyfyeth a christian congregacyon, be translated by this word church / which
is and ever has been the word that sins crystendome first began among
english men has always served therefore / and not be translated by this word
co^gregacyon, which word of congregacyon is a word of latin, and sygnyfyeth a
sort gathered to gether in to one floke, as they speak, in gregem oui uin,
gregem gruum, gregem anserum. And so when Tyndale has all said and all done /
this word congregation, except some

But yet the change of the word, if Tyndale had done it either of chance or
of purpose for his pleasure, and for none evil purpose: I would never have
spoken word against it. But for as much as I perceive y^ he has been with
Luther, and was to at the same time when he so translated it / and that I knew
well the malycyouse heresies that Luther began to bring forth: therefore must
I nedys myssetruste

And now I say that even of his own words spoken here / ye may in his
trans^acyons perceive his cancred mind. For he says that Demetrius had
gathered a company against Paul for prechynge against images. Here may ye
christian reader well perceive the poison of this serpent. It is to no man
unknown that all good christian people do both abhor the Idols of the false
Paynyme gods, and honor also the images of Christ and our lady and other
holy saints. And as they call the tone sort ymagys: so call they the the other
sort Idollys. Now where as saint Paul preched there against idols: comes
this good man and says he preched against images.

And as he sp^keth here / even so he translateth. For in y^ fyfte chapyter of
saint Paul to the Corynthyes, where

Now sees he well enough, that saint Paul spoke not of images but of idols /
and he perceived both that he so did, and also wherefore he so did, by his other
words written in the tenth chapyter of the same pystle / where saint Paul
speaking of the meat offered unto idols which he would y^

This only text of saint Paul is enough to answer all the hole hepe of
heretyques, that bark against holy ymagys that good men honor for goddys
sake. For saint Paul here shows that the cause why the worshyppynge of idols
was unlawful among the gentyles or Paynyms / was because that the worship y^
was done to those idols, was done to deuylys. And why, but for because that it
was done to those idols for the love and honor that they bare

But so it is on the the other side, that good folk which worship images of
Christ and his saints: do worship thereby Christ and his saints whom those
ymagys represente. wherefore it follows that like wise as the p^^^yms
worshyppers of idols did evil in the worshyppynge of them, because that in the
worshyppynge of them they worshypped deuyls: right so do the christian men well
in y^ worshyppynge of images, because that in the worshyppyng of images they
worship Christ and his holy saints. And now ye se good christian readers that
this one place of say^^ Paul so plainly reproves all these heretykes that
(...)

But Tyndale to blind the reader with / has corrupted in his translacyon all
this place of saint Paul also, and has in every place put out idol and
set in image / to make the reader wene that saint Paul speak all this
against images / which he so speaks against y^ paynyms idols, that his
reason which he makes against them, does op^nly commend and conform the
christian wurshyppynge of holy saints images. And here may ye se what a true
translacyon Tyndales is, and for what purpose he translateth yt false / and god
prouydeth that the scripture which he falsyfyeth, openly fyghteth against him.

This pageaunt has he played also shamefully falsyfyenge

Now comes me Tyndale, and in dyspyght of holy images he has translated that
place in this wise: Thou abhorrest images and take from god his honor. Here
ye se Tyndales truth lo. Did saint Paul say so? did saint Paul mean so?
did the Jews abhor images? they abhorted idols but not images. They
abhorred not in y^ arch

what shyft shall Tyndale find now? will he say that idols and images be all
one, because that idols be a kind of images, and image is a term indyfferent
to good and badde. For a man may say and image of the devil as well as an
image of god.

Tyndale shall I think find no reader so sle^^erly wytted to su^^er him skape
so. For though idols be of y^ kind of images / yet sith they be such a
special kind, as always to christian me^nys ears do sygnyfy evil images and
deuelyshe: he

And if ye Tyndale would styffely stykke in this point and abide there by / yt
his tra^slacyon of idol in to image is good enough because idols be images:
the^ sith ye devils be angels as in deed they be by nature, and evil angels be
angels still / Tyndale may at his pleasure translate ye devil in to angel
without any other addicio^ where pste/ye through out all ye gospels scraped out
diabolus and wrote Jesus Cristus, because he thought ye deuyls name was not
mete to stand in so good a place. And thus I think yt every child may now
perceive / with how little lernyng and less wit, and lest truth, Tyndale has
translated this word ecclesia in to congregation instead of church / and yt he
has so substancyally defended yt, y^ in the mayntenaunce of one false folly, he
is now founden in twain. For by a like manner as he falsely translated ecclesia
in to ye unknown name of co^gregacyon, in such places as he should have
translated yt in to ye holy known name of church, and y^ he this has done of
a malicyouse purpose to set forth his heresy of y^ secret unknown church,
wherein is neither good works nor sacraments: so is it now proved yt in the
same wise and of like malice, has he translated

In the end of this chapyter Tyndale tells me, yt I have been so long used
in my fygures of poetry / that when I err most, I do now as he supposes by
reason of a long custume, believe my self y^ I say most true / or else as wise
people when they dau^ce naked in a net, believe yt no man se the^: eue^ so he
says y^ I think mine errors so subtly couched, yt no man ca^ spy the^. As
for mine errors how subtly they be cowched I ca^ not tell / nor what other
me^ (...)spy I ca^ not say. But surely if I coud spy any i my writi^g my
self: I would not fail both to confess it to god and y^ world and forsake it.
Now

And yet if poetrye be as Tyndale calls it, nothing but faynynge and lyenge:
then is he conning enough and can I assure you make as much poetry upon any
part of scripture, as any poet can in england upon any part of Uirgill.
And he uses in his writing much plain poetrye,

Then he asks me why I have not co^tended with Erasmus whom he calls my
derlynge, of all this long while for translatynge of this word ecclesia in to
this word congregatio. And then he comes forth with his fete proper taunte,
that I ^auour him of lykelyhed for making of his boks of Maris in my house.
There had he hit melo save for lakke of a little salt. I have not contended
with Erasmus my derlynge, because I found no such malycyouse intent with
Erasmus my derlynge, as I find with Tyndale. For had I fownde with Erasmus my
derlyng the shrewde

Now for his translacyon of ecclesia by congregatio/his deed is nothing like
Tyndals. For ye laten tongue had no laten word before used for the church, but
the greek word ecclesia/therefore Erasmus in his new translacyon gave it a laten

As touching Moria in which Erasmus under the name

For all be yt that yt be lawful to any man to mysselyke the mysseuse of every
good thing / and that in my dyaloge there not only those evil things
rehearsed but answered also and soyled / and the goodness of the thing self well
used is plainly confyrmed and proved: yet has Tyndale by erronyouse books in
setting forth Luthers pestylent heresies, so enuenemed the hearts of lewdly
disposed persons / y^

And therefore in these days in which Tyndale has (god amend him) with
thenfeccion of his co^tagyouse heresies, so sore poysened malycyouse and
newfangle folk / that the kings hyghnes and not without the counsel and
aduyce not of his nobles only, with his other counsaylours attendynge upon
his gracys person / but also of the right virtuous and special well learned
men of either university and other parties of the realm specially called
thereto, has after dylygent and long consyderacyon had therein, ben feign
for the while to prohybyte the scripture of god to be sufferd in english tongue
among the peoples hands / lest evil folk by false drawyng of every good
thing they read

But now after this Tyndale handeleth me full vncourtesly / for

Now if the spyritualtye had been about to have gathered a dysme among them
and give yt me: Tyndale here had lost yt me every penny. But god forgive the
good man and I do. For when he speaks of my lucre / in good faith he makes me
laugh / and so I wene he makes many mo to,

Now where Tyndale says I have fayntely defended ye things whereof I write:
the things be strong enough and little need me to defend them / and also my
purpose was not so much to do that that neded not, that is to wit to defend
them / as to prove and make the people perceive that Tyndale went about to
bring in heresies among them. And that needs now as little / for Tyndale has
proved yt him self.

And so little defense suffyseth for any reason yt Tyndale lays against yt.
And finally if I were faynte therein as

But Tyndale yet for all this as a good godly father of his haboundaunte
cheryte, says that he charitably does exhort me in Christ by the examples of
Judas and Balaam to take heed / and ferther he counsayleth me and my fellows
full holyly to awake by times ere ever our sins be ripe, lest the voice of
our wykkednesse ascend up and awake god out of his sleep to look upon us and
to bow his earys unto our cursed blasphemies against the open truth / and to
send his herueste men and mowars of vengeance to repe it, except we repent
and resyste not the spyryte of god, which opens light unto the world.



And now when that I had thus thoroughly serched well my breast and my book, and
saw my conscience clear, far out of any such cause of ieoperdy: then Tyndals
terryble exorcysme made me not much to trymble / sith heretykes have of old be
wont always to use such words. But my mind more gave me to laughe at his high
solemn charge / wh^rby he (...) with his strange words enchaunt and charm
(...), and (...) wene he were walking down to hell quykke, if he made so
much as a mumme against

Now where as Judas and Balaam were not mete samples for me, that bear my self
neither for an apostle nor for a prophet: I might here lay them both well
for plain samples to him that bears him self for a right apostle that were
sent to preche a new faith to this realm, and a new euangelyste to, that
makes with his false translacyo^ new scripture of his own / and very
proprely plays he the part of Balaam to, in that he laboreth to bring
maledyccyons upon Jerusalem, that is the catholyke church of Christ. And
here might I bring him other samples in also very mete for the matter of men
much like him self, heretykes I mean of old time and some of later days not
long before Luther. And when I had rehearsed up a Ragmans roll of a

Against Tyndales using this word senior
Tyndale.
ANother thing which he re^^^eth is, that I interpret this greek word
presbyteros by this word se^io^^. Of a treuth seniour is no very good english,
though seniour and junior be used in the vniuersyties: but there came no better
in my mind at that time. How be it I spyed my fault s^^s, long year M. More
told it me, and have mended it in all the works which I seus made, and call
yt an elder.

More.
Tyndale in this chapyter at great length declares f^r his excuse, four fair
virtues in him self / malice, ignor^^^^

Here in the beginning lest he should seem to have learned the knowledge of
his ignorance by my monycyon: he says yt he perceived his fault him self
before and amended it to. For where as for lakke of finding a better english
word he says that he had translated this word presbiteros in to this word
senyours in english: he has now amended it and made it elders.

Here has he done a great act, now that he has at last found out elder. He
has of lykelyhed ryden many mile to find out that. For that word elder is ye
wot well so strange and so little known, that it is more then marvel how

This word presbiter in the greek, as it sygnifyeth yt thing that men call a
priest in english / was called sometime senior in latin. But this thing that
english men call a priest, and that the greek church called presbiter, and
the latin church also and sometime seni^r: was never called elder neither in
the greek church, nor the latin, nor the english neither. Now this being thus
/ judge good readers your self whyther of two bad, it was not better when he
called a priest a senior, by which word it was called sometime at the least

Tyndale.
And in that he makes heresye of it, to call presbiteros an elder: he
condemns their own old latin text of heresye also, which they use yet
daily in the church and have used I suppose this.xiiij. hundred years. For
that text d^^th call it an elder like wise.

More.
Se the synceryte and playnnesse of the good man. It is no mayst^y for him to
make proper solucyons, if him self may make the obieccyons, such as no man
obiecteth nor would obiecte against him but him self. For here he says
presbyteros an elder, which thing I never said nor thought. But I said and
say and truth I say, that Tyndale did in his englysh tra^slacyon change the
word of priest in to senior of an heretycall mind and intent to set forth his
heresye / whereby he techeth that presthe^ is no sacrament.

For as for this word elder, how could I then charge him with yt as an
heresye / when he had not then translated elder but senior, till now that he
has by longer laysour amendyd yt and made yt worse. So that ye may first here
se a piece of his plain poetrye double proved and double reproved / by which
he lays unto me the thing that I never said nor had at that time either
cause to say or occasyon to think upon.

Nor now I say not that yt is heresye, if he have as he says translated
sins that time presbyteros by this word elder: but I say he does it with the
mind of an heretyque to set forth his heresye. For else I would not call it
heresye, if one would translate presbyteros a blok: but I would say he were a
blok head. And as very a blokhed were he, that would translate presbyteros an
elder instead of a priest, for that this english word elder sygnyfyeth no
more a priest, then this greek word presbyteros sygnyfyeth an elder stykke.

And yet this thing being so properly spoken as ye se: he says that the old
translacyon in latyne read in the church this.xiiii. hundred year, calls
presbyteros an elder in like wise. which word of Tyndale I would call a lie /
saving yt yt is more then a lie by a syllable.

Tyndale.
In the.v. chapyter of the first of Peter, thus stands yt in the latin
text: Seniores qui in vobis sunt, obsecro ego consenior, pasc^te qui in vobis
est gre^^ Cristi. The elders that are among you / I beseech which a^^^^ elder
also, that ye feed the flock of Criste which is among you. There is
presbyteros called an elder.

More.
Herd ye reder ever such a another? Is presbyteros here called an elder in ye
old latin tra^slacyo^? I find there this word seniores, where the greek
church used in their langage presbyteros. But as for this word elde^ which
Tindale says is ye old latyne translacyo^: he were like to pore out his eyes
vpp^^ latyne book ere he find y^ english word elder th^^^, (...) presbyteros
this word seniores and natu maiores/and always he sets thereto, lo here is
presbyteros called an elder and an elder in birth, as though this latin word
seniores or natu maiores were this englysh word elder / where he says that
presbyteros is called elder in the old tra^slacyon / which as ye se must
needs be false: but if this english word be in that latin book, and that he
make english latin and latin english.

But now lest he call the redargucyon of his folly sophystycacyon / let us
divine for him what he might mean. He will happily say, that he means yt
this greek word pr^s^yteros is in the text that he has alleged called by the
old translatour seniores, and seniores sygnyfyeth elder or elders. And so
though this word elder be not in the latin tra^slacyon, yet sith that latin
word is there that sygnyfyeth in laten the same thing that this word elder
sygnyfyeth in english: we can not blame him for translatynge presbyteros in to
this word elder / but if we blame in like wise the translatour, for
translatynge presbyteros in to this word seniores.

First if I said that the old translacyon were in that point not so well as
yt might have been / I should not say so alone. And Erasmus whom Tyndale
calls my derlyng, and whom him self does for all that in his own tra^s^acyon
prefer before the old / does as well in the said pystle of saint Peter, as
in the said.xx. chapter of thapostles Acts, not only keep still the greek
word presbyteros, but shows presbyteros into this word s^niores, and in the
the other place into maiores natu/but says that he should rather have kept still
the word presbyteros unchanged, because that word is yt yt sygnyfyeth
authoryte with the greeks / where seniore^ in latin sygnyfyeth but their age,
and all were not old as appeared by Timothe. And for that cause in the said
place of saint Peter his pystle / saint Hierome amendeth that old translacyon
and keeps presbyteros still, recitynge saint Peter in this wise: Presbyteros
qui sunt ^n vobis obsecro ego compresbyter. wherein saint Hierome was rather
cont^^^ to join the latin co^iunccyon with the greek word, and ^all y^
compresbyter/then to change that word sygnyfyenge the (...) in to seni^res
and consen^or, sygnifyeng but ye age. For among the latins senior sygnyfyed
none other / but among presbyteri was the name that many times sygnyfyed
rulers and governors.

Now if we list we may yet excuse the old translatour / which how sone after
Crystes death he translated it who can tell? And then when the latin church
had no laten word for the christian prestes all ready received and used / what
blame was he worthy that took that word not contynually but among, which of
all the latin words seemed to him to go next the sygnifycacyon of presbyteros
at that time. And yt was as him thought seniores, in which word yet the church
never followed him though / but though they read his tra^slacion openly in
divine service, yet neither in their writing nor preaching would they take up
that word and call a priest seniour / as appears by the books and sermons of
all holy

And therefore Tyndale is without excuse, which has translated presbyteros by
this english word elders / a word unknown among english men to sygnyfye
prestes / and among whom this word priest was ye proper englesh word well
known, and had served in that sygnifycacyon so many hundred year before Tyndale
was borne.

Also go me to the place which Tyndale alleges in the first pystle of saint
Petre: Seniores qui sunt in vobis obsecro ego consenior pascite qui in vobis
est grezem Christi. which place I take for ensample. For where he lays two
places of the pystles of saint John^, and one in the.xx. of the Acts / all be
for one purpose, and this one place answered, answers them all: I say
therefore that Tyndale has even here in this his new

The elders that are among you, I beche which am an elder also, that ye ^ede
the flock of Christ which is among you. There is presbyteros calle^ an elder
And in that he says feed Cristes flock / he means even the ministers that
were chosen to teach the people and to inform them in godd^^ word and ^^
say persons.

More.
Lo Tyndale here showed him self that by this word se^niores, be there
understood the minysters that were ch^^^ to teach people. Then say I that if
this word seniores (...)

As if percase a man would translate a latin cronycle in to english, in
which were mencyon made of some thing done in London / if he found in that
cronycle the aldermen senatores, or peradventure seniores: he should yet in his
english translacyon call them not senators nor elders neither, sith neither
of those two words is in english the name by which the aldermen of London be
known / but he must therefore translate senatores and seniores also in to
aldermen in his english translacyon. And ferther if he there found this word
senatus Londinensis: he should not tra^site yt in to this word senate / but
either into mayre and aldern^en, or percase (if the circu^staunce of the matter
so led him to yt) in to mayre, aldermen, and comen counsel.

And therefore as ye plainly se / Tyndales defense of his translatynge
presbyteros in to elders is as feeble to stykke to, as is an old roten elder
stykke, and though yt were but in a profane storye.



(...) does he not by the same re^^on change bishop in to ouerseer, and
de^k^^ in to seruer^ both which he might ^^ ^all do as priest in to elder. And
then must he with his tr^^^l^^yon make us an englysh vocabularye of his own
deuyse (...). And so with such prouisyon he may chau^g chynne into (...) b^l^e
in to bakke, and every word into other (...), if all England list now to go
to (...), and else not.

Now if h^ (...) that with such chau^ges he could change the names in to the
better and show us what the why the apostles used not this greek word
hiereus, or the interpreter this latyne word sacerdos, but always these words
presbyteros and senior / by which was at that time nothing sygnyfyed other
then an elder.

This shot shall I not now much need to fere. For likewise

But I ask of Tyndale no such far fet whyes, but a why of his own deed.
And that sith we now have, and hundredes of years have had english names
enough for such orders of offices as he translated out of latin: I ask him
this why / why did he translate the same by this english presby^er^ nor the
latyne word seniores sygny^yeth in those places by Tyndales own confession
the age ^ut ye office: why gives he than that english wo^^e^ elder in their
stead, which sygnyfyeth not the offy^^ (...) age. For though Tyndale say that
(...) was at that time nothing (...), wherein as to ^^^chynge (...) sith him
self says n^^ (...) (and in that (...) it happ^th him to say (...) deed yt
b^the pres^yt^ros and (...) be in those places (...) ^y^ the (...) ^ no^ the
age (forels had young (...) ^ppon presbyteros or seniores, ben left uncalled
and had leave to bide at home) what so ever moved in the first gyuynge of the
name the apostles or the interpreter to call the office by the name of
presbyteros in greek, or seniores in latyne / it was Tyndales part yet in his
english translacyon to give it that english name, by which the office
(were it holy or profane) was and long had been comenly known in england.

And ferther if no special name would have contented him: yet should he then
have called presbyteros the rewlers, governors, or officers, or some such
other english word which sygnyfyeth office, rather then to call it elders /
by which name there is in the english tongue none office understood at all
but only the bare age.

presbyteros in to seniores, and his amendment in to elders, that is to wit
from evil to wurse: ye se how well he has quyt him.

How be it if he had had in the change none other fawte but folly / it should
have been long ere I would have gone about to find it. But now stands all ye
matter in this which he slyppeth over / that he did it of very ca^kered malice,
by which he sets forth against Christ and his church his dedely
malycyouse heresye / wherewyth he would make men wene that holy orders were no
sacrament. And for that cause he asks why that the apostles did not call ye
prestes hiereus in greek but presbyteros, which sygnyfyed he says nothing but
only elders. And by this reason would Tyndale have it seem, that the apostles
did take the christian prestes

But Tyndale here though he wynke fast / is not yet so fast a sleep as he
makes for. For if he lysted to lift up his head and look up a little ^he
should sone se that his argument were assoyled with the the other word, which he
has also ^ysse translated of like malice ecclesia.

For if he will nedys argue that prestes be no persons consecrated, nor their
order no sacrament, because ye apostles called them presbyteri/which name had
at that time none h^^y syg^^^ycacyon in the greek tongue where they took it:
(...) Tyndale well enough (saving that he wynketh and wy^^^^^^) that it must
nedys follow, that baptysme were no sac^am^^^ neither, because the apostles and
euangelystes called it baptisma, and in holy scripture also named ye
ecclesia/of which two words baptisma and ecclesia neither another had in the
greek tongue before, any holy sygnysyfacyon at all, nor sygnifyed there any
other thing the^ ye tone a wesshyng / the the other a congregacyone or assemble of
hethen paynem people. And thus is in this point Tyndales plain folly and
dissymuled falsed, well and plainly conuycted.

And now sith that the apostles and euangelystes did apply and approper that
profane word ecclesia, to sygnyfy ye holy company of christian people sacred
and sanctified in the holy sacrament of baptysme / and in likewise the profane
word presbyteros to sygnyfye a certain sort of the same company, specially
consecrate unto god by the holy sacrament of order: he that now translateth
those words in those places baptisma in to washing, to make men wene it were
no

He planteth in a great process to small purpose / because I said yt Tymothe
was not old. And then Tyndale says that saint Paul chose him because he
found in him more wisdom, sadness, and virtue, then in the aged t^en of that
place. And Tyndale does well to tell us so for ^llys would all ye world have
went that saint Paul h^^ made a young man bishop, bycau^^^ ^e would have
had him wild.

But the goth he forth and (...) ^s a solemn process, that god and necessyte
is law^^^^e / and all this he bryng^^^ in to prove that not only young men but
women also (...) for necessyte mynyster all the sacraments / and that (...)
Mat. 10
there shall no woman fall a land in any so far an Island, where he will
have his name preached and his sacraments mynystred / but that god can and
will well enough provide a man or twain to come to land with her, whereof we
have had all ready metely good experyence and that with in few years.

when Tyndale has proved by this improbable case, that

How despise ye them. The vyser the better welcome to you. Better is to you
^^^^o^d then a good woman.

O the tender heart of py^uouse Tyndale. He begins now by lykelyhed to look
toward weddyng he speaks like a ^^e^. But he will I warraunt you no vile
person. But byca^^e he is a pressed and has promised perpetually to live chaste
/ h^ ^yll none whore therefore, but rather will do as Luther (...) done, wedde a
^onne and make here an whore

Then exhorts he full holyly, and in manner con^ureth also the re^^^^^ (...)
lord god, that he shall read over the two pystles of saint Poule wryte^ to
Timothe, whereof him

For saint Paul there teaches Timothe to beware and avoyde the company of
men of corrupt minds, which waste their brains about wrangelynge
questyons. And Tyndale is in company of none other / but such as Luther is and
friar Huskyn and their fellows, that had wasted out their wits so long about
wrangelynge heresies, yt now they are fallen at last to run out of relyg^on,
and waste

Saint Poule also teaches Tymothe, that he should not sharply rebuke any man
that were elder then him self, but exhort him as his father, though him self
was bys^hope and as Tyndale says an apostle to. Now Tyndale being neither
another, nor having any office so much as among heretics: lets neither
sharply to rebuke his elders in age, nor also to ieste and rail upon all
states spyrytuall and temporal through out all Crystendome, and namely against
all relygyouse men, but if they will run out and wedde. And thus ye may se
with what fruit Tyndale reads saint Paul.

Now would I that Tyndale had put in this place these words that he leueth
out: Noli ^^gligere gratiam quae in te^ est, quae Neglecte not the grace that
is in the, 1. Timoth. 4
which was given the by prophecye, with the putting upon the hands of a
pressed. And ^fterwarde in the.ii. pystle: 2. Timoth. 1.
Admoneo te vt resuscites gratiam ^e^, qu^e est in te per impositionem manuu^
mearu^. I warn the that thou ^tyrre up the grace of god, that is in the by
the putty^^e of mine hands upon the.

These words of saint Paul to Timothe i^ those pystles which Tyndale
exhorts every man to read, and whereof him self rehers^th also partes^ do
manyfes^ely reprove ^^ndales heresye, and clearly prove the holy order of
prestehed a sacrament.

For these places show both ye sensyble sign of (...)

And these textes do so plainly reprove him / that he is feign to make a
shameful shameless shyfte to void them, such as all the world may wonder
at. For he says in his book of obedyence, that the putting on of saint
Paul's hands upon Timothe was no sacramental sign / nor any other thing
but a custume of puttyng a mannys hand upon a another / as men do here upon a
boys head when

what avails it to lay manyfeste holy scripture to Tyndale, that forces so
little so manyfestely to mokke it. Tyndale cries out that every man
mysseco^strueth ye scripture / and then him self ye se what construccyon he
makes. Saint Paul says plainly that Timothe received grace by the putting
of his hands upon him. And Tyndale lets not to tell him as plainly nay /
and that he did but stroke Timothees head and call him good son, by lykely
head because he was but young. But how so ever Tyndale list to tryfle / these
places plainly reprove and connycte his heresye, and prove prestehed an holy
sacrament.

Now falls he to raylyng^ upon the holy ceremonies

This is a worthy ieste I promise you. If melysted here to tryfle as Tyndale
does / I could ask him how he proves that saint Peter was never shaven, sith
I suppose he neue^ saw him / or if he would put me to prove that he was shau^n,
and therein when I could find no plain scripture for it^ Tyn^ale would not
believe me but if I brought forth his barb^^^: I might tell Tyndale again
that I were not boside^ ^yth the s^^^pture shows it not, to believe him that
^ayn^ (...) cry^tened, till Tyndale bring forth his godfather.

But these fantasyes of his and mine both, go far fro


And seeing that the oil is not of necessite: let M. More tell me what more
virtue is in the oil of confyrmacyon, in as much as the bishop sacryth the
one as well as the other / ye and let him tell the reason why there should be
more virtue in the oil wherewith the bishop anoynteth his prestes Let him
tell you from whence the oil comes, how it is made, and why he sells yt to
the curates wherewyth they anoynte the sick, or whether this be of less
virtue then the other.

More.
Tyndale here puts many questyons to me, which he will that I must nedys
answer because the oil in the making of a priest is not of necessyte / but
surely these questyons be to ye matter of much less necessyte. How be it
because I must nedys answer to men of such authoryte, when the questyons be
so solempnely put: I say that if a bishop

And therefore such dyfference is there, as is between the hallowed water
standing in the font before it be occupied, or if it were sprynkled upon a
man for holy water / and the same holowed water being occupied in the
crystenynge of a child at the time in which it is applied thereto. For in

And when Tyndale asks me in any of these things ye cause and ye reason why:
I might as well ask him ye cause and reason why, in the nature and properte of
any natural thing, best, herb, tree, or stone. which if I were so mad to
look that Tyndale were able to tell me: what had he more to say, then that god
had planted that nature and properte therin^ which answer shall also serve in
these holy ceremonies and ^a^rame^tes / whereof the virtues be caused by gods
ordyna^^ce through his holy words, whereof the profit is lymyt^^ and po^^^n^d
after such rate and degrees^ as is to no man full and perfitely known but
only to god that qstyones.

He asks farther from whence ye oil comes, and whereof yt is made: what is
yt any more to ye matter, then from whe^s the water is fet yt is put in to the
font, or of what grapes ye wine was made yt Christ at his mau^dye turned i^to
his blood

Now where he asks me why the byshope sells it unto the curates wherewith
they anoint ye sick: thereto I say that the bishop sends yt to the
curates, because they should therewith anoynte ye sick in the sacrament of
anoylyng

But why he sells yt to the curates if he so did: thereof can I not tell the
cause / but if yt were peradventure because he would be paid therefore. But I
ca^ tell well yt the bishop sells it not to curates nor no man ellis, but ye
curatis have it sent the^ fre, but if they reward ye brynger of their courtesy

Tyndale.
And when he affyrmeth that I say how the oylynge and shauyng is no part of
the presthed: that improueth he not nor can do, and therefore I say yt yet.

More.
It is very truth that I improve him not in that point / but am well content
that he say yt yet, and I will say the same. But I improve that he says
every Christian man and every woman to, is as verily a priest as these that at
the recepte of that holy order are both anointed and shaue^. This is yt that I
improve / and this is yt that is a stark heresye though Tyndale say yt yet.

Tyndale.
When he enserched the uttermost that he ca^: this is all that he ca^ say
against me / that of an hundred there be not ten that have the propertees
which Paul requires to be in them. Wherefore if oylynge and shauy^ge be no
part of their preesthed: then ever more of a thousan^e.ix. hundred at the
le^te should be no prestes at all. And quoth your friend would confyrme yt with
an oath and ^were depely that yt would follow, and that it must nedys so be.
Which argument yet if there were none other shyfte / I would solue after an
Oxforde fashyon with concedo couse quentiam and consequens.

More.
Tyndale here makes a tale, as though yt were a dyaloge or rather a tryaloge,
between himself, the messenger, and me / saying that I in my dialoge did
allege, that if ^ylynge and shauynge were no part of their pr^^^h^d / then
concedo consequentiam and consequens. wherein he means that sith he shows
none other shyft, he granted both twain for true / that is to wit that
except oylynge and shauynge be part of the prestehed, else yt must nedys
follow that of a thousand prestes nine hundred be none at all for lakke of good
condycyons. And also he grants not only that of reason yt would so follow /
but also that yt is true in deed, that for as so myche as oylyng and shauyng be
not the things

But for as much as he says that he will soil yt so for lakke of other shyfte
/ he shall not need so to do / for I will find him a another shyfte my self,
and a plain contrary shyfte, and soil yt with nego consequentia^ and
consequens. For where as he grants both to be true: I say that they be
both false. And where as he makes as though they were mine own words and
the messengers with me: in good faith I neither remember them nor find the^,
all be yt that I have purposely looked for them in all such places of my
dyaloge, as me thought yt should be if yt were there at all. And therefore
leuynge ye point in questyone between us, till I come to replye to his answer
made unto my dialoge / at which

To the matter I say therefore, that yt is false that if oylynge

And that the grace by god appointed unto holy orders

But the place is for all that so plain / that when Tyndale so plays
therwyth and so lawgheth thereat: he lawgheth but from the lyppes forward, and
gyrneth as a dog does when one porreth him in the teeth with a stykke. And thus
have I proved the consequency to be false, which Tyndale grants for true.
Now to thet other part, that is to wit the consequente which he grants for
true also, I say yt yt is false also. For like wise as he grants

But all this bysenesse makes he for hatered and dyspyte that he bears to
presthed, and to the dyuyne service that the prestes say, whereof him self says
none at all / and for the malice

Against Tyndales translatynge of charitas in to love rather then into cheryte.
HEre makes Tyndale a great process / and tells us that cheryte has in
english speech diverse sygnyfycacyons, sometime love, sometime mercy, sometime
pacyence. And what is all this to purpose?

Then shows he that ^he greek word agape stands so sometime, that he must
nedys interpret it love and not cheryte / as though I had found a fawte with
him because he used this word love in such places as this word cheryte might
not co^uenye^tly stand / where I find ye fault in this yt he puts out
cherite where it might well stand, and that so often that he seems to myslyke
the name of cheryte.

Now because I say that every love is not cheryte, but only such love as is
good and ordynate: Tyndale answers me, no more is every faith Crystes faith.
That wot we well enough / but yet put by it self it come^ly sygnyfyeth
Crystes faith in matter of the faith / so that when we mean a false faith, we
be feign always to set some other word therwyth, as when we say Tyndales
faith, Luthers faith,

He puts a another ensample by this word hope, and says that every hope is
not a Christian hope / and yet he must use it and a thousa^de other words like,
such as ben indyffere^t and sygnyfye both good and bad / all which if he
should eschew, he should he says translate no thing at all.

who byddeth him leave all such words out? or who says that he should never
put in this word love? He answers the thing that no man lays to his
charge / and the thing that I lay to his charge he leueth ever unanswered. For
go me to his word hope which is indyfferent, and sygnyfyeth as well hope of
getynge the love of his lemman, as hope of reward in heaven for cheryte borne
to his enemy / though this be thus, yet if there were in english a word

Tyndale.
yet says he farther: Agape and charitas were words used among

More.
yet he is in hand again with agape often and brings not forth one wise
word. For though this greek word agape sygnyfye love indyfferentely good and
bad: yet this word charity sygnyfyeth no love but good. And therefore in such
places of scripture, as agape sygnifyeth good love: why should Tindale
translatyng in to englysh, rather take this word love that sygnyfyeth no more
good love then badde / rather this word charity that sygnyfyeth

Now though this laten word charitas was a word used among the hethen ere
Christ came / and though yt had sygnyfyed in laten at that time among them an
evil love and a noughty: yet this english word charity never sygnyfyed among
us any other love then good / not eue^ in that speech that Tyndale speaks of,
that turks be charytable among them self, and some of them to christian people
to / where yt sygnyfyeth yet rather pytye then love. And therefore Tyndale must
in his english translacyon take his english words as they sygnyfye in
english, rather then as the words sygnyfye in the tongue, out of which they
were taken in to the english. And yet remember I not that charitas in the
latyne tongue was used to sygnyfye evil love. And I say to

For else he should make a gaye confusyon, if he would in the matters of virtue
and christian faith use the old words ^ides for nothing but such as it
sygnyfyed ere Christ came. Then where so ever he found in saint Austyne and
other holy doctors persona patris, persona filij, persona spiritus sancti:
Tyndale must call them not the persons but the visours of the father, the
son, and the holy ghost / and make men wene yt they dawnce in a mask.

And thus yet again ye se to how little purpose this reason serves Tyndale,
that agape and charitas were words used among the hethen ere Christ was borne.

Tyndale.
Finally I say not cheryte god or cheryte your neighbor, but love god and
love your neighbor.

More.
This is a pretty point of iuglynge / by which he would make the reader look a
side y^ him self might play a false charitas, and where this holy word
cheryte was more proper for the matter then this indyfferent word love. This
was the fawte that I found. And therefore whereof serves his tryflyng between y^
nowne and the verb. I let him not to say love thy neighbor / nor I bydde him
not say cheryte thy neighbor, nor good affection thy neighbor, nor good mind
thy neighbor, ^^

Tyndale.
Though we say a man ought to love his neighbors wife or his neighbors
daughter: a christian man does not understand that ^e is commanded to defyse his
neighbors wife nor his neighbors daughter.

More.
This matter is somewhat amended here by this word, ought to love. But else if
Tyndale fall not to ye cherytyng, but to the loving of his neighbors wife, or
the loving of his neighbors daughter: I had as leave he bare them both a bare
cheryte, as with the frail feminyne sex fall to

But where of serves him this ensample. Did any man forbede him to use this
word love. He makes as though I forbode ye word utterly / because I forbede
yt him where he should not use yt but charity. Thus cries he (...) upon all
the church / and says they forbede all (...), because they forbede the banys
between frerys and ^^^nes.

Against (...) favor instead of grace.

ANd with like reasons rages he, because I torn charis into favor and not in
to grace / saying that every favor is not grace, and that in some favor
there is but little grace. I can say also in some grace there is little:
goodness / as when we say he stands well in my ladies grace, we understand
no great godly favor / and in vnyuersitees there be many ungracious graces
gotten.

More.
This is all that he says for his putting out of grace and setting in of
favor. And I pray you consider what cause has he now shewede why he so
should do. And yet his tytell of this chapter is, why favor and not grace, as
though he would tell you why. And has he now showed you any

(...) Tyndales chaungynge of confession in to knowledge, and penauns into
repentauns.
Tyndale.
ANd that I use this word knowledge and not ^^^s^syon, and this word
repentance and not ^enaun^^ in which all be ca^ not prove that I give not the
ry^^^^ english unto the greek word.

More.
This is plain untrue that Tyndale says, as I have plainly showed all ready
in the words church, priest, cheryte, and grace / all which chapyters who so
read and consider from the beginning, and advise well Tyndales words and
mine, be he learned be he not learned that reads them, if he have natural wit
and be but indyffere^t / he shall (I dowte not find) Tindale in these points
so clearly confounded, that he shall trust both his lernyng the less and

Tyndale.
But yt is a far other thing that payneth them and byteth the^ by the
^restis. There be secret pa^ges that pinche the very hertes of them, whereof
they dare not complain. The sykenesse that makes them so impacyent is, that
they have lost their iuglynge terms. For the doctors preachers, were wont to
make many diuisyons, distinccyons, and sottis of grace, gratis ^ata, gratum
faciens, praeuenicus, and subsequens.

More.
Nay god he thanked they have not lost these termys yet, gratia gratis data,
and yet that to alm^^^e / ^^yth which gratia gratis data all had he thereof
^yche (...) then he has, he might go forth as he goth ye strayg^^ (...) down
to the devil. For those (...) graces and (...) god gives a man, whereof he
may make a m^^^r of (...) or a matter of vice as him list to (...) them to
(...), the man is much the worse for them as (...), strength, learning, or wit.
Gratia grat^^ facie^^s, is that grace by (...) the man is acceptable to god. As
the grace given in y^ (...) gratia praeuen^e^s. And for as much as we should
sone ceace to, but if grace continued with us / as our eye should ceace to se,
if that we lakked light: god contynueth his grace with us to work, with us,
which is called gratia cooperans. And yet for as much as he that well works
with grace, deserves of god by goddy^^ goodness encreace of grace according
to the gospel, omni habenti dabitu^ and habunda^it, Matthew. 25
to every man that has there shall be given, and he shall habounde that well
gratia subsequens. And finally for as much as grace perceueryng with man at his
end, brings him to glory / which who so attayneth is then in suretye of
stedefaste and vnperysshable grace and favor of god: this fynall grace is
called gratia con^i^n (...), that is grace that perfyteth the thing.

Now sith every man perceyueth well, that all be it that in god all is one
grace, with which he preuenteth our good works; and with which he helps
them forth in the progress, and which adds and makes more, habounde, and
with which he perfyteth his creature in glory: yet fyth yt in us and our
works it is dyuersely considered after diverse,

And therefore ye may^ se that these be no iuglynge (...), (...) devised with
good reason and of necessy^^. But (...) subtyle iu^^e^ the devil / has tau^^^
these (...) Luther Huskyn, and ^^^ndale, to fall to such false iuglynge: that
they labor f^re to iugle

Tyndale.
With confession they iugled, and made the people as often as they spoke of yt,
understand shrifte in the ear, whereof the scripture makes no me^cyon. No,

More.
This high godly spiritual man takes for none abominacion at all, but can
abide well and hold very well with all, and not defend yt only but commend
yt also / that a nonne consecrate unto god, should run out of relygyon, and do
fo^le stynkyng sacri^yce to that fylthy idol of Priapus, that friar Luther
bears about to gather in his offering with / and that they shall both, and a
great many such reba^des mo / shame fully show their abomynable bychery, to the
corrupcyon of the world openly. But he can not abide in no wise that any man
should so repent his secret sin, that he should unto his confessor show yt
secretly. This can Tyndale in no

I purpose not here to fall in dys^ycyons with Tyndale for y^ mate^/nor at
every lewd fellows blasphem^/to bring the blessed sacraments in questyon. For
sith Tyndale can not him self deuye, but that said Austayne, (...) Hierom,
saint Ambrose, (...), and other holy saints have b^th used, (...), and taken
c^^essyon for a necessary (...)/and every go^^ man has in him self ever fou^^
no little spyrytuall pr^fy^e and soul comfort therein: yt shall not now greatly
(...)

And as for this word knowledge is very far from the greek word
exomologesis/and as far from the latin word confessio/and yet much more from
the very matter self, that is to wit from the sacrament of penance. For both
the greek word and the latin, do sygnifye an openyng and a showing of ye
thing / and ye matter self means a willyngly offered declaracyon of ye
secret hyd sin / and this english word knowledge is anthyguouse and
doutefull. For as yt is a nowne / yt sygnifyeth but the knowing of a thing or
understanding / as where a man says, this child has yet no knowledge neither
of good nor evil. And when yt is a verb, or that yt is turned in to this
word knowlegynge / yet sygnyfyeth yt rather the not denyenge then the
wyllyngely telling of our agnosco or agnitio may stand in the place if they
talked in latyne. As where we say of a stuberne body that stands still in
the denyenge of his fawte that is laid before his face / this man will not
knolege his fault, or he will not be a known of his fault. And therefore is
this word knowledge or knowlegyng not very mete nor very proper neither for the
greek word nor the latyne: and lest of all for the matter / sith that
confessing and confession is the wyllyngly made declaracyon of our sin
vnlayed unto us by any man save our self. In which doenge though the
penytente use among with

Now if Tyndale will tell us that confession and confessing is drawn out of
the laten, and then will ask me what english word had we for the thing
before: I wene we had before ^on^ at all / but ever sins the proper en^^^he
word has been shryfte and shryuyng. For saving (...) goodness of god
brought in that thing with his (...) of penance, which was brought in by the
(...) were I wene far of from confessing of their (...) of their own offer
/ and scantly would (...) they were laid unto their charge and (...) Only god
has brought in with the grace of the sacrament, that men are so supled and
made

But this is it that Tyndale means / he would have all willing confession
quyte cast away, and all penance doing to, as him self shows by and by.

Tyndale.
And in like manner by this word penance, they make the people understand ^oly
deeds of their enioy^ynge, with which they must make satisfaccyon to godwarde
for their sins: when all the scripture precheth that Christ has

More.
This is a great sin lo, that ever any man should take pain for his sin.
Now though y^ scripture precheth that Christ has made full satysfacyon for our
sins: yet would I feign that Tyndale should tell me where he fyndeth any one
place in scripture, yt Crystes satysfaccyo^ for our sins is in such wise
full, that he will there be no pain put unto us therefore. Let us consider his
own words y^ follow.

Tyndale^
And we must now be thankful to go^ again, and kill the l^stes of our flesh
with holy works of gods enioyn in ge^a^d to take pacyently all that god
says on my bakke.

More.
This is well and holyl^ ^^^ken. But now let pass for this ones holy Luther
and his holy noune with all their holy works that they work together, in
killing y^ lusts of their flesh, in showing them self thankful agay^^
(...) god.

I will ask Tyndale first, whyther such h^^^ works as god has taught his
church to be eni^^^^d, (...) hy^ by his goos^ly father / be not enjoined unto
(...) by god. If not, he takes away all the (...) of father (...) mother,
prela^e and prince, (...) any good (...) to be done to goddys honor / (...) in
all such commandments, god commands Tyndale (...) every man else to be
obedyent, and accompteth their ^^^maundementes

yet if Tyndale will no pain enjoined but by gods own mouth / nor suffer
nothing laid upon his bakke but if god trusse up the pakke him self and
with his own hands, and bind it upon his bakke with a paksadle: then will I
yet wit of Tindale whyther god do not enjoin any such holy works, or lay any
such burden upon ye bakkes or repentant sinners for the sins that be passed,
and whereof he is al^ (...) ^epentaunt.

If Tyndale answer no: then shall we put him in remembrance of many places in
holy scripture / as well in Exodi, where he promyseth to punysshe the people
for their idolatry notwythstandynge their repentance and his remyssyon to / as
in the second book of kings, 2. Regum. 12
where he punysshed

Now if he grant that god punyssheth the sin notwythstandynge the
repentance of the penytent, and the remyssyon of his dyspleasure: then
grants he and so must he grant, yt all be it one drop of Crystes
precyouse blood had been suffycye^t to satysfye for all the synnys of this whole
world / and for all the pain also that were in any wise dew to the same: yet
has it not pleased him so to order it. But lest that such short forgyuenes,
as well of all ye pain as of the dyspleasure of god, and of the dedelynesse,
or as men might say of the damnabylyte belonging to the mortal offense /
might make men wax the worse, and set much the less by sin: he forgyueth
at the repenting and by the

Now if Tyndale grant as he nedys must, that not wythstandynge the
repentance and the remys^yon both / and

And then if yt be well done that a man for his sin, willyngly punyshe him
self: why may he not mekely submyt

Tyndale.
And if I have hurt my neighbor, I am bound to shryue my self unto him, and
make him amends if I have wherewyth / or if not, then to ask hy^ forgyuenesse
/ and he is bound to forgive me. As for their pen^^nce the scripture knows
not of.

More.
He never brings in a good word but for an evil purpose. He says here very
well concerning our duty toward our neighbors. But he says malycyousely to
make us wythdraw our duty toward god, for the satysfaccyon of the temporal
pain that is dew for our sin, after the restytucyon to gods favor, and
theternalyte of the pain

Tyndale.
As for their pena^nce, the scripture knows not. The greek has metanoia and
metanoite, repentance and repent, or forthynkyng and forthynk / as we say in
english, yt forthynketh ^e or I forthynke, and ^ repent or yt repe^teth me,
and I am sorry that I did.

More.
Tyndale herebereth us in (...) the scripture ^peketh not of penance / because
him self gives this (...) word a another english name. And because that
Ty^^ale.

Now as for the word penance what so ever the greek word be: yt ever was and
yet yt is lawful enough (so that Tyndale give us leave) to call any thing in
english by what word so ever englysh men by comen custume agree upon. And
therefore to make a chaung of the english word, as though yt all England
should go to scole with Tyndale to learn english / is a very frantyque folly.

But now the mather stands not therein at all. For Tyndale is not angry with
the word but because of the matter. For this greueth Luther and him / that by
penance we vndresta^de when we speak thereof so many good things therein /

For if we called it but the sacrament of repentance, and by that word would
understand as much good thereby as we now do by the word penance: Tyndale
would be than as angry with repentance as he is now with penance. For he
hates nothing but to here yt me^ should do any good.

we have for our pore english word penance, the use of all english men
sith penance first began among them. And that is authoryte enough for an
english word / except Tyndale will bind us to fetch authoryte of reason
for every word of every langage, out of Albert de modis significandi/because
that friar Luther, friar Huyskyn, and friar de secretis musierum. And yet if he
will nedys prece upon us therewyth: we may say that we take in penance of
the latyne word penitentia, which the church uses for the same sacrament /
or we may say that the word penance is deryued and comes of the word
pain, which both in heart, in word, and in deed, the penytent should
endeavor him self (...) conceive and sustain for his sin. But this is it
that Tyndale so sore does abhor. For he consequentely says.

Tyndale.
So now the scripture says repent or set yt forthynke you, and come and by^
se^e the go^^^ll or glad tidings that is brought you in Christ / and so shall
all before (...) ben^ forth: sy^e a new life.

More.
Here seems a godly thing, and is in deed very deuelysshe.

And therefore says holy saint Hierom, that the sacrament of penance is the
board upon which a man geteth to land and saves him self after the
shyppewrake. which words of his, Luther in his book of Babiloni^^ sore
dysprayseth.

But who ^o consider well the ^ordes of saint Poule in Hebre. 6
It is impossyble that they which have been ones illumyned, and have tasted the
heavenly gift, and have been made per^eners of ye holy ghost, and have also
tasted the good word of god and the powers of the world to come, and then are
slyden down: should be renewed again by penance, crucyfyeng again to them
self the son of god, and having him in derysyon.

Here shows this blessed apostle Poule that the dedely sin committed after
baptysme / puts a man in that case, that it shall be very hard (for so is
impossyble sometime taken in scripture) by penance to be renewed again / that
is to wit to come again to baptysme or to the state of baptysme, Mat. 19
But I speak of the ordynary course of his

For sith the sacrament of baptysme which regendreth us and makes us new
creaturys, does not so fully apply y^ passion of Christ for our satysfaccyo^,
that it so dyschargeth us from all the pain of sin, but yt we sustain yet
every

^^^ude for my part be very well content, that sin and pay^^ and all were as
shortly gone as Tyndale tells us. But I were loathe that he deceived us if it
be not so. And therefore to the intent it may the better appear that penance is
necessary, and that to return to god and clean to be forgyuen, is not so
light a thing as Tyndale makes it / but Iche^ 2.
return to me with all your heart in fasting, in weeping, and weylyng. Tear
your hertes and not your garments, and return to your lord god. For he is
benygne and merciful, pacye^t, and plentuouse of mercy, and ready to forgive
sin.

Tyndale.
And yt will follow if I repent in the heart / that I shall do no more so
wyl^lyngly and of purpose.

More.
In these few words there are many doutes. First how Tyndale takes
repenting in the heart / whether he mean that who so repe^teth in his heart
shall no more do so again wyllyngly and of purpose, as long as he so
repents, or else that who so repent onys in his heart, shall never ceace to
repent / or though he do, shall never yet do more so wyllyngly and of purpose
while he lives. And if he mean in the first manner, his words be little to
purpose. For if he grant that though he repent at one time, he may ceace to
repent at a another, and then do as evil as he did, and be as evil as he was:
then had I as leave that he said y^ man which onys repe^teth, will do so no
more as long as he does so no more, and will be good still till he be naught
again

Now if he mean in the secunde manner, that who so repents

Now if he say that never any which do sin again, did heartily repent
before / and then that he requyre^^ (...)



Now to the the other point. If Tyndale think to ease all the matter by this that
he says not, that he which repents in heart shall do so no more / but that
he shall do so no more wyllyngly and of purpose: then ryseth there a another
doubt what he calls wyllyngly and of purpose.

pain till the day of dome. For as many men as before y^

But else I say, where a man has no will in the deed nor in the occasion
thereof / there is he as I think no partener in the sin. I wot not what
Tyndale means by wyllyngly and of purpose. For he is wont to reken as though
there is nothing done willyngly yt is done of frayletye / nor I can not tell
what he calls purpose / how long time serves after his rekenyng to make yt
done of purpose.

But this I wot well, allbe yt that there be degrees and ci^cu^stau^ces that
aggreue the sin and make it more weyghty / as when yt is in the mind long
continued, and done of pure malice, and such other things: yet if these lakke
so the damnable deed yt god has forbode^ to be done in deed, by him

Now such things as these be, we dow^e not but ye folk have fallen to again
after repentance and after penauns to / and such as have been by the sacrament
of penance res^^^ed unto the state of grace. And sith that these be damnable,
whyther they be before purposed or no: therefore if is partly false partly
folysh that Tyndale says, that who so repent

And for co^clusyon though yt may be say^^ (...) good men of good mind in
exhortacyon in perseuerau^^^ (...) good works, against the (...) of such as
(...) again, that they (...) lyghtenes gives (...) to think and say yet to
put ye for a rule and (...) as Tyndale does, that who so repe^teth onys in
ha^te ^^all (...) wyllyngly and of purpose / and that they that sin
(...)lyngly

Tyndale.
And if I believed the gospel, what god has done for me in Criste: I should
surely love him again, and of love prepare my self unto his commandment.

More.
It is vndowtely a very good occasyon to move a man to love god again, when he
believes ye love that god has to him, and the things that of very love god
has done for him. But yet it is not true that Tyndale says, that every man
which byleueth this love, does so love god again, that of love he prepares
him self unto goddys commandments. I dare say that saint Peter loved him
well / and yet he both forsook him and forsware him to. But a man

And finally if it be true that Tyndale says / that is to (...) th^^ if he
believed the gospel he should surely prepare him self to the commandments
of god / and then if this be true (...) as in deed it is, that he that does
(as Tindale does) enfeete his neighbors with dedely poysened

And now comes he and says, that I know that all y^ (...) for his defense in
ye change of church, priest, (...), penance, and such other is true: because
(...) as he ^ayth the greek before him / where as I by (...) knowledge as I have
of greek, latin, and of our own (...) tongue together, know his defense does
(...). And that have I so clearly proue^/that to the (...) of both his (...)
and his ^oly, there shall not greatly need y^ knowledge of th^^ tongues nor

And to that intent only have I taken the labor (...) answer his defense, to
make it open to learned and unlearned both, that he brings to the matter after
his two (...) musing thereuppon, ^eyther insyghte of any substancyall
learning, nor yet any proof of reason or natural wit, but only a rasshe
malyciouse frantyke brayde, furnysshed with a bare bold assercyon and
affyrmacyon of false poisoned heresies. For saving to make this appear / I
neded not to

Lo this being y^ only purpose and intent of (...) Tyndale comes now and
expressly (...) the same thing that I purposed to show. For he (...) and
writes openly those false heresies in deed that I ^^yed then ^^teded after to
do / so that hy^ self shows now that I (...) then shew^ the people truth /
and th^^ ^eded I to make (...) answer, sith his own writing shows that he
made his

For as for that that Tyndale calls them none heresies but the very faith,
forces me but little / for so has every he retyque called his own heresies
syns cryste^dome first byganne. But for all that the devil will be the devil
though Tyndale would call him god.

And I made my book to good christian people that know such heresies for heresies
/ to give the^ warning that by scripture of his own false forgynge (for so is
his false translacyon, and not the scripture of god) he should not bygyle them,
and make them wene the thing were otherwise then yt is in deed. For as for
such as are so mad all ready, to take those heresies for other then heresies,
and are thereby

And (...) where as in the end he looks so much to me, yt he forgeteth him
self / and making me a another holy

Here ends the second book, in which is confuted Tyndales defense of his
false translacyon of the new testamente.

whether the church were before the gospel, or the gospel before the church.


But for as much as by the dyscourse of my dyaloge, I proved clearly that
nothing can be sure and certain among christian men not so much as the holy
scripture it self, but if we believe the church / and I proved also that the
church of Christ can not fall in dampnable error, but has been, is, and eue^
shall be, taught by the spyryte of god every necessary ^r^u^h to the bylefe
whereof god will have them bounden / and that this church is and ever has been
taught by the word of god partly written and partly unwritten / and yt those
two words are both of one authoryte / and finally did I prove that the very
church of Christ here in earth which has the right faith, and which we be
bounden to believe and obaye, is this vnyuer^all known people of all

Now to know that the nerer Tyndale comes to the matter, the forther he flees
from yt troth / and hydeth him self in the derkenesse of the devil, walking
with a sconse of a dymme light to make men w^^e he would show them the way,
and ledeth them clean awry: ye shall here how boldly he begins / and after
shall I so show you the matter, that every child shall perceive his bold wyly
folly to come of no good trust in his cause, but lakke of wit and shame.

Tyndale.
Whyther the church were before the gospel, or the gospel before the
church.

More.
Lo he that redeth this and hereth not thanswere, except

I said in my dyaloge that the church was before the gospel was wryte^, and
that the faith was taught and men were baptized, and masses said and the other
sacraments mynystred among christian people, before any part of the new
testament was put in writing / and that this was done by the word of god
unwritten. And I said also there,

I showed also that the church of Christ has been, is, and ^uer shall be,
taught and instructed by god and his holy sp^ryt with his holy word of either
kind / that is to wit both with his word written and his word unwritten / and
that they which will not believe gods word but if he put it in ^^^^ynge, be
as plain infydeles as they yt will not believe it written / sith gods word
takes his authoryte of god th^^ s^eketh it, an^ not of man that writes it.
And there is like suertye and like certain knowledge of

And therefore I showed in my said dyaloge / and yet the kings hyghnes much
more plainly showed in his most erudyte famous book against Luther out of
which I took it: that the word of god unwritten is of as great authoryte, as
certain, and as sure, as is his word written in the scripture / which point
is so fast and sure pytched upon the rokke our savior Christ him self, that
neither Luther, Tyndale, nor Huskyn, nor all the hell hounds that the devil
has in his kenell, never hitherto could, nor while god lives in heaven and
the devil lies in hell never herafter shall (bark they, bawle they never so
fast) be able to wreste yt out.

And that they be all as I tell you so feeble in this point,

Tyndale.
And again as the air is dark of yt self, and receives all her light of
the son: even so are all men's hertes of them self dark with lies, and
receive all their truth of gods word, in that they consent thereto.

More.
And this lyketh me very well / and so myche the better by cause that the
goodness of god causes Tyndale to speak these words, nothing touching the
matter for any reprofe of my book / but only reprouynge him self and conde^nyng
all his hole sect. For I never said, nor no man else as I suppose neither
christian nor hethen / that god takes his

For sith yt is true that by the light of god as Tyndale here confesses,
mennys hearts be cleansed from lies and false opynyons and from thynkyng evil
good, and therefore from consenting to sin / and we se well that Tyndale and
all his sect be set all upon heresies and false blasphemouse lies, and
think (if they think as they say) both evil good and good evil / for they
call Crystes sacraments evil and (...) lechery good / and so not only
consent to sin but also commytte and defend and teach the whole deed
stynkyn^^ (...) of sin: yt follows by Tyndales own holy sermon here, that
his own heart and the hertes of all his whole sect be the dark air of hell
/ from which the light of

yet has he one word, by which it appears that while he saw him self
fallen: he would pull down other men in to the mire to him. For if ye consider
his words / ye shall se that he cowcheth them in such wise, that he would
make men wene that where so ever there were a true bylefe and false opynyons
taken away / that there it must needs be yt men shall not consent to sin.
which thing he does for

As it is a great folly to afferme this / so were it all most as much folly to
confute this. For who is there that thinks that to kill a man for his money
is no sin and yet many wretches do it. who thinks that aduowtry is no
sin, and yet many wretches do it. who th^nketh yt to wedde a nonne

Tyndale.
John^.xvij. Sanctyfye them o father through thy truth. And thy word is
truth. And thus thou seyst that goddys truth depends not of man. It is not
true because man so says o^ admits it for true.

More^
whereof serves all this while no man said ye contrary.

Tyndale.
But man is true because he byle^eth it, testyfyeth, and gyu^th wyl^^^ (...)
hy^ heart that yt is true.


Nay pe^de this is not always true. For saint Peter him self was not true, when
he testyfyed and gave witness with his master in his heart, and yet forsware
him openly with his mowth. And Judas byleued in his heart that goddys word was
true / and yet was him self not true but a false thief and a false traitor
to. And now adays also be there many false theuys and traitors unto god,
false heretykes I mean, that by the word of god believe and wot well enough
that it is abomynable theft and sacrylege for a friar to wedde a nonne / and
yet as false harlottes both, do and teache the contrary to their own bylefe.

Tyndale.
And Christ also says him self John^.v. I receive no witness of man. For if

More.
Now comes he sumwhat to his purpose in deed / but he comes to a full shrewde
purpose. For by these words of Christ in the fyfth chapyter of John^ / he
would make it seem that there should no credence be given to ye church because
they be men / and therefore can not as Tyndale says ^ere ^ytnesse unto Christ
nor his word, sith Christ says him self I receive no witness of man. To
this purpose has he brought forth all his gaye painted process before / the
glyterynge whereof he hops should so dase our eyes, that we sh^lde not se the
falsed of his short sudden conclusyo^, in which he knytteth up Christ and
Machomet together,

But good christian readers, dyfferrynge for ye while Machomett^s doctrine with
whom Tyndale may make a match: I shall show you what fraud and deceyt
Tyn^^le here uses, both in the translatyng and in the interpretacyon of these
words of our savior Christ, that he reher^^th written in the fyfthe chapy^^r
of saint John^. Christ in (...) place neither means nor says, that he takes
no wit(...) man as Tyndale reherseth / but he both means and (...) he takes
not his special witness of man but (...) to the intent that ye may the
better perceive (...) heresye seem proved by the gospel, he (...) the (...).
ye shall understand that the latin tongue (...) article that ye greek has, and
which article in part both oue englysh langage has,

I shall show you first an example thereof in the ^^^^^ cha^pyter of the
gospel of saint John^, which place Ty^^^le has wrong translated also / for
what cause the devil and he knows. For Tyndale is not ignorant of that
article, neither the greek nor the english, and makes him felt as though he
translated ye new testament out of greek. The^e words be the words of the
gospel in that place after Tyndales translacyon:

This is the record of John^, when the Jews sent prestes and seu^^es from

I would not here note by the ^uaye, that Tyndale here translateth no for nay,
for yt is but a trys^e and wysta^^yng of the english word: saving that ye
should se^ he which in two so plain english words, and so co^^e as is (...)
and no, can not tell when he should take the tone, and (...) the the other / is
not for translatynge in to english, a (...) very mete. For the use of those
two words in answery^^e to a questyon is this. No answers the questyon (...)
by the affyrmatyue. As for ensample, if a man (...) Tyndale him self: is an
heretyke mete to transla^^^^

And this thing lo though yt be no great matter / yet I have thought good to
give Tyndale warning of, because I would have him write true one way or
other / that though I can not make him by no mean to write true matter, I
would have him yet at the least wise write tre^ english.

But now to the matter self. ye se that by Tyndals translacyon ye jews asked
of saint John^ whether he were a prophet article / saw well enough that he
should not have translated Deuter. 18.
not that he should be Christ but a great prophet that should come before him /
and therefore they asked saint John^, art thou the prophet, menynge that
special prophet. And yet the jews that asked saint John^ the questyon,
notwyth standing that by their own questyon they knew that he did not in his
answer deny him self to be any prophet, Lyra desirat: yet he shall not say
nay but he gave him good warning here, and has in deed more good learning in
the scripture of god, then has Luther and Huchyns, and five friar Huys^yns,
and as many friar Lambertes to.

Now that I have showed you somewhat of the strength and effect of the article,
both greek and english, which declares that the word whereto it is set,
sygnyfyeth not a thing generally and confuse at large, but some special
thing determynate of that kind / and that I have sh^^ed you one ensample
thereof in ye gospel which Tyndale h^^^ evil translated: I will now go
ferther and show you (...)

The wordys spoken by our lord be as Tyndale has translated them these, I
take no record of man. In the latin they be thus Ego testimonium ab homine non
recipio. which if it be translated into english without the article as the
latin has none / then is it thus, I take not record of man, and not as
Tyndale has translated, I take no record of man He makes his english as
though the latin were, ego nullum testimonium ab homine recipio. And whyther
the sentence be precysely both one in these twain, I take not record of man,
and I take no record of man: we shall not now need to dispute,

ye shall therefore understand that in that place of saint John^ the fyfte
chapyter, where Tyndale has translated Crystes words in this wise, I receive
no record of man: the greek book has there upon this word record the
article, that is as I have showed you correspondent unto our english article
the / by which article put before ye word record, that word there in the tongue
in which theuangelyste wrote the words him self, sygnyfyeth not a comen
record

And therefore I say that Tyndale should in his englysh translacyon not have
left out that article the / but should at the least wise have translated yt
thus, I receive not the record of man / where as with his translatyng no
record, yt article the, wheruppon the wayght of the sentence hangs / he has
not only left out but clean excluded also. For if he had translated yt, I
receive not record of man, though he le^t out the^ yet he might take yt in
there to and mende yt, making (...) I receive not the record if man. But now
that he has translated yt, I receive no record of man: he has excluded yt
utterly but if he take in not, and put out

But now because yt will peradventure seem unto some men, that though he had
in his translacyon expressed the greek article and made yt thus, I take not the
record of man, that yet yt were all one and no difference between those words
and these, I take no record of man: of troth the dyfference is not ethe for
every man to man to perceive / and

But yet shall ye ferther understand that as I said in the beginning, though
our article the, be correspondent unto the greek article in declaryng the
certayntie of the thing that it is put unto, and in restraining the word from
his general sygnyfycacyo^ to a more determynate especyaltye / and that in many
things this is very plain and clear: yet does not our article sometime so
fully and so effectually declare that thing as does the article in the greek
specially, but if we change the order of our english words from the order
of the greek. And therefore I say, that to put

But first it will happily seem hard to some men, that he which translateth
should in his translatynge make any

I will therefore of a great many give you but one / in which Tyndale has for
lakke of chaungynge the order of the words, translated a very plain place in
the very beginning of saint Iohn^s gospel, whyther wrong or no let other
judge / but surely otherwise then I would have

His translacyon is this, In the beginning was that word, and that word was
with god, and god was that word.

First this word that, puts Tyndale for the article the, whereof I have
showed you before / wherein he does much a mysse. For it is no dowte but that it
is here put for to sygnyfye the specyaltye of the thing, as of god and the
word / because there be many words, and the paynyms worshypped many gods /
ye article is set to those words to sygnyfye not a word nor a god, as though
it were one of ye many words of men, or one of the many goddys of paynyms /
but the god and the word that is the synguler god and the synguler word, that
is to wit the word of god. And that article is not in english this word
that, as Tyndale has translated / but this word the, as he should have
translated /

A man may say the man that we spoke of was here, or that man that we spoke of
was here. But and if he speak of him absolutely, without mencyon of any speech
before had with him, he must then say, the man was here / and may not say,
that man was here, but if he add sumwhat to it.

If ye speak of the cheyfe capytayne of the field / ye may say, the capytayne
will march on to morrow. But ye may not say, that capytayne will march on to
morrow, but if ye show which capytayne by some other token, or else point him
with your finger. And Tyndale knows this well enough / and therefore he
calls god all way the lord, and not a lord nor that lord. And therefore I
marvel why he translated In principio erat verbum, In the beginning was that

But as I was about to say, where he translateth god was the word / all be it
that in the greek and in the latyne it does well enough, and in the english
that manner of speaking may stand in many other things, and specially in the
plurell number, or in the first person or the second synguler, where the
things that we speak of or the article or the dyuersyte of the word which is
in the verb in our english tongue, changed in those two persons synguler,
takes the dowte away, and makes the matter open which of the two termys we
take for subiectum and which for praedicatum: yet in this great matter I would
rather in our own tongue have changed and turne^ the order of the words and

How be yt I say not this to show that I think yt Tyndale me^t any evil in
this / nor I impugn not in this pa^^^^ his traslacyon so greatly, but yt may
be borne: but (...) the the other is in english better and more clear. And (...)

Now if he will contend and strive with us upon the vygour and strength of
this article the, or of his corresponde^t in the greek / and bring us forth
example in our speech or in the greek either, in which yt may seem that those
artycles have not always that man^r strength: all this shall nothing (...) all.

(...) receyuynge. Now yt is not all one to say I take no record

Now shall I plainly show you by many places of scripture, that yt is false
that Christ receives no record of

For Tyndale can (...) saye^ here that Christ spoke yt there by the figure
called ype^bole, as saint John^ did where he sayed^ his witness no man
takes, meaning very few. Our savior him self in the.xxliii chapyter of saint
Luke, when he had showed his apostles and other of his dyscyples that all
thing wryte^ of him by Moses and the prophets and in the psalms, were and
most be fullfylled / and theruppon opened their wits to the understanding of
scripture, and said unto him, thus yt is (...) and thus yt dehoued Criste

^

He says also himself (...)

(...) which is the spyryte of troth that (...) ^^^^eth of the father,

And yet for because we should not by these words wene that he would have no
witnesses of ^enne, but those only that were with him in his own time while
he lived here on earth: god says by the mouth of saint John^ the baptyste in
the.iiii. chapyter of saint John^ the euangelyste: he that comes from heuyn is
above all, and testyfyeth: the things that he has seen and herd; and his
testymony (...) ^eceyueth. who so ever do receive his ^ecorde has put his
seal thereto that god is true. And what is that to say ^ but that every true
byleuyng man is a witness y^ god is true.

And thus appears it not only that Tindale has mysse translated and mysse
construed these words of Christ, I

And also sith our savior says, my cheyse ^ytnesse I take not of man / but
yet I say to you this, that is to wy^^e the witness of the good holy man
saint John, because ye should be saved: it appears that Tyndale refusyng all
witness

Now all be it that I have in this (...)uycted Tyndale of ma^^ (...) by
(...)uertynge the holy scripture of god, as well in (...) as in the sentence,
for the setting for th^^ ^ys yt (...)resye / taking away the (...) give to
the church of god, and the (...) men are bounden (...) does all this because
(...) bring men into the (...) myth as I se that Tyndale (...) py^et^ and
would we sh^l^e (...)

And for as much as Tyndale is all in the word of god / and would thereby make
us wene that me^nys words should utterly serve of naught, not so much as for
the witness of goddys word: ye shall understand that where Tyndale says
that the word of god cleanses ma^nys soul from false faith, Io.v. ye be clean
by reason of ye word / yt is not true that (as Tyndale would have yt seem) the
word alone cleanses the soul from false faith, no more then faith alone as he
would have yt also seem, cleanses the soul fro sin. For bysyde the grace and
goodness of god preuentyng mennys

will ye se that Christ puts not all in his word, but joins his work the
^^^yth. Here what he says in the.xv. chapyter of saint John^. If I had not
comen and spoken unto them, they should (...) sin / but now have they nothing
to cloak their sy^ne wythall. He that hates me hates my father. Now though
this be in deed true, that if (...) had never comen and spoken to them, there
could not (...) ben laid unto them the sin of that (...) (...) ere now (...)
when they refused to believe on (...) hated (...) to show that h^s only (...)
wroughte miracles among them for the proof of his word^

Thus have I clearly showed you that where Tyndale would have yt seem, that
gods word alone always cleanses mennys souls from false faith: he teaches
in that a false faith / for the miracles many tymys help to the clensynge of
mennys souls.

And let Tyndale stykke well to this point / for I entende shortly to show
by this, that the miracles wrought in Crystes church, clearly reprove all the
false faith that he and his master, and all their whole hundred sects that
are their ofsprynges preachen.

But first where Tyndale says that gods word is true / and layth therefore
the.xvii. of saint Ion^: no man says nay to y^. And where he says forther, y^
gods truth depends not of ma^nys word: we will graute him this, and much
more to then he looks for. For I say ferther that the troth of god depends
not upon gods own word neither / but is absolutely true in yt self without
any dependau^ce upon his word at all. And as yt is true that Tyndale says,
that gods truth is not true because man so says: so is this true also, that
gods truth is not true because god so says. But on the tothe^ side likewise
as this argument or co^secucyon is true, god says that who so believe not his
church / is to be taken as a paynem, ergo that thing is true: so is this
consecucyon true, Crystes church ^ayth ye who so

If Tyndale ask us now whereof serves then the treuth of gods words: I say
that yt serves to make known

And this y^ therefore the way that god has taken from the begy^nynge, that is
to wit he has from the beginning

Thus (...) he in eu^ry age before the coming of Christ. Thus did he in Christ
him self, whose words he proved by his wonderful works as him self says
in the.xv. of saint John^. Thus did ^e also by his blessed apostles, whose
doct^^ne he (...) by (...). And thus has he done (...). For likewise as when
he sent his own son, (...) him and his doctrine decla(...) self such as he
was ^ god made him do myra(...) (...) then ever any did among (...) (...) the
sent his apostles and (...) that Christ did, the countrees to whom they were
sent, would

And yet when Tyndale is so (...) to tell us thus / he to^cheth nothing this
point ^hyche I laid against him in my dyaloge / that if his ly^ were (...)
in, then shold^^ follow that of so ma^^ false chyrche^ ^f false heretics, (...)
should some such miracles be wrought as well as (...)/sith if that our church
were a false church, it (...) one of the many. And if he will say that (...)
the greatest and the falseste, and therefore ^alse (...) therein (...)

And this I show you for the order of the thing, that ye may perceyi^e that
the truth of god is ^ustyfyed in it self, and depends not upon his word,
nor his word is not the cause of his truth: but by his word he shows his
truth / and by his word we believe that he does it / and by hy^ ap^^^^es and
euangelys^es we believe that he said it / a^^ by the church of every age
following, we be taught and believe that the eu^ngely^es and the apostles
preched and taught partly by writing partly by word without writing, such
things as the catholyke church of Christ tells us to have been taught by
them. And by

And therefore though yt be true as in deed yt is, that the

And as for false miracles / the catholyke church of Criste

Now if Tyndale will say that the doctors of the catholyque church have not
done miracles for every point of their doctrine: I say no more did the apostles
them self, though Tyndale say yes, which he shall never prove. But

And if he say farther that every man in the catholyque church does not
miracles, nor every doctor neither: to that I answer that of many men
teaching all one faith, yt suffyseth if any one of them do miracles. For when
the Jews were in desert / every man that was of the well beleuyng sort did not
miracles / nor (...) also did no miracles but Moses did, and god wrought
^o^ders among them self.



If he will say that sometime the doctors which we call holy saints, have
not all agreed in one / but some one has sometime thought in some one thing
otherwise then other have done: I say that this his saying is nothing to
purpose. For god does reuele his trouthes not always in one manner / but
sometime he shows yt out at onys, as he will have yt known and men bounden
forthwyth to believe yt / as he showed Moses what he would have Pharao do.
Sometime he shows yt leysourly, suffryng his flokke to comen and dyspute
theruppon / and in their treating of qui facit vnani mes in domo, which
makes his flokke of one mind in his house, that is to wit his church. So yt
in the mean while the varyaunce is without sin, and makes nothing against
the credence of the church / except Tyndale will say that he will neither
believe saint Peter nor saint Paul in any thing that they teach / because
that ones they varyed in the manner of their doctrine as appears. But he shall
never find that any of the holy doctors held obstynatly,

And therefore as tou^hynge Tyndale and Luther and friar ^usken: this obte^cyon
will not excuse their obstynate heresies, holden so^ styffely against all the
old holy saints, while they say now that freres may well wedde nonnes / but
if they repent, and leave their heresies, and do penau^s, and teach troth /
for by such means they may yet be fayntes to, and so I (...) god make them.

Now if Tyndale will yet forther say, that the church yt self have not (...)
in every age utterly byleued a like / but that the church in some age has
byleued otherwise then

And if Tyndale say the contrary of this / he must also say that Christ
has broken his promise / and he must also tell us, yt we be still bounden yet
unto this day^, and ever

But his church is sure enough / by that they know well that their hole assent
is not wrought without the spyryte of god assystent in his church. And that
them self be his very church they be sure enough / by that they se him
specially present with them by his contynuall miracles, which fail in all
false chyrches y^ be fallen out of this. All which false chyrches this true
church of cheryte Crystes proper badge / ceaceth not to sollycyte and labor
to revoke and receive again into the port of salvation and the haven of
heaven: except the devil by their ded^ly malice, drown them utterly with
dreuynge them down into the dep^he of indurate heart, thoroughly perced with
they^ pestyle^t heresye.

And yet I say ferther, that this objection of diverse a^tycles

Now if Tyndale will take hold of that y^ I have said / that god is at his
lybertye to reuele a thing when he will / and that he has now reveled this
new article to him and his holy fellows: they must I say then prove us by
miracles

If he say that they prove it by scripture, in that they preche his word: I
say again the scripture I know for goddys word, but them I know not for
goddys messengers, because they will not he aknowen of all goddys words / for
they will believe no word of his without writing / and also his words written
they mysconstrue. And therefore concerning the word of god written: the questyon
lies between us, not upon goddys word but upon the right understanding
thereof, wherein while all the old holy doctors be quyte against them, we say
now to Tyndale that of reason we may not believe him. For in these points
wherein we vary / as for ensample that freres may wedde doctors that in their
exposycyons call it abomynable lechery:

For where he says in one place of his book against me, that we may require
no miracles of them: if he had said, because they can none do, I would have
taken it for a fynall answer, and would have troubled him no more with that
troubelouse questyon. But now because he says it needs not / and would it
should seem that ye miracles which Christ and his apostles did, should serve
for the proof of his doctrine: my conscience can not suffer me to let him go so.

For sith our questyon is not upon Crystes and his apostles words, which
their miracles proved true / but upon the exposycyon and understanding that
Tyndale and

And now in such things as god sees most need, and the heretykes most busy
to assaute his church: there does

And therefore we say not as Tyndale bears us in hand, that the troth of god
depends upon the multitude of mennys mowthes: but that the catholyque
church illustrate

And these miracles has god often wrought to the conuersyon and amendment of
iewys and heretykes / and often to the confusyon and burning up of obstynate
jews and heretykes, with the beginning of their hell even here in earth.

Now Tyndale denies not but that there be and have been such miracles / but he
says that they be done by the devil. But then say I that in his so saying
he is worse

But when he says it / I say yet again he must show me why there be no
miracles among all his false chyrches of heretykes / or else to call the
true miracles of god done in the catholyke church of god false illusyons of
the devil, is a word well able alone to prove him self a devil.

Now if Tyndale will say that the turks have miracles among them as well as
our church: I may deny it him by his own rule, but if he prove it by plain
scripture. But now if I grant it him, yet shall it not serve him. For I may
prove him by plain scripture that there be neither none such, nor so many
done among them as these be that be daily done in Crystes catholic church.
For our savior Io^^. 14
should do as great and greater. And we se that in the catholyke church god
has done and daily does for his saints, both while they were here and after
their departing hense / and has also done and daily does at diverse images
and pylgrymages, as great miracles in confyrmacyon of our faith in that
behalf, as ever he did in the time of the apostles. And therefore am I very
sure that neither paynyms nor turks be able to match our church in miracles
/ but that ours as far pass all theyrs if they have any, as ever the
miracles of Moses passed the wychecrafte of the egypcyan iuglers. And of this
am I as sure / as that ye false chyrches of heretykes do no miracles at all.

Forther more as for miracles or meruayles done among

And thus in this mine answer to his one chapter, which he so gayly
florysshed, that he had went the glyteryng thereof would have made every mannys
yies so adased, yt no man should have spyed his falshed and founden out the
troth: I have is such wise confounded him and all his hole doctrine utterly /
that if I never would write one word more, yet should he never against this
alone defend his deuelysh doctrine while he lives, and take all the deuyls in
hell to

whyther the apostles left aught unwritten, that is of necessyte to be byleued.
WE be come now good christian reader unto that matter, which is vndoutely one of
the most special points that are in debate between these heretyques and us.
For upon this questyon hangs all their whole hold, in the destruccyo^ of
many holy things byleued and observed in Crystes catholyque church.



As for ensample when we say that confyrmacyon, presthed, and matrymonye, be
holy sacraments: Tyndale says nay / for he says yt is not wryte^ in
scripture. we show him plain scryptures for them, of grace given in them by
the imposycyon of the hands by the words of saint Poule / and Tyndale
laugheth his words to scorn, saying it was but a manner of the country, as a
man lays his hand upon a boys head when he calls him good son. And as
for matrymony / he says that saint Poule mente not in such wise / and that he
can make as good a sacrament of salt, of musterd seed, of a kaye, or of a
net.

So that as I say believe them onys in this, that we be bounden to believe
nothing but the only scripture / and

Now for as much therefore as ye matter of this chapyter, wherein Tyndale as he
did in the chapyter last before in which I have plainly confounded him,
gooth abowte again to take away the credence of Crystes catholyke church /
which onys fallen away, the credence and the feute of scripture and all
gooeth with it (For both would every sect of heretykes wreste it unto their
own e^^ours / and as saint Austayn says, save for the church we know not
the holy scripture of god fr^^ unholy wry^ynge of man): I require the reader to
consider well what he reads, and pass

Tyndale.
But did not the apostles teach ^^ght by mouth that they wrote not. I answer,
because that many taught one thing, and every man the same in diverse places
and unto diverse people, and confyrned every sermon with a sondrye miracle:
therefore Christ and his apostles preched an hunderd thousand sermons, and did
as many miracles / which had been superfluouse to have been all written.

More.
Now consider good reader that Tyndales purpose is, to prove us that the
apostles wrote all that was of necessyte

For I se well his falsed for which he fayneth yt. He sees miracles wrought by
god plentuousely in his church, and that thereby his church and the faith
thereof is confermed / and therefore to bring at the lestewyse some part thereof
in questyon, he would say that we find not special miracles



More^^er Tyndales words fight to gether, and one (...) can not agree with an
other. For if these words ^^ true that they preued every sermon with a sundry
miracle / (...) false that he says here also, that is to wit of ^^racles,
(...) be written as needs.

(...) that Tyndale say^h, that thapo^^le^ (...) (...) miracle: yt follows
that every necessary point that they

And for farther proof thereof / hew many things, preac^ed the apostles by
their pystles, with which we read not that they sent by the messengere for
every point a miracle.

And thus good readers here ye se first that this poyn^ of Tyndales preaching
must be better proved / which point thus reproved, answers and reproves
clearly dy^^^^ other places of his book hereafter. But yet is i^ (...) ^o ^e
considered and wayed in his words yt he says, (...)substance in general of
euerythynge ^^^^ssary to (...)

More.
In these words though I find lakke of troth / yet I sumwhat allow his wit /
as our savior said by ye wykked bailey, Lucae. 15
which though he played the false shrewe for his master / provided yet wylyly
sumwhat for him self. And so plays Tyndale here. For now that he plainly
perceyueth that the doctrine is plainly false, which his master Luther and
him self to, have taught so plainly bytwen them all this while / that is to
wit that there is no necessary troth to be byleued, but if it be proved by
plain and euydent scripture: now comes Tyndale and sees that they

But yet if he would honestly stand to his taclynge in this point, and give us
ye like lybertye that him self will take / and neither use false deduccyons of
his own, nor refu^e our deduccyons if we deduce them well: we would never
find fault in this point. But now let us deduce a thing never so straight, it
can not be allowed. Let him self draw it never so far a wry / yet will he
swear yt it is right Matthei 2^
we say that sith our savior has him self promised in the gospel, that him
self and his holy spyryte shall be with his church all days unto the end of
the world: yt follows say we thereof, that his church shall never fail as
long as ^he world lasts. John^. 16
And because our savior says in lyke^^^e, that his holy spyryte ever abiding
with his church, shall teache his church all things, and led them into every
troth, and put them in remembra^^^e of all that he him self had or would say
unto them: we deduce theruppon yt he will not suffer his church fall in to the
erronyouse bylefe of any dampnable untruth / but led them into the t^outh yt
is the contrary of that untruth. And sith (...) the holy g^^^^ shall write
unto you all things, nor shall write you all troth / but shall led

Here have I showed you a sample of our deduccyons / which I trust every man
may se that we draw it not far of, but that the scripture well and clearly
maynteneth our deducynge thereof. And the sample also that I show you serves
much for our matter against Tyndale, that contendeth and laboreth to prove that
we be bound to believe nothing but goddys promyses / and here he sees that god
promised not to put all thing in writing, but that the holy gooste should
teache us by ledynge us into every troth.

Now shall I show you a sample of Tyndales deduccyon upon scripture, which
as god would he brings forth him self in this same present chapyter, to the
intent that ye should not lakke a show / whereby ye shall se how plainly he
proves his holy doctrine by the holy scripture.

The scripture says, love thy neighbor as thy self. Now upon this text
deduceth Tyndale, that women may christian and consecrate the body of Christ and
say mass to. How other men will allow this deduccyon I can not tell. But lest
they that like it not, might hap to wene that he says it not: I shall
rehearse you his own very words.

Tyndale.
They will happily demand where yt is written that women should baptyse.
Verily in this commandment, love thy neighbor as thyselfe / yt is written

More.
Lo sir here ye se that if the mass be so necessary as the church techeth /
which says and has ordained that it is necessary to be said unto the
parysshe at the le^^e wise every sunday: if the priest be not at home, then
some good wife may for a need step to the awter and say mass in his stead
/ because the scripture says, l^ue thy neighbor as thy self.

what is there that these folk may not prove by sc^^pture / if they may
deduce it thus and have their deduccy^^ allowed. Or a made as good deduccyon as
this, and y^^^^^ 1. Parasip. 13.
thou shall honor thy lord god / he might and was bounden to set his hand
unto stayeng and keeping up of the arche of the testament that was about to
fall. But god taught other men by that mannys sudden death / that he was to
malapert to meddle with yt kind of goddys honor that was not mete for him. And
Tindale because a woman must love her neighbor as her self: will have her
not touch the arche but the blessed body of god, and bodily consecrate yt her
self / which neither the blessed mother of Crist, nor ye highest angel in
heaven, durst ever psume to think, because god had not appointed them to that
office. Such deduccyons upon scripture made they of lykelyhed that took upon
them in the old testament more then their part Numeri. 16. 2. Parasip. 2^.
that would needs play the priest and encence god him self / for which
honorable seruyce^ our lord sent him shame and sorrow.

Now if Tyndale ask me why a woman may christian and not consecrate sith both
be sacraments: I can answer him the comen answer, that though both be
necessary / yet both be not like great nor like necessary. For both is there
greater reverence to be had to the sacrament of Cristes body, then to the
sacrament of baptysme, and yet is baptysme of more necessyte then the the other,
sith that ^or fault of baptysme salvation fails and not forfaute of housell.
But as for my part I would give him none answer to that question, other then
the ordinance of gods spyryte / which I se yt god

It is to me for all Tyndales deduccyon a greater que^^yon yet, saving for the
custume of Cristes catholyke church why a woman may christian, then why she may
not consecrate. For surely sith god sent out only men to baptyse: I would set
no woman thereto for any need, no more then to be a confessor, and ^^^oyle men
of their synnys for ned^/saving yt I se ye ^one ever (...) where in Cristes
ho^e church, and the consent of holy saints approuynge and allowyng

But now as I say ye se by Tyndales ensample, for what intent and purpose he
puts in his deducynge and drawyng of articles of the faith out of the
scripture / wherein he may as well believe what he will and take what he list,
not of y^ tradycyon of Crystes catholyque church, but of the tradycyon of
Martyne Luthers lemman / as frame him self a faith by a deduccion of scripture
deduced in such a fashion.

In the same manner he draws out of scripture in his book of obedyence, and
in this book also, that a friar may 1. Timoth. 3
a bishop must be unreprovable and the husband of one wife. And in the
words of saint Poule, 1. Timoth. 4.
there shall come false prophets that shall forbede marriage. And in this text
also, 1. Corinthians. 7.
yt is better to may then to burn.

Is not this conclusyon trow ye well deduced? In ye first because saint Poule
did put in this word one, to forbid and exclude any mo then one: Tyndale
deduceth that a bishop must needs have one / and thereby makes saint
Poule false in a another place, where he counsayleth and wysshyth that he should
rather have none.

In the second text because saint Poule conde^neth the^

And upon the third text, because saint Poule says that yt is better to
mary the^ to burn: Tyndale deduceth yt it is better for a friar to marye, then
to forbere lechery / and co^sydereth not that when he breketh his vow and
weddeth an harlot, then he burns both body and soul, first hete in

Now for the declaracyon of his purpose, in drawing and deducynge of thartycle
of their faythlesse faith out of scripture of god, these ensamples suffyse /
and therefore I shall proceed farther.

Now next he comes to the purpose, to prove you that every necessary thing
that we be bounden either to believe or to do^ is written in scripture. And now
hark I pray you how properly the good man proves it. These are his words.

Tyndale.
For if that I were bounden to do or believe under pain of loss of my soul,
any thing that were not written nor depended of that which is written: what
^olpe me the scripture that is wryt^n.


Lo here is his first argument that he sets forth in the fore front of the
feld, as a special strong band. which argument who so w^ll aduy^e and
consider: if him self have wit, shall plainly say that it comes out of a
mad mann^s mouth.

For by this ^^afon till the gospellys were written, every man myght^ have
refused all the doctrine of Christ in every poy^t that was not wryte^ in ye
scripture before his day, nor drawn out thereof by a little streyghter line
then Luther draws his. And when Christ taught them the counsel of virgi^^t^
and ^any other holes^^^ things above the perfeccyon of their old law: they
might have said; show me t^ys in writing. And then if he had answered that him
self being such as he was, and for such testyfyed by writing,

1. Corinthians. 11.
Now when saint Poule in his pystle to the Corynthyes said, I will order the
remanaunt when I come my self: they should by Tyndales reason have sent him
his pystle again and say / If we shall be bounden to do any thing unwritten,
what avails us all that ever thou wrytest?

But there needs no places of scripture to this blasphemouse folly of Tindale
spoken against ye scripture / because god has taught and left some part of
his pleasure without scripture. For if a man write certain rules to his
howsholde servants, and yet give them certain beside by his own mouth, such
as peradventure should need no warnyng in writing, because the co^tynuall use
and excer^yse of the^ could not suffer them to b^ forgotten (in which kind of
commandments be the blessed sacraments so daily used in Crystes church,
that forgoten they can not be, nor left they shall not be for all the
business that these heretykes the deuyls doctors can make) if this lords
servants were so wise to learn this lesson of Tyndale and say, nay sir and
ye leave these things unwritten then a straw for all that ye

Now let us proceed to the second / why^^ is I promise you very second, for
any fruit that ye shall fyn^^ therein. These are his worde^.


In as much as Christ and all his apostles warned us, that false prophets
should come with false miracles, even to deceive the electes if it were
possible: wherwyth should the true precher confou^de the false, except he
brought true miracles to confound the false, or else autentique scripture of
full authoryte all ready among the people.

More.
Great cause have we to give thank to god / whose goodness wresteth the
tongues of heretyques and makes them there speak most against the^ self, where
they wene to speak for them self the best, as he serves Tyndale here. For
these be the words that I would have wysshed him to say. For where he means
that all must be written because that else there were nothing that could
confound false prophets the mighty mean of true miracles, and out of
measure

This secunde answer is open and plain enough in yt self. And for as much as
the first appears not peradventure so fully plain at the first sight / I
shall make yt clerer. when Tyndale says that except all were written that we
be bounden to believe or to do, there were else nothing save miracles to
confou^de false prophets that should come with false miracles: ye perceive
well that he prosupposeth that if every such thing be written in autentique
scripture, then without miracles the matter is save enough / and the true
preachers able enough to co^founde the false by the scripture

Now Tyndale telling us thus / we must first wit of him which false prophets
he means, Paynyms, Turks, or heretics. If he mean Panynyms or Turks, the^
goes he very far wide / for the true preachers can not co^founde them with
our autentyke scripture / for yt is not autentyke among them, but they say
that yt is false. If he mean heretykes, he goth almost as far wide / for
they will also when they list deny for holy scripture any part of holy
scripture that proves against their purpose / as they deny the book of
Machabees, because yt proves purgatory and prayours for them that are deed /
and deny the pystle

Now if they admytte the scripture for scripture, yet are ye never the nere /
for they will deny the true sense thereof, and obstynately defend a false / s^
that the true preacher and that false prophet shall be still as far a
sonder, as if they denied the very scripture yt self.

Now when he speaks of confoundynge them: we must wit of him what he means
by co^foundyng them. whether he mean that the true preacher shall make the
false prophet ashamed / or that he shall make the people perceive their
doctrine for false. As for making the false prophets ashamed: ye se your self
they be so shameless that yt will

of all the catholyque church of Christ this fyftene hundred

Now if against all this, the true preacher fall in farther dyspycyons again
/ as well about his first questyon as about the church, with diverse other
that incydently fall in debate between them / and then for the fynall end and
playneste proof conclude and rest upon the scripture, and say that he has
proved his part well thereby, and that his textes be clear, and the textes of
the the other part are falsely wrested, and his own answers effectual, and the
tothers but sophystycall / and then the false prophet for him self again
say, that he ioyeth much that their dysputacyon is

But now how myche parell were there more, if this false prophet should as
Tyndale puts his case, come forth with false miracles to / and in the end
of his dysputacyon and his holy e^hortacyon theruppon, say farther to the
people thus: Dear brethern in the love of the lord the father and his only
begoten son our savior Christ, that came into this wreched world to show yt
ensample of meekness, and not to make him self as great a god as his father,
as the this evil man miss led with an evil spyryte, would led

But now say I that on the the other side the word of god unwritten may stay all
to g^ther. For I say that the truth of that article taught and byleued as the
church without any doubt or questyon byleueth / may be so surely graven in
mannys heart, that though he never have read nor herd neither any scripture
in that point: yet presupposynge yt for an undoubted troth, he shall set at
naught all the false wrested scripture of the f^lse prophet, and all his false
miracles to / and shall ever conster the scripture by the known article of the
catholyque faith, which was tought and byleued before those textes of scripture
were wryte^, and has

But I say therefore as I have often said before, that as for miracles he has
so specially kept for the profe^ of ye troth,

Tyndale.
Some man would ask, how did god continue his generacyon from Adam to Noe, and
from Noe to Abraam, and so to Moses without writing but with teaching fro
mouth to mouth. I answer first that there was no scripture in the world all
the while / that shall they prove when our lady has a new son.

More.
Tyndale says that some man would ask this question. But he knows well
enough that I lay this against him

But is not this a proper answer now? where as against his false ground that
there can be no true faith but if it be written in scripture, I objected
against him the faith of many good faithful men / in whose days we can not
matter is not of scripture, as it is taken for bare writing, such as every
scryueners boy writes in his masters shop / but as it sygnyfyeth such
holy writing as god causes to be written and byndeth folk to believe, upon
the parell of their soul health. And then I say yet again that it is enough
for me that our lady shall have fyfcene new sonnys, ere Tyndale be able to
prove me that some of those whom I allege and he confesses for faithful
folk, had any such scripture at all.

And Tyndale feeling full well that this point prykketh him, shrynketh hither
and thither thereat, and seeks many shyftes. And for all the shyftes that he
fyndeth here, because they all satysfye not him self: he is feign a^terwarde
Lira delirat. But it is more easy for Tyndale to make a mokke upon his name /
then to obtain his virtue and lernyng. But what wins Tyndale by that
answer there? if he said true / yet were he never the nere. For if the hole
world were at that time fallen from the faith save those few: yet were it for
my purpose suffycyent that the true faith had first from god to man, and so
forth fro man to man, com^ by mouth without scripture unto those few / though
all the remanaunt that had herd thereof had then been fallen fro the
bylyefe

Tyndale.
God taught Adam greater things then to write.

More.
If he mean of spirytuall reuelacyons, it makes little to y^ purpose / if of
worldely things, I think well he taught him things of greater necessyte, as
peradventure tyllage of the ^^^^^de. But as for writing, I wene as long as he
lived, was founden yet long after Adams days. For though Adam had as g^^at
a wit as any man has had synnys: yet he found not out every thing that many
a more

Tyndale.
And that there was writing in the world long ere Abraam, ye and ere Noe, do
stories testyfye.

More.
Full well. But there is none of those stories any thing sybbe to saint Iohn^s
gospel. He fyndeth not in them: Qu^ vidit testimonium perhibuit/nor, verum est
testimonium eius.

There were stories, which as saint Austayne says, wrote of things done
thousands of years before ye world was made. And though yt were proved as yt
is not, yt there were writing from the bygynnynge: yet as I said before,

Tyndale.
Not wythstandynge though there had been no writing: the preachers were ever
prophets gloryouse in doing miracles, wherewyth they confyrmed their
preaching.

More.
This is right well said and very largely / and lakketh nothing now, but even
to be as well and largely proved. which when he shall so largely prove me by
plain scripture (without which by Luthers own rule, Luthers own scoler may
not look to be byleued) he shall have myche a do I trow. For he says that by
all this time which was ye space

But I am very glad to here him say so / and am^^te^ts

Now if Tyndale will say that it is now not like / for there is no cause
neither of holy preachers nor miracles, because we have the scryptures / as
Abraam said unto the Lucae. 1^
they have all ready Moses and the prophets / and if they believe not them, no
more will they believe one that were come hense neither: this will not serve
Tyndale. For they were not excusable which then had the scryptures,
considering that the scripture had been and yet every age were well testyfyed
with miracles, in that the prophets and prechers thereof, and the places where
it was preched and occupied in goddys service, were by god illustrate and set
out with miracles / in so much that he did not only send in to the world his
prophets and true preachers with miracles, 4. Regum. 13.
but also by the bon^s of them raised and sent in to the world deed men also,
to give the world warning to, though he lysted not to do so much at that
wreches request^

Tyndale.
And beyond that, god wrote his testament unto them allway, both what to do,
and what to believe even in sacraments. (...) the sacrifices which god (...)
Adams sons, were no dumme popetrye or superstycyouse maho^et^ye, but signs
of the testament of god / and in them they red the word of god as we do in
books.

More.
Tyndale tells us here a another fair tale. But in this I say as I said
before in the the other / that his tale lakketh but all that yt should have, that
is to (...) the proof. For ye shall here now how he would seem to prove yt.


The testament which god made with Noe, that he would no mo^e drown the
world with water / he wrote in the sacrament of the raynebowe. And the
appoyntement made between him and Abraam / he wrote in the sacrament of
cyrcumcysyon. And therefore said Steven, Acts.vij. he gave them the testament
of cyrcumcysyon / not that the outward cyrcumcysyon was the hole testament /
but the sacrament or sign thereof. For cyrcumcysyon preached goddys word unto
them as I have in other places declared.

More.
Is not this well proved now. He shows us of sacrifices of cyrcumcisyon, and
of the raynebowe / which he coupleth with sacryfyces and circumcysyon, and
calls yt a sacrament like the the other, because he would have us wene that no
sacrament either then did or now does, any more profyt

Nor if it had never be seen yet / there would I wene for all the natural
reasons that men make now therefore, never a man have myssed yt. But as I say
were yt the tone were yt the the other / god either made yt or appointed yt but
for a sign of bodily health and the world, to be preserved from universal
flode / where as sacryfyces and cyrcumcysyon and much more the blessed
sacraments of Crystes church, perteyne to the soul health / not as bare
signs, but as things

But now consider how well these things prove his goostly purpose. He says
that from Adam to Moses god taught them in sacraments always both what they
should do and what they should believe / and he proves yt because god did so in
three. And so this is his argument, god did so ^hryes, ergo he did so a^way /
god did s^ (...) three, ergo he did so in all / god in sacraments taught them
some things, ergo in sacraments

where fyndeth Tyndale that god taught Abraam, what thing the cyrcumcysyon
should sygnyfye, or wherefore he should do yt, other then that he would have him
and all his do yt / what moral virtue he should understand thereby, as the
cuttynge of and ca^tynge away of all superfluouse carnal things, or any
such other thing, what did he teache him. Or where fyndeth he that to the
people was any such thing preached thereby, when the circumcisyon was given
and commanded.

In the sacryfyce of Abell in killing and offering the bestes / where fyndeth
Tyndale that there was taught unto Abell or any man else, that yt should
sygnyfye the kyllyng of fleshely lusts or any such other things / saving
that

where fyndeth he that Abraam was taught, that in offering up his son
Isaac, and then the sheep in his stead / yt should sygnyfye the offering of
Christ upon the cross, or any thing else, but his thankful obedyence and
proof of his fast faith and hope in god.

And though yt may appear in every sacryfyce and in every prayour unto god,
that men should love god above all thing: yet in what sacrifyce were they
learned to love their neighbor?

This is a vain tale of Tyndale which he shall never prove while he lives.
And yet the better he proves it if he could prove yt / the worse should he
make his matter. For if

Now sees Tyndale this to be very troth him self, th^^ if sacraments were
without scripture profitable unto the^, and stood them in the stead of
scripture: yt might be by the so yt might in deed, if that the wykked pope
had not taken away the sygnyfycacyons of our sacraments from us, as he has
robbed us (says Tyndale) of the tre^w sense of all the scripture.

Tyndale must here tell us which pope has taken from us the sygnyfycacyon of
the sacraments, and robbed from us the true sense of the scripture. If any
pope this.viii. hu^derd year (by all which time Tyndale says they have been all
naught) have done any thing therein contrary to the old popes y^ were by the
space of.vii. hundred year next before that, which popes he denies not for
good nor ca^ not deny: let him tell which, and wherein, and whereby he can prove

Tyndale.
But in the time of Moses when the congregation was increaced, that they must
have many preachers and also rulers temporal: then all was received

More.
Here is his hole ground wheruppon he will anon conclude, that sith all was
then received in scripture among the jews / so must it follow that all was
received by scripture among christian men. which follows not as I will after
show you, though he said true / in that he says that in the time of Moses
all was received in scripture.

But sith that theruppon is all his hole matter grounded: let him prove you that
point first. For ye consider well that it is not enough to him that they then
received scripture / but he must prove that then they received all in scry^ture
/ and that every thyng^ that they should do or believe, was then delivered them
in scripture. And therefore sith yt

Tyndale.
All was then received in scripture / in so much that Christ and his apostles
might not have been byleued without scripture for all their miracles.

More
Lo this is all the hole proof that ever he brings forth for this point,
wheruppon his hole purpose hangs. And in deed it were somewhat / if it were as
true as it is false For he neither has any scripture to prove it / and all
reason is quyte against it. First as for scripture, though Christ showed to
the jews as the troth was, that the scripture

But because Tyndale compares the scripture with miracles, and sets so
little by gods word unwritten: Christ said sumwhat more by miracles and by
his own word at that time unwritten, then he said either by saint John^ or by
ye scripture either. Johan. 15.
For he said of those twayne^ that if either of both had lakked / they ^^d
not ben in the sin of infydelite. And he says not so much of saint John^,
nor of the scripture neither.



And because that in the credence given unto Cryste^ Tyndale gives so great
preemynens to the scripture above the miracles of Christ / that is to say to
the word of god written above wonderful works of god done: let Tyndale
understand that the cause why the witness of scripture help unto the
crede^ce of Christ, was by reason of miracle /

And yet farther they that would not believe in Christ for his miracles / would
not believe in him for the scripture neither.

And yet for the fynall confutacyon of Tyndales folly, in saying that Christ for
all his miracles could not have been byleued but for the scripture: every fool
knows that all the world save the Jews in their turnynge to Crystes
bylyefe, were not led by the scripture but by the miracles / and byleued not
Christ for the scripture, but byleued the scripture for Christ, and Christ for
the miracles. And the Jews which people most byleued the scripture / of them
I say fewest byleued in Christ.

Tyndale.
Wherefore for as myche Crystes congregacyon is spredde abroad into all the
world, much brother then Moses / and in as much as we have not the old
testament only but also the new, wherein all things are opened so rychely and
all fullfylled, that before was promised / and in so much that there is no
promise byhynde of ought to be showed more save the resurreccyon / ye and
seeing that Criste and all the apostles with all the angellis of heaven if they
were here, could preach no more then is preached of necessyte to our souls:
how then should we receive a new article of our faith without scripture, as
profitable unto my soul as smoke for sore yies.

More.
Here Tyndale makes his conclusyon, that sith Moses because the people was
encreaced, so fully received all things necessary to be byleued in scripture,
that Christ him self might not have be byleued without scripture

One is that all things be now bysyde the old testament, opened rychely in
the new testament, that before were promised. This vnderpropper is not very
proper for to bear up his byldynge / for yt is the self same thing that is
in questyon. For we say that if he take the new testament for

Then sets he to yt a another shorer, that all thing is in the new testament
fulfilled that was promised before / and also that there is no promise byhynde
of ought to be she^ed more, save the resurreccyon. Now this shorer is so
surely

But finally he sets to a mighty strong post able to bear down all, when
he says that Christ, and all his apostles, and all the angellys of heaven,
could preach no more then is preached of necessyte to our souls. And
therfore^ and for all the wise and well framed reasons which I have reproved,
and proved unreasonable before: he says that to receive a new article of faith
without scripture, were as profitable for our souls as smoke for sore yies

he so would do / the^ were they of necessyte to our souls salvation

And this was also a wise temperaunce of the matter that he says for these
wise causes, that yt were as wholesome for our souls as smoke for sore yies, if
we received any new artycles of faith without scripture. If the yien of his
soul

Tyndale.
What help yt me to believe that our ladies body is in heaven.

More.
If this be a new byleued article / let Tyndale tell when this bylyef began
/ and he shall find that yt has been thus byleued even from the time of her
deceace. And now ye thing that almost.xv.C. year has been byleued / he calls
a ne^ article. But now how like is this bylyef of this new article of.xv.
hund^ed year old, unto his ensample of smoke and sore yies. For first if yt
help him not / yet at the least yt hu^ted him not as sm^ke does sore yies. But
sith it is true and taught unto the church by the spyryt^ ^f god, which
ledeth the church into every tro^th / and ^h^ ^hyrche grow^ into the consent
and argument the^of by the same spirit of^ concord and agreement, which makes
all the house of on^ my^de / and though the bylefe thereof were very new: yet yt



If Tyndale will avoid this and say, nay / but I believe better these men that
wrote ye tone of Enoch and Hely, then I believe th^se men that tell me the
the other of our lady: then must Tyndale tell us why he better byleueth those
then these. wherein what has he to say, but that those that wrote it in the
scripture were inspyred of god and so he byleueth should any such church tell
it him as him self knows

And thus good christian ^eaders ye se to what wourshypfull conclusyon, with a
fourfolde confusyon. Tyndale has brought him self, with layenge this article
whereby he would mynysshe the wourshyppe of our most blessed lady.

But likewise as he speaks here of the assumpcyon of our lady / the bylefe
whereof he would should seem to serve of naught: the same says he in diverse
places of the bylefe of the perpetual vyrgynyte of our lady / saying, that it
is nothing pertaining to the salvation of our soul. But I

For likewise as though a sophyster would with a fond argument, prove unto a
simple soul that two eggs were three / because that there is one, and there be
twain, and one and twain make three: that simple unlearned man, though he lakke
learning to soil his fond argument / has yet wit enough to laugh thereat,
and to ete the two eggs him self, and bid the sophyster take and ete the
third. So is every faithful man as sure in the syghte of his soul, how
apparently so ever an heretyke argue by scripture to ye contrary, that the
comen faith of Crystes catholyke church is out of questyon true / and that
the scripture understood right,

But for because Tyndale will when we have all said, stykke still at one point
/ and ask us what shall profit his soul to believe that our lady is in heaven
body and soul

And in good faith I wene we shall se those folk fall so

Tyndale.
What am I the better for the bylyefe of purgatory.

More.
In good faith not the better of an halfpeny, while ye by leave yt no better
then ye do. But surely if ye byleued yt well / ye might be both the better
for purgatory and ye farther from hell.

Tyndale.
To fere men with, thou will say.

More.
He makes men answer as yt pleases him self. But we will not say so / for
it were a folyshe saying to say, Tyndale is the better for the bylyefe of
purgatory to fere men with. what fool would say so but Tyndale? For Tyndals
bylyef can not fere folk, no more then other mennys bylyef fereth Tyndale /
nor Tyndale is not ye better though other men be aferde. And therefore that
questyon as he folyshely frames yt, so he folyshely answers yt.

But I say that purgatory is ordained for the punyshement of such synnys, as
were either venyall in the bygynnynge / or from mortal turned to venyall by
the forgyuenesse of the mortalyte.

And I say that the bylyefe th^rof profyteth two manner

A another way the bylyefe thereof profyteth, in that as for so far forth yt
keeps the byleuer from hell / into ye fire whereof for the contrary bylyefe and
heresye holden against yt, he should else fall hed^ynge down / byleued he
never so well, and lived he never ^o well also bysyde. And therefore of the
bylyefe of purgatory there comes ^hese profy^es (...) other folk / though
Tyndale be neue^ ^he better for the bylyefe thereof, which byleueth yt not.


Christ and his apostles thought hell enough. And yet besides that, the
flesshely ymagynacyons may not stand with gods word. what great fere can
there be of that terryble fire, which thou may quench almost for three
halfpens.

More.
Nay surely that fire is not so lyghtely quenched, that folk should upon the
boldness of perdons, stand out of the fere of purgatory. For likewise as
though the sacrament of penance be able to put away theternalyte of the pain
/ yet has the party for all that, cause to fere both purgatory and hell to,
lest some defaute upon his own part let god in the sacrament, to work
such grace in him as should serve therefore: so though the perdon be able to
dyscharge a

And if the fere of purgatory were so clear gone, because it might be quenched
with the cost of three halfepence: then were the fere of hell gone (...) by
Tyndales techynge / sith bare faith and sleyght repentyng puts out that fire
clean, without the cost of a penny.



And therefore now, where as he calls as unprofitable ^^ the so^le as smoke to
sore eyes, all things that be not either written in scripture or deduced
theruppon / and put the

Tyndale.
And that the apostles should teach aught by mouth, that they would not write /
I pray you for what purpose.

More.
Now have ye herd all ready by what high reasons Tyndale has prouyd you the
thing that he affermeth / that is to wit that the apostles wrote and left in
writing every thing that is of necessyte for the soul, either to be done or
to be byleued.

But sith he sees him self, that in his reasons for his own part there is
so ly^^e pyth / and that he can never prove nor no man else, the things that
Tyndale must prove or else prove him self a fool, for falling from the faith
of Crystes chyrce / that is to say y^ the apostles left all such necessary

This manner is much like as Tyndale would afferme yt all the laws of England
be written, and what so ever were unwritten were no law. And when he had long
wrestled therwyth and could not prove it / would then ask me, has the realm
of England any laws that he not wryten^ to

Tyndale.
Because they should not come to the hands of the hethen for mokkynge says
master More. I pray you what thing more to be mokked of the hethen / could
they teach, then the resurreccyon, and that Christ was god and man and dyed
between two thieves, and for his deths sake all that repent and believe therein
should have their sins forgyuen them. ye and if the apostles understood
thereby as we do / what madder thing unto hethen people could they

More.
This was an happy hap for master Tyndale, that it happed master More with
the layenge of such a slender cause, to mynyster master Tyndale so much
pleasant matter of replycacyon. For if I had not happed to have said that the
apostles forbear the writing of some things, for estewynge of infydeles
mokkynge: Tyndale had had now

But now if I would be content to say, that I was over seen in so saying /
and that I can not defend my words yt they forbear to write any manner thing
for any such cause / and that also I can not tell why nor for what cause the
apoles wrote some necessary things, and left some necessary ^^^nges unwritten
/ no more then I can tell why that every e^angelyste writes many things that
his fellows have, and yet l^^eth out some as great and as necessary as some
that h^ w^^^^^h in: if I would for Tyndales pleasure say this (^h^c^^ y^ I did
I neded not much to force, for any great ha^^^ that my part could take thereby
/ for y^ thing were in it self never the less true that the apostles so did

But yet if it like you good readers to read mine own words as I wrote the^,
which ye shall find in the first book of my dyaloge the.xxv. chapyter: there
shall ye perceive it / yt it is not fully so far from all reason, as Tyndale
would have it seem. For I show there that the apostles did more plainly speak,
and more openly declared, many things by mouth among the christian folk,
because their audyence was more mete while they were only among them self /
then they did by their writing, which might percase come in to the hands of
hethen men, that would laugh some Actuum. 2
where he forba^e ^o call C^y^t god lest it should have hyndred the faith in
that audyen^^/but that our savior did ye same him self in the many(...)
preaching of his godhed, a^ app^reth in the^^ c^apyte^ of saint John^. Now
sith ye se that thus th^^ dy^ in deed / wh^^ needs me to ca^e for all Tyndales
why^s (...) they (...) bare this where was less cause to ^ere (and wh^ the^
(...) this where was more cause to fere: sith he can (...)

For the proof whereof / Tyndale has here as I said before, by reason of his
heresye with false understanding of saint Paul / brought forth a right good
sample. For thus he says.

Tyndale.
ye and if the apostles understood thereby as we do / what madder thing unto the
hethen people could they have taught, then that bread is Crystes bod^e

More.
Lo here ye se yt Tyndale him self dowteth upon saint Poules words, whyther
he meant as we do / which yet mean not as Tyndale does, that bread is Crystes
body and wine his blood, so that ye bread and wine still remain as Tyndale
says that the apostles write / but that the bread and wine is converted and
changed into Crystes body and blood / and that by what words so ever the
apostles write yt, yet yt is the thing that they mean / and that all be yt
that they have written yt plain enough in scripture, yet both Christ and they
with many words so clearly did declare yt by mouth, that in that article
neither then nor never after was there any doubt arose, till yt these heretykes
scrutamini scripturas, search ye in scripture: so says yt as plainly, nisi
credideritis non intelligetis, but if ye believe ye shall not understand. And
here ye se that though Tyndale will not confess that the apostles left any
thyng^ unwritten, nor that they wrote any thing the more coue^^^^ ^or the
mokkynge of the Hethen / yet he says him self that the apostle wrote so that
men might doubt what they me^^^ And that I ^are well say yt in the christian
flokke, they presently so farreforth declared yt / yt they left no such ^.
Corinth. 11.
yet saint Poule said yes him self, when he wrote unto the Corinthianes,
caetera quum venero ipse disponam: the other things I will dyspose or order
when I come my self.

But the sacraments so sore grieve Tyndales sore yien, that he may not abide
the sight of them / and therefore he goth on against them still.

Tyndale.
More over what is yt that the apostles taught by mouth and durst not write,
the sacraments. As for baptyme and the sacrament of the body and blood of
Christ, they wrote / and yt is expressed what is sygnyfyed by them. And also

More.
If a man read over these words and examine them not / he may be sone abused.
But who so well way them, and consider every part / shall sone perceive that
this process is filled up with malice, falsed, and folly. First he would
that because the apostles have written the two sacraments, that is to wit
baptysme and the sacrament of the auter, and the sygnyfycacyons of them / and
of the the other five as he says, have not written: he would I say therefore that
we should take yt as proved, that the other ^yue were no dyuine sacraments,
nor delivered to the church by Christ nor his ap^stles. Now is this argumen^
though his anteceden^ were true / yet as wisely concluded, as this is of the
laws of ^^glande: Men have wryte^ some / ergo they have w^^ten a^^^



Now yet in this reason of his as faynte and as feeble as yt is, he is feign to
psuppose false. For he presupposes that of any of the remanau^t / the apostles
have not written. which is so plain false, that if there were any shame in him,
he might not for shame say yt. Of co^fyrmacyon writes saint A^^. 8. He^re. 6.
(...). ^. 1. Tim^^^. 4. (...). 5. M^rc. ^.
Of matrimony and presthed, saint Poule manyfestly / the tone to the Ephesyes,
the the other to Timothe. Anelynge, saint James, and saint Mark in the gospel
also. And of penance and the parts thereof, every man all most in every
part of scripture. And this thing Tyndale so well knows / and that yt has
been so often so plainly proved unto them, that they could never yet nor never
shall while they live, be able to wythstande yt, neither with scripture nor
with reason, but with raylynge and babbling. And therefore as I say this knows
Tyndale so well, that yt is more the^ shame for him now so to write, as though
the apostles had never written of them. which if they never had done in deed
/ yet were the sacraments sure enough,

But yet because I would be loath that Tyndale might

Now if he mean in the third fasshyon / that is to wit that the apostles of
those five sacraments, do not beside ye comen sygnyfycacyon of grace, write
any special and proper sygnyfycacyons of the outward tokens, to which
sygnyfycacyons the same outward tokens had such resemblans and likeness
that they were therefore appropred unto them / as water in baptysme has by ye
wessynge of body a resemblauns unto the clensynge of the soul, if Tyndale
mean in this manner as yt seems that he does (for when Luther and he and all
the sort of them: had long

Now then I say sith Tyndale means this wise and therefore says in his
words before remembered, that otherwise preached they do no good but hurt all
to gether / for yt makes he says the audyence to put confydence therein, that
the deed yt self iustyfyeth a man, which is the denyenge of Cristes blood /
sith Tyndale I say says thus: I would wit of Tyndale whether the sacraments
and the ceremony^s of the old law were by god provided to be well, and with
their profit delivered and taught by M^yses unto the Jews. I think ^^^t
Tyndale will not be so mad to say, yt god did by Moses teache them to serve
him with

Now if Tyndale will at this clappe turn his cheke a side / and say that
because that else all their service to god done with those sacraments and
ceremonies had been dampnable / therefore it app^reth well that all the
sygnyfycacio^s of them were taught them / and so the minor of mine argue^mt
false: yet in turnynge the to cheke for me, he tourneth the the other very fair
to me / so that he will have a clap on the tone cheke or the the other make what
skyfte he can.

For then say I this unto him, that if the knowledge of all these
sygnyfycacions was so necessary to them that with out that knowledge, the doing
of those things which without sin they might not leave undone, were sin
as often as they did them / and that therefore lest we should be so wretched to
wene god had on ^ue^y side so bywrapped his

And then say I that therup^on^ it very well follows ferther / that Tyndale
saying that M^yses receyu^^ all ^^cessary things in writing, said very false
and (...)

And if Tyndale wene to wry aside and skape, by that he says that those
sacraments and ceremonies served them for books / and that they ^ed all the
sygnyfycacyons in them as in books: I ask him whyther the ceremonies were
tokens so like the sygnyfycacyons, that they were able to teache the
sygnyfycacyons, and keep them by the beholding of the ceremonies or not. If
they were / they had not ben forgotten. If they were not, and yet the
sygnyfycacyons so necessary / then yet again was not every thing necessary
delivered Moses in writing.



And it is no dowte but yt the jews never knew ye special sygnyfycacyo^s of
all their sacraments, sacryfyces, and ceremonies, other then grace and
remyssyon of sins, or peraduentu^^ yt they were fygures and tokens of things
that should fall not yet perceived by them / as we know our sacraments (...)
signs of grace. And it is undoubted, yt both they and we which in fay^h, hope,
and che^yte, do any such thing as god (...) and (...) such fashyon as he
byddeth v^/all though we know^ not why he will be served in such wise, no more
then Abraam knew why god bad him

But yet consider one thing by the way, yt ye mysse take him not, nor be not
by a fair word led out of your way. He calls the sacrament of the auter
the sacrament of the body and blood of Christ / in which words he calls it
well, but yet means he not so well thereby as good christian men do, nor as him
self would seem to do. For he means not that there is the very body and
blood of Christ in deed, though

For the great heretyke Thorpe in his examynacyon, calls the sacrament a
right; and by the same name that Tyndale now does / so that ^ man would at the
first heryng find no fault therein, but mysse take him for a good christian man.
But afterward he declares him self well and clearly, that he means like a
naughty heretyke / as Tyndale does also in sundry places of his book. For he
says ye sacrament, sign, and token, be but three names of one thing / and
that the sacrament of the auter is very bread still. And he mokketh at them
that teach it to be the very body of our savior him self / and he is wood
with them that do it any honor.

And so in this point concerning the blessed sacrament of the auter, Tyndale
is yet a much more heretyke then Luther is him self in his writing / all
though in deed it appears well that he meant as much in the begynn^ng, till he
wythdrew him self for envy of other, that hasted forward and set forth that
heresye before him.

And of troth I am right credebly informed by a very virtuous man, whom god
has of his goodness illumined and called home again, out of ye dark Egypt
of their blind heresies / that at such time as friar Barons and Tyndale first
met and talked to gether beyond the sea, after that he fled out of the
f^eres where he was enjoined to (...) his penance after he had borne his
faggot; Ty^dale and

Tyndale.
All the ceremonies and sacraments that were from Adam to Christ, had
sygnyfycacyons / and all that are made mencyon of in the new testament.

More.
Upon this he concludes after, that except baptysme and the sacrament of the
auter / all the remanaunt be no true sacraments for lakke of sygnifycacyons.
But ere he can so conclude / he must first prove, not only that all the
sacraments and ceremonies from Adam to Christ had sygnyfycacyons / but also
that all those sygnyfycacyons were the^ to the people known and understood.
For else though god did set things to sygnyfye and to be done: yet if he
commanded them to do it and told them not the sygnyfycacyons, follow and his
argument good. For if god gave them ceremonies

But now that they be good in deed, and delivered unto Crystes catholyke
church by him self and his holy spytyte sent by him self to dwell therein, to
teach it all necessary troth, and thereby necessaryly to preserve it from all
damnable vntreuth, false bylyefe, and idolatrye (as the sacraments and
ceremonies were if they were false): this have I proved to Tyndale ofter I trow
the^ fyftene times / to which in fyftene hundred year he shall I am sure never
make one good answer.

Tyndale.
Wherefore in as much as the sacraments of the old testament have
sygnyfycacyons / and

More.
He repeteth here and hepeth up all his proves together, which proves I have
repreued piece mete all to gether / and

This piece is, where he says that all the sacraments of the new testamente
have sygnyfycacyons also / and then expowneth which all he means / saying all
of which mencyon is made that they were delivered unto us by the very apostles
at Crystes commandment.

It is to me more then wonder what this man means. First yt must needs be
that he accompteth among such as he says, there is no mencyon made of their
delyuery by the very apostles, all those five which he so often and so fully

But now his words will rather prove that these five have sygnyfycacyons to.
For he says that all have sygnyfycacyons, whereof mention is made that they
were delivered unto us by the very apostles. wherefore Tyndale does here either
confess that these five have sygnyfycacyons also / and then confesses his
words false, by which he so often says they be no sacraments, because they
have no sygnyfycacyons / for A^t. 8. Tim^o ^.4. Ephesians. 5. Iac^^^. 5. Marc. 6.
and the other of the apostles / if they be the very apostles whom he and we
both call the apostles, saint Peter, saint Poule, saint Iamys, and their
fellows. So that I wonder what the mad man means to speak in this matter so
^olempnly, and handle yt so madly. For when they make mencyon of them: the wise
man may well wit that they did not bygynne by any wyly fo^e after / but by
Christ him self that taught those things to them, and they forth to his
church.

Tyndale.
And thereto presthed was in the time of the apostles an office / which if they
would do truly it would more profit then all the sacraments of the world.

More.
Is not here a another mad reason? His purpose is to prove that the apostles
left no necessary thing unwritten / and Tyndale proves it thus. In the
apostles time prestehed was an office / which if the prestes would do it
truly, would more profit then all the sacraments in the world. Now ye wot
well his conclusyon must nedys be this: And therefore it follows that ye
apostles left no necessary thing vnwryten^ is not this a mad concluded
argument. And yet are there in his words mo folyes then one beside. For
granted that presthed was an office / yet might that offycer

Now if that office well occupied, were more profitable then all the
sacraments besides: what lets yt the other sacraments to be good and
necessary to salvation. were this a wise argument? Better is it to forbere
sin then to do penance for sin / ergo to do penance for sin is not
necessary. Now after this goodly argument goes he to another as gay, and says.

Tyndale.
And again, Goddys holynesses strive not one against a another, nor defyle one
a another. Their sacraments defyle one a another. For wedlock defyleth
presthed, more then horedome, theft, mur^^er, or any sin against nature.

More.
Here is but one argument, and that but short / but here be two lies long and
loud enough. For first where he grou^deth him self upon this, That gods
holynesses strive not one against another, nor defyle one another: he says
plain false and against holy scripture quyte. For the beryenge of deed men,
ever was and is an holy deed and well allowed with god / and yet would he not
suffer the bys^hoppe to bery any man, and though it were his father. And also
if Tyndale will abide by this: either he must say that perpetual vyrgynyte is
naught and not holy, contrary to saint Poule and our savior him self, who
take it and teache it for holy and prefer it before wedloke with his w^rke /
or

only commytteth horedom, but also says openly that he

And now puts he after yt his great solemn questyon, where he fyndeth in
scripture that women may christian children / which joins to his words
before, nere enough in the book, but in reason as far of as the scripture
that he lays therefore, is far of from ye matter / as I have touched before.

And surely through all his book and almost every thing that he makes,
sometime the chapyters, sometime the

Tyndale.
And finally though we were sure that god him self had given us a sacrament
what so ever yt were: yet if the sygnifycacyon were ones lost / we must of
necessite either seek up the sygnyfycacyon, or put some other sygnyfycacyon
of gods word thereto, what we ought to do or believe thereby, or else put yt
down. For yt is impossyble to observe a sacrament without sygnyfycacyon, but
to our damnacyon. If we keep the faith purely, and the law of love undefiled
/ which are the sygnyfycacyons of all ceremonies: there is no ieobardye to
alter or change the fashyon of the ceremonye, or to put yt down if need be.

More.
Lo good readers here ye se finally how well and how w^sely, and thereto how
vertuousely Tyndale fynysheth th^s chapyter. For the whole effect of all these
words is in the

when god taught Moses the making of the tabernacle,

when our savior him self sent out his dyscyples, and bade them in the
confyrmacyon of their doctrine, lay their hands upon syke folk, and they
should be hole, and that they should anoint some with oil: would yt not (wene
ye) have done very well, that they should have said nay, but if he would tell
them why lay their hands more then speak their bare word, and why anoint
them with oil rather then smere them with butter. Surely the devil has made
this man mad / he would else never say as he says. For if it change the
fashyon of the ceremonies, and to put the^ down

And surely very soth he says. For when we fall ones to be content with that:
there will, but if we change that mind and mende, neither any ceremony nor
any sacrament serve us.

And yet if faith and love be as Tyndale here says, the sygnyfycacyons of all
the ceremonies: what parell is there to keep all the ceremonies with them
twain, without any other sygnyfycacyons? And thus by Tyndale his own

And here have ye now seen all that ever he says, for the proof of the thing
that he has in this chapter taken in hand to prove / that is to wit that the
apostles have left written in scripture all things that of necessyte perteyne
to ye soul health, both in things to be done, and things to be byleued. And
now perceive ye perfitely also / y^ all that ever he says, there is not any
one thing that to the proof of his purpose serves him worth a rysh.

Here might I now well leave (ye se well) as for this matter / sith I have
suffycyently confuted and avoided clearly

I showed there in my dialoge by the authorite of saint John^ the eua^gelyste
in ye last chapyter of his gospel / that all thing was not written. For there
he says him self, John^. 21
Many things did Jesus / which if they were all written, the world would not
receive ye books. To this answers Tyndale thus.

Tyndale.
He iugleth. For John^ means of the miracles which Jesus did / and not of
the necessary points of the faith.

More.
ye se well now that Tyndale well feleth, that sith y^ eua^gelystes Galathas. 2,
to come and speak of the faith among them, but not to write it all out in
books / but every euangelyste of occasyo^ offered unto him self, as god put in
his mind and remembrance, wrote his own gospel severally by him self, and
their epystles in like wise / and peradventure one of them in all their lives
never read the gospel that the the other wrote: this I say being thus, except
that god beside their purpose provided ^ among them all every necessary point
should be written (which thing Tyndale neither does nor can

And therefore Tyndale feleth full well how nere this place of saint John^
prykketh him / if in those words of saint John^ might be understood that
he had not wryte^ every necessary point of our bylefe.

And therefore to avoid this pynche / Tyndale says that I iugle. For saint
John^ he says meant only of Crystes miracles / and not of any necessary point
of the faith.

I iugle not. For I say not nay but ye saint John^ meant of miracles. And in
the tone place of the twain he speaks

I think he takes not so great hold^ upon this word, did / in that saint
John^ says, Christ did many other things, and says not Christ taught many
other things. For

But now let us se whyther of us two play the false iugeler / I that tell you
that every necessary point of bylefe is not written in saint Iohn^s gospel / or
Tyndale that would



And thus ye se how wisely Tyndale sykketh with me

And yet because Tyndale will nothing allow but the word / if he pull from yt
word of saint John^: I shall prove him the same purpose by the word of saint
Iohn^s master, our savior Christ him self / and saint John^ shall bear me
record that yt was Christ that said yt. For our savior lo as witnesses
saint John^ in the.xvi. chapter, Johan. 16
said unto his dyscyples him self: I have yet many things to say to you,
but ye can not bear them now / but when that the spyryte of truth is come, he
shall teach you all truth.

Lo here ye here our savior say him self, that he left and would leave some
things, and that great things, and therefore of lykelyhed necessary / that
they should not here

where as I show in my dyaloge that yt is not written in scripture that our
lady was a perpetual virgyne, and yet yt is a necessary point to be byleued:
This is his answer thereto.

Tyndale.
And how brings he in the perpetual virgynite of our lady / which though yt
be never so true, is yet none article of our faith to be saved by / but we
believe

More.
By this answer yt appears well, that god be thanked he fyndeth not yet the
peoples devotion so far fallen from our lady / that he dare be bold to say
all that he thinks. For else he would say more then he does. And like as he
forbedeth folk to pray to her / and specially mysselyketh her deuowt antem of
Salve regina: so would he not fail if he saw the people frame all after his
fantasye, to blaspheme her in this matter of a another fashion / as other of his
fellows have done before his days.

But now for the mean while he is content yt men may think them self at
lybertye to believe it or not believe yt as

This will not Tyndale herafter let to say when he list / if he may make us
wene in the mean while that we may

But I say that in that point Tyndale says wrong. For in any such thing
as we be bounden to believe / if I believe yt in deed, and yet believe therwyth
that I may lawfully choose whether I will believe yt or not: I say that in so
byleuynge I believe naught, nor my bylyefe shall not serve me.

Then say I farther that this article is such, that we be bounde^ to believe
yt. For he that byleueth yt not is an h^retyque / as yt plainly appears hoth
by saint Austayn in his book to quod vult deus/and by saint Hierome in his
book against Heluidius / and by the other holy saints and martyrs, who as
saint Hierome and saint Austayne rehearse, did write against heretykes before /
and called them Antidichomarians,

Then say I finally that for as much as it well and plain appears, that all
those holy co^nynge men and blessed saints / and therwyth all the whole
catholyke church bysyde, have ever hitherto taken the perpetual virginyte of
our blessed lady for so sure a point of christian faith and bylyefe, yt they
have ever condemned the contrary for an heresye / and then sith y^ article is
not in holy scripture written, but yt the words of scripture not well
understood, seem to say the contrary: I may and do against Tindale and his
fellows well and fully conclude, that there is some thing necessary to be
byleued, and yet is not written in scripture. And so to my secund argument, ye
find his answer fond. For as for his story faith / with only which he says
we believe this point: I

Tyndale.
And when he alleges Paul to the Corinthies: I say that Paul never knew of
this word mass / neither can any man gather thereof any strange holy
gestures, but the plain contrary / and that there was no another use there then
to break the bread among them at soper, as Crist did. A and therefore he calls
it Cristes super and not mass.

More.
Here goth Tyndale about to iugle / but his gallys be to great. I laid those
words for none other cause, but to caetera autem quum venero disponam/the
remanaunt or all the other things, I will my self order

And where Tyndale says that saint Poule never know this word mass, I believe
that well enough / for I never herd that he spoke any word of english. But
that he knew not the thing that english men call the mass / Tyndale has not
proved yet, nor will not do this weke. For he must

where as I said that of ye apostles tradicyon was learned ye manner of
co^secracyon: y^ answers Tyndale in this wise.

Tyndale.
A great dowte / as though we could not gather of the scripture how to do yt.

More.
Surely men setting no more thereby then Tyndale and his fellows do: may gather
out of the gospel or the pystle read both Rosseus and Luther in those places
/ and therefore

where as I in my dialoge allege, that the priest in the consecracyon puts
water in to the wine, where as the scripture speaks but of wine: thereto
answers Tyndale thus.

Tyndale.
A great dowte also and a perilouse case if yt were left out. For either yt
was done to slake the hete of the wine / or put to after a ceremonye, to
signifye that as the water is changed into wine, so are we changed through
faith as yt were into Christ, and are one with him. How be yt all is to their
own shame, that ought should be done or used among us christian, whereof no man
wiste the meaning. For if I understood not the meaning / yt helps me.1.
Corinth. 14. and as experience teaches. But if our sheperdes had been as
willing to ^ede as to shere: we had neded no such dispycye^ce, ner they to
have burnt so many as they have.

More.
where Tyndale says in skorne (as he gladly scorneth always when he speaks of
the sacrament) yt yt were a great doubt and a perylouse case to leave the water
out: I am very sure that if there had be not dowte nor parell to leave yt out
/ there was never good christian man that any reverence had to Christ, but he
would have put great dowte, and have thought yt great parell to put any water
in. For what best would be so bold when he fyndeth not that Christ in the
co^secracyon and change of the wine into his own blood, used any other thing
then wyne^ and spoke also him self

Luther was him self also so meshed in this matter, when

But what so ever Tyndale say / there was never good man yet this.xv. C. year
that durst leave it out / nor other wise use it the^ god has taught his
apostles with his own word unwritten otherwise then in christian hearts.

Holy saints also have thought upon other causes. For some have thought that
god ordained the water to be contrary^ till now Luther and Tyndale and such
other of

Now where he says yt it is the shame of ye clergy if aught be used among
christian men, whereof no man wyste the meaning: why more then for Moses to
deliver and leave to the people many ceremonies commanded by god, whereof the
people what so ever Tyndale say never understood the meaning. would the wise
man that if god bydde a man do

Then fynysheth he this matter with a proper taunt, that if our shepeherdes were
as willing to feed as to shere: we had neded no such dyspycyons / nor they
to have burned so many as they have.

Lo ye great fault that Tyndale fyndeth in yt the prelates do not as he does,
deuyse causes at adventure and warraunt them for true / nor leave out the water
boldly upon his goostly consayle now, against the faith of all faithful
folk this.xv. hundred year before.

And where he lays that ye slaknesse of fedyng has caused so many to be
burned: I will not say nay but that yt might have be^ better with some, if
there had been used more dilygence in preaching. But as f^r many such as have been pchynge in the world would not have helped their obstynacy. But sure if ye
prelates had taken as good head in time as they should have done: there should
peradventure at length fewer have been burned thereby. But there should have been
mo burned by a great many then there have been within this seven year last
passed. The lakke whereof I fere me will make mo burned within this seven year
next coming / then else should have neded to have been burned in seven score.

where I alleged the change of the sabbath day into the sunday without
scripture: thereto he answers thus.

Tyndale.
As for the sabbath a great matter. We be lords over the sabbath day, and

More.
Tyndale makes the change of the sabbat day a very sleyght matter. And
because that our savior said of him self, that the son of man, that is to
wit he him self was lord of the sabbat day: therefore as though every man
were god almighty his fellow, Tyndale says that we be lords of the sabbat day,
so that we may chaung the sunday

He says that there was never cause to chaung it fro satterday, but only to
put a difference between us and ye Jews, and lest we should bycome servants
unto the day after their superstycyon. But I think there was bysyde this a
another cause more pryncypall then any of both those. For ye Jews and the
christian had other dyfferences and dystynccyons between them / as baptysme and
cyrcumcysyon. Nor yt had not ben so great inconvenience that they should both
have served god on one day, that for the auoydyng thereof we should have left
the day that god him self appointed in the beginning. And also christian men
both might have kept the same day that the Jews kept, and yet have left the
superstycyon thereof that the Jews use. And may now

And yet because they should not have such a lordely

If Tyndale stykke still in this point / and say the church made yt and the
church may break yt: I say that the church as yt made yt so yt may break yt.
That is to wit that as yt made yt by the spirit of god, so yt may break yt by
the same spirit. That is to say that as god made yt, so him self may break yt,
if yt so shall please him. For in such things though the church have
ordained yt: yet has the church not done yt but the spirit of god / as holy
saint Austayne says in the receyuynge of ou^ howsell, where he says that yt
has pleased the holy ghost, that where as in the bygynnynge

And in like wise the apostles, to give us knowledge that though the church
make the ordinance, yet the spyryt of god is the worker thereof: wrote as is
remembered in the.xv. of the acts: It has pleased ye holy ghost and us, and so
forth showed what laws they had made / declarynge thereby that though them
self made them, yet made they them not with out the mocyon of gods holy
spirit. And never shall the whole catholyque church, neither make without god
nor break again without him. But he shall with his presence and his holy
spyryte, so gyde and govern his church in such manner of things / that they
shall not chaung^

For where Tyndale says that we be such lords over

And where he says we need none holydaye at all if the people might be taught
without it: this is one drawght of his poison put forth under the sweet
pretexte of preaching. whereby sith preaching is necessary / he would make men
believe that coming to church on the holyday, or there to honor god with
dyuyne service and prayour, were but a thing of naught / where as the apostles
came them self in to the temples in the holidays to pray. And our savior
alleges him self the words of Esaias: Esaiae.51.
My house shall be called the house of prayour.

Now where as I alleged in my dyaloge the words of saint Poule unto the
Thessalonycenses, to whom he writes in this wise: keep you my tradycyons which
I have taken you, either by word or letter: to this does Tyndale

Tyndale.
I have to that answered Rochester in the obedience / that his tradicyons were
the gospel that he preached.

More.
In very deed Tyndale in his book of disobedyence laboreth sore to wade out of
those words of saint Poule / in which as my lord of Rochester said, it
appears plain that saint Poule says him self that he taught things by
mouth which he wrote not. And what says Tyndale to it there? he says nothing
else in this world but as he says here / that ye things which saint Poule
taught by mouth, were the self same things that he wrote. And then goes he
forth with a long babelary, part to no purpose and part

we say that these sacraments and many holy ceremonies used in the church in
the mass and in other parts of dyuyne service / were taught by the spyryte of
god and delivered by his blessed apostles. Nay says Tyndale yt could not be /
for all necessary things yt they taught they wrote. Prove that say we and
take all. But we will prove by saint Poules own words, that he taught things
that he wrote not. For he byddeth the Thessalonicensis keep and observe well
all that he had taught the^, either by mouth or letters / and then that none of
them were any necessary points, that Mary says he, for I shall tell you what
he taught. He taught the same that he wrote / and his tradycyons were the
gospel that he preached / and good manners and virtues, and some good custumes
to, that be sins for abuses changed, as ^ys^ynge each other. And some he
taught as precepts, and some as good counsay^es / as virginite, and wydolye
chastyte, not to ^ynne heaven thereby (For neither cyrcumcysyon nor
vncyrcumcysyon is any thing at all, but the keeping of the commandments is
all together) but that they might be without trowble, and the better wait on
goddys words, and the frelyer serve their brethren.

Here I pass by his heresies, that in these words appear both against
vyrgynyte and wydoly chastyte / which he means to be nothing worth as
touching any reward to be given for them in heuyn. For though he say no
ferther here but that they win not heuyn, which every man agrees:

I let pass also / that by those words of saint Poule which him self now
brings in, that the keeping of the commandments is all together, his own
heresies be over thrown. For if the keeping of the commandments be all
together / then faith alone is not all together. But rather as he makes
cyrcumcysyon nothing, because the commandments be all: so might he make
faith nothing because

These words also of saint Poule destroy Tyndales heresye, that mennys good
works be not rewarded in heuyn / and that it is idolatrye to serve god with
any bodyly works, or to do any of the^ to come the rather to heaven. For if the
keeping of the commandments be all together / and some of them be bodyly
works: a man may lawfully do them for goddys sake, and to his worship to, and
have his reward in heaven to.

But now lettyng these points pass as I say: I would

Tyndale in this point well perceyueth him self, how hard a part he has to
prove. And therefore seeing that he has entrede a matter that he can not end /
and has said that he can never make good: at last he waxes angry. And
because he can not tell all thing that saint Poule taught, as he began to
take upon him: he concludes nothing but that saint Poule taught none of the
sacraments nor ceremonies that Luther and he reprove. And thus he says.

Tyndale.
But that the apostles gave us any blind ceremonies, whereof we could not
know the reason / that I deny and also defye.

More.
Forsooth save for the ryme I would not give a ryshe, neither for his denyeng
nor for his defyenge, nor for any reason that he lays forth therefore.

For where he says that yt is contrary to the learning of saint Poule every
where: I say that therein Tindale says not true. For saint Poule reproved but
the superstyciouse trust that the jews had, as well in their ceremonies and
sacraments, as in the works of their law without faith and justice and deeds
of cheryte / and the superstycyon (...)

One other thing he says which he takes for an high point, to prove that
saint Poule taught no ceremonies or sacraments, but such as h^ taught also
their sygnyfycacyons. And that he proves thus.

Tyndale.
Paul commands that no man ones speak in the church that is the
congregacyon, but in a tongue that all men vnderstnade / except that there be
an interpreter by.

More.
And what than? At such time as the law was given first to the chyldern of
Israel / yt was in deed written in a tongue that the people understood. But yet
the ceremonies

And therefore where Tyndale tells a long tale yt saint Paul commands
them to labor for knowelege, under ^tadynge, feeling / and beware of
hypocrosye, ceremonies, and all manner of dysguysynge, and many such words mo,
some of saint Poule and some of his own planted in among them: his tale seems
somewhat solemn, but yt is nothing substauncyall. For the sacraments and
ceremonys given by god unto (...) church, be neither hipocrisye nor iudaycall
ceremonies, nor dysguysynges neither / which word

For where as Tyndale rymeth yt out, and says that he both denies and also
defyeth, that the apostles taught any ceremonye whereof the reason could not be
known: for all his denyeng and also defyenge, a better man then the apostles
did, our savior Christ him self, when he sent is dy^cyples forth to baptyse
and to preach / he taught them how they should go and what they should do, but
the reason and cause of every ceremony that find we not y^ ever he taught

For that he would have them neither bear walet, nor sachell, nor shone upon
their ^^te, nor stykke in their hand, nor salute any man by the way, nor why he
chose water and baptism instead of circu^cisyon, nor why he would they should
lay their hands upon some syke folk whom they should hele, nor why they should
anoint syke folk with oil and hele them by that mean: the causes I say and
the proper sygnyfycacyons of all these ceremonies and many other, we find not
that our savior when he sent them showed them / and yet he bode them do yt,
and they were bound to obaye and meryted and deserved by their obedience.
Myche more the^ he should have done, who so would have said, tell me first

And as I have before somewhat say^e / almyghtye god taught many ceremonies to
Moses, and he forth to ^he people / and neither can Tyndale nor any man elips
prove

I let pass all the ceremonies taught about the arche, the temple, the
sacryfyces, and many other things / and will wit but how Tyndale can prove me
that the chyldern of Israel, or as I say Moses either, understood all the
ceremouyes commanded by god about their departing out of Egypt? why a lamb,
why a kydde, why of one year, why without spotte, why taken the.x. day, why
offered the xiiii, why the vengauns of god put fro the house at the token of the
blood put upon the posts, why eaten by night, why none left till the morrow,
but rather the remanaunt burnte, why unleavened bread, why wild letuse. I know

If Tyndale yet say that the people understood all those ceremonies: I will
first bydde him prove me that point by scripture. And then for some lykelyhed
toward a proof of the contrary / I will lay forth for authorite against
wyllyam Tyndale, the words of one man whom Tyndale would were most byleued of
all men / that is to wit the words of wyllyam Tyndale him self. For him
self says in his book against me.

Tyndale.
Christ axed the apostles Matthew. xv, whom they took him for. And Peter answered
for them all / saynge^ I say that thou art Christ the son of the living

More.
Now sith as Tyndale says him self, saint Peter at ye time did not know by
what mean Christ should redeem us / and yt is very lykely that saint Peter al
be yt he was not yet fully learned, did yet at ye time going to scole with
Christ, understand as myche at the least wise as the come^ people did even in
Moses days: I think therefore ye Tyndale should him self agree contrary to
that him self has said before, that the people understood not all the
ceremonies. And yet I think he will not say that they might at that time leave
all such undone / and say as Tyndale says,

I would feign wit wherefore Tyndale should take it for so strange, that god or
his apostles should give unto Crystes church any ceremonies, whereof they
should not understand the reason / when he sees well that god has spoken to
his people many words by his prophets and his own son, and his sons
apostles to, and caused them to be written also in holy scripture / in which
textes men be no more sure of the very sentence then of the very sygnyfycacyon
of those ceremonies. But god has not without our fruit left such things
unknown unto us, to quykken and e^ercyse as saint Austayne says some mennys
minds in the study and deuysynge theruppon / which if all were open and
plain, would wax neglygent and dull / and now

I were loathe to leave untouched any thing that Tyndale any where says
against my purpose in this matter. And therefore sith I find in his answer to
my dyaloge yet a another patche, wherein I perceive he takes great pleasure /
and weneth or would at the lest that other men should wene, that he had
therwyth utterly proved his part and clearly reproved mine: I will wythdrawe
none of his glory, and therefore ye shall here that to. In his answer to
the.xxix. chapyter of my first book these are his words.


In the.xxix. chapyter M. More alleges, that Christ s^yed not the (...) ghost
shall write, but shall teach. It is not the use to say t^^ holy (...) writes
/ but inspyreth the writer.

More.
Properly answered, if I would hold my peace. But I must put Tyndale again
in remembrance because he byleueth nothing but scripture, and then draws all
the scripture into gods promyses: I must therefore I say put him in
remembrance that I brought in that authoryte to show him that god made no
promise that he would write all his new testament, nor cause yt to be made all
in books / but that he would send his holy ghost to teache his church and to lead the^ into every troth. And where Tyndale says it is not ye use to say ye
holy ghost writes but inspyreth y^ writer / I Hi^r^m. ^1.


Lo here he tells what manner of writing he will use in writing of his new
law / because we shall not excuse our self and say, that we will not believe no
more thereof then we shall find written in books. He makes us no promise yt he
will cause it to be wryte^ in books / but pursuyng these words of the
prophet, he said him self his own mouth^ yt he would send the holy ghost to
come teach his church and led them in to every troth. To this will Tyndale
happily say in ye word he meant and so did ye prophet also, that he would write
yt in the hearts of the euangelystes and apostles and E^^iae.54 Io^annis.^.
that they shall be all gods own scolers / which sygnyfyeth that the
congregacyon and company shall be taught by god and his spyrite, that shall
write the new law the right faith in the hearts of his church. And our savior
said, I shall send ye holy ghost that shall teach you all thing, and led
you into every troth. He said not the holy ghost shall teache some of you that
shall write yt out unto the remanaunt. And therefore Tyndales comely gloss will
Iohannis.xxj, ad Thessalonicenses, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
ad Corynthios.xj. And if these plain textes seem not yet suffycyent for our
part / let him and all his fellows bring forth some half text half so
suffycyent for their, part proving that all is written and take all to gether.

But yet goth he farther and would seem of his curtesye to help me somewhat
forth, and say more the^ I could for mine own part / and yet avoid yt to.
For thus he says.

Tyndale.
I marvel that he had not brought as many of his brethern do, Matthew in the
last / where Christ commanded the apos^les to go and teach all nacyons, and
said not write.

More.
In deed this would have been well brought in there / and many of my brethern
have as he says brought yt in, and my self also some where else in places mo
then one / which I now boste of, because ye shall se that Tyndale has not
yet so gayly answered yt as to make me ashamed to lay yt forth again. For if
he could bring out one text so good for him, as that is for us / that is to
say, that like as my brethern find out that text by which Christ byddeth
all his apostles go preach and teach his gospel: so if Tyndale or any of his
brethern could^ find out any text, in

Tyndale.
I answer that this precepte, love thy neighbor as thy self, and god above
all thing / went with the apostles and compelled them to seek gods honor in
us, and to seek all means to continue the faith unto the worlds end. Now the
apostles knew before that heresies should come / and therefore wrote that yt
might be a remedy against heresies as yt well appears John^.xxi. where

More.
Lo now have ye herd his uttermost, whereby he preueth us that they wrote all
to gether that is of necessite to be known. which he proves not as ye se by
any scripture proper for the point / as that any of them had any special
commandment to write: but that their cheryte drove them to yt. which he
proves by a deduccyon upon this commandment, love god above all thing, and
thy neighbor as thy self. For theruppon as he deduced before that women

He must also set in, that no mo of the apostles knew that point but only
those that wrote: or else that the the other could not write nor god could not
teach them / or finally that each of them read others writing, and so saw
that all was written by their fellows / and then carried all their fellows
writynge with them into the countres where them self preched, and left yt
there. And this must he prove me by scripture / for else he saves not
vpperyght the cheryte of saint Andrew nor saint Bartlemew, that wrote
nothing at all nor of saint Peter in writing less then saint Poule / nor of
saint John^ for leuynge out the consecracion at Crystes maundye.

He must also put in that they saw that without writing god could not keep the
points of faith among ye people / for

He must also put in, that all their writing is kept and reserved saufe, and
ever shall till the day of dome / for else he sees what follows. And then
knows he well that beside corrupcyon of books, myche thereof is lo^te / but if
he will say that in that scripture was nothing necessary, but that it is in
this ye remains. And then must he prove me that by scripture ere I believe
him. And over this must he put in, that they have written all thing as clear as
they might have done to answer all heretykes wythall / for ye thing longed
to cheryte to, if of cheryte their purpose was to write against all heresies.

And yet which I had almost forgoten, he must put in

And finally must he put in to this argument also, that after their days
Christ would never show nor reuele any

Now se you good readers how syke, how sore and how feeble his argument is / by
which he would prove us that ye cheryte of the apostles drove them to put all
necessary things in writing. But yet had there almost one reason of his
passed me unware / which if I had left vntowched, Tyndale would have said
I had dissymyled^ and left unanswered his chyefe reason of all. For where as
his feeble argument before touched, was but the cause that drove the apostles to
leave nothing unwritten: he has yet one, that shows the cause why and
wherefore god would him self have every necessary thing written, and that ye
wot well

Tyndale.
Now sir god has made his lasie and everlasting testament, and no more
byhynde then the apperynge of Christ again. And because he will not stir up
every day a new prophet with a new miracle, to co^ferme new doctrine, or to
call again the old that was forgoten: therefore were all things necessary to
salvation comprehended in scripture ever to endure.

More.
If Tyndals bare word be worthy to be taken for so great authoryte, that what
so ever he say men must believe it, only because Tyndale says it: then is this
argument very sure and strong / but than it is superfluouse and a great deal
to long. For then it should suffyse him to say, the apostles

For first how proves he that all thing is open. How proves he that he
understands every place in scripture? every place in Genesys, every place in
the prophets, every place in ye Psalter, every place in saint Iohn^s gospel,
every place in saint Poules pystles, every place in ye Apocalipsys. Be all
these things open to Tyndale? Is any man so mad to believe him therein upon his
word, because he boldly

But I dare be as bold to say that the scripture; all be yt many places be
plain, and in ye hardeste place good folk may take fruit if they play not as
Tyndale does, be bold upon yt like blind bayarde, and think it plain and
open / yet is it not so open but yt there is many a place in every part
thereof, so dark, and of such diffyculty / yt there neither is nor I wene never
was synnys ye apostles days, nor peradventure every man among them neither,
y^ durst have been so bold to say yt all thing was so open to him / but yt there
may lie yet therein for all ye understanding ye men have thereof, many a great
mystery

But when yt shall please god any such things to do, show, and reuele: he
shall then send no Luthers, nor no Tyndales, nor none Huskyns, nor no friar
out of a no^nes bed to preach yt / but he shall send such holy messengers
as he has been ever wont about such besyn^sse to send, that shall not come
with a false faith, and evil works, and be accursed

Such false prophets shall god as I say send none of his erand. But Tyndale
ca^ not prove yt true that he says, that all thing is yet so fully fynyshed,
but that ye time may

Tyndale.
Because all is done save the dome, and because god will not stere up every
day a new prophet with a new miracle, to conferme new doctrine or to call

More.
Lo now have we herd him say yt / and now lakke we no more but even to here him
prove yt. For when Tyndale proves not that the thing is so done in deed / but
lays us only the causes for which he says god caused yt to be done: in
this does he nothing ellis but tell us what god should have done if he had
taken him to counsel.

Tyndale proves not that god has showed him that all is done save only the
day of dome / which he must prove or else we will deny yt him. Nor he
proves not that god has showed him yt he would not sterre up if need were
every day a new prophet, and that with new miracles to, rather then bind him
self that he should never teache any

And we say also that god has daily stered up and daily does sterre up new
prophets in sundry parts of his catholyke church, holy doctors, and
preachers, and faithful men^ and good lyuers / for whom both quycke and deed
he does show miracles in his catholyke church, and thereby approves the faith
and works that they lived and dyed in, as he sterred up prophets among the
jews in sundry ages for all the miracles done by Moses / and does not so for
no church of heretykes.

Nor he proves not that ye points of faith must nedys have fallen away, but
if they had been wryte^. which thing he must prove us / for else will we
boldly deny it, and go nere to prove the contrary. For we se that the church
has kept diverse things without scripture this.xiii.C. year, and as it is
thought.ii.C. year before / and is yet as lykely to keep it as many mo, and
twyse as many mo if the world last so long.

Now have they be kept so long either by man, or by ye devil, or else by
god. And if Tindale say that either man or devil have kept them all this
while: we may be bold to tell him that then was god as able to keep them, as
was any of those both / and neded no more scripture thereto, then neded either
man or devil.

Tyndale proves us not neither that when the things were written they were
thereby sure as he says to endure for ever. For he proves not by scripture
that ye scripture shall endure for ever. For though the scripture say that ye
word of god shall last for ever, and that there shall not thereof the least
letter be lost: yet is that meant of the son of god and of the matter, and of
the word unwritten, and not of the words written in scripture / except none of
saint Poules epystles be lost, or that such as be lost was no scripture, or
y^ in those pystles were no letters.

Nor Tyndale has not proved that the scripture is so clearly written, but that
god needs as well to sterre up prophets with miracles for the declaracion of
ye troth thereof,

Tyndale.
By the scripture the counsayles general, and not by open miracle, have
concluded such things as were in them determined / as stories make mencyon.

More.
Let Tyndale bring forth one story that says as he says, and then ^ette
him tell us the tale again. I make my self very sure, that he shall find no
story that shall say that the general counsayles in their co^clusyons,
regarded no miracles but only scripture. For he shall find in the stories

For when the Arrianes and ye catholykes were in debate upon the
understanding of the scryptures (as the catholyques be with these heretykes
now) the catholyques did not only se then yt the heretykes wrested and mysse
co^strewed the scripture (as we se that these heretyques myche more mysse
wreste yt now) but they saw also that ye come^ faith of the catholyke church,
was received and byleued before that heresye bygon / and being very sure by
the promise of god,

They saw also that god did miracles in his catholyque church, and sufferd
none among the Arrianes / saving in the taking of vengeance upon them to
their pain and shame, as when Arri^s guts fell out of his belly into the
draught / (as we daily se that he does, and ever shall se that he shall do in
his catholyke church / and suffers none

Tyndale.
And by the same scryptures we know which counsayles were true and which
false.

More.
This is a pratye point lo. For now may ye se for what cause he says that the
general counsayles made their determynacyons by scripture and not by miracle /
because he would have yt seem that there were nothing of gods spirit
wurkynge with the general counsales, but only the wit and affeccyons of men
/ so that he would as appears

For he says that by the scripture we know which of those counsayles were
true and which false. But where he says we know: I would wit of him
which we he means / which of his hundred new sects he calls his we. For
they agree so evil to gether, that ye thing which the tone says that by the
scripture he knows for true, the the other says that by the scripture he
knows for false.

Tyndales master Mar^en Luther and all the sects in Almayne, call for a
general counsel. Now would I wit to what purpose, if all that were concluded
therein should be never the surer / but that every froward fool may as well
after as he might before, say that he knows by scripture

Tyndale.
And by the same scripture shall we if any new questyon arise, determyne it
also. For Abraam answered the rich man: They have Moses and the prophets,
let them here them / and said not, they have the scrybes and the pharysees,
whom they should here preaching out of the sete of their own doctrine without
scripture.

More.
I had little went that Tyndale would have brought in this point of Abraam,
Lazarus, and the rich gloto^ in hell.

And Tindale sees also full well, yt those words of Abraa^ nothing touch
the new testament, nor nothing that this question hangs upon. For those
words were spoken by

For where he says that every new questyon that may arise, we shall
determyne by scripture: ye se your self very well he speaks of an ungracious
purpose / willing to bring in his poysened heresies under that ptexte, sith
that

And yet se ye farther that he speaks as though he herd not his own voice.
For he said before that by the scripture we judge the counsayles. And then how
can any thing be determined by scripture / when of ye right understanding
thereof there ca^ never any determinate end be made, though all Cristendome
should come to gether and agree thereon, but that every folyshe heretyque may
say that all they understood

what scripture laid they for this general counsel of theyrs. For though
there were scripture in the old testament,

Now this same authoryte has Crystes church assembled in the general
counlayles / and the same spirit enspyreth them, and the same words of Crist
byndeth his flokke to obey them that bound them to obey his apostles.

Tyndale.
Nay says Tyndale, not so. when M. More alleged, he that hereth you hereth me
/ and also this, If any man here not the chyrh ta^e him for an he

More.
I would feign with of Tyndale in what place of my book he fyndeth that I make
that conclusyon / with which yt pleases him to bylye me to sweet his own
answer with. For I never concluded nor said that we were bounden to believe
all that is shaue^ in all that ever he says. But I then said and yet I say,
that these words of our savior Criste, who so hereth you hereth me / were no
more proper commandment to bind any man to believe the apostles, then to
believe the whole catholyque church and general counsayls, that represent that
whole body of the catholic chirch / and

Now these words of Criste, if any man here not ye chirch, take him for an
hethen: every man well wotech that this is manifestly spoken not of the
apostles only for their time, but of the chirch as long as ye world shall
last. For so long shall the chirch endure, do these heretics what so ever
they can to the contrary. And as yt is true of every partyculare church and
the governors thereof, as long as yt swarueth not from ye whole body of ye
chirch universal: so is it much more properly meant of the whole vnyuersale
church yt self / and of the counsayles general representynge that hole
church,

And therefore where as Tyndale says he would feign find in what figure the
syllogysme is made, which he says I conclude: he must go light a candle and
seek up that him self / for it is his own syllogysme and not mine, for him
self makes that conclusyon and not I.

But my syllogism is this. Every christian man refusyng to here, believe, and
obaye, the church / is to be taken as an heretyke and an hethen. But so it is
that Tyndale being a christian man, and taking upon him in the understanding
of s^rypture, to control and condemn the church / refuses to here, believe,
and obaye the church: ergo Tyndale is to be taken as an hethen man and an
heretyke.

This syllogysme is mine. And this syllogysme if Tyndale

Now knytteth he up all this gere with another syllogysme of his own making.
And in what figure he makes that, let him tell that can / for surely that
can I not. These are his words.

Tyndale.
Crystes dyscyples taught Crystes doctrine, consermyng it with miracles / that
it might be known for gods and not the yrs. And even so must the church
that I will believe / show a miracle, or bring autentyke scripture that is come
from the apostles that confyr^^d it with miracles.

More.
Now may I be bold to make the conclusyon of his argument for him. For sith
he goes about in his book to teache not him self but other that shall read
his book: his conclusyo^ can be another, but that no man should believe any
church without miracle or autentyke scripture. whereof the cause is because he
will not otherwise believe any. Let him put that in figure when he can, and set
there to ye cause that moves him thereto, to believe no church without scripture
or miracle / and yet will all together with.xvi. syllogysmes bring him short
home.

For when he says that Crystes dyscyples taught his doctrine, confyrmynge it
with miracles / and so must ye chirch that he will believe, or else bring
autentyque scrypture^

I say therefore farther ye Tyndale does but mokke and trifle / when he says
he will believe no chirch without miracle or aute^tike scripture. For he
refuses to believe ye chirch though it bring both twain. For if we bring
aute^tyque scripture: he will not let to say yt it is not autentique, as he
plays by the Machabees, and his master be saint I amys pystle. If he deny
not, then will he say that the church understands yt wrong / so that the
church has need to bring miracles, to prove him that the scripture is the
scripture / and that they all to gether understand yt better then he alone, as
well as that the church is the chirch. And yet when the catholyque

Now have ye herd all that I find Tyndale answer, against such things as I
laid before in my dialoge / to prove that all thing necessary is not written
in scripture. And then what proof he ca^ make for his own part, to pue that
all is written, ye have herd all ready / wherein how little pyth there is, every
child may perceive.

And then may ye surely reken, that sith this is his last book, and the place
in which he makes a special title for the matter: he brings in all the
best that he ca^ find. And if he find any thing ellyswhere written by his
master, Ins^^^^te scriptur^^, quoniam i^s^ testimonium ^^hibe^t de me. Look
you in yt scriptures for they bear witness of me. which thing no man denies /
but we deny them that nothing witnesses Christ else but the scripture alone.
For our savior him self which said those words, said that saint John^
also bare witness of him bysyde the scripture / and that his father bare
witness of him bysyde the scripture / and that his own works bare witness
of him bysyde ye scripture / and that the holy ghost at his coming bare
witness of him bysyde the scripture / and his apostles (as him self said they
should / bare witness of him beside the scripture.

And like wise he saw that yt had not ben to purpose to bring in those
words, which some of that sect bring forth full solemnly, yt is to wit the
words of saint John^

By which words he means not that no man shall never after be so hardy to
write any prophecye, if ever it please god any other thing to reucle. And much
less he means to put god to silence, that he shall never any other thing
reuele if him list / nor says not that god has showed him that he never
will. But he gives a charge that men use dylygence and treuth in the writing
out of his

And therefore as solempnely as some of his brethren bring forth these words
of saint John^: Tyndale saw yet that they would not serve, and therefore he
left them out.

Now lay some folk for this purpose, the words of Moses in the.xii. of the
deuteronomy, where he sayth^ The thing that I command the, that thing only
shalt thou do to god / and thou shalt neither any thing add nor mynysshe.
which words be yet in this matter less to y^ purpose, that were abomynable
before the face of god.

Now what serve these words of Moses to our psent purpose. For first if
Moses had not meant as I say, and as the circu^staunce of the terte shows /
but had utterly meant to command them that they should nothing add at all
in no manner thing unto those things that he commanded them him self as the
words sown: then had he forboden them to believe or obaye any prophet that
ever should come after him / except only the prophet of whom he prophesied
and bad they should here him. And yet might they think that prophet
restrained by those words, in such things as should perteyne to the service
of god.

Also if that Moses had not meant as I say, but pcysely forboden the^ to add
any thing at all unto his instytucyo^s: they might never have added any new
feste of holy days festum encc^nioru^ have been instytuted afterward, which
was long after Moses days instytuted and very sol^mnly observed / and god
there with so well content, that our savior honored it with his own blessed
presence him self.

But now suppose that Moses had him self meant as strayghtly as their
unreasonable construccyon would strayn his words to: what would all that serve
unto their purpose in our matter. May christian men do nothing but that that
Moses bad / because the jews might do nothing but that that Moses bad?
where were then bycome the sacrament of baptysme, and the sacrame^^ of the
auter? ye say they, but this proves that the church should add nothing

Secundely I say that if Moses had meant as precysely as they mysse take him:
yet had yt touched but the jews / and us christian men nothing at all.

Thyrdely I say that in the things which Tyndale reproves

Fourthly we say that any such thing as ye church uses or byleueth as
necessary, though yt be not written: yet add they thereby nothing unto gods
words. For we say that yt is gods word unwritten, and of as great authoryte
as is his word written / as the things that partly were delivered to the
chirch by the apostles, and partly taught unto the church by that holy
spirit of god, that was by Crystes promise sent unto the church to be with
yt for euer^ to

Finally for conclusyon to prove you the folly of that allegacyon: ye know well
all our questyon is no more but whyther the apostles left every necessary
thing in writing, as Tyndale affermeth. And now consider you whither this be
a good proof or not / though Moses words were taken as straight as these me^
mysse take the^. were not this wene ye well argued. Moses forbode the iewys to
add or mynyshe to or from any thing that he commanded: ergo the apostles
have left no necessary thing unwritten.

Bysyde that this argument is very folysh in yt self: yet have I before at
large opened you the lakkes thereof, where I answered Tyndale concerning his
high reason of the apostles cheryte, compellynge them to leave nothing
unwritten.

And Moses also commanded to write as he was / was not commanded yet to
put all to gether in wry^ynge, that the people should be bounden to do or
believe, by any text ye Tyndale has showed us yet, or ever shall show I
suppose.

How be it as for this allegacyo^, though some other have thought yt gay:
Tyndale yet perceived it for such as he saw well would not serve him / and
therefore he left it out.

yet are there some, and among them friar Barons / yt lays for y^ purpose
the words of our savior written in the.xxiii. of Matthew, where he says, Upon
the cheyre of Moses,

For the thing that saint Austayne there says: diverse says in this wise,
For they bind importable burdayns

I know right well that those words may be well expowned on the the other
fashyon before remembered, understanding in the allegory by the chair of Moses,
the doctrine and law of Moses. And then may those greuouse importable burdayns
be called the burdens of the old law / with which

And therefore as I have said, those words of Crystes were properly meant of
the tradycyons and commandments of the scrybes and pharasees them self
bysyde the law / which things our savior there co^ma^^ded to be kept and
observed, where so ever they were not superstycyouse, nor contraryed

Now there is no man I think so madde^ when he dowteth not but the servants
in a mannys household are so bounden to fulfill and obaye their masters
lyefull commandments, that if they would refuse at his bidding to knele
down and say certain praoyurs with him to bed ward all the whole house to
gether, till he should show them some such commandment in scripture / they
were well worthy to go to the devil for their proud dysobedyence in

Upon these words concerning their tradycyons, would I not have been so long /
saving that both friar Barns rially

But now that I have proved that those words of Crist make not only nothing
for they purpose against ye laws of Crystes church / but also make plainly
for the laws against their purpose: I shall not need long to tarry you for
the the other point / that is to wit, to prove you yt those words of Christ
nothing make against our pryncypall purpose. For they nothing prove yt every
necessary thing is written / though we constre Crystes words not of the
tradycyons,

Therefore by those words expownynge them of the doctrine of Moses, and not of
the tradycyons of the scrybes and pharysees / yet is there nothing proved that
they were not to be byleued in any thing that they should teach bysyde
Moses, nor bysyde all ye scripture neither. Nor those words of Christ be not
contrary, but that there might be yet at those days trewthes kept among the
people by tradycyon from the beginning, which the scrybes and pharysees both
might preach and remember to the people as they might the scripture, and be
therein byleued. And therefore our savior said not, believe the^ in nothing but
the books of Moses or other books of scripture / but he said, do not as they
do / not forbedi^ge the^ to believe the^ in many other things, but forbedyng
them to follow them in their vices.

Now if Christ had said farther to the jews / all things necessary be
written, and therefore believe the scrybes and pharysees no farther then ye find
written in Moses and in the prophets: had this proved that all thing that
cryste^ me^ must believe, is written in the apostles and the eua^gelistes^ Now
the words of saint Austayne which friar Barons adds thereunto / do for this
purpose nothing auaunce the matter. For when saint Austayne applies those
words of Christ to a preacher that is not a very true shepeherde, so king
only the weal of the flokke and ye pleasure of Criste / but mercennary and an
hired man, that preaches for luc^^ or other wordely affeccyons of his own /
and then says yt in the chair of Moses is understand the learning of the

Now of troth there is no such statute made^ nor no such thing done, neither
concerning the tone point nor the the other. For as for the new testament / if
he mean the testament of Christ, yt is not condemned nor forboden neither, no
more then was the holy arche, though every man might not be so bold to touch
yt. But of troth, there is a false english translacyon of the new testament
newly forged by Tyndale, so altered and changed in matters of great weight,
malycyousely to set forth against Crystes true doctrine auferte masum ex
vobismet ipsis/and greatly tendyng to the mayntenaunce of the faith.

And concerning that testament: I have both in my dialoge and in the secu^de
book of this wurke, well proved this point / whereunto when Tyndale weneth to
find any farther defense, let him lay yt forth.

There is also no statute made by ye chirch, to forbid any man to preach the
word of god having no cause against

Now here serve well the words of saint Austayne against Barns, which words
Barns brings for him. For when we here such a merce^nary precher as these
heretykes be / for the time yt we here them, if they say aught well, and
according to the catholyke faith, as they can not for shame say all naught at
ones: then take it. But when we here them preach their own heresies for the
reward of worldely praise, or delight of their own syngulare pride, and so
seek their own and not Crystes: then here them not, but put them to silence
and prohybyte them to preach any more.

This allegorye will agree with ye said words of saint Austayne and of Crystes
words to. And yet so much ye better,

These be the things which we should not vouchsaufe to here these scrybes and
the^e false pharysees preach. For these be the deuyls deuyces and their own.
For as for all yt is preached consonaunte to the catholyque faith, is very
gods law whyther yt be wryte^ or not. Nor saint Austayn says not, Here them
in preaching only the scripture / but gods law he says, wherein is
comphended all that ever we be bounden to do or believe. whereof saint Austayn
does him self confess, that diverse things are unwritten / as for ensample
the perpetual virgynyte of our blessed lady, which who so byleueth not
because yt is not written, saint Quod vult deus. And so does saint Hierome to
in his book against Eluidius. And all such things be therefore parts of the
plants which the father of heaven planteth by him self, his apostles, his
holy spirit, and his own son abiding in his church: whyther they be
written or not.

And thus ye se good reders, that neither those words of Christ, nor of saint
Austayne, neither do prove that the apostles have left all necessary things
in writing. And therefore though Barns was so fond to bring in that text for
this purpose: yet Tyndale perceived well that yt would not serve, and therefore
left yt out.

yet lays friar Barns a another text for this purpose, ye words of saint
Poule written unto Timothe the.iii. chapyter of ye.ii. pystle. where saint
Poule writes unto him in

I have rehearsed you saint Poules words more full the^ does friar Barns /
because ye may have some guess why he left the remanau^t out. For he
reherseth no more but that ye church must neither make law nor statute nor
nothing do but only preach and mynyster the word of god / and that nothing
adding nor mynysshynge, but as Poule

Now se ye well that saint Poule speaks nothing to Timothe against adding
o^ any good order or statute in his church / but byddeth him abide fast by
those things that he has learned of him, and that he has learned in scripture
/ ioynynge to the scripture always the right faith of Christ which he had
learned of saint Poule. And therefore against making of any law, this text
serves friar Barons a straw.

Moreover it is to be considered that saint Poule says not to Timothe, Abide
in those things that I have written, but abide in those things that thou have
learned either in scripture or else otherwise of ^e without scripture, as

And as he writes unto Timothe before in the same pystle, Have thou the form
and fasshyon of the wholesome words, which thou haste herd of me in faith and
love in Christ Jesus. He says not the words that I have written unto ye, and
that thou have read of mine / but the words that thou have herd of me.

But yet is there for this purpose in that text of saint Poule that Barns
brings forth, another thing to be co^sydered / that where as saint Poule
tells Timothe, that all be it he have been learned in scripture from his
chyldhed /

Saint Poule told Timothe to / that the scripture was good and profitable to
teach the faithful folk, and to reprove heretykes if he joined therwyth
always the faith of Christ / without which it would do him no service, for all
that he had been learned therein from his chyldhed. And in y^ warning given to
Timothe saint Poule has taught us also, that if we have sure in heart the
artycles of Crystes is this comen known church of all christian nacyons, save

And thus ye se that friar Barons has very pore help of this text of saint
Poule / which thing Tyndale well percyued and therefore he left yt out. And
Barns him self perceiving that the most part would make so much against him
/ took in a little and left the remanaunt out.

yet brings in Barns a another text of saint Poule, where he writes unto
the Romans in the.xv. chapyter: I dare not speak any other thing then those
that god has

I show you this good reders because ye should somewhat perceive the manner of
these men / which use in many things to prove their matters by those textes
that are of most dyffycultye, and such as are lest understood. And
therefore in the matter of the lyberty of mannys will, and predestynacyon, and ye
matter of faith, and good wurkes: they pass over the plain textes of the other
euangelystes with some slayght gloss of their own diuyse / and then for the
proof of their own part they ru^ne to the hard places of the gospel of
saint John^, or to the apocalypse, or to ye pystles of saint

And thus as I say these heretyques lay forth for their part hard textes and
doutefull, as Barns does here / which text in the place where yt stands, the
best learned men are in dowte how to constre yt. How be yt let Barns constre yt
which way he list, that may have any hold of the words / and it shall never
serve for his purpose, neither concerning any forbedynge of laws to be made by
the church, nor to prove that every thing necessary to salvation is written in
scripture / but rather plain the contrary. For every man well woteth, that
every necessary thing is not written by saint Poule, nor he has not written
every thing that he taught, nor every thing is not now had that he did write.

Tyndale saw well also that any thing that his master Marten Luther laid and
lashed out against the kings hyghnes, concerning this purpose, or speaking
against the tradycyons of men / serve to no purpose in this matter against the
sacraments, or any point of the catholyque faith, which we say be the
tradycyons of god. whereof as Tyndale well knows / nothing that Luther laid,
any thing prove the contrary, nor any thing touch the purpose, to prove that
all the necessary points of the christian faith were by Crystes apostles put
in writing. And therefore Tyndale seeing his master Martine Luther in that

Then was there yet one text remained, whereof many of them were wont to bear
them high. And that was the saying of saint Poule / which text Tindale has
also brought forth ere this, to prove that we must believe nothing but only
scripture. And that is where he writes to the Galathyes in the furst chapyter:
that if an angel of heaven would come down and preach any other gospel then
him self had done, accursed were he. This text has now friar Barns brought
in a fresh for the same purpose in his new frantyke book, and magnyfyeth much
him self there with,

Tyndale saw also that that text says not that saint Poule has written all
his own gospel, nor that all his fellows had written yt among them all /
which he wyste well was the point that must be proved. And therefore as friar
Barns folyshely brings yt in / so does Tyndale wisely leave yt out. And surely
as I have said, his wit served him well in leuynge out all th^se. But his
wit failed

Now have ye herd as far as I can find, all that ever Tyndale either has
said or can say in this matter / either him self or any man else for the
proof of his own part, or for the dysprofe of ours. And thereby se ye well
that he neither has proved, nor never shall he prove while he lives, neither
him self nor no man else, the thing that he so boldly says, that all thing
necessary for salvation is wryte^ in scripture / nor able is he not, nor no man
else, nor never

And I think yt not to be dowted but notwythsta^dynge that Moses received the
laws ad ceremonies in writing: yet received he not (as Tyndale says he did)
all thing so fully in writing, but that there remained in the peoples minds
bysyde the writing diverse things necessary and of great wayght, that they
had received byfore^ and kept peradventure from Adams own days /
concerning the

And yt will who so list to look therefore, well be perceived in them that
wrote after Moses days / that the jews had myche open light and knowledge in
some such things bysyde all that that appears written / in the.v. bokis of
Moses whereby yt will well appear that Tyndale says not true, where he says
that Moses did put all in writing.

ye shall well find also, yt not wythsta^dyng all that ever has been written
synnys, either by the prophets, euangelystes, or any other apostle: yet will
yt never appear that all is written that was taught by mouth / but that y^
church of Christ has had taught unto them by the spirit of god,

By these tradycyons have we also ye prayeng to saints, and the knowledge that
they pray for us / all be yt in ye book of Machabe^^ yet that thing well
appears.

By these tradicions have we the holy lenton fast / which

By these have we also the saterdaye changed into ye sunday, which they care
not to turn into frydaye now.

By these have we the halowyng of chalyces, vestyme^ts, pascall taper, and holy
water, with diverse other things.

By these tradycyons of that holy spirit / has the chirch also the knowledge
how to consecrate, how to say mass, and what thing to pray for and to desire
therein.

By this have we also the knowledge to do reverence to the images of holy
saints, and of our savior / and to crepe to his cross / and to do dyuyne
honor unto the blessed sacrament of the auter, to which yet to say the
troth never

But yet is Tyndale so far bysyde him self / that he byleueth not the
scripture of god, nor the word spoken by gods own mouth, when he said that
yt is his own body / and is so blasphemouse against god, that he calls it
great sin to do to that blessed body of Christ in the sacrament any honor
at all, because yt is not commanded he says in scripture.

But thus may ye good christian readers se, to what point at last this heresye
brings these folk. For when they first fall to that point, that they
regard not gods word but if he give yt them in wrytynge^ within a while
after fall they down so far, yt they neither regard his word, nor his
writing, nor yet him self neither.

But now is yt a world to se what shyfte these folk be feign to seek.
Sometime they come forth shamlesse, and boldly tell on their tale. And yet
when they perceive in the mids thereof, that all that here them wonder on
them: then they cast on their hodes and keuer their faces for shame.

For sometime they say they care but for scripture alone,

And when we ask them then / which of those old men before.viii.C. year last
past, ever said that relygyous men might run out and wedde nonnes: to that
they say nothing, but fare as though they herd it not.

But when that my lord of Rochester in the self same matter yt we have now in
hand, to prove that diverse things which the church uses and byleueth, and
which were

But yet shall not Tyndale so fere me there wythall / but that to thentent that
he shall not blind you and make you wene that all the old fathers were in
this matter of his mind / but that ye shall well se that the things which he
reproves and would have you wene were naught worth, because he says they be
not in scripture, be not things devised as Tyndale says by popys and popysh
within this

Origene in the fyfte homely upon the book of Numeri writes in this wise: In
the obseruaunces of the church, some things there are, which must of
necessyte be observed and kept / and ye^ the cause why appears not to every
man. As (for ensample) that we knele when we pray / and that

Damascene in the fourth book in the.xiii. chapyter of y^ prayeng toward the
oryente writes thus: This tradicyon

Dyonise the first chapyter of Ecclesiasticae hierarchiae, of the leders and
masters of the christian faith, says that they delivered us many things to be
kept, partly by writing

Saint Cypriane in his sermon of the washing of the fete: The high priest
him self, is the ordayner and author of his own sacrament. In all the resydew
men were taught by the holy ghost. And likewise as in Criste and in the holy
ghost, is like and egall godhed: so is there in their instytucyons and
ordynaunces, like power and egall authoryte. And no less is yt ratyfyed of
god, the thing that thapostles by the inspyracyon of the holy ghost did
instytute: then the thing that him self has ordained / and has in
remembrance of him self, wylled and commanded to be done. Each of them has
their own proper dygnyte / and each of them has in their own kind egall
authoryte. Nothing

Saint Hyllary in the syxte book of the Trynyte, when he had made mencyon of
the apostles writes in this wise: Of these apostles am I taught these things
y^ I observe. In them am I so seasoned, that the taste can never be gotten out.

Theophilactus upon these words of saint Poule My brethern stand fast and
keep the tradycyons that ye have learned, be yt by my word or by my letters: of
this trewly yt is euyd^nt that saint Poule delivered unto the^ many things to
be kept without writing, and by word of mouth only / that is to say with
lively voice, not by letters all only. For as well be those things to be
byleued, as these.

Saint Hierome interp^etynge the.xi. chapyter of the first epistle to the
Corynthyes, says in this wise: Saint Poule prevented them, to thentent none of
them should say / where is this written? nor should with any other arguments
strive against this reason. And therefore he said, we have no such custom to
strive and contend / neither we nor yet the church of god, which is rather
given to myldenesse then to contencyon and strife.

Theophilactus expowneth the same place likewise and says: For as myche as the
Corinthyans would perchance color this matter by certain subtyltyes, and
went about

These words therefore of saint Poule / may make the herers ashamed, to do
any thing contrary to the custom received by the church.

Saint Leo also an holyman and a cunning / in a sermon that he makes in the
fast at whytesontyde, says in this wise: There is no doubt my well-beloved
brethern, but

Saint Austayne in the book of the baptysme of young children, against the
Pelagians wry^eth in this wise. Children which be baptized be taken in ye
number of faithful people / and that only by an old cononyke and sure
grounded custom of the church. And in a another place again: Now says he we
have showed you before yt the little child believes, and that he is accounted
amonxst men y^ be baptized. This holds the authoryte of our mother holy
chirch / and

Cassianus in the.xi. collacyon the.xii. chapter: Thauthoryte of the old
fathers, and the custom of our elders continued by the space of so many years
unto this day / although the cause of them be not perceived by us: must we
fyrmely believe. And yt custom must we with perpetual obseruau^ce reverently
fulfill, in such wise as yt was delivered of old.

Saint Austayne in the.cxviii. pystle to January says thus: Those things
which are not written, and yet we by tradycyon observe them, such I mean as are
through Crystendome kept: we may well understand that they be kept as things
ordained and commanded unto us, either by

Many things be not found in the wrytynges of the apostles, nor in the
counsayles of those that came after them / which yet because they be kept of
all the hole church, we believe them to have had no another bygynnynge, but by
the tradycyon and commendacyon of the apostles unto us by them self.



Saint Austayne in the fyfte book of baptysme against the Donatistes says,
Many things are there which the universal church holds / and therefore be
well byleued, that the apostles have commanded them, though they be not found
in writing.

Saint Austayne in the.xi. chapter of the.ix. book of his confessyons,
writing of the departing of that holy blessed woman his mother Monica: shows
that all be yt before psent with her, that she cared not in what church they
beryed her body / but she prayed them very effectually to remember her in his
mass which thing I write ye ye may se, that the mass and prayenge for
souls therein, is not so new a thing as Tyndale would have yt seem.

And in the next chapyter after, saint Austayne says these words spoken
unto god: Her body was carried forth, we followed, and came again without
tears. And over y^ in those prayers which we made unto the, when ye sacryfyce
of our redemption was offered for her, ye corpse being set by the

And afterward in the last chapyter of the same book, saint Austayne prays
for his mother unto our Lord among many other words in this wise. I good lord
that art my praise and my life, the god of my heart / setting a side for the
while my mothers virtues and goodness, for which I joyfully give the thanks:
will now beseech the for her synnys. Here me gracyously good lord / for that
medycyne of out wounds which honge upon the cross, and now sitting at thy
right hand, does call upon the for us. I know good lord that she did works
of mercy, and that she heartily did frogyue the dettes unto her dettours.
Forgive thou good lord her dettes to her, such also as she has fallen in by
so many years after ye water of health. Forgive her good

The old holy doctor saint Chrysostom, in his home lie wherein he shows
that alms deed, masses, and diriges greatly profit them that are deed / among
many other things writes in this wise.

It was not for naught ordained by thapostles, that in the dreadful mysteryes
of the mass, should commemoracyon be made for them that be deed. For
thapostles knew that thereby comes to the souls, great advantage and
profit.

Now se you very plain good christian readers, that of the eldeste and the very
best that ever have written upon the scripture of god in Crystes church, and
which been holy saints in heaven, and such as sufferd persecucyon for gods
sake: do testyfye for our part, that the things which the catholyke church
universally ^yleueth and uses, are nothing to be douted of / but to be
byleued and used whyther they be founden in scripture or not. And ye se that
they say that the apostles taught and delivered to the church diverse things
by mouth, bysyde all yt they wrote, which

ye se also that some such things as Tyndale says, that the popes have
oflate feigned them self for their lucre, as the mass and the pains of
purgatory: both saint Austayne, and saint Chrysostom, and other holy saints
/ say that the things were byleued, used, and taught by the apostles them
self.

(...) as for the old holy doctors, ye se how far they (...) Tyndale / and
therefore of Tyndale or them believe whom ye like ^este for me / and consider
well with your self, with whyther of those two were surer to send your
souls.

yet is there as old as any that I have rehearsed yet, saint Polycarpus the
dyscyple of saint John^, which wrote a book of the tradycyons given unto the
church by the apostles / which would plainly have proved Tyndale a fool and
a liar both, if the book had not ben lost. And vndoutely god would never
have sufferd yt to be lost, if he could not have kept his tradycyons without
writing.

How be yt what need we better or elder then as I before have said, the
authoryte of saint John^ him self in his last chapyter of ye gospel: Many
things were done that are not written in this book / or of saint Poule writing
him self to the Corynthyes: All other things I will ordeyne when I come my
self / and to the Thessalonycenses: keep you my precepts or institucyons,
which I have given you

Saint Poule also to Timothe writes of such unwritten tradycyons well and
plainly, in his secunde pystle in these words: Thou therefore my son Timothe,
be comforted in the grace that is Christ Jesus / and those things that thou
haste herd of me by many witnesses, commyte them unto faithful men, such as
shall be mete to teache them forth



I would in like wise feign wit of Tyndale, whyther he think any part of
christian people bounden at this day of necessyte to the wasshyng of the fete,
whereof Christ at his maunday gave ensample and commandment also / not without
a great thretenynge unto saint Peter of loss of heaven, but if he suffered him
to wasshe his fete. I dowte not but Tyndale thinks him self dyscharged of
that bond / and

If the spyryte of god gouernynge the church, and ledynge paracletus, that is
a comforter, if we were left so comfortele^^e that we were uncertain whyther
the hole church were in damnable error instead of the right faith.

Take away that spirit fro the church / and how can Tyndale excuse the
apostles of their baptysynge in ye name of Christ only, when Christ had him
self commanded them to baptize in the name of the father and the son and
the holy ghost. How will he excuse saint Poule for taking away the
circumcysyon, which god had before commanded, and said that yt should be
his everlasting token and couenaunte, and Christ kept it him self / and
saint Poule circumcyded Timothe him self, and yet afterward forbode

God proved will Tyndale say their doctrine with miracles. So does he say I
the doctrine of his whole church contynually. For therein he wurketh miracles
contynually / and in all the chyrches of heretyques is there wroughte never
one. weneth Tyndale that our lord had the cure of his apostles whom he
ordained for his church / and that he has no cure of his church for whom he
made his apostles.

And if Tyndale list so precy^ely to lene to scripture

For Tyndale sets not so myche by baptysme, but that he will agree that faith
iustyfyeth without baptysme. And yet take away the credence of the catolyque
church / and he shall never be able while he lives so well to prove by
scripture, that a martyr may be saved and brought to heaven without baptysme,
but that these words of our savior Nisi quis renatu^ f^erit ^^ aqua and
spiritu san^to, no^ potest introire in regnum dei. who so be not borne again
of the water and the spyryte, can not enter into the kingdom of heaven.

Now where as Tyndale techeth after his master Martine Luther, that as often
as a man only repent, though he be never in mind to do penance nor be
confessed neither / his only faith shall save him, and geteth him forthwyth
full remyssyon both of sin and pain: if he will give credence to the
church, he shall find that faith of his full false. And if he will not give
credence to the church, but precysely stand to the scripture: then shall he
find yet that faith more false, if he will be bounden as precysely to the
words him self as he would bind other men. For ^
there is not now left us any sacrifyce for sins / but a terryble expeccyon
and lokynge for of judgment, and of fyerce and ragyouse fire, which shall
consume the adversaries. There will also stand in this lyghe, these words of
the apostle: He^. ^.
yt is impossyble that they which have been ones illumyned and have ta^^^ that
heavenly gift, and have be made partetakers of ye holy ghost, and have tasted
also the good word of god, and the virtues of the world to come, and are
fallen down: should be renewed again to penance / crucyfyeng

If Tyndale say that he can so co^stre these textes as they shall not hurt his
heresies: I deny not ye he so may do / and I can to so constre them, that they
shall not hurt the troth, that is to wit the catholyque faith. But yet this
I say, that when he and I have both done what we can / yet who so list to
hold that heresye against his repentance and the chyrches penance to, shall
not lakke words wherewith he may seem to such as will set the church at
naught, to maynteyne his part as well as we both maynteyne ours. And
therefore I say taking away the credence from the catholyque known church
(for no church unknown

And unto the the other side, if the credence of the known catholyke church
abide, as it nedys must abide if ye scripture abide, by which it is promised
by Christ that him self and his own holy spyryte shall dwell therwyth all days
unto the worlds end: then be we sure not only which are the holy scryptures
and the sure wholesome exposycyons

For I would feign wit of Tyndale, if the hole church shall never believe nor
do nothing as of necessyte, but that is all ready written in scripture: why
shall any one man be bounden to believe or do any thing as of necessyte, though
god bid him by mouth / if it be not written in scripture.

Finally there is no dowte, but that ere the new testament was written / men
were bounden to believe things without scripture. And then sith Tyndale will
nothing believe us without scripture / and he may not look of reason that we

Now if Tyndale answer this argument and say that he needs not to lay forth
any text of scripture dysch^rgynge us of that bond / but that it is enough
for him to

which thing when he can not do / if he will then be plain and confess the
troth that he can not prove his own part, but will then bid us prove our
own part / and will tell us that like as he says that the apostles d^d put
all in writing whereof he fails his proof, so we say that they did leave
diverse things unwritten / and that of those be some of such things as the
church now byleueth that we prove our part, that is to wit yt the apostles
gave

If nothing had be written / Tyndale must have byleued the church in all to
gether. And why should he now for the writing of part (for that all is written
ye se well he can not prove) believe the church the less in the remanaunt that
remains yet unwritten / or for that that was written at one time, believe the
church the less in all that yt teaches after unwritten. which thing Tyndale
does, and that so far forth / yt where as god works mirycles in his church
to make the chyrch^ and the doctrine thereof known for true: Tyndale then
under the false pretexte of favor to gods writing, blasphemeth all his
unwritten words,

And this dot^ Tyndale / bycau^e he would not in any wise, that the church
had any credence farther then yt can prove by ye written words of some
apostle, where he woteth well that thapostles wrote not all that they taught,
and also that god ordained his apostles for his church, and not his church for
his apostles / and does therefore more esteem and more set by his church,
then by any of his apostles, or all the whole twelve to gether. And yet will
not Tyndale believe for gods word any thing that the church teaches for his
word, but if he find it written in holy scripture / where as if he believe not
ye church, he ca^ never tell of any part of scripture whyther it be holy
scripture or not.



And finally thus ye se that Tyndale and such other as would have us reiecte
and refuse all that god has taught his church, but if yt be proved by
scripture: be not only unable to prove or defend that heresye / but also do
handle

And thus end I my third book, co^teynyng ye answer of his two special
chapyters / the tone, whyther the word were before the church, or the church
before the word / and the the other, whyther the apostles left any thing
vnwryte^, necessary to soul health. In which two points as gloryousely as he
glytered in his own y^e: every man sees

And now shall I (god wyllyng) in my fourth book as soon as my time shall serve
my / so confute his false faith, and so show which is the church: that I
shall leave Tyndale never a church for his flokke / but the church whereof the
the prophet speaks, Odiui ecclesiam malignantiu^, I have hated ye church of
malycyouse folk / which church is very proper for him. For all that ever
Tyndale writes, when it is well co^sydered: is powdered with malice toward all
good men, both relygyouse

Thus ends the third book.
The fawtes escaped in the pryntynge.
The fawty^ in the preface.
The fawtes The amendementy^. v.lefe.^^.side A.v^. taking talkyng vj.lefe
A.xij. death Hytton death of Hytton the same lefe C.x. to an fro to and fro
vii.lefe.ii.^yde B.xii. Thymas Thomas viij.lefe B.xiiij.i^ England in England
the same lefe.ii. side A.i^. and that and some that ix.lefe A.ix. according to
unto according unto x.lefe.ii.side B.iiij. thas that xiiij.lefe A.ij. And this
And to this xvj.lefe B.iij. ^efte fefte

The fawtes in the Book.
^. C.viij. then them ix. A.j. is that the is the ix. C.j. salfe false xxvii^.
A.vj. neth ned xxx. C.xiiij. man manner xxx. C.xiiij. penaus penauns xxxj. C.vi
sauaunt saruaunt xxxii^. B.xi^. vncharmed charmed xl. B.j. keth ked xlii^.
A.vj. acco^^yng the according to ^he l^. B.v. la^^ed la^^eth lij. A.xi. i^ i^
i^^ liiij. B.xiiii. lo^t le^t lxv. C.xiiii. fight le^acyon sight of the
leuacyon lxxxix. A.viii. xv.C. viii.C. xc. C.ix. preserve persecute xciii.
B.xii. god good xcv. C.ii. thank thanked xcix. B.xi. and all at all cxxxi.
B.iii. neither either cxxxvi. C.vi beche beseech cxl. A.xi. holy hole cl.
C.xiiii. rather this rather than this clxxxiiii. B.i. every man to man perceive
every man to perceive clxxxviii. C.i. unto him unto them cxcvj. C.xiiij. them
self them him self cc. B.iii. ever has synny^ ever synny^ ccx. B.vii. may
mary ccx. C.iii. every may every man may ccxv. B.v. neythe neither ccxvi. A.v.
not care not ccxix. B.iii. every very ccxx^ii. C.xii. argument agreement
ccxl^iii B.vii. if any of any ccxl^iii. B.viii apofile apofiles ccxlvi. B.vii.
for me fro me cclxv. B.xii. unwritten otherwise unwritten any otherwise cclx^ii.
A.iii. teac^e teach cclxxii. A.v. say ^^ say yt cclxxiii. B.ii. at all and all
cclxxvii. B.iiii. bowle^ bowels ccxc. C.v. be another be no another ccxcii. A.v.
Iuspicite S^rutamin^ cccvii. A.ix. heretyque heretyques cccxiiii. A.xi cononyke
canonyke cccxv. B.vi. them him cccxvi. C.xii^. where were ccxxi. B.ix. thy^
lygh^ ^ye lygh^ (...) (...) (...) (...)


