The four ways to Sion.

I. The reward of Mercy.

MATH. 5.7. Blessed are the merciful: for they shall obtain mercy.

II. The praise of Purity.

MATH 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see GOD.

III. The Crown of Peace and Concord.

MATH 5.9. Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the Children
of God.

IV. The honor of Obedience.

1. PET. 2.7. Fear God: and honor the King.

Quadrivium SIONIS OR The four Ways TO SION

by John Monlas Mr. of Arts

LONDON Printed by Augustine Mathewes. 1633.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, (AND HIS singular good Lord) EDWARD, Earl of
Dorset, Lord Chamberlain to the Queen, Lord Lieutenant of his Majesty's
Counties, of Sussex and Middlesex: One of the Lords of his Majesty's most
Honorable Privy Council, and Knight of the most Illustrious Order of the
^arter.
RIGHT HONORABLE:
THis Pilgrim of Sion, having been beaten with the storms and tempests of a
long persecution beyond the Seas, after he had learnt the sweetness, and
tasted the goodness and Debonayritie, which makes your Nation and Nobility of
England honorable, and recommendable to all the four corners of the Universe,
he is at last arrived in your Ports and Harbors, to shelter himself from the
waves and winds, which so cruelly had beaten and assailed him, as they would
not permit him, either to feed, or rest. But casting anchor here in your
Harbors, I find that Fame has infinitely wronged her self, in not having
sufficiently discoursed, and published the excellency of your goodness and
merits: She seems to be sparing of your praises, which are so justly due to
you; For Experience has now made me know a thousand times more thereof, the^
heretofore I heard or understood, because I find so much benignity and
goodness among you, and especially your Honors house, that I should e^teeme
my self to be guilty of a base ingr^titude, if I consecrated not the remaynder
of my days to the honor of your service and commands; For I confess, that
this small Present, which I now present and proffer you, cannot counter veil
or equalize those sublime favors; whereby you have eternally made me your
debtor.

Th^se Philosophers, which entreat and discourse of natural causes, do
affirm, That the Sun which makes the Raynebowe in the firmament, by the
darting and defusion of his rays, in a watery clowd disposed to receive it;
does there form and engender this diversity of colors so pleasing to our
sight. Your Honor (my good Lord) is the Sun of my happiness, and I am this
clowd covered with the rays of your favors, which makes all the world admire
in me, the greatness of your Generosity, and the excellency of your goodness.

But herein (notwithstanding) consists not my satisfaction, but rather your
honor and glory, and as I desire to publish that, so I likewise desire to
find this; For I cannot live contented, if I made not a public
acknowledgement of those many favors, whereby you have perfectly purchased and
made me yours, and this Confession consists in the oath of fidelity and
obedience, which I have sworn to the honor of your service, and to testify
the the immortality of my vows, wherein with all possible humility I present
you my self, and this small Book to your Honors feet; A work
proportionable to my weakness, but merely disproportionable to your
Greatness.

If I am any way guilty herein, your goodness is the true cause thereof; in
regard it makes me believe that you will rather excuse my zeal, then accuse or
condemn my presumption* and I do promise my self this hope, and flatter my
self with this confidence, that your Honor will partly excuse this work of
mine, if it be not accuratly or delicately polished, and that the will
remaining where the power wants, is free and current payment with great and
generous spirits.

Some perchance may affirm and say, that I have discoursed and treated those
Matters with too much simplicity, which indeed is my only intent and design.
Because my text and matter do^ necessarily oblige and tie me thereunto, as also
in regard I ever find the easiest way to be the best, for that the thorns of
Study and Schollership, do but engage and ingulph our Wits in the labyrinth
of insupportable length and languishment, and the which most commonly when we
have all done and ran through, we in the end find but a Minotaur of doubts,
and a pensive melancholy anxietie which devoures them. My Lord, I have no other
design or ambition in this my Dedication, but to pay this tribute to your
Honor, hoping that your charities will cover my defects, and your goodness
over-vayle and pardon my weakness and imperfections.

And my Lord, it is with all manner of right and reason, that I consecrate and
inscribe this small Work of mine to your Honor, and place your Honorable
name in the Frontispice thereof, as a bright Phare and relucent torch, which
shall communicate and lend its luster and light, to make it see and salute the
world.

And so my good Lord, I will seek my delights in the honor of your service;
my inclinations shall have no other center, but the execution of your
commands. My vows and prayers shall be incessantly powered forth for your
prosperities; and my Ambition shall never fly or soar higher, then to
conserve the honor of your favors, and to be both to your Honor, and to the
young Noblemen your Sons,

Your most humble, and truly devoted Servant, JOHN MONLAS.

The first Way to Sion.
THE REVVARD OF MERCY.
MATH. 5.7. Bl^ssed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.


THat which in men changes Reason, courtesy, and humanity, into a wild,
fierce, and brutish nature, and which makes them less pitiful then Lions,
and more to be feared then Tigers, is cruelty; that terrible vice the mother
of cowardice, the spring of disasters, and the death of innocence.

For after a Coward has once tasted of blood, he delights in no other
spectacle.

It is the cause of mischiefs, and of so many fatal and mournful
accidents; for there being a natural Antipathy between that vice, and reason,
she expells reason; and therefore will not hearken unto her, in her furious,
violent, and sudden counsels.

In a word, it is the death of innocence, for to satisfy her bloody appetite,
she spares neither age, nor sex, but upon the altar of her furious and
brutish passion, sacrifices as well the just, as the guilty, and would not
spare her self, if she feared not the self same pains and torments, which
she inflicts on others.

Now this vice is detested by noble spirits and generous souls, is abhorred by
Angels, and in great abomination to God himself; so by the law of contraries,
mercy must be the subject* and royal field, where we must abundantly reap
the honor of men, the love of Angels, the graces and blessings of our heavenly
Father, then must mercy be practiced by men, admired by Angels, and be
delightful to God, and therefore we see in our Text, that the beloved Son of
eternity it self Jesus Christ our Savior, to perfect his Apostles in the way
of salvation, says to them in general, Blessed are the merciful, etc.

As if he had said, I do much hate and abhor cruelty, that I desire also
that you that are my Disciples, should expel and banish it quite from your
hearts, and thoughts, and in her room to admit and entertain mercy, that
heavenly virtue, which I both esteem dearly, and love, and respect perfectly.

You must therefore practice this eternally praiseworthy virtue, if you will
be blessed; for it is impossible to get into my Fathers favor, if you be not
furnished and armed with mercy.

You cannot ascend to the top of felicity, before you have left sin, this
heav^e and intolerable burden, I say, before you have received pardon, and
absolution for your faults, which you can never obtain, before you have
forgiven your brethren their offenses; before you have showed your selves
favorable and willing to assist them; In a word, before you have ex^ended and
practiced on them all sorts of mildness, clemency, and meekness, which they
shall stand in need of, for I say unto you, (...). Blessed are the merciful,
for they shall obtain mercy.

We read words like unto these, Luke 6.36. Be ye merciful, as your Father is
merciful: And again after, forgive and it shall be forgiven unto you; give
and it shall be given unto you: And Eccl. 4. Be merciful to the Orphans, be
unto them a father, and to their mothers a husband, and then ye shall be the
obedient sons of the most high, who will yet more liberally distribute unto
you his great mercy: And Pro. 11. The soul that does good, shall be
exceedingly filled and replenished.

It is a principle flowing from our nature, that we must not do to another
what we would not have done to our selves, from which principle is derived that
golden sentence of Christ. Luke 6. With what measure you mete, it shall be
again measured unto you. And James 2. Condemnation without mercy shall fall
on them that have not used mercy, and mercy is glorified against
condemnation. Blessed then are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.

In which words by Gods assistance, which we to this end implore, we will
consider, 1. Who be these merciful. And 2. The reason why they are termed
blessed.

And first, let us hear the sacred voice of the eternal Son of God, the
Redeemer of our souls, saying in the first part of our Text, Blessed are the
merciful, as if he had said, O how great and altogether incomparable, and
incomprehensible are the favors, blessings, and graces laid up for them that
shall practice the works of mercy, they shall be Citizens of heaven, the
Angels companions, and shall eternally enjoy and ^ossesse in heaven, those
b^atitudes which eye has not seen, ear has not heard, and that are not
entered into the heart of man; and this is the recompense that God has prepared
for them which practice mercy.

Now that we may the better know the definition of this word, Merciful, which
is the concrete, or conjoined, we will first consider it in its abstract, as
the Philosophers speak, to wit, Me^cie, which is commonly defined to be, A
hearty grief* or a sorrow, for another misery, whom we assist and help with
all our power.

The object of it, is, the misery and affliction of other, which makes her
produce these gracious and pitiful effects, because she is unable to behold
the sore, without applying the remedy.

God being one, cannot suffer any kind of division, there be no qualities nor
accidents in him, but all things are essential in him, the Scripture to
represent him unto us, does describe him all justice, and all mercy, so by
reason of the foregoing maxim, we cannot say, that mercy is one of his
parts, seeing that being one, he is indivisible; but we will more properly
say, that he is Mercy it self, and therefore the faithful that shall be
merciful, that shall practice the works of charity, of clemency, and
meekness, may undoubtedly believe that they are the sons of the most high,
who has communicated unto them a ray or spark of his insinite grace, and
mercy, that so they may thereby resplend and shine with the same light with
their heavenly Father, tread upon his steps, and be made like him as much as
may be, Be merciful (says Jesus Christ) as your heavenly Father is merciful,
Luke 6.36.

Mercy, said an ancient Doctor, est fidei ornamentum, it is the ornament of
faith, for faith shows her self by her fruits, which are pious and
charitable works, and as trees are never so fair to behold, as when they are
laden and covered with fruits; so faith never appears so glorious, as when
she is adorned and crowned with the sweet and delightful fruits of mercy;
He called it again s^lutis domicilium, the retreat and lodging of salvation,
because that when sinners shall be called to give account of their actions
before God, when God shall ask them, the reason of their administration, as
that Lord in the Gospel, then the shortest and safest remedy, is to fly to
his mercy, and to ask him forgiveness.

Solomon that wise King, counsels us to make a carcanet of mercy, to put it
about our neck, and that in this habit and ornament we shall make the access
of heaven free to our selves, finding grace before God, and men: and indeed it
is one of the most precious stones, and that is fit to beautify and adorn the
crown of perfection it self.

We will therefore compare it to the Oppall stone Irius, which represents the
same colors that appear in the Raine-bowe, so the merciful makes all sorts
of graces and blessings to shine upon his forehead, and to appear in his
actions; this Oppall stone Irius is green, red, and white, the green color
represents unto us that Hope which we have to find grace before the sovereign
Judge of our souls and bodies; The red color represents unto us the pure
blood of Christ, shed upon the Cross, to obtain this grace for us, she also
denotes unto us the redness of our sins, according to the Prophets phrase,
Though our sins were as red as scarlet, they shall be made as white as snow,
Isa. 1.18. and the white color figureth unto us the divine justice, covered,
and overcome by the whiteness of his mercy, as it is noted in the Rainebow*
that his white color covers, and exceeds the red if fair weather to be
follow; They mark besides that this Oppall eases the pains and labors of
women with child, so mercy lighteneth much the mise^ie and grief of the
afflicted.

We will here make no di^ficulty to u^e in this place the fabulous inventions
of the Poets, following the example of Solomon, who took of Hiram (though a
Pagan) all the wood, and stones needful for the building of the temple.

They usually describe Mercury (the messenger of the imaginary Gods) with a
wand in his hand, composed of horns of plenty, wreathed with serpents, they
also give him wings, with which he with incredible celerity, flies whether
soever he is sent.

In this fable we see a remarkable moral, which is, that it is a symbol of
the Merciful, who quickly and without delay takes pity of the misery of
others, according to this axiom, no less common then true, Bis dat, qui cito
dat, he gives twice, that gives speedily. Secondly, he lives in all pl^nty
and abundance, because, that God blesses him in all his goods, as the Psalmist
speaks, He has given largely to the poor, his righteousness remains for
ever, his horn shall be exalted in glory, and he shall have whereof to lend,
all the days o^ his life. Psalm. 112.9.

The serpent uses once a year to cast off his skin, to assume another, that
thereby he may be more healthful and fair; so those who are merciful leave,
and cast off their wealth and substance, in favor of them that need it, that
so they may appear fair in the eye of the most high, give your alms, and all
things shall be clean unto you, putting off the old man.

But that we may walk in the sacred paths of the holy Scripture, let us
compare Mercy to the Serpentine rod of Moses, that faithful servant of God,
for if this had done many miracles in Egypt, that has done as many wonders in
the world: If this was called the finger of God, that is an excellent virtue,
that makes us come near to God; but contrarily if the rod has turned the
waters into blood, Mercy turns the blood of wrath into the water of
mildness, and mansuetude; If that has caused darkness, this brings light,
if that wounds, this cures; In this they agree, that as the one divided the red
Sea, to deliver the people from Pharaohs slavery, so the other makes us pass
the red waters of Gods divine justice, to shun the devils seizing of us, and
to come to the Sanctuary of caelestiall goodness, according to the sense of
the beati^ude described in our Text, Blessed are the merciful, for they shall
obtain mercy.

O happy and infinitely glorious (therefore) shall those be, that use mercy
toward their afflicted brethren, who open the bosom of liberality, and reach
out the hands of goodness and compassion, to draw them to them, there and
thereby to shelter them, from the miseries and calamities that compass them
about; for when the sovereign Judge of our souls and bodies, shall come to
keep his Assizes, when he I say shall come accompanied with thousand millions
of Angels, who are the Heralds and great Officers of his divine Justice, when
heaven and earth shall shake before his face, when all the elements, and all
the creatures together shall quake for fear in his presence, when he shall
judge by an eternal decree the living and the dead, among all the most
grievous and notable reproaches whereu^to the wicked shall be subject, that of
cruelty shall be the most remarkable, he will not then so much tax them of
having been thieves, drunkards, murderers, fornicators, as of not having
been pi^tifull to the poor and needy; Math. 25.42. Go (will he say) ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels, for I was
hungry, and ye gave me not to ^ate, I was thirsty, and ye gave m^ no drink, I
was naked, and you clothed me not, I was in prison, and ye visited me not.

But contrariwise he will alter his voice, when speaking to his Elect, with a
sweet, smiling, and gracious co^ntenance, he will pronounce this favorable
sentence of congratulation, Math. 25.34. Come ye blessed of my Father, possess
the inheritance prepared for you before the foundation of the world, for I was
^ungrie, and ye gave me to eat: I was thirsty, and you gave me drink: I
was naked, and you have clothed me: I was in prison, and you have visited me.

The end, and center of the law of God, in the second Table, is this, Thou
shall love thy neighbors as thy self: in these few words, we see all the
offices, all the duties, and all the services which we owe to our neighbor, to
wit, to love him as we love our selves, for as no man is so unnatural (unless
he has lost the use of reason, and be ready to precipitate himself into
despair) that would in his need, for his good, refuse himself any thing that
should be in his power: so likewise, let us represent to our selves, that our
neighbor is our other self, and that to refuse him any needful thing, yea,
not to prevent him in his wants and incommodi^ies, is a sin in him that is
infected with it, which makes him unworthy to be compared or placed among the
Pagans and Infidels, for they help one another with all their might: but with
a great deal of reason and justice we may say, that he is far worse then a
brute beast, for we may observe and mark, that those of the same kind help,
and succor one another; As we read in Pliny, that when a great and heavy
Elephant is fallen, being for his heaviness not able to rise, s^^ing specially
they have no joints in their legs, his fellows do then assemble and raise
him up with their snow^s.

It is noted, that when Stagges intend to swim over some swift River, they
gather thems^lues together; and because their heads laden with such great
horns, would make them sink, they lay them on the hinder parts the one of the
other, and because the foremost has no place to lean his upon, every one in
his turn supplieth that place, and what should we not do although we had no
natural affection; would not the very beasts accuse us of cr^elty, and
barbarousnesse, if being all to pass together the vast and deep Ocean of this
temp^stuous life, in hope once to arrive in the delightful Haven of salvation;
If, I say, feeling our heads laden with so many miseries, imperfections, and
calamities, we did not mercifully assist and ease one another, and so we
should not accomplish the Apostles command, saying, Bear ye one another
burdens, that you may fulfill the law of Christ.

St. Chrysostom with his golden mouth as his name imports) tells us in
general, that all men represent unto us but one body, whereof the greatest and
most honorable are like the brain, the eyes, the mouth, and the ears, and
that so orderly according to their dignities, they possess and take their
place; and neverthele^se, there is so great an affinity between all th^se
different members, that they all help and succor one another; the eye helps
the foot, and the foot serves the eye; the mouth is serviceable to the hand,
and the hand to the mouth; and besides, that experience teaches us, that if
there be the least ach in the head, the face becomes pale, the eyes often
times flow with tears, and all the other members participate of her pains,
according to the proverb, Quando caput dolet, caetera membra aolent. If the
foot chance to tread upon a thorn, and to be pricked by it, the eye though
far distant seeks presently the place offended; the back stoopes, the hands
run to the place, and all the members in general are attentive and careful
of the easing hereof: Alas! let us remember that we are members of the same
body, that we owe our help and assistance one to another; when we see any in
affliction among us, let us not stay so much to know the cause of his grief,
but that we may run to apply the remedy to it, and to help him out of his
wants and incommodities, and then by these actions w^ shall testify, that we
are the children of God, who says, Math. 10.42. That if we give to the poor,
a glass of cold water in his name, he will hold it as done to himself, so
much does he delight in the holy and pious works of mercy: Blessed (says
he) are the merciful.

Mercy is compared to a tree, planted in the fruitful ground of the hearts of
the faithful, that is watered by the wholesome waters of blessing and grace,
which the holy Ghost continually distilleth thereon, and upon which the Sun
of righteousness continually shines, that so at all times he may bear
abundantly the gracious and delectable fruits of charity, compassion, and
meekness.

This tree is divided into three branches, which we see is set forth unto us,
Luke 6. whereof of the first shows us, that we must not rashly judge of our
neighbor, but that we judge of him charitably.

The second teaches us, that we must liberally dist^ibute, and dispose of our
faculties in favor of the needy, that thereby we must partake of their
misery, and sigh with them in their afflictions.

The third and last branch, is, to forgive our enemies, and cast away from us
all desire of revenge.

Saint Luke in the Chapter before cited, after he had exhorted us to be
merciful, as our heavenly Father is merciful, divides this mercy into three
kinds, as we have already showed, saying, first, 1 Judge not, and ye shall not
be judged. 2 Give, and it shall be given unto you. 3 Love your enemies, and ye
shall be the children of the most high, for he is kind unto the unkind, and
to the wi^ked.


Let us a while attentively consider the three offices and duties of the
merciful, but rather let us practice them heartily, that we may be recompensed
with the felicity promised unto us.

Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mer^ie.

The corruption of this age is come to that height, that it seems that the
best discourse that men can find, is to speak ill of one, to detract from
another, and to judge so hardly of the best actions, that one might think them
void of reason, and of the fear of God, and to be partakers with the devil,
in vexing and slandering the life of those, who are good examples to all, and
the subject ^f tha^ksgiving to all them that fear the Lord; and therefore the
holy Ghost admonishes u^ in this first kind of mercy not to be rash in our
judgments, least we suffer the pains, and incu^re the rigours of Talions law.

(...). Judge not, that ye be not judged. Math. 7.1.

We must then observe these maxims in judging the actions of others, that if
they be manifestly good, we praise and imitate them, that those that did them
may be encouraged to continue, and that the wicked leaving their wicked ways,
may follow them, for examples move more then rules or precepts.

If in all likelihood they may be thought evil, nevertheless we must
practice and confer on them the works of charity, and construe them
favorably, seeing that it is God alone who searches the hearts, and who
tries the reins and thoughts, and who is only able to judge of our good, or
bad intentions, for now Satan transformeth himself into an Angel of light,
and hypocrites (his imitatours) do so perfectly counterfeit the just, that it
is altogether impossible to discern truth from falsehood, Satan has made them
so deceiptfully crafty.

On the other side, the just do sometimes commit actions, which seem to be
evil, and notwithstanding are in themselves very good, though they do not
appear to be such, as when Christ was found alone speaking with the
Samaritane, but it was to teach her the way of Salvation.

When he delighted in the kisses of Mary Magdalene, who was so impudent in her
life, and manne^s, in so much that the Pharisie that had invited him was
offended at it, yet the end and the answer which Christ gave them made them
think otherwise, when speaking to the Pharisie, he said, Ioh. 11.2.12.3.
Simon, see thou this woman? I entered into thine house, and thou gave me
no water to wash my feet, but she has washed my feet with tears, and wiped
them with the hairs of her head. Thou gave me no kiss, but she since the
time I came in has not ceased to kiss my feet. Thou did not anoint my
head with oil, but she has anointed my feet with precious ointment.
Wherefore I say unto the^ many sins are forgiven her, for she loved much, to
whom a little is forgiven, he does love a little. And he said unto her, thy
sins are forgiven thee, Luke 7.44, etc.

Jesus Christ (take this example more) did often eat with Publicans and
sinners, but it was purposely to convert them, and yet the Scribes and
Pharisees that envied him, did not interpret it so, for they called him a
glutton, a wine bibber, a friend of Publicans and sinners, Math. 11.19. Behold
how the best and wholesomest meats are converted into ill humors by ill
disposed stomachs, whence comes the proverb, Ictericis omnia videntur esse
slavia, all things seem yellow to them that have the Iaundize, the wicked
measure other by themselves, and think that all imitate them in doing ill.

The second branch of this divine tree, is, (...), Give, and it shall be given
unto you, that is, that Jesus Christ by these words exhorts us, to distribute
freely, and liberally of our means to the poor, assuring us to hold it as
done to himself, and that he will repay it a thousand fold unto us, by giving
^s eternal life. Make you friends, says he, Luke 16.9. with the riches of
iniquity, that when ye shall want, they may receive you into everlasting
habitations.

Jesus Christ Math. 19.21. speaks thus to a young man, that asked him what he
should do to inherit eternal life, after he had bidden him keep the
commandments, he says moreover unto him, If thou will be perfect, go sell
all that thou have, and give it to the poor, and then thou shall have treasure
in heaven.

One of the chiefest laws which God commanded and recommended to his people
Israel, was to be merciful to the poor, and needy, as we read Deuteronomy. 15.7. If
one of thy brethren with thee be poor, within any of the gates of thy land,
thou shall not harden thine heart against him, nor shut thy hand from thy poor
brother, but thou shall open thine hand unto him, and shall lend him sufficient
to sustain his needs and wants, and let it not grieve thine heart to give it
unto him, for because of this the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy
works, and in all that thou put thine hand to. And Prou. 28.27. He that
gives unto the poor shall not lack, but he that hides and shuts his
eyes from him, shall have many cu^ses.

It is a wonder to see and behold the admirable effects, and works of the
Almighty, that which commonly makes those to abound in wealth, that bestow
largely upon the poor, like a good spring or fountain, which the more it is
emptied, the more it overflowes in the excellency of her waters; so the more
the f^ithfull gives to the poor, the more God sends his graces and blessings
upon his wealth, so that the alms which he gives are like seed fallen into
good ground, which yields a hundred for one.

It is like a little piece of leaven among a great deal of dowe, which
raises, and makes it to increase, and therefore the Wiseman exhorts us, to
give the first of our fruits to the poor, and that the rest will make our
Barnes to overflow with plenty and abundance.

The widow of Sarephta, 1 Kings 17. making a Cake for the Prophet Elijah, with
a little meal and some few drops of oil, which only were left unto her in
that extreme famine, desiring rather to obey the Prophet, then to satisfy her
own hunger, and that of her own son: but how can we produce this example
without admiring this her incomparable charity, to see the love of her self,
the natural affection she bare to her dear, only, and welbeloved child,
give place to the pity and compassion she had a Stranger, for the Prophet
asking her something to eat, she answered, I have but a little oil, and a
little meal, which my son and I will eat, and after we shall die, showing
unto us, that the hopes of recovering any elsewhere would be vai^e, and yet
mercy passes through all these difficulties, she makes a Cake for the
Prophet; but where is the ^ecompence? it follows immediately, as the shadow
the body, that is, that during that extreme famine, she wanted no meal, and
her oil was never dried up.

Merciful effects are commonly followed by those which are miraculous; as we
have already showed, and as we could yet more largely show, if we did not
fear to be too tedious; but let us see how God delights so much in mercy,
that besides that he rewards it in this world with many temporal blessings,
he does also shower down on the merciful, his ^ternall and spiritual graces.

In the 29. Chapter of Ecclesiasticus, Lay up thy treasure according to the
comman^ement of the most high, and it shall be more profitable to thee then
gold, shu^ up mercy in thy Cabinets, and it will draw thee out of all
affliction, the bounty of every one b^ing shut up in him, a^ in a purse shall
conserve his grace, as the apple of the eye, and at the end will give the
reward unto ^very one. And Dan. 4. The Prophet speaks thus to Nabuchadonosor
the King, Dan. 4.27* O King, take my counsel, break off thy sins by
justice, and thy iniquities by being merciful unto the poor. And Luke 11.41.
Give alms of what you have, and behold all things shall be clean unto you.

But because many seek precautions, going about to practice the works of
charity, I will give my opinion upon this matter, that is, that we must not be
like Martha, curious to be informed of so many things, but as Jesus Christ,
before whom there is no regard of persons, but makes his Sun equally to shine
both on the just, and on the unjust, and makes his rain to fall upon the good
and bad, the Sun shines as well upon mud and dirt as upon Roses on the
valleys, as on the mountains; the rain falls as well upon the rocks and
sands, as upon the good and fertile ground: so the merciful wheresoever he
sees any calamity, he partaketh of it, and applies the beft remedy to it
that possibly he can.

Intention is the level and square wherewith all our actions are measured. It
is the rule to measure them; the touchstone to know their value: Havens and
Harbors receive as well the broken and torn pieces of a shipwreck, as a great
and rich lading in a good vessel; the earth which is the mother and cradle of
all mortal men, receives equally Lazarus, and Dives, Irus, and Cyrus,
Diogenes, and Alexander.

So the merciful must always propose this object to himself, to obey Gods
Commandment, in assisting the poor, and in comforting and consolating the
afflicted, without searching further if he be worthy or not of your
compassions, if it be his laziness, or his folly that have made him miserable;
these things are not to be examined by you, it belongs to God to judge of it,
and to you to obey Gods holy ordinances.

Jesus Christ being here on earth, exercised his charity on all those that
asked it of him: He fed several times great multitudes: He healed the sick:
He made the lame walk, the blind see, and that at the first request, without
further enquiring.

Mercy is the bank and haven of misery, if thou receive the unworthy, after
thou shall entertain the worthy: Abraham making an Hospital of his tent,
received therein all Strangers indifferently that came to him; and in
practicing this courteous and bountiful hospitality, he received Angels into
his house: St. Paul, Heb. 13. bids us forget not hospitality, for some have
lodged Angels, not knowing it. When thine enemy is hungry, give him to eat,
and to him that asks give, says Christ.

Saint Math Chap. 4. The devil seeing that Christ was hungry, asked him if he
were the Son of God: you likewise when you see the poor languishing and
starving at your doors, succor him quickly, and ask him not if he be the
child of God, if he be an honest man and worthy of your alms, because that
Christ says, Math. 10.41. He that receives a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward.

The good Tobias finding any ofhis brethren lying dead in the midst of the
streets, used to rise from his bed, and left his meals to come and bury him.

Lot stays very late at the gates of Sodom, to receive and entertain into
his house poor Strangers, yea, defends them valiantly, and lovingly against
the Sodomites rage and violence.

From all these examples we must draw this wholesome doctrine, That there is no
virtue that makes us so conformable and delightful to our heavenly Father, as
Mercy, and therefore that we bear not wrongfully the title of the sons of
God, let us extend our liberalities to the poor; Let us give them cheerfully,
and without grudging or enquiring, the first and best of our alms deeds, let
us not stay to be troubled with their cries.

The Israelitish women at the first asking of Aaron dispoiled themselves of
their Rings, Carcanets, and Jewels to make that Idol, the golden Calfe, Exodus
32. and should we be abl^ to stop our ears, and not to hear those pitiful
and lamentable cries of Christ, speaking by the mouths of the poor, use
charity, give and it shall be given unto you: those alms or benefits which are
done either by importunity, or by force, or for shame, deserve not the name of
^ercie: think you that it was a great favor which the wicked and malicious
Jews did to Christ, to give him gall and vinegar to drink, in the agony of
his Passion, when he pronounced these grievous words; I am dry, those that
give alms for spite, to be rid of the poor, for grief, or for shame, if
they commit not an equ^ll malice, they commit a like offense.

What then is that Tiger, and Dragon-like cou^age, tempered in the water of
eagernes, and c^uelty, that is not penetrable to the shot of th^se powerful
reasons, who is so unnatural as to behold with dry eyes a poor Christian
languishing for hunger, starved with cold, and full of wounds, and does not
give him bread to eat, calls him not into his house to warm him; and that
like the Samari^ane, powers not oil into his wounds, what Adamantine heart is
so hardened, as not to open and cleave with grief, at the object of such
pitiful sp^ctacles, and sights.

There be some that take the Etymology of Miscricordia, Mercy, from that it
makes the hearts of men miserable, by beholding the misery of others, and that
with as much truth, as reason, for the truly merciful feels in himself all
the miseries of others, which was it that drew so many tears out of Heraclitus
his eyes, being able to behold nothing on earth, but what was lamentably
miserable.

Saint Paul exhorts us, Romans 12.15. ^o weep with them that weep, and to be
of like affection one toward another.

Good Job in his complaints, Chap. 30.25. said, Did not I weep with him that
was in trouble, wa^ not my soul in heaviness for the poor?

It is one of the most pious and generous actions of the soul, to take upon
her the afflictions of others, and to ease them of them: It is the sacrifice
the most delightful, with which the Lord is pleased, they are I^remiahs
rags, but they draw us from the Cave of sin, from the pit of iniquity; it
is the dry rock of the mountain of Horeb, from whence flows abundantly the
wholesome waters of grace, and blessing.

In a word, it is a Jacobs ladder, by the which the Angels of consolations and
divine favors descend upon us, by the which our faith, our love and affection
ascend up to Christ, who stays for us on the top, to say unto us, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, before the
foundation of the world.

And will not therefore our hope to hear those sweet and gracious words,
oblige us to comfort and consolate the afflicted, and with our mean^s to ease
and refresh the poor and needy, since those are actions so pleasing and
acceptable to God, that S. August. says, That charity toward the poor, was a
second Baptism, because, that as the water of baptism, is a sacred sig^e unto
us, that the fire of original sin is ex^inguished in our souls: so pity
and compassion of the afflicted, is an undoubted mark that God has powered out
the sacred wate^s of his grace and forgiveness, upon the burning coals of our
transgressions to quench them.

Saint Chrysostom calls it the friend of God, that obtains of him all she
asks, she sets prisoners at liberty, recalls the banished, and implores
and obtaines grace for the condemned; the hand of the poor is the purse of
God, it is the Altar whereon we leave our gifts, to go and reconcile our
selves to our eldest brother Jesus Christ our Savior, whom the wickedness of
our sins, did cruelly fix and nail to the Cross.

Having sufficiently confidered the two first branches of mercy, let us now
behold the third branch of this divine plant which Saint Luke has perfectly
taught us, saying, (...). Love your enemies, and ye shall be the children of
the most high, Math. 5.44. Luke 6.27. Luke 3.24. for he is kind unto the
unkind, and to the evil. And indeed this part of mercy does greatly
beautify, and make glorious her body; for her two sisters, Pity in giving,
and Compassion in condoling, are actions which humanity cannot refuse, to the
lamentable cries of the languishing, to the sad and sorrowful objects of poor
and miserable men, but must move your hearts were they of steel, and draw
tears from your eyes, though they were of marble.

But to forgive our enemies, is to vanquish and overcome our selves, it is a
nearer approaching to the divine nature, then to the humane.

All Histories are full of charitable actions of men toward their neighbors,
and without taking them out of Scripture, the examples are (thanks be to God)
usually to be seen, but to forgive our enemies, not to annoy them when it is
in our power, is to be enlightened by the sacred presence of the holy Ghost, to
be regenerated by his grace, to be fully possessed of mercy.

Moses (that great servant of God) who had beheld him face to face, that had
seen him practice this rare and excellent virtue, toward the people of
Israel, falling into Idolatry; He that had mediated for them, speaking to God
after this manner: O Lord what will thy enemies say, that thou have brought thy
people out of Egypt, by a strong hand and stretched out arm, to kill them in
the wilderness, seeing that thou could not bring them into the land which
thou did promise them, and himself notwithstanding is carried away by this
passion of revenge, when he made the earth open and swallow up alive Core,
Dathan, and Abiram, with their families, though it be not mentioned that they
had participated in the murmuring of their heads; yea, he did not spare Mary
his own sister, whom he covered with leprosy. Neither is it to the purpose to
say that it was in Gods cause that he used this revenge, that is vallable in
putting Nadab and Abihu to death, because they had violated the divine
ordinance; God forbid that I should excuse their fault, but I desire only to
show, that though Moses were so holy a man, yet he had some touch of humane
weakness.

But in this circumstance what shall we say of David, a man after Gods own
heart, that so often curses his enemies, that gives charge to Sa^omon his
son, to revenge him of the injuries, and curses which Shimhi had spoken
against him, as he fled from before Absalom.

What greater Prophet then Elijah, nevertheless because two of Achazias
Captains were gone to seek him to take him, and bring him to the King, as he
had commanded them, he made the fire fall down from heaven, which consumed
them with their fifties.

And the Apostles themselves having not been well received in a certain
place, said to Christ, Will thou that we make fire fall from heaven, upon that
City? but Jesus diverted and hindered them.

We produce all these examples not to imitate, but to shun them, and thereby
to make it appear that we must not revenge our selves when we can do it,
but rather to do good to our enemies, when they have done us hurt, is to make
our selves perfect in this excellent virtue of Mercy. It is to become
conformable to the Savior and Redeemer of our souls, who seeing and feeling
the horrible cruelties of the Jews against him, hearing the blasphemies which
they pronounced against his divine Majesty, notwithstanding in stead of
revenging himself, he prays his Father, and cries out thus, Father forgive
them, for they know not what they do.

That which made Saint Stephens martyrdom the more honorable, is that in the
midst of his torments, among a fearful shower of hail of stones cast
against him, he desires not God to punish his tormentours, but rather being
posses^ed with the spirit of mercy, and meekness, he prays to God for
them, herein imitating his good and blessed Master Jesus Christ, saying, Lord
impute not this sin unto them, As we read Acts 7.60.

If Moses in the precedent examples has bin seen something too much desirous
of revenge, we may also read, that many times he has for given those that had
offended him, yea and has mediated and prayed to God for them, least he
should have revenged them.

David having received innumerable offenses and wrongs of Saul, notwithstanding
finding him weary in the Cave, having him in his bed at his discretion, he
forgave him all the injuries and harms he had made him suffer, saying only,
The Lord is a just Judge, that will avenge me o^ mine enemies, and will render
unto me after the in^egrity of my heart.

The Apostles indeed suffered themselves to be carried away by this sweet
desire and appetite of revenge, when they would make fire fall from heaven upon
that Town, that had offended them, but it was because they were frail and
weak men, like us when they fell i^to their faults and errors, but they we^e
soon rectified and raised up again by the grace of the holy Ghost; so that at
length when any gave them injuries, they rendered none again, they were
whipped and stoned, they were cast into prison, and yet they blessed, and
prayed for them that did it, and sought by all means to Preach the Gospel
unto them, and to show them the way of salvation: these second examples we
must follow, that we may appear to be the children of God, Disciples of
Christ, and imitatours of his Apostles.

This noble and godly action of forgivi^g our enemies; we must practice, first
if we desire that God shall acknowledge us for his children, we must strive to
be like him who is the fountain of forgiveness, who is meekness and
courtesy it self, and nothing but mercy: Secondly, we must pardon others, if
we desire that God shall forgive us, since that is conditional, which we
ask him, Lord forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us; Now if we do not forgive men their trespasses, no more will our
heavenly Father forgive us. Math. 6.15. For with the same measure that we mete,
it shall be also measured unto us again.

And that which must the more oblige us to put off the infected and poysonsome
coat of cruelty and revenge, since it is an abomination to God, which he has
prohibited us in so many places of Scripture; as Proverb. 20.22. Say not thou,
I will recompense evil, but wait upon the Lord, and he shall save thee. And
Romans 12.19. Dearly beloved avenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath,
for it is written, Vengeance is mine, I will repay, says the Lord: if then thy
enemy be hungry, give him to eat, if he be thirsty, give him drink, for
in so doing, thou shall heap burning coals upon his head. And Ecclus 28. The
Lord will be avenged of him that revenget^ himself, and he will keep
carefully his faults for him: forgive thy neighbor his misdeedes, and when
thou shall pray, thy si^nes shall be forgiven thee. Shall man keep his wrath
against man, and ask to be cured by the Lord, he will not take pity of man
like to himself, and will ask pardon of his sins; ^ince he that is but
flesh keeps his wrath, and asks forgiveness to God, who shall obliterate
and blot out his sins?

It is a common saying and proverb, There is nothing so sweet as revenge; but
for my part I cannot perceive this sweetness, unless it be compared to a
well scowred blade of a sword, that pierces and p^sseth through easily, but at
the same time takes away our lives, as the Bees that leave their sting where
they strike, and with it their life, Animasque in vulnere ponunt, so when we
revenge our selves, we leave the sting of our wrath in the wounds of our
enemy; but we do not consider (so blind are we) that withal we thereby
wound our souls to death.

Heliodorus tells us of one that said, That death would be sweet and welcome to
him, if he knew that his enemy should also die, and of another jealous woman
that cried out, O how delightful would death be to me, if I could fall dead
upon the dead body of my rival.

Plutarch says very well, That of all the wild beasts, there is none so savage
and cruel, as a man that has the liberty and power to execute his revenge.
But if we consider it diligently, we shall see, that this impatience, and not
to be able to bear an injury, is a great infirmity and weakness; but as
noble hearts, and generous, and magnanimous souls, do scorn and despise
wrongs, so do they also forgive, and forget all kinds of revenge.

Pericles of all the actions of his life, esteemed this the most remarkable,
that he had never revenged himself, for any wrong done unto him.

And Phocion being pu^ to death unjustly, feeling the eff^cts of that mortal
Hemlock, to bring him near to the last period of his life, recommended nothing
so much to his son as this, that he should forget the memory of this
offense, and that he should never seek to be revenged for it, that in meddling
with it, he would stay the gods from taking in hand the justice of his cause,
who would questionless revenge him of this offense.

Let us use the same Doctrine, though coming from the profane mouth of a
Pagan, they are nevertheless of infallible truth, as a Diamond loses nothing
of his value, though it be in the dirt: let us then practice it, and let us
remember, that whilst we desire to punish our enemies, we do them a great
favor, and are revenged of our selves, for the offense which they have done
unto us, which would deserve a far more rigorous labor if we left it to
God; but he seeing that we will neither refer it to his justic^, nor to his
commandments, nor to his promises, being unwilling to endure a companion in
any of his works, he suffers us to try our uttermost, which is most commonly
the cause of our ruin.

Let us then break off this discourse, which would never end, if we should
punctually follow it; and let us remember that revenge is our Masters own
dish, which none can touch without incurring his indignation: And let us
(imitating our heavenly Father) forgive our enemies, for if he should take
revenge of all the offenses which we at every moment commit against his sacred
Majesty, he would then reduce us to that nothing from whence we came, or
would inflict upon us eternal pains and punishments, since the least offense
committed against an infinite goodness, deserves an infinite pain and
torment. Let us then follow Saint Lukes admonition, Be merciful, as your
heavenly Father is merciful; and presently after we shall hear that blessed
recompense, which we shall receive for it, to wit, Blessed are the merciful,
for they shall obtain mercy.

We have already showed how God recompenseth the merciful, yea in this life,
with blessings, favors, and graces, spiritual, and temporal, giving unto
them a hundred times more then they have given to the poor, and giving them
consolation in their distress, as they also have suffered with their neighbor
in his affliction: But let us consider the third fruit of charitable works,
which is the highest degree of honor, unto which the merciful shall ascend,
to wit, eternal blessedness, and withal we will also examine the cause,
wherefore the faithful receive graces spiritual, temporal, and eternal,
which does clearly enough appear in our Text, Blessed are the me^cifull, for
they shall obtain mercy.

The only and perfect felicity of man both in this life and in that to come,
consists simply and soly in the possession of the favor of God, which the
wicked, cruel, and impious shall never be partakers of; but only the Saints,
the bountiful, and merciful shall pitch their te^ts there; the reason why the
one are put back from this infinite good, and that the others shall be
received and cheri^hed therein for ever is, because the first have lived in
cruelty, rigor, and tyranny, and shall therefore be thus punished; but the
second having been gracious, bountifu^l, and meek, they shall obtain mercy,
according to that saying of Christ, With what measure you mete, it shall be
measured unto you again.

In these words to obtain mercy, we have many very remarkable circumstances,
for God will show himself such unto us, as we shall show our selves to our
neighbors, if we give a crumme of bread to the poor languishing at our
doors, he will call us into his royal Palace; he will make us sit down at
his Table, he will fill us with the dainties of his house, and will make us
drink abundantly in the riv^r of his delights, if we bear with grief our
neighbors affliction, if we dress his wounds, and power oil on them; he
will comfort u^ in our sorrows, he will wipe off the tears from our eyes,
and will fill our hearts with joy and gladness, if we forgive our brethren
their offenses, when either maliciously, or through infirmity they have
offended us, he promises and assures us, to be so bountiful and merciful
to us, that h^e will drive our sins away from before his face; he will
scatter our misdeedes like a cloud dispersed by the parching beams of the
Sun, and in this part shall we find the center where the fullness of our
felicity rests and resideth.

This forgiveness of our sins is, that which covers us from the divine
justice, that gives into our hands the shield of assurance, which is
impenetrable by the revenging shot of his just judgments, that makes us walk
void of fear toward the throne of grace, and that without the least doubting,
for since God is with us, who shall be against us? shall the world, why it is
vanquished? shall hell, why it is fettered and shackled? Shall death, why it is
dead? shall sin, why it is prevented and pardoned* Finally, shall the flesh,
why it is crucified? We may therefore say and conclude with the Apostle Saint
Paul, O death where is thy sting, O hell where is thy victory? now thanks be to
God that has given us victory through his Son Jesus Christ.

From this word obtain, we will also derive and draw this remarkable
doctrine, for he presupposes asking, seeing we cannot obtain a thing before
we have demanded it, which teaches us our duties toward God, acknowledging
our selves poor, weak, and miserable, both in body and soul, subject in body
to thousands of sicknesses, weaknesses, and necessities, troubled in mind with
a world of business, crosses, and afflictions, and so laden in soul with
sins, misdeedes, and iniquities, that they are more in number then the sand
that is on the Sea shore; But the only remedy to these sicknesses is, to have
our recourse to Gods mercy, which is the sac^ed anchor of our hopes, the haven
of our salvation, and the eternal residence of our incomparable, and
incomprehensible felicities.

And let us hold for certain and infallible, that we shall never be refused
by his sacred goodness, which calls out aloud unto us, Math. 11.^8. come
unto me all ye that are troubled, and ^e^vie laden, and I will ease you: take
my yoke upon you, for it is ^ight, and ye shall find rest to your souls; his
yoke is nothing else, but the affliction, weakness, and necessity of the
poor, that is the yoke he commands us to bear, that is to (...), we ^ust
take off the load of misery and calamity from the poor, to lade it upon our
own shoulders, and we shall find that his yoke is easy, and his burden
light, because he will then augment our strength, and will make us so able to
bear it, that we should be sorrowful ever to cast it off again.

As a King finds the weight of a crown but small, when it is upon his head,
by reason of the wealth, honor, and power that follow the heaviness of this
burden, as he would never leave his Kingdom, his power, and his Empire, for
the weight of a S^epter, seeing they make him honorable to his Subjects, and
feared of Strangers, so that faithful man which has compassed and environed
his forehead with the crown of love to his neighbor, that has adorned his
hand with the Scepter of charity, to the needy, and miserable, he without
doubt shall find rest in his soul, which is the fullness of all felicity.

Now since such great and admirable effects, since so excellent profits and
advantages, proceed from our mercy, charity, and bounty to our neighbor,
since in the practice of it, we find our felicity, which consists in the
love which God bears unto us, in the confirmation of the pardon for our
offenses; since again God assures us, that the charity which we give and
exercise to our neighbors, he will accept as done to himself: alas, who
would be so savage, and hardened with rigor; who would be so defiled with
ingratitude, that having received favors from a King, would yet refuse to obey
him, and to serve him with all his power, should not he be worthy of the
greatest torments, of the most cruel punishments, that have ever been
imagined; would not the heaven, the elements, and all the creatures together
rise up in judgment, to ask punishment for so grievous a crime; since it is
most true, that ingratitude is the basest and damnablest vice, that can infect
the soul of man.

Let us remember that we have nothing but what we have received of our heavenly
Father; and if we have received it from his favorable and fatherly hand, why
should we be so ungrateful, as to refuse him a small portion of it, when ^ee
asks for it: Now, and at all times when we hear and see the poor praying,
and crying unto us in the streets, or at our doors, it is the voice of God
himself, tha calls us to acknowledge his benefits, as often as we see one
afflicted that asks us help, and consolation; let us r^n^e to him, and give
him occasion of joy, and gladness, for it is Christ himself which was
comforted by an Angel, in the Garden, when praying to God his Father, he
sweated drops of blood, which made him pronounce these lamentable words, so
full of grief; My soul is full of sorrow even unto death.

When we have bin offended by our neighbor, and that he will cast himself at
our feet, to ask us forgiveness, let us not be such tigers, and so
unnatural, as to refuse him his request, remembering that it is a condition
needful to obtain the pardon for our own sins, which we shall never
obtain, until we have first forgiven our brethren their offenses: but let us
follow the example of our heavenly Father, who says, That at what time so ever
a sinner repen^eth him of hi^ sins he will put away his wickedness out of
his remembrance.

And when we must appear before the terrible and dreadful Throne of the
Sovereign Judge, when we shall be called to a strict account for the talents
and administration which has been committed to our charge by our heavenly
Master: let us then I say follow the example of that wise Steward, let us make
our selves friends with the riches of iniquity; let us fill the hand of the
poor, which is the Al^ar of God, upon the which he affectionatly rec^iveth
the Incense of our prayers, as a delightful and pleasing Sacrifice, to the
glory of his holy name.

Then I say, shall we hear that sweet and heavenly voice of the Savior of
our souls, speaking graciously to us after this manner: Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, before the foundation of the
world. Amen. Amen.

The Prayer.
O Lord God, full of mercy and compassion, O favorable Father, that art the
fountain of pardon and remission, and the refuge of them that truly repent,
who desire not the death of a sinner, but rather that he may turn from his
wickedness and live; we thy poor and miserable creatures, who by the weakness
of our flesh, by the malice of our minds, and by our own vicious inclination
to follow ill examples, have provoked thee to make thy wrath and indignation
fall upon our sinful heads; we have many ways and times by our transgressions
incited thee, to cast upon our sinful souls the thunderbolts of thy
judgments, we have made sin our delight, and iniquity the height of our
happiness. Thy ju^tice did cry and run after us, like a roaring and ravening
Lion seeking to devour us, thy judgments were ready to cast our bodies and
souls into hell, but that the excellent greatness of thy mercy, (O
bountiful and gracious Father) has interposed her self, and has not
permitted that we should be cast down into the depth of eternal death, and
condemnation; thy hand (O sweet Savior) has upheld us, and thy clemency (O
our Redeemer) has perfectly delivered us: therefore (O gracious Father) seeing
thou have preserved us from evil, conserve us still in good things, receive
(if such b^ thy good pleasure) the incense of our prayers, o^r sacri^ice of
thankesgiving, which we most humbly offer upon the sacred Al^ar of thy divine
compassions. Put up our tears into thy bottels, accept our contrite hearts
broken with grief, to have offended thee, for a pleasing Sacrifice: receive
our griefs and displeasures for thy satisfaction, and behold thy Son, thy
only, thy welbeloved Son, his head pricked with thorns, for our sins, his
hands, his sides, and his feet pierced with Lances, and nails for our
iniquities, for his torments sake, for his pains, and for his deaths sake,
restore us unto life, forgive us our sins, (O great God) blot out our
iniquities, that so following thy example, we may do the like to them that
have offended us; change in us our hard hearts, and make them gentle and easy
to pardon and forgive; and suffer not our souls to be defiled, and infected
with the venom of revenge: but that leaving it unto thee, we may think of
nothing else but to be obedient unto thee, blessing those that curse us,
speaking well of those that slander us, and praying for those that persecute
us.

O good God, kindle in our souls an holy love toward our afflicted brethren,
that we may partake with them in their afflictions, and so ease them that they
may the better bear that burthon, which thou have imposed upon them.

We most humbly beseech thee also (O good Savior) to give us charitable
hearts, and full of compassion to help the poor in their need, remembering
that they are o^r brethren, that thou art the Father of us all, and that we are
the children of the same mother, that a glass of cold water only given unto
them, is of an inestimable price before thee, because thou acceptest of it as
willingly, and recompensest it as largely, as if it had been given to thy
self; make us understand and know that thou art the King and great Master of
the world, that all that is therein justly belongs unto thee, that we are
but thy Stewards, to dispose of thy goods, to them of thy household, to wit, the
poor, who as well as we have that honor to belong to thy house, to be thy
servants, y^a to bear the name of thy children, that when it shall please thee
to call us to account, we may be found to have used with profit the talent
committed unto us: and that it may please thine infinite goodness, not for our
sakes, but through thy mercy, for thy welbeloved Sonne^ sake, to call us good
and faithful servants, and to make us enter into our Masters joy, which is the
heavenly Jerusalem. Amen.

The second Way to Sion
THE PRAISE OF PVRITIE.
MATH. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.


IN the holy and sacred Temple of wise King Solomon, there were three things
chiefly considerable, that is, 1. The body of the temple whereto the people
came. 2. The holy place appointed for the Levites, and those that ministered at
the Sacrifices. And 3. the Sanctum Sanctorum, or the most holy place,
consecrated for the Ark of the Lord, who had appointed it for his ordinary
dwelling and residence, wherein he commonly appeared, in the form of a dark
clowd, out of which were heard, the divine Oracles, and the irrevocable
sentences of his sacred judgments. It was a place whereinto none (upon pain
of death) could come, except the high Priest, and that but only once every
year, and yet with many precautions, and circumstances, for he was first to
purify himself, to wash his body, and to change his clothes, before he
appeared in the terrible and fearful presence of the living God.

By this fair and marvelous Temple of King Solomon, is lively represented
unto us the world, adorned, and diversified with so many fair and admirable
creatures.

By the Body of the Temple, where the children of Israel heard the reading of
the law of God, his Spouse the Church is naturally denoted and figured unto us.

By the holy place, whereunto came only the Levites, and those which ministered
at the Sacrifices, are signified unto us, the Ministers of the word of God, who
are chosen and put a part in his Church, to be Heralds, and Ambassadors of
his holy will, offering the ordinary Sacrifices of p^ayer and thanksgiving,
which are his d^lectable and well accepted service.

By the Sanctum Sanctorum, or the most holy place, is truly figured unto us
Heaven; for, as the high Priest entered not into that place, before he had first
purified, and washed himself according to the Divine ordinance: so the
faithful cannot enter into heaven, until he has first divested sin, and
be covered with the cloak of Justice, holiness, and innocence; therefore
Jesus Christ himself declares the same thing unto us with his own sacred
mouth, saying,

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see GOD.

The Prophet David expresses exceeding well the same words, in the 15. Psalm,
saying, Lord, who shall abide in thy Tabernacle? who shall dwell in thy holy
hill? he that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and speaks the
truth in his heart.

And in the 24. Psalm, Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? and who
shall stand in his holy place? he that has clean hands, and a pure ^ear^;
who has not lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully. He shall
r^ceive the blessing from the Lord, and righteousness from the God of his
salvation.

And in the 33. Chap. of Isaiah ver. 14. Who among us shall dwell with the
devouring fire? who amongst us shall dwell with ^verlasting burnings* He that
walks righteously, and speaks uprightly: he that despises the gain of
oppressions, that shake^h his hands from receiving of bribes; that stops his
ears from hearing of blood, and shuts his eyes from seeing evil. He shall
dwell on high: his place of defense shall be the munitions of rocks, bread
shall be given him, his waters shall be sure. His eyes shall see the King in
his beauty; they shall behold the land that is very far off.

O what admirable places, how many fair and rare promises, do all these
Prophets make to the faithful, who shall keep his heart from sin* and his
hands from iniquity; and Jesus Christ himself comes after to confirm their
testimony, and to ratify their words, saying in this place,

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see GOD.

Words very energeticall, and significant, as if he had said, Dearly beloved,
the only and perfect way to possess all happiness, all pleasures, and all
the advantages that you can wish; and in a word, to enjoy eternal felicity, to
contemplate face to face Gods divine Majesty, wherein consists the fullness
of happiness, and all contentment, following the serpents example, to cast off
the old skin, that is, to pull off the old coat of sin, infected with
the leprosy of iniquity, to fly and eschew evil, to embrace good, to hate
vice, and perfectly to love virtue, which is the true way to heaven, to the
po^session of heavenly graces; and in a word, to the fullness and perfection of
all true happiness.

Blessed are then the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

Now to enter into a more particular explication of these words, we will divide
them into two principal parts, and will consider, 1. who are the pure in
heart. And secondly, the cause why they are blessed.

The royal Prophet David in the 15. Psalm, describes perfectly unto us those
that are pure in heart, They are those, says he, that lie not, and who live
^prightly; they who ba^kbite not with their tongues, nor do evil to their
neighbors, and in whose eyes a vile person is contemned, but they honor them
that fear the Lord: they that swear to their own hurt, and change not: they
that put not out their money to usurie, nor take bribes or reward against the
innocent.

This is a very fair, true, and ample description of the Righteous man, who
has a pure heart, that is, who has his conscience pure and just, and who
lives in integrity, justice, and innocence.

For this word heart, is not here to be understood or taken for the material
and carnal heart, placed in our breasts, which is the fountain and beginning
of life, the first living, the last dying i^ man, but for the soul that
keeps there her ordinary Sessions, as we commonly say that is corn, by
showing only the sacks that hold it; there is the Kings Treasure, by showing
only the Exchequer Chamber where it is kept, the place containing being called
and taken by the name of the thing contained: so must we understand a pure
heart to be taken for the conscience, which therein makes her residence.

Where at the first sigh^ we find a thing very remarkable, and worthy our
consideration, that to wit, that sin being as it were a black and venomous
Ink, or an infected and corrupted poison, as soon as it comes near our
hearts, the seat of our souls, it defile^h, infecteth, and makes them so
stinking, that God cannot endure them before his face, so much abhors he the
very sent and smell of sin, and so much the very object of iniquity is noisome
and troublesome to him.

Now Jesus Christ knowing that man brought into the world from his mothers
womb with life, the cause of death, that is, original sin, cursed sin, a
disastrous blade or stalk, which like the wild and evil plants casts
continually ^orth so many young sprigges, which does so people and store the
field of our souls, that in the e^d in stead of a Garden of Eden, where God
took pleasure to walk, in stead of a delightful River, where the Angels
bathed, it becomes a hideous and dreadful wilderness, where the devils and
wicked spirits keep their Sabaths, and criminal Assizes and Sessions, a
filthy sink, where wicked and impious men like Hogs continually wallowe: And
therefore Jesus Christ (I say) to bring his Apostles to perfection, and to put
them and all the faithful in the way to heaven, he exhorts them to keep their
hearts pure, clean, and naked from all sin, filthiness, and iniquity, to
extirpate the thistles, and briars from the fields of their souls, to plow and
till it carefully, with the share and harrow of contrition and repentance for
their sins: In a word, to make it a ground fit, and fruitful to receive the
holy seed of the word of life, and to make it bear fruits to immortality and
eternal life.

As men would be curious to sweep and cleanse a house, wherein a King
resolves for a while to be resident, and may justly accu^e him of imp^udence
and impudence, who having advice and notice of his coming, would not make have
to perfume it, to adorn, and enrich it with the fairest furniture, to
embellish it with all the rarities and most precious jewels they could recover:
So, alas! the hearts of the faithful are nothing else but the house of God,
the glorious throne of his beloved Son, and the tabernacle which the holy
Ghost has chosen for his habitation; where is then that heart of stone, that
soul so base, and obstinately resolved to be lost, that knowing the happy and
most honorable arrival of the great King of Kings, of the three divine
persons, of the ineffable and incomprehensible Trinity, and trineunity, does
not sweep and cleanse the house of his heart, and does not purify it from all
dirt and filthiness, who I say will not adorn it with the riches^ treasures,
and with the rich ornaments that holiness, justice, and innocence abundantly
affords; purposely to receive with honor and reverence so magnificent a King,
who promises us to come unto us, when he says in the 14. Chap. of Saint
John, If a man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him,
and we will come in unto him, and make our abode with him.

Our good Master Jesus Christ (the Savior of our souls) teaches us in the
22. Chap of Saint Matthew, how much and how dearly pureness is accepta^le
before him, saying, That the Kingdom of heaven is like a certain King which
made a marriage for his son, and having invit^d many, the banqueting room
was filled, and the King himself being come in to see the guests, he there
saw a man which had not a wedding garment, and said unto him, Friend how
came thou in hith^r, not having a wedding garment? And he was speechl^sse.
Then said the King to the servants, bind him hand and foot, and cast him into
utter darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth: for many are
called, but few are chosen.

Can we desire a more lively representation, or an example more formal, to
show us that God delights in the sincerity and pureness of our souls; and
contrariwise, that he abhors, and detesteth the filthiness of sin, the
ink and coals of iniquity, which blacks and defiles our consciences, for it
is impossible ever to taste of the dainty and delicious Viands served at the
Lambs wedding, at the sumptuous and magnificent feast of the only Son of the
great King of Kings, before we have left off our working days clothes, the
infected and stinking coat of our natural corruption, to put on the white
roabe of holiness, purity, and amendment of life, and to use the very words of
Scripture, Colos. 3. We must cast off the old man with his deeds, and put on
the new man which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that created
him. And Ephesians. 4. concerning the former conversation, Cast off the old man,
which is corrupted according to the deceitful lusts of his heart, and be
renewed in the spirit of your mind: and put on the new man, which like unto
God is created in righteousness, and true holiness. And in Romans 6.6. Our old
man is crucified with Christ, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that
henceforth we should serve sin no more, but walk before him in renovation
and newness of life.

The clearest waters are always the best, and therefore commonly see that the
excellentest springs are derived from the rocks, and fetched from the highest
hills, because that the water distilling through many narrow passages, and
strait places, the farther it goes the more it is purified, and the most
subtle and clearest springs seek the highest places, as approaching nearer to
the nature of the air, whose nature and propriety is still to ascend. And
contrariwise, you may observe and mark, that the thick and heavy waters are
always filthy and stinking, and are conserved in pitts and deep sinkes, as
participating of the nature of the earth, and therefore are fit for nothing but
to breed serpents. and Frogs, whereof some kill us by their mortal venom,
and the other trouble us with their unsufferable croaking.

These clear and pure waters do lively prefigure and set forth unto us, the
faithful servant of the Lord, who has purified, and as it were distilled
himself at the fire of the love of God, thereby to leave off what was earthly
ponderous, and troublesome in him, as hatred, ambition, sensuality, and vain
glory purposely to soar aloft, and to elevate himself to the holy mountain
of Syon toward heaven, which is the center whither the circumference of his
desires, designs, and thoughts tends.

These black and muddy waters may express and set forth hell unto us, where
there is nothing but horrible darkness and fearful obscurity, where that old
serpent is justly banished for his deserts, and where the damned, ghastly, and
frightfull souls do nothing else but vex themselves and curse.

But to apply it to the subject of our text, these stinking and corrupted
waters, may very fitly be compared to the wicked, and to the men of this world,
who have Woolfes or Lions hearts under the shape and form of men, who wallowe
like Hogs in the mire, and dirt of carnal security, who run not after
piety and virtue, but remain fast chained and bound to sensuality, and vice;
casting all their affections on the earth, whereof their body is made and
composed, never aiming nor levelling their thoughts at heaven, whence their
soul had their original; True serpents in malice, hatred, and envy, that
with mortal venom infect the Lillies and Roses of the best consciences,
Frogs in prating and slandering, that never open their mouths, but to utter
unsufferable blasphemies, oaths, lies, and detractions.

Take yet this farther conceit upon the purity of the heart, to wit, that as
the eyes ore-vayled with clouds, or with carracts and webbs, cannot clearly
discern the objects, or colors, which are exposed before them, because their
faculty is prevented and hindered, by the interposition of these obstacles,
which are placed between the object and the sight; whereas contrariwise good
sound and well disposed eyes as are these of Eagles, who though soaring in the
highest clouds, do nevertheless see very plainly in the thickest bushes, in
the remotest furrows of the far distant field, and which is most admirable,
is, that her sight is so strong and powerful, that contrary to the nature and
practice of other living creatures, she can steddily behold and contemplate the
Sun, without winking at all; yea, when she is nearest him, and standing on
the highest branch of a tree, planted on the top of the loftiest mountain.

Now to appropriate this to our matter, we say, That he whose heart is
incombred with the things of this world, whose soul is ore-vayled with
ambition, with the clouds of vanity, and vain glory, whose conscience is
obscured, and darkened with hatred, envy, and malice, can never contemplate
God, nor see his face, which is all the consolation, all the joy, and in a
word, the true center of our happiness, the fullness of all our felicity, and
the greatest delights which the faithful can wish or desire. But those that
shall be careful and diligent to keep their souls pure and clean from the
filthiness of sin, those like Eagles indeed always soaring in heavenly and
godly actions, shall be perched and placed in the highest place of mount Syon,
from thence-forth ever to view the heavenly Sin rising, that bears health
in his rays and wings, to behold steddily, and without winking, the
glistering, and bright shining beams of the Sun of righteousness, without
any fear of hurt, being assured of his wonderful favor, manifested by his
inviolable promises, for he says in our Text,

Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see GOD.

By this purity of heart, we may understand the simplicity of our lives and
actions, and so this sentence, Blessed are the pure in heart, may be thus
interpreted, Blessed are those that walk simple in their actions, whose heart
is void of fraud, and of any thoughts of iniquity, whose tongue speaks nothing
but the hear^s meaning, that shunnes vanity, and the glory of this world, that
so they may be perfectly glorious in that which is to come. St Augustine lib.
1. de Sermon Dom. is of this opinion, because that as St John says, 1. Epist.
chap. 5. ver. 19. The whole worldlyeth in wickedness, and that the Apostles
were to take men, and to bring them to the way of salvation, neither by craft,
no^ by force, but by meekness and simplicity.

And therefore Christ sending through all the world, to publish the Gospel of
the Kingdom of heaven, the redemption of captive sinners, from the chains and
torments of hell, and to preach openly the acceptable year of the Lord, says
unto them; Behold I send you forth as sheep in the midst of Woolves, be ye
therefore wise as serpents, and harmless and innocent as Doves; as we read in
the 10. Chap. of S. Math. ver, 16. And in the same Gospel, Chap. 6. ver. 22.
The light of the body is the ^ye, if therefore thine eye be single, thy whole
body shall be full of light.

This so excellent virtue of meekness and simplicity, has always been
hated of the world, as being contrary to the vanity and folly of it, and the
high way to mount Sinai, there to see God face to face as Moses, who preferred
the simplicity of a Shepherds crook, to the honors, riches, and preferments
which he might justly have expected in Pharaohs Court, as being reputed his
daughters son.

This virtue cannot but be very pleasing to God, since he himself has put it
in practice, in appearing to Moses in a bush, which is a base and abject plant,
despising the lofty Pine trees, and C^dars of Libanus, which in height and
b^auty exceed all other trees of the earth.

The Angels also have practiced it, when having left the heavens to appear
unto men, they have not taken the form and majesty of Kings, to be respected
of all, but rather the habit of Pilgrims, and men of base quality, to teach us
to shun pride and vain glory, and to show us by their clothes that we are
Strangers and Pilgrims in this world, that our houses are but Innes, where we
should stay only as posts do under a tree till the storm be past, and so to
continue our way as long as the day of our life shines, that the night
envelloping and wrapping us up in her dark cloak, we may arrive at the
heavenly Canaan, which is our native Country from whence we first departed.

We read in the 18. Chap. of Genes. That Abraham sitting at his tent door, saw
three men passing that way, whom he^ called, and desired to come and sit under
a tree with him, to eat a morsel of bread, to comfort their hearts. Now if it
were god himself in the form of three men, to represent the three persons of
the blessed Trinity, or if they were Angels sent by him, is a question out of
the subject of our Text; but because many Fathers of the Church are of the
second opinion, we also will hold it, grounded on the 13. Chap. to the Heb. Be
not forgetful to entertain Strangers, for thereby some have entertained
Angels unawares, which is commonly referred to this action of the Father of the
faithful, and of Lot his brothers son, who also entertained in Sodom two
Angels, in the shape of Strangers, and of men that were traveling further.

In the 5. Chap. of Tobit we read, that the Angel Raphael appeared to the
young Tobit, and offered to bring him into Media, which he did afterward
perform.

But leaving many other examples, which we could allege of the humility, and
simplicity of Angels; let us briefly run over the lives of the Patriarks and
Prophets, where the simplicity and innocent purity of their actions do most
lively appear. Abraham at Gods command, without any further information, goes
to the place appointed him, to sacrifice on an Altar his only son.

Isaac following the steps of his Fathers obedience to God, runs to his
death, never fearing the great torment that he was ready to endure, lays the
wood on his shoulders, and carries in his hand that fire that was appointed to
burn him to ashes; yea, he encourages his poor old Father to execute Gods
divine command, restores unto him by his exhortation, his strength already
lost, by reason of the extreme grief which he endured, to be the executioner
of his own son, and to kill him to whom he had lately given life.

But least we should be too tedious, this example of simplicity shall serve us
for all the Prophe^s, as being the most remarkable that can be ever rehearsed
by man; and indeed was it not a great and lofty mys^erie, that God should give
so resolute a courage, so great a constancy, to the Father of the faithful,
and so admirable boldness to this obedient son; for Abraham represents
unto us God the Father, who to execute the irrevocable decree of his divine
justice, has seized the sword of his terrible judgments, to dip it in the
blood of the spotless Lamb, that bare the sins of the world on the Altar of
the Cross.

This sweet Jesus, whose simplicity, and meekness are both peerless and
inexplicable, this good Savior, following the example of Isaac, by whom
during the shadows of the law he was figured, goes freely to his death,
bearing the wood, which was to bereave him of l^fe upon him, and within him the
burning fi^e of love, that inflamed him with an infinite affection to save the
Elect: He was brought says the Prophet Isaiah as a Lamb to the slaughter; so
opened he not his mouth to complain: he is conducted as a dumb Sheep before
her Shearer; but in that we see nothing but part of his simplicity, appearing
in the catastrophe of his actions, when he was near his death; but if we
should curiously view the acts of his life, beginning from his birth, we should
be ravished in admiration of these infinite wonders; but let us consider only
in general, that he is borne of a pure virgin, espoused to a Carpenter: was
that befitting his excellent Majesty, who was the King of the world?

He was borne in a Stable amongst beasts, judge if that were the Royal
Palaces, and honorable company, which he had in heaven among the Angels.

He was swadled in clowts, and laid in a Manger, for want of a Cradle to keep
him from the injuries of the weather: were those the delights of his Paradise?

He was fugitive here and there, to shun the envy and furious rage of Herod,
who fought to kill him.

In a word, considering diligently all the course of his life, from the moment
of his birth, to the last period of his death, we shall find all his actions
framed in humility, and guided by meekness and simplicity.

This example and no more, he did not go choose within the Palaces of Kings,
the goodliest and gallantest Courtiers; he did not elect the sons of Princes
to be his Apostles, but went to the receipt of custom, to the Cottages and
Boats of Fishermen, to call that honorable company of his twelve Apostles, who
like well instructed Disciples followed the steps of their loving Lord and
Master; so well did they imitate and follow his examples and especially that of
his simplicity, that they may be patterns of it themselves, as the History of
their life sufficiently shows, and as the duty of their place required, for
men and being deeply plunged in malice, pre^umption, and arrogancy, there was
no way to vanquish them, but wholly by contrary weapons to them unknown, that
they might the more easily be subdued and vanquished.

To their arrogancy, they opposed meekness, to their pomp and vain glory,
humility, and simplicity, ever remembering the command of their good Master, Be
ye simple as Doves.

Now it is remarkable, that the faithful, and such as walk uprightly before
God, are called by the wicked, and by the children of the God of this world,
Poor and simple people, because they addict not themselves to fra^d and
deceit, so spoke Jobs wife to her husband, being yet in affliction upon his
dunghill, Do thou still retain thine integrity?

But Jesus Christ to show us that he approoveth those whom the world
rejects, speaks as if he had said, See you those simple and base people,
they shall see God: So Christ gives them hopes of the blessed vision of God, as
if he had promised light to the blind, knowledge to the ignorant, and
wisdom to fools, for so this wicked world calls those that will not drink
the cup of his malice, nor tread in his paths full of sin and iniquity.

Blessed then are the pure in heart, etc.

He does not only say, they shall be blessed, but he speaks in the present
tense, saying, they are already blessed: for God having given them that
holiness which they possess, and upon all occasions practice, has also given
them two strong and well feathered wings, to soar and fly aloft to heaven:
whereof she one is faith, by the which the just trusting and reposing himself
wholly in the promises of Christ, takes his flight toward Paradise, to have a
taste of them; for it is the nature of faith (as appears by her definition) to
know how to assure it self, how to ask the grace of God promised in his word,
how to embrace salvation offered by Jesus Christ, and during this life, how to
possess in part that eternal and blessed life.

And because faith begins here to taste the delights of the vision of God,
she is yet upheld and fortified by Hope, which is the second wing, that makes
her expect heaven, and promises her absolutely to fill her abundantly with
those swee^ pleasures whereof the has, she yet had but a taste, and to make
her perfectly know, that which now she sees but obscurely, and like a shadow.

Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see GOD.

Upon these words there is an objection to be resolved, why Christ says here
the pure in heart, seeing the Scripture in many places is directly opposite to
this justice, to this purity, to this cleanenesse, as we read Prou. 20.9. Who
can say I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my sin? And in the first
book of Kings, the 8. Chap. There is no man that sins not. And in the 1.
Epist. of Saint John, 1. Chap. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive our
selves, and the truth is not in us. And in the 25. Chap. of Job, How can man be
justified with God: or how can he be clean that is borne of a woman?

Although these places, and many more (that we purposely leave to avoid
prolixity) seem to be opposite to our Text, notwithstanding we will reconcile
them together.

For when the Spirit of God calls here those that live justly and holily
pure in heart, we must not understand it so, as if they were totally and
absolutely clean from the filthiness of sin: for in that sense the royal
Prophet David says, There is none just, no not one.

But we must understand here those that strive to walk in the sacred paths of
Gods commandments, that live holily before God, and without reproach before
men, that have been purified, like gold tried seven times in the fire, and
that fire is the word of God, that enters and penetrates to the most secret
thoughts, there to consume the wood and chafe of our wicked inclinations.

This cleansing and purification is clearly set forth unto us in the 15. Chap.
of Saint John in these words of Christ, Now ye are clean through the word
which I have spoken. And in the 13. Chap. ver. 10. of the same Gospel, He
that is washed, needs not save to wash his feet, but is clean every whit:
and ye are clean, but not all.

In a word, the faithful that live holily, may be called just, and pure in
heart, Secundum quid, non-simpliciter, Just in that degree of Justice that may
fall on man whilst he is here below fighting against flesh and blood his
domestical enemies, that often overcome him, and would quite keep him down
if he were not upheld and fortified by the spirit of grace, and by ^he
Almighty hand of God that raises and delivers him.

The faithful servant of the Lord is again called pure in heart, because ^ee
is such in part already, and that besides the great disposition that is in him
to tend to his perfection, he already here begins to taste the excellent
sweetness of that delicate fruit whereof he shall hereafter be fully and
perfectly satisfied and satiated in Gods Paradise.

Blessed then are the pure in heart, for they shall see God.

We have another circumstance here very pregnant and remarkable, to wit, that
Christ exhorts us here to be pure in heart, and not of our head, or hands,
because that the heart being the seat of the soul, sin is most busy to
vitiate and infect it with his foul and filty corruption, which it does not in
the other parts of the body, and therefore you see that God does so strictly
command us to keep our hearts for his part and behoof, saying, My son give
me thy heart.

Now to omit or let pass nothing worthy consideration like the inhabitants of
Nilus, we will draw water in running.

We say then that this word heart, is diversely taken in the Scripture, First,
it is taken for faith, as Romans 10. For with the heart man believes unto
right^ousnesse, and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation.

2. It is taken for the thoughts, and for the gift of regeneration, as 1.
Epist. of Saint Peter, Chap. 3. ver. 4. The hidden man of the heart in that
which is not corrup^ible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which
is in the sight of God of great price and estimation.

3. For the understanding, as Romans 2. They show the work of the law written in
their hearts.

4. It is taken for the conscience, as in the 1. of Sam. the 24. chap. 5. ver.
David's heart smote him, because he had cut off Saul's skirt. And in the 1. to
the Thessal. chap. 3. To establish your hearts unblameable in holiness before
God. Here is yet another very clear passage in the 1. Epist. of Saint John
chap. 3. ver. 2^. If our heart condemn us, God is greater then our heart, and
knows all things, and if our heart condemn us not, we have confidence
toward God.

And in this last signification it is taken in our Text, to wit, for the
Conscience, as if Christ had said, Blessed are those that possess a holy,
pure, and just soul, a good, clean, and spotless conscience.

David desirous to raise himself from his fall, and to restore the temple of
his body polluted by wicked adultery, desired of God a new Altar, praying him
to create in him a clean heart, and to renew a right spirit within him. Psalm.
51.12.

Judas Maccabeus having seen the Temple of Jerusalem profaned by Antiochus
his sacrilegious hands, he purifieth it, destroys all the Altars where that
Pagan had sacrificed to his Idols, and called that the renewing of the Temple:
Our bodies are the living temples of the holy Ghost, our hearts the Altars, on
the which having wickedly sacrificed to the Idols of our passions, we must
break them and destroy them, by our true repentance and conversion to God, who
despises not a broken and a contrite heart: And afterward we must build new
ones pure and clean, on the which we must offer to God Hecatombes of Justice,
and solemn burnt offerings and sacrifices wherein he delights.

The Etymologists hold, that this word Cor is derived of Cura, that is, care,
because that part communicates, sends, and does distribute blood and life to
the rest of the body: Even so all our study, all our exercise, and occupation
should be to seek the means fit for the conservation of our souls: for what
will it profit a man if he gain the whole world, and loose his soul. Math.
16.26.

As soon as the Embrion is conceived, the first part which is formed in the
heart, being as it were the center whence the several lines are drawn to the
circumference of our bodies, it is also the first member living, and when the
pains of death have compassed a man, the blood from all parts retires to the
heart, as to a citadell, so that it is also the last part that dies in us,
according to that common saying, Cor est primum vivens, and ultimum moriens.

So when the faithful of the Lord resolves to live piously, he must cast for
a sure and unmovable foundation, the righteousness of a pure and clean
conscience, which must be the Ocean where all the rivers of hisaffections must
run and tend, the corner and fundamental stone, on the which must be edified
this his Pilgrimage: All the building of this mortal and transitory life,
must begin with the just man's beginning, and never end till his death, when it
shall be augmented and perfected in heaven.

It was Gods commandment under the law, that all Israelites, all the seed of
Abraham should offer and consecrate to him the first borne, both of man and
beast; now if we unvayle the letter, and consider what it therein figured unto
us, we may note among other things, that God desired by this Decree, whose
letter and figure is abrogated, though the truth and sense of it be eternal,
that we should offer and consecrate unto him our hearts, which are the first
borne of our selves.

The greatest part of Physicians hold, that the soul being generally all over
the body, has her principal seat in the heart, as the King has in his Court,
although his power reach through all his Kingdom; so that the soul being that
very man which God requires, it is then not without reason, that God demands
our heart, which is her throne: My son give me thy heart.

The heart is known to be the original of natural heat; now God being a
burning fire of love, and affection toward his children, we ought to
consecrate that part to him for his Tabernacle.

The heart is red and bloody, to show us the fervencie and zeal that should be
in us to Gods service and glory, and that our thoughts should always burn
with love to him, and with charity to our neighbors.

It is little; whence we may learn not to puff, or swell it with pride, but
to keep it always humble and modest. Virtues that seek not after large and
spacious Palaces, but are contented in the narrowest and remorest places.

His beating and panting is upwards; so all our desires and thoughts should
tend toward the end of our supernatural vocation, according to the Apostles
advice, Seek the things that are above.

The heart is agitated by a continual motion, by reason of his vital spirits,
that animate and nourish it: So our thoughts should bear and conduct us to the
actions of Justice, innocence, and godliness, and to follow the steps of the
Scripture, Charity always works, and is never idle, by reason of the spirit
of grace dwelling in our souls, who inspires continually in us holy and
religious thoughts.

There is but one heart in man, and yet his shape and form is triangular, a
figure bearing proportion to his object, that is God, one in Essence, and three
in persons: So our souls should be adorned with these three beautiful virtues,
Faith, hope and Charity.

He is open at the top, and that way he receives his nourishment: Which
teaches us, that our souls should always be open, to proclaim the praises
of our Creator and Redeemer, that nourishes them with the holy and wholso^e
meat of his sacred word, sent dow^^ from heaven.

The least angle or cor^e^ is turned downwards, to show us that (...) least
care should be for earthly things.

It is again not hayrie, to teach us that our soul which is hi^ hostess,
must be void of the foolish and light imaginations, of the weak and unconstant
considerations of this world, that so she may hope and aim at nothing but
heaven, her blessed Country, wherein it is impossible to enter, before our
heart (after Moses his example) have pulled off the Shoes of our corruption
and worldly affection, that so we may come near this burning bush, this
fearful fire, Gods divine justice.

The Oracle of Apollo, being once enquired, what was the most pleasingst thing
of God; after his ordinary manner he answered ambiguously, and obscurely:

Dimidium sphaerae, sphaeram cum principe Romae.

An answer most true, though it came from the father of lies, for a C is the
half of a Sphere, and O is a Sphere, and the beginning of the word Rome is an
R, which letters put together make COR, that is, the heart, and questionless
it is the most pleasingst gift that can be offered unto God, and which no man
can justly refuse him. The poor may say, I cannot give alms; the sick, I
cannot go to Church, I can neither watch nor pray; but none can say, I cannot
love God, for thy others defects may be excused by ^hy poverty, or sickness,
but to refuse God with (...) heart it cannot be excused but by malice, as S.
Augus^ine very learnedly says.

Let us remember th^^ how charitable so ever our actions be, if our hear^ do
not go before to enlighten them, all of them will tumble down together into
the obscure darkness of the deep.

Our actions are of no value without the heart, but the heart may be good
without the actions; God had respect to Abel, and afterward to his offering;
the good Thief to obtain mercy gave nothing but his heart; Marie Magdalene
but her tears, and Saint Peter but sighs and lamentations, proceeding from
the depth of his soul.

Now that this heart may be pleasing and acceptable to God, it must be clear,
bright, and shining, to the end that as in a glass God may see his own image
and likeness after which he at the first created it, and when it is once
clean and pure, then right so, and in that manner, we must keep it in the
same glorious estate, for Non minor est virtu^ quam quaerere, parta tueri.
And to that end we must imitate the Bees, which to hinder the drones and
spiders from coming into their Hives, to corrupt or devour their honey stop
the entries of them with bitter and stinging herbs, as good Husbandmen who
enclose their grounds, lest passengers or the wild beasts should spoil them.
Even so should we always keep the passages of our senses, of our hearts, and
of our thoughts, fenced with the fear of God, which is a bitter Rue, and
Wormwood, that the devil cannot endure to taste or relish.

Mark and observe with me the care and diligence which is used to conserve
Crystal, and China Dishes, what pains are taken to keep them clean,
bright, and shining, because they are dear and rare. And what can we find in
this world more precious and rare then our heart, then let us with a diligent
care, and careful solicitude, seek the cle^nenesse and purity thereof,
following the Apostles counsel, Let every one possess his vessel with
sanctifi^ation, and honor, 1 Thessalonians. 4.4.

When a vessel is cleft or cracked, it is unfit to contain any liquid thing;
Now the wicked heart is a cracked vessel, says Eccles. chap. 21.

A broken heart threatens death to a living creature, as a Ship split and
torn with the violence of the waves, threatens undoubted death, ruin and
shipwreck; so that heart that is not well united to God, that is broken and
shattered by the force of worldly affections, threatens and fore-telleth an
infallible ruin and destruction.

To fill a vessel in a Well or in a Fountain, we must needs bend it
downwards; so must we humble our heart, to fill it with heavenly graces, I have
inclined my care, and I have received wisdom, says the wise man, Sap. 61.

Again, we know, that none ca^ fill a vessel with any good and wholesome
liquor, wherein there is some corrupted, before he first empty it, and make it
very clean: If we defire to fill our hearts with the love and other graces of
God, we must first expel and exempt the love and delights of this world, that
have been so long resident there, and then when we have done those things, we
shall be sure fully to enjoy the inestimable effects of this divine promise.

Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see GOD.

In this second part we have demonstrated unto us the reason, why Christ
calls the pure in heart Blessed, it is says he, because they shall see GOD.

This conjunction, for, joining those two sentences, shows and marketh out
unto us the reason of this felicity, and happiness, that cannot receive a name
enough emphaticall, and significant to represent to our senses, and to our
understandings, the least beam, the least spark, the least drop of that
inexhaustible Ocean of that devouring fire, of that Sun of righteousness,
whose brightness if we should undertake to contemplate, it would strike us
blind, whose immense depth if we should search, it would swallow us up, whose
burning heat if we approach, it would convert us to ashes, and would make us
pay dear for our curiosity.

The Poets feign, that the Giants attempting to clime up to heaven, were
thunder-stricken, as they were heaping Olympus, and Pelion upon Ossa, one
mountain upon another: A fable derived from that truth taught us in the
Scripture, touching the building of the Tower of Babell, whose Builders were
shamefully confounded; the Allegory of this truth, the morality of this fable
sets forth unto us the curiosity of them, who thinking to pierce too far into
Gods secrets, are cast down into a deep Abisse of confusion, by their
audacious presumption.

Empedocles desiring to know the cause why mount AEtna did cast forth such
flames, was swallowed and devoured by them.

^od indeed depresseth, and dejecteth the proud design^s of those that are so
rash, as to discourse of that which is altogether ineffable, and
incomprehensible, but yet is so gracious and favorable, that he enlightneth
and fortifieth those, that with fear and humility approach the greatness of
his mysteries, as David teaches us, Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord in fear, and
rejoice with trembling: And Solomon his son, Those that trust in the Lord,
shall understand the truth: and the faithful shall know his love.

Then with the spirit of fear, and humility, we are to seek after this hidden
glory, and under the veil of faith, which teaches us to believe the things
which we see no^, nor cannot be the object of our senses, Hope will make us
desire them, Charity to love them, and the gracious goodness of God will help
us to attain them.

O blessed then shall be the pure in heart: for they shall see God.

St. John Chap. 17. says, This is life eternal, to kn^w thee the only true
God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent. And in the 1. Epist. of Saint John,
chap. 3. Beloved, now we are the sons of God, and it does not yet appear
what we shall be: but we know that when he shall appear, we shall be like
him, for we shall so him as he is. And every man that has this hope in him
purifieth himself, even as he is pure. And in the 22. chap. of the Revel. His
servants shall serve him, and they shall see his face.

The infinite greatness of this divine promise, whose performance is
infallible, makes us skip and leap for joy, charmeth our senses, and ravish^th
our minds, for it seems altogether impossible, that living tombs, mortal
carcasses, the prey of death, and the food of worms, should ever aspire so
high, as to pretend to see and view that felicity which is better described by
silence, and admiration, then by any other description, for they are things
which eye has not seen, ear has not heard, and that are not entered into the
heart of man, which God has prepared for them that love him, 1. Cor. 2.9.

But the children of Israel did not pitch the Tabernacle in Jerusalem, before
they had cleansed the mountain of Sion, of those enemies that were opposite to
their rest: So we must not settle our selves in the contemplation of the
divine Tabernacle, before we have cleared some places of Scripture, that seem
to forbid us entrance.

In the 33. Chap. of Exodus ver. 20. God says to Moses, Thou can not see my
face, for there shall no man see me and l^ve. And in the 1. chap. of Saint
John, No man has seen God at any time. And in the 1. Epist. of the Cor. chap.
13. ver. 12. Now we see through a glass darkely. And in the 28. chap. of Job,
God is hidden from all living eyes. In a word, there are many other p^aces to
confirm this, which will be too long to rehearse.

We with one consent said, That God is invisible; which seems to be
opposite, and contrary to the promise made unto us in our Text, Blessed are the
pure in heart: for they shall see God.

N^verthelesse, to reconcile them together, for the holy Ghost is never
contrary to himself; we say that the places before alleged a^e so to be
understood, that whilst man is in this mortal prison, in this valley of
tears so obscure, and dark, whilst like an Owl he delights in the night
of sin, his eyes can no way endure the least beams of the Sun of
righteousness, for God being an infinite Spirit, cannot be seen by a finite
body; but when we shall leave off this mortal prison of our bodies, our souls
then perfectly enlightened by the heavenly grace, shall be endued with that
knowledge, and faculty, that they shall openly contemplate their Creator, and
their God, as Saint Paul says, 1. Cor. 13. Chap. Now we see through a glass
darkely, but then we shall see hi^ face to face.

This word See God, is much controverted among Divines, which be of two
several opi^ions; whereof the o^e holds, That souls delivered of this
corporal veil, cannot see Gods face, for two reasons; the first is, that God
being a spiritual Essence, infinite, incomprehensible, cannot be see^e by a
finite creature, without implying contradiction, for then the containing, to
wit, the blessed soul should be greater then the contained, that is, God,
which is absurd, by this axiom, that the object is contained by the visuall
faculty: As if a man placed in the midst of the earth, or of the sea, looking
round about a great distance off, as far as his sight could reach, could not
for all that say, That he saw all the earth, or all the sea.

Those of the second opinion answer to this first reason, saying, That the
Creator may not be compared with the creatures, that God is all in all, and
all, and whole in every part, that he is one, and consequently indivisible;
that all things in him are Essential, and is not subject to division, that
whosoever sees him, sees him totally.

The second reason of the first, is, that we measure our souls by our bodies,
imagining that they shall have eyes, with the which they shall be able to
discern and distinguish the present objects.

To which the others answer, that indeed the souls in heaven shall have no
corporal eyes like ours; but that notwithstanding God will give them a seeing
faculty, by the which they shall perceive the present objects: 2. When these
souls shall be rejoyned, and reunited to their bodies, God having purified
them from all uncleanness, will make them like unto the glorious body of his
Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who says, Math. 22. That our bodies shall be as
the Angels of God in heaven, who always behold the face of God, Math. 18. that
is, that are always in his presence, and that see him perfectly, in respect of
themselves, as much as it pleased God to permit, but not perfectly in respect
of God, as he that sees the Sun, may say, that he sees it perfectly, in
respect of himself, if his faculty be good, and notwithstanding he cannot see
him as he is, because of the weakness of his eyes.

The second opinion which is more generally received, holds, that this word
See, is taken simply, and absolutely, for to Know, and those that hold it, say,
That Jesus Christ in our Text promises to the pure in heart, a perfect
knowledge of the divine goodnes^e; wherein consists the fullness of our
felicity, of our delights, and content, which they do well prove by the 14.
Chap. of Saint John, ver. 7. If ye had known me, ye should have known my
Father also, and from henceforth ye know him, and have seen him; where Christ
shows to his Disciples, that they have seen his Father, because they have
known him by so many miracles done before their eyes. And in the 17. Chap. of
the same Gospel, This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only
true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent: where it plainly appears,
that this word to know God, is as much as to possess life eternal.

And so from those two places joined to our Text, this conclusion follows,
that, To see God, know God, and have ete^nall life, are the same thing.

As the Angels then see the face of God, even so shall we also see it, for that
blessed sight is reserved for a recompense of our faith, as Saint John in his
1. Epist. 3. Chap. When he shall appear we shall be like him, for we shall see
him face to face.

Not that we must imagine, that God has any members, although it be said, that
man is made in the image of God, for that is thus to be understood, that man
has been created in perfect justice, and innocence, after the example of God.

But by this face of God, we must understand with the Scripture, the Church,
and the Fathers, and namely Saint Augustine in his book Decivit. Dei, the
manifestation of his glory, and a perfect knowledge of his wonderful mercy,
which he will communicate unto us.

It is a hard question, and difficult to handle, Whether the Saints after the
Resurr^ction shall see God with their corporal eyes, after they be glorified;
so Job says, In my flesh shall I see God: there Job prophesies the
Resurrection of his body: but he does not say, I will see him by my flesh; and
if he had, it might have been understood of Christ, that shall come at the
last judgment in the sight of all; but his meaning was, that when he should
see God, he should be in his flesh, though the worms and corruption had
devoured it.

Saint Augustine is excellent upon this subject, saying, We shall see God with
our corporal glorified eyes, as we see the life of a man by his living
actions, not seeing life it self; so is it likely, that being enlightened by a
heavenly and divine light, we shall be able to see the Creator of all things
both in them, and himself, so doubtfully the learned speak of it.

In the 5. Chap. of the 2. book of Kings, we read, that Elisha after that he
had healed Naaman the Syrian, saw Gehazi his servant take Presents from him,
although he were beyond the common reach of the sight; and when Gehazi was
returned, he said unto him, Went not my heart with thee, when the man turned
again from his Chare^ to meet thee. Now if this Prophet has bin able to see
the actions of his servant, although absent from him, how much more shall our
glorified bodies see all, when God shall be all in all.

Now Elisha saw this action of his servant, either by a special revelation
from God, or by the sight of a spiritual imagination of the Prophet, that
showed him the thing, after which manner he knew the most secret counsels of
the King of Syria.

We speak of these things, as blind men do of colors, we find no certainty
of them any where, the Fathers themselves speak so obscurely of them, they go
as softly on, in the handling of this question, as if they trod on thorns,
they grope along, as if they went in the obscure darkness of the blackest night,
hardly can you find two agreeing together, and which is more strange, not one
that is agreed with himself; and indeed how should a worm of the earth, the
dwelling of errors, the subject of ignorance, know or comprehend that great
God, which is the fountain of all knowledge, and the bottomless and
shorelesse Ocean of wisdom, and prudence.

It is true, that when our souls shall be blessed with that eternal happiness,
and that they shall enjoy the divine vision, in which consists our chiefest
felicity, we shall then see God as he is, but to conceive and comprehend the
infinity of his being, it will be altogether impossible to us.

Those that sail in the maine Sea, which way soever they look, find no other
object but the heaven, or the waves, their sight being too weak to penetrate
to the bottom, or to view the shores; Even so shall we see God, and know him
as far as it shall please him to enable us, but so far shall we be from
comprehe^ding him, that he does comprehend us, and we should then be no more
seen there then a drop of wine in the Ocean.

Saint Ba^ile handling this question in the Epistle to E^moniu^, has an
excellent comparison, from the least to the greatest, If we cannot comprehend
the composition of a Pismire, for the smalnesse of it, how shall we comprehend
the infinite greatness of God.

We shall comprehend it indeed, but it shall be as sponge cast into the Oce^n,
which is filled quite with water, but is overcome, and compassed round about by
it.

I should want time rather then matter, to speak on a subject so high, and
excellent, we should never have done if we should propound, and resolve the
infinite number of arguments, and opinions moved upon this question of our
sight of God.

But for us, let us hold as the Mathematicians do, linea recta est brev^ssima,
that the straite^^ line is the shortest, and in this the shortest way is the
surest: let us turn neither to the right hand, nor to the lef^, from the
certain way of truth, taught unto us by the truth it self, to wit, by Jesus
Christ, in our Text, saying,

Blessed are the pure in heart: for they shall see God.

Let us then purify our hearts, and cleanse our souls, from the filthiness
of sin, and from the spots of iniquity; let our consciences be white as
snow, and clean as washed wool; let us take the firm and inviolable oath of
Allegiance to our God, and let us not suffer Satan our mortal enemy to take
possession of the fort of our souls, of the hill of Syo^, that is of our
consciences: let us not suffer him to make a breach in that vow, that we vowed
to his obedience at our first reception into the Church by Baptism, and so we
shall be washed seven times in the Jordan of repentance, and of contrition for
our faults; when we have put on the white roabes of holiness, justice, and
i^nocencie, we shall be invited to the Lambs wedding, we shall sit down at
table with the Kings son, we shall be abundan^ly filled with the dainties of
his house, and shall drink in the river of his delights.

In a word, when like the high Priest we have left off the habits of our
natural corruption, and put on the white and clean garment of sanctification
for our selves, of love for our God, of charity for our neighbor; then, even
then, the gate of the most holy place, which is heaven shall be opened unto u^,
we shall see Gods Majesty, not darkly, and as in a clowd, as it has long
appeared to our fore fathers, but rather as a bright shining Sun, whose
virtue shall enlighten us, whose love shall warm us, and those compassions
shall animate us, at whose sight we shall be vivified, consolated, and
glorified.

For he will enrowle us among his Angels, will make us Citizens of heaven, and
impatriate us to be absolute possessors of the rich treasures of eternal life,
where it is far easier to know what is not there, then to discourse what is.

There, there is no death, no weariness, no infirmity, no hunger, no thirst,
no hea^, no cold, no corruption, no want, no mourning, nor sorrow.

We have told you what there is not there, but what there is there, eye has
not s^ene, ^are has not heard, neither is it entered into the heart of man,
what God has prepared for them that love him: now beca^se these joys and
felicities have not entered into the heart of man, therefore man must strive to
enter into them.

God speaks thus by his Prophet Isaiah, chap. 32. My people shall dwell in a
peaceable habitatoin, and in sure ^w^llings, and in quiet resting places. In
this blessed life there is a certain assurance, a sure tranquillity, a happy
eternity, an eternal happiness, a perfect charit^, a perpetual day, ^ quick
motion; in a word, all shall be there led, and governed by the same Spirit.

Here let us burn with zeal to ascend to those fair places; let us be
enflamed with extreme desire of possessing so goodly an inheritance, and if
our bodies cannot as yet go thither, yet let our hearts ascend up, if our
soul be as yet bound and fastened within this mortal prison; at the least, let
our faith fly up to those delicious places, and there rest and stay until our
souls be perfectly pure, clean, and white, that one day both in body and
soul, we may contemplate Gods divine Majesty, and sing eternally with the
holy Angels, Holy, holy is the Lord God of hosts for evermore. AMEN.

O Most bountiful God, and most merciful King, we thy servants and children
here prostrate and humbled before the high and holy tribunal of thy sacred and
sovereign Majesty, do ingenuously confess, that we are not worthy to lift
up our eyes, or our hands toward heaven, to call upon thee in our necessities,
for our sins are raised over our heads like terrible mountains, which seem
to threaten and defy thy judgments, from the top of their presumptuous
impudency: Iniquity has made our souls as black as firebrands, and the
transgression of thy divine commandments has made our consciences more red
then scarlet; in a word, forgetting thee, we have forgotten our selves, and
remember but as a dream our beginning derived from heaven: Wherefore, O good
Jesus, O sweet Savior of our bodies and souls, kindle in our hearts the fire
of thy divine love, and let it be a candle to our feet, and a light unto our
paths, that we may safely escape out of these terrible downefalls, which
threaten unto us death and condemnation: wash our souls in the precious blood
issuing from thy wounds, make them by thy favor whiter then snow, and then
washed wool; we cannot ente^ into thy Tabernacle, before we be cleansed of
our faults: grant then unto us by thy mercy one only drop of this large, and
vast ocean of thy great compassions; wash our roabes in the blood of the Lamb,
that we may be made worthy to follow him, whither soever he goes.

Change our eyes into two lively fountains of penitent tears, which may
become a Iordane of grief, and displeasure, for having been so wicked before
thy face, within the which we may dip our selves seven times, yea seaventy
times seven times, that we may be delivered of the spiritual leprosy of
sin, which makes us so ^oule and ugly in thy sight and presence.

And after thou have pulled off from us the old man, and clothed us with the
new, which is with justice and holiness, when thou have given us the wedding
garment, then we shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, at the delicate
feast which thou have prepared for us; and the which must be kept upon the
mountain of the heavenly Sion, where we shall see thee face to face, where we
shall be ravished in this contemplation, and shall be quite exchanged and
transformed into the ecstasy of this ravishment. Amen.

The third way to Sion.
THE CROWN OF PEACE AND CONCORD.
MATH. 5.9. Blessed are the Peacemakers: for they shall be called the children
of God.


WHen two Kings to decide some quarrel, are ready to take Arms, they first of
all ^nkindle the fire of war in their subjects hearts, through all their
Dominions, then all is in ^rouble, combustion, and disorder, and all news are
sorrowful and lamentable; on the one side you may see desolate Parents, poor
old men, leaning on the brim of their graves, considering, with eyes
overflowing with tears, their dear children, whom for the greatness and
multiplicity of their cruel wounds they can scarcely know. On the other side,
you are frighted by the lamentable complaints, by the loud cries, and pitiful
lament^tions, of the bewayling widows, over the dead bodies of their dearly
beloved husbands: In a word, there is nothing but fire, blood, and slaughter to
be seen, so that one may properly say, That War (the mother of all
mischief) is as it were a feast celebrated to the honor of death, to whom are
continually offered up many pitiful and bloody sacrifices, which she exactly
keeps in the grave.

But when some great Prince or earthly Monarch undertaketh to agree them, his
Ambassadors are every where received with open arms, bone-fires, and
triumphall arches, erected in token of that joy and contentment which they
receive, by their mediation for peace, according to that saying of the Lord,
Blessed are the fe^te of those that bring tidings of peace, Romans 10.16.

Jesus Christ here continues his Sermon to his Disciples, where in a continued
order he shows them the perfe^tion of blessedness, he makes them scale the
heavens by eight degrees, which they must ascend here on earth. And having
spoken formerly of six, he comes now to the seventh, saying, Blessed are
the Peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.

Which words by Gods assistance, we will divide into two principal parts; 1.
the proposition: 2. the reason of it; the proposition concerns the
Peacemakers, and their felicity: the reason of this beatitude, is, to be called
the children of God.

Now for our better understanding of these words, let us handle them all
severally, and let us for a while leave this concrete word Peacemaker, and so
come to his abstract, to wit, peace, the which is diversely defined according to
the several sorts and degrees of it.

For there is the peace of the body, which is a just temperature of the parts.

There is a peace of the irreasonable soul, which is an inordinate rest of the
appetite.

There is a peace of the reasonable soul, which is a moderated consent of the
action, and understanding.

There is a peace of the soul and body, which is a well governed life* and the
health of the living creature.

There is a peace of mortal man, which is a well ordered obedience in faith,
under the government of the eternal, and divine law.

There is a peace of the house, which con^isteth in a just concord of the
dome^ticall, both in commanding, and obeying.

The^e is a peace of the City, which is a concord among the Citizens.

There is a peace of the heavenly City, which is a well governed Society,
wholly and eternally to enjoy God.

There is a peace of men, which is a mutual concord. And again, there is a
peace of all things, which is a perfect tranquillity of order: now order is
nothing else but a true disposition, giving to every thing his true rank and
place.

The Hebrew word (...) shalom, represents unto us exceeding well her Essence;
for it signifies a happy success of all things in God.

Where we may note that every word has his weight, and inestimable value.

For first it is a success, and not a hazard, which is happy and not unlucky,
of all, and not of something only, in God, and not in the world.

The Grecians call it (...), quiet, sweet, gracious, as deserving that name
(...), by excellency, because there is nothing in the world to be compared to
the excellency of a public and particular rest, and tranquillity.

The Latins call it (...), quasi paecata, because it is peaceable, and no way
moved by the winds of seditions, nor of desperate passions; She is like the
Sea when it is calm and quiet, there is nothing fairer to behold, then the
humid and serene plains of it, all seeming to be an entire piece of Crystal.

And to prove that peace is nothing else but gentleness, and courtesy, let us
hear the Apostle St. Paul, Heb. 11.31.

(...).

By faith Rahab the harlot perished not, with them that believed not, when she
had received the spies with peace, which is gently, and courteously, so that
she did them no harm, nor suffered any to be done unto them, any way at all.

So we read that Christ after his resurrection came among his Disciples, saying
unto them, Peace be unto you.

We read also in the 2. Chap. of Saint Luke, ver. 29. (...). Lord now let
thou thy servant depart in peace according to thy word, that is, thou suffer
him to depart with happiness, and felicity, since he has seen thy face.

And in the 10. Chap. of Saint Math. ver. 13. If the house be worthy to receive
you, let your peace come upon it: but if the house be not worthy, let your
peace return to you. Where all interpreters agree, that by this word peace,
christ understands all things good and favorable, all blessings, and all
graces.

Now that we may the more delight in the description of this garden of peace,
let us therein imitate these Painters, who intending to represent unto us some
very excellent beauty, use to draw and place close by it some black, and
ghastly picture, that by the opposition of that deformity, our eyes may take
the more pleasure and delight, in beholding that fair and beautiful face
opposite to it, according to the truth of the Latin Proverb, Contraria
contrarijs opposita magis elucescunt. One contrary appears better by the
opposition of his contrary: so the darkness of the night makes us find the
Suns light more pleasant, the thorns embellish the Roses, and the roughness
of the black briers seem to add excellency to the soft whiteness of the
Lillies: Even so if we speak a little of the mischiefs of war, we shall
find the sweetness of peace far the more excellent, and without staying, let
us here say with Plutarch in the life of Fabius Maximus, That war is a time
when neither right nor reason can find place: Caesar said, that the time of
war, and that of laws were two; It is a time when Justice is trodden under
feet, when the time of ill doing is in season, when unfaithfulness is taken
for virtue: O time pitifully miserable, since force trampleth Justice under
foot, when nothing is to be seen but fire, slaughters, treasons, robberies,
cruelties, tortures; in a word, all that fearfulness which hell can afford,
there you may see virgins ravished, children hanging on their mothers breast
slain, honest women mocked and abused by the insolent soldier, Churches
robbed, houses pillaged; there is nothing to be seen but burning, but
slaughtered bodies, but blood; nothing is to be heard but lamentable sighs,
cries, and groans; in a word, all humanity is banished from thence, so that
we say, that war est bonorum mors, omnium vero malorum fons and scaturigo:
War is the death of goodness, and the life and beginning of all evil.

Now is not this face at the first sight capable to make us abhor it, even
before we perceive the least lineament, or the least draught or shadow of
beauty, which appears in the face of his contrary, that is of peace.

But let us see the effects of war in the hearts where it is praedominant,
certainly ex malo coruo, malum ovum, ex malo ovo, malum omen, Of an ill Raven,
an ill egg, of an ill egg, an ill presage; for as the Philosophers say,
Qualis ca^ sa talis effectus, as is the cause, so is the effect, Eagles do not
bring forth Doves, nor war this horrible and fearful monster, any thing
else bu^ cruelty, rigor, and fierceness.

When man is possessed by any of these foolish passions, (daughters of
disaster, an^ mothers of misfortune) then his reason is all disfigured by it,
the use of it is lost, Denigrata est super carbones faci^s ejus, The functions
of his mind are turned upside down, they are like a broken clock, wherein all
is in disorder, and to which there is no trusting: The royal Prophet David
shows us the effects of it, in few words, In mine anger (says he) mine eye
was troubled, my soul, and my belly were moved.

and indeed in that case man is quite perverted, his functions depraved, he
foames at the mouth, his eyes glister, he shakes, and sweateth all over his
body, Ora tument ira, nigrescunt sanguine venae,
Lumina gorgoneo saevius ignemicant.


As in the clouds are formed all the meteors, all the storms, thunders,
hayles, mists, raines, fogges, that trouble the air, make the earth dirty, and
cause a thousand incommodities to the world, even so in the microcosme, or
little world, wrath confounds all, and overthrows all order.

But when that powerful planet, the sun of reason has dispelled and
scattered the mists of those confusions, the clouds of so many disorders, then
his light pierces and passes through all those obscure darknesses, to shine
on the actions, and to put the mind in her first station and temper.

A choleric man makes me remember the Be, that being troubled, stingeth him
that angereth her, but in stinging, leaves her sting in the wound, and with it
her life, Animasque in vulnere ^onunt: So the choleric man thinking to wound
others, kills his own soul, and murthereth it with his own weapons,
patitur teli^ v^lnera facta suis.

Solomon that wi^e King says, That the Kings wrath is like the roaring of a
Lion, and against which who can subsist, and that his mildness is like the
morning dew.

When the Sun passes through the Zodiac, and is entered into the sign of
Leo, we endure unsufferable heat, so when wrath is joined with power, and some
likelihood of reason, it produces strange effects.

The Lion is a beast of an exceeding hot complexion, which causes in his mouth
so strong an infection, and stink, that when he has devoured the half of
his prey, that which he leaves is suddenly putrified, and corrupted, this
eternal fire is so violent in this beast, that it is commonly the cause of his
death, happening by the corruption of his bowels.

Is not this a lively Emblem and representation of the choleric man, whose
slandering tongue is so venomous, and stinking, that it corrupts, and
infecteth his neighbors good name, if he touch it never so little, in a word,
wrath is a black and burned humor, that not only corrupts the body, but
also kills the soul.

In the law of Moses* those birds that had crooked claws, an^ lived by prey,
were not to be eaten, nor sacrificed; under the shadow of this figure let us
light this torch of truth, that all that suffer themselves to be carried away
by wrath, that gape after revenge and hatred, are unclean before god, and
unworthy to be offered to him in sacrifice: If thou bring thy gift to the
Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee: Leave
there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way, be reconciled to thy brother,
says our Savior, Math. 5.23. And the royal Prophet says, Bloody men are
abomination to the Lord, Psalm. 5.7.

Hitherto we have seen the horror, and mischiefs of war, with some of the
fruits she commonly bears, to wit, cruelty, eldest daughter of this terrible
monster: now let us contemplate a while the picture of peace her contrary, and
let us taste with delectation the sweetness, and excellency of the inestimable
fruits which she bears, and propagates in the hearts of peacemakers, which
are so great, that St. August. says, Tantum est pacis bonu^, ut in rebus
terrenis nihil gratius soleat audiri, nihil desiderabilius concupisci, nihil
postremo possit melius inveniri. Peace is so great a good upon the earth, that
no pleasanter thing can be heard, nothing more delightful desired, and nothing
better found.

Saint Bernard in the 9. Sermon. on the Lords Supper speaks thus of it, The
peace of this world is in the which whilst we dwell, we vanquish our enemies,
we love one another, and judge not of those things that are hidden from us,
that peace which shall be in the world to come, shall be when we shall reign
without enemies, where one shall not be of contrary advice to the other; in a
word, where all things shall be known, and open to every one, and ends
thus, Jesus Christ is this true peace, because he has reconciled us to God
his Father, by the inestimable price of his blood.

Saint Augustine in the Sermon of the word of the Lord speaks thus of it, Pax
est serenitas mentis, tranquillitas animi, simplicitas cordis, vinculum amoris,
consortium charitatis, baec est quae simultates tollit, bella compes^it, iras
comprimit, superbos calcat, humiles amat, discordes cedat, inimicos concordat,
cunctis est placida, nescit extolli, nescit inflari, hanc qui acceperit teneat,
qui perdiderit repetat, qui amiserit exquirat, quoniam qui in cadem non ^rit
inventus, a patre abdicatur, a Filio exhaer^datur, a Spiritu Sancto alienus
efficitur, necad haereditatem. Domini poterit venire, qui testimonium pacis
noluerit observare. These be golden words deserving well to be known, and to
be exactly observed.

Peace, says he, is a calmness of the understanding, a tranquillity of the
mind, simplicity of the heart, the bond of peace, the practice of charity; it
is peace that takes away quarrels, ends wars, appeaseth wrath, treads the
proud under foot, loves the humble, paci fieth the quarelsome, agrees the
enemies, which is gracious to all, which is not high minded, nor proud, which
whosoever has received, let him conserve it, who so has lost it, let him
seek and recover it, for he that shall not be found in it, is disclaimed by
the Father, disinherited by the Son, alienated from the Holy Ghost, nor shall
he ever attain to the Lords inheritance, that would not observe the bonds and
testimony of peace.

Now we have heard these two pillars of the Church of God; let us hearken to
himself, speaking by the mouth of his chosen vessel, Coloss. 3.15. Let the
peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called, in one body,
and be ye thankful. And Philip. 4.7. The peace of God which passes all
understanding, keep your hearts and minds, through Jesus Christ.

And that which should most bind us to love this Peace, is the soring or head
foun^aine from whence it sloweth; for as the war of sin proceeds from the
wicked one, so the peace of our consciences comes from the Father of
eternity, from the King of mercy, as we read 1. Thessal. 5.23. The very God of
peac^, sancti^ie you wholly.

This peace of conscience is a mark, and an effect of our justification by
faith, as we read Romans 5.1. Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace
with God, through ^^r Lord Jesus Christ.

All these places should induce and incite us to the practice of peace, since
the recompense promised to it is so excellent; In a word* let us shut the gate
of peace, with that saying of Xenophon, (...). Peace is the greatest good can
happen to men, and war the greatest hurt.

Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.

This word peacemaker is diversely interpreted by Author^, for some hold that
those are they which live justly, and who by their actions never provoke the
divine Justice.

Others as August. hold, that those are meant, which possess a very peaceable
conscience, that is, that are not agitated by the troubles of sin.

Others believe, that those are they that are not Authors of quarrels, and
dissentions.

Others understand it of those that forgive freely the injuries, and wrongs
done unto them, as Hilarious.

The last, and most likely to be the best opinion, of the which number are
Chrysostom, Euthymius, and Theophylacte, is, that the true peacemakers are
those that are themselves, and in themselves peaceable, and pacified, and that
besides, that try their uttermost endeavors and power, to compound differences,
and to introduce peace where dessention and disorder reign: And this
interpretation comes nearer to the Greek word of our Text, (...), Quasi
pacemfacientes, aut conciliantes, Those that compound quarrels; and this
interpretation is also very convenient to the charge and duty which was
enjoined the Apostles, to whom Jesus Christ spoke these words, who were to
keep maxims altogether contrary to those which the world practices, who does
esteem far more those that fight valiantly, and that continue obstinately in
co^bat, then those that make peace, and pacify all things; now this maxim was
to be practiced by the Apostles, as being to fight and overcome the world, not
by force of Arms, but by gentlen^sse and mildness, as we read Saint Luke 10.
chap. ver. 5. Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house.

Besides, the Apostles were to imitate the Prince of the Apostles, Jesus
Christ* the true and perfect representation of meekness, humility, and
mildness, as we may understand and know, if we run over all the actions of
his life, until his ascension up to heaven: now this meekness proceeded from
him, both by inclination, for he was the Lamb of God, and by imitation, for he
was like his Father, that is not a God of confusion, but a God of peace, as the
Apostle says, in the 1. to the Cor. 14.33. And Romans 16.20. The God of peace
shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly. And 2. Cor. 11. Brethren live in
peace, and the God of love and peace shall be with you: It was needful, I say,
that these good Disciples should be like their Master, whose duty and charge
it was to reconcile men unto God, as we read Romans 5.10. For if when we were
enemies we were reconciled to God, by the death of his Son, much more being
reconciled, we shall be saved by hi^ life. And 2. Cor. 5.18.20. God has
reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and has given us the ministry of
reconciliation. For God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, and
not imputing their trespasses unto them.

And Coloss. 1.20. It pleased the Father to reconcile all things to himself,
through the blood of his cross.

O what praise deserve those souls, that seeing so many dissentions and
quarrels kindled, run presently, and make have, to bring the wholesome water
of peace and quietness, least the continuation should cause a total ruin, or
some irreparable hurt; those, I say, are doubtless, and without comparison to
be preferred to the valiantest Champions; that come into the field, for those
overcome the bodies, these vanquish and tame the minds, those fight for a
crown that will wither, these eternally carry away a green crown of
benedictions and blessings; those tear and break their bodies, these
beautify and strengthen their souls; In a word, the issue of the combat of
those is recompensed, but by a little weak renown, in the unconstant and
different minds of men, but the end o^ these is an exceeding excellent glory,
an eternal triumph, and trophies that never die, in the blessed remembrance of
God and the Angels.

God commanded Noah to build an Arc of polished wood, covered with pitch, so
must all faithful* Christians be inseparably united the one to the other, by
chains of love, and bonds of concord and amity, that so they may escape from
the deluge of unreconcileable ha^red, and quarrels.

A ship split, and that takes in water every where, give^h fear of an
infallible shipwreck, for every Kingdom divided shall fall into desolation,
says Jesus Christ, right so rough and unsociable spirits, that will never
consent to an agreement, are thereby nearer their grave.

In the Arc of Noah, the Lion was with the Heart, the Woolfe with the Lamb, the
Eagle with ^he Pigeon, the Hawk with the Partridge; so the peacemaker must
procure peace, not only among his neighbors, when they are fallen out, but he
must also receive into the Ar^e of his heart friends and foes, without
distinction or difference of persons, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy
self, says the law of Moses; but the law of grace goes farther, and says,
Love your enemies, pray for them that persecute you, Matthew 5.

(...) and blessing which he gave, was, Peace be to this house, showing unto us
by that, that the greatest good and blessing that can happen to man, confist in
peace.

When he was ready to depart out of this world, he said to his Apostles, I
give you my peace, I leave you my peace, as being the rarest gift after
salvation, which he could give unto them, Genesis 14.27.

Saint Augustine is very witty in these points, Sicut spiritus humanus nunquam
vivisicat membra nisi fuerint unita: sic spiritus sanctus nunquam nos vivificat
nisi paece unitos. As (says he) the soul of man does not quicken or vivifie
our members unless they be joined together: so the holy Ghost does never
vivifie or quicken us, but when we are united by the bond of peace.

Ignatius says, (...). 'There is nothing better then peace.

And Saint Basil (...). There is nothing more proper and natu^all to a
Christian, then to reconcile and pacify.

Let us say with an ancient Author, that peace is the salt of this life,
without which it is unsavorie, and without relish.

When salt is put into the water, it melts, and insensibly becomes liquid,
but when it is ^h^owne into the fire, it cracketh, until it be quite
consumed; Even so is the peacemaker, for he conformeth and fashioneth himself
so quietly to peace and tranquilli^y, that he lives therein as in his own
element, out of the which he cannot subsist, but when either by chance, or
misfortune, he finds himself in the midst of noise, in the fire of disorder,
and among the flames of contentions and riots, then he cries, runs, and
tormenteth himself, until by his agitation and diligence, he have quenched
and repressed all, holdi^g this indubitable maxim, that Candida pax homines,
trux decet ira seras.
In a word, to end this discourse of politic peace, we say, that if war be
a thorn, p^ace is a Rose; if that be bitterness, this is sweetness; if that
be a storm, this is a calm weather; if that be full of mifchiefes, this is
full of goodness; if that causes poverty, this brings and gives riches; In a
word, if that kills, this gives life; and to end with the Poet, let us say,
Nulla salus bello, pacem te poscimus omnes.


But let us after the example of the high Priest, enter into the most holy
place of the Temple of Solomon, and there visit that sac^ed arc of our
consciences, within the which God will keep his sessions: let us contemplate
that inestimable peace, immediately proceeding from the remission of our sins,
and most particular and perfect assistance of the holy Ghost, dwelling in our
souls; for it is impossible that any other, but the just should possess that
peace of conscience, seeing that between sin (the devils child, and the
father of trouble) and peace, and quietness, there is so great an antipathy,
that if sin can set the least footing in any place, he drives away
presently from thence peace and rest, and in their room introduces and
breeds therein quarrels and contentions, which like tormentors, do
miserably torture, and cruelly handle the miserable hearts where they lodge;
and therefore the ancient Fathers of the Church openly pronounce, that the
greatest felicity wherein Adam the first model of mankind was created, was
peace of the heart, that rest of conscience, which he possessed absolutely
within Paradise, having no other care or thought, but to love his Creator, to
honor his Conseruator, and to adore his God.

But after that he was fallen from that state of innocence, by the greatness
of his fault, after that sin by disobedience had driven away pe^ce from his
heart, then you see him in trouble, he flies, he hides himself, he is afraid
of himself, he covers his nakedness with fig leaves, he trembles, and
dares not answer to that terrible and fearful voice, which he heard
walking in the Garden, behold the first effects which his sin brought forth.

The Royal Prophet David, Psalm. 85.10. says, Righteousness and peace have
kissed each other, upon which Saint Augustine discourses thus;

Duae sunt amicae, justitia and pax, tu forte unam vis, and alteram nonfacis,
nemo enim est qui non velit pacem, sed non omnes volunt operari justitiam, si
amicam pacis non amaveris, neque te amabit pax ipsa.

Righteousness and Peace be two friends, thou it may be desire the one,
and wilt not practice the other; there be none but wish for peace, but all
will not do righteousness; if thou love not the friend of peace, peace also
will not love thee.

Justice with reason is called the mother of peace, because it goes always
before, and is immediately followed by it, Peace is the work of justice, says
the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 32.17 And the Psalmist in the 72. Psalm. ver. 7. In
those days righteousness shall flourish, and abundance of peace. And Psalm.
119. ver. 165. Great peac^ have they which love thy law.

From which propositions, we draw this conclusion, that to have this peace of
conscience it is needful for us to be just, to fear God, and to walk exactly
in the observation of his sacred commandments.

So contrarily the wicked can have no peace, because of the worm of sin,
that gnaweth continually their souls, as we read Psalm. 28.3. Ill luck and
unhappiness is in their ways, and the way of peace have they not known.
There is no peace for the wicked, says the Lord; they think nevertheless
that they have this peace, when they enjoy their pleasures; but this peace
lasts but a moment, and like their pleasure is presently followed by an
extreme grief, it is lethargick sleep, very dangerous; it is a security, but
it is carnal, it is a sleep, but that represents unto them a thousand
apparitions, and a thousand strange visions. The wicked man's peace is like
those fires which by night appear burning in hills and meadows, the which if a
man follow, they will insensibly lead him into terrible downefalls, but the
true peace of a good conscience, as says an ancient Author, is the title of
Religion, ^he Temple of Solomon, the field of blessing, the garden of delights,
the Angels joy, the Arc of the covenant, the treasure of the great King, the
Court of God, the Tabernacle of his Son, the tent of his Spirit, the tower of
Sion, the book with seven seals, which is to be opened upon that great and
fearful day of judgment.

Saint Augustine (in his City of God) speaks thus of it, Pax nostra propria,
hic est, cum Deo per fidem, and in aeternum erit cum illo per speciem, talis
est paxut solatium miseriae sit potius quam beatitudinis gaudium. Our own
peace (that is the peace of our hearts) is here with God by faith, and in
eternal life shall it be with him by vision: that peace which now we enjoy, is
but a spark in respect of that great fire, here it su^sisteth but by faith,
then it shall be effected.

In a word let us say, that the peace of conscience is a particular feeling and
knowledge that God is pacified with us, that he has blotted out our misdeedes,
that he has cast away our iniquities from before his face, like a clowd, that
we are no longer under the Kingdom of Satan, nor of the flesh, but are
received in our heavenly Fathers favor, like the prodigal child, that we
shall dwell in his house all the days of our life, and there receive those
goods, joys, and delights which he has reseru^d for his children.

Hitherto we have spoken of peace in general, and in particular of politic
peace, and of the care must be used to bring it to pass, of peace of
conscience, or with God, of the worlds, or wicked man's peace, that troubles
all them that live not like him: now let us speak of that peace which is in
our selves, and of the virtue of it.

Among all the perfections wherewith our first Father Adam was adorned, during
the state of his innocence, mildness was one, at the sent whereof all living
creatures ran to him, to do him homage, and yield him obedience.

Moses in the book of Numbers, is called the debonnaire, or gracious, for
which quality, God loved him dearly, and for a testimonial of his love,
called him to that honorable charge of deliverer, Prince and law giver of his
people.

The King and P^ophet David had this virtue in great measure in him, for which
cause God changing his Sheepheards crook into a Royal Scepter, gave him
victory over a world of enemies, that rose up continually against him, which
makes him to cry out in one of his Psalms, Lord remember David and his
mansuetude or clemency. I^ the book of Leviticus, God commands the Priests
to offer him a Lam^e without blemish for a peace offering; a Lamb is the
symbol of mildness, then according to that command, he that will receive the
peacemakers recompense from God, must offer him his soul full of gentleness
and mildness.

The Lamb in the Revelation of all living creatures, was only found worthy to
open the book sealed with seven seals; so among all men the faithful only,
and among the faithful the meek, shall be able to open the book of life,
there to behold his name written before the foundation of the world.

The Bridegroom in the Canticles, calls thu^ his beloved, Come my Dove, that
a^t in the clef^s of the rock, thy eyes are like Doves eyes, and thy cheeks
like Tur^les, my Dove is alone, and per^ect.

Now it is familiar and common enough, that of all creatures Doves ar^ the
symbols of mildness, and meekness, for it is noted that they have no gall.
And here to apply these places to our design^, let us know that the Bridegroom
in this epithalamium or marriage song, is Jesus Christ himself, speaking to
his Church, setting her forth by her lively colors, by the pensill of his
love, showing us in this comparison of the Dove, the perfections wherewith she
is adorned, where if we weigh and consider diligently the force of every word,
we shall find them all emphaticall, and deserving a more par^icular search
and observation.

He says first Veni Columba mea, come my Dove, he does not call her my Eagle,
or my Hawke, for those are creatures too cruel, loving nothing but blood, and
slaughter, and their humor is incompatible with the Bridegroomes bounty, who
desires that the Church (his well beloved Spouse) be altogether like him, and
therefore he calls her my Dove, as having no gall, nor bitterness in her
soul.

When that sweet JESUS was baptized by John in Iordane, the three divine
persons of the glorious Trinity were clearly manifested, for the majestuous
voice of the Father was heard speaking from heaven thus, This is my well
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. Matthew 3.17.

Jesus Christ was in Iordane, and the holy Ghost descended from heaven like a
Dove, and lighted upon him, from which place we may draw this instruction,
that if we desire to be called the children of God, if we wish to hear from
heaven that gracious voice, speaking to our souls, Thou art my well beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased.

If we aspire to that great happiness to receive the spirit of grace,
mildness, and meekness in our consciences.

Let us remember that we must be like unto sweet JESUS our example, he was
naked, so must we put off cruelty, malice, and hatred: he was in the water,
even so to enjoy so great a favor, we must plunge our selves in the riv^rs of
our tears, in the Iordane of a holy and true repentance, which may open our
hearts, and continually touch them with grief, for our forepast off^nces.

It was Gods ordinance under the law of Moses, that when a man was unclean,
he should for his purification resort to the Temple, and there offer two
Turtle Doves.

That we may light the to^ch of truth within the shadow of Moses law, let us
say, that there is nothing that more infecteth and soyleth the soul, then
cruel^y, debates, and hatred; It is a Gangrene that gnaweth and undermineth
her, until it sees her absolutely possessed by wicked spirits; but the only
remedy to this obstinate disease, is, to ru^ne to the sacred Temple of Gods
divine me^cy, there to offer him the gift of a mild, meek, and peaceable
conscience.

When Noah would know if the waters were withdrawn from upon the face of the
earth, he sent forth a Dove, which came to him in the evening with an Olive
branch in her mouth; also he sent forth a Raven, which returned not, because
he stayed on the dead bodies, and stinking carcasses of those which died in
this inundation.

God (in this example) is represented unto us by Noah, our soul by the Dove,
peace by the Olive branch, it is God that staying in the Arc of heaven,
s^nd^th our souls to visit the inundations of this world, which mess^ge
faithfully to perform, they do not sit on the highest and loftiest tops of
Cedars, and Pinetrees, for they love not vanity, nor the glory of this world,
they do not perch upon the Juniper, nor thorns of quarrels and contentions,
but upon the Olive tree of mildness, and meekness, wherewith they adorn
themselves, and so prepare themselves to return into their heavenly Country,
there to give a true account of their journey.

But the Ravens that stayed upon the carcasses drowned by the flood, are those
black and infected souls, that delight in nothing but quarrels and
contentions, and who so excessively love the corrupt^ons of this world, that
they never return to heaven, from whence they took their first ^light.

The excellency of this particular peace cannot be sufficiently known,
without we consider the privation of it, that is contempl^te her contrary; let
us judge it by our selves, for there is no man that sins not, there is
nothing more extrauagant in the world then a seared conscience, nothing more
tossed up and down then a soul troubled and vexed by the unquietness of
sin, for example do we se^ke the means to revenge some injury? presently
our mind runs and rangeth all about, to obtain a sufficient satisfaction,
Our eyes dart and cast forth burning flames of wrath, and rage; our mouth
proffereth nothing by injuries, and blasphemies; our feet cannot stand still;
our hands itch; our hearts vomit revenge, and our brains are so preoccupated
by this damnable passion, that there is nothing but confusion to be seen, as
in a clock out of order, whose wheels are dismounted; these be the effects of
sin, that never gives rest to a soul, never so little touched by the venom
of his passion.

Consider ^ pray, a malefactor how bold and secret soever his crime be, he
thinks nevertheless that all know it, the least look alters his face, and
for his contenance, If he think that to keep off be good for him, when he is
in the fields, he thinks every bush a Sergeant, to lay hold on him, every
t^ee a Hangman, that stays for him, and every leaf that stirs, a witness
to testify his wickedness.

Now contra^iwise, let us see the sweet rest and tranquillity of a soul that
has made her peace with her God, whom she loves with all her strength, and
that cherishes her neighbor as much as her self, who is not puffed up with
the wind of ambition, and that is not infected with covetousness, who
laugheth at wrongs, and cares not for revenge, who goes boldly every where,
and fears nothing, for he that is deeply in Gods favor, should be afraid of
nothing; in a word, a quiet and peaceable soul studieth and busieth her self
about nothing, but to love, serve, and honor her God, she is always between
love and fear, love to please him, fear of offending him, a fear, I say
filial, but not servile.

When I think upon this peace and tranquillity of the mind and soul, I am
like the needle of a Compass, that always turns toward the North of my
desires, toward my Jesus, my Savior, and my God; which is the excelle^test
and perfectest pattern of peace and mildness that I am able to choose, or
propose in this behalf and matter: I am (says he by the mouth of the Prophet
Isai^h) the meek Lamb, he is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a
dumb Sheep before her shearers, and he opened not his mouth, Isaiah 53.7.

It is a thing very frequently, and commonly known, that the Panther sm^lleth
so sweet, that all other beasts come to smell to her: Our sweet Jesus is
represented by her, both by her name and effects, for in Gre^ke (...)
signifies all, as God was defined by Plato.

Jesus Christ breathes forth so sweet and fragrant a smell, that it embalmeth
the faithfulls souls, so speaks the Spouse in the Canticles, The name of my
beloved is like oil shed, therefore have the young maidens loved thee so
dearly: by these maidens we must understand the virgins of finne, those that
have not known iniquity, that love peace, and seek after it; after he goes
on, Chap 4.11. Thy lips, O my Spouse! drop as the honey comb: honey and milk
are under thy tongue, and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of
Lebanon.

We should pass ^oo often over the same steps and path, if we should here
again speak of the admirable and inimitable mildness, and tranquillity of
our good Master and Savior Jesus Christ, whose birth preaches unto us
humility, his life peace, and his death compassion.

Let us then strive to imitate him as much as we can possible, in our youth,
being very humble: in our viril age, peaceable, and in our old age pitiful;
and in all the course of our life mild, bountiful, and loving, following
David's counsel, Love peace and seek it, for God with a favorable and
gracious eye, beholds him that is studious of peace, and he hears his most
humble prayers, in the ti^e of his affliction, Psalm. 34.16. Behold great and
divine profits, fair and admirable rewards and recompenses, that the faithful
get, by seeking after peace with God, and by having procured all the means of
agreement with their neighbors, both in things that concern them, and in
things needful to the union and concord of all our brethren.

Let us now hear that gracious and favorable voice, showing unto us the
profit and recompense which we must without doubt expect, for having been
peacemakers, it is Jesus Christ himself, who is not a man, that he should
lie, nor the Son of man, that he should repent, when he says in our text,

Blessed are the peacemakers: for they shall be called ^h^ children of God.

He does not only say they shall be blessed, after their death, but they are
so already* because that he makes them know in their souls, the delight he
takes in it, and the goods which they shall receive, which is eternal peace,
Blessed then are the seete of those that bring tidings of peace, Isaiah 52.7.

This particle, For, shows the reason of their blessednes^e, and not the
cause, for if all the peacemakers were the children of God, by con^equence many
Turks and Pagans should be such, because they are peacemakers.

But the tree must be first good, before it can bear good fruit, so we must
first be the children of God, before we can be true peacemakers, for those
that are peacemakers not being the children of God, have already received their
reward, that is, they have received the praise and applause of the world, which
they were peacemakers ^o obtain, but all that is nothing but a mask and false
apparition of that true peace, which God recommendeth unto us.

In this reason of Christ's, why the peacemakers shall be called the children of
God, we must note and observe a double Hebraisme, the one in the word
Children, the other in the verb, they shall be called, vocabuntur.

The first Hebraisme is in the word Filij, Children, which in the holy tongue
signifies comform^e, and like, as Math. 5.44.45. Love your enemies, bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you, and persecute you, that ye may ^e the children that is
like to your Father which is in heaven.

The other Hebraisme is in the word (...), in Hebrew (...) Kara, that is erunt,
or vocabuntur, they shall be called, which is turned erunt, they shall be,
where of we have an example, Genes. 21.12. God speaking to Abraham, says, I^
Isaac shall thy se^de be called, that is shall thy seed be.

Of which words Saint ^aul is an irreprehensible interpr^^er, Romans 9.7.8.
Neither because they are the seed^ of Abraham, are they all children, but in
Isaac shall thy seed^ be called, that is, they which are the children of the
flesh, these are not the children of God: but the children of the promise ar^
counted for the seed.

The Prophet Isaiah 36.7. uses the same phrase, My house shall be called an
house of ^rayer for all people. And Saint Luke interpreting these words, chap.
19.46. says, It is written, My house is the house of prayer, but ye have made
it a den of thieves; and indeed this word shall be called, seems to me^
much more emphaticall, and compreh^ndi^g more then the word to be only,
because this to be called, est in rerum natura, is in the nature of the things,
and besides, that it is known and published of every man: therefore Blessed
^re the pea^emakers, ^or they shall not only be the children of God, but also
shall be known, and acknowledged for such, even by their greatest enemies, who
before thought them to be foolish and pus^llanimous, but then they shall be
forc^d to confess that they are the true children of God, and to speak like
the wicked, Wisdom ^he 5. Chap. Then says she, shall the just appear in
safe^y before the face of them that have ^ormented him, and that shall have
rejected his labour^, who s^eing him shall be seized with horrible fear, and
shall ^ee frighted to see him beyond their ^xpectation saved; then changing
their opinions, and sighing for grief shall be in their hearts, they will say
among themselves, Behold this is he of whom sometimes we laughed, and made
proverbs of dishonor; We fools thought his life madness, and his death
infamy, and how is he counted among the children of God, and has his portion
among the Saints?

Blessed then are the peacemakers: for they shall be called the children of God.

This word child of God, is diversely taken in Scripture, and according to the
Hebrew phrase, this word Son signifies him that is vowed and ordained to any
thing: so we read Saint Math. 9.15. The children of the Bridechamber, that is,
those that are ordained for the wedding, cannot mourn as long as the
Bridegroom is with them. And Saint John 17.1^. While I wa^ with them in the
world, I kept them in thy name, those that thou gave me I have kept, and none
of them is lost, but the Son of perdition, that is, he that was or dained to
destruction: but this kind of speech touches not our text.

But let us say that this word Son of God, is commonly a^tributed in
Scripture either to Jesus Christ, as being the natural Son of God, (...),
consubstantiall, and coeternall with his Father, of the same will, (...), and
same power with him, being both true God, and true man, the divine nature
neither confounding nor destroying the humane, and the humanity not being
mingled and changed into the Godhead, both natures remaining entire and
perfect, make but one person; He I say is called the Son of God, by the
acknowledgement and confession of the Father himself, Math. 17.5. When Jesus
Christ took with him Peter, James, and John, and brought them up into an high
mountain, and being transfigured before them, they heard a voice from heaven,
saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear him. We read
also the same words in the 3. Chap. 17. ver. of the same Evangelist.

The Father and the Son sunt relata, say the Philosophers, are relatives,
that is, are referred the one to the other; for there is no Father, but there
must likewise be a Son, whence I draw this conclusion, That God the Father
being such, that is, having that title and quality before the Creation of the
world, consequently Jesus Christ was before it, also his generation then is
immediately from the Father, as being begotten of him from all eternity, by a
way incomprehensible to us; for, In the beginning was the word, and the word
was with God, and the word ^as God, the same was in the beginning with God,
John 1.1. And in the 1. Chap. to the Heb. ver. 5. unto which of the Angels
says he at any time, Thou art my Son, t^is day have I begotten thee: And
again, I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son, (...).

He is not then called Son by adoption, or for respects of love, or for any
consideration, but only because he is begotten of ^he Father before the
Creation of all things, as we read Coloss. 1.15. He is the Image of the
invisible God, the first borne of every creature: which is prooved again out
of the 1. Chap. of Saint John, ver. 18. No man ^ath seen God at any time, the
only beg^tten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared
him.

Upon this place Hilarious li. 6. says, that Hoc nomine vnige^iti adoptio de
trinitate excluditur, and natura magis asseritur. By this word only beg^tten,
adoption is excluded from the Trinity, and nature the more confirmed.

And Saint Chrysostom very subtly, Christ^m non eodem modo quo caeteri
homines unigenitum dici, nam caeteros quidem quod soli ex parentibus nati sint
unigenitos dici, Christum non solum quod solus ex patre, sed etiam quod
singulari and ineffabili modo natus est unigenitum appellari. Christ is not
called the only Son after the sort of other men, who are called such,
because they are borne alone to their Parents; now Christ is no^ called the
only Son in that respect alone, that he is the only natural Son of his
Father, but also because he has been begotten by a special and ineffable way.

But whither does the wind of our discourse carry us, why do we touch this
divine subject, more worthy of admiration then capable of description; we
shall more lively describe it by our silence, then by our obscure
representations. Nevertheless for satisfaction to our curiosity, which is
never contented with reason, and that will not be contained within the limits
of civility, and modesty; let us bring one only comparison, to give us some
spark of knowledge of this ineffable generation of the Son of God. When a
man sees himself in a well polished glass, he presently sees his image, and
the figure of himself, having the same marks, and motions with his, which is
caused by the reflection of the species within the eye, and there is so great a
relation between the species, and the image, that one cannot be taken away
without annihilating the other; and although both the sight and reason make us
^ee, that they are sever^ll things, truth also and experience makes us know
that those two things subsist by one only Essence, and that both have but one
and the same subsistence, to wit, that of the species opposite to the glass.

So God from all Eternity, contemplating his divine Essence, made such a
reflection upon his person, that of this reflection he produced and begot that
eternal Wisdom, which is the Savior and Redeemer of our souls; the sooner
we can go from this matter is our best, for we should be like them that will
paint and represent the Sun with a coal.

And indeed how should it be possible, that we that are poor Owls and Batts,
should b^hold so great a light; how should we that are poor Pismires stir
so great mountains? We shall sooner put the whole sea in the palm of our
hands, then we can any way comprehend this large and spacious ocean of the
divine generation, within the little compass of our understanding.

Since then that we cannot ascend so high, let us stop and stay our
contemplation upon our selves, where we shall have a more free access; and
continuing our first discourse, let us remember, that we may be called the
children of God three ways, 1. First, the Scripture makes mention of the
natural generation of Christ, individual, and incommunicable to any other,
but to him only.

There is a filiation, or (not to speak barbarously with the S^hooleme^) the
Scripture gives this title of Son of God, to the Angels and Princes of the
earth, which is a title of honor and affection, as we read Job 1.6. Now there
was a day when the sons of God (that is the Angels) came to present
themselves before the Lord; and Satan came also among them. And Genes. 6.4.
When the sons of God came in unto the daugh^ers of men; The seaventy
Interpreters by the sons of God here understand the Angels: but Saints
Augustine in the City of God by the sons of God, understands the children
of Seth, which was a blessed family, which came in unto the daughters of Cain.

Among the children of God, in affection and honor are first placed, the
Princes and Potentates of the earth, as we read Psalm. 82.6. I have said ye are
Gods, and all of you are children of the most high.

And Ierem. 31.9. I will cause them to walk by the rivers of waters in a
straight way, wherein they shall not stumble, for I am a Father to Israel, and
Ephraim is my first borne.

The third sort of the children of God, is of them that are such by adoption
and by grace, as we read Ephesians. 1.5. God has predestined us unto the
adoption of children, by Jesus Christ, according to the good pleasure of his
will. And Galath. 4.5. God sent forth his Son made of a woman, that we might
receive the adoption of sons. And James 1.18. Of his own will begat he us,
with the word of truth, that we should be a kind of first fruits of his
creatures.

And 1. Epist. of Saint John, Chap. 3.1. Behold what manner of love the Father
has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God: beloved, now
are we the sons of God, and it does not yet appear what we shall be.

Athanasius ^rat. 2. that which is naturally begotten of another, must be
esteemed his true progeniture: but those that receive the title of Son only
by grace, and by virtue, receive not the right of Sons by nature, but only
by grace:

Quod secundum naturam ex aliquo gignitur, id vera ejus progenies censendum
es^, qui vero ex virtute, and gratia nomen filiorum solum modo obtinent, non
natura, sed gratia jus filiorum obtinent.

Ambros. lib. 1. de fide cap. 9. We are called Sons by adoption, but he
(speaking of Christ) is such by the truth of his nature, per adoptionem nos
filij dicimur, ille per veritatem naturae est.

Augustine. Epist. 120. cap. 4. We were something before we were Sons, and
we have received that benefit to be made what we were not, as he that is
adopted was not the son of him that adopteth him; nevertheless he was,
since he has been adopted, and from that gracious generation is
distinguished; he that being the Son of God, came down to be made the Son
of man, that he might make us that were the sons of men, the children of God,
Eramus aliquid antequam essemus filij, and accepimus beneficium, ut fieremus
quod non eramus, sicut qui adoptatur, antequam adoptaretur nondum erat ejus
filius a quo adoptatur, erat jam tamen, qui adoptaretur, and ab hac generatione
gratiae discernitur ille filius, qui cum esset filius Dei, venit ut fieret
filius hominis, donare^que nobis qui eramus filij hominum, filios Dei fieri.

Many of the Fathers do daintily describe this free adoption and filiation,
for so the Greeks interpret this word Adoption, having no other to express
his signification, but this word (...) filiation or adoption, but that we may
remember, that when our first Father Adam fell from the state of grace in which
he was created, he became the enemy of God, for sin by his gluttony having
seized the dungeon of his soul, inciteth and provokes him continually to
war against God by disobedience to his divine commandments, and by the same
sin he made God his enemy, so that his revenging justice instantly took
from him that fair Robe of Justice, holiness, and innocence, in which he was
created.

But his mercy being not able to suffer that man, that maister-piece of his
hands, should be for ever banished and confined within the ^aines and torments
of hell, to satisfi^ his Justice, has left some in their Reprobation, to
endure and suffer the punishment due to their faults, and has chosen and
elected some to testify in them the effect of his compassions, br^aking the
chains wherewith Satan kept them bound, and that by sending into the world his
only and well beloved Son, who has paid their ransom by the inestimable
price of his precious blood; and moreover, having given them liberty, he has
besides bestowed on them the gift to be made the children of God, and coheires
with his Son of eternal and most blessed life: And thus it is, that we are
called the children of God in our text, children by adoption, by favor and by
grace. This custom of adopting is common and familiar among men, for we see
many that having cast their affection upon strange children, receive them into
their houses, love them dearly, bring them up with great care, and at their
life's end appoint unto them either all, or part of their best i^heritance.

Let us now draw some in^tru^tions from all this discourse, and let us say,
That since God has so much honored us, as to adopt us for his children, that
we mu^t not bear unworthily that title, to the end that we may ^eceive the
effect of his invariable promises, to wit, the inheri^ance of heaven, and life
eter^all.

Good children strive to tread upon the holy steps of their Parents, imi^ating
in all things their good and laudable actions; so must we with all our power
follow the steps, and imitate the actions of our heavenly Father, whose name is
the great God of peace.

Let us also imitate o^r eldest brother Jesus Christ our Savior, who is the
true image of the Father, who exhorts us by the mouth of the vessel of his
election, to fly quarrels and contentions, saying, 2. Cor. 13.11. Brethren live
in peace, and the GOD of love and peace shall be with you.

Let us live a blameless and innocent life both before God and before men,
before God in holiness, before men in justice, that so God may be appeased
with us, and that our souls may be void of those fears which sin conceives
in the hearts of the wicked, who continually represents, and sets before
his eyes the deposition of the witnesses, the mortal sentence of the Judges,
and the intolerable cruelty of the hangman, although oftentimes no man have
any knowledge of his crime.

This peace is for our selves, for the rest and tranquillity of our
consciences, and for the salvation of our souls.

Let us also seek to have peace with all the world, as much as in us lies,
let us hate noise, and fly from ryots and contentions, that so our conversation
may be pleasing to all the world, and this is the true politic or civil peace.

Let us be like Lamps and Torches lighted in the midst of darkness; let us
be that water of pacification and rest, to quench the fire of quarrels and
contentions, that are among our brethren, least that fire consume them to
ashes: And in so doing, we shall be true imitatours of our heavenly Father,
who justly styles and calls himself the God of peace, and then with a great
deal of right and equity, we shall b^are the blessed and glorious title of
his children.

And after we have quenched and put out the trouble of our hearts, and vexation
of our souls, caused by the fire of sin, when we shall have scattered those
flames that destroy and devour that union and concord, which God has so
strictly commanded us to keep, then shall we be called to that heavenly
Jerusalem, which is ^he City of peace, and there shall we enter into the
possession of the inheritance promised to adopted children in Jesus Christ our
Lord, we shall partake with him eternal blessedness, he shall be our head,
in those divine sessions, and we shall be his members, we shall shine as the
Sun, the holy Ghost shall enlighten us, and the God of peace shall be for ever
with us. Amen.

O Sovereign Monarch of heaven and earth, that governest all things by thy
providence, which to us is altogether incomprehensible, we thy most humble
Subjects, calling unto thee from the bottom of our souls, beseech thee by the
greatness of thy compassions, that it may please thee to plant in our hearts a
holy and perfect justice, which taking deep roots therein, may bring forth
fruits of peace, and concord, which thou straightly recommendest unto us in
thy holy word. Make us perfectly just, that we may love peace perfectly, as
being the daughter of justice; enkindle (O good God) the fire of thy love in
our hearts and souls, that we may love our brethren even as thou have loved
us: give us a spirit of g^ntlenes and meekenes, that we may fly and eschew
quarrels and contentions, not only in our s^lues, but also when we shall see
them kindled among our bre^hren; make us know (O good Savior) that those
enmities and dissentions are the devils daughters, who loves nothing but noise
and disorder, and that peace and mildness are the daughters of divine justice,
which thou love dearly, which we must embrace and practice, if we will be
honored with the title of thy children; and not only be called so, but also
to be indeed children of God, and heirs of eternal and blessed life, to the
which, the Father, Son, and holy Ghost bring us. Amen.

The fourth way to Sion.
1. PETER. 2.17. Fear God, and honor the King.


AS rays (or Sunne-beames) follow and bear observa^ce to the Sun; As all
rivers run to the Sea, and as many lines end and terminate in their center;
so there are many ways to bring us to the Paradise of God, to Ierus^lem above,
which is our heavenly and happy Country; Neverth^lesse, we must herein u^e the
Maxim of the Mathematicians, who hold, that the shortest line ^s still the
rightest; also in all th^se different ways of new Sion, the shortest is the
best and surest.

When God gave his Law to Moses upon the Mountain of Sinay, he divided it into
^en commandments, which are so many perf^ct ways to conduct and bring us to
heaven; for JESUS CHRIST (the sweet Savior of our souls) being himself
descended from Heaven, to show and point us out this way; he drew a short
Compendium and Abridgement of all these Ten Commandments of the Law, and
reduced them to two, as we shall find it written in the 22. Chapter of St.
Matthew, where we see him disputing against a Doctor of the Law, who demanded
of him which was the first and greatest Commandment; and Jesus answered him,
Thou shall love God with all thy heart, with all thy soul, and with all thy
mind, which is the first and greatest commandment; and the second is like
unto it; which is, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; and of these two
Commandments depend the whole Law and the Prophets, as our Apostle Saint
Peter (in the imitation of his blessed Master Christ) after he had instructed
and admonished his faithful flock, in all their duties, in the precedent
verses of our Text; he draws an abridgement of all which concerned their
salvation, when he said, Fear God, and honor the King.
(...).


In these words, we have all the instructions which we must practice in our
souls and bodies concerning those divine and humane duties; which we must
convert, and reduce into practice; which words (naturally divide themselves)
into two several branches, or heads, (to wit) 1. the fear which we ought to
bear unto God: and 2. The honor which we must observe and give to the King.

The sweetest, and most pleasingst sacrifice which we can offer up unto the
Lord Almighty, is a heart replenished and fraughted with the fear of his holy
name, a mind trembling before his sacred Majesty, and a soul terrified with
the sublimity and greatness of his fearful judgments, as the royal Prophet
affirms in Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling;
And again Psalm. 2.7. I will come into thy house in the multitude of thy mercy,
and in thy fear will I worship toward thy holy Temple.

We can offer up no sacrifice so pleasing, nor perform no action or duty so
acceptable to God, as when we adore him in all fear, and reverence him in all
astonishment and trembling, which lively depaynteth and prefigureth his
Greatness and Magnificence, perfectly demonstrateth us our Duties, and
witnesses our humility and obedience, which is exceeding delightful, and
pleasing to him.

That Roman Emperor perspicuously expressed and deciphered the excellent
power and effects of this fear, when he carried for his Motto and Devise,
Oderint dum metuant, Let those hate me that will, so they fear me; showing
thereby what small account and esteem he made of the hatred, and how dearly
he prised and respected the fear which he would have given and borne to him.

Moral Philosophers affirm and say, That Love and fear are two sister
germans, because the one is conjoined to the other, and both linked together
produce one and the same effects; for still the Lover is in care and fear of
the thing beloved; whereas we never fear to lose that which we hate, but
that which we love dearly, and cherish tenderly, and both of these together
produce the conservation of their object. But this distinction takes no place,
but here on earth among crea^ures, and does neither regard nor look up toward
Heaven to God the Creator; For God is all Love, but he can never be capable of
alteration or defect, as is that fear which he has left and given unto man
for his portion and inheritance.

So he which is possessed with a perfect fear, to offend his God, or to lose
his favor, he is linked and joined to God with the Gordian knots of his love,
which are then wholly made indivisible and inseparable; and the Love of God
conjoined with the fear of man, cause the conservation of the soul; and this
it is, where the Apostle Saint Peter tells us in our text, Fear God, By which
word fear we must not understand, a cowardice, a pusillanimity, or any
irregular passion, which freezeth our blood in our veins, which causes our
hearts to pant and beat with an incessant motion, which calls and attract^ our
blood from all parts of our bodies; to come to assist and succor our heart,
which shutts and hood winkes our eyes against reason, and imagines, that all
objects whatsoever presented to us, have all together conjured and conspired
our ruin; as those who fly from a battle, fear every bush which they see or
meet with to be their enemies, who purposely pursue them, and run every
where to kill them: Or else as those who are led to their executions and
deaths, whom fear does so powerfully seize and surprise, that by these
passions and effects, it in a manner deprives them of life, before they think
thereof, the which we can testify and approve by many irrevocable precedents
and examples.

No, no: It is not of this defect of judgment, or of this cowardly
apprehension and fear, which our Apostle tells us of; but it a holy, just, and
commendable fear, which we ought to have and retain, in bearing a^ admirable
respect, and honor to the Creator and conseruer of our bodies and souls; As
to fear and tremble before the terrible throne of his divine Justice, and by
not rashly abusing of his favors and mercies, so liberally, so bountifully
extended to us, because his presence is a consuming fire, which devoures and
consumes to ashes, all those who unrevere^tly approach his sacred Throne, his
most holy hill; as heretofore he forbad the children of Israel, not to
approach mouth Sinay, because he was there purpos^ly to sp^ake with his
s^rvant Moses: But not to stay any longer on this point, let us say with the
Philosophers and Theologians, that there is generally two sorts of f^are (that
is to say) Divine and Humane, which again subdivide themselves every one into
three several parts and branches;

The Humane fear compriseth and comprehends:

1. The Natural, which has wholly buried in her, the senses, all Philosophy,
and the strongest and most assured courage cannot hinder him from shutting his
eyes at the sudden surprise of a flash of lightning, or at the feignednesse
of a hand, which unexpectedly approaches our face; or that we withdraw not, or
turn not our head from the sight of a fearful precipice; or that a sudden
crack or noise do not at first hearing terrify or astonish us: Primi illi
motus non sunt hominis,

The first motions (or terrors) are not in our power.



2. Corporal, whereby we naturally abhor Death, and fear to expose and
cast our selves into danger.

3. Mundane, (or worldly) whereby we fear to lose our wealth, honors, and
dignities, but it is of neither of these sorts of fears, which our Apostles
speaks unto us, but only of Divine fear, which likewise streams forth in
three rivolets:

1. Servile; whereby we fear God, for the apprehension we have of the
infernal tortures and torments of Hell, and this degree and sort of fear is
not good of it self, because it has no good object, nor is made or formed to
a good end; nevertheless, it is held and termed good, because it conduces to
good.

2. Initiant, which looks two ways: 1. toward the torments we fear: 2.
toward the glory we desire, and it is also termed, interwoven, or mixed,
because it is composed both of a good and bad fear.

3. Filial, which is the last and best sort of divine fear, whereby we love
God not only for our own glory, or for the apprehension of tormen^s, but for
his goodness, excell^ncy, p^rfection, and in a word, for and in regard of
himself.

Saint Bernard lively describes, and pertinently represents those three sorts
of fear: 1. Ne cruciemur a gehenna: 2. Ne exclusi a visione tam inestimabili
gloria privem^r: 3. Replet animum sollicitudine ne deseratur a gratia.

Which is to say: The first fear apprehends torments; The second, the
privation of glory; and the third wholly possesses our hearts and ^indes with
care and anxiety, as fearing not to lose Gods grace and favor.

The servile fear is attributed to the wicked.

The filial, to the good, I mean to those who are the children of God.

The Initiant (or intermixed) is proper as well to the good, as the bad, and
also it is the most frequent and general.

Those three sorts of fear are so many wing^, which conduct, elevate, and
soar us up to heaven; The Servile begins first, which denounces to sinners
eternal death and damnation, and that sharp and sensible apprehension to be
devoured with the flames of hell fire. It opens him the gate to be sorrowful
for his offenses, which threaten to precipitate him in that unquenchable fire,
and afterward entering into a firm and lively ^epentance for his former
sins, he begins to conceive the future felicity and glory of Heaven, for the
love whereof he partly resol^es to forsake and abandon sin: as Solomon
says, By the fear of the Lord men depart from evil, Prove. 16.6. Although
nevertheless that he do it, partly for fear of punishment which will
infallibly follow him; and after that, it again leads him into this perfect
filial fear, whereby he so infinitely loves God, that he had rather dye,
then offend him in the least thing of the world; so nearly he loves him, so
dearly he honors and adores him.

St. Augustine makes only two sorts of fear, (to wit) Filial, and Servile,
and makes them different in this, That the Servile has for object malum
poenae, the evil of punishment, and the filial malum culpae, the evil of
guiltiness; Illo timet^r ne incid^tur in tormentum s^pplicij, isto ne
amittatur gratia beneficij: By the first, we fear the torments of hell fire;
By the second, we fear to lose the grace and favor of God.

It is this fair, this sweet spiritual virtue, which gives us admittance and
entrance into the closet of God; which opens unto us the treasures of his
favor and mercy, and which makes us enter into the possession ^f life
eternal; For those who fear the Lord shall behold his face, shall have
prosperity, and see good days, says the royal Prophet King David, Psalm.
34.11. It is this fear of the Lord, which makes men prosper on earth, as says
Solomon the Prince of wise men, and the wisest of Princes, The fear of the
Lord prolongeth days, but the years of the wicked sha^^ be shortened, Prove.
10.27. This wise King, in all his afflictions and troubles, had still his
recourse to the f^are of the Lord, which was his fortress, his Sanctuary, his
comfort and consolation, as we shall read in the 14. Chap. of Proverbs, In the
fe^re of the Lord is strong confidence, and his children shall have a place of
refuge, The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life to depart from the snares
of death: He again teaches us, that wealth is unprofitable, yea prejudicial
to us without this salubrious, this sacred fear of God, and that poverty is to
be preferred before fading and perishable riches: Better is a little with the
fear of the Lord, then great treasure and trouble therewith.

This fear of the Lord, is (as it were) Jacobs Ladder, whereby the Angels (of
divine consolations) descend upon us on earth, and our holy prayers, and
religious thoughts and meditations ascend unto Heaven. This Ladder has three
principal steps; As the fear of the Lord makes us ascend unto Jesus Christ,
which is our wisdom: for through and by God he has made us wisdom, 1. Cor.
1.30. Ies^s Christ leads us to God his Father, and God receives and lodges us
in Heaven, and therefore we first fear him, if ever we hope or think to enter
into his favor.

This fear of God, is the head spring and fountain, from whence we^ draw and
exhaust the sacred mysteries of our salvation; and D^vid tells us in formal
and express terms, That the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom,
Psalm. III. 10. Thereby to teach us, that all this knowledge and learning
whereof men vaunt and glory, is nothing else but pure folly, if it derive not
his Origin, or beginning from the fear of the Lord. This fear is here taken
for the principle of wisdom, and Ie^us Christ himself (in many places of
Scripture) has assumed and taken the title of Wisdom, because he is the
wisdom of the Father, as we read in the former alleged Chapter of 1. Cor.
1.30. But in the book of Genes. Chap. 31.42. He himself is by Moses called the
fear of Isaac; Except the God of my Father, the God of Abraham, and the fear
of Isaa^ had been with me, thou had sent me away empty.

But here the best Interpreters, by this fear of Isaac, do unde^stand the
second person of the Trinity, Jesus Christ our Savior, who had not yet assumed
and clothed our humane nature, and of whom Isaac was the true type and figure,
^t is an excellent que^tion of Saint Augustine (in his City of God) that is,
If this filial fear after the death of the faithful Children of the Lord
remain with them in Heaven yea or no: Those who maintain the contrary,
forti^ie themselves from the Apostle Saint John, Chap. 4. ver. 18. There is no
fear in love, but perfect love cas^^th o^^ fear, because fear has tormen^,
and ^ee that fears is not made perfect in love, from whence they argue,

Where there is perfect Love, there is no fear.

But among the Saints in Heaven there is perfect Love.

Therefore among the Saints in Heaven there is no fear.

And from the same ^lace and passage of Saint John, they derive and draw
another Argument thu^:

All fear is accompanied with torment.

But in Heaven there is no torment.

Therefore in Heaven there i^ no fear.

They say (moreover) That this fear should then deprive them of their rest and
repose, and consequently that they could not enjoy a perfect felicity, whiles
they were troubled and tormented with any apprehension or fear. Others
answer, That the Apo^tle Saint John understands not to speak there of a chaste
and filial, but of a servile fear, and to fortify and support their opinion
they allege, the Psalm. 19* 9. The fear of the Lord is clean, enduring for
ev^r.

And Saint Augu^tine expounding this sort of fear, says, Non enim est timor
exterrens a malo quod accidere pot^st, sed tenens in b^no, quod amitti non
potest; This kind of fear makes us not apprehend any evil which can befall
us, but makes us so to keep fast good, that we may not lose it; And
afterward he again adds, Timori^ Casti nomine, ea vol^ntas, significat^
est, quo nos necesse erit nolle Peccare, non solicitudine necessit^tis, sed
tranquillitate c^aritatis, He says, that by this name of chaste fear, is
signified, the will whereby it is necessary, that we will not sin, not for
the care of necessity, but for the tranquillity of Charity. He then concludes,
that indeed Servile fear cannot enter into Heaven but only the filial, and
yet (notwithstanding) it must be after it has lost the effects which it
produces in this present life, (to wit) this natural apprehension, whereby
she fears that the soul falls from the State of Grace: No, no, this fear in
Heaven shall be but a perfect reverence, honor, and piety, and a full and
absolute devotion, which we shall bear to the service of GOD; whereby every
one seeing the divine Majesty, shall profoundly and perfectly study to serve
and honor him in all reverence: And for this cause it is why the 70.
Interpreters have turned Timorem Dei, the fear of God, into this Greek word
(...) (to wit) Dei pietatem, the piety which we bear to God, and so it
remains true, which the Prophet David had said long before, The fear of the
Lord is clean enduring for ever.

In this Elementary world, the fear of God is the most assured way to go to
celestial Jerusalem; Those who have not been to a place, if they foolishly
and rashly run athwart fields, they then run a great hazard to go astray,
and to lose themselves among woods or briars, or peradventure to fall into the
hands of cruel and merciless thieves: So those who will ascend to the top of
the holy Mountain of sacred Sion; If they ar^ not curbed and retained by the
golden bridle of the fear of God; If without wisdom or judgeme^t they run
over craggie rocks full of thorns and briars (for such are the ways to Si^n
and Heaven) without doubt they will fall into the error of precipi^es, or else
they will serve for prey, or fuel to eternal flames.

The fear of God, is the pledge and seal of his love and favor, the which
h^e places and planteth in the midst of our hearts, when he will call us to
him, and c^nserue us to his service; For he has united and tied us to hi^ with
the linkes and chains of his love in his own house; He for ever makes us his
domestical servants, yea, his heirs and adoptive children, and in this
quality he makes us to enter into the inheritance of eternal life above in
Heaven with Jesus Christ his only welbeloved Son, who is our eldest Bro^her;
Neither are they fantastic imaginations, or light presumptions, which must
make us b^leeve these things, for it is God himself which has pronounced them
by his Prophet Jeremy, Chap. 22.39.40. I will give them on^ hear^ and one way,
that they may fear ^e for ever, and I will make an everlasting cov^nant with
them, that I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my
fear into their hearts, that they shall not depart from me.

The fear of the Lord takes place among the rarest presents, and richest
Jewels which the Holy Ghost discovers to his Elect, and it is the entry to
the greatest, which is wisdom it self; for as Salamon says truth, The
beginning of wisdom is the fear of God: For when the Holy Ghost will operate
in the heart of any man, he then stampes and ma^kes him with his seal, which
is the fear of God, and then conducts him by degrees unto the very last point
of perfection which is wisdom, or the perfect knowledge of sacred mysteries,
as we read in the Prophet Iere^y, Chap. 11.2. The spirit of the Lord shall
rest upon him, the spirit of wisedo^e and understan^ing, the spirit of counsel
and might, the spirit of knowledge, and the fear of the Lord.

The old proverb ^aith truly, That fear and diffidence is the mother of
security, for when we fear our enemy, and are vigilant over his actions, then
we prevent his ambushes, and avoid his power. Let us remember that Satan (the
deadly enemy of our souls) watches still at the door of our hearts, as a
roaring Lion attending to devour his prey, so that if we have not still the
fear of God before our eyes, to avoid the nets and ginnes which he lays in
the way for us, we shall become his prey and food. But if we stand upon our
guards, and no way fear his assaults or threatni^gs; then he will in^allibly
f^y from us both with have and sha^e; For God commonly bestows his graces and
favors, to those who fear to offend him, and he distributeth and imparteth
his richest treasures to those that serve him with reverence, fear, and
trembling: We read Acts 2. That when the day of Pentecost was fully come,
they were (...) prey to that old Serpent the devil.

The ancient Pagans have perfectly and truly depaynted fear, when they said
it was all environed with fire and flames, as Love; and so they understood of
corporal and Mundane (or worldly fear) and likewise of divine fear,
concerning their false imaginary Gods. Here we will do as N^^h did; We will
make use of sinners to build the Arc of our salvation, or as Salom^n did of
the timber and stones of King Hiram, to build the temple of the Eternal, 1.
Reg. 5. That which Pagans have spoken without knowledge, we will speak with
reason and knowledge, That all sorts of fear, is a fire in our souls, which
scorcheth and consumes us as long as it remains there: B^t let us h^re
endeavor particularly, to consider the Analogies and resemblances, that there
is between fire, and the fear of God* which is the subject of our text.

Fire is a furious, hasty, and active Element, and ^o li^kewise are the points
of apprehension and fear; Fire is the cleanest, the purest, the wholsomest of
all Elements; I^ cleanses, it purifieth, it drives out all filthiness and
corruption; as being neither able no^ ^apable to suffer in it self any
impurity, for it either consumes, or expells it; And all this agrees well with
the fear of God, which is the most wholsomest Physic that we can take to
purge our selves of sin, and to purify our heart^ of all uncleanness; for
there is no vi^e but it will purge and reject; Fire is an Element which
consumes and devoures all that is presented to it, and the fear of God is a
coal and flame, which devoureth all our concupiscences.

To make straight a crooked piece of wood or timber, we use fire, thereby to
make it become more soft and flexible. So to replace souls in the way of life,
when they are either crooked, or gone astray, in the by paths of vice, then
the fear of God, of all other remedies i^ ^he best and most sovereign.

Fire (by Antiperistase) as it heate^ those who are cold, so it refreshes and
comfort those who are ^ot; The fear of God heates and enflames those souls
to do well, who are most frozen in piety; and contrariwise, it cools those
who are most enflamed with their burning sensualities and concupiscences.

To venomous Apostumes, mortal Gangreens and desperate diseases, we for the
last remedy apply Irons and fire to cure it.

To sinners inveterated in their wickedness, and as it were despairing of
their salvation, we must apply the Iron and fire of the fear of God, to make
them apprehend and know his divine judgments if they remain impenitent, and
unrepentant.

Historians report, that the Arabian Pho^nix (the only bird of his race) is
accustomed every five hundred years, to build an Artificial nest, whereunto
the rays of the Sun reflecting and darting, it at one time reduces to ashes
both the work and the workman: So if we desire to revive to the love of
immortal beatitude and celestial felicity, we must set fire to our vices, by
the art and flame of a true and lively repentance, and burn them all together
in the fear of God.

All the world is a field richly strewed and diapred with the miracles and
wonders of God, whereof man is the principal Masterpiece, and the chiefest
workmanship of his hands; and the sacred Scriptures are as it were the E^itomie
and Compendium thereof, wherein I every way see nothing but Gods love (of his
side) toward man; and read nothing but subjects of honor, and causes fear of
man toward God; But among diverse other places, I find one exceedingly
agreeable and concurring with our text, which is Daniel C^ap. 2.32. concerning
the Statue which Nabuchad^nozer saw in his dream, The head of this I^ag^ was
of fine gold, his breast and arms of silver, his belly and thighs of brass,
his legs of iron; his feet part of iron and part of clay, a stone was cut
out without hands, which smote the Image upon his feet that were of iron, and
brake them to pieces, and having br^ken the^, the Statue fell backwards, and
was reduced to Summer dust. This Statue does lively represent unto us a sinner;
By his golden head, I understand Pride, Vanity, and Ambition, which fumes and
swims in the Head of a sinner, who esteems himself as precious as gold, and
as rare as Pearls; His breast and arms of silver, marks unto us his affection
to covetousness, as having all his desires every way bent and levelled to
rapine and extortion; His belly and thig^es of brass, represents unto us his
voluptuousness and insatiety; His legs of iron show us his cruelty; His
feet of earth depaynts us his weakness and fragility; and this stone cut
without hand from the mountain of Sion, is the fear of God, which God casts
and rolls at our feet, to beat us to dust, and to make us consider the
nothing from whence we came.

The world, the flesh and the devil (the professed mortal enemies of our
soul, who will never want subtilty or malice to make us stumble in the way to
life) seeing that this fear of God is a sovereign Antidote against all the
diseases of the soul, not being able to diminish its virtue, by their artifice
and deceipts, at least they will make us lose the relish thereof, by their
insinuations and persuasions, figuring us out this fear of God to be so hard,
sharp, and bitter, that it is impossible for us to enjoy any rest, or
tranquillity of mind, as long as we are possessed of that passion; That the
ways to heavenly Sion, are not so craggie and difficult, but that they are all
paved with silk, with delights, and contentments; But the faithful man
fearing God, ought to be as wise as a Serpent; He must stop his ears to this
false Imposter, and Inchanter, who would surprise him to strangle him; He must
remember the words which Christ Jesus spoke and dictated to him by Saint Luke,
Acts 14.22. We must through much tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God. And
again by Saint Mathe^ 7.13. Enter ye in at the s^ra^t gate, for wide is the
gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction.

No, no, let us not flatter our selves, there a^e no Roses without prickles; we
shall never obtain and carry away the incorruptible Crown of glory before we
have first fought the good fight, we shall never put our foot in celestial
Canaan, before we have first past the red sea of the afflictions of this life,
and departed forth of the wilderness of our sins; and in a word, before we
have fought with the infernal Giants and Devils, who strive and endeavor to
prevent and hinder our entry thereinto.

For it is absolu^ely impossible, ever to possess or enjoy the love of God,
here below in Earth, or much less above in Heaven, before we have first
sworn to him, a perfect fear, honor, and obedience, Amoris Ianua timor est;
The fear of God, is the entry and gate to his love, as also Love is a fear
entermix'd with care and anxiety, Res est solliciti plena timoris amor.

In the 19. Chap. verse 4. of the 1. Book of Kings, the Prophet Elijah flying
the persecution of Queen Iezabel, being weary of his way, he sat down and
slept under a Juniper Tree, where an Angel came and found him ou^, and carried
him a Cake baked upon coals, which he pleasingly eat and relished, and so
satisfied his heart and stomach for forty days and forty nights, after which
they came to the mountain of Oreb, the pl^ce of his refuge and security. This
Iezabel is the devil, and this Prophet may lively represent unto us our soul,
which of all sides is persecuted by this cruel and implacable enemy, who
flying his assaults, if she come to repose her self under the sharp Juniper
of a truly holy and filial fear; Then without doubt the Angel of Divine
consolations, will bring him the bread of Love, favor, and mercy, baked upon
the coals of his affection, and the good will and clemency of God, which will
then refresh and replenish our hearts and souls during all the pilgrimage of
this our mortal life, until we are arrived to the mountain of Sion, which
is the center of our desires, the residence of our delights, and the
impregnable Fort and Castle of our felicities.

I find Saint Augustines comparison to be very excellent and pretty, upon
Fear and Love, and that we must pass through that, before we can arrive to
this; He says, that fear is as a Needle, and Love as the silk which it
draws after it; The Needle is sharp, hard, and piercing, but the silk is
soft, fair, and pleasing; Fear is indeed a sharp and distastf^ll passion,
but that which does sweeten, lenifie, and cure his prickings; it is love which
immediately follows it, being fraughted with courtesy, goodness, and favor;
We must not therefore apprehend the small stings of Bees, because they
afterward promise to delight and satiate us with their honey, which distills
and flows from the rock of our salvation; And it is the Enigme of Sampson to
the Philistims; from the bitter came sweet; from the rage and gall of the Lion,
issued sweet honey to delight and refresh Sampson; If Jesus Christ (the true
Lion of the tribe of Judah) had not endured for us the bitter and cruel death
of the Cross, then we had never tasted the excellent virtue of the honey of
his resurrection: Indeed to flesh and blood the Fear of God, is as it were a
kind of gall and bitterness, because it daunts, and out-braves his passion^,
and it still keeps him waking, as we do to wild birds, thereby to tame him,
and to make him quiet and docible; and so to instruct and civilize him to the
service of God. It still shows him the eminent dangers wherein she will
ingulph and precipitate him, in offending his God, but still with an indulgent
intent to prevent and hinder him from it, Pondus timoris est anchora c^rdis;
The burden which fear caries with it, is the hearts anchor; to prevent that
it ^ee not reversed, and overblowne by the waves, nor of all sides split and
shipwrack'd by the violence and impetuosity of tempestuous passions, which
without intermission assail and beat upon it; But the mercy of the Lord (says
David) is from generation to generation upon all those who fear him.

In a word, (and so to draw to the conclusion) of this part of the Text, the
two principal pillars of Christian Doctrine, and the two firm and
vnremoveable foundations thereof, is Fear and Love, which are the two proper
means to contain the godly, and to retain the wicked in the observation of
Gods Commandments; The wicked by Fear, the godly by Love, as the Poet
speaks, but morally, in a Christian sense and language: Oderunt pec^are mali
formidine Poenae.
Oderunt peccare boni, virtutis amore.


The wicked abhor to offend for fear of punishment, and the Godly will not
be drawn to sin, because of their love of virtue.

But here fearing least I should run astray, and so lose and ingulph my self
in this great and vast Ocean o^ the fear of God, it makes me row abord,
thereby to gain the desired shore, and so to treat and discourse of the second
part of the Text, which is (...), Honor the King.

The two noblest and most excellent offices, which the Angels, and blessed
souls enjoy above in the triumphant Church, are the vision of God, and the
ordinary action of glorifying and honoring God, about the which they are
eternally employed, and therefore the holy Ghost to fashion and dispose us here
below in the militant Church, to glorify in time his sacred Majesty in
heaven, commands us in our text likewise, to Honor the King, as being the
true Image and lively representation of that great King of glory, of the Father
of Eternity, of the mighty God of Hoasts, Fear God, says he, and Honor the
King.

Divine, and altogether admirable words, as being the sum and abridgement of
all the duties which we ought to practice in this world, both in body and
soul, both for the moral and spiritual life, the performance whereof brings
us to absolute perfection; for if we fear God, we serve him, and never offend
him; and in honoring the King, besides the performance of our duty, we obey
the Commandment of God.

So these 2. commandments are so straightly linked and joined together, that
the breach of the one, is the violation of ^he other; for we cannot displ^ase
the King, without offending God, nor offend God, without violating the Kings
laws.

Let us see what that chosen vessel says, in very earnest and pressing words,
Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, for there is no
power but from God, and all authority is given from the Lord; which is the
reason of the commandment, followed presently with a threatening; wherefore who
so resist^th the power, resists the ordinance of God, and therefore incurres
condemnation, for the Prince bears not the sword in vain, seeing he is the
servant and minister of God, to punish evil doers, therefore must ye be subject
not only for fear, but also for conscience s^ke; and therefore pay ye
tribute, because they are the ministers of God ordain^d to that end, Give then
unto every one his due, tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, fear
to whom fear, and honor to whom honor.

Before we ent^r into an exact and particular exposition of the words of our
Text, we will examine the consequence of this commandment, and as those who
desire to know the sweetness and goodness of water, ascend to fetch it from
the spring, that we may esteem the more the excellency and greatness of
this commandment; we must observe, that this ordinance is not made by men,
either to flatter King^, for fear of their sovereign authority, but that it
is Gods own ordinance, dictated unto our Apostle by the holy Ghost.

Which brings great matter of consolation, to those who with zeal undertake
the execution of it, knowing that God loves those that fear him, and blesses
those that are obedient to him.

And contrarily, it must greatly terrify the disobedient, when they remember
the infallible threatenings, and the irrevocable sentence, pronounced by Gods
own sacred mouth, saying, Cursed is he that break^s the least of th^se
commandments, Math. 5.19. Cursed is he that shall not be perman^nt in all the
things written in the book of the Law, to do them, Deuteronomy. 27.26.

We must again note, that the Commandement^ of God, are like the Sciences
which are more or less esteemed, according to the nobility and excellency of
their object, for as that affection and charity which we owe to our neighbor,
without comparison gives place to that extreme and infinite love which we owe
to our God, and heavenly Father; so the honor we are to bear to all men in
general, is so much inferior to that we owe the King, as his dignity is
elevated above that of other men; and therefore you see, that as soon as our
Apostle commands us to fear God, h^e adds presently, Honor the King.

Showing by that order, that the honor and service due to the King, immediately
follows that which we owe to God, and therefore a great servant of God of our
times, expounding these words, says after Tertullian, That in the performance
of these two precepts, the Christian makes himself perfect, both for the
religious and mo^all life, for in fearing God, he walks through the paths of
justice, holiness, and innocence, which leads in the end to eternal
felicity.

And in honoring the King, he observes his laws, and by those means builds
up for himself a delightful rest, and an incomparable felicity.

But because it is to undertake to sail over a boundless and bottomless
Ocean, if we should go about to allege here all the places which we might
cite out of the Fathers, and many others; let us hearken to the holy Ghost, in
the most common places of Scripture, and imitating the ^sraelites, we will
only take some few drops of water out of the land of Edo^, and show only the
springs afar off; we will pass over quickly, like the dog of the river
Nilus, least some Crocodile, thirsting after our innocence, should open his
stinking mouth to accuse us, a^ though our intention were other, then tending
to the service and glory of God, which is the only center, unto the which all
the lines of our intentions immediately tend and aim.

We very easily learn the definition, or description of this word to Honor,
in the 6. Chap of Esther, when Ahashuerosh asked Haman what should be done unto
the man whom the King would honor; Haman thinking the King spoke so for him,
invented all the ways and means he could, to enjoy and increase this honor;
therefore he answered the King thus, As for the man whom the King will honor,
let them bring for him royal apparel, which the King ^seth to wear, and the
horse that the King rides upon, and that the crown royal may be set upon his
head, and that one of the greatest Princes should go before him, and
proclaim, Thus shall it be done unto the man whom the King will honor.

In this ample description of Honor, we note the definition of it; to wit, to
give glory, to do homage to any one, to seek all the means that may be to
advance his credit, and increase his reputation through all the world, and thus
that cursed Haman thought to be honored.

But this word to Honor the King, in that sense that our Apostle takes it, is
like to that honor mentioned in the first Commandment of the second table,
Honor thy Father and thy mother, which signifies in general, to serve,
reverence, obey, assist those whom we honor, and of that reverence,
obedience, and assistance, Saint Paul speaks expressly, 1. ^im. 5.17. The
Elders that rule well, are worthy of a double honor, where observe and note,
that by the first honor, he understands a civil and common honor, like
that which is due to other honorable men; but by the second honor he
understands a subvention, and reward of his labors, as it appears by the
following words, Thou shall not musle the mouth of the Ox that tread^th out
the co^ne, and the labourer i^ worthy of his wages, Luke 10.7.

And of all these four duties which we are to pra^tise, to honor the King,
is spoken at large, 1. Sam. Chap. 8. When the Israelites did so earnestly
desire him to give them a King, he does lively set forth un^o them, how
perfectly they must be subject to him, how they must reverence him, how they
must obey him.

But because commonly among good corn there be tares, or some other bad ^e^d,
we will show by express words of Scripture, and by invincible reasons, That
he that obeys not to the higher powers, offends directly God himself, who
will destroy him.

Saint Paul, Tit. 3.1. Put them in remembrance that they be subject to
principalities, and powers, and that they be obedient, and ready to every good
work.

And Romans 13.4. The Prince is the Minister of of God for thy good, but if thou
do evil, then fear, for he beare^h not the sword for naught, for he is the
Minister of God, to execute justice on him that does evil; therefore ye must
be subject, not for fear only, but also for conscience sake* wherefore those
that resi^t the power, resist the ordinance of God, and those that resist this
ordinance, draws on themselves condemnation.

But if these rules be not strong enough to convert those perverse men; at
least let them be frighted by the fearful judgments which fell on so many
wicked men, which aunciently rebelled against Moses their Prince and
Sovereign, who by Gods command had delivered them from the hands of Pharao,
the cruellest of men, and had led and conducted them with a wonderful wisdom
into the wilderness; let ^o^ them before their eyes the example of Core,
Dathan, and Ab^ram, who with two hundred and fifty Princes of the Israelites,
Numb. 16.2. rebelled against their Prince; but God avenger of their folly,
caused the earth to open her mouth, and to swallow them up alive with their
families, Nad^^, and Abihu, his own Nephews, because they had not obeyed him,
were consumed with their f^llowes by fire, that went out from the Altar, Levit.
10.2. and his own sister Marie, for speaking undis^reetly of him, was by the
Lord infect^d wi^h lep^osie, what shall we say of Abisha^, and Absalom,
against King David, the History of whose destruction and confusion is so well
known, that we need not insist upon it.

But here are yet very express words. Exodus 22.28. Thou shall not rail upon
the Judges, neither speak evil of the ruler of thy people. And Acts 23. Thou
shall not speak ill of thy Prince, of him that governs thee.

But because these laws and examples like waves of the Sea follow one another,
we will insist on the consideration of the horror of this crime, which cannot
take place in a soul never so little endued with heavenly graces; for that
heart must be desperately wicked, and that soul possessed with a thousand
furies, that suffers the least thought of it to harbor in his will; that
soul, I say, must not only be void of reason, but worse then bruit beasts,
who without contradiction follow and obey their Kings: The birds yield to the
Eagle, the fishes follow the Dolphin, and the beasts are pliant and humble
before the Lion; and should man that is made after Go^s image, be worse then
all other living creatures? This is to be neither man nor beast, but the
offspring of those abominable spirits, which rebelled in heaven against God,
and therefore received the punishment due to their foolish ambition in hell;
but we will no longer stay our contemplation about these de^estable men,
hoping that our age is not so unhappy as to be corr^pted by them.

But we will now speak of the reward, profit, and recompense, which those
shall certainly receive that obey this commandment of God, in honoring the
King.

All the Interpreters of the law of God, with one consent agree, that the first
commandment of the second table, to wit, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, is
to be understood of all them that have any power or dominion over us, and
chiefly of Kings, and Princes, to whom we are subject, and to whom we owe
both our lives and goods; and besides, that all the Fathers are of that
opinion, yet we also see it proved in the 13. Chap. to the Romans, where the
Apostle teaching the faithful all the laws which they must observe; he
runs over all the Commandments of God, and yet speaks not of this word
Father, because he comprehends it sufficiently under that of King, because
the Father is King in his Family, and the King is the Father of his people.

As for that objection, that th^re is no mention made of a King in the
Decalogue, the reason is clear and manifest; first, the Israelites had no
need of it, because God did every day appear visibly unto them, spoke to them
at all times, and wrought continually so many miracles among them, that they
could not be doubtful of his presence: secondly, there is no mention made
neither of Governor, nor of Prince, and yet it is unlikely that God had
forgotten Moses, who had delivered them, before God wrote the Law with his own
finger on the mountain of Sinai; but the reason is, that by the word Father,
God understands, as well Kings and Princes, as those that have begotten us;
all the curses made against the rebellious, and disobedient to this
commandment, are common both to the rebellious to their Prince, and to the
disobedient to their Father; as on the contrary, those that are obedient to
both, shall be equally rewarded with the same blessing, and the promise made
to them by God, who do honor their parents, is also to be extended to those
who honor their Kings, and Princes, which promise is happiness, and length of
days upon the land.

Which promise (though it often seem otherwise) is always fulfilled, for when
an obedient son to his father, or a faithful subject to his Prince dies
young, and in the flower of his age, God nevertheless accomplisheth his word,
and fulfilleth truly his promise; for if it be good for the faithful to
remain in the land, GOD will make him abundantly to prosper therein; but if
his admirable and incomprehensible providence, see that he should be sundry
ways grievously afflicted, he often times puts him in safety, and calls
him unto him in his mercy, and yet he is still as good as his word, as if a
man promised me a hundred pounds, and should give me three hundred, he
thereby breaks not his promise; so God having promised us here below the
possession of this world, and seeing that our dwelling in it is not for our
profit, bereaving us of this, he admits us into the incorruptible Kingdom
of glory, more excellent without comparison then the first, and so whether he
let us dwell here below, or whether he call us above to himself, we shall
always be in a most happy condition, if we obey his commandment, in Honoring
the King.

This word, and dignity of a King is so known, and familiar to all kind of
nations, that we should seem to light a candle at noone day* to see the light
of the Sun, if we should exactly seek out the definitions, and Ethymologies
of it.

We will only say with Saint Augustine in the City of God, that the name of
King is the auncientest title, given to the Governors, and Rul^rs of peoples,
yea, when the earth devoyd of all ambition, enjoyed the sweetness and felicity
of an inestimable peace.

For as Non minor est virtus, quam quaerere, parta t^eri, There is no less
virtue in conserving then in purchasing; so you see that the peaceablest of the
Ancients, have provided for their conservation in choosing Kings and Princes,
under whose shadow they enjoyed quiet rest, for the Kingdom being as a body,
the King must always be the head, which being seated on the top, and elevated
over the rest of the members, he fore-seeth the dangers to avoid them, and
con^idereth the advantages to embrace them.

Now as in the head is seen the glory, and beauty of man, according to these
ancient verses. Pronaque cum spectent animalia caetera ^erram,
Os homini sublime dedit, coelu^que tueri
Iussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.


All living creatures always behold the earth, but God has made and erected
man's face, that he might behold the heaven, and the stars; even so must we
consider the beauty of the subjects, in the Kings face and Majesty, as being
the head thereof.

As you see that all the senses both internal and external are seated, and
take their beginning from the head; so all the counsels, all the resolutions,
justice, the laws, in a word, all that is necessary for the Kingdoms
conservation, is all to be found in the King, as in his center, and in the
place whence they take their beginning.

Let us then examine particularly, since we have a Royal subject in hand, all
the circumstances, by which the King in comparison of his subjects, is just as
the head is over the rest of the members, wherein reason holds her Assizes
and Sessions, the better to govern this Microcosme, or little world.

The two chiefest and noblest faculties of the soul, are the Understanding,
and the Will* the same which we note in the soul, we may also mark to be in
the King, which is as it were the soul of the people, for as from the
understanding proceed the counsels, resolutions, and enterprises, needful for
the conservation of man's body; even so from the King proceeds the means, and
inventions for the right, and just government of his Realm* As by the Will,
we see that man accepts those things which are good, and rejects those
that are hurt^ull; even so the King by his wonderful prudence, and wisdom
seeks what is good, profitable to his subjects, and contrarily rejects and
preventeth whatsoever is hurtful and dangerous to them.

In a word, as all the parts of the body, and all the appetites of the soul,
stir according to the motion of the will; so the people should never have any
other desire, thought or intention, but the desire, thought, and design of
their King, who is the Lords anointed, sent by God to administer Justice, and
so govern his people in Equity, as the Psalmist speaks. Psalm. 46.10.

The hands of Kings are like that divine river, which compassed about the
Garden of Ed^n, and being* divided into four branches, communicated to the
herbs, and plants of that enclosure, a continual moisture, and which was
altogether most wonderful and miraculous, in that those four brooks, besides
the excellent sweetness of their water, were well stored, some with fine gold,
and others with precious stones.

With infinite right and reason, may we therefore compare the hands and actions
of Kings, to this undraynable spring and river of the earthly Paradise, sinc^
they are employed about nothing else, but lovingly to cherish and tender their
Subjects by liberally distributing, and communicating to them the means of
their subsistence and prosperity.

But least we should be carried away, by the swift stream of the many
several cogitations, which arise from so royal a subject, let us return to
our fo^mer discou^se, ^o wit, that the King being to his people, as the head is
to the rest of the body, all the rare and admirable parts contained therein, as
the internal and external senses, ought justly to be compared to him.

And first, that Sense by precedencie and excellenc^e, which the Philosophers
call Common, tha^ is, that which receives all the objects of the external
s^nses, to bring the species of them to the fantasy, and what is the King
el^e but this common sense, since he is profitable to all, he receives the
obj^cts, that is the wishes, and petitions of all, to conv^y them to the
phanta^ie, that is, to his imaginative and ma^ure deliberation, there to
con^ult and resolve, what is good, ^sefull, honest, needful, and profitable
for his ^^ppliants and people.

Le^ us now behold that golden head, as (...) expounding N^buch^dnez^a^s dream
calls him; Let us I say see how all the five external senses are very fitly
and properly appliable to him.

First, the King, the head of the people, has the sight, he possesses it in
the highest degree of perfection; he is like the Lion that never s^utteth his
eye lids; he sees all his kingdom, he beholds all his subjects; in a word,
he has eyes, Eagles eyes, which though soaring and flying in the highest
clouds, yet sees clearly in the lowest places of the earth.

His ears are always open, to hear the

He smells with an incredible content, the

He tastes what is good or evil, what is

H^e himself feels, he sets his hand to the

In a word, the time would fail us sooner then our conceptions upon so royal
a subject, full of admirable con^iderations, notwithstanding we will be
contented only with this.

As we see that all the members of the body take their nourishment, and receive
their sustenance by the mouth, which sends the food into the stomach, as
into a common storehouse, thence to be distributed according to every members
need^, from whence are first sent to the head, by a very remarkable gratitude
and acknowledgement, the best and most subtle, for the nourishment of the
brain, the seat of the understanding, the spring of the senses, and the cause
of his subsistence, so must the best and fairest of the Kingdom be reserved,
and dedicated to the Prince, which is the head and first mover thereof.

The examples of it are ye^ now a days familiar, that Kings and Princes give
their particular possessions to their Subjects, on condition of some yearly
acknowledgement, which they are obliged to, according to their agreement and
conventions.

Again, there is no Kingdom in the world but has been sometimes conquered,
and consequently all the lands thereof are absolutely in the Conquerours hand,
to dispose of at his pleasure; now i^ is the custom of a new and victorious
Prince, to bestow them on whom he pleases, always reserving to himself some
tribute, or homage for it, that the remembrance of his liberal favor may
never be forgotten.

Again, we read not that those which went to seek new habitations, did go
confusedly, and disorderly, and in equal authority, but they went all under
the colors and conduct of some chief, which afterward became the King and
Prince of that land, the which he distributed according to the deserts or
affection which he bare to his soldiers.

So we read Numb. 34* Chapter, that Eleazar and Ioshuah divided among the
Israelites the land of Canaan, which they had conquered by the sword, and yet
no mention is made that that valiant Captain Ioshuah, which had brought them
into that land flowing with milk and honey, reserved any portion thereof for
his share, for the which he had been questionless blamed by the Israelites,
had they not sufficiently known, that seeing he had put them in possession of
so large a territory, they were at his command.

The Apostles had nothing, and yet po^sessed all the riches of the faithful,
of whom they were as Kings and Princes, and therefore in sign of
acknowledgement, all the new Christians brought their goods to their feet, Acts
Chap. 5. for who would not despise all his wealth for love; if a man should
give all the substance of his house for love, they would greatly contemn it,
says Solomon, Cantic. 8.7.

But what horrible ingratitude would that be in him that should do otherwise,
seeing that pains, care, and unquietness follow commonly the Scepter, and
that there is no burden so heavy as a Crown, and the reason hereof is
manifest; to wit, that a private and particular man aymeth no further then to
his household bu^inesse, but the King must embrace all the affairs of his
Kingdom, he must care for all, and provide for all, which makes Salust say,
That a great Empire is always accompanied with great cares, and troublesome
labors, and with much anxiety, and vexation of mind.

Selcucus in Plutarke said, That if men knew how troublesome a thing it is to
govern a Kingdom, they would scorn to reach and take up a Diadem from the
ground; this was the cause why Numa at the first refu^ed the Kingdom offered
unto him by the Romans, but in the end overcome by their importunity, he
accepted it with grief, saying, That to reign was greatly to serve the gods,
thinking to deserve much from them, by taking upon him so heavy a burden.

In a word, let us say with Cassiodorus, that, Sub imperio boni principis,
omnium fortunae moresque proficiunt. Under a good Princes government, the goods
of all increase, and their manners are augmented and enriched in civility.

Now as in a fair meadowe enamelled, and beautified with a thousand different
kinds of flowers, one may find Serpents, Vipers, and Toades, which defile,
and infect by their mortal venom, the rich and natural Tapistry, the beauty,
goodness and virtue of an infinite number of Simples, and wholesome herbs,
wherewith it is richly diapred; So we see to our grief, that in the bosom
and midst of the fairest, richest, and most illustrious Kingdoms, the
corruption of the age, and the infection of vices, are produced and propagated.
Some Ravens, which go about presaging and foretelling their sinister and
lamentable predictions, who by their odious voice, (to them at least that have
good souls, and generous hea^ts and affections) cry out aloud, That it is the
facility and weakness of men, which has brought in this ambition of mastering
and governing the nations; That it is more by usurp^tion, then by election, or
by divine ordinance, that they have taken the rule and Empire over Kingdoms,
and they allege for proof of their saying, that the first King that ever was
in the world, to wit, Nimrod, come to the Crown by force and violence, and not
by the ordinance of God.

That all Empires (for the most part) were gotten by the sword, by force of
Arms, by deceit, by i^ju^tice, by a foolish and desperate ambition, that has
often covered the fields with slaughtered bodies, and made them overflowe with
blood, when one Prince offended and angry with another, sought to revenge
himself with the lives of his miserable subjects.

That the establishing of Monarchs is simply humane, alleging that of Saint
Peter, 1. Epistle 2. Chap ver. 13. Submit your selves un^o all manner of
ordi^ance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it ^e unto the King as unto the
Superior, or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent of him.

But these both ignorant and malicious Loyolites and Anabaptists, stop for the
nonce their ears, that they may not hear this loud resounding voice from
heaven, which convinces them of malice, and would recall them from their
ignorance.

Let us see if Solomon (like them) believed that Kingdoms fall by chance into
the hands of men, and that Kings are not expressly called and ordained of God to
govern his people; Now then (says he) O ye Kings, hearken, learn ye that
are Judges of the earth, hear ye that govern the nations, for power is given
unto you by the Lord, and principality by the most high.

And as we have already observed, Romans 13. the Apostle resolves so perfectly
this question, that it is impossible to say or add any thing after him,
unless one be resolved to sin against the holy Ghost, in resisting the
known truth, There is (says he) no power but from God, and those powers that
ar^, be ordained of God, therefore who so resists the power, resists the
ordinance of God, ye must be subject to the Prince, not for wrath only, but
also for conscience sake, Romans 13.5.

And as God sent such blindness on the Philistims, thi^king to overcome and
destroy the Armies of Israel, that every one turned his sword against his
fellow, and so flewe one another, the people of God being a^ the most but
beholders of their deliverance; Even so our adversaries having marshalled a
squadron of reasons against us, before we thought upon our own defense, to
enter into combat with them, have cut one another throat, and have left us
their Arms to make trophies for this our victory; for ^hinking to make a
buckler for their defense of that place of S. Peter, where he exhorts us to
bear the yoke, and to submit our selves unto all manner of ordi^ance of man
for the Lords sake, whether it be to the King or Supreme, 1. Pet. 2.13. This
reason kills them, for if it be for the Lords sake, that we must be subject,
it argues that God likes it, delights in it; and this order is by his
command and special ordinance.

Although Nabuchadnezzer King of Babylon, were one of the most wicked and
impious men of the earth, yet let us hear how the Prophet Daniel speaks to
him, in the second Chapter of his Prophesies, O King, thou art the King of
Kings, for the God of heaven has given thee a Kingdom, power, strength, and
glory.

But I would have these disturbers of the public tranquillity; these Adders
swelled and suffocated with the venom of sedition, and disorder, tell me,
whether Moses the first Prince and Law giver of Israel (the names change not
the things, for he was their King and Monarch, since he ruled them with an
absolute power, depending only from God) whether, I say, he entered by fo^ce,
by craft, or by art into the government of the people; and if it was not God
himself that spoke to him out of the midst of the burning bush, and
commanded him to go deliver his people from the hands of Pharaoh, Exodus 3.2.

If Saul thought to adorn his head with a Crown, when he sought about the
fields the Asses of ^is his father, if he made suit to Samuel to anoint him
King over all Israel;

If David when he fed his flock, meditated how he might change his Shepherds
crook into a regal Scepter;

If Solomon his son, the King of wise men, and the wisest of Kings, has
deceived or corrupted the people, to enter by the windows, or back gate into
the kingly Palace.

But rather is it not God himself, who by his sacred mouth commanded Samuel in
the 9. Chapter of his book, as soon as he had seen Saul that went to enquire
of him about his Fathers Asses, at the same time God said unto him, This is the
man of whom I spoke unto thee, he shall rule over my people.

And in the 16. Chapter of the same book, God commanded him to go to
Bethlehem, to anoint David, whom he chose among all his brethren, the Lord
saying unto him, Arise and anoint him, for this is h^.

In the same book, God promises Davi^ to confirm his son upon his Throne.

And in the 1. of Kings, Chap. 3. God appeared to Solomon in a dream in
Gabaon, presently after his Coronation, and said unto him, Ask what thou will,
that I give thee; A sufficient testimony, that God was well pleased with his
ascending to the Royal throne, and Solomon asking of him only wisdom to
govern his people, God said, Because thou have not asked of me riches, glory,
nor power, I will give thee what thou ask me, and other things besides.

We read 2. Kings, Chapter 9. that Heliseus sends one of the children of
the Prophets to Iehu, one of Ahabs Captains, to anoint him from the Lord King
over Israel And Psalm. 75.7. To come to preferment is neither from the East, nor
from the West, nor from the South, but God is the Judge, he it is that humbles
and exalts.

And ^salm. 113.7 The Lord raises the needy out of the dust, and lifts up
the poor out of the dung, that he may set him with the Princes, even with the
Princes of his people: We might allege many other examples, and proofs out
of Scripture; but these are sufficient to prove our assertion.

It is an erroneous and damnable opinion to hold, that Kings come to the Crown
by fraud, force, or succession, without the Divine providence and sacred
decree, Luke 12.74.
for one hair of our head falls not, without the providence of God, much
more a thing of so great a consequence, as the establishing of a King over the
Provinces of a Kingdom, and over so many millions of men, that are bound to
swear obedience to him. I say not only, that his coming to the Crown is
ordered by Gods general providence; but moreover, that it is his special
intention and design, that made him ascend the Throne.

Let us hearken to the wisdom of GOD, Prove. Chapter 8. etc. after we shall
see if it be fraud, force, or succession, which are the causes, and ways, by
the which they ascend unto that dignity; By me (says Christ, true God,
coessentiall with his Father, under the name of that wisdom) Kings reign,
and Princes decree justice, By me Princes rule, and the Nobles, and all the
Judges of the earth.

The Prophet Isaiah speaks very pertinently and manifestly upon this subject,
Chap. 45.1. Thus says the Lord unto Cyrus his anointed, whose right hand I
have holden, to subdue nations before him, therefore will I weaken the loins
of Kings, and open the doors before him, and the gates shall not be shut; I
will go before thee, and make the cr^oked ways straight, I will break the
brazen doors, and burst the iron bars; I girded thee, though thou have not
known me.

The Prophet Jeremiah, Chap. 27. speaks so openly, that he alone is
sufficient to stop those profane and seditious mouths. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, I have given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, the King
of Babel, my servant, and all nations shall serve him, and his sonne^, and his
sons son, and the nation* and Kingdom which will not serve the same
Nebuchadnezzar King of Babel, and that put not their neck under the y^ake of
the King of Babel, the same nation will I visit (says the Lord) with the
sword, and with the famine, and with the pestilence, therefore hear not your
Prophets, nor your Southsayers, nor your dreamers, nor your inchanters, nor
your Sorcerers, which say unto you thus, Ye shall not serve the King of Babel,
for they prophecy a lie unto you, to cause you to go far from your land,
and that I should cast you out, and you should perish, but the nation that put
their necks under the yoke of the King of Babel, and serve him; those will I
let remain still in their own land, says the Lord, and they shall occupy
it, and dwell therein.

Words worthy of a great and profound consideration, and which totally desides,
and cuts off that question, which we now have in hand, for it is God himself
that speaks to his people, that strictly charge them to obey the King of
Babylon, into whose hands he had delivered them; and although he was an
Idolatrous and unfaithful King, yet they will obey him, on pain of his curse
and malediction; what judgments, what punishments should we much more cause to
fall upon us, if the least thought of rebellion, or disobedience to the Lords
anointed should enter into our minds, if we were not perfectly obedient to
Kings, who are good, faithful, and zealous to further the glory of God, if our
hearts and our mouths be not always filled with prayers, and vows d^dicated
to their service.

But to the end that imitating Hercules, we may cleanse and sweep clean this
Augean stable, we will answer to that objection propounded touching Nimrod,
who has been the first King of the earth, who (say they) has attained to the
crown by force, and by violence, words which we find not in the Scripture;
but contrarily we read, Genes. 10.8. that C^sh begat Nimrod, who began to be
mighty in the earth, he was a mighty Hunter before the Lord. These words will
never oblige us to conclude, that he has raised himself violently; but we
may more truly expound the words, He was mighty before the Lord, that is, he
was lifted up to greatness by the most High, he walked in his ways, and
followed his ordinances; and when Moses says, that he began to be mighty in
the earth, he means, that he was more feared then his predecessors, who
were also Kings, Priests, and sovereign Princes of their families: For after
the general deluge, which overflowed the whole earth, men lived commonly five
or six hundred years, and so one of his posterity might see above a hundred
thousand persons, over whom he was Prince, and sovereign Monarch, because
there was then no other form of government in the earth; so we read Genes.
23. Chap. that the Hittites, of whom Abraham asked a Sepulcher to bury Sara,
these I say called him a Prince of God, or a most excellent Prince, which he
clearly manifested at the overthrow of the five Kings, which had beaten the
King of Sodom, had pillaged the Town, and carried away his Nephew Lot
prisoner, for at the rumor of these sorrowful news, he armed three hundred
and eighteen of his servants borne in his house, and yet had no children, Genesis
14.

It is then in vain to allege, that violence, craft, and hereditary
succession, are the only means to attain to Crowns; for although some
attain to it by humane means, and sometimes by dangerous ways, as Absalom,
who caused himself to be anointed King by expelling his Father, as Abimelech
by the death of 70 of his brethren upon the same stone; yet for all these ways
to come to reign, are never brought to pass, without a manifest foresight,
and providence of God, permitting it sometimes to punish those peoples, and
sometimes for a punishment to the Kings that reign over them; yet whatsoever
they be, God commands us to obey, and perfectly to honor them: now cursed,
cursed be he that shall resist the will of God, and that shall not obey his
commandments.

After we have heard both Scripture, and reason, manifestly evincing the truth,
Let us now hear Saint Augustines opinion in this matter, in his book De
civit. Dei. The cause (says he) of the greatness of Empires, is neither
casual, nor fatal, it comes neither by chance, nor by destiny; By chance I
understand (says he) the things that happen; we not being able to know the
causes of them, or that happen without any premeditated order of reason,
assisting their conception and birth: By fatal things I understand (as Pagans
esteem) what happens without the will of God, and men, by the necessity of
some particular order; which opinion is greatly injurious to Gods divine
providence, but rather we must certainly believe, that Kingdoms are
constituted, and established simply, and absolutely by the divine providence of
God.

And in another place, Let us not attribute the power of giving, or disposing
of an Empire, but only to the true God, that gives eternal happiness in
heaven to his children only; but for earthly Kingdoms, he gives them to good
and bad, as it seems good to him, as it pleases him, who is delighted in no
unjust thing; therefore this true and only God, that always provideth
mankind, both with aid and counsel, when he would, and as long as he
pleased, has given the government, and Empire to the people of Rome; he is
the giver of all felicity, that gives earthly Kingdoms to whom he pleases,
and yet always with justice and reason, though the means seem to us
oftentimes manifestly contrary to both.

I think we have employed too much time, and too many good weapons, to fight
against this horrible monster, and monstrous Hydra, and therefore the shortest
and surest way, is to follow the example of that valiant Hercules, and so to
cut off this monster, for he that will not hear the Scripture, so manifestly
showing unto us our duty to our Kings, that so expressly commands us to yield
unto them all obedience, he that stops his ears to those sweet and most
gracious invitations of reason, and natural inclination, to honor and serve
him, whom the bounty and will of GOD has established over us; He who watches
in labor, to make us sleep in rest; He who sits on the throne to do us
right, that to ease us, bears the burden of all ou^ affairs; and in a word,
He whose mind is always in trouble and anxiety, to preserve the quietness
of his people, and to keep off the invasion and tyranny of Strangers; those
Subjects, I say, are worthy of all the misfortunes, disasters, and calamities
which can happen, through the privation of so good things.

But we, who by the grace of GOD are brought up in his School, that together
with our mothers milk have sucked the honor, service, and obedience which we
owe to our Kings and Princes; Let us not suffer those wicked and dangerous
plagues, to infect the purity of our hearts, and let not the whiteness of our
souls be spotted and defiled, by so black and venomous a crime, assuring our
selves, that the least thought of disobedience and rebellion, which possesses
the mind; besides, that it is an evident token of an ungodly mind, is worthy
of the most severe punishments that can be imagined.

But let us show, that we are begotten among the children of GOD, and
regenerated by the Spirit of his grace, let our ambition never fly higher then
to the execution of his sacred commandments, wherein lies the fullness and
center of all delights, and of all felicity both spiritual and temporal, and
since particularly he desires, that we should fear him, and honor the King,
which he has established over us, seeing that in the accomplishment, and
fulfilling of these two commandments, we have as it were the sum of all his
law; let us be careful to honor and serve him, and to yield unto him all
sorts of duties, for he is the Lords anointed, assuring our selves, that
whilst we shall study to yield unto him due ob^dience, whilst we pray
fervently for his long life, and prosperity, as we are in duty bound, God for
his part will make good unto us his promises; to wit, to make us enjoy a
delightful rest, and an admirable contentment, to bless the land wherein we
dwell, to multiply our days upon it, in joy and felicity, and after we shall
have served, obeyed, and and honored the King, he will call us unto eternal
felicity, to crown us with the incorruptible Crown of glory, that seated with
the 24 Elders, in the Revelation, we may with them cast down our crowns
before him, who is set on the Throne, to sing before him altogether: O Lord,
thou art worthy to receive honor, blessing, and glory; to thee therefore, O
eternal, immortal, admirable, to thee only wise God, Creator of all things,
be ascribed all honor, glory, and magnificence, now and for evermore. Amen,
Amen.

O Almighty God, and sovereign Monarch of the whole world, who have by thy
incomprehensible virtue created all things, both in heaven and earth, that by
thy foresight and wonderful providence, do conduct and govern with so
great wisdom, and with so beautiful, good, and just order, all thy
creatures, that the contemplation thereof ravisheth us in admiration, and
forces the wicked and Atheists to confess, that the disposition so admirable
of the stars, the swift motions of the heavens, the constant diversity of the
seasons, happen not by chance, nor hazard, but that there must be some first
and Sovereign mover, to turn those great Spheres, some great Captain, to set
in order the whole host of heaven, and to make the seasons march in their
order; this order I say so exactly observed, opens thy childrens mouths, and
makes them say with the Royal Prophet David, The heavens declare the glory of
God, and the firmament shows his handy work.

Of God of peace, that hate confusion, and disorder, grant us (if such be
thy good pleasure) the grace to obey thy laws, and to follow in all things thy
holy and divine ordinances, and since thou show here unto us one of the
ways, leading to the mountain of thy holiness, to the spiritual Jerusalem,
to wit, this commandment which thou make here unto us, to Honor our King:
give us the grace, O loving and gracious Father, that we may perfectly perform
it, that our eyes may be always turned toward the Lords anointed, that our
ears may be always open, to receive and obey his commandments, that our
mouths may be always filled with his praises, that our hearts may be always
enflamed with zeal, to his service, to testify unto him on all occasions our
most humble obedience, that after we have here below been faithful subjects,
we may be crowned above in heaven, with the incorruptible crown of glory.
Amen.

FINIS.

