The second part of the co^futacion of Tyndals answer In which is also
confuted the church that Tyndale deuyseth.

And the church also that friar Barns deuyseth.

Made by sir Th^mas More knight.

Prentyd at London By wyllyam Rastell.

1533

CVM PRIVILEGIO.

The fourth book,
whyther the church can err.
Tyndale. THere is a another question, whyther the church may err. Which if
ye understand of the pope and his generacyon / is verily as hard a questyon
as to ask


More. WHo would not now wene that this man had a plain clear open cause and
easy to defend / when that even in y^ beginning in so few words, he
concludes all the matter at onys / and that with ensamples so plain and
euydent, that every man must nedys agree them to be trew^ But when ye shall
again se, that his ensamples are no more

For here would I wit what thing Tyndale means, by the pope and popys
generacyon. If he mean his carnal kynredde, or the pope and his cardynallys
either: he then wynketh of wylynesse, and will not se the mark. For he knows
very well y^ neither of these is the thing that we call the church, when we
speak of the catholyke

If he mean by the pope and his generacyon, all the crystens nacyons not
being cut of nor cast out for their obstynate malice, nor of wylfulnesse
departing out by sedycyouse scysmes: then sees he y^ mark at the least wise.
But then while he says that all these nacyons may and has all this.viii.
hundred year, so entyerly fallen in to heresies and dampnable errors, that by
all this.viii. hundred years last passed unto Luthers days, nor yet unto this
day neither, there has been no one known congregacyon any where, wherein y^
professynge of the very right catholyke faith of Christ has been so surely
kept, that yt might there be surely learned and known: then I say Tyndale is
as blind as he that lacks both his eyes / ^atth. 28.
where he commanded that who so would not here the church, Matthew. 1^.
should be reputed and taken as Paynyms and Publicans / and in many a plain
text of scripture mo, as I have before showed, as well in my dyaloge as mine
other three formar books of this present work, and yet hereafter shall forther.

Moreover, if Tyndale say that all this known corpse of crystendome, have all
these.viii. hundred year ben in a wrong bylyefe / where has been all this
while the right congregacyon of Tyndals church, that has h^^ the true
bylyefe? And let him tell us then, which congregacyon

If he say that it has been among these, and was in this church but not of
this church / but they have lurked there a few faithful folk, among the
great many multitude of the faythlesse, and have ever been to the world and
outward syghte of man unknown / not so much known as one of them to another,
but yet very well known to god: to this, besides that if they have lain all
this while lurkynge therein, they have be then idolatres by their own
judgment, in image service and prayeng to

For if he say that we need no known company, but every man may read the
scripture him self: every man he woteth well can not read, nor every man
understand it though he have it in his own tongue / but by the redynge without
a reder, may soon fall into the dampnable error of Arrius, Heluidius, and
many a another heretyke mo / which of the scripture through their own pride
took occasyon of their heresies.

If he then say that of that unknown congregacyon, as now Tyndale does, he
may be soon controlled,

And whereby can we be sure that his techynge which is accusyd, is false and
theyrs true that correct him / but by that we be sure that the comen faith of
the catholyke church is true / and that the catholyke known church can not
err in that faith, which from hand to hand has been taken and kept from
Crystes days and his apostles hitherto. which faith must needs be true by
Crystes promise made unto his apostles, as teachers of his church, and not for
them self but for his church / that is to wit, Matthew. 16.
the faith that saint Peter professed should not fail, and that god would be
with them all days unto the end of the world. Matthew. 28.
And that the faith of the known

These things and many other makes us sure, that the prechour which prechyth
against the faith of this congregacyon is a false prechour, and a false
wryther and wrester of holy scripture / how solempnely so ever he paynte yt.

And if we were not sure by these means, that the faith

But then must I says Tyndale, try him by ye truth of scripture. what if I
be unlearned? what if I can read and have it in my langage, and yet understand
it but sle^derly? what if I be well learned, and the false prechour as well
learned

And that this is true shall much the better apere when we well examyne and
consider what congregacyon Tyndale calls the catholyke chyrch^.


Tyndale. I say that Crystes elect church is the hole multitude of all
repentyng sinners that believe in Christ, and put all their trust and
confidence in the mercy of god / feeling in their hearts that god for Crystes
sake loves them and will be or rather is merciful unto them, and forgyueth
them their sins of which they repent / and that he forgyueth them also all
the mocyons unto sin, of the which they fe^e lest they should thereby be
drawn into sin again. And this faith they have without all respect of
their


More. Now has Tyndale here defyned and descrybed us what he called the
church. And for as myche as his tytell is of his chapyter, the questyon
whyther the church can ^rre / and that he now for the clerynge of the
questyon, declares that there be two chyrches, the tone which he says that
we take for the ch^^^he which he calls the pope and his genera^yo^, and
say^^ that there is no dowte but that church bo^^e may ^rre and in deed so
does / and the the other church ^hy^he hy^sel^e calls the very church; is
this y^ he now defyn^th: it would some that he would afferme that this church
which him self descrybeth,

wherefore to the end ye may the better understand where about he goes / and
that he longs to le^e us in derkenesse, and feed us forth with his high
solemn folyes that he would were not understood: let us a little examyne
the partys of his dyffynycyon and descrypcyon of the church.

where he says that Crystes elect church, is the hole multitude of all
repentaunt sinners, that have the condycyons Ioha^. 15. Ioha^. 6.
Have I not elected and chosen you twelve, and one of you is a devil: or else
that he mean by the elect church the church of the fynall electes and
predestynates to glory, being there unto predestynate in the prescience and
purpose of god before the creacyon

This point whyther he mean that his hole multitude of repenting synners^ ^e
the tone elect church or y^ the other, has he not exp^e^^ed / but h^th left us
at large to guess and arede upon (...) derke rydles after following, which of
these two (...) m^ane^h. How be it for awght that I can se his descrypcyo^
^greeth with neither of them bothe^

For as for y^ first ^y^de of elec^yon, after which Christ has chosen his
cat^o^^ke chy^che out o^ the Iewys and Gentyls to be his c^^^che herein (...)
this kind (...) there penyt^ntes and i^pe^ytentes ^^the. For penite^^es are
accounted among ^he good / and in ^hys ^^y^che ^e Matthew. 13. Matt^. 1^^
and also the net with fysshes good and badde / and the scripture shows by
the arch of Noe with bestes clean and unclean / and Christ with his aforesaid
words to his apostles: Ioha^. 6.
Have I not chosen you twelve and one of you is a devil.

Now as for y^ elect church of predestynates if he speak thereof, as it may be
verifyed in every time sith it began as he must if he speak to the purpose /
then are there therein accounted not only repe^tyng sinners, but sinners also,
some yt yet repent them not, and some also yt never did the thing whereof they
should repent / as was our blessed lady while she lived here, and our savior
him self also for any syn

yet are there also in this church of electes many that never came to the
faith, but are yet enmyes there unto / as Jews, Saracenes, or Turks, not yet
converted unto y^ faith. And therefore this elect church will in no wise agree
with the dyffynycyon or descrypcyon of Tyndale. I

How be yt we shall guess at his mind as nere as we can and make the best of
his matter / and then se whyther the best be able to stande^ He may seem to
mean by Crystes elect church of his descrypcyon^ a part of the elect
church of the second manner / that is to wit as many thereof as be repentaunt
sinners with those other condicyons that are expressed in his des^rypcyon. For
other then this I can not deuyne what he should mean. But then as those
repentaunt sinners be a part of the church predestynate / so be they a part
of this catholyke church here mylytau^t after the fy^st kind of eleccyon, in
which are both good and bad / of which hole number the good are y^ tone part.

yet leueth he us after this way in a another dowt / whyther

And finally for all that ever he says / he leueth it in dowte whyther his
repentaunt sinners, sith he grants

Of all these dowtes the more part he never moves /

But in the mean while this ye se, that how so ever he mean by the elect
church of his repentau^te sinners, with all the felyng faith that he can frame
thereto: yet sith men can never know which be they, there can no man have any
suretye by that church of the true doctrine of god / no more then a man could
by that unknown church know which is the true scripture of god. And
therefore is this elect church of Tyndals descrypcyon devised only to

But yet that it can not only do no good, but is also dremed out by him to do
myche harm: ye shall plainly perceive, if ye consider what repentance and
what faith he means. For these words will sown very well in the erys of
such simple souls, as do not while they read them consider what manner things
Tyndale means by them, and what thing he calls repentance and byleuyng in
Christ with a felyng faith. But on the the other side / he that consydereth that
Tyndale would have us so to believe in Christ, that we should set his holy
sacraments at naught, and that we should believe that all christian people have
hitherto byleued wrong, that have byleued that men ought

And also when he hereth him so sayntly speak of repenting / and then
consydereth that he would have us rep^nt that ever we were shryuen (for shryfte
he calls the false inuencyon of Satan) and would have us also to be such as
repent that ever they were of the right bylefe, and such as would have freres
and nonnes repent their relygyon

Now am I glad yet that he comes forth with repentance, at the least wise one
way or other. For faith alone was wont to do all through all a mannys life. And
when it was proved them by plain and euydent scripture, that 1. Cor. 13.
Iacobi. 2.
and defend their words only by words against all reason, and against the
plain words of god not unwritten which they set not by, but the very written
words in plain and euydent scryptures, for all that they say they believe no
thing else. And in that point I believe them well and in more to. For where
they say that they believe nothing but scripture, I think they say true / for
they believe no thing beside the scripture, nor yet the scripture neither, as
their own wrytynges do full clearly declare.

But now sith they say still that faith alone suffyseth,

Nor this point will never be well patched with his feeling faith and
hystorycall, as ye shall hereafter here when we come to the chapyter.

But yet again in the mean while, because he speaks of repentaunt sinners,
that they make the elect church of Christ: I would wit of him whyther one
part of repenting Io^^. 16.
that who so here and believe his church, may be sure that he can not be
deceived / but that if a false techer would led men out of the right faith, the
church of Christ shall reprove him and condemn him, and put the people in
certentye. 1. Ti^^^^. ^.
For which cause saint Poule says that the church is the fyrme
^tablyssh^mente

But then says Tyndale, that it is true that there is all suretye in the
church of Christ. But he says that the chyrch^ of Christ is only the number
of repenting sinners, that have the feeling faith which him self descrybeth.
Then we ask him whereby shall a man know them, and be sure of them / so that
he may use them for his sure and vndoutable judges between the two contrary
preachers, of which the tone is true the the other false.

It makes no matter says he, though ye know them not. How shall I then be
put in surety by them, but if I know that they be the church with whom god
promised to leave his holy spyryte / and whom he wylled every man

Now then if he say true / it is impossyble for me to

Then if he walk as it were in a mase, and come to the first point again,
and say it forcheth not, for they shall be decerned by the scripture it self:
that gappe have I so stopped all ready, that he shall stycke still at a stake
and rest his bones in y^ busshes ere ever he get out there. wherefore when he
shall se him self unable to defend his own chosen unknown church, in y^
point in which it should specially serve, that is for y^ sure techyng of the
true faith: he shall then find none other shyft, but to look whyther he might
make the catholyke known church to fall in the like defawte / and shall ask
us how we do know the true church of Christ, by whose doctrine we may be sure
of the right

This catholyke known church is that mystycall body be it never so syke,
whereof the pryncypall head is Christ. Of which body whyther the successor of
saint Peter be his vycar general and head under him, as all christian nacyons
Psalmo. 67.
by ledyng the^ in to the consent of every necessary troth of reveled faith,
be they in condycyo^s and manners never so syke, as long as they be comfortable
and content in unity of faith, to cleue unto ye body.

Of this church can we not be deceived, nor of the right faith can we not be
deceived while we cleue to this chirch / sith this church is it in to which god
has given his spyryt of faith, and in this chirch both good and bad profess
one faith. For if any profess the contrary faith, be it any one man or any one
country: they be controlled, noted, and rep^ou^d

psent work, well and plainly proved you: yet shall I finally before I
fynysshe this work by such clear open

But now consider in the mean while, that Tyndals dyffynycyon or descrypcyon
of the church, by which he calls it the number of all repenting sinners with
all his other co^dycyons adjoined thereunto / is first full of darkness. And
when it is opened ^ it agreed neither with one church nor other. And yet is it
by another point of his own false doctrine, utterly destroyed. For he techeth
plainly, that who so ever do after baptysme sin onys of purpose wyllyngly,
and not only of wekenes and infyrmyte, he shall never be saved / but all his
repe^tau^ce after, though he trust never so myche in god, and have after never
so sure faith in


Tyndale. This faith have they without all respect of their own deservings /
ye and for none other cause, then that the merciful truth of god the father


More. I dowte not good reders but ye remember well, that all the doctrine of
Crystes church is full of warning, that no man should put a proud trust and
confydence in his own wurkes, nor onys think that he can of him self alone
without gods gracious help, do any good wurke at all / and great cause has
to fere and mystruste all his own works, for imperfect cyrcumstaunces seldom
perceived by him self. And also that in all that a man may do he does but his
only duty / and that the best work were naught worth to heuenwarde of the
nature of the work yt self, ne were it for the lyberall goods of god, y^

And therefore it ^^pereth well that Tyndale varyeth not with us for so far /
but that he means a far forther thing, where he says that the elect
church trusts so utterly to be forgeuyn all sin and mocyons unto sin,
without any respect of their own deseruyng / and plainly means therein (as
in other places also he plainly declares him self, which I have in my
formar books proved and reproved) not only that men should not need, but also
that it were sin to go about any good wurke wroughte

To this point comes Tyndals holy feeling faith, that feleth always full
forgyuenesse, without any regard or respect of mannys own endeuour^ deserve
it. This false feeling faith has Tyndale taken of Luther / when he and all the
rabble of their sect say, that faith of necessyte brings forth good wurkes,
as the fruit of the tree of faith. And yet they say ye good wurkes be naught
worth and thereby make they y^ tree of faith little better. For what good tree can
yt be, whereof ye good fruit is naught worth.

But Tyndale and Luther both lie loud in both the points. For both may a
man have the right faith idle and workelesse, and therefore deed and frutelesse.
Deed I Ecc^^^ias^icae. 3.
when it says that as the water quenches fire, so does almoyse deed avoid
sin / and except our savior him self say false, where he says, ^uc^. 11.
Give your superfluouse substance in almoyse, and then lo are ye all clean.
And in like wise where he promyseth reward in heaven in sundry plain places of
scripture, M^t^^. 1^.
for good wurkes done here in earth. ^uc^. 1^.


Now if Tyndale answer, that the good works be nothing worth of them self,
nor without faith, as he answers me in his answer to ye third book of my
dyaloge: then may every child se that he is dreuen to the hard Roma. 8.
the passions of this world be not worthy to win the glory to come, that
shall be showed upon us.

And if he say that good works be naught worth, because they be naught worth
without faith / so might he as well say ye faith were naught worth, because it
is naught worth without cheryte. So that ye may plainly se that he seeks
nothing but shyftes / which will yet serve of naught when he has all
together done.

For ye may finally perceive, that though every man may well fere that the
works which him self has done seemed they never so good, were yet for some
lack upon his part in y^ doing, so vnperfyt in the deep secret sight of
god, that they were unworthy to serve him or be any thing rewarded / and also
that were they never so pure and perfyt, they were not yet worthy ^uche reward
but of gods lyberall goodness: yet is it a very false faith and a pestylent
heresye, to believe as Tyndale here techeth us, y^ god will save such as may
work without any respect or regard unto their deseruynge / as though he
rought not whyther they did good or ill, but will save all such as him list
do they what they list, only because him list / and that him self so
lysteth for none other cause, but

For surely, neither is the promise the cause as I have in mine other book
showed / but ye goodness of god which caused him so to promise. Nor also he
has not so sworn nor so promised neither, that he will save man without any
regard of good wurkes / but has both promised and sworn the clean contrary,
that but if we wurke well if we may, Psalmo. 10^.
or repent that we did not and be in purpose to do / else shall our faith
stand us in little stead, Matthei. 25.
but greatly aggreue and increase the pain of our dampnacyon. And now that
his faith is proved very plain false and faythlesse / it is a world to se how
ryally he runs forth in the praise, as though it were proved true.


And this faith and knowledge is everlasting life / and by this we be borne a
new, and made the sons of god, and obtain forgyuenesse of sins, and are
translated from death to life, and from the wrath of god unto his love and
favor. And this faith is the mother of all troth, and brings wy^h her the
spyryte of all truth, which spyryte purges us as from all sy^^e, even so from
all lies and error noisome and hurt^ull. An^ this f^yth is the fundacyon laid
of the apostles and prophets, whereon Paull says Ephe. 2. that we are bylte,
and thereby of the howseholde of god. And this faith is the rock whereon Christ
bylte his congregacyon.


More. Lo what a praise he has made you of this faith, that feleth that folk
should need to do no good works. How

Now wot ye well that no good man can deny, but that for lack of such wurkes
men shall be dampened, as Christ says him self in the gospel. Matt^. 25.
And hard it were that the good nature of god being more ready to reward then
to punysshe / would punysshe us for the lacking and not reward Matt^. 25.
that he shall give men heaven for their almoyse ded.

But Tyndale as he denies the tone, so denies he the the other to, and with some
fond gloss will avoid the gospel and all / and then goo boldly forth with
his faith and boste it, and say this faith and knowledge is everlasting life.
But all faithful folk will say again, this faith and knowledge is
everlasting death. For this faith has Luther and friar Huskyn both, and yet
be far from everlasting life. For bysyde that abomynable heresye it self,
against all regard of good wurkes / they be not agreed in bylyefe concerning
the sacrament of the awter / the tone byleuynge it to be very bread ^ the
the other no thing loweth else but bread, and false both twain. And Tyndale
follows 1. Timoth. 5.
that is to wit their faith given to god in their vow of abstynence from all
carnal knowledge of man / against which faith they would now wedde, and give
a second faith unto man in marriage. But now goth Tindale forth with his tale,
and would seem to prove it true by scripture.


Tyndale. Christ asked his apostles Matthew. 17. whom they took him for. And
Peter an^wered for them all saying, I say that thou art Christ the son of
the living god, that art come in to this world. That is, we believe that thou
art he that was promised unto Abraham, should come and bless us and deliver
us. How be it Peter yet wyste not by what means / but now it is opened through
out all the world, that through the offering of his body and blo^e


More. Here is it necessary that every wise reder mark well and consider, the
cause and purpose of Tyndale, in bryngyng in this confession of saint Peter's
faith / where he said thou art Christ the son of the living god, that art
comen

ye shall understand that Tyndale and his master Marten and his felowys, for
as myche as they be fallen from the right bylyef in many great artycles of our
faith / and considering that with such slender prouys as Tyndale brings for
his part, and thereto so plainly reproves, every good christian man yt any care
has of his own soul wylbe sore afraid to put it in iuperdye of dampnacyon
by falling in any point from the faith of Crystes hole catholyke church, for
the word of a fond wedded friar or any fond fellow of his: he deuyseth here
to take a way that fere, and to make m^n believe at the least wise, that so a
man believe the thing that Peter then confessed /

And hereafter in his other chapyter, how a christian man can not err and how he
may yet err / in that chapyter he says that the very christian men can not
err in any thing that should be against the promyses which are in Christ /
and in other things their errors be not unto dampnacyon, though they be never
so great. whereof he by and by puts ensample of the perpetual vyrginyte of
our lady / in the not bylyefe whereof he says that a man being led I am
(says Tyndale) therefore never the more saved, n^yther yet the less though she
had had / and in such like an hundredth that p^^^keth not a man's faith from
Christ, they might err and yet be never the less saved, though the contrary
were written in the gospel.

Lo here have I well-beloved readers, no thing let partly to repete again
his words written in his other chapyter before, partly to anticypate his
words written in his oath chapyter. After which words of his I have out of
both places taken into this / to the intent that all be it I partly have and
partly shall, touch them in their

But now that I have laid in effect all his hole opinion together as
towchynge the faith (saving his only dyfference and dyuysyon of hystorycall
faith and feeling faith, which I shall reserve unto his proper place) I shall a
little examyne this faith of his, that ye may look thereon in the light, and se
whyther it be suffycyent for your salvation or not.

First in this faith that saint Peter confessed is never

Now dowte I not but that Tyndale when he redeth this word, will well and
merely laugh thereat, and say no more there needs. For that faith will he say
will put out and quench the fire of purgatory clean.

Then will we ask him how will he laugh at the fire of hell / for of that fire
is there no thing spoken in that co^fessyon neither, but that he might for
all that confession wene well enough that there were none hell. If Tyndale will
say nay / for he must needs believe that the thing from which Christ the
son of the living god was comen into the world to redeem mankind, must
needs be hell / and that therefore Peter's confession includes of necessyte y^
bylyefe of hell: I answer Tyndale again that Limbus patrum though out of
pain, yet suspyrynge and syghynge after the syghte of god and joy of heaven /
and into such estate as children live in that dye vnbaptysed. which though
they enter not heuyn, because they dye the children of wrath vnreconcyled: yet
the merciful anger of god dreueth them not down into sensyble pain and to
the feeling of the infernal fire.

This faith might perad^enture s^ynte Peter have,



Therefore yt will be very hard (if impossyble be hard) for Tyndale to sustain
that the faith which saint Peter confessed than, were suffycyent to serve
every cryst^n man now. And therefore let no man take any boldness upon
Tyndales tale, to think as he would have him, that only the thing that Peter
there confessed were enough now to believe / and that in all other things that

Tyndale shall be constrained to come to this even by his own words, all be
it that he affermeth for fast and sure somewhat more then he may make good^
For he says that Peter meant by his words / we believe that thou art he that
was promised unto Abraam, should come and bless us and deliver us. And yet he
says, Peter wyste not by what means Christ should deliver us. But now it is
open he says through out all the world, that through the offering of his body
and blood.

Now if Peter at that time knew not the thing that must now needs be
byleued, upon pain of damnacion: ye may thereby se that the faith which
Peter confessed

Consider yet also that Tyndale agrees, that the very true christian of his
elect unknown church / do believe the article of the perpetual vyrginyte of
our lady as soon as they be taught it, and knowledge their formar error /
whereby he grants that he which does not so is no^e of the electes. Then
say I that theruppon it follows by his own words, that the article of the
perpetual virginyte of our lady is a necessary article of our faith.

And thus always must Tyndale upon his own words, confess that all the
artycles reveled ferther by Christ unto his church, must be byleued as
fermely as the faith taat was by Peter confessed / or else we be not only
dyscharged of the bylyefe of our ladies perpetual vyrginyte, which Tyndale is
now yet brought unware to grant for an article necessary sith it is now
taught and known / but also of the bylyefe of Crystes death, descencyon,
resurreccyon, ascencyon, and of the godhed of the holy ghost, with diverse
other necessary points mo.

But here it is to be considered, that saint Peter in co^fessynge Christ to be
the son of the living god / did confess the very point wheruppon all the
hole faith hangs. For in that point alone he confesses that all his Ioha^.
vltimo.
where as the scripture it self says that all was never written / nor will not
also believe and obaye Crystes church according to Crystes commandment / nor
will not so myche as know it, Matthew. 18.
Lucae. 10.
but fondely frames an unknown, whom he for lack of knowledge can neither
believe nor obaye: yt follows I say that Tyndale byleueth no piece of the faith
that saint Peter confessed. And so he does but pratle and prate of feeling
faith, without the feeling of any faith at all, or any true bylyefe
hystorycall or other.




Tyndale. That offering of Crystes body and blood, is a satisfaccyon for the
sin of all that repent, and a purchasing of what so ever they can ask to
keep them in favor, and that they sin no more.


More. Treuth is it that the passion of Christ and offering up of him self
unto his father upon the cross, is a satysfaccyon for the sin of all that
repent / so that we repent a right and effectually, by confession,
contrycyon, and by Matthei. 3.
not sleyght fruits, simple, and syngle, but fruits good, great, and worthy /
and yet not of them self worthy, but such as the satysfaccyon of Christ
makes worthy, without which we could no thing satysfye / but with which we
may, sith his pleasure is that we so should, and not so take his death for so
full satysfaccyon of all to gether, that we should therefore be careless and
slothful to do any penance our self for our own sin.

Tyndale will say to this that he can be content, that

Now is this teaching of Tyndale myche like, as though he would advise us, be
never the better because thou haste be naught, do never the better because
thou haste done evil, run never y^ faster forth in virtue, because thou
haste long sytten still in sin.

But saint Poule against Tyndals doctrine, ran forth the faster because he
began later, and took the more pain for the faith, because he had been a
persecutour of y^ faith. And though he never thought thus, if I had been sooner
converted I would have done less good: yet had he this Roma. 6
he would be the better / as him self counsayleth other, as ye have exhybyted
and given your members to serve vncl^nes and iniquyte, from iniquite to
iniquite / so now again exhibyte and give your members to serve ryghteousnes,
that ye may be sanctyfyed.


Tyndale. And Christ answered upon this rock I will byelde my congregacyon /
that is upon this faith. And against the rock of this faith, can no sin, no
hell, no devil, no lies, none error prevail. ^or what so ever any man has
committed / if he repent and come to this rock he is safe. And that this
faith is the only way by the which the church goes unto god, and unto the
enherytaunce of all his richesse / testyfye all the apostles and prophets, and
all the scripture with signs and miracles, and all the blood


More. Lo these words of Tyndale seem very gaye and gloryouse. But when ye
shall well examyne them / as gaye as the head glytereth with the pretexte of
Crystes own holy words, yet shall ye find the tail of his tale as poysened
as any serpent. For where he bosteth and says, Against the rock of this faith
can no sin, no hell, no devil, no lies, nor none error prevail / for what
so ever sin any man has committed, if he repent and come to this rock he is
safe: ye may not forgete that he means all way, that he which repents and
comes to the rock of this faith is safe for all his sins, without
confession

ye shall also consider that his tale hangs evil to gether / and the words
by which he proves that against the rock of this faith, there can no sin,
nor no devil, nor none error, prevail, do not prove that point no thing at
all. For though it were true that he says, that what so ever sin a man have
committed, if he repent and come to the rock of this faith he is saufe: yet
might the devil prevail against the rock of y^ faith / sith it might be that
the devil might bring a man having that faith in to a dedely sin that he
should happily never repent. And therefore if Tyndale will bost that the devil
can not

In like wise where he says that none error can prevail against y^ rock of
this faith, that saint Peter there confessed: I would feign wit whyther he
mean that who so ever onys believe it, can never fall fro that bylyefe, nor

Now if he mean in the secunde manner, that is to say that a man which has
that faith may fall therfro / but for all that the gatys of hell can not
prevail against any man that onys has it, because he that falls from it
shall be saufe if he repent his error and return again to it: if he mean
thus he says nothing to purpose, except he say which he shall never prove,
that who so have it and fall from it, shall be sure that he shall repent and
return again / for else the gates of hell may prevail against him for
lack of repenting and retournynge.

And then yet forther, if he say which he shall never prove that who so ever
onys have that faith, if he fall from

And thus good reders ye se that this man fares as one that walked barefote
upon a field full of thornys, that woteth not where to trede.

I would be very loath to myssetake him, or wyllyngly to let pass and
dyssymule any sense that he might mean in his own words, by which his
saying might be saved and be borne. But in good faith, I se no ferther thing
that he might po^syble mean in his words, y^ hell gates shall not prevail
against the roche of that faith, but this 1. Cor. 13.
that he may keep faith and yet fall from cheryte. which thing if Tyndale
gloss and say, that then his faith is deed, and a deed faith is no faith / and
that therefore while he keeps faith he can not sin, because that when he
synneth he kylleth his faith: I answer that though faith by sin wax deed, it
waxes not 1. Timoth. 5.
and is as saint Poule said of wanto^ wydowes, that the wydow which lives in
delyces is deed even while she lives.

But now if he mean but so, that faith is so strong of it self for our
salvation, that sin nor error can not prevail against it, because faith
will always prevail against them till some of them enter in and kill it: this
were a goodly boste of him to say, that the church be non^ but electes, and
all that be electes have the right bylyefe




Tyndale. That this faith is the only way, by the which the church of
Christ goth unto god, and unto the enherytaunce of all richesse / testyfye all
the apostles, and prophets, and all the scripture, with signs and miracles,
and all the blood of martyrs. And who so ever goth unto god and forgyuenesse
of sins or salvation, by any other way then this / the same is an heretyke
out of the right way and not of Crystes church.


More. Lo here be lusty high words either false or else of little effect.
For if he mean that no man may go to salvation by any other thing, without
this faith that ^aynte Peter professed / then be they true. But then are they
to no

Now if he mean not that way, but that we be plain heretykes and out of
Crystes church, if having that faith that saint Peter confessed, we go to
heuenwarde with any other thing bysyde then testyfye all the apostles and
prophets, and all the scripture and signs and miracles, and all the blood of
martyrs: then Tyndale is a stark

yet would I feign in good faith find and bring it

All be it that this will not very fully serve him, and also him self speaks
no thing of it: yet is this as help me god the best gloss that I can deuyse
for him. But now

And in deed, all be it him self shall for him self never find a better /
yet mine will not suffycyently serve him ^
ascrybe gods miracles to Belzabub, and call gods high meruelouse works
illusyons and wonders of the devil / as he calls all

This might one do that byleued Christ to be gods son, and to have redeemed
us also by his blood. And this does in deed both Tyndale and Marten his
master, which believe of Crystes words no more then is written / nor of the
written words no more then they list / and the remanaunt but as they list,
sith they draw them to what sense they list, against all the old holy
doctors, and all the church of Christ. And thus it appears yt neither my
gloss nor any gloss else, can save Tyndals tale from plain pestylent heresye
/ both in that he says there needs no more to be byleued, and also in that
he says that the bylyefe alone is suffycyente for salvation / and that yt is
heresye to say that bysyde the bylyefe, any man unto

But surely yt is hard for him to starte out fro these plain words of his
own: who so ever go to god by any other way, then this faith that saint
Peter confessed / the same is an heretyke out of the right way, and not of
Crystes church. For this is no more to say, but who so ever bysyde the bare
bylyefe, with as bare repenting, add confession, or for sin punysshe him

But now gothe he forth, not in the proof but in the praise, and says.


Tyndale. For this knowledge makes me a man of the church.


More. which knowledge? the knowledge that a man needs no mo artycles in his
faith now, then saint Peter confesses


Tyndale. The church is Crystes body Collos^. 1. And every person of the
church is a member of Christ. Ephe. 5. Now it is no member of Christ, that
has not Crystes spyryte in it / as it is no part of me nor member of my body,
wherein my soul is not present and quyckeneth it. And then if a man be none of
Crystes, he is not of the church.


More.

But now is he yet of this mind, that the faith which him self has
descrybed, is the thing that it onys gotten and had of any man / keeps in
the spyryte of god so fast in his heart, that he is surely a quycke member of
the church that is Crystes body / and that he can not lose that faith nor that
spyryte at any time after that he has onys gotten it / so that he have it as he
says in another chapyter after, felyngly and not only hystorycally.

And who so ever have not the faith that he descrybeth him, he rekeneth for an
heretyke / and only his faith for the true, and the byleuers thereof for the
true church.

Now his faith have ye herd often enough, that only Matthew. 16.
Thou art blessed Simon the son of Jonas, For flesh and blood has not
reveled this unto the, but my father that is in heuyn: so will he say to
Tyndale, for confessing of this false faith of his: Thou art accursed Tyndale
the son of the devil / for neither flesh nor blood has taught the these
heresies / but thyn own father the devil that is in hell.


Here ends the confutacyon of this chapyter of Tyndale, whyther the church
can err.
Here follows the next chapyter of Tyndale, in which he says that a true
member of Crystes church synneth not, and that he is yet a sinner.
Tyndale. How a true member of Crys^es church synneth not, and how he is yet
a sinner.


More. Now come we to the special point


Ferthermore, he that has this faith can not sin / and therefore he can not
be deceived with dampnable errors. For by this faith we be (as I say^e) borne
of god. Now he that is borne of god can not sin, for his seed dw^^^e^h in him
/ and he can not therefore sin by cause he is borne of god. I. John^. ^.
which seed is the holy ghost that keeps a man's heart from consenting unto
sin. And therefore it is a falls conclusyo^ that master More hol^eth, how that
a man may have a right faith joined with all kynd^s of abomyna^yon and sin.
And yet ^uery member of Crystes congregacyon is a sinner and synneth daily,
some more and some less. For it is written. 1. John^. 1. if we say we have no
sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. And again if we say
we have not sinned, we make him a liar and ^^s word is not in us. And Paul
Roma. 7. says that good which I w^^^e that do I not / but that evil which I
would not that do I. So it is not I t^^t


More.


Tyndale. Forthermore he that has this faith can not sin, and therefore can
not be deceived with damnable errors.


More. Here he tells us that no member of the elect church of his faith can
be deceived with any damnable error / and proves it by that none of the^ can
sin. And in deed it follows, he can not sin, ergo he can not be damnably
deceived, sith every damnable error is sin. But now let us se how he proves
his antecedent, that no man having that faith can sin. He proves it thus.


Tyndale. For by this faith we be borne of god. Now he that is borne of god can
not sin, for his seed dwells in him / and he can not therefore sin,
because he is borne of god, the.3. chapter of the first epistle of John^.
which seed is


More. Consider now good reader, that Tyndale tells us here three things, to
prove thereby that who so get onys the faith that saint Peter confessed can
never sin after.

The first is, that by that faith we be borne of god. The second is, that who
so is borne of god, has the seed of god in him.

The third is, that who so have the seed of god in him, can not sin.

Upon these three he concludes, that who so get onys that faith can never
sin after.

Let us now consider the first, where he says that by faith we be borne of
god. And therein dare we be bold to tell him, that though it be true that by
faith we be borne of god as he now says: yet is it false that by only faith
we be borne of god / as he falsely means, and in many places as falsely for
troth affermeth, where he would make us wene that because we be borne of god
and become his children by faith, we were therefore borne of god by only faith.
As wisely as if he would say, that because he was bygotten by his father / he
was therefore bygotten of his father only without any mother.

And this his folly him self so well perceyueth, that in many places he
laboreth to cover it with sophystycacyon,

And thus ye se that ye shall not need to be deceived by his first point, that
we be borne of god by faith.

His second point is, that every man being borne of

But yet is the seed of faith alone, that is to say the bylyefe alone, a very
great occasyon of retournynge to god at his calling again by the offer of
his grace, and thereby

Now if the seed of god in the christian man, be meant his grace by which men
come to faith, hope, and cheryte and do good works wythall, not without the
consent and applyeng of their own fre wylles thereto / such folk as have use
of reason workynge with god for their pore part toward their own salvation,
with the instrument yt god

Now if he mean by the seed of god, that the spyryte of god dwells in the
Christian man by any other special manner of dwelling, above such dwelling as he
dwells in other men by his power and presence of his godhed, then only by
his favor and grace / which other special manner if Tyndale mean any such, I
can not co^ceyue, sith I make Mat^he^. 8.
As did the people of Gerasens, which seeing Crystes miracle wrought upon the
mad man, out of whom he did cast the devil, because he drove the

yet god, when man has put him out of his dwelling / does of his great
goodness not always utterly leave him for his unkindness / but though if the
man dye ere god come in again, god shall of justice for his unkindness
Ap^calip. ^.
How be it a man may be so froward and obstynate in sin, and when he has
expelled god out of his heart, may dreue him with sin upon sin and
dispyghtfull cyrcu^stau^ces so far of fro the door, as some of these
heretykes do (which in dispyght of virtuous vows of chastyte, ru^ne out and
wedde no^nes and live in lechery / and in dispyght of y^ lenton fast, eat
flesh upon good friday / and in dyspyght of the blessed sacraments of ye
awter, cast the precious body of Christ out of the pyx) y^ god shall justly for
ye hougenes of their abominacio^ withdraw him

This point ye remember he proves, by the words of saint John^ in the third
chapyter of his first pystle. which pystle is undoubtedly one of the most
hard and dark places of all the new testament / and whereof sundry great
heresies have risen, and sundry mo there may, through

This way uses Tyndale universally, as well in every other thing yt he takes
in hand to prove, as in this point specially / y^ he which has onys the faith
can never sin, because he has ye seed of god dwelling in him. For where as
it is euydent and plain by clear and open textes of scripture, full and
plentuouse in every part thereof, that there is no man here (except some
special reuelacyon thereof) so sure of his own fynall salvation, nor of his
own present estate neither, but that he has good cause to fere and temper his

For he gathers and affermeth upon saint Iohn^s pystle, in his false
exposycyon, and also in his foresaid beginning

First that who so ever have onys the true faith, can never after sin of
malice or purpose / but that all the synnys that he can after fall unto, shall be
but of wek^nes and frayltye, be they murder, aduowtry, perjury, sacrylege,
inceste or treason, or any other abomynable deed be it never so detestable
sin.

Seco^dely yt of all such sins he that has onys at any time gotten ye faith,
shall have ever after the grace to repent.

And thyrdely yt at the bare repenting without shryfte or penance, he shall
have forthwyth forgiveness of all sin and pain / so that any satysfaccyon
shall not only no thing need, but is also as he says a dampnable thing to do
it, for hope or desire toward any remyssyon either

For in his exposycyon of ye first pystle of saint John^, he is come so much
ferther then ever he came before (as far as I remember) yt there like as I
have showed you before in the preface, he denies not only purgatory but also
all punysshement: here he techeth also that who so get onys the true faith,
which he calls the felyng faith, has a sure undoubted knowledge that he is in
the state of grace, and an elect that can never be dampened.

Now of these abomynable heresies what bold occasyo^

And to the proof of this pestylent heresye, he draws Hebr^. 6.
which places of them self all old holy doctors confess for dyffuse and
almost vnexplyclable / saving that they all expoune them contrary to Tyndals
heresye, by y^ artycles of the known faith of Crystes catholyke church, and
by many plain open textes of holy scripture. Of which two things Tyndale the
tone dyssymuleth, and the the other despyseth / and byleueth the old heretyke
Nouaciane the fyrsse author of that abomynable heresye, better then saint
Cypryane, saint Hyerom, saint Austayne, saint Ambrose, saint Gregory, and
all the old holy saints that have written against it / and better then the
hole catholyke church

For as Tyndals other heresye fyghteth against gods justice / so does this
dyrectly fight against his mercy / and puts almost all cryste^ people in
utter despair of heaven, if men were so mad to believe one heretyke or twain,
better then all the old holy saints, and all the hole church of Christ.

This heresye as I began to tell you, Tyndale among his other before remembered,
laboreth to stablysh / not only by the dark and hard places of scripture
before remembered, but also by certain words in this first pystle of

But now for our present purpose, to towch his heresies of this chapyter of
his, of synnyng without sin / I shall touch you the place in that pystle of
saint John^, whereby Tyndale would prove you that who so get onys the faith
which he calls the true faith and the felyng faith, can never sin dedely
after. By which ye shall plainly se how plainly he mysseconstrewth the
scripture, to the myschyef of me^nes souls. The words of saint John^ be these
Every man that is borne of god does not sin, for the seed of him abides in
him / and he can not sin, because he is borne of god.



we shall I think also agree to gether in this that to be borne of god or to be
the children of god, is not mente to be his natural children as our savior
Christ is by reason of his godhed / but by faith, hope, and cheryte^ and the
sacraments, and the following of Christ in good works, and keeping of gods
commandments, to be me^bres of his mystycall body of his elect church.

But herein peradventure shall Tindale and we begin Eccle^iastae. 11.
in what place so ever it fall there shall it remain.

But here says Tyndale, that who so ever have onys the faith which he calls
after the felyng faith / he has

Now se you in what manner Tyndale takes these words. But against his
taking, ^tande all the old holy doctors of Crystes church, from the days
of him self and his apostles hitherto. Of all whom, let Tyndale tell me the
name of any one that ever did understand these words of saint John^ in such
wise as Tyndale does / that who so ever gate onys the right faith of Christ,
and put therwyth as great a feeling thereof with hope and cherite thereto, as
ever holy Tyndale him self felt in his days /

Now if never any good man understood saint John^ so before / but all holy men
clean y^ contrary / by what reason looks Tyndale now, that we should now
begin to believe him alone, in the understanding of these words of saint
John^, better then all good conning men this.xv. hundredth year before him.

Now is his exposycyo^ bysydes this, not only against the catholyke faith of
all christian people, and the plain determynacyon of Crystes church / but also
against many

what say we by the words of the spyryte reveled unto saint John^, against
the bishop of the church of Ephesus / whom where as god praised for many
great virtues, in such wise that it appeared that he was at that time in grace
and gods right special favor, yet said he unto him, I have for all this a
few things agayst the, because thou have left of thy first cheryte. And
therefore remember from whens thou art fallen, and amend and do the good
works which thou were wont to do. For else will I

Does it not here plainly appear, that he which has gotten so the faith, and
that the living faith to, that he works so well therwyth that the light of
his faithful lively works shine bright before the face of god / may yet by
declynynge from that fervor of devout works, in to some slothful slaknesse
though myche of his virtue tarry, fall yet so low at last, that god shall
reiecte him and cast his candelstycke, whereof the light shall be worn out
quyte out of his place? If this might not be / god would not tell him, it
both might and except he mended should.

Does not saint Poule say, 1. ^^r. 1^.
he that thinks that he stands / let him beware he fall not.

It apereth there plain by the cyrcumstaunces of the

He says also to the Romans in y^.10. chapyter, Rom^. ^^
They that is the Iewys are broken of for their lack of bylyefe. But thou
stand by faith / be not proud thereof but fere.

There shows saint Poule effectually by a long process, that like wise as
he which lacks faith may by grace come to it / so he that has it and
stands in it has cause to fere, because he may by his own defaut fall from
it.

1. Timo^^. 5.
The rote of all euylles is couetyce / which while some folk couetyd, they
walked out of the way from the faith.

He says also, 2. Timo^^. 2^
Hymeneus and Philetus are fallen from the treuth / saying that the
resurreccyon is paste all redy^ and they have perverted the faith of some
persons.

Here shows saint Poule plain, that men may have the faith and lose it /
and that can they not I suppose with out dedely sin.

Peradventure Tyndale will say, that he speaks only of electys / and that I
can not prove these textes to be spoken of electes. Thereto say I that he
calls every man an elect, that is only borne again of god by faith, and
that byleueth to be saved by the mean of Christ / and of such

Then will he peradventure say, that he means of a feeling faith only. I
know not what he means by his feeling faith / but I wot well these textes
speak of good faith and lively faith, that works with love. If he find any
other feeling let him tell us.

And yet if there be any other feeling of faith, then byleuyng, loving, and
workyng / the self same to, seems by saint Poule that it may be left of
again and lost, as appears by the same words of his in the syxte chapyter
unto the Hebrewys / of which words Tyndale takes his chyefe hold of the
the other part of his heresies, Hebrae. 6.
that is to wit that who so sin onys dedely after his baptysme, shall never
after be forgeuen. Saint Poules words are

Lo syrs where as Tyndale speaks of feeling faith / saint Poule speaks here
of them that have felt the taste thereof. And where as Tyndale speaks much of
the word of god / saint Poule here speaks of them that have felt the taste of
the good word of god. And where as Tyndale speaks myche of being borne again
of the spyryte / saint Poule here in like wise speaks of them yt have
received

what has Tyndale here to say to saint Poule? Surely for the defense of this
folysshe heresye, no thing has he to say at all, that any good color has.

But when he shall be feign to give over this / then will he comfort him self
with that that saint Poule here seems to ferther his other heresye, that
every dedely sin

But out of that comfort shall I dreue him shortly, For I am sure the places
of holy scripture written all by one holy spyryte, varyeth not in sentence. And
where as these words, as well appears by the old holy writers, be full of
hardynesse and dyffycultye: yet that the sentence can not be such as may serve
Tyndals heresye, yt shall we, leuyng all their exposycyons which are all clean
against him, make him open and euydent, by the plain and clear words of the
holy prophet Ezechyell, whose words lo be these in the.xviii. chapyter.

If a sinner repent him of all the sins yt he has done, Ezec^^^^^ 1^.
and keep all my commandments, and deal justly and ryghteously: he shall
live, and shall not dye. Of all ye iniquitees that

Lo syrs here is more then I promised. For here be both his heresies destroyed
at onys. For god here by the mouth of this holy man, promises without any
manner excepcion, yt when so ever the wicked man will turn, he shall be taken ^
The ryghtuousnes of the ryghtuous man shall not save him in what day so ever
he sin. Also when so ever the wicked man turn from his wyckednes / it shall
not hurt him. And the ryghtuous man can not live through his ryghtuousnes, in
what day so ever he sin.

Here have ye good reders hard this sentence by y^ word of god in this one holy
prophet, dowble co^fermed and thereby Tyndals dowble heresye dowble also
condemned.

And yet lest Tyndale might say, why should you not as well expoune and gloss
Ezechyel by saint Poule, as saint Poule by Ezechyel, namely sith saint Poule
came

Ezechiel. 33.
ye and though I would say to a ryghteouse man that he shall live, and he then
trusting in his ryghteousenes commytte and do wickedness / all his
ryghteousnes shall be forgotten / and for the iniquyte which he has wrought,
for that he shall dye. But if I say to a sinner, Thou shall dye / and he then
repents him of his sin, and does judgment and justice, and that the same
wicked man restore

Lo good christian reders, here se we very plain, that we were far unwise if
we would follow the folly of Tyndale, either in bold presumptuose hope or
folysshe ferefull despair / either wenynge that after any feeling faith onys
had, any deed that we could after do, could be no dedely sin / or y^ for
any deed done after our baptysme, we could be penance never be saved after. we
may be very sure,

Now against all these euydent places of scripture plainly contrary to
Tyndals exposycyon / what thing has Tyndale to defend his exposycyo^
wythall? If he name any men / he shall name you none but a few known
condemned heretykes, against all holy doctors and saints and the catholyke
faith of all christian people. If he pretend any places of scripture / he shall
allege a few dark

Finally ye shall find that the hole purpose of saint John^ in that pystle,
no thing makes in this world for Tyndals intent, but rather clearly the
contrary.

For saint John^ intended there, not to show them, that who so is onys good can
never after be badde, as Tindale says he meant / but utterly to give all the
world warnyng, that be men at one time never so good, yet when so ever after
they do naught they be naught, and by their evil doing lose their goodness.
And like wise as before while they believe well and work well, they be all that
while borne of god, and be gods children, and have his seed in

And that saint John^ in this point meant none other then thus / the hole
process of his pystle one part compared with an other, does more then
plainly declare. For he shows that ye devil is the father of evil folk,
and they his children by following him in their sinful works / as our savior
said to ye jews ye be of your father the devil, and his desires will ye do.
Ioh^^. ^.
And the son of god says Saint John^ came in to this world and here appeared,
to dyssolue and break the works of ye devil. And every man that is borne of
god, that is to say that is gods child does not sin, because ye seed of
god abides in him / and he can not sin because he is borne of god and is
gods

And therefore it follows forthwyth in the text, By this be the chyldern of
god and the chyldern of the devil open. That is to say, by this may ye se
who be the chyldern of god and who the chylderne of the devil. For he that is
not ryghtuouse is not the child of god, nor he that loves not his brother.
And after he says, every man that hates his brother is a manqueller / and ye
know that no manqueller has everlasting life abiding in him.

Lo good reder, where as he said before that the child of god can not sin,
because he has the seed of god abiding in him: here he says for all that,
who so ever hate

And thus have he the seed of life never so strong and sure at one time while
he is the child of god: yet when so ever he falls after to the hatered of
his brother, he leseth that life by the committing of dedely sin, and
becomes the child of the devil.

To this will Tyndale peradventure say, that I pass 1. I^^^. 5
whereby he is begote^ and borne of god) does preserve and keep him.

In this wise will Tyndale peradventure answer me. And surely I can my self
deuyse no more effectual words that he might speak for his part / for in
good faith if I could I would. For never will I purposely leave his part any
more fayntely defended the^ mine own, as far as my self can se any thing
that him self might say.

But now to this answer. we shall tell him again that between man and angel
is there almost as great dyffere^ce in this matter, as there is between them
in their substance and nature. For the blessed angellys that stood still with
god in the deuyls fall, were forthwyth so surely confermed

we se also that the catholyke faith of all christian people is to the contrary.
For all christian people except a few heretykes, both now believe and all
this.xv. hundred year before Ezechiel. 18.33.
Many textes also of holy scripture plainly prove, Roma. 11.
that good folk may fall and perysshe. 1. Cor. 1^.16.
Psalmo. 32.33.
And the scripture is full of good counsel / aduysynge all good men to stand
fast always and ever live in fere of falling / but if any special reuelacyon
be given to some certain man bysyde the comen ordinary course.

we find also plain ensamples, both in scripture and at our own eyes, of
many virtuous children of god, that have fallen from that estate, and becomen
by sin the children of the devil.

For lettynge pass over Judas, that from the child of 1. Ioha^. 5
For then is there in them peccatum ad mort^m that saint John^ speaks of / and
vain were it then and sin also, any more to pray for them then for the
devil. ^u^a^^ / and the wreches lie there now blasphemynge god, and are his
unchangeable enemies as is the devil.

But these reasons and these examples I say, with the consent of all the old
holy exposytours of saint Iohn^s pystle before / make us to perceive surely,
that saint John^ did never mean by these words, after such manner as Tyndale
expouneth him now / that because the seed of god is onys in him, therefore there
can never any dedely sin enter after. For saint John^ him self in the same
pyste counsayleth every good man to stand still in his goodness, 1. (...). ^.
and beware that he fall not in to idolatry. which he might have boden all
gods children care never for, if they were

But as I said before, Tyndale in these words of saint John^ takes occasyo^
of the symplycyte used in the manner of speech in holy scripture, to make
cauyllacyons and seek out sophysmes upon every word. And where as saint
John^ says, that the child of god can not sin / menyng not precysely that
he can not sin dedely by any manner mean, but that it is a great occasyon to
keep him from sin, and that he y^ does dedely sin, is not gods child but
the deuyls: Tyndale affermeth him plainly to mean, that he which is onys
gods child can never sin dedely after. As though every man that would say,
an honorable man's child and vertuousely brought up, can

Or if one would say, a man that takes his wife for very love, can never fall
to aduowtry, y^ love that he has to her must needs keep him to her / nor she
can not for very shame begyle him, for the love that he bears to her. Do not
folk speak in such fasshyo^? And yet though they mean that these things be
great occasyons to contain the parties

In such manner of whyse meaned saint John^ in those words, when he said he
that is borne of god synneth not, for he has the seed of good in him / and
therefore he can not sin, because he is borne of god / he meant I say, not
that it is impossyble for him to sin dedely, but y^ it is a great help and
occasyon to keep him from dedely sin.

yet will not Tyndale let to stycke still in his error, and say that saint
John^ plainly meant, that it is impossyble for him to sin that has the seed
of god in him. For he says that he which onys has the seed in him, can not
sin after dedely by no manner menys, because he has the seed of god in him
onys.

To this I say that in y^ sample that I before did put, neither the man nor
the wife that come to gether for great love can fall to aduowtry, because the
love which is in each of them toward the other, can not suffer it. And truth
it is as long as it lasts and endures in them. But either of them both yet,
may so far fall in love with some other, that the hot love which they had
between them self, may cole and clean be quenched / as is the fire with
casting on water enough.

Saint John^ therefore writing those words, and understanding as in deed he
does, not after a sophystycall fasshyon, yt it were utterly impossyble for him
at any time after to sin dedely, that has onys ye seed of god in him /

And so as it is true to say, that he which has a good fire by him can not
be a cold, menyng thereby as long as he keeps him by it: so is it true to say,
that who so have ye seed of god in him can not sin dedely, menyng thereby as
long as he keeps it. And thus meant saint John^.

And as he that would say who so sits by the fire can never be a cold,
menyng thereby that he could never go from the fire and so cathe, cold after,
were a very stark fool: so he that would say that who so have the seed of god
in him can

And sith Tindale so styffely stycketh in this point, that the seed of god onys
had in a man's heart, does keep him for ever after from every dedely sin:
let him tell us wherefore it keeps him not for ever from every dedely sinful
deed. For Tyndale says him self, that though the seed

And therefore good christian reders, I shall in this point end with the good
wholesome counsel of saint John^, by which in the self same pystle against
Tyndale, expressly he byddeth us all beware of all such heretykes, as would
make us wene y^ some were gods wanton cokneys in such a special wise, yt
what so ever they do no thing could displease him / and some other so little
set by and so far out of his favor, yt no repentance, no penance, no
faith, none hope, no love of god and their neighbor, could bring them in his
favor. Against which fond and frantyke imagynacyo^

Now may we clearly perceive, that these only words of saint John^ utterly
destroy Tyndals heresye, grounded upon his false exposycion of saint Iohn^s
other words. For when saint John^ says here him self, that the children of
god and the children of the devil be manifest and

ye se good reders openly, that if Tyndale in this his heresye and false
exposycyon of saint John^ said true / then should saint John^ him self say
untrue, where he says yt by the outward deeds, 1. (...).
the children of god and the children

But now no man dowteth whyther of the two, better understood saint John^ /
whyther Tyndale or saint John^ him self. And therefore good christian readers,
while ye se that these holy fathers and authors of these heresies,

And therefore finally, where as Tyndale knytteth up all his matter with a quyppe
against me, and says that because every man that onys has the right faith is
born


Tyndale. And yet every member of Crystes congregacyon is a sinner, and synneth


More. Lo now ye here his wurshypfull rydle / in the first part whereof he has
all ready showed us, that a true member of Crystes church synneth not, because
it has y^ right faith / and so is borne again of god and has his spyryt, and
by cause of that can never sin. And now he shows us in the the other part of
his rydle, that every true member of

For where as saint Poule in his pystle to y^ Romans, speaks of the pronytye
and mocyons in the flesh remaining, as the relyques of orygynall sin,
whereby we be tycled toward great actual dedely sins, and daily fall in to
venyall: Tyndale as appears by his words next after following, would we
should wene that saint Poule meneth, that every true member may daily fall into
great horrible deeds, as perjury, manslaughter, and aduowtry, Matt^^^. ^.
And saint Poule him self 2. C^r. 12.
there was given him the angel of Satan, the prycke of the flesh, to dabbe
him in the neck and make him stowpe and be^^ him.

And it appears plainly, that Tyndale takes saint Poulys words spoken of
him self, to sygnyfye not one^y styrynge and incytacyons toward dedely
sinful deeds / but also the very deeds committed and done as he calls it of
fraylte, by the vyolence of those mocyons. For if he mean not so / he laid
those words nothing to his purpose, as it appears openly by those his own
words following.


Tyndale. Thus are we sinners and no sinners. No sinners if thou look unto the
professyon of our hearts toward the law of god, on our r^pent^unce and sorrow


More. Lo good christian reders, here have ye herd a full vncrysten tale of an
evil christian man. For now se ye clearly that

And yet keeps he his accustumed guyse as far as he can, in covering him
self and colourynge his matter from knowledge. And therefore he comes in with
synnynge and yet not synnyng. And for the redyng of that rydle, he says that
the true members of Crystes church are sinners and yet no sinners. And among
them he sets him self / saying of him self and his fellows, we be no
sinners if thou

Here would I that Tyndale should somewhat more clearly tell us what he means
in this matter / whyther he mean that a true member synneth not dedely all the
while that he resysteth, and does not the sinful horrible deed, as for
ensample ma^slaughter or aduoutry. And that then again he synneth not, when
that after the deed done he repents and is sorry for his evil deed, and is
forgeuen of

By these words of his we be no sinners, if thou look to the profession of our
hearts to the law of god, and unto our repentance and sorrow that we have
sinned / it may seem that he meneth the first way, that is to wit that they
sin not all the while that they resist the mocion to the deed, and that they
sin not also, when that after the deed they take repentance

Now if he mean to read his rydle on this fashyon / then he soyleth his
strange rydle as bloutely, as an old wife of Culnam did onys among scholars
of Oxenforde, that sogerned with her for death. which while they were on a time
for their sport purposynge rydles among them, she byga^ to put forth one of
hers to / and said arede my ridle, what is that I knew one that shot at an
heart and killed an haddoke. And when we had every body much mused how y^ might
be, and tha^ prayed her to declare her ridle her self / after long request
she said at the last, that there was onys a fyssher that came a land in a
place where he saw an heart and shot thereat, but he hit it not / and
afterward he went again to the sea and caught an haddoke the spirit calls
us home again. whereby it seems that he meneth, we were onys gone from home
and afterward be brought again.

How be it on the the other side, he may peradventure mean by these words, we
be no sinners if thou look to the profession we cast never of the yoke of god
from our necks, neither yield our selves unto sin for to serve it, but
fight a fresh and begin a new battle. By these words it seems, and of
troth so I trow he fully meneth, as appears by sundry other chapyters of this
book / and yet most especyally by his exposicyon upon the first pystle of
saint John^: y^ though they sin in that they have the mocions of sin, the
relics of oryginall sin remaynyng in the flesh, yet because



Sith Tyndale agrees, that both Luther and him self, and all other the true
members of the elect church, may do great horrible deeds such as he denies
not to be in

He will peradventure answer us and say, it is no dedely sin in them,
because that god does afterward upon their repentance and sorrow taken for
their sin, forgive them the death and all manner of pain dew to ye horrible
deed by them before committed / and that therefore it is not dedely to them,
because by gods remyssyon and pardon it is provided that they shall not dye.
This answer of Tyndale is very slender / for it implies the contrary of yt it
should prove. For it declares yt the deed is dedely, and that he synneth
dedely.

And I do not now lay to them the time before their consent unto the deed, nor
the time of their repentance after their evil deed / but the time in which
their will co^sen^ed and agreed to do it, and the time in which they did it in
deed / in this mean time say I they sin dedely in deed.

Nay says Tyndale, for afterward we repent, and by and by god forgyueth us
the death, for his mercy in our savior Christ, and for our faith, and for his
promyses.

This wise answer is much like, as though he would tell us that one which had
robbed a church were a thief and yet not a thief. A thief because he had
stole^ away ye chalyce, and yet not a thief because ye king had given him a
pardon.

Tyndale will yet happily say, yt the thief was not sure before yt he should
have his pardon after / but Luther and he and such other true me^bres of their
elect church, be sure by gods promises, yt upon their repe^tau^ce they shall
have their pardon.

But then ask we him again, though he know by the promise that upon
repentance he shall have pardon / how knows he and what promise has he,
that when he has committed horrible deeds, he shall have after the grace given
him to take such repentance as ye pardon shall follow.

Hereto shall Tyndale say that him self and his fellows do feel by their
felyng faith, that they be borne of god, and that they have his seed within
them / by which they be well assured that they shall never do any such deed, as
they shall

Of this opynio^ be they very surely / whereof ye se well follows no little
occasyan of bold setting forward unto sin. For if a prince would promise
every man a perdon before hand, yt would so surely trust upon his promise, as
what so ever he should do he would not let to come and ask it / no man dowteth
I suppose what plenty this promise would make of all kind of unthriftiness. But as
for god, though he have made a true faithful promise of pardon, to all true
repe^tau^tes and penite^tes what mind or purpose so ever they had before (the
truth of which promise Tyndale yet mystrusteth his king, that he verily knew
that when he had all

Tyndale will say that his felowys and he do not sin dedely in the time of
the doing of such horrible deeds,

Is not here good reder a goodly defense and a godly? And undoubtedly this is
their very defense in defending them self from dedely sin, as Tyndals own
words

But now sees every good christen man well inowgh, that they be wyckedly
occupied, Psalmo. 140.
in sekyng as holy David says, excuses for their sin. For there is no man
does any such deed against his will / but all be it that he resyste ye mocyon
of the devil and the flesh at the first, and cleuynge to the contrary
styrynge of god and his good angel, repugneth and stryueth against the sin
and is peradventure loath to be brought thereto / which doing is very godd, and
thereby good folk finally cast of and overcome all those temptacions through
the grace of god wurkyng with the^: yet such as in conclusyon fall to the
doing of those

And therefore when Tyndale tells us that Luther and he and such other true
members of their church, wha^ they commytte any such horrible deeds, do not
committee them wyllyngly, because they do commytte them upon great occasyons,
and be carried away spyte of their tethe with the rage of the sin that
breketh out of their members: saving my charity sir I beshrewe their knauysshe
members,

For without the defawte of their own fre will, all the deuyls in hell can
never cast upon them such an hete, that shall be able to bring them into
that vyolent inuyncyble rage, to compel them vnwyllyngly to do such horrible
deeds. For god has promised as in plain scripture appears, that he will
never so suffer them. 1. Corint^. 1^.
God is faithful says saint Poule, which shall not suffer you to be tempted
above y^ ye may bear / but with the te^ptacyon shall also make you a way to get
out, so that ye may well welde it. And when saint Poule him self, 2. Corint^.
12.
lest the greatness of his high reuelacyons might have set him up in an high
pride, had through gods great merciful goodness the

For if he lake for any help of these words, where he says that they yield
not them selves unto syn for to serve it / as though other folk when they do
sin do entende to serve sin / but they for holiness of their feeling
faith, in the doing of their sins do not entende to serve the sin, but to
make the sin to serve them and do them pleasure at their own lust and
liking: let him for answer look how saint Austayne mocketh in like case an
old fylosopher / which being asked why he was not ashamed to have an harlot
as other rybaudes had, answered for his defense that there was great dyffere^ce
between his deed and theyrs. For as for them they had not the harlot but the
harlot had them. But as for him he had the harlot and not the harlot him. And
there was by saint Sym, we fall when the occasyons be great into horrible deeds,
and the fruit of the sin which remains in our members breketh out, but
yet we never yield our selves unto sin to serve it / menyng of lykelyhed that
the sin shall serve the^, as the harlot did the folyshe phylosofer. But our
savior him self wypeth a way clean all the worship of Tyndales word, when he
says plainly that who so ever do sin, is by the doing bycome the bond
thrall of sin. And so by y^ very true tale of Christ, Tyndales false tale is
avoided. For when so ever he yeldeth him self to do horrible deeds, which he
says they fall in upon great occasyons,

For as towchyng Tyndales words following, where he says they will rise and
fight a fresh and begin a new battle: these words make nothing to the
purpose / for they were never able to rise again alone. And if god lift them
up as many times he does / yet were they not sure that he so would for he
does not ever so to every man.

And also if he did always so, and that they were also sure before that he would
allway so do after / yet can it not serve Tyndale in this point. For we speak
of the dedely sin in the time of his fall, and of the servitude and thraldom
that he lies in, all the while that he lies prostrate under the deuyls foot,
and not that after that god has gotten him up again / and therefore those
words will not help

How be it of truth Tyndales words written a little before, if they were
true as they be not, would make more for the proof of his purpose / where he
says that though they fall into horrible deeds, upon great occasyons when
the ^rute of the sin remaining in their flesh breketh out of their
members, yet they never cast of the yoke of

These words if they were true, would make in deed somewhat for their purpose.
For if it so were that for all the doing of their horrible deeds, they did
never cast of the yoke of god fro their necks: than might it seem that in the
time of the doing they did not yet sin dedely, sith their necks were yet
still bouden within the yoke of obedyence to the love of god, and that they had
not shaken that yoke of.

But of truth those words are untrue. For when they do those horrible deeds,
which god has upon pain of eternal death precysely forboden them / and
which no temptacyon can cause them so to do against their will, but that they
might by gods help leave yt undone if they

Now if Tyndale say still, that because of his feeling

If he say for sorrow that he has offended god, which

Finally if he stycke still in this point, that in ye doing of those horrible
deeds, their lively feeling faith, which can not as they say but work well,
stands still in them all the while that they be doing these horrible deeds
that they fall in upon great occasyons, through the fruit of the sin that
breketh out of their me^bres / and that they therefore 1. Corint^. ^.
and make them as saint Poule says the members of a stynkynge harlot. First
when the devil upon some sight of a wanton woman, puts that suggestyon am
now carried thither eue^ in a rage. But yet for all y^ rage

Is not here a godly medytacyon true ye. Forsothe I suppose ye shall not find
such a another in all the medytacyons of saint Barnarde, as holy a man as he
was. And I assure you Tyndale and his felowys, if their holy here syes be true
/ must nedys in the doing of every such horrible

Finally for co^clusyon of this his worshypfull chapyter of ever synnynge and
never synnynge, where as Tyndale as And therefore it is afals conclusion that M.
More holds, how that a man may have a right faith joined withal kyn^e of
all abommacyon and sin: I conclude against Tindale y^ he concludes clearly
ye same. And yet conclude I farther for all ye, that I concluded true and that
he concludes false. And thus because yt in this chapiter^ Tindale is as it
seems by his ever synnynge and never synnynge, set upon redyng of rydles for
his recreacyon: I put him my rydle to, y^ he and I be agreed, and yet we be not
agreed / and that he says as I say, and yet I say not as he says. For where
as I said and true I said, that a right faith may stand and abide with all
abomynacyo^ / menyng thereby that the true right bylyefe of all the artycles of
ye catholyke faith may abomynable sin can not stand with the thing which

But mark well good reder, that he comes forth after and says, that him
self and such other his holy companyons the true members of their elect
church, as have y^ right faith and the feeling faith to, that is to wit after
his own doctrine full faith full hope and cheryte both, so surely that it can
never fall from them / may yet for all



Tyndale. ANd as they sin not, so they err not. And on the the other side as
they sin, so they err / but never unto death and damnacyon. For they never
sin of purpose, nor hold any error malycyously synnynge against the holy
ghost / but of weakness and infyrmitye. As good obedyent children, though they
love their faders commandments, yet break them often by the reason of their
weakness. And as they can not yield them selves bond unto sin to serve it /
even so they can not err in any thing that should be against the promyses
which are in Christ. And in other things their errors be


More. I Shall good christen readers make no long work about this chapyter.
For sith the hole sum thereof is as ye se no thing else in effect, but that
the true members of Tyndals elect church, do often err and yet never err,
even in like manner as they often or rather always sin and yet never sin /
which his manyfolde folyshe heresies in ever synnynge and never synnynge, I
have many manner wise plainly refelled and confuted in the chapyter next
before: I may therefore and will ^ake a great

I will therefore but put you in remembrance that all his matter stands only
in this, that his true members of his elect church, after that they have
onys gotten the true faith that saint Peter confessed / understanding the same
in such erronyous wise as Luther and Tyndale teache them with many plain
pestylent heresies therein, as I have before openly and clearly declared you /
and when that they have onys attained that faith, not with an hystorycall manner
as a man may believe a story, but with a felyng fasshyon as the child byleueth
that the fire is hot, because he has burned his finger, as Tyndale will tell
you in a another chapyter after / who so (says he) has onys in such a
fasshyon attained and gotten that faith / that is to wit who so ever is ones
enfect with those heresies, in

A another cause is, because what other error so ever such a true faithful
elect member of his elect church happen to fall into, so that it be not
against the promyses that are in Christ, can not be da^pnable be it never so
great / all though the truth that is contrary to that error, be written says
Tyndale even in the very gospel it self. And why can it be no dedely sin?
because says Tindale that an elected men ber of his, can not hold it
malycyously.

So that by this ye may clearly se, that Tyndale affermeth

By this also ye may clearly se, that concerning the promyses that are in
Christ / he says that a true member can not err at all, neither malycyously
nor of fraylte. For sith he grants error of infyrmyte in other things
only that towch not the promyses / ye may clearly perceive that concerning
the promyses he holds that a true member of

For if he meant not thus, he would not so deuyde^ these two kinds of error /
one against the promyses, and the other against other things, as ye se him do
/ but if it were to teache us that the tone were dedely sin and da^pnable
every way, and the the other never dampnable, but if it were

Let us first begin with errors against y^ promyses in Christ. And therein
let Tyndale tell us first wherefore a true member of his elect church, can not
err in any thing that is against the promyses y^ be in Christ / in such wise

Then must we forther ask him, whereby he woteth and whereby he proves, yt
every manner error in every article of any promise yt is in Christ, is dedely
sin and da^pnable, though it come but of weykenes and fraylty / and none
^rrour in any other article, be it never so great is dampnable and dedely, but
if it be holden of malice.

we must ask him whereby he knows y^ it is inowg^ for his saluacyo^, to
believe y^ promise of god in Christ, tha^

The cause of our saluacyo^ is not the bylyefe of the promise, nor the trust
therein neither, of any proper nature of that bylyefe in the promise / no more
then the nature of our good works, is able of it self for our salvation / but
the ordinance of god, that it pleases him to save us for our obedyence of his
commandment both in the bylyefe

Now if this be thus as of troth it is / what dowte is there but that we be as
upon like reward, so upon like parell and pain, bounden to believe all other
things yt god tells us, as well as the things which he promyseth us.

And therefore if Tyndale will to the contrary look to be byleued of any man in
this point / he must according to his own rule^ bring forth plain and open
scripture, by which god has told us by writing, that if we believe onys his
promyses, care for no more. For as for all other things that be no promyses,
he will that we be at lyberty to believe as we list / so that there be no
malice in us. And why at more lybertye of byleuynge god in his other words,
then in his promyses? I can not perceive what cause Tyndale can imagyne / but
if he be so mad to think, that god will in all his other tales that him
list to tell us, though they be written in the very gospel as Tyndale says
after, have us yet at lybertye in beleuynge him, because him self would be at
lybertye to tell us for his pleasure

Surely this is a maruelouse tale of Tyndale in my mind / and a maruelouse
dyfference that he puts between the bylyefe of the promyses and the bylyefe
of all the other artycles of the faith. As though the bylyefe of the promyses
only, were so far above the bylyefe of any other article / when every man
that any wit has, may well and clearly se, that the bylyefe of the promyses
do so depend upon some other artycles, that the bylyefe of those artycles
gone, the bylyefe of the promyses and all to gyther were gone. As who so were
(as many have been) so mad to believe that there were no god at all / with him
were gods Matthew. 16.
qui in hunc mundum venisti, is Tyndals exposycyon to. And therefore as for
Tyndale, ye se well so that he believe that his elect church of mankind
shall be saved / he may without any parell chese whyther he will believe that
ever any angel is eternally saved or not / notwythstandyng that Christ said of
saint John^ the baptyst, that the lest in heaven was greter then he. Lucae. 7.
yet because it was but a tale told by the mouth of Christ, and not a promise
made / and specially sith it was

Concerning yet the promyses made to man / let us consider which things be
promyses, and which things be not the very promyses, but other artycles
beside. That we shall be saved through Christ and by Christ's passion, is a
promise. And yet that Christ him self was the same very person, by whom that
deed should be done, is more properly a tale then a promise. And it may be that
a man byleuyng the promise that mankind shall be saved through Christ, may yet
err in not byleuynge y^ Jesus the son of Mary Matthew. 17.
that of his seed should such a savior come. Genesis. 22.
For it is not all one to promise that of him should one come by whom the
world should be saved, and to tell him this is the man that in my promise I
spoke of. For a promise and a tale be not both one thing. For though every
promise by in deed a tale, sith no man can make a promise but if he tell it:
yet is not every tale a promise, as every child perceyueth. And therefore
saint Peter took a sure way, when he said, Thou art Christ that art come
into this world / taking it for a pryncypall point to believe gods

But surely concerning the bylyefe of goddys promyses / Tyndale seems to fare
as the Jews do. For like as many of them believe, that through Christ the world
shall be saved / and yet they lose the fruit of that bylyefe, because Matthew. 28.
that he byleueth Christ's promise made unto his church here in earth, that his
holy spyryte shall be therewith unto the worlds end, and teache it and led it
into every troth. Ioha^. 16.
But he leseth yet the fruit of that bylyefe (if he believe it as he says he
does) because that he will not know which is Christ's ^hyrche here in earth.
But like as the Turks instead of the true savior of the world, worship the
false deceyuer Machomet / so Tyndale instead of the true catholyke church of
Christ (of which church Christ would that every man should learn the ^routh,
which the holy ghost by Christ's promise techeth, and ever shall tech unto it^
and which church must for that cause needs be a congregacyo^ known) Tyndale
takes not only a secret

And also where as Christ when he turned the bread into his own precyouse body,
and the wine into his blessed blood, and commanded the same to be done for
ever in his church after in remembrance of his passyo^, Lucae. 22.
and did in so co^mau^dyng make a faithful promise, yt him self would be for
ever with his church in that holy sacrament / and for a perpetual memory of
his bitter passion that he suffered for us, would give his own flessh^ that
suffered passion, and his own blood that was shed in his passion, to abide
perpetually with us, Matthew. 28.
I am with you all days unto the end of the world: Tyndale will not now
believe that promise at all / but as I have in my first book by his own words
proved you, makes mockes and mowes at that blessed sacrament, and calls it
but cake bread, and reasons it rather for starche full like a stark heretyke
god wot, and says it is neither body nor blood at all.

And thus where he so hyghly magnifyeth the bylyefe of gods promyses only,
setting all other artycles of the faith as things of a second sort / him
self byleueth as ye se the promyses as little as the the other.

But now let us go ferther in his words, and se for what cause he says, that
none other error in any thing save


Tyndale. In other things that be not the promyses, their errors be not unto
dampnacyon, though they be never so great, byca^se they hold them not
malycyously. As now, if some when they read in the new testament of Christ's
brethren, would think that they were our ladies children after the birth of
Christ, because they know not the use of the speaking of the scripture / or of
the Hebrews how that nygh kynnesmen be called brethren, or happily they might
be Iosephes children by some first wife, neither can have any to teach him
for Tyranny that is so great / yet could it not hurt him thowgh he dyed
therein, because it hurts not the redempcyon that is in Christ's blood. For
though she had none but Christ / I am therefore never the more saved, neither
yet the less though she had had. And in such like an


More. Here have ye good reders the reason and ye cause, wherefore the true
members of Tyndals church can never sin dedely, though they err in any
article that is no promise, be the article never so great. The cause is says
he, because that like wise as in all other sins as soon as they be rebuked
they repent / even so as soon as they be better taught, they repent their
error, and believe the troth, and resyste not / and for that cause it is no
dedely sin in the mean season, before they be rebuked and taught better, all

This is the hole sum and effect of this hole chapyter, though he tryfle
with other things between. And therefore will we first ask him by what
scripture or by what reason, he proves that every person which is elected to
be saved, shall repent as soon as ever he is rebuked of any sin that he does.

He will show peradventure, that David did so, and happily some other to. That
will be a very bare argument. David was an elect person / and he did so, ergo
every elected person does so? This argument will be very like the form of
arguing, that young children use in grammar Asinus meus habet aures, and tu
habes aures, ergo tu es asinus meus. Mine ass has ears, and thou have ears
/ ergo thou art my a^se.

First I suppose y^ Tyndale will him self agree what so ever he says here,
that such rebukynge at which his elect person shall always so soon repent
and return, had need to come after the rage passed^ as him self says, that
when the rage is paste he shall repent. For if such a rebuker come while the
rage is on him, while the man is forward upon his vyage, and as Tyndale says
upon his great occasyons carried forth with concupyscence, through the fruit of
the sin that breketh out of his members / the rebuker may fortune at that
time to speak twyse ere he go back again with him. ye and what so ever

A^^ then sith he mak^th this point the gro^^de of the tother^ that is to wit
that every elect pers^^ shall^ in like

For it may be full well that a right good man may be mysse led by such as
Tyndale is / and through such folks false perswasyons, may fall in errors and
heresies mo then one, not only beside the promyses, but also in the promyses
to / extendynge some to far and cuttynge some to short, as Luther, Huyskyn,
and Tyndale do. And their untrue doctrine may be so deep entered and roted in
the good simple soul, that when he is by better men better taught, he shall
not repent his errors at the first nor at the second time neither, but
defend them many a time and

For else if Tyndale said true, that every elect person would be reformed at
the first / it must follow that who so ever did not when he were better
taught, return and be reformed at the first, were a fynall reprobate and
should never be saved. And then were it vain to talk with him ofter then
onys, if he would not turn at the first as soon as he were onys well taught.
For by Tyndals tale, he y^ is elect shall by and by a^sent unto the troth, as
soon as it is told him, and forthwyth repent his error.



For th^ugh saint Poule counsel Titus, Ad Titum. 4.
that ye man why che^er^ an ^^retyke, he should after one warning or twayn^
e^^^we^ yet meant he not to forbid him the oftener calling vp^n him after, with
good and wholesome counsel.

For as ^aynt Chrysosth^m says, if the devil do not dyspayre to turn a man
at last from god unto him self,

I dare boldly say that Tyndale him self if he should mete with a man of the
true catholyke faith, and should find him fas^e therein when he would teache
him his heresies / though he could not at the first techynge nor at the
second neither, bring him from the troth, yet would he not leave him so by
his will / but would assaye him ofter, and prece upon him still, not without
hope to win him and begyle him at the last. Now say I then to Tyndale, that
his hope of the man's change to his sect, either because him self shall in
the laboring of him to draw him to it, play the deuyls part, and think
that though an elect shall turn from evil to good always at the first
mocyon, and that therefore if he turn not at the first it is

And this were thus after Tyndale, though the man's error were but in such
artycles as be no promyses. For if it were in any of the promyses, that Tyndale
should find a man after baptism believe as ye church byleueth, against the
heresies that he byleueth / that is to wit byleuynge against Tyndale, that
gods promise of salvation in the blood of Christ, does not quyte put away
shryfte and all penytencyall works toward satysfaccyon, and all punysshement
for any sin repented, to be sustained either

But thus good Christen reders ye may well perceive, that there is no treuth
in Tyndals tale. And that the proof against the strong rocks of Christ's
catholyke church,

yet for because that Tyndale in such things as be no promyses / in all
which things he says be they never so great, the elect may err and dye
in that error for lack of good techynge, and yet never be dampened therefore,
because they hurt not the redempcyon that is in Christ's blood: because
Tyndale I say for his ensample of such kind of things as be no promyses,
puts y^ perpetual vyrginyte of our lady / it is good to consider in what
manner he handeleth it.


Tyndale. If some of them (that is to wit the true members of the elect
church) when they read in the new testament of Christ's bret^e^^e, would
think


More. Consider good reder, how many things here fall upon Tyndals hedde at
onys, by his own fond handelyng of this ensample.

First it is folly for him to put, that for tyranny now any man should lack
techynge, that those children were not borne of our ladies body / sith that
article is as well and comenly known as any of y^ promyses / and as long has

Bysydes this, him self and his own doctrine destroys his own solucyon.
For he says that we be bounden to believe none article, but if it be proved by
plain scripture. Now though he teache now the true members of his elect
church, the thing that every child can tell all ready, that



This doctrine of his master and his own has he as ye now se by his own
handelyng of this matter, here utterly destroyed and dampened.

Now if he will happily for shame, labor to seek some shyfte, and say that
he means no more but to put this dyfference between the artycles of the faith
in the promyses, and all other artycles, that none error in any of the

But yet abedeth still against him, that sith he confesses the perpetual
vyrginyte of our lady, to be now that it is taught necessary to be byleued,
which is not written in scripture: still I say stands it styffely against
him, that

But now concerning his dyfference, between the necessyte of the bylyefe of
the promyses, and the bylyefe of the other artycles / we shall tell him y^ it
wylbe peradventure hard for him to prove his saying true, specially taking the
promyses as him self takes them.

For in the beginning upon the first prechyng of saint Peter, Ac^uu^. 2.
when there were so many so suddenly chrystened thereupon / whereby can Tyndale
prove yt all they were fully taught y^ faith of the promyses before they were
baptized, or that none dyed ere ever they were taught any ferther / or

If Tyndale make us many questyons of them y^ were so suddenly chrystened so
many at onys in the beginning: we will yet be bold to tell him y^ many
children dye now soon after yt they come from chrystenyng, ere ever they be
weshed out of y^ chrysome / of which I suppose yt some were never taught fully
the faith of the promyses ere they dyed.

If he say to this that though they were not taught it actually, yet by the
gift of god in the sacrament, it is taught and infunded into their souls
habytually: then

If he will say that the children baptized, and so forthwyth departing, have
no faith at all / but be saved only by the faith of their friends, and by that
our lord has received them to the sacrament of baptysme, and by the sacrament
of baptysme has received them to grace and glory, without any faith of their
own: then gives he to the sacrament against all his other doctrine, a great
effycacite of grace, and makes it not only a sign. And yet grants

Besides this, if we would grant him the thing that he can never prove: yet
were he never the nere. For though it were true that without bylyefe of all
the promyses, no man might be saved / but that the bare ignorance of any of
them were dampnable, and that the ignorance of any other article were not
dampnable, nor the contrary bylyefe till they were opened and taught: yet sith
men were (as Tyndale has here confessed) bounden upon pain of dampnacyon to
believe the perpetual v^rginite of our lady, and to repent their forma^ error
to the contrary as soon as they be taught it, notwythstandyng that it can not
be proved by plain and euydent scripture:

Then ask we Tindale how knows he those artycles which be necessary artycles
of the faith, of which artycles the contrary bylyefe were dampnable after the
troth of those artycles taught, the same artycles not being wryte^ in
scripture. Does Tyndale know them by any other mean, then by the church /
sith they be not taught him by scripture? For it were hard that he should in
such a matter believe y^ authoryte of any one man, but if that either god bid him
believe him, or that for lack of scripture he prove

Therefore conclude I, that Tyndale must needs grant, that he knows not those
articles but by the church. Lucae. 10.
which church has proved it self by myllions of miracles, Matthew. 28.
and which church god byddeth him believe, Ioha^. 16.
and says he will dwell therwyth always, and send his spyryt to teache and
inform it, and led it into every trowth.

Of this church therefore must Tyndale learn those artycles,

Then ask we Tyndale forther, which is that church of Christ, by which he
is taught to know those necessary

To this point is Tyndale now good christen r^der dreuen of necessyte / but if
he will say that this hole multitude of y^ known catholyke church, is not the
very church, but only the good men and electes y^ be within the same.

Now if he wene to escape out so / he shall be soon set in. For then at the least wise he knowledgeth, that there are no good men out of this church / nor
no man has any true sure faith but it be learned of this church, or of some
members of the same. And then sith him self and his fellows be out of this
church / both wylfully first departed out, and after worthly cast out: them
self be none of them of whom the troth can be learned. Also to say yt he
therein byleueth only the good men of the known church / that thing has

For god shall for the knowledge of his true church ever more among many
other things, specially provide

Matthew. 2^.
and teache it every necessary truth / that is to wit every troth, Ioha^.
1^.
to the bylyefe whereof he would have his people bounden.

Now follows it forther good chryste^ reder upon this, that Tyndale is in this
matter so caught in a net of his own making / yt he must either lie tomblyng
still therein like a fool, and the more he stryueth therwyth the more all way
meshe and entangle him self faster and faster therein / or wisely give up his
heresies and renounce his formar errors / and from hensforth utterly knowledge
and confess, that against his hole purpose he is upon his own words L^cae.
10.
and therein believe that church, and give credence thereunto. which if he do
not endeavor him self to do, but resyste their doctrine / god which has
commanded him to believe and obey the church, shall never work with him
toward the bylyefe.

And thus good christen reders for the fynall conclusyo^ of this chapyter /
here ye may plainly se, that I might well if I would with this same chapyter
make an end of all the hole matter. For ye well remember that all our matter

And now ye se that as our lady would, by his folysshe handelynge of the
article of her perpetual vyrgynyte, he is quyte overthrown / and has it
plainly proved unto him upon his own words, that the very church is none
other, but this that he denies / that is to wit the common known catholyke
people, clergy, lay folk, and all / which what so ever their living be
(among whom undoubtedly

And therefore as I say, saving that I will go ferther to show you some what of
his ferther folly / else might I well even here both end this present
chapyter, and also this hole work / wherein with a few of his own wise words,
Tyndale has confounded him self, and stroyed all his hole matter.

For as towchyng his accustumable raylynge in y^ end


Tyndale. But they which malicyously maintain opynyons against the
scripture, Here should he say as for ensample they that maintain that frerys
may wedde nonnes.

or that that can not be proved byscrypture, One of these things is

or such as makes no matter unto the scripture, He meneth such things as were
not of necessyte requysyte to be wryte^ in scripture / and therefore he writes
like him self. For there is not one article of the faith y^ of necessyte neded
to be wryte^, but that god could both have taught them and kept them without
writing. As he has taught and kept some / as for ensample y^ perpetual
virginite of our lady, which Tyndale has both denied, and confessed, and
denied again, and woteth and to salvation that is in Christ, whyther they be
true or no / The church has none such as make no matter to salvation. For
every thing that god will have byleued pertayneth to salvation / sith the
contrary bylyefe is dysobedyence to god that so taught it his church, because
he would have it byleued. And y^ the perpetual virginite of our lady is of
such sort, Tyndale has him self openly and plainly agreed / and yet would he
now secretly stele back again. Not wyttyngly peradventure, but yt the devil
pulls him back by his cote skyrte unware.

and for the blind zele of them make sects, brekyng the unity of Christ's
church, for whose sake they ought to suffer all things / and rese against
their neighbors (whom they ^ught to love as them selves) to sle them: such
men I Now good reder, consider who make sects, y^ is to say sundry parts and
dyuisio^s, and breketh the unite of Christ's church, whyther the catholyke
church yt was agreed all of our mind, byleuyng purgatory, and the equal
godhed of Christ with his father and the holy ghost, and the blessed body and
blood of Christ in the sacrament of the altar, and all the other holy
sacraments, and the perpetual virginite of our lady, and prayed unto her and
other holy saints, and did reverence to their relykes, images, and kept holy
days and fasting days, and byleued all very fast and fermely yt is was
abomynable sacrylege for a friar to wedde a nonne. In all these things and 1.
Timoth. 1.
to follow thensample of saint Poule / and as he betoke some of them to the
devil, to the punysshement of their bodies in help of their souls or
ceacynge of their sinful blasphemy: so by te^porall laws and bodyly
punysheme^t, to fynysh ye infynyte malice and intolerable trouble of those
heretykes, for the sauegarde of good people in peace and tra^quyllite. which
common peace and quyete if the heretykes had not perturbed / they had been them
self much more esely handeled. But as Tyndale knows that this is true / so
knows he well again that the heretykes have been those, y^ did in chrystendom
begin to fight, kill, and sle, before y^ the^ self were killed and slain, or
any thing

Now is this a plain co^clusyo^, that both they that trust in their own
works, Lo what a parell here were, if a friar should put any trust in
chastyte and keeping of his vow. But and if he trust in lechery with weddyng of
a nonne, then is he saufe enough / because that wurke is not his own wurke but
the wurke of the devil, and of the sin that breketh out of his me^bres. And
they also that put trust in their own opinyons / be fallen from Christ, This
does him self and his fellows that are heretykes. For the artycles that the
hole catholyke church put trust^ in, be not the opinion of any man but the
sure doctrine of god. whereof the certayntye of the truth depends upon the
promise of our savior him self, which has promised that they holy ghost
shall teache his church all troth and led it there unto. And therefore if it
be true as in deed it is, that the which trust in their own wurkes, and make
idols of their own opynyons, and break the union of the church, and make
sundry sects, and kill their christen brethren, be fallen from Christ and
from the way of faith that is in Christ's blood / and therefore are none of
Christ's


Faith is ever a^^a^ted and fought withal.
Tyndale. Moreover this faith which we have in Chryst^, is ^^er fought
against, ever assailed and bete^ at with desperacyon / not when we sin
only, but also in all temptacyo^s of aduersyte, in to which god ^^yngeth us,
to now^t^e us and to show us our (...) hearts, the ypocrysye and falls
thoughts that here lyehydd^ / our almost no fayte at all and as little love,
even the^ ha^pely when we thowght our selves most perfect of all. For when
temptacyons come, we can not stand. When we have sinned, faith is feeble. When
wrong is done us, we can not forgive. In sykenesse, in loss of goods, and in
all tribulacyons we be impacyent. When our neighbor needs our help that we
must depart with him of ours, then love is cold. And thus we learn and feel
that there is no goodness nor yet power to do good, but of god only. And in
all such temtacyons


More. This chapyter has Tyndale put in for no great effect, but only with a
comely florysshe, to set out and furnysshe his heresies of the chapyter next
before. wherein he techeth that in the true members of his elect church, the
faith does never fail but ever contynueth, and that therefore they do never
sin dedely, how horrible deeds so ever they do as he confesses that they do
many / and yet sin never dedely, because they do them not of malice nor of
purpose, but of fraylte only and of wekenes, thorough the fruit of the sin
that remains in their

Now for the fe^ther ga^nysshy^ge of this his horrible heresye, has he brought
in this chapyter / in which he neither proves any thing thereof, nor any thing
go^h ab^u^ to prove / but only falls to prechyng, and tells us f^ll holyly
that y^ faith is ever fought ^n against, as though no man had ever herd that
before. where as every child well woteth, that the faith is always assawted and
fought against, whyther he speak of his own false faith and heresies, or of
the true catholyke ^^yth of Christ. For like as the true catholyke faith is and
ever has been oppungned and assawted, by the devil and all his dyscyples such
heretykes as Tyndale is, from the beginning unto this present time: so has
ever his false faith and heresies ben impugned, 1. Corinthians. 15.


And as for every man's faith pryuately / who knows not though Tyndale tell
us not, that the devil daily laboreth to quench it, as he laboreth to
destroy hope and cheryte and all other virtues.

Nor this we need not to learn of Tyndale / neither that men by temptacyons
learn to find and feel, that there is no goodness ne yet power to do good,
but of god only / if



And yet may he be an elect person and fall from the true faith, that is to
say the true bylyefe, and lose it utterly byleuynge lies and heresies / and
fall from grace for the time, and yet after that with help of gra^e find the

And if Tyndale here by the name of faith, understand hope and trust in god,
as he iugleth co^tynually with that word / for such equyuocacyons and diverse
understandings of one word, serve him for his goblettes, his gallys, and his
iuglynge stycke in all the proper points of his hole conuayaunce and his
lygier de main / but as I said, if by faith he mean hope: I grant that it
dies not always with the sin, nor gothe not therwyth away. But it waxes by
Tyndals doctrine ofte^tymes over great. For by the dredeles trust of their
techyng, the man falls into boldness of sin. In which when he has
ferelesse long continued / he waxes forcelesse and careless, and sets not
by sin, till suddenly the devil out of his high Job. 24.
And yet I say that with these sins, a true member may lose all hope and fall
in dyspayre / and after by grace come unto hope again.

Now where he says that love and co^sen^ to the law of god, is not lost by a
true member of the elect church: I wot not whyther Tyndals love remain or
no / but I am sure that by sin christen cheryte goth away. For neither
cheryte nor grace can stand to gether with sin. For as saint Poule says, 2. Corinthians. 6.
what felysshyp can there be between light and darkness, between Christ and
Beliall.

I say also that all his gaye goodly tale that he tells us here, of his
elect members with their holy feeling faith / to whom he would approper some
special pryuylege of keeping still faith, hope, and cheryte, with all their
heavy hepe of horrible deuelysshe deeds / I say that as farforth as in his
words is any treuth, his pryuylege is not proper to the members of his elect
church, but common to the

And the other part of his tale, which can not be veryfyed in the reprobatys,
that is to wit the keeping of cheryte


Tyndale. As a good child whom the father and mother h^^e t^^ght nurtour and
wisdom, loves his father and all his commandments / and perceyueth of the
goodness showed him that his father loves him, and that all his fathers
precepts are unto his welthe and profy^e, and that his father commands him
nothing for any need that his father has thereof, but seeks his profyt only /
and therefore has a good faith unto all his fathers promyses, ^^d loves all


More. or (to call them as him self calls them) horrible deeds.

And now to prove us this wonderful strange paradox, this opinion inopinable,
to be very plain, open, euydent, and clear / he furnyssheth it with samples so
feeble and so dymme, that the faint syghte of our sore eyes can scant attain to
perceive, how the samples any thing touch the matter.

For where he should to make us clearly behold it, put his ensemples in great
and horrible deeds, such as him self before in another chapyter confesses
that his holy members do: he forgets here now such horrible deeds as would
make the reders abhor the doers of them, and speaks fair and easily that
they be feeble sometime in temptacyon, and than they can not stand / and that
after they have sinned their faith is faynte, and when they should help their
neighbor their love is cold, and they be not pacyent in trybulacyo^s, and
when they suffer wrong they can not forgive lo, and when men take away their
goods they be angry, so they be lo.

Lo how angry Tyndale is with his true members of his elect church, and how
sore he lays their sins to

But sith that Tyndale now goth about to play the the master, and set all
the catholyke church again to scole / and would have us learn such hard
lessons as we never herd of the like / as that men may comenly do myscheuouse
the hateful herynge and beholdynge of their abomynable

Now sith we have for ensample taken no little pretty sins, but great and
horrible deeds / and have also taken for ensample no little pretty boy, but an
old great knave fytte and mete for the matter, as in whom may well and
co^uenyently

ye remember good reders that he says, that his true members upon great
occasyons, as upon the syghte of such things as delyteth them, be rauesshed
of their memory,

we might here let Iak slouche alone / and ask Tyndale whyther a another
slouche of his acquayntaunce his own master Marten Luther, not only a true
member but also one of the chyefe members of his elect church, has lain all
this while a sleep by the space of so many years to gether, sith he first ran
out of his order in apostasye, and after wedded his nonne, and yet contynueth
with her still. This friar and his nonne, drank well of lykelyhed ere they
went to their bryde bed, if they lie still and

But for as myche as Tyndale will not agree, that friar Luthers lechery with his
nonne, is any evil deed at all, but very well done and virtuously: therefore
though we need none other ensample against his frantyke heresye to the earys
of any good christen man, yet for Tyndale him self we must leave Luther lyenge
still a sleep with his le^man, and return again to Iak slouche / whose deeds
Tyndale will grant and agree to be horrible, though he deny them to be
dampnable because of Iakkes feeling faith / which though he feel it not
because he lies a sleep, keeps in him still yet the love to gods law, and
suffers him not to consent unto the sin, nor to do any such deeds
wyllyngly nor of purpose, or at the least wise not

Let every man here against Tyndals folyshe tale and shameless inuencyon,
take testymony and witness of his own wit / whyther he that by the deuyls
entycement defowleth his mother, poyseneth his father, and mordereth his
brother, and mocketh almighty god, and such other horrible and abomynable
deeds oftentimes, does delyberately with long deuyce and study bystowed about
it, do this gere wyllyngly and consent there unto / or else does all
vnwyllyngly, as he were a sleep or in a trance. Let Tyndale tell us what he
will / he shall I wene find no wise man in this point agree, that these bestes
do their detestable deeds vnwyllyngly, without consent unto sin.

Now towchynge Tyndals the other goodly refuge, that the horrible deeds of his
true members of his elect church

For where as finally Tyndale techeth us, that his true members of his elect
church do never sin dedely, because that after the luskes have played out
all their lusts, then they repent again and remember them self and their
fathers formar kyndenes, and be sorry: this is a fair tale

But then say we one thing forther, that where as the electes be by his own
agreement the penytentes only and the true repentauntes: neither him self
which repents not his abomynable heresies, but stuburnly stands by them
and says he will dye in them / nor his master Marten Luther, which
notwythstandynge that the luske has often times played out his lust, will not
yet leave his lechery, but lie still with the nonne, and defend for lawful
matrymony their fylthy life that is before god and all good men a very bestely
bychery / show them selves

yet says Tindale forther in y^ end of all this chapter, that all be it the
old kyndenesse of the father can not let the good child utterly dyspayre, for
all that he has played at spurn point by the way in going at scolewarde:
yet all the world can not set his heart at rest, until the pain be past, and
until he have herd the voice of his father that all is forgyuen.

These words would I have Tyndale apply me well to his gostely purpose / and
turnynge the sample of his good child into some old shrewe, and the playenge
at spurn and all, both eternal and temporal, both in hell and

And this is lo the conclusion of Tyndall in this his chapitre, of his false
faith ever assawted / which is as ye se now taken here with assawte, piece
mele on every side wounded, spoiled, and bounden / and quycke of felyng as any
blayne or botche, but utterly deed of grace sent down unto the devil.


Tyndale. The manner and order of our election. EVyn so goth it with gods
electes. God choseth them first, and they not god, as thou redest John^. 15
And then he sends forth and calls them, and shows them his good will
which he bears unto them, and makes them se both their own dampnacion in
the law, and also the mercy that is laid up for them in Christ's blood, and
thereto what he will have them do. And then when we se his mercy, we love him
again, and chose him, and submit our selves unto his laws to walk in them.
For when we err not in wit, reason, and judgment of


More. THis chapter depends upon the chapter before, in which he compared
his true members of his elect church unto his good child, whom his father
taught nurter and wisdom, and sent him to scole, and he like a mycher and a
trewaunt played at bokle pytte by the way / and when the game was done, fell
almost in despair of life for fere Even (...) it with gods elect.

yet since he resembles gods elect unto the little boy / he should have put
into the sample of his little child, that his little child sometime when he has
played the little young trewaunt, for all his r^membraunce of his fathers
goodness,

But we will not now for this time trouble Tyndale much with that matter. I
would that in this chapter all were well save y^. Forsu^ely this chapter is
very naught /

But first consydre how darkly the man walks in his way still. For yet he
handeleth it of that fasshyon, that he would not we should se, whyther he mean by
this^ word elect, the man that is elect for the time, after the manner of any
of those eleccyons that I declared you before in the beginning of my fourth
book / or whyther he mean of those electes yt are of god before the beginning
of the world forsene,

Thus which kind of electes him self meneth, Tyndale leueth vndeclared / and
will we shall guess at his mind upon his uncertain words, to the end that
he might ever have some refuge into a startyng hole / and when he were
plainly confuted and reproved, cry out upon me tha^ and say that I mysse take
him.

But I am content to take him therefore, that way that may^ be the strengest
for him self / and that way that his words gathered out of diverse of his
chapitres, some before and some here after, show most lykely that he should
Ioha^. 6
Have I not elected and chosen you twelve, and lo one of you is a devil. And
therefore as I say, the man lays the scripture very far from his matter.

But now taking him as he would say if his wit would serve

He says that after that god has chosen them (and tells not when /
whither after their coming into the world, or before the world were made /
so that he leaves it by those words yet in doubt which eleccion he moves,
whether unto salvation in the church tryumphaunte in heaven, or only in to the
church here milytaunte in earth) god he says sends forth and calls upon
them, and shows them his good will which he bears unto them.

Now here falls Tyndall in two fautes. One is that these words of his can
not be verifyed upon all electes,

But than gothe Tyndall farther and says, that god makes his electes see
both their own dampnacion in the law, and also the mercy

These words men would wene were but well and plainly meant. For they may seem
to good plain meaning men, to be well and plainly spoken, and as well and
plainly meant. But yet as ye shall shortly see in these words, that god makes
his electes se his mercy / as plain words as they be, and as innocent and as
simple as they seem, yet in them meneth Tyndale covertly to come forth with
his poison of false prechynge the predestinacyon of god, with destrucion of the
fre will of man concerning any manner of devour of them self toward the
^eleue and faith. For he ^^neth here, that god always makes the electes to se
these things, without any will of their own any thing workynge with god
toward the sight thereof / and that all the

And that Tyndale thus falsely meneth by those fair plain words / ye shall
farther perceive by other words of Tyndals own writing, afterward in his
answer to to the first chapyter of the third book of my dyaloge. For where
as I there showed, that the very books of the scripture if self, can not make
men believe yt scripture, nor very surely know which were the very true
scripture of god, and which were scriptures countr^fete, saving that the
catholyke church techeth us to know the scripture /


Tyndale. O ho^e betlebly^de is flesshely reason. The will has none operacion
at all (...) the workynge of faith in my soul, no more (...) the child has
in the begettynge of his father. (...) (says Paul) it is the gift of god
and not of us. My (...) s^ewe ^e (...) or an appatent cause why, yer my will
have any workynge at all^


More. Now perceive you good christen reders, what an unchristian mind this
evil christen man has in those words,


Tyndale. And then when we se his mercy, we love him again, and chose him, and
submytte our selves unto his laws to walk in them. For when we err not in
wit, reason, and judgment / we can not err in will and choice of things.
The choice of man's will does naturally and of her own accord, follow the
judgment of a man's reason, whyther he judge right or wrong, so that in
techyng only rests the pyth of a man's living.


More. Now trust I good reders, that it is inoughe that we perceive and se,
what Tyndale entendeth in this chapitre of the order of our eleccyo^ / and that
for all his great exclamacyon, we be not yet so betle blind, but that we spy
well enough which way this wyly serpent walks / and that he goth about under
color of the praise and commendacyon of gods predestinacion^ and ordinance
utterly concerning

And all be it that he seem here to give man's will in manner like place, in
the act of our love toward god, as he gives god in the work of our belyefe
and faith in us: yet when he is well perceived, he brings all to such
ineuytable necessyte, that both in the tone and the the other, and in all manner of
good works, he takes utterly away all manes of meryt from the good men and
electes / and gives unto the evil people and reprobatys an excuse for the^
self, and an occasion to lay the wight of there just dampnacio^, to the
vniusty^e of gods eternal ordinance and most ryghtuouse predestynacyon.
And yet are all his reasons in this great matter so small, that a man may not
well wit

Now all be it that I shall purpose to treat of this matter more at long with
Tyndale, when I shall come to the co^nfutacion of his fond answers made unto
the third and fourth books of my dyaloge: yet can I not presently forbere some
what to show you of his abomynable error in this point. And yet in good faith
me seems no very great need / his folyes after his words of both the places
brought forth and laid together, be now so plain and euydent of them self.

For who is so betle blind, that sees not clearly y^ dark deuelysh heresye
of this high spyrytuall heretyque, that says it is a betle blind fleshely
reason, to think that the good endeavor of the man's part in wyllyngly
conformyng

If man's will had no more part toward the attaynynge of the belyefe, than
the child has in the bygettyng of his own father / I se not wherefore our
sauyoure should call upon the people and bid them do penance, and believe the
gospel, Marce. 1.
as he does in the first chapter of saint Mark.

For though it be very true, that without gods help and gods grace
preuentyng and foregoyng, no man can believe: yet if there were nothing in the
man him self, whereby he might receive it if he would with grace which god of
his goodness o^^reth apply him self towardely to the receiving thereof, and
whereby on the the other side he might frowardly refuse it, or of sloth and
necligence so sleyghtly regard it that he were worthy to lose it: if there
were I say no such thing in the man whe^by he him self might some what do
therein with god, our lord would not call upon men, and ^xhort them to believe,
and praise them that will believe, and rebuke them that will not believe, as he
does in many plain places of the scripture.



what good thing is there that is not the gift of god? hoope, charytie,
coutynence, pitye, lernyng, wisdom, or any thing in this world y^ ought is.
For as says saint James, every good perfyte gift is from above discendynge
from the father of lyghtes. Iacobi. 1.
And saint Poule says, 1. C^rm^^. 4.
what haste thou y^ thou haste not received? And of whom meant he all thing
received, but of gods gift. Now will that is yet vnb^goten, can nothing
make nor mar.

Now if Tyndale would here labor to make us betleblynde with his bl^nte
soteltees, and tell us that we can do thing till god ^reuent us wyt^ his grace
nor nothing but as his grace goth on forth with us: these tales when they be
all told, be n^^ worth a whystle. For ye may tell him again, that we say
not that man's endeavor can any good do without god. But we say that when
men endeavor

I would also very feign wit of Tyndale / if him self were as ferme and as
fast in the true christen faith, as he is in his heresies / and then should
happen to fall in company with either Paynyme, Turk, Saracen, or Jew, and

whyther would Tyndale advise them thus? which if he did / then should he
teache them that mannys endeavor toward faith, is not a thing to be mocked as
him self mocketh it now / but that man's own will does somewhat toward the
gettyng of the faith, to the intent they should

And thus good christen readers, the reason that Tyndale makes us against the
endeavor of man toward the attaynynge of faith / which endeavor he mocketh
and calls it a counsel of betle blind reason, because faith is the gift
of god: I dowte not I say but that his reason


Tyndals other reason against the good endeavor of man's will is this.
Tyndale. My wit must show me a true cause or an apparent cause why, year my
will have any workynge at all.


More. Let Tyndale set his consequente and conclusyon to this antecedent made
of this reason, and say, My wit must first show me some cause either
true or somewhat

For what though my wit and reason must first set my will a wurke / can yet
my will when it is ones moved dyuersly between two reasons, no thing do at all
in remouynge an obstynat le^ynge to the tone side, or a conformable inclynacyon
toward the consent of the the other.

If all the faith of such trewthes as are taught, were in such wise inspyred
into every man's heart that is a

Now does god with his christen folks ordynaryly take that way in the
gyuynge them their bylyefe and faith, that though they do not merit with any
forgoyng good deeds, nor deserve the gift of byleuynge / yet may they with
good endeavor and obedyente conformyte, deserve and merit in the beleuynge.



And therefore I say, that god does not ordinaryly give Roma. 8.
though not sufficient and worthy (for as saint Poule says, all the passions
and sufferaunces of this world, be not worthy the glory that is to come that
shall be releued in us) yet such at the least wise as his high goodness
accepts and rewards for worthy, through the force and strength of those
merytes yt are in deed sufficient and worthy / the merytes I mean of y^ bitter
pain and passion of his alone only begotten and tenderly beloved son. Than
say I now, that sith y^ faith is not ordinaryly with such open inevitable
and inuincyble lyghtsomnes inspyred in

And that this is the ordynary manner of the faith given by god into the soul,
with the pliable and comfortable will of man / and not an ineuytable sight of
the troth inspyred

Does not saint Poule unto the Hebrews in the dyffynycyon of faith, Hebrae. 11.
openly and clearly declare, that the faith is an argument or matter of things
that appear not. Now if the resurreccyon of our own body were in this world
in such manner apperynge unto us, as it shall after the resurreccyon when we be
in heaven / it were now no faith at all but a sure knowledge. And therefore says
saint Poule also, that we se now as it were but in a glass, and perceive and
behold but as it were in a dark rydle / but in the the other world shall we se
face to face.

To show also that god gives not ordynaryly ye faith M^tth. ^^.
Jerusalem Jerusalem, how often have I wylled to gather thy children to gether,
as an he^ne gathers to gether her chyke^s, and thou woldeste not.

No man here dowteth, but that our lord if he would have used some such ways
as he could / it was in his power to inspyre the knowledge of him self into
their hearts, and of all thing that he would have them believe / and that in
such wise, that they should not chose but believe, for they should not chose
but know it / and that in such wise that they could not have thought the
contrary. But god had determined to bring man to salvation, not in such

And therefore let not Tyndale look to bring us in darkness


Tyndale. And than when we se his mercy, we love him again, and chose him, and
submytte our self to his laws to walk in them.


More. Here seems he to give as much to the workynge of man's will
concerning charity, as he before took from it concerning faith. For here he
says that we chose god, and submit our self to his laws / where as of
truth without his grace, both preuentyng us and concurraunt with us, we can in
these things neither, do nothing

Now meneth Tyndall ferther for all this, that man's will in these things
yet does nothing work at all but of necessyte. For he says ye god makes
the^ to se his mercy by faith, without any manner working of their wylles, as ye
have herd. And than he says that upon the sight thereof / they love god, and
chose him, and submytte them self to his laws. But yet says he, that their
wylles do this of inevitable necessyte. And than can no man if Tyndals lie be
true, neither in faith nor charity have any merit at all. For what can a men
deserve, in beleuynge ye thing that he thoroughly sees, or in doing a thing
when he can do none other. Now that Tyndale so says,


Tyndale. For when we err not in wit, reason, and iu^ement / we can not err
in will and choice of things. For the choice of man's will does naturally and
of her own accord, follow the judgment of a man's reason whether he judge
right or wrong / so that in techynge only rests the pythe of a man's
lyuinge.


More. Here ye se that Tyndale in loving and choosing by which man loves and
cheseth god, puts a plain necessyte that man's will can none other do,
because he sees the mercy of god by faith / which as Tyndall fayde before,
man sees also of necessyte, and so consequently no

But Tyndale says untrue in both. For man neither of necessyte sees the
tone, nor of nece^syte does the other, but may do the contrary both in the
tone and the the other / and therefore in doing both, meryteth in both what so
ever Tyndale say.

But yet says Tindale untrue in these other two things also / that is to
wit both where he says, that when a man sees the mercy of god, than he
loves and choseth god, and submytteth him self to walk in gods laws / and
also where he says for the proof of that point, that when we err not in
wit, we can not err in will / but that the choice of the will does ever
follow the judgment of the reason. For first what question is there, but that

Now as touching the the other point, that when we err not in will and
judgment, we can not err in will and choice of things / but that the will
always does naturally accord and agree to follow the judgment of reason,
whether it judge right or wrong: we shall differ the sotletees of that

Many a man that has a great wit and a great reason to, and much learning
joined unto them both, does yet more folysshely and more vnresonably, than
does some other whose wit and reason is very far under his, and as for
learning has utterly none at all. And whereof comes this? but in that the
tone with no learning and no great wit, has great good will to work with
gods grace and do well / and the the other with much wit and lernyng, lacks
the will to work well after his reason / and therefore lets grace go by,
and wylfully follows affeccion.

And if Tyndale in this believe not me, nor all the wide world beside / he will
I trust at the least wise believe him self. Now than says he in mo places
of his book than



But now knows every man very well, that all the pythe of a man's living
stands not in only techyng. For many be full well taught how they should
live, ye and so well taught that they be able to teache it other full well / and
yet live them self full naught. we shall not need to seek Matthew. 1^.
And yet as well taught as he was, and as well as he taught other to / yet was
his own living not very good, while he was both a the^e and a traitor both
to god and man.

And yet that we shall not need to seek so far as fyftene hundred year ago /
I wene it will be no great difficulty to find folk inoughe even now in our
own time, that can

But this wise reason among many like, learned Tyndale of his master Luther /
which at worms in Almayne at his being there before the Emperor said, that
if the gospel were well taught, there should need none other law. And this
said he there, and this says Tyndale here / because they and their fellows
would feign take away all laws, and leave nothing but sermons. And than after
that their ungracious he^esyes might be freely preched for the gospel of god,
and no law to let them / when after many

But Tyndale in this matter wha^ he has told us this tale, that the pythe of
man's living stands all to gether in techynge / he adds thereunto by and
by and says,


Tyndale. How be it there be swyne that receive no learning but to defyle it /
and there be dogs that rent all good learning with their tethe.


More. If there be such swyne and such dogs as in deed Matthew. 7.
that Tyndale tells us now / than is it false that Tyndale told us before,
that is to wit that all stands in techynge. For those swyne and those
dogs will be naught for all the good techyng. And than to keep such from
doing harm, we must not only teache and preche / but unto such as will be
like swyne, we must yoke them for brekynge hedges, and ring them for
wrotynge, and have band dogs to drive them out of y^ corn with bytynge, and
lead them out by the eres.

And if there be such dogs as in deed there be, that rent all good learning
with their teth / then stands not all the pyth of good living in good
teaching. For what avails to tech them that will not learn but rent all good

And who be now more proprely such dogs, then be

yet goes Tyndale forther and shows mo kinds of


Tyndale. And there be popeholy / which following a ryghtuousenes of their
own faynynge, resyste the ryghtuones of god in Christ.


More. These words lo good reder, expowne very well and very plain declare,
what techynge it is that Tyndale all this while so bosteth, wherein he says
all the pyth of good living only stands / that is as he takes it, the
techynge of his abomynable heresies, in which he techeth us that only faith
suffyseth, and that neither good works have reward in heaven, nor that any
evil works shall have any punysshement either in this world or in purgatory^
no

For Tindale makes as though it were no mercy at all, after a little penance
in this world done by the party

yet goes he finally forther to a another kind of such folk, as techynge can
not for a while help, and yet after does / and of them thus he says.


Tyndale. And there be that can not attend to harken unto the truth for rage
of lusts / which when lusts abate, come and obaye well enough. And therefore
a christen


More. Lo good reders here ye may se, what constaunce is in this man, here he
says (and says true) that men will at some time not learn nor harken to the
troth, though it be never so well taught them. And yet in a another chapyter
before, he shows that the electes as soon as ever they be taught the
troth, assente forthwyth and will never resyste / so he that has a false
part to defend, never woteth where to hold him.

But at the least wise, this that he now says is true and more to. For not
only when the rage is passed then men harken / but also when the rage comes
again, then many fall naught again and into dedely sin / and that of such
as after wax good again and finally shall be saved. And like wise some good
faithful folk, when false shrewys come, and false heretykes / do by ^alse
doctrine fall fro the ^rewe faith again, though they had it before right
lively. And yet of such, some turn again by grace from their dedely heresies
into the life of faith / and some be so sore nowseled in the fal^e heresies,
and in their obstynate frowardness take such a deuelysshe delyght, that
finally they dye therein / as did Bayfeld, Bayn^^ and Tewke^b^ry.

And thus good reders ye se that of his order of eleccyo^ Tyndale has in this
chapyter hitherto said no thing to purpose / and now shall ye se that as
little he says to purpose in this that after follows.


Tyndale. And though gods elect can not so fall that they rise not again,
because that the mercy of god ever wayteth vp^n them to deliver them from evil
/ as the care o^ a kyn^e father wayteth upon his son, to warn him and to
keep him from occasyo^s, and to call him back again if he be gone to far:
yet they forgette them selves oftymes, and synke down into traunces; and


More. Here makes Tyndale as though he said a great thing. And when his
words are well examyned / he both meneth very falsely, and speaks folysshe
wylyly. For where he says, that an elect can not so fall, but that he shall
rise again / he means that of necessyte the elect must needs rise again,
thor^we the mercy of god that ever wayteth upon him / which is very false.

For all be it that of truth the elect shall arise again by mean of gods
grace and mercy / yet might he if he would lie still in sin, when gods
grace and mercy calls upon him and byddeth him rise / as many reprobates do
upon whom gods grace and mercy wayteth,

Now that Tyndale thus meneth, appears plain by the whole process of his
work. wherein as concerning salvation and dampnacyon, he laboreth to make us
wene that the will of man does nothing wyllyngly, but were utterly forced and
ineuitably necessytat by the eternal eleccyon of god unto glory and his
eternal reprobacyon unto pain / which is as much, as to say that the will
of man is no will at all, any more than as he might say that the will of, a
tree were to grow and bring forth fruit and leaves,

And that ^e thus specially meneth in this chapyter of the order of our
eleccycon, appears as well in general by the hole progress thereof, as by
this also that he assigns that thing as the only difference between the
electes and the reprobates / alledgynge that the electes can never so fall but
that they shall rise, by the reason that mercy wayteth ever upon them. whereby
it well appears that Tyndale meneth, that no reprobate, that is to wit none
that finally shall be dampened, has gods mercy while ^elyueth waiting upon
him to call upon him, and stir him to rise out of his sin. For except he
meant so / he should put electes and reprobates all in one case, if he said
that the

Now menynge falsely thus / he uses yet in his speech a folysshe wylynes, as
does a cony that covers her head, and weneth all were well when all her loins
be open.

For he says that the electes can not so fall but that they shall be so saved,
because mercy wayteth upon them. And therein he says truth. For if god had not
foresene that they would finally turn again to him, and with help of his
grace deserve to be part takers of the mer^tes of Chry^tes

wherefore he were as good to speak out plainly, and tell us whyther he mean,
y^ after a fall mercy wait any more upon any reprobate or not. If he say nay,
he says against

And if Tyndale will avoid this / he must then say Apoca^^^. ^^.
that all the words of holy scripture by which god called upon the people to
repentance, be spoken only to the electes. And the^ must he tell every man,
how he may know

But surely if Tyndale tell us that the mercy of god wait upon the only
electes, and only calls upon them / he tells us a vain folysshe tale. And
so he does in deed / for so he meneth in deed against the plain scripture
and all the old interpretours of the same, and against all the old holy
doctors of Christ's church, and against the catholyke faith of all christen
nacyons this.xv. hundredth year, from the time of our savior him self and his
blessed apo^telles, even unto lowsy Luther days.

And yet natwithstandinge that he seems to assygne the

In this chapyter which Tyndale entytleth the order of eleccyon / I look
always that he should as reason is, tell us those things that properly
pertayne unto the electes / and the things that contrary wise appertain
properly to the reprobates / by which manner of handelyng of ye matter, we might
clearly perceive and understand what he meneth,

And always while I look for this / Tyndale, beside that his conclusyons be
false heresies in the end, tells us no thing almost by the way (except
only peradventure yt last repentance before the death) but that they be
comune as well to the fynall reprobates as to the fynall electes / as this is
also that in his chapyter follows, where he writes in this wise.


Tyndale. God now and than withdraws his hand, and leueth them unto their
own strength, to make the^ feel that there is no power to do good but of god
only / lest they should be proud of that which is none of theyrs.


Tyndale makes these words for a ground of a great matter, concerning the
order of god used toward the electes. And upon this fundacyo^ he specially
rereth his byeldynge, of the traunces, and the slepes, and slydinges of the
electes into sins and errors / in which sins yet they sin not, and in
which errors yet they err not, because of their feeling faith. From which
though they fall yet they fall not, because they feel it still though they feel
it not.

But what is there good reder in these words of his y^ he speaks of the
electes, that is not veryfyed both in the electes and in the reprobates to.
Now if he say that he speaks here specially of the electes, because at sometime
god wythdraweth his hand from them, and that from reprobates he wythdraweth his
hand of help and grace always. If

And therefore this that Tyndale here tells us of electes, that god sometime
wythdraweth his hand and leueth them to their own strength / he may as well
tell us of the reprobates as of the electes.

Now the cause why god wythdraweth his hand and his help, is not always the
cause that Tyndale here alleges, because he longs always to make a glaunce
against all the meryt of man's fre will / but to avoid the pride of the
mind, and the far less boldness presumynge upon Lucae. 18.
though he were proud of his deeds, yet ascrybed them not unto him self, nor
said not all this have I done good lord of mine own strength. But he said, I
thank the thereof good lord that I am such / and that thou haste made me
better, and given me the grace to live more holyly then this publycane / and
said not, I thank thereof my self. And therefore as I say, god wythdraweth his
hand to show his electes and (...) (...) (...) (...) 1. Corin^h. 4.
as though thou had not received it. He says not as though it were
thine own. For when I have received it, it is than mine and so may I call it.

Another false intent wherefore Tyndale tells us this tale of withdrawynge of
gods hand sometime from his electes, is because he would have it stand with
his heresye that he gothe so fast about / that is to wit that the electes do
not sin dedely in their dedely sins, because they do it not wyllyngly but
of infirmyte for lack of power. Inpursuynge of which purpose he would make it
seem, that god withdraws his hand from them without their fault, Matt^. ^^.
but to keep them only from the sin that they would else do at another time.
And where as god does for this point both for electes and reprobates all
after one, that is to wit never withdraws his grace from the tone nor from
the the other, till they begin them self to withdraw their will from him / he
dissymuleth that point, and goes forth in his matter that he byeldeth upon
that foundacyon,


Tyndale. God said so so^e a wayghte of persecucyon upon Dauides back, that
passed his strength to bear. So that he cries o^te out in his psalms,
saying that he had lived well and followed the right way of god in vain. For
the more he kept him self from sin, the worse it went with him as he
thought / and the better with his enemy Saul, the worse he was. Yet god left
him not there, but con^orted him and showed him things which before he wyste
not of ^ho^^ that the saints must be pacyent and abide gods heruest, until
the w^y^enes of ungodly sinners be full ripe, that god may repe it in dew
season. God also suffered occasyons stronger then David to ^ail upon him, and
to carye him clean out of the way. Was he not ready for a chursysshe answer to
have slain ^ ^bell, and all the males of his house, so myche as the child in
the cradell. How be it god withhelde him and kept him back from that evil,
through the wisdom of Abegall. How long


More. Lo good reders, here ye se that by Tyndales doctrine, David did no
dedely sin / but was ever out of fault and

But yet is Tyndale ashamed to confess and say boldly, that to be elect is
inoughe, and that he may do what he lys^e and sin at his pleasure, and that
god will give him leave to do it, and cause him to be repentaunt when he has
done it, and forgive him forthwith when he repents, and and so forth totiens
quotiens a pena et culpa, so that he believe it well and surely trust thereto,
lest for faynte hope and

First for they never sin but upon great occasyo^s far above their
strength. Secondely, for after their horrible deeds done, they repent upon
rebukyng without resystence.

First he says that David sins arose upon great occasyons above David his
strength / which great occasyons god suffered to fall upon him and carry him
away. For when he would have slain Naball and all his sons even to the
child in the cradell, he fell not into that mind without great occasyon ye
wot well. For the rude fellow had as Tyndale well reherseth, given him a
churlyshe answer. And what man were there so unreasonable, yt would

But we must here yet remember lest we mystake Tyndale, that these great and
strong occasyo^s were not so very great and strong of the^ self / but they
were as Tyndale says stronger then Dauyd, and able to carry him awaye^ whych^
he says, to show us yt they were of y^ strength in comparison of

Then would ye wene that he accuses Dauyd and the electes, because they be so
light and so frail to fall upon such occasyons as be strong to them, by
reason of their own feblenesse. Nay forsooth. For here ye must remember that
to provide them their excuse in this point, was the cause for which as I
told you before he laid for a fundacyon / that god at soche times first
wythdraweth his hand of his help, and then must they needs be weke, feeble,
and frail. And so their fall comes of the occasyons / and the occasyons be
mighty to them, by reason of their feblenesse. And their feblenesse comes of
the wythdrawynge of gods

And this is as ye se the first goodly cause, for which Tyndale will make us
wene, that the abomynable deeds of electes be no dedely sins because of the
great occasyons. Against which if the matter were worth the argument, we
would prece upon him sore with the sins of the reprobates / and bear him in
hand that some of them have as great occasyons of their sins sometime, as
is

But for as myche as the folly thereof is open and plain of it self / we shall
let the forther dyspycyons of this point pass, 1. Corinthians. 10.
as against which saint Poule plainly speaks and says unto us, God is
faithful which suffers you not



But yet is this but barely laid forth for the order of y^ electes. For of
troth thus do some reprobates to among repent, not only when they be
rebuked, but also before to / and be forgyuen at their repentance and penance
as well as be ye electes as long as they do so repent, till they be dampened
because they dye at last impenytent.

And also this is not proved to be always true, that every elect repents at
the first rebuke, and mekely returns John. 26.
which left not his dyffydence and dystruste, neither at the first speaking
nor the second, nor till he put his finger in god almighty his side. But
Tyndale excuses all that by being amassed, as he does all the electes horrible
deeds, by being in traunces and slepes, as he does Dauyd here. For that is ye
third point and the most special excuse of all electes from all dedely sin,
in that they be a sleep all the while they do it. For thus says he of Dauyd,
as ye have herd.

How long slombred he, o^ rather how hard in sleep was he in the adultery of
Bethsaba, and in the murder of her husbonde Vriah.


More. Dauyd was here in a very long slomber and a very deep deed sleep in
deed, if he did all those deuylysshe deeds in his sleep. Tyndale of lykelyhed
lay nere him and herd him all the while snorte and ^owte. And if he so say
that he did / then is his tale as full proved as is any part of all his
heresies. And except he say it of his own certain knowledge, he shall else
never make me believe, y^ Dauyd did spy her, and sent for her, and talk with
her, and get her with child, and sent for her husband, and deuyse the
murder, and write ye leter, and sent the man to his death, and all these deeds
in diverse days, and all this while still a sleep.

But Tyndale will have him a sleep needs, for the defense


Tyndale. Now in all that long time from the adultery of Bethsabe until the
prophet Nathan rebuked him, he had not lost his faith nor his love unto the
laws of god, no more then a man loses his wits while he is a sleep.


More Lo because he was all this while a sleep / therefore in all this while he
lost neither faith nor love to the law, no more then a man loses his wits
when he is a sleep. Is not here a wise tale trow ye? except that Tyndale
had either lost his wits, or else were him self a sleep while Lucae. 15.
and left the remanaunt and sought the lost sheep, and found it. And that
the woman had lost her money, though by ransakynge up her house and seeking she
found it at last again. Now Tyndale is not so mad I suppose, as to say
that if a man let fall his ring in the main see, though he find it five
wekes after in a fishes maw, that therefore he never lost it because he fyndeth
it again. The common people say among, that nothing can be founden till it be
lost / saving

Now if a thing may be lost in deed for a season, though it be after founden
again / how proves Tyndale here, yt Dauyd in all this long while between the
first sight of Bethsabe and the rebuke of Nathan, never lost neither faith
nor love.

He proves it us in this wise by ensample. A man yt lies a sleep leseth not
his wits / and therefore in likewise David lyenge in lechery, lost neither
faith to god nor love to his law. Is not this well lykened? yes by my she^he.
Less like than Poules steple to a dagger sheth^, till he

For god has naturally provided sleep for man's rest from labor, and for
his refresshynge again to labor. And the withdrawynge of the use of our
wits is there not forbeden by gods ordinance, except we sleep when we
should not. And so is neither aduoutry nor such manner of manslaughter / but ^e
things of god forbeden and of their nature abomynable. And in the sleep also
there is only a suspendynge of the use of the wits, and no contrary wylfull
doing against the wit / as there was a wylfull workynge of David, against
the faithful love of gods law in his horrible deeds.

For as for his faith, as farforthe as concerns only Ga^a. 5.
But surely as for the lively faith that works as saint Poule says by love
/ that kind of faith had he lost for that while in which he wyllyngly
wrought evil / except Tyndale say that all his lechery and his manslaughter
to, was wrought by love, because all that ever he did was done for the love
that he bare to Bethsabe. And if Tyndale tell me so / than dryueth he me to the
hard wall. For than can I go no farther in that point, but as for as
concerns his faith I must needs give it over.

away / and both his wit and his will suspended

Here is Tyndals proof pyked out unto the best that I can perceive of his
words. But now this reason of his,

But let this pass this ones as for this time / and se how he proves that
David was fallen to such a deed sleep, that he had in all that while neither
wit nor will / and therefore consented not unto sin against the law of
god. Proof lays he none i^ this world, but only says it was so. Now might
he lie by possybilyte, though his

Now than when David first began to spy her, let that be chance and
occasyon of one rysynge in his sleep / but when he lyked her and longed for
her, and stood still and looked on her, and kyndled his hete him self, and set
him self sore a fire / was he all that while a sleep? when he thought he
would have her, when he sent his messinger for her; when he stood and talked
with her, when he brake the matter to her, when he wanne her assent to the
sin, wha^ he fulfilled his foul fles^hely lust, when he sent for her

If I ask Tyndale here how he knows or why he believes, that David was
elected to salvation / what will he answer. He will not say I am sure, because
the church so techeth him, lest I should ask him again which church. For
than were he forced to grant that he believes well him self and syns he
believed wrong, of whose

In which point, as I have before proved in another chapyter by like matter,
if he were so a sleep, his very first

Nor it excuses not David nor no man else that Tyndale says, There is no
man so good, but that there comes a time upon him, in which he fealeth in
him self no more faith or love unto god, then ^ whyther this happens unto
the best men or not, god wot I can not tell / I wot not what affeccions they
feel / for I am none of them, nor I fere me Tyndale neither, as wise and
expert as he makes him self of their feeling. would god we were both of the
best, so the best were never the worse, nor waxen as evil as we, and we made
their matches in that manner wise. But this dare I surely say, that when so
ever the best is in such case / it excuses not David fro dedely sin. For
than is the ^este very naught.

And finally for conclusyon of David his deeds, where Tyndale says he could
not sin dedely because he was an elect / for which cause god kept him
through the feeling

For after those horrible sins so comytted by David, his dedely deeds so
dyspleased god, as it is written in the xii. chapyter of the second book of
kings, 2. Reg^m^ 12
that he sent Nathan the prophet unto him. which by the commandment of god,
after y^ he had put unto him the parable of the rych man that took away the
pore man's sheep, and thereby made him give sentence unware against him self /
he said forther

why haste thou then set my word at naught, and done evil in my syghte? Thou
haste killed with swerd Uryah Hetheus, and his wife have thou taken to thy
wife, and him have thou slain with the sword of the sons of Ammon. And
therefore the sword shall never be taken away from thy house, because thou
have despised me, and taken to thy wife the wife of Uryah Hetheus. And therefore
thus says our lord: Byholde, I shall reyse up evil against the, even out of
thine own house / and I shall take away from the thy wives before thy face,
and give the^ unto one yt is nyghest unto the, and he shall lie with them in y^
sight of this son. For thou haste comytted this deed pryuely / but I will
accomplish this my word in ye sight of all Israel and this son.

Lo good reders, here se ye very clear, that where as Tyndale says that David
in all those horrible deeds did yet no dedely sin, because he says he
consented not to sin, nor did none of these deeds wyllyngly, nor cast not of
the yoke of love toward the law of god / god here says that Dauyd did in
those horrible deeds dyspyce both his law and him self to. And how did he
then keep still his love to the law of god, in the while in which he despised
both the law of god and god him self also? Or how says Tyndale that Dauyd
consented not to the sin, when god him self that best knew his thought
laid his sins so sore to his charge, that he appointed an endeles plage for
the punisshement thereof? till by his repentance and his humble confession, god
as he forgave the dedelynesse of

For where as the prophet, had before his repentance and confession said
unto him by the bidding of god, The plage shall abide in thine house for ever
world with end / forthwyth after his repentance and his confession made, he
said unto him, Our lord has translated thy sin that was, from dedely to
venyall / that is to wit the punysshement from eternal to temporal. And
therefore the prophet said, that yet the child that he bygatte upon her in
that auoutry, should dye as it did after in deed. And yet was not Dauyd out of
hope with other penance (which he had lever sustain) to purge and redeem
ye punisshement to / and therefore fasted and prayed to save the

And thus good christen reders ye may clearly se, that all Tyndals proper
process of king Dauyd, concerning the order of his eleccyon, that he was
thereby preserved for ever from all dedely sin, is clearly comen to naught /
and all his words reproved by the very plain words of scripture. And yet by
the same scripture for advantage, is there a another of Tyndals heresy
destroyed / by which he teaches that after repentance all is forthwyth
forgyuen unto the elect, both sin and pain and all / so far fo^th that
for the sin passed, the party shall never after be punusshed nor suffer any
pain, neither in this world; purgatory, nor any where else. The plain
reprofe whereof

And now that Tyndale has of king Dauyd told us his wise process of not
synnynge, such as ye se it proved / he proceeds forth from Dauyd, and tells
us as wise a


Tyndale. And in like manner the apostles of ^hryste at his passion were
astonyed and amassed / and in such a storm of temptacyons, for the soden
change from so great glory into so vile and shameful death, that they had
forgotte all the miracles and all the words which he had told the^ before, how
that he should be betrayed and delivered on the same manner unto death. Moreover
they never understood that saying of his death, because their hearts were
always heavy and over ladde with erthly thoughts. For though they saw him
reyse up other / yet who should reyse him up when he were deed they could
not comprehend. Read what thou reder can / and thou shalt find no
temptacion like unto that from the creacyon of the world, or so great as it
by the hundred part. So that the wondrefull soden change, and the terryble
syghte of his passion, and of his most cruel and most vy^e death, and the
loss of whom


More. Here have ye herd good devout christen people, a piece of Tyndals devout
godly collacyon, in which the man is not so far fallen into devotion, but he
is much forther fallen from his wit / whereby he neither perceyueth y^ point
that he should prove, and over that sees not that his sermon says more
against his matter then we that impugn his purpose.

For his purpose is to prove us that none elect can at any time sin dedely.
And now forgets he that point, and tells us that the apostles never lost
their faith. which if it were granted him, yet wanne he not his purpose. For
they might keep still the faith in their heart, Roma. 10.
and yet syn^e dedely by the denyeng thereof with their mouth. For as holy saint
Poule says, In heart believe we for our iustyfycacyon Matthew. 10.
where he says, who so deny me before men, I shall deny him to before my
father, which is in heaven. And thus for the first point Tyndale in his holy
sermon is so deep in deuocyo^, yt he forgets where about he goth.

Now for the second point, where I said no more but that they lost the
suffycyent faith, that is to say the life of their faith / he goth about as I
told you, to prove us that the apostles such as were elect never lost their
faith at

For first read me all those words of his again / and as gayly as they be
cowched, with astonyed, and amassed, and stormy temptacyons, terryble syghtes
with their hearts perced, and their minds cumbred, with sight of his death, and
fere of their own, that ere they could believe his resurreccyon, he was feign
to eat and drink with them and to let them feel him / is not all this tale
excuses of their

Now where he says that all this happed them through te^ptacyon / that will
we well agree. But yet is that no more to say, but like as David did auoutrye
through temptacyon, and killed his good friend through temptacyon / and as Eve
ete the forbeden fruit through temptacyon, and Adam ete hit also through
temptacyon / and Judas bytrayed Christ also through temptacyon: so thapostels
fell from their faith, and l^ste it, and all through

But the sin of men stands in this, that they break the commandment of
god, in that they do not as he byddeth them, strive and resyste the temptacyon.
which till they cease to do, if they trust in god and call help of his grace
/ there can no temptacyon be so great that it can over come them / as
witnesses our lord by the mouth of saint Poule: God is faythefull, 1^
Corinth. ^.
which suffers you not to be tempted above that ye may bear / but gives with
y^ temptacyon away out that ye may well wyelde it.

But let Tyndale say for excuse of their sin what him list / which though
thoccasyons and circumstaunces

For where as Tyndale would seem to say well for the apostels, in that he
says they would feign have dyed with our savior, saving for the fear of
their own death: Christ had before forbyden them such fear of temporal
death upon the pain of eternal death, when he said unto them, fear ye not
them that kill the body / which when they have killed the body have nothing
that they can do more. But I shall show you whom you shall fear. Fear you
him which when he has killed the body, has the Ioha^. 12
shall lose it / And who so shall lose his soul in this world, keeps it still
for the everlasting life. And finally to show them that all these words
most proprely perteyned to the putting away of that fere of death, by which
folk for fear of death would forbere and refuse to dye for him and his
faith: he ^ayde the words which I before remembered, who so deny me before
men, Matthei. 10.
I shall deny him also before my father which is in heaven.

And therefore Tyndale in vain goes about to excuse the sin of Christ's
apostels, which they rather will have known, and the great mercy of god
therewith / and therefore

How be it that they sin not in lesyng of their faith, I let no man to
believe Tyndale, when sa ever he prove him self more credyble than Christ. But
here ye se that as I told you that they lost their faith in deed / Tyndale
proves us after his manner in his fore rehearsed words, wherein he says nay.

And yet is the man of so good remembrance, and so good head takes where
about he goes, that forthwith in his next words after he says very
plainly more and more, that they could not believe the resurrection / and
excuses them thus, that for all that they hated him not in their heart. Lo
thus he says.


How be it there was none of them that was fallen in his heart from Christ.


More. who can more plainly say that they were fallen from the faith and
lacked the belefe, than Tyndale says here? For though he says that none of
them was in his heart fallen from Christ / yet he says they could not believe
the substancyall article of the faith of Christ, that is to wit the belefe of
his resurreccion / without the belefe whereof all the remanaunt would not than
serve them to salvation.

And that they believed not that article, Tyndale here says expressly. For he
says that though they ran to the sepulcher, and would feign have believed
that he was Ioha^. 19.
and Nychodemus, and the wo^^en came afterward to strength and boldness,
Lucae. 24.
and that his two discyples toward Emaus burned in their breasts to here speak
of him: all this makes to Tyndales purpose in this point not the value of a
points end. For we speak of his apostels, in the time in which him self
says here they believed not, nor could believe it. At that time say I, y^ sith
they than believed not,

And also to what purpose tells Tyndale us, that they could not believe at
the bare prechynge of the woman? As though they were nothing to blame for
that, because they were but women / when the apostels them self kn^we these
women for such, as they were worthy more credence some one of them than some
many men.

And for to excuse the apostels in the lack of belefe, because the messyngers
were but women / Tyndale does therein no more but lay lack and ouersyght in
our savior, that in a thing that he would have believed, sent out such women
on his myssage.

But Tyndale woteth well if he believe the gospel, that no more they did when
they saw the miracle of him self

Nor yet saint Thomas, which as Tyndale says could not believe till he saw
Christ / neither did believe the woman nor all his own fellows, nor our
savior him self upon the sight neither, till he felt him fully, and put his
finger in his side. And this he did of stoberne standing in his mysse belefe /
in that after his belefe lackinge, he went not about to seek the truth, and
endeavor him self to believe them that told him the truth / but as it
seems by the gospel, obstinately stood in his distruste, and

And I say plainly, who so ever being enfourmed of any article of the faith
which god byndeth us to believe, believes it not / the cause why he believes
not is not because he can not, but because he will not. For if he would do the
thing which Tyndale takes for folly, that is to wit not resyste but
endeavor him self to submytte his reason unto faith, with asking help of
god for the fortheraunce of his imperfeccion / he thus doing his part, god
would I say not fail on his part again, but would effectually work with him
to perfyte in him the faith in which he preuenteth him by grace / which
preuencyon

But ever comes Tyndale by degrees / and ever he sees him self lykely to be
dreuen fro step to step. And therefore where he said yt the elec^e can not
sin dedely / first he alleges for the cause thereof that he synneth never,
but upon great occasyons. And seeing that a man may thereto say what than? He
goes to another step, and says that he never consents to sin. And than
seeing that step will not be defended / he goes to another, and says he
consents not to sin to serve it. And perceiving that he can not stand
sure there / he steppeth down to ye next, and says that he casts not of
from his neck the yoke of

Now as he played there / so plays he by the apostles here. For first he
says they lost never the faith, because they were amassed, and then astonyed,
and then aferde, and th^n because they could not perceive the thing for
poss^ble.


Tyndale. There was none of them that ever ^aysed on him, and came so far
f^rth ^o say he was a deceyue^, and wrought with the deuyls cra^te all this
while, and se whereunto he is come in the en^e, we defye him false wret^he that
he was and his false doctri^e also. And thereunto music they have com^ at the
las^e, when fear, sorrow, and wonderynge had been pas^e, if they had not ^en
p^euented and helped in the mean season.


Lo good chryste^ reders, here has Tyndale taught us, yt who so believe not ye
resurreccyo^ of Christ / yet all y^ while he rayleth not upon him and calls
him wrech, and defieth him, he is save enough. For all ye while though they
believe not, yet lacks he not his kylyef. And then if he be an ^lecte ^ he
shall be prevented of god, and helped before, ere ever he fall in to such
blasphemy. But and if he be a reprobate / then when he comes onys into ye case
that ye apostles were in as Tindale says / he shall for lack of such
preuencyon and help, fall i^to such raylyng and blasphemye / and then is he
remedylesse he says. And therefore says he both here and in diverse places,
that the seed of god preu^nteth always, and keeps and preserves the electes
from falling into ye case.

Here is a goodly tale be ye sure. But now whereby shall

The gospel to begin with for one piece, makes us sure of the contrary.

For therein we find that the traytoure Judas, which was I wene as far from
the bylyefe of the resurreccyon as ever was saint Thomas of Inde / came never
yet unto such raylynge and blasphemynge of Christ / as Tyndale says that the
apostles because they byleued not, had they not ben by grace prevented, must
needs have comen unto.

For when he went about to make his bargayn, and bytray him and sell him / we
find not that he called him false wretch, nor no such vylanouse word. And
after we find that when he repented and brought again the money, he was far
from raylynge upon him, and said I have

Now Tyndale will peradventure stycke upon some sotle conjecture of his own
and styffely bear us in hand, that though it be not written in the gospel, yet
did Judas when he sold Christ, speak of him some blasphemouse words, and had
opprobrouse lauguage against him / and that the blasphemy thereof was the very
cause why that he could never after by any repentance be forgyuen his sin,
and received again to grace.

If Tyndale thus tell us, and will wene by this way to wind out / we will for
this ones forgette to put him in mind of his own rule, that we need not
believe him forther then he fyndeth in plain and euydent scripture. Ac^uu^. 9.
persecuted and punysshed so cruelly the christen people / did rail and
blaspheme the name of Christ, and his doctrine, and miracles, and all that he
taught and did. And yet for all this was he received after to grace and
forgyuenesse / and was after elected, ye and for the foresyghte of his
repentance, change, and penance, was a chosen vessel before god before the
world was made / and had ones the right bylyefe of lykelyhed, as myche as
he was bounden to before the gospel preched, and then stood in state of grace
/ and yet was suffered through his own fawte to fall therfro, by refusing the
gospel of Christ, and after fell

But by this one ensample of saint Poule, are in ye mean while utterly
destroyed, not only Tyndals words last above rehearsed / but over ye all this
his hole chapyter of the order of our eleccyon / whereof the hole purpose is in
effect, that god keeps them ever from all dedely sin.

And thus good reders ye se how well he defends the

Is not here good reders a wise and well told tale? It is enough for me, that
how so ever Tyndale excuse their mystruste and vnbylyefe / I se them self
write, that our savior him self accused it, Maici. 16
and rebuked the^ sore of their incredulyte and hard heart, for that they had
not byleued them that they had seen him rise. And now that Tyndale has so
wisely defended them all / he comes partycalarly to saint Peter and says.


Tyndale. Ye and Peter as soon as he had denied Christ / came to him self
immedyately, and went out and wept bytterly for sorrow. And thus we se that
Peter's faith failed not, though it were oppressed for a time.


More. Tyndale ever laboreth to lead us a mile fro the matter. For well ye wot
the church techeth not, nor no man was there ever any where so mad to say,
that the chosen and electes do dye in dedely sin / but that they sometime do
dedely sins / that is to wit, such sins as if they dyed in them without
repentance of them, they should be dampened for them.

Against this doctrine of the catholyke church / takes Tyndale in hand to
prove us, as well by diverse other tytles of this book, and by his exposycyon
upon the first

Now good christen reders the point considered that is in debate between us /
ye perceive very well that either must Tyndale take and understand dedely
sin, for some other thing and in some other manner then all other men do, and
otherwise then it is taken and understood by ye catholyke church of Christ
against which he dysputeth / which manner of his dysputacyo^ if he otherwise
took

For Tyndale if he will prove that he did therein no dedely

This should he prove us ye wot well / and this ye se well he dissembleth. And
to prove that saint Peter sinned not dedely before / he tells us that he
repented after. which is the very thing whereby it is declared in holy
scripture, that his sin was grievous. For what was the thing he so repented /
but the sin of his denyenge. And therefore ye more sorowfully that he repented
it, the more bytterly that

And now comes Tyndale on the the other side / and by the self same sorrow,
would make men wene it was no dedely sin / by which it specially does
appear the contrary.

And than thus handelynge the matter, he is not ashamed to tell us in
conclusyon, that we now se by this wise reason, that saint Peter his faith
failed not. whereof he has as ye se proved us nothing / but has him self
told us by plain express words the contrary, when he told us that
thapostles could not for all ye women's words, believe that Christ was risen /
nor well in a good while

How be it all this he says was no faylynge of Peter's faith, but an
oppressynge for the while / as though I or any man else had any time said
that Peter's faith feyled for ever.

I say that it failed for the while, not for ever. And yet said I no ferther in
my dialoge thereof, but that his lively faith failed for ye while, because it
wrought not by love. But if his belefe stood still / it was a bare belefe,
barayne of the fruit of charity / with which it wroughte not in the heart,
when it brought not forth the confession of Christ by the mouth.

But mary Tindale has said yet more / and has taken away from him boldly
both quick faith and deed faith and all as for the while.

In which point when Tyndale has all done / he can never while he lives
avoid it, but that in saying that there was a time in which the apostels
could not believe that Christ was arysen again, he is agreed with us as for
the matter. For in those words he confesses, that in that time their faith
was fallen from them. But he stryueth still with us upon the word, and will in
no wise have that fall called faylynge, but amasyng and astonyenge upon great
occasyons, and with the great burden oppressynge.

well than sithe we be metely well agreed together, Tyndale and I in the matter
/ we will for this ones no longer debate about a word, and still dyspute all
day, whether falling may be called failing. But I am content to give it over,
and let Tyndale have his will, and abide thereby

And in like wise am I content, that if upon great occasyon of a long weary
way, with a deep mire and a great block in the botome, Tyndals horse happen
under him first to snappre and stumble, and after that faint and fall down in
the mire and tumble, and his master and he there lie to gether and iumble,
till some good fellow help them up and bring them to an inn, where they
tarry together till the horse be with mete and rest better grown in heart: let
Tyndall for me when he rydeth again, call his fall no faylynge nor no falling
neither. But yet shall he never

Now Tyndale yet after his foul fall, dissymulyng his overthrow as though
no man saw it / ryally tryumpheth and bosteth in this matter, that he has in
his chapyter of the order of eleccion, so well and wisely quytte him self so
like a pretye man. For joy and glory whereof, he fynyssheth his chapyter with
a pleasant proper taunt, wherein he taunteth me.


Tyndale. Therefore we need to seek no gloses for the text, that Christ said
to Peter how that his faith should not fail. Yes says master More, it
failed in him self, but was reserved in our lady. But let us se the text and
their gloss together. Chrys^ says Luke the.xxii. Simon Simon,


More. Tyndall here good reder feeling his matter very fayn^ and feeble, and
that by reason, scripture, or other good authoryte, he neither can impugn his
adversary nor defend

How be it if Tyndale had here rehearsed you my very words of my Dyaloge, as I
am in such cases wont to rehearse his / it would (and that he saw well) have
made his quycke merry scoff wax very dulle and more thanne half deed / as ye
shall well perceive I trust, when I come to that place in the replyenge to his
several answers made unto the chapyters of my said work. whereunto I shall
reserve the substance of mine answer to this wise cauellacyon of his,
against mine exposicyon and bettre men's to than mine, of those words of our
savior spoken unto saint Peter, I have prayed for the that thy faith

But where as he can in no wise bear the comen opinion of good Christen
people, that the faith abode at any time only in our lady / and therefore
mocketh and makes a gaye game, that saint Peter's faith should be preserved in
our lady, and that her faith should be his faith: I wene it will be no very
great sotell thing to perceive, that the faith which saint Peter confessed,
may both be his own in that he confessed it, and yet our ladies to in y^ she
believed it / and the thing also believed, is all one both in him and in her /
saving that it is hers in that she believes it, and his in that he byleueth
it. And yet if he lost y^ belefe thereof, it may be called still his /
understanding by that speaking, that he first confessed it. And therefore in
good faith I can not well se, wherefore we may not say

And therefore, where for the saltynge and seasonynge of his unsavory scoff, he
changes and mysse reherseth my words, and the very words of Christ's
gospel to / and has a pleasure to play between our lady and saint Peter,
and to toss the faith like a tenys ball from the tone to the the other, with
fond words of his own folisshe framynge, nothing nere to the matter when
the place in my dyaloge shall be as it shall ones be by gods grace, surely seen
and examyned: I trust to make you than se, that all his propre sporting
wherein he plays his pageaunte between saint Peter and our lady, may for any
wit hit has, serve him for a pastyme, if he satte saddely by

But yet reserving as I say y^ farther answer to mine other place, to which
this matter much more appertains: yet sith Tyndale says here him self that
the cause why no such gloss needs to those words of our savior, is because
that saint Peter's faith never failed in his own person / he confesses
thereby that if it ever at any time failed in his person, than at the le^te
wise some gloss there needs. And than dare I be bold to say, that if there
any need / the gloss tha^ that he mocketh let him rehearse it right, is such as
he will not this five year find a better.

But leaving that gloss as I say, till I come to my

And to thentent that we may deal well and plainly to gether / let him and me
first agree to gether, what the thing is whereupon we dispute. For he uses
often when he is conuycted, to say that he took this word or that word
otherwise than we take him therein.

Let us therefore first, because we speak of faith, here him declare what him
self calls faith.

To this after that he saw him self shamefully confuted,

Now shall ye se how courteysely that I shall handle Tyndale. For all be it ye
se well that I might by many means and many plain authorytees, Iacobi. 2.
as well of saint Iamys as saint Poule, and the very gospel to, 1. Corinthians.
13.
conuycte him in that point / as I have often done all ready: Gala. 5.
yet shall I for his pleasure let all that pass for this time, Matthew. 2^.
and take faith as he says he takes it him self.

But then ask I Tyndale this time, whyther that in the time in which Peter
forsook and forswore Christ,

Now thinks me than that between Tyndale and me there lacks now but one
thing / and that is what we call

If saint Peter had hold on still in that forsakyng and that perjury still all
his life, and so finally dyed therein, and had yet for all that all the while
byleued in his heart all the artycles of ye true faith, and the contrary of all
yt he said, and not only rayled no thing all ye while against Christ, but also
loved him to, saving not so well but yt he would rather forswere yt ever he saw
him, then to suffer pain and sorrow for him: I ask I say of Tyndale, if saint
Peter had continued his life and dyed in this state, had not then at no time in
his life his faith yt Tindale calls faith, yt is to say his bylefe with well
workyng love failed him? if he say no / the^ will it follow upon Tindals word,
yt there may be many faithful folk with a well workynge love, eternally
Lucae. 12.
in this world shall lose it. Ma^ci. 8.


The most part I suppose that of the christen people shall be dampened / the
cause of their dampnacyon shall be, that where as they believe right and love
god also, so far forth as he will let them live as they list and make merry,
and bind them to nothing that they have no lust to do / love him not yet so
suffycyentely, as for the love that they bear him, they will rather forbere the
pleasours of their life / and also rather dye then dedely to dysplease him, by
the doing of any such thing as he will rather that they shall dye then do
it.

Now se I therefore no remedy, but that Tyndale must needs agree, that if saint
Peter had in such state lived and dyed / his faith well workynge by love had
failed him.

Then sith it had then in sometime at the least wise failed him / let us
deuyde that time of that state of his from his first denye^ge and forswerynge,
unto the very minute of his dyenge, supposing to continue still and dye to in
the same state, into five egall parts if it please him / and then have we five
times all of one fasshyon / to which five times Tyndale if it please him may
give names to, and call them A, B, C, D, E.

Now say I than, sith Tyndale must needs agree yt n^ some of these five times
Peter's faith failed / I ask in which of them. whereto sith they be all five of
one fashyo^

Let us now then somewhat change our case, from that that might have been in to
that that was in deed. And after that Peter's faith had failed in the three
first times, that is to say those that are named ABC parts of the hole time,
whereof ABCDE were all the parts / let us put, that in the fourth part
^hyche we called D, Peter re^ented by help of gods grace, through ye mean of
Christ's foresaid prayoure / and that his l^^ynge bylyefe so came to him
again in that ^yme why^h we ^^lled D / and that he would ever after ^ather
suffer ten times to dye, then onys to forsake god again.



Now what Tyndale must needs answer unto this, he can tell well enough I
warraunt, when he looks in his card upon those letters in his cross row.
For there he must needs se, that though his faith fails never after while it
failed not / yet before while it failed, it ^ayled perde. whereof the prefe is
so plain upon his cross row that he must needs se it.

Now if Tyndale would wynk at these letters like a wanton ladde that no man
could make him look up: yet

For ye wot well that in those words of our sauyoure unto saint Peter, he
says unto him: And thou after that thou shall be converted, conferme thou and
make strong thy brethren. As though he might say, I have prayed for the that
thy faith shall not finally fail. But though it ^ayle for a time by forsakynge
of me, as I tell the tru^ly thou shall thryes do ere the cock crow / yet shall
it come in to the again, by the mean of my prayour. And therefore when thou
shall be converted again, that is to wit after that thy lively faith fallen
and faylynge for the time, and thou thereby turned fro me to my enemy through
forsakyng

Now se for gods sake where Tyndale has scraped out and altered one word /
in which one word stands the making and marrynge of all the hole matter.

For where as our savior said, when thou art onys converted, then strength
thou thy brethren / Tyndale puts out cu^uerted, and makes our savior say,
when thou art come to thy self again, then strength thou thy brethern.

And ^here as he in his translacyon had put in this

Now this ye s^ good reders very well, that though we g^aun^^ unto Tyndale that
a man may be turned to good, and turned to be bad, and turned to virtue, and
turned to vice,

And now ye se that Tyndale to make the gospel seem to agree with his heresye,
changes in his exposycyon the very chyefe effectual word, whereupon the pyth
of all the matter hangs. I will not therefore ask ye now y^ question that
Tyndale does, whyther ye think not as myche wit in the head of mad Colyns
as in the bray^es of such an

For else would he never for shame speak of that folyshe heresye, that none
elect at any time does dedely sin / which thing he sees so plainly
reproved by the scripture / and except a very ^ew heretykes, else, by the
agreement I wene of all the hole people of the world both christen and hethen
to, as many as believe the soul to be immort^^^^

And yet is it a better sport to se, how in the very point in which he
weneth him self to deal the most wylyly,

For where as all his purpose of this chapyter of the order of our eleccyon, is
only to prove that none elect at any time synneth dedely: even in the very
last end there of^ where he weneth lest, where he weneth him self to sytte
surest in the chair of his glorious tryumphe, and most merely mocketh and
scoffeth at his adversary / even there in his false exposicyo^ of this text of
scripture, And thou being ones converted confirm and strength thy brethren /
by his unwise wyly change of this word converted in to, comen to him self /
he is fallen from him self and perceived not that he that change has made
every man well perceive, that him self when he so changed that word perceived
very well, that the word converted, that is to


The recapitilacyon of all Tyndalles process concerning the church, from the
beginning hitherto.


And therefore sithe here is an end of his own part / it is necessary that we
brefely gather to gether and consider, what thing he has proved us therein,
or at the least (for proved has he nothing) what thing he has told us
therein from the begy^nynge hitherto.

Remember first good reders, that the occasyon of his

Now comes Tyndall, to teache us that the church is another church which
he will show you, and not the church that^ I told yo^. And whether the
church that he shows you can err or not, he will tell you. And therefore he
makes the title of this book, what is the church, and whether it may err or
not / wherein harken well now what he has hitherto taught you.

First he told us in the beginning, that this word church has diverse
significacyons / among which at last he bethought him upon twain. One a
general significacyons, by which it is taken for all that embrace the name of
Christ, though^ their faythes be naught, or though they have no faith at
all.

A another, by which it specially signifies only the electes / in whose
hearts god has written his law with his holy spirit, and gy^en them a
feeling faith of the mercy that is in Christ Jesus our lord.

All his other signifycacyons I let pass, as things not properly
pertaining to this present questyon of the catholyke church / except only
that which he has also diffined false, that is to wit the pertyculer
churches of

But in all his declaracyons of all the signifycacyons / he has as ye have
seen in my first part of this work, neither rehearsed them all, nor taken
^yght almost any one of these that he has rehearsed.

For lettynge as I say the remenaunte pass as now not pertinent proprely to
this matter, and reproved in mine fyr^te part ^f this work: of these two
last significacions has he done his part in neither another / but has as I
there showed, lift out the chief significacyons of all,

For as touching the first of his two last, if he will say that he meant that
for the catholyke church, than I say that he defamed it false. For the
general catholyke church is not the nombre of all y^ embrace the name of
Christ, whether they have faith true or false, any faith or none.

For heretykes such as Luther is, and zwinglius, and wyclyffe, and him self,
that first wylfully leave and forsake the catholyke church and the catholyke
faith thereof, and be therefore after precyded and cut of there fro, and cast
out thereof / neither be nor never have been accounted, either in the church or
of the church / though they still call

Than as touching the second signifycacyon of the only electes, which is
the church whereof he ^abereth in all this work / and would have it only
taken for the church of Christ milytaunte here in earth: let us consydre
ordrely from the begyn^ynge to the end, what he tells us thereof, and to what
wise end at last he brings all his purpose.

Aft^r his defense of his translacyon very fondely defended, to prove us that
the church is only the nombre of electes / in whose har^es god has written
his law, and

There with scoffs and monks he concludes against us, that the word was
before the church / whereof never no man said the contrary.

But that the written word was before the church, which was the thing that
him self had said and mente, and which ever was an^ is his princypall ground
and foundacyon, whereof we had said and yet say the contrary thereof / in all
that chapyter neither any thing proves he, nor any thing so much as speaks.
And so that chapyter

More over, sithe he brings forth that chapyter, for the proof that the
only electes be the church, for there about goes all his matter / and well
ye wot the word of god both written and unwritten, may be and is believed
both of the electes and of the not elected: therefore is also that chapyter
nothing at all to purpose.

Finally sith he speaks of the law written by the spyryte of god in the heart
/ now sithe that law so written there, is rather y^ word of god unwritten,
than his word written in the books of the scripture that we have / of which
words only, Tyndale makes all his matter, and abhors every word that god
would either speak or write beside the scripture that we have all ready: this
chapyter

Than goes he forth with his other chapyter, wherein he laboreth to prove
that the apostels left nothing unwritten that were necessary to salvation /
meaning that we be bounden to believe nothing, but only that that they have
written / and that (as Tyndals master Martyn Luther says) evidently and
plainly written. wherein who so consider what I have answered him / shall I
trust well perceive that it had been better for him to have left that matter
untouched.

For both is his purpose on his part unproven, and the contrary to him proved
/ beside that it is in many places proved, that the sacraments which he
reproves be

How be it he cor^ecteth and amendeth therefore his doctrine of that chapter,
(...) another chapter after. For where as in the former chapter, he t^c^eth
that we be bounden to believe nothing of necessyte, but only that that is
written in the scripture: yet ^este we should be thereby concerning our belefe,
over ^^^^^tely re^^rayned of our euangelycall liberty / he bethynketh him
self better / and in his other chapyter after he techeth us that we be not of
necessytie bounden to believe all that neither / but so that we believe the
promyses, we may be saved well inoughe he says, beleuynge not other things
written even in the very gospel it self.



Thanne comes he forth in his chapyter with this questyon, whether the
church can err or not. And there he first says, that this comen known
catholyke church both may err and does err / and proves it by his bare
word. And than he shows what him self calls the elect church / and
says that it is the whole multitude of all repenting sinners that believe in
Christ, and put all their trust and confydence in the mercy of god / felyng
in their hearts that god for Christ's sake loves them, and will be or rather
is merciful unto them, and forgyueth

Than goes he forth, and bosteth hyghly this manner of feeling faith that is
heresies instead of faith, as I have in mine answer proved / and therein he
spends up that chapyter.

But yet though he thus descrybe the elect church: yet does he not prove
that this is the church which we must here and obey. For god has
commanded us to complain to the church, and here the church, and obey the
church. And therefore though we agreed every thing

Also where his title of that chapyter is, whyther the church may err:
Tyndale saying that the catholyke church may err / whyther the elect
church which him self takes for the church may err or not, he says not
in all that chapyter any one word. And so is his chapyter neither any thing
toward his pryncypall purpose / nor yet, which is more shame for him, any
thing conteyneth in it belonging to the matter of the title.

Then comes he forth with his other chapyter that a true member of Christ's
church synneth not, and is yet for all that a sinner. which chapter besides
that it is but

After comes his other goodly rydle, that a christen man can not err and
how he may yet err. And therein he tells us as I have before showed you, yt
the electes can not err in ye promyses of god / and as for all other errors,
none can (he says) be dampnable to them, though the contrary of their
error be written in the very gospel.

By which doctrine of his ye may se, that errors of

yet ye se well that this chapyter if it were all as trew^ as it is all false /
proves yet no thing which is the church. where as he should fayste have
proved that the electes only be the church, and then after search whyther they
can err or not.

Then comes he forth with his other chapyter^ that the faith which he has
before descrybed, is ever foughten

Now this great conclusyon whereof he makes this chapyter is such, that as ye
se well thereupon depends many great matters. yet does he not in all this
chapyter bring forth any manner thing for the proof, either reason, scripture,
or other authoryte / but only by his own bare word, tells us that it is so.
Now if he told us a thing well known or comenly byleued, I should not blame
him. But now to tell us such a thing so strange, and unto every man save him
self so inopynable, and such as no man would wene were lykely to be true, and
bid us so boldly believe it,

Finally comes he forth at last with his chapyter, of which he calls the
manner and order of our eleccyon.

Therein he tells us concerning electes, and y^ order of their chosyng, that
god does first chose them, and after calls them, and techeth them, and
makes them se their da^pnacyon in the law and mercy laid up for them in
him, and what he will have them do. And the^ they chose god again and submytte
them self to his laws to walk in them. And that thing he says the man does
of necessyte, because his will can do none other / but his wit must needs se
the things that god makes him se, and his will must needs

Then he tells us that the mercy of god allwaye wayteth upon the elect / by
reason whereof he can never so fall, but yt he shall rise again. But yet he
shows us forther, that for all this the elect synketh down sometime, and
^alleth into traunces and slepes, by which he forgeteth him self, and then
does diverse horrible and abomynable deeds in his sleep. But yet in all his
horrible deeds he does no dedely sin, because he does them all of fraylte and
infyrmyte, and none of them of purpose or wyllyngly. For wyllyngly can he not
do them, because he lies a sleep / nor in all y^ while his faith never fails
at any time. And this he proves us by thensamples of king Dauyd, and saint
Peter, and saint Thomas of Inde, and the other apostles.

And here is all Tyndals hole tale, that he has from the beginning hitherto
told us / whereby we should learn of him which is the church, and whyther the
church may err or not. In all which who so look it through and mine answer
therewith / shall well perceive y^ he has not in all his hole process half a
lefe to gyther nor almost half a line, without one great folly at y^ lest, or
else a lie and an half.

Consider now that of his electes, which is of his

For as for any endeavor of them self at gods good mocyon toward the
faith, they do no more he says then

And sith these folk that are Tyndals electes, have or wene they have, such a
feeling faith, that thereby they feel or else wene they feel that they can not
be dampened / but have here learned of Tyndale now, that what horrible deeds so
ever they do, they can never do dadely sin / and be also very sure to
repent, and the^ to be never punyshed in hell, purgatory, nor in this life
neither. (For so far says Tyndale now) but with a short repentance after
long lyenge in sin, saying ones Christ help for the manner sake, as it
were after a snesynge / the fre^ys may from

And these be as ye se now Tyndalys special electes / which only number by
his high spyrytuall doctrine, he would we should take for the church.

Now good Christen reders if we would grant unto

For where as in the first he defyneth it to be only the electys, in whose
hearts god has written his law with his holy spyryte, and given them a feeling
faith of the mercy that is in Christ Jesus our lord: afterward in the secunde
he says that it is the hole multitude of all repenting sinners, that believe
in Christ, and put all their

Now ye remember that Tyndale has put you by the way, two special great
heresies. One that who so ever after baptysme ^ynneth ones of purpose and
wyllyngly, shall never have remyssyon after. The the other, that who so have onys
his feeling faith, can never sin dedely

Let us now se in the end, beside that these heresies of his be all ready
otherwise impu^ned and reproved: let us yet forther se how his dy^fy^ycyon of
the church and his heresies, will iumpre and agree to gyther among them self.

And first I ask Tyndale, whyther he that have ones after his baptysme sinned
of purpose and wyllyngly, and set malycyousely thereto / may after by gods
help repent again that ever he s^ did / and believe therwithall, that he is
bounden to believe and love god and his neighbors as god byddeth ^ym to do.
May he after such a sin done, do this by go^des help o^ not?

Tyndale will peradventure say he may not. Then I Mat^hei. 17.
Hebr^. 6.
It is impossybl^ that they which have ones ben illumyned etc. and the wo^des
of our sauyoure him self spoken of the sin of blasphemye against the holy
ghost, do prou^ it / which I will then deny. For those places taking them as
falsely as any heretyke can construe them, say yet at the vttermoste no more
but that his sin shall never be forgyuen him / and says not that he shall
never again repent, nor that he shall never well believe, nor that he shall
never after love god nor his neighbor.

whereunto if Tyndale will say, that if he might come to very repentance and
very bylyefe and love, he n^des must have his sins remytted and be saved /
and sith Ezechiel. 33.
thou shalt dye / and the same ^ynner repent him of his sin, and deal
justly and ryghtuousely, and deliver again the pledge, and make restytucyon
of the ^o^bery

^

(...)

And thus must either his heresye distroye his diffinicyon, or his diffinicion
must destroy his heresye. Of wh^che twain yet it will be more honesty for
him to keep his diffinicyon still, whereupon all his whole matter hangs / and
let his heresy go to the devil yt gave it to him / and than understand those
places of scripture whereupon the devil taught him to ground it, that either
the blasphemye against the holy ghost is final impenitence, and the the other

you se well and perceive, that in his second diffinicion he restrayneth his
elect church, unto only repentaunte sinners that believe as him self shows
you.

And than has he confessed unto you, that his chosyn electes plainly do
sometime abominable deeds / which deeds yet they repent not always, till the
rage be paste / and till as Tyndale says yt they have played out their lusts
/

ye remember very well I wot well, that he techeth us plainly, that none of
his electes does at any time sin dedely, though their deeds be never so
horrible and abomynable, because of their feeling faith which can neither at
any time fail, nor suffer any of their horrible deeds, to be dedely sin. And
therefore are they consequently never out of the favor of god, not even in the
time wherein they do their horrible and abom ynable deeds,

And therefore sith they be so / wherefore does Tyndale that is in some places
so angery with yt catholyke church, for the putting out of evil folk by
excommunicacyon / excommunicate good folk now and put out of his elect church
him self and faithful / and finally such as though they be fallen a sleep in
lechery, theft, sacrilege, inceste, and murdre, stand yet hyghly still in
gods especial grace and favor.

Now the fautes that are commune to both his diffinicyons, and yet more open
in the second than in the first / I shall not need to rehearse you. For both
have I touched

For where all his electes depend upon his feeling faith and his repentance
/ while him self shows what false artycles he techeth his electes for their
faith every good faythefull man very well feleth, that the more that Tyndals
electes feel his false faith, the less faith have they, and the more
faythlesse be they.

And when he techeth them to repent the right belefe of Christ's sacraments,
and therein the right rule and order of repentance: every true repentaunte
person well perceyueth, that Tyndals repentaunte electes, abhorrynge from
shryfte, and reiectynge the sacrament of penaunce^but

But now suppose that all were very well that Tyndale here has said / yet
how has he with all that proved his purpose? He has told us that the whole
multitude of his fassyoned electes is the church. But what one word has he
told us toward the proof? neither reason nor one authoryte of any old holy
saint, nor any one text of scripture / but only one or twain such as
nothing makes for his matter, but utterly clear against him.



And therefore now has he nothing proved which from all holy days, and
specially (for so these heretykes

And thus good christen reders, sith ye now plainly

Here endethe the fourth book.

Answer unto the chapyter of Tyndale, in which he would prove that the known
catholyke church is not ye church. whyther the known catholyke church can
be the church.
YE have all ready good christen readers well seen and perceived, that Tyndale
has in a long process labored to prove you, that the church of Christ is a
another company then the known catholyke company

This I say ye have all ready seen, that Tyndale has by a long process
labored much to prove us / and has in co^clusyon not only no thing proved us
thereof, but has instead of feeling faithful folk, brought us forth such a
sort, as never was there puddynge stuffed so full of farsynge, as his holy
feeling faithful folk are farsed full of heresies.

wherefore seeing that for the very church of Christ here in earth, which god
has and ever shall instruct and preserve in his true faith and out of the
faith of which church shall neither be true faith hope nor cherite / he can
when he has all done find out none other, then this common known catholyke
church of all christen people, neither of malice gone out nor for obstinacy
put out / of which

About this purpose uses he now this order. First in one chapyter he takes
upon him to prove yt the known catholyke church is not the church of Christ.

Afterward in his other chapyters following, he pretends to answer and
soil the reasons, with which it is proved that the known catholyke church
is the church of Christ, and that none of these sects of heretykes be.

And yet pretendynge as I say that he will soil all the reasons of the the other
side / of so many as there are he towcheth only twain / and yet those twain
how simple he soyleth, that shall you after se.

Let us now go to Tyndals first point / which point in his first chapyter
how falsely he handeleth and how far fro the point, it is even a world to se.
For first he makes the title before his chapyter in this wise.

Tyndale. Whyther the pope and his sect be Crystes church or no.


More. well ye wot good christen readers, that I (whose dyaloge in the
beginning of his wurke he professes him self with all his hole book to
answer) have in places

Thus did I never defyne the church / but purposely declyned therfro, because
I would not intryke and entangle

And then if the pope were or no pope / but as I say prouyncyall

And therefore may y^ good christen readers se, yt Tyndale which in this
point will in no wise perceive me, but makes the title of his chapyter
whyther the pope and

Now is not the title of his chapyter so synystrely written and wryed away from
the point / but the beginning of his chapyter it self, is much worse and
forther wrested wrong. For lo thus he begins.


Tyndale. That the pope and his spirits be not the church may this wise be
proved.


More. Lo before in the title he made his questyon of the pope and his sect,
which questyon as I have showed you he framed far from the matter / and sith
those people which Tyndale calls ye popys sect (by which name he meneth all
that profess the common catholyke faith) be all the nacyons chrystened, except
a few late fallen to Luther, wyclyffe,

But where as before in the title he made as I say his questyon of the pope
and his sect / here he turns it into the pope and his spyrytes. In which
except he call spyrytes in mock and scorn / all christen nacyons besides
those corners that profess them self for heretykes / he must needs

And Tyndale very well woteth, that the spyrytualtye so farforth does account
not them self alone but the temporaltye, and them self to gether for the
catholyke church / that there is not so pore a friar, but he professyth it
almost in every sermon. In which when he exhorts his audyence to pray for
the church, he says not ye shall pray for the spyrytualtye alone / but ye
shall says he pray for the three estates of holy church, that is to wit
the spyrytualty

Now it is a great shame for Tyndale to fly fro the point as he does, in a
matter so plain and open, that every child may se how loathe he is to comme
nere and cope.

But Tyndale has all ready ryden so many shrewed courses, in which he has
had such buffettes, that he has almost broken his horses back and his
own to / that now neither is there bear nor heretyke more loathe to

And therefore drawing a side and flyttynge from the church, that is to wit
from the hole multitude of all christen nacyons spyrytuall and temporal
both, which is the tylte by which he has to run: he standythe still at
the tyltes end tymperynge and temperynge about his harneys, and will no
forther then the spyrytualtye / but puts of his helmet and does on a folys
hode, and from iustynge falls to jesting, to do the people pleasure, and
dreue away the matter with making of mockes and mowes. For now lo shall we
peruse his proves. Lo this wise reason he brings in the first.


That the pope and his spyrytes be not the church, may thy^ wy^e be pr^ued.
He that has no faith to be saved through Christ, is not of Crystes church. The
pope ^^^eueth not to be saved through Christ. For he teaches to trust in holy
works for the remys^yon of sins and sa^uacy^n / as in the works of penance
enjoined, in vows, in pilgrimage, in ch^styte, in other men's prayers and
holy living, in freres and freres cotes, in saints merytes. And the
sygnyficacyons put out / he teaches to believe in the deeds of the ceremonies,
and of the sacrament; ordained at the beginning, to preach unto us and to do
us service / and not that we should believe in them and serve them. And a
thousand such superstycy^usnesse sets he before us instead of Christ, to
believe in neither Christ nor gods word, neither honorable to god nor
seruysable unto our neighbor, nor profitable


More. Some man would here peradventure say to Tyndale, that he plays in
this point the very folysshe dysour, for the fault of the man to rail upon
the office / consyderyng that all be it there have popes been that have evil
played their parts, yet have there ben popes again right holy men saints
and martyrs to / and therefore in jesting thus upon a good office for an evil
offycer, he can lack no matter of raylynge, but may run out in his

Therefore would some man think I say, that Tyndals raylynge here upon the
pope were all run out of reason, though that all the things which he lays
here to his charge, were in deed as evil as Tyndale would have them taken. But
surely sith the man has fawtes enough beside / I will my self defend him
well in this.

For first he proves us that the pope byleueth not to be saved through Christ,
because he techeth to trust in holy works for remyssyon of sins and
saluacyo^. Is not here a peryllous lesson trow ye / namely so taught as the
church techeth it, that no good work can be done without help of gods grace,
nor no good work of man worthy the reward

^
and give almoyse, and forgive our neighbor / and we pore men that lack the
high spyrytuall syghte that Tyndale has and his holy electys, take these
things for good works. And god says in his holy writ, that he will forgive
our sins the rather for them, and will reward us for them, and through the
scripture / this cries god in our earys, and faithfully promyseth almost in
every lefe. And now ye se Tyndale that precheth so fast of the faith and
trust of gods promyses, would have us in these p^omyses trust god nothing at
all.

But herein is great peril, ^
specially to hope and trust to get any good at gods hand for y works of
pena^^^e

If Tyndale list to look in saint Austayn in his book

But than does Tyndale specially touch, ^
that ye church techeth to put trust in vowys and in chastyte / for that is a
thing in the earys of Luthers electes of all things mo^^^ abomynable. But the
church techeth none other tru^^^ therein, than the scripture does hy^ self,
and our bl^^s^d savior him self.

They teache says Tyndale, ^
to trust in other men's prayours and holy living, in freres and in freres
cotys. Is not here an abomynable sin, that any man should have so little pride
in him self, that he should think other men much better than him self, and
therefore desyr^ them to pray for him to, beside him self. In how many places
Ia^^^i. 5.
but think that it were right naught worth at all / or because the scripture
so commends the prayour of a good man, should we like his prayour the less
for his holy living, and bid him pray not for us but if he live naught / or if
he be a friar and go in a freres cote, bydde him pray not for us, till he put
of his frerys cote and put on a frese cote, and ru^ne out of his order, an
catch him a queen and call her his wife?

Than goes he from good lyuers in earth unto saints in heuyn / and fyndeth yet
more fault, in that men are taught

How be it in this point I dare be bold to say for Tyndale my self, that he
is not so folysh, but that he sees well I nough that if I may well pray my
neyghbur to pray for me that is here with me in earth / I may much better pray
the saints pray for me that are with god in heuyn / saving that he byleueth
that they be not there, nor neither here us nor se us, but lie still as Luther
says a sleep. And therefore Tyndale lest we might wene that he byleued well,
byddeth us in another place of his book, that when we mete ye

He blames us and bylieth us, as though we took their deed ymagys for quyke.
But him self seems yet much worse in deed, Matthew. 22.
that takes gods quykke saints for deed, against Christ's own words
declarynge the contrary, both by the scripture in the gospel of saint
Matthew, and by the story that Christ also tells of Habraam and the rich
gloton and Lazare in the.xvi. chapter of Luke. ^ucae. 16.


Than comes Tyndale in at the last with the ceremonies

How should they now be the denyeng of Crystes blood, when the church teaches
us as god has taught it, that they all have their strength by Crystes blood,
and that in the tone of them is Crystes own very blood and his blessed body
both. Both which this heretyke denies / and as in my first book I showed
you, both iesteth and scoffeth upon the precyouse body and blood of Christ
in the

And now that ye se good christen reders for what doctrine Tyndale rebukes the
common catholyke church / ye can not but thereby perceive what doctrine he would
have them teache / that is to wit that we should have no respect to good
works, use no shryfte nor penance, beware of chastyte and bless us well
therfro, let no good men pray for us, nor none that use holy living, no
Francysce friar bydde any bid for us in his freres cote, till he do of his
graye garments and cloth him self cumly in gaye kendall grene / set saints
at naught, and all holy ceremonies used in gods seruyse, and als the seven
sacraments to / make mokkes at the mass and at Crystes body, and


The second reason.
Tyndale. Another reason is, who so ever believe in Christ consente^h that
gods saw is good. The pope consents not that gods law is good / ^or ^e
has for^^den lawful wedlokke unto all his over whom he reygneth, as a
tempo^a^^ tyrant with laws of his own making, and not as a brother
exhorting.


More. Here Tyndal proves us that no pope byleueth in god /

Now this glawnce that Tyndale in raylyng upon popes makes by the way at all
temporal princes and laws

And thus ye may se that the shrewd sort of all this sect, would not only
have popes and popes laws gone and

But now is it good to se what law so specially lies in Tyndals eye / for
which he generally rayleth upon all the remanaunt. That is for that he says
that the pope has forboden lawful wedlock. In this he meneth two things,
with which two Luther and wyclyffe were evil

But this thing, to which pope will Tyndale lay? For he shall find that in
these things the old holy pope saint Gregory and diverse other holy popes to,
and not popes only but also diverse counsayles and great assemblees of holy
virtues fathers, have in old time sone upon chrystendome well spredde abroad,
for encreace of natural honesty and propagacyo^ of christen cheryte, forboden
marriage to be made with other degrees both of kynred and affynyte, much
forther of then they that abide now forboden

The the other law that he lays so sore against the pope, is that prestes,
freres, chanons, monks and nuns, may not be suffered to be wedded, contrary
to their own vowys and promyses made unto god, which no man compelled them to
make. Is not this a great fawte tha^ friar tukke may not mary mad Maryon?

But then to set out this matter some what the better to the show / he ryally
rayleth out at large upon all bysshoppes, archedekens, and other spyrytuall
officers. whose fautes if they be such as we well know that he falsely
bylyeth many / yet were their evil deme^nure neither to be imputed unto the
law which forbedeth it as ye gospel does nor unto the pope. which when he
has been informed of a bysshoppes fault, has as by diverse decretales appears
proceeded to the punysshement and amendment thereof.

But Tyndale lets not to lie out alowde, and say that the pope has him
self granted unlawful whoredom to as many as bring money / and in another
place of his book he says, that the pope has in Rome set up a stewys of
boys.

we have had many pardonys come hither and many dyspensacions and many
licenses to / but yet I thank our lord I never knew none such, nor I
trust never shall, nor Tyndale I trow neither / but that he lysteth loud to
lie. And as for his lycences custumably given by the ordynaryes, I trust he
lies in other countrees / for as for England I am sure he lies. And therefore
every honest man will I wot well take his tale thereafter, for in the like
manner he may when he list, and will hereafter when he sees his time, rail
upon eu^ry ^orde that has any let, and upon all the sessyons of peace kept
within the realm / in all which many kinds of malefactors are amerced
yearly, and fynes set on their heddes, and they compelled to pay them, to
compelle them the^by to leave

And consider that his second reason wherein he reproves all laws the
spyrytuall openly, and covertly the temporal to, and for the laws calls the
makers tyrauntes / so farforth y^ finally no man can please him, but wyclyffe
the first founder here of that abominable heresye, that blasphemeth the blessed
sacrament / this second reason of his I say every wise man sees, is yet more
unreasonable and much more fond and folysshe then the first.



Tyndale. Thereto all christen men if they have done amys, repent when their
fautes be told them. The spyrytualtye repent not but of very su^^^ and
con^^^te t^ sin, persecute both the scripture wherewith they be re^^^^^, and
(...) ^^^m that warn them to amend and make heretykes o^ them and burn^ t^em.
And besides that the pope has made a plain decre, (...)death saying, Though
the pope sin never so greu^us^^, and (...) him to hell by his ens^mple
thousands innumerable (...) hardy to rebuke hym^ Por he is head over all, and
none ^uer hym^ (...). xl. Si papa.


More. Here he proves us that the spyrytualtye be not of the church / for
none is of the church but repentauntes. And

Tyndale hoth now forgete, that he has ofter the^ onys told us here before,
that his owne^ electes will not ever here their fautes told them at the first
while they be carried forth in the rage / but that a man must if he will have
audye^ce, tarry till y^ luskus have played out their lusts / and as he said in
one place, some of them will not give ear till the very cold fere of death
come. And now if he will stand to this tale, he gives the spyrytualtye whom
he so sore accus^th, a plain answer after his own doctryne^ that he is to
hasty upon them / they may be of his ow^e especyall electes perde fulwell,
though they be not con^ent to mende yet / but he must suffer them to play out
all their

How ^e it leuyng his own doctrine for him selfe^ they may tell him that he
is somewhat over temeraryouse and hold, either to judge so^ rashely the
repentance of other men which inwardly lies in the heart, whereof only god
is the beholder / or else to impute and ascrybe the manner and condycyon of
some impenitent wretchys, to the who^e company of the clergy, which usually
declare them (...) repentaunt by shryfte and confession of their sins and
doing of penance, as all other good christen people do.

Now if Tyndale allege against them / that for a^l that they fall to dedely
sin again: we will ask him whereby knows he that / and then must he say
that by

And yet as for repenting / our clergy perde may well appear more penitent
then theyres. For I dare boldly say that except some such as be fallen into
Luthers and Tyndales church / there is else no man so bad of the catholyke
church, but he will confess and agree that his lechery is dedely sin. But on
the the other side, their own clergy and the very great clerks of their clergy,
as the great clerk Luther, and the great clerk Tindale, and the great clerk

But all their excuse lies in this, that all their fawtes come but of frayltye
/ and our spyrytualtye synneth of malice, because they persecut^ Tyndals holy
translacyon of the scripture, in which him self has plainly confessed that
he turned the usual english words of church, priest, and penance, to
congregacyon, senyor, and repentance, of very purpose to bring in his
heresies agay^st

Now if he would excuse him self from malice, in that he would make us wene
that though part be false, him self might of weyke wit and frail faith, wene
his heresies were the true bylyefe, because of his own mind and Luthers and
Huyskyns authoryte in the construccyon of scripture: he must perde by the same
reason excuse our clergy

But than he says that the pope never repents, by^^use he (...) made a
plain decre, in which he commands saying; Thoug^e the (...)

There are orders in Christ's church, by which a pope may be both admonisshed
and amended / and has be for incortigible mind and lack of amendment,
finally deposed and changed. But that every lewd lorell upon every false
tale that he hereth, or peradventure that him self makes, should have courage
and boldenes to scoff, geste, and rail, either upon pope or prince, or a
much more mean estate / is a thing so little commendable, that every well
ordered regyon, has by plain laws prohibited and forboden such rybauldous
byhauoure / all though they were able to prove that the thing which they
said were nothing false at all. And this thing has every

And if a man would say that great men can not otherwise come to the knowledge
of their own fautes: ye may be sure that if the things be true whereof the
people talk, they know their deeds them self before the people here of them.
And if the same be false / yet may many men have it in their mouths before it
come at the princes ear / and yet when he hereth it sith the same is feigned,
what good can he do thereby. And if percase any man think that the princes
them self perceive not their fautes for fautes / till they here the people
murmr and wondre at them: surely right seldom happes it that a man could
not perceive that thing for a fault, which were in deed so great that it were
worthy for all the people to wonder at. And yet if private affection toward
their own fantasies, happened

But yet are there some that defend such evil fassyon of vnreuerent raylynge
vppou great personages, affermynge

that no man shall slanderously speak of any noble man in Ex^di. 22.

^


And myche more is then intolerable to suffer any such ribauldes to the
rebuke of any state, to put forth any raylynge books / which malyciouse manner
is by all other laws upon great pain forboden, though the matter touch a
right mean person.

And all this I say yet / as though I granted that the pope had made that
law that Tyndale here says he did.

But now if it be false ye Tyndale says, and that of troth the pope made not
that law, but that the words which Tyndale reherseth be no law at all, nor
spoken nor written by any pope, but by some other that was never pope / what is
Tyndale than, that says the pope has made those words for a plain law.

Those words which Tindale says are a plain law

Now the words which Tyndale brings forth, and says that the pope has
made them for a law, be not the words of any pope / but they be the words
of the blessed holy martyr saint Boniface which brought the faith in to
Almayne, and was for the faith martyred in Freselande. And so is it plainly
specyfyed in the decrees, by those words in the rubryce, Exdictis Bonifacit
martyris.

But Tyndale to blind and begyle the readers with /


The fourth reason.
Tyndale. And Poule says To. 13. let every soul obey the higher powers, that
are ordained to punysshe sin. The pope will not nor let any of his.


More.

But the thing that greueth Tyndale is this / that any priest should in
honor of the sacrament of preesthode, have any manner of preuiledge more than
a lay man. For his heresye rekeneth every woman a priest, and as able to say
mass as ever was saint Peter. And in good faith as for such masses as he
would have said, without the canon, without the secrets, without oblacyon,
without sacrifyce, without the body or blood of Christ, with bare signs and
tokens instead of the blessed sacrament: I wene a woman were in deed a more
mete priest than saint Peter.

And all be it that neither woman may be priest, nor any man is priest or has
power to say mass, but if he be by the sacrament of holy orders taken and
consecrated into that office: yet sith the time that Tyndale has begone 2
R^gu. 1.
and sent his ^rronyous books about, calling every christen woman a priest:
there is not now in some places of England the symplest woman in the
parysshe, but that she does, and that not in corners secretly but look on who
so woll, in open face of the world in her own parysshe church / I say not
here, but say her own self and (left you should look for some ridle) openly
reuested at the high altar, she says I say her self and syngeth to, if it
be true that I here reported, as many masses in some one weke, as Tyndale him
self either says or hereth in two whole year to gether / but if it be when
he swereth by it, or hereth some other swear.

All holy consecracyons Tyndale calls folysshe ceremonies / forgettyng that
in the old law diverse times it

And he list not to remember that the holy Prophet David, did so much esteem
that holy oyntemente with which king Saul was consecrated, that all be it he
was rejected again of god, and him self received and anointed king in his
place, and was also persecuted by him / he not only put the man to death that
said he had slain him for touching of gods anointed / but also for all
that he spared him and sauyd his life, and being his dedely enemy, did him
yet no bodily harm. He repented and forthought that he had so much done to
him, 1 R^gum. 24.
as secretly to cut his garment.

These things and many such other like whereof the 1 Pe^ri. 2.
prove neither the tone nor the the other.



Tyndale. And Paul charge. 1. Co^. 5. If he that is a brother be an whore
keeper, a dro^kerd, covetous, an extorcioner, or a rays^^, and so forth / that
we have no felowshyppe with him, no not so myche as to ^ate in his company. But
the pope with violence compels us to have such in honor, to receive the
sacraments of them, to hear their masses, and to believe all they say / and
yet they will not let us se whether the say troth or no. And be co^pelleth.x.
paryshes to pay their tithes and offerynges unto one such, to go and run at
riot at their cost, and to do naught therefore. And a thowsande such like does
the pope contrary unto Christ's doctrine.


More. To begin here at the last point / the pope, though the

Now where he says that whore kepers and such other as saint Poule
forbyddeth us the company, the pope with vyolence compell^th us to have in
honor, and to receive the sacraments of them, and to here their masses, and
to believe all that that they say: This is a very lowdelye. For the pope lets
you not to complain upon them / and the laws of the church be, that for
their crimes they shall be suspended from the medelynge and adminystracion of
such things / and sometime deposed of their offices, deprived of their
benefyces, and degraded of their orders to. And therefore the pope comp^lleth
him not with vyolence to do them honor in their vices. And if there were any
that did / he were in the doing an evil pope as he

Buf then is there one thing wherwyth Tyndale is sore dyspleased, that the pope
will not as he says let him and his fellows se whyther the priest say well or
no.

If the priest be accused of his doctrine / he is as I say brought unto
examynacyon, to wit whyther he said truth or no. what other way would
Tyndale have? It is plain enough what he meneth in this matter. He meneth
therein nothing else, but that he would have all thing so ferforth set at
large, that he might bring first in dowte and questyon, and after in errors
and heresies upon the questyon, every point of Crystes catholic faith, that
god has by his holy blessed spyryte in.xv.C. year taught his catholyke
church. And then all things ones brought in that euangelycall liberty, that
every man may believe even as him list, and after that live even as him list
to, with out any lord or any law to let him / then lo to make the

And now good christen reders here have ye hard all his five reasons / by
which instead of that he should have proved, that is to wit that the known
catholic church of all christen people is not the church of Christ in ^rthe,
he has taken upon him to prove (all beside the purpose) first that the pope
and his sect, and after yet farther fro the purpose, that the pope and the
spirytualtie be not the church. And of that which should be his purpose, that
is to wit that the known catholic church is not the church, he has not
spoken one word. And yet finally concerning that he has goone about to
prove / touching


Here ends the fyfte book / and begins the syxte, where in is avoided the
solucyons of
The syxte book,
The defense of the first argument against Tyndale.
Tyndale. The arguments wherewith the pope would prove him self the church
are solued.


More. This is the title of his chapyter, wherein he desce^deth by degrees as ye
se, ferther down from his purpose then ever he did before. For where as
before instead

And yette forthwyth to show his forther constaunce, when he comes to the
matter self / he turns it again fro the pope alone, to the whole company of
the clergy / dyssymulyng always still the temporal^ye, as though there were of
them neither man nor woman of the church. where


Tyndale. Nothwithstandynge a^ because as they be all shaven, so they be all
shameles^e, to afferme that they be the right church / and can not err,
though all the wo^lde sees that not one of them is in the right way. And that
they


More. Lo sir here Tyndale affirms that like wise as all the clergy be
shaven, so they be all shameless / and therefore has his master Martyn
Luther let his crown grow, and lies with a nonne to learn of his lemman some
very maydenly shamefastnes. But not till her here was well grown again, ye
must understand / for she was before for lack of her hear as shamele^se as
Luther ye wot well.

But now why be all the shaven clergy shameless says Tyndale? Because they
affirm that they be the right church. Now when Tyndale knows well that we

But yet when he goes farther, and says that all the whole world sees that
of the whole clergy being all shaven, there is not one of them all in the
right waye^ but that they have all euerychone with vttre defiance forsaken
both the doctrine and the living of Christ and all h^s apostels: I verily
believe in good faith, that Tyndale

And when he has about the proof of this point bestowed all ready his whole
chapyter before, wherein he come forth perdy with his five eggs / and after a
great face made of a great feste, supped them all up him self without an^
salt / for all his gestes that he bode to supper, might smell them so roten
that they supped of the savor). Now to come forth again with the same tale,
and set us to the same table at supper again, with neither bredde nor drink,
fless^e, fysshe, nor fruit / This man well declares us that though he be not
shaven, but have his h^are of his vnshavyn crown grown out at great length
in

For surely if there were any one spark of shame in his whole body, it would
set his face a fire to speak among christen men, that other folk are out of
the right way / when he woteth well that his writing shows in what wrong
way him self is, how far fallen from Crystes holy techynge, with his
bestely doctrine, under name of matrymony to cowple to gyther freres and nuns
in lechery / and his abomynable mocking of Crystes own blessed body.

But now because he speaks of our sophystrye: let us consider how
substancyally the man soyleth the first reason,


Tyndale. One of t^^yr high reasons is, The church say they was before the
herety^es, and the heretykes came ever out of the church and left it / and
they were before all them which they now call heretykes and Lutherans, and the
Lutherans came out of them etc. wherefore they be the right church, and the
other heretykes in deed as they ^e called. well I will like wise dyspute.
First the right ch^rche was under Moses and Aaron and so forth, in whose
r^ume^ satte the Scrybes and Pharysees and high prestes in the time of Crist /
and they were before Christ / and Christ and his apostles came out of them and
departed from them and left them: wherefore the Scrybes Pharysees and high
prestes, were the right church, and Christ and his apostles and dis^y^ses


More. Now good christen reader, this reason that Tyndale so ryally s^offeth
out, with a like argument of his own making / he tells you not where he
read. But it well appears that he has read it in other men's books beside
mine / for else he would not say one of their high reasons, but one of his
high reasons if he took the reason but for mine alone.

But this is his fasshyon lo in all things / he makes as though he mock but
men of these later days / which

For ye shall understand that this reason which Tyndale so scornefully
reherseth, and would seem to shake of so lightly / was not only made by me in
my dyaloge, but also before my days by diverse good and great connyng men. And
among other, this reason that Tyndale in scorn calls an high reason / was
made by that great fa^ous doctourand high glorious martyr saint Cyprian,
against Nouatiane and fortunacian, and other heretykes and scysmatykes, in and
before his days.

Now is saint Cyprian a man of such authoryte, that

And this reason that Tyndale now derydeth and mocketh / saint Cyprian thought
so sure, specially so furnysshed with scryptures as he set hit forth, that
he uses it not ones or twyse / but in sundry places so often against
heretykes, that it makes me even sorry to se how sore god suffered that good
saint to be deceived, if an heretyke might now by a like formed argument lo
shortly and so shamefully shake his reason of.

But I will not do saint Cyprian so much dishonor, as to set him to dispute
with Tyndale. But sith Tyndale and I be somewhat more metely matches. He and I
shall

For the better perceiving whereof, ye shall understand that where as in my
dyaloge I had proved first that the church of Christ here in earth, shall
ever endure and continue as long as the world shall last / which thing is
I doubt not in such wise proved there, that Tyndale dare not him self deny
it here: I than in the second book did after prove, that the known catholic
church is that same church / and none of all the sects of heretykes, because
all they be come out of it / and that therefore all they

And so this reason that Tyndale here reherseth, I there lay forth and declare
with diverse places of scripture / by which I prove at good length through all
the second chapyter, that such as go out of this known catholyke church, be
and always have been the heretykes, and for heretykes be declared by the very
scripture it self. whereof I there by some places, as some such as saint
Cypryane says him self / how be it of troth not all the places of scripture
that he lays for that purpose, because I had not at that

Now comes Tyndale and barely reherseth my reason, dyssymulynge after his
accustumed fasshyon all that ever I laid forth for the proof. Of all which
things neither in his answer here which he calls his solucyo^, nor
afterward when he comes to the place in his pertycular answerys unto every
chapyter in order, he never makes any manner me^cy on / but when he comes to
my second book, goes fro the first chapyter to the third, as though the
prenter had left the secunde vnprynted.

Is not this fashyo^ a plain confession of his ignorance, and that he was at
his wits end, and saw not what to say unto it. And because he left all my
proof of my reason untouched / he durst not here for shame speak of my name,

How be it saving that it had been more wisdom for him to have dyssymuled
and let a lone all the whole matter / else did he more wisely then to have
wrestled with that chapyter, out of which he shall never be able to wade while
he lives / y^ reason I am sure is in it self so strong, before made by saint
Cypryane as I said and some other mo, other manner men then Tyndale or I be
either.

And in good faith, I never looked that ever I should have fownden any man so
folysshe as to wene that he were able to soil it with this argument that
Tyndale here

For remember now good reder, that the church of Christ must as I have in my
dyaloge proved by scripture, last and continue for ever, and christ's church
can be bu^ one. whereupon it must needs follow, that there can none go out of
hit to begin any new church of Christ. But those therefore that go out
thereof, must needs be churches of heretykes.

Than must Tyndale if he make his reason, like mine make the ^ynagoge of the
Jews like to the church of Christ, in perpetuity of lasting and
contenuaunce upon earth / or else shall his argument and his ensample be as
like to mine as I wyste ones a gentle woman make unto bored even through the
whole earth / if there were a mylle

Now while he was telling her this tale, she nothing went about to consider
his words / but as she was wont in all other things, studied all the while
nothing else,

It were to long a tale to tell you all their dyspycyons. For words would she
none have lacked, though they should have dysputed the space of seuyn year. But
in conclusyon, because there is no mo words but one whereby he might give her
a true sample, nor she could not perceive the difference

Now plays Tyndale even the same part with me / and makes an argument and
a sample of the sinagoge, as like to the church of Christ for the point that
we speak of, that is concerning our savior with his apostels going out of
the synagoge of the Jews, and christen people going out of the church of
Christ / as the wharle was like the world, concerning the stone to go through
the wharle, and the stone to fall through the earth, or the whole earth to fall
into the moon when the son were over our hedes and the moon on the the other
side in the contrary

For I think that no man will desire to have it proved that the church or
Synagoge of the Iewys was not ordained to last for ever / but to ceace and
give place unto Christ at his coming / and that he should then instead of
the synagoge of the Iewys, begin and continue his church both of Iewys and
Gentyls / and that then should be of the Iewys peculyar church and peculyar
laws and sacraments and ceremonies an end / and that the church of Christ
as long as the world should last, s^olde never have end. Nor no man will I
suppose desire to have it proved, that the church of Christ can be but o^e.
For these things are good reder not only in every part of scripture so
plentuousely proved, but also among all

Now these things being thus / consider good christen reader how like these
two reasons are to gyther, Tyndales I mean and mine / which two Tyndale says
be not only like, but also be both one.

Christ and his apostles and saint John^ baptyste went out of the church or
synagoge of the Iewys / because the time was come in which by gods own
ordinance, the Iewys church or synagoge should have an end. And therefore
Luther, Tyndale, Huyskyn, and Swynglyus be gone out of the catholyke church of
Christ, which while the world endures, is ordained of god to have none end.

Also Christ and his apostles went as god had ordayne^ out of the old church
to begin a new / because the old

Also Christ and his apostles went out of the old church to begin one new
church of all people agreynge in one faith either with other. And therefore
Luther, Tyndale, Huyskyn, and Suinglius, be gone out of the old church, to
begin a great many new diverse chyrchers, of which never one should agree with
other / nor almost in any of them any one man with other.

Finally Christ went with his apostles out of the old church to begin a
new, that was prophesied to be a (...)
And Luther, Tyndale, Huyskyn, and Suinglius, be gone out of the old church
to begin a great many new, which are all prophesied by Christ and his
apostles to be stark heretykes / and that none of them all shall endure and
last no more than has done the chyrches of Arrius, Heluidius, Pelagian, or
Manicheus, with forty such sectys mo. All whom the very gates of hell have
so prevailed against / that they have gotten them in and shette them fast in
and fast keep them in with the dampened deuels with flame and fire in the deep
dongeon of hell.

And thus have I now good christen readers showed you so many plain
dyfferences between Tyndals reason

But now shall you ferther se, that the ferther he wadeth on in his solucyon,
the deper he synketh in to the mudde, and the faster he stycketh in the mire.
For lo thus he wadeth on.


Tyndale. But in as myche as the kyngedome of god st^ndeth not in words, as
Poule says. 1. Cor. 4. but in power: therefore look unto the mary and pyth of
the things self, and let vain words pass.


Uery well remembered lo. For there is one dyfference more between Tyndals
reason and mine / which dyfference saving that Tyndale here puts us in
remembrance, I had else almost forgoten. And that is, that as he puts
me well in mind, the kyngedome of god is not in words but in power.

Now did Christ therefore and his apostles, prove their departing to be lawful
from the church or synagoge of the Iewys, not by bare words only, but also
by might and power in workynge of many wonderful miracles for the proof
thereof.

And on the the other side, Luther, Tyndale, Huyskyn and Suinglius, prove their
departing from the catholyke (...). 23, 1^.
both to provide for the perpetual saufgarde of his catholyke church (which
he has promised never to forsake / but though he vysyt their iniquytees with
the rod of correccion, yet his grace and good will he has warraunted never
to take from them) and also shall of his goodness turn again from their
errors, some such as those malycyouse archeheretykes deceive / and them whose
malice he shall find incurable he shall as an old noughty rod, before the
face of his faithful children of his catholyke church, when he has beten and
corrected them therewith, do as the tender mother does, break ye rod in pieces
and cast it in the fire. But now shall you se how Tindale goth forth, and
declares his solucio^


Tyndale. Under Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, was the church great in faith and
small in number. And as it increased in number, so it decreased in faith until
the time of Moses. And out of those unbelievers god stered up Moses, and brought
then unto the right faith again. And Moses left a glorious church, and in
faith and clea^ynge unto the word of god / and dely^ered them unto Iosu^h,
^leaz^^, Phineas, and Cale^. But as soon as the ^eneracyon of them that saw
the miracles of god were deed / they fell to ^^olatrye immedyatly, as thou
seyste in the bible. And god when he had delivered them into captyuyte for to
chastyse their wekednesse / stered them up a prophet ever more, to call them
unto his testament ^gayne. And so he did well nigh an hundred times I svppose
yer Christ came / for they never bode any space in the right faith. And
against the comy^ge of Christ, the scrybes Pharysees, Ca^ph^s, Anna, and the
elders, were crepte up in to the sete of Moses, Aaron, and the holy prophets
and patriarchs and succeeded them ^inal^y,


More. Tyndale has here made us a long dyscourse from Abraams days unto
Christ showing that ever in time faith has decayed. But he might for ye
purpose have bygonne at Adam a great deal a fore Abraam / and end at the
day a dome a great while after Christ.

Now it is no new thing among mo people to have mo taught.

But what avails Tyndale all this tale / proves it any other but that yet
that company was still, the church

Now that many times god punysshed them / so does he now, and his mercy always
will, when his wisdom sees it necessary^ what of all this?

ye says Tyndale but he rered up always prophets in diverse times, an hundred
to turn them home in to the right way again. Be it that he sent so many /
what helps this unto Tyndals matter? For well we wot that all the fautes of
the people for which they were punysshed, and against which god sent so many
prophets to prech, were not ever more idolatrye / but sometime other sins, ^
and specially the sin of the flesh for which the hole world

But now that god raised up so many prophets to call the people home / what
fyndeth Tyndale for his purpose therein? Fyndeth he that god raised any such as
Luther^ Suinglius, Huysken, and him self, that to call men from

Also god punysshed his peole / and then sent his prophets, not to make
sedycyone and sects among his people, but to govern and led his whole
flock and his whole people to gether. As he caused Moses to co^uaye his hole
people out of Egypt / and the other prophets, judges, and prestes after, in
to the land of byheste. was there ever any of those heretykes whom the
catholyke church has from the beginning condemned, that ever so did? Let
Tyndale name us one.

Then if he will say that every prophet did not so,

Besides this, those old prophets proved them self by miracles to be
messengers sent from god. But Luther, Tyndale, Huyskyn, and Suinglius, show no
miracles at all to show them self messengers sent by god but by their evil
doctrine clearly prove them self messengers sent by

And finally as far as the church or synagoge of the Iewys was decayed in
faith, or good living decayed by the false doctrine or false glos^s of the
scrybes and pharysees, Cayphas, Anna, and thelders / which were as Tyndale
says crepte up into the seat of Moses, Aaron, and the holy prophets and
patryarche against the coming of Christ / and whom Christ for their false
doctrine did rebuke: yet confesses Tyndale him self, that they kept the
people from outward idolatrye of worshyppynge of idols with the hethen.

And Tyndale must confess ferther, that neither scrybes nor pharysees, nor
priest, nor elders, as he calls them no nor yongers neither if he will have
all the temporalty

And as for their tradycyons and doctrine, of which was many vain, some evil
and some superstycyouse, whereby the people among them took harm in the
following: such as were evil things were not so fully determined but that
some were of one mind some of other / and therein men might follow the best
doctrine if they would, where in they had doctors and teachers to / and might
if they were desyrouse of the best, very well decerne them concerning the
glosyng of scripture, by the old virtuous doctors

And also Tyndale says him self, that between the time of Moses and the
cummynge of Christ / god styred up

And thus though god did not provide so fully for the church of the Iewis, as
for the church of Christ / as in which he has provided and promised to
dwell him self for ever: yet provided he for it so sufficiently, that they
might therein be saved and enter heaven when it were after open / and that in
evil doctrine and supersticiouse traditions, they could not be dampened, if
they were desirouse and diligent about their own soul health. And al be it
that because the thing had than so great difficulty, that many did set up his
church / the sinagoge was the very church /

And thus it appears lo, that concerning the synagoge even at the coming of
Christ / Tyndale has here won little ground to build his purpose upon /
but that even there was yet at that time the very church and a church also
known. And therefore when he goth now ferther and resembles it unto the known
catholyke church of Christ


Tyndale. In like manner is the clergy crepte up in to the sete of Chr^ste and
his ^p^stles by succession / not to do the deeds of Christ and his apostles,
but ^or lucre only / as the nature of the wyly f^^^e is to get him an hole
made with an other bestes labor, and to make merchau^dyse of the people ^yth
feigned words, as Peter warned us before / and to do according as Christ and
all his apost^es prophesied, how they should begy^e and ^ede out of the
ryghtewaye all them that did not love to follow and live after the treuth.


More. Tyndale here good reader plainly confesses him self, ^
Go ye and preche the gospel to all creaturs. And also these words: who so
hereth you hereth me / and who so dyspyseth you dyspyseth me. And these words
also, ^
who so receive you receives me / and what so ever city receive you not,
Sodom and Gomorre shall be more easily dealt with then that city in the day
of judgment.

And also sith they must be the techers / it follows that they be and must be
that part of his church, to which part these words were also specially
spoken: ^
I shall send you the holy ghost which shall teache you all trewthe and led
you into every truth / and I am with you my self unto ^


For though god in these words promised to send his spirit, not into the
clergy only but into his whole catholic church / nor to be with his clergy
only, but also with his whole catholic chirch / nor to lead his clergy only
into every troth, but the lay people of his chirch also: yet since he provided
specially the clergy to be the prechers, of whose mouth the lay people should
here the truth / by mean of which herynge with their own good endeuo^r, god
would him self write it in the herers hearts / which order of cu^mynge to the
faith appears plainly, by sundry places of holy scripture / as where saint
Paul says, ^
Faith is made by herynge. And how shall a man here without prechyng / And how
shall a man preche but if he be sent to preche. ^
Be thou not an vnbileuer but a byleuer. And that he tha^ writes him self in
the heart witnesses the prophet Jeremy: ^
I shall write my law in their hearts. In which place he says speaking of the
chirch of Christ, Every man shall not teache his neighbor, ^
but they shall all be the scholars of god, and I shall write my law in their
hearts: he means not that there shall be no prechynge, for that were ye wot
well contrary to the words of saint Paul / but he meneth thereby the techynge
which the precher techeth, without which saint Paul shows that they can
not ordinarily cum to the faith, is yet no techyng whereof any fru^e can cum /
but if god therewith write upon the heart, which he never fails to do if the
party do his part, and be not by his negligence or frowardenesse

And all be it that these words of the prophet be specially spoken for the
dyfference, between the old law that was called the law written, because that
Moses received and delivered the law by writing / and the new law whereof
Christ neither received nor delivered any part by writing: yet may those
words well serve for this purpose also, sith the troth of them is also in
this point veryfyed / to which troth saint Poule subscrybeth, ^. ^^rint^. 12.
where he says that no man can say and confess our lord Jesus but by the
holy gooste.

Now these things I say being thus, though god write in the hearts of every
sort of his catholyke church as well the lay people as the clergy, as well
women as ^ucae. 1^.
He that hereth you hereth me, and he that despyseth you despyseth me / and he
that hereth not Matthe. 13.^
than he shall at the day of Judgment. Luce. 1^.
And thus has Tyndale denounced his own dampnacion him self, plainly
pursuynge upon his own confession.

Now if Tindale will paraduenture say, that it is in the clergy now as it was
in the scribes and phariseis in Christ's time / and that as they and that
people were tha^ fallen from the trewthe into false errors, so be now the
clergy and the christen people: I have all ready showed him the plain
scriptures, in which god has made many such plentiouse promises of his
assistence with his holy spirit in his church, perpetually to keep it from
all dampnable errors, by techynge it and ledynge it into every troth / that
though he ^
and led it into every troth, be so good and so sure, that unto those that
shall be well willing to learn the truth, it shall always be known 1. (...)
^.
the pylar and the foot or ground / that is to say the sure strength or
fastenynge of the truth. And this church must be that known catholic
church / of which from age to age the scripture has been received, and the
people taught / and not a church unknown of only good men or electes only,
in which is neither precher nor people assembled to preche unto, nor
sacraments ministered by any man as a ministre of that unknown church, nor
people of an unknown church to ministre them unto / among whom can be no such
asse^ble^ for no man can know where to call a another, nor how to know another
if they came together by hap.

And thus I say that neither can Tyndale stand by

But yet if Tyndale stycke so sore thereto, that he will

Though it so were in deed / yet must Tyndale be bou^de^ to obaye them perde,
as ferforth at the least as Christ commanded the Iewys to obaye the the other.

Than if Tyndale will say that it can extend no ferther, then even barely to
as farforth as they teache and preche the gospel truly / and that every man
and woman whom they teache and to whom they preche, may say not only

Now let us then ymagyne that Tyndale as he was borne hethen and chrystened
in England, so had been borne a paynyme and cyrcumcysed in Jerusalem, four
year before the birth of Christ, by the reason that being at years of
dyscrecyon, and heryng of the stories and the temple and manners of y^ Iewys, he
had of devotion suddenly fallen into their synagoge, and dwelled in Jerusalem
/ wheruppon yet after his cyrcumcysyon considering that there were among them
diverse sorts and sects, as pharyseys and Saduceys, forbedynge him that
folysshe proud fasshyon of study and ^


Then would he of lykelyhed have had recourse to them, and enquere of them the
solucion of those dowtys. For out of the church or synagoge of the Iewys, it
is not lykely yt ever he would have looked to have ye treuth of those dowtes
determined, which dowtes rise up their law and upon the construccyon fo their
scryptures.

And also considering the miracles that god had so great and so many very
oftentimes showed in every age for that synagoge, and that in that synagoge
some continued still, such as him self had seen in the pole of the temple
seruyng for the sacryfyce: he might still have thought that in the synagoge of
the Iewys, both had been and then

Now seems me that it should have been no great maystry for him then to find
them out. For it is no dowte but that if he should have taken unto him such as
were called cunning, twain at onys at good lays^ure, one on the tone side and
an other of the the other / as for ensample on the tone side the proud pharasy
that despised the publycane; and on the the other side Gamalyell: now where as the
proud pharasey would have told him for his part, we have with us master
Tyndale of the scrybes and the pharyseys the

For M. Tyndale as late as ye were cyrcumcysed, yet this ^ote ye well your self
/ or at the leest wise ye thynk it is so that god has stired up among us syns
the time of Moises almoost an hundred prophets. And surely he has styred up
very many / of whom beside the.xii. that are accomp^ed in part of our
scripture, we have many of sundry ages passed, in whose books we find written
expositions and commentes upon our scriptures / and those men were good and
holy men / and for whom god showed many great miracles, and for none of our
adversaries he never showed one. And in their old books find we that in the
points for which these men and we vary now a days, those old prophets

^
or in the temple pole, they can not draw to their part against us / sith
they be not showed to declare the truth of any particular man / but only to
give knowledge that the church or sinagoge of the Iewys, is the church of god
here in earth / in which as well we as they, that is to wit as well the tr^w
as the false, as well the good as the bad be for the while together, till
Messiah come that shall make a new church, a greater and a better ^ and the
true from the false much better known to.

I doubt not but Tyndale should at that time among the Iewis in Jerusalem
have herd his doubt disputed and debated thus. And than could he not with any
good reason have douted, but that the false phariseis had been well answered by
the true / and so should he have known even

Now if Tindale will here deny me and say that ^here were no such holy men of
them, that from age to age left any such books behind them: when so ever he
so shall answer me, he shall then here what I shall say more unto him. But as
for this time I shall not need to let therefore.

For though there had not been such in dede^ nor that Tyndale could not have
hard any man in Jerusalem at that time, that could have told him that tale
and proved his tale true: yet shall Tindale never be able to w^^hstand

Now say I than, that sith that a^swere if (...) might have been proved
true, should and of reason ought, ^o have contented Tyndale at that time in
Jerusalem, concerning the church of the Iewys: he shall never avoid it here,
but that in the known catholyke church of Christ though we leave of the
promyses of god made unto this church, Matt^. 1^.28.
by which promises it appears clearly that he will n^ue^ suffer it to come to
such a confu^yon or dyf^ycultye / ye^ if it

whereby should it be perceived will sum man say, surely^ well, and plainly by
this way.

God has sithe the death of Christ and his apostles, styred up in his known
catholic church I dare well say, many mo than an hundred prophets / whom he
has with moo than a thousand miracles declared to be his messangers. Now of
these holy doctors and prophets we have

Let us now tha^ setting for ye while all other marks aside, of which there
are very many: let us I say consider but this mark alone / for eue^ this mark
alone shall be sufficient to dyscerne and know the church now for the true part,
and Tyndale and Luther and all their sects for the very plain false.

For al^e it that Luther in the beginning professed in his writing, that he
would stand for the proof of his doctrine, unto the trial of those old holy
doctors and prophets

And thus though some of these folk be glad to catch a patche of an old
saints saying sometime, if they may

And this point them self so clearly perceive to be perceived and known /
that they begin to make in a manner mockes openly / and give the people
counsel to give little credence to the old holy saints wrytynges / and they
scoff at them that against such heresies allege them / and in this manner
they ^este and say in their sermons: men lay forth now a days unto you for
the proof of their doctrine the old saints, and call them fathers / but we
lay for our doctrine the Evangelists, and apostles, and Christ him self /
and these be graundfathers. And therefore as they cry

Here is lo a goodly false folysshe fallace, to begyle the poor unlearned
people / with turnyng their minds from the point that is in questyon, and make
them gase and muse upon an other thing / and wene that the clergy would have
them think, that the old holy doctors were more to be byleued then Christ
and his apostles them self. where as in deed the questyon stands in this,
whyther the old holy doctors and saints whom we call the fathers, ^e better
to be byleued in the construccyon and the

Also that these folks doctrine can not agree with the old holy doctors /
appears plain, by this that these m^n teache and renew the self same old roten
heresies, which those holy doctors by their full consent and agreement
co^dempned^ both in great assembled cou^sayls, and by their own books
severally made against the^, as against their h^r^si^s y^ the^

Of this consent of the holy doctors and saints against their heresies,
comes this envy and hatred that these heretykes bear unto the^ all again so
great, that lest men should because they be saints have their doctrine the more
in reverence and estymacyo^, they have devised a new heres^, wherewith they
would make men believe that there were none of them all yet in heaven. And lest
their malice and envy toward them should appear, and the cause also wherfo^e
they bear i^ ^f they should so say, be no mo saints but those y^ were writers

And then lest they should be dreue^ to confess that the^ believe the thing,
which if they durst for shame show I

And therefore if we tell them of that story of Abraam, Dives, and Lazarus, the
twayn in rest and welthe the third in fire and flame, the storye that Christ
tells him self / they call it but a parable, and almost make a pot at it.

Then all apparycyons they mock at / and all the miracles they blaspheme, and
say the devil does all. And thus Matthew. 12.
as the very wurst sort of the Iewys did / and unto all their old heresies to
lynke an whole chain of new, such as the worste and the most shameless
sort of heretykes that ever were of old, would have been yet ashamed to think
upon.

If Tyndale deny that him self and all their sects be against all the old
holy doctors, and all the old holy doctors against them: he can not say
nay but that beside

And so for conclusyon of this point, that Tyndale may se what he has won
with his resembling of the catholyke church unto the synagoge of the Iewys
that was at the coming of Christ / and the clergy of the catholyke church to
the scrybes and pharyseys that then were in the synagoge / he has now by
occasyon of that resemblau^ce luckely founden out, that though these heretykes
did still dwell with the church, and neither departed away them self nor the
church did vomyte and spew them out / but

This one mark which Tyndale has here caused to be founden out, does yet
ferthermore shake of all his raylynge

For by thexposicions of the old holy saints / we know that the words of
saint Peter / with which Tyndale here rayleth upon the church, ^
were by saint Peter spoken against such heretykes, as taught opinions against
the church / as plainly appears by many old doctors of the church.

And also the very words of saint Peter will declare the same. For he says
that those false lying masters, shall be the bryngers in of dampnable sectys.
whereby it well appears, that he speaks against those archheretykes, which
against the one catholyke church, which in the necessary ^
and makes all of one mind in that house / do bring and have brought an
hundred sundry sectys of her^syes erroneouse false and untrue, whereof neither
any one consents with a another, nor among them all one man almooste with a
another.

And where saint Peter says, that many men shall follow their dampnable
abhominacions / that is so clearly v^ryfyed in these heretykes now, that all
the world has cause to weep that it is so well spied.

Also where he says that by them the way of troth shall be blasphemed / is
very manifest and open, spe^^ally in these new heretics as Luther, and
Tyndale, Huyskyn, and S^inglyus

And when he speaks of auaryce and feigned words / as for feigned words they
use none other, if plain falls be feigned / as appears by their plain false
heresies against the blessed sacraments.

And as for avarice, though many of them fall at the last to beggary, by the
very vengeance of god full sore against their wyllys: yet se we well enough
how gredely the pedelynge knauys that here bring over their ^okes, gryspe

And sir Tho. Boulde, reported here their lyd^ralytye very well. For beside
myche other euangelycall auatyce, he told us here, that all be it he saw
gold great plentye in Tyndals purse / yet could he get but one small piece
to go out of Almayne unto London on his errande, both to sow his euangelycall
sede, and to stele an euangelycall book out of a poor frerys lybrary / and
when he had stolen it then bring it into Almayne to him. And for all this
long labor of his going, and his besynes of tyllynge and sowynge, and besides
that his lygyer demayne in stelynge, whereof a man might hap to fall to
hanging / he could as he said get of Tyndale no more for all this gere, but

Now as for making of merchaundyse, that saint Peter speaks of and Tyndale
here lays against the clergy of the catholyke church / what merchaundyse
these heretykes make I can not well tell. But this is well known, that when
our euangelycall English heretykes fall in acquayntaunce beyond the sea with
some of our merchau^tes factours / they milk them so euangelycally, that when
their masters call them home, they give them a very shrewed reckoning.

And surely as all the words of saint Peter with which Tyndale here iesteth
against the catholyke church, were by saint Peter spoken against these
heretykys only:

But as for that that Tyndale says, that the clergy crepynge into the seat of
Christ and his apostles by succession, do as the wyly fox does, whose nature
is to enter into an hole made with an other be: I can not well perceive what
he meneth by his wyly symylytude of the wyly fox. For sithe he says they cum
into the place by successiou / he layth not any inuasio^, or intrusion, or
other unlawful c^mynge therein to. And as for their wylynes in following the
wylynes of the fox, whose nature is to get him an hole made with an other
beestes labor: he can not mean any

And therefore I can not dyuyne what mystery Tyndale means by his following of
the wyly fox, whose nature is he says to get him an hole made with an other
bestes labor. Nor I purpose not to lose y^ time in musyng what he may mean
thereby, nor to be so curyouse and inquysytyue as to^ inquire whither
peradventure he have found out

Now where he says that the clergy do enter for only lucre / he takes upon
him to judge the power of god, in judging every man's mind / but if he
think it a sufficient proof that they cum thereto for nothing else, because they
say not take away the lands and all the fruits from the benefyce, or else I
will none of hit. As though the apostle said not him self, that reason would
they should have their living by the autre / ye and though he counsayled the^ to
be content with bare meat and drynke^ and clothing / yet said he that one of
them doing their duty, Timoth. 5.
is wurthy

Nay says Tyndale. For they govern not well, nor do not as saint Poule
says, sow spyrytuall things. For they be says Tyndale false techers, and
do begyle and led out of the right way, all them that have no love to follow
and live after the truth.

Let Tyndale here speak out, and tell us which treuth is that that the people
love not to follow and live after / and that therefore god suffers the clergy
to lead them out of the right way far wrong. This treuth is good christen
reader a very false treuth / whereof not only y^ clergy now but thapostles also
them self, ever clearly taught the contrary / as that folk should not pray
for their fathers souls nor do penance for their own sins, nor honor the
blessed

Lo these things and such other are the sure tried truths ye wot well, that
Tyndale would have the people believe and live after / and the spyrytuall
things which he complayneth that the clergy will not preche. which spyrytuall
seed because they will not sow / he would they should repe none of our carnal
corn / nor not only be rekened unworthy to receive as saint Poule says, the
dowble advantage that an other man should, but also to receive so myche by
Tyndales will, as an other man's old clowted shone. And


Tyndale. And in like manner have they corrupt the scripture, and blinded the
right way, with their own constytucyons, with tradycyons of domme ceremonies,
with the taking away the signyfycacy^ns of the sacraments to make us believe
the work of the sacraments first, whereby they might the better believe in
works of their own setting up afterward.


Now would I that Tyndale should here have rehearsed with what con^tytucyons of
their own the church has corrupted the scripture, and blinded the right
way. How be it he may say that I am to blame to bid him rehearse the^ again he
has reherced the^ so often all ready / as orderyng that men should have matyns
and mass, and keep the sunday and sum other holy days, and that they should be
bounden to keep fasting days, and namely as Tyndales fellow Brightwell says,
whom sum folk call Fryth, the folyssh fast of the Lent / whereby there is taken
away the eua^gelycall lyberty, that folk may not eat f^essh on good friday for
compassion of Christ's passion.

And with this ordinance be they wondre wroth / as

And yet in this point to, the mark that I spoke of^ of the old holy
saints, does mark these men for heretykes. For these ordynaunces are not
bygon by the clergy that

Than says he that the clergy has blinded the right way with do^me
ceremonies. yet ask I Tyndale here again which clergy, and which
ceremonies? I say that in this point again, the mark that him self made me
find out, the old holy doctors and saints, mark him for an heretyke and a
liar both.

For it is euydent and open, that great part of the ceremonies

But to what purpose he makes all this brablynge upon dumme ceremonies,
appears well upon the next word after, where he says that the church
has taken away the significacion from the sacraments. yet I ask Tyndale
again which church, and which significacions? Let us go again to our old
mark / and I dare lay a wager with him, he shall find no mo signyfycacions
of the sacraments in the books of the eldest of al y^ old holy doctors and
saints, than I shall find him in the books of every age now this two or three
hundred years from Eester last passed upward, and so forth in the other ages
next above that, till he cum to the old time of that holy doctor who^ so ever
him self will allege. And than it well appears

we will also demand of Tyndale, sithe he says that the clergy has taken
away the sygnyfycacyons of the sacraments / whyther were those sygnyfycacyons
that they have taken away, necessary to salvation or not. If they were not /
then is there not so great loss of them. And on the the other side if they
were so necessary, that without the knowledge of them the things that we be
commanded to do, and which we may not without disobedyence of good leave
undone, be bycomme noyouse, superstycoyuse, and dampnable / thanne sithe as
many such sygnyfycacyons as be written in the scripture, do remain Actuu^. 5.
And then falsefyeth him self his own doctrine, that no such necessary thing
was by thapostles left unwritten.

If he say that mo then have their special sygnyfycacyons written in
scripture, be not necessary: therein will not only the mark that we spoke of
of the old holy saints, mark him for an heretic / but so will the very
scripture to, by which it appears that all the seuyn sacraments were by god
given to his church, as things by gods instytucyon necessary for mannys
salvation / in such wise at the lest wise as the neglecting and contempt of
the grace that god gives in them, is able to bring the

But it appears clearly what holy purpose Tyndale has in this matter. For he
speaks not so myche of the sygnyfycacyons, for any ca^e that he cares for the
sygnyfycacyons / but only because he would have us ^ake the sacraments for no
thing else, but only for the bare signs of some lost sygny^ycacyons / and
therefore as things not only naught worth and superfluouse, but also
superstycyouse and noyouse.

And in this wise would he make us wene, that for the sacraments we were never
the better / and that to take them for any other thing then a bare token, and
to think that the blessed sacrament of the altar were the very body and
blood of Christ, or any thing else then wine and cake yet we may well fere
in all our good dedys, such imperfeccyon

And ever this the farther he walks, the deper is this mark prented in his
forhed / that he can never wander so far out of the way, but the devil
will well enough by that mark perceive him and challenge him for his own. For
lo thus goth he forth,


Tyndale. And with false gloses which they have patched to the scripture in
plain places to destroy the lyterale sense, for to set up a false feigned
sense of al^egoryes when there is none such / and thereby they have stopped up
the g^tes of heaven, the true knowledge of Christ, and have made their ^wn belyes
the door. For through their belyes m^ste thou crepe, and there leave all thy
fat behind the.


More. If Tyndale have yet rayled enough / glad would I be ^
nor durst not upon pain of death after the vengeance of god fallen upon
Ananyas and Saphyra for keeping part of their own a side for them self. Then
might lo some such as Tyndale is now, have ray^ed and said to any that were
wyllyng to come in to chrystendom, Brother beware of the apostles, for through
their belyes must thou crepe, and there leave all thy fat behind the.

And as it seems, some such fellow bygan to sow such seed of evil rumor
among ye people against thapostles even than, and set some suspycyouse or
inquyete minds upon grudgynge.

Nor I can not now so greatly se, who is compelled to be at so great cost with
the clergy. Such as have of the^r

Now where he says that the clergy uses to dystroye the lyterall sense of
the scripture with false feigned allegoryes / this is falsely said of him. For
the allegorye neither destroys nor lets the lyterall sense / but ye
lyterall sense stands whole bysyde.

And where he says that there is none allegorye sense

Luther and Tyndale would have all allegoryes and all other senses taken away,
saving the lytterall sense alone. But god whose plentuouse spyryte endyghted
the scripture, foresaw full well him self that many godly allegories holy men
should by his inspyracyon at diverse times draw out thereof. And sometime he
endyghted it, and our savior him self sometime spoke his words in such wise,
that the letter had none other sense then mysteryes and allegoryes / as come^ly
all his parables be, of which he expowned some him self and some he expouned
not, but has left the^ to be expowned by holy doctors after his death / and
some

Sometime also though the lyterall sense be full good / yet does god give the
grace to some man to find out a ferther thing therein. which sense god that
endyghted the letter, did when he made it fore see^ and more did set thereby
then by the sense that immedyately ryseth upon the letter / which letter his
high wisdom so tempered for the nones, that such other sense might be
perceived therein and drawn out thereof, by such as him self had determined to
give the grace to find it.

^^ut^r^. 25.
And for ensample our lord says in the book of Deuteronomy, Thou shall not
bind the mouth of the ox as ^. Corinth. 9.
Cares god awght for the oxen / as though he would say nay. And yet in deed
god cares and prouydeth for the living of every living thing. For it is
written in the psalm, Psalm^. 146
that god gives the mete to the bestes and to the young birds of the crows
that call upon him. And our savior says him self, Look ye upon the birds
of the air, Matt^. ^.
they neither sow nor spynne / and yet your father that is in heuyn fedeth
them.

And thus it apereth that god cares for the fedynge of all that ever he has
made.

But yet saw saint Poule, that god so myche cared for the prestes leuynge,
above that he cares for the oxes leuynge / that in respect of the tone
compared with the the other,

Now are there many other textes in the old law, which in like wise receive
like exposycyon, by goodly and fruitful allegoryes, as in the old holy saints
books appears. All which will Tyndale here have wyped out in any wise and
will have none allegoryes at all.

Holy saint Hierome expowneth by an allegorye the text of scripture, ^
that the holy prophet David by the co^^sayl^ of his physycyons when he waxed
very cold for age^ took

Finally I dare well say, that the allegoryes written upon the text of holy
scripture be very fruitful, what so ever Tyndale say / and else would god
never have suffered so many blessed holy men bystowe so myche time about them
/ but that him self both foresaw the frute^ and devised those textes in such
wise also, that through good folks labor with the sweet warmth of his own
inspy^acyon, such wholesome fruit should plentuously spring th^rof.

Go me now through all these points again, that Tyndale has under the name of
the clergy, laid against the catholyke church, crepynge up in to thapostles
place respect of lucre, ledynge in a wrong way, begylynge the

For their archeheretykes account them self for the prechers, and challenge
the apostles place, not by succession but by inuasyon. For they go and preach
and be not sent / and though pride prykke them forth with lybertye to lechery,
yet not without lucre neither. For some one of them putting out his fellows
such as will be religyouse and continue chaste, keeps all their leuynge alone,
saving for an harlot taken unto him to be called his wife, and get up a
covent of bastardes between them / and then

Now as for co^stytucyons whereof they would have none among us / them self
have been feign in some cytyes of Almayne as late as they be bygonne, to make mo
constytucyons and more bourdenouse to the people, more grievous and more sore to
keep up their heresies with, then the church has made in many years to keep
up the true christen faith.

Ceremonies also which among us they mokke and call them du^me / Marten
Luther him self Tyndales great master, after that he had left them of, was
by the proof and experyence dreuen little and little to take them almost

Now touching the sacraments, where of they say the church has taken away
the sygnyfycacyons / these heretykes take from them all the thing which they
chiefly sygnyfye, that is to say, the grace inuisyble that god gives with
them, and whereof he makes them an effectual toke^ and instrument.

And over this of the seven they take away five quyte, and leave the the other
twain frutelesse / and from the tone take they the sweet carnell within, the
blessed body of Christ, and leave the people the shalys.



Finally for making of false gloses / them self do much more then that. For
they where they list boldly deny the text / and will take for scripture but
what they list them self / for so reiecte they diverse parts which the
whole catholyque church does receive / and so might they by the same reason
reiecte the remanaunt to, and so they will I wene at last, and some have done
all ready.

And then as for false gloses, they make them self the worst that ever were
wroughte. As Luther to make men Ephesians. 5.
Luther I say, lets not in this wise to gloss saint Poules words, and say
that saint Poule peradventure said yt of his own head.

Is not there an hamer head more mete to make horshone in hell, then to constre
the scripture in earth, that is so hard as to make such gloses to that
gloryouse apostles words? wherein who so list to follow Tyndale, may set at
short all that thapostle teaches / and say he said that but of his own mind,
and not according to the mind of god.

Matthew. ^.1^.25.


Now what false gloses be they feign to find against good works, Luc^e. 11.
to corrupt an hundred plain places of holy scripture, Eph^s. 6.
by which they be clearly declared for things specially pleasynge to god,
He^^ae. 13.
and thorough the menys of his goodness hyghly rewardable in heaven and
merytoryouse. 1 Petri. 3.
Apoc. 2.14.22.
2. Corinthians. 5.


what false gloses be they feign to find against holy vow^s Psalmo. 75.
to corrupt so many plain places of scripture, 1. Timoth. 5.
as utterly condemn to the devil their foul fylthy wyddynges and
incestuouse lechery.

Finally feign they not false gloses to corrupt the gospel, and dreue god out
of christendom, when they would expel Christ out of the sacrament of the
auter? what care they how they gloss the apostle, when they care not how
shameless they show them self in setting so false and folyshe gloses to the
plain open words of our savior Christ him self.

For where he said of the blessed sacrament, This is my body: Martyne Luther
Tyndales old master gloseth yt thus, Matthew. 25.
This is bread and my body.

Then friar Huyskyn and Suynglius Tyndales two

These goodly gloses lo do these heretyques make, and these blasphemouse folyes
they preach unto the people, as boldly and as solempnely as though they had
herd them in heaven, and learned them of gods own mouth / and would seem to be
sent from heaven instead of Christ's apostles and of our savior him self /
and with testynge mokkynge and scoffing, wene to rail out every mannys reason
save their own. For thus lo with his symylytude of


Tyndale. And such blind reasons as ours make against us, made they against
Christ, saying Abraam is our father; we be Moses dyseyples. How knows he
the understanding of the scripture, he never learned of any of us. Only the
cursed unlearned people that know not the scripture believe in him / look
whyther any of the rulers or pharysyes do believe in him.


More. Tyndale as he before has hitherto lykened the catholyque church of all
christen people, unto the synagoge of the Jews / and the scrybes and pharysyes
that were then, unto the preachers and the clergy that are now: so does he
now crepe a little farther, and resembles him self and very sore opposed, and
that even by the very scripture it

For if Tyndale and his fellows had been there than them self, and our savior
and his apostles away / when he with his fellows would have rebuked the Jews
and have reproved their living, they should have founden in Tyndale and his
fellows fautes enough, so great and so syghtly, that they might have said
unto them very well, Take the beams out of your own eyes ye hypocrytes,
Matthew. 7.
ere ye go about to take the motys out of other mennys. For neither had
Tyndale nor any fellow of his, been able to say as Christ said, which of you
can reprove me of sin. Johan. 8.
And when they would find fautes that were none / then so to have answered them
ferther and confute them as Christ did.

For unto Tyndale if he had reproved the serybes and the pharyseys doctrine,
and showed that they both taught evil for good, and reproved as evil some
things that were not evil, and some things also that were in deed good /
when he would have proved them this by scripture, they would peradventure have
stycked with him upon the right understanding of the scripture. wherein if he
would have looked to have been better to be byleued then they / me thinks that
before right reasonable folk, he should have had an hard part to defend /
saving only for one thing if he could and would have laid it agayn^^ them.
And that is if he would have said and could have proved unto them, that the
good holy Iewys of old time before them in sundry ages, had expouned the
scryptures after his prechynge and contrary unto theyr^. This point

But then will this point as sore appall Tyndale in this debate between him
and us, because all the old holy saints from Crystes time to ours, have ever
expowned the scryptures in the necessary points of faith as the church now
does, contrary to Tyndale and all the whole rabble of all the sects of
heretykes.

But now for as myche as I am not sure, whyther Tyndale would so say to the
Iewys or not: let us therefore hardely take Tyndale thense again / and let
our sauyoure Christ alone with them / and se whyther he have any better
answers to make the Iewys there, the^ Tyndale has

Christ, if they would look to be better byleued in the construccyon of the
scripture then he, and would ask him of whom he learned it sith he learned it
not of them / could well tell them and well prove them, that him self alone
ought more to be byleued therein then they all together. For he could show
them that all those scryptures fro Moses down ward, did all prophecye of
him, and that he should be the techer of them, and the chyefe prophet, ^
and the trewest precher / and that therefore Moses had commanded them to here
him / and a greater then Moses the father of heuyn him self, ^
had commanded them to here him, and that the spyryte of god had lyghted
upon him in witness thereof and that he was him self gods own^

All this lo could Christ for him self answer unto the blind reasons that
the Iewys made unto him.

And now let Tyndale in like wise with help of all his fellows, answer the
same things for him self to our blind reasons that we make agay^ste hym^ and
th^nne make his answers good, that is to wit prove them true / and then would
we give him good leave to put out all ou^ eyes, and make us all blind in deed.

makes us in manner as stark blind as a catte / and so maseth

And yet I promise you either is my brain stark blind in deed, or else does
Tyndale play blind hobbe about the house. For he falls suddenly upon a
conclusyo^ / toward the proof whereof as far as I can spy, he has nothing
to wched. And yet by the words of his conclusyon he leueth us in like dowte as
he did before. For lo as though ^e had before well and plainly proved it / in
this wise he suddenly concludes, with as many dowtes as words.


Tyndale. Wher^^re the scripture truly understood after the plain places
and genera^^


More. who herd ever such an other wherefore? wheruppon does his wherefore
depend? has he any thing said yet, wheruppon it must follow, that the
scripture and the artycles of the faith with ensamples goone before, do teache
us which is now the church, he that sees it let him say^ it / for surely I
se it not.

And yet are also these words in them self so blind, that if he said
true, standing yet of all these marks all most every word between these
heretykes and us in questyon debate and controuersye / till he make us those
questyons more clear either they or we be still as blind as we

For first where he said the scripture truly understood / have they not
brought that point in questyon. And then how means he now truly
understood: as the church understands it, or as heretykes. And yet are not
he and we well agreed upon that point neither / but like wise as that we call
trewly, he calls falsely / so look whom we call heretykes he calls the
church, and whom we call the church he calls heretykes.

After the plain places / which be those, and to whom plain? the places that
the tone part calls plain, the the other calls crooked / and those that the
tone calls dark the other

The general artycles of the faith / which be those? For he woteth well that
they and we be not yet agreed upon them. For we believe matrymony is a
sacrament / Tyndale says he can him self make such a another sacrament of a
net or a kay. we believe that the sacrament of the auter is the very body and
blood of Christ / Tyndale says yt is but wine and cake bread. Tyndale
byleueth yt is lawful (if he believe as he says) that freres may wedde nunnys
/ and we believe as all good men have ever byleued, that such marriage is very
unlawful lechery and plain abomynable bychery. what are we then the nere
toward the knowledge ^
troth.

Nay says Tyndale yt shall not need. For the general artycles be those that
thou fyndest in scripture. which thou? to whom speaks he / for that the tone
part either fyndeth or weneth he fyndeth / the the other part says is not there
/ and when yt is showed, yet he says he sees yt not. And when the the other
tells him that he is then very blind, the the other tells him again nay, but
that on the the other side his sight rather daseth and weneth he sees, that he
sees

For we think we find in the scripture that confyrmacyon, holy order, and
anelynge, ^
be great and holy sacraments / Tyndale says we find yt not there. we think
we find in very palyne scripture, that in the sacrament of thauter is the very
blessed body of Christ / Tyndale will if need require, not let I am sure to
swear, that there is nothing there but cake bread.

we think we find in scripture, (...)
that men are bounden to keep their holy vowys, and that freres therefore may
not wedde nuns / Tyndale will not let to say we lie all, and that so do all
holy saints to fro Christ's days hitherto, that ever said so before. Now
shall we now agree / what are we now the nere for this mark.

I wot nere also what he means by general artycles /

But now I can not tell which he calls general artycles. For the general
church calls those part of the general artycles, which artycles Tyndale
says be false and no part of the faith at all.

yet where he says such general artycles as thou fyndest in the scripture, he
must tell us onys again, which thou. For between the church and his sectys yt
is not fully agreed, which books be the true scripture. For friar Barns says
plain, that saint Iamys pystle is none of his. And friar Luther says the
same, and sets not much

Now where he speaks of the samples gone before / he must both tell us which
ensamples he means, and apply those ensamples also to his present purpose.

And when he has so done / then shall ye well see that they s^all as all his
other marks do, but if we believe the come^ known catholyque church, show
else no certaynty of any church at all / but one church to one sort and a
another church to a another, and finally as many sundry chyrches, as there be
sundry sects of heretyques.

And sith not only no sect agrees with other, but almost also no man among
them all with other: all Tyndales

And against this has Tyndale none euasyon that can well serve him / but only
one. And that is, if he say that he meneth all his doutfull words to be
expowned by him self / that is to say, that he means by scripture well
understood, the scripture so understood as him self understands yt / and
by plain placys, those places that he calls plain him self / and by
general artycles, those artycles that he calls general him self / and that
he calls founden in scripture, all those artycles and only those,

And surely if he mean thus / this will some set an end in the matter, and
shortly ceace all the strife, if all folk agree to follow him / and else be
we still yet at as great strife as we were before.

And yet if he so mean, what needs he so long process. For then amou^teth
all his tale to no more, but as though he might say, will ye know which is
the very church? Surely the very church is even which so ever church my self
list to tell you. And this were ye wot well soon and shortly said, and
were a very godly conclusyon.




More. Though the pharyseys succeeded the patryarches and prophets, and had the
scripture of them / yet they were heretykes and fallen from the faith of them
and their living. And Christ and his discyples and John^ the Babtyste,
departed from the phariseys which were heretykes, unto the right sense of the
scripture, and unto the faith and living of the patryarke^ and prophets and
rebuked the pharyseys. As thou seyst how Christ calls them hypocrytes,
dysimulers, blind gydes, and painted sepulchers. And John^ called them

And after the same manner, though our popyshe ypocrytes succed^ Christ (...)
this new baptyste saint Luther, give the world warnyng

And therefore if this young saint John^ Baptystt he foregoer of these new
Crystes, and all their new apostles now sent by god in so great a message, and
for so great a purpose, like to find the world so full of flesshely folk,
that such a spyrytuall man must needs find much resystence: surely god caused
him to be prophesied of as the the other old saint John^ Baptyst was.

And therefore if Tyndale will have Luther taken now for a new saint John^ / as
of the old saint John^ it was of old prophesied by the mouth of Esaie^ that he
should be a voice of one cryenge in desert^ Make ready the way of our lord,
^saiae^ 40.
make straight the paths of our god in wilderness: so mus^e Tyndale now tell
us by what old prophet god

Now where Tyndale says to make up his matter with in this wise, we depart fro
them unto the true scripture, and unto the faith and living thereof and rebuke
them / in like manner he brings forth now for his part another manner thing in
deed then



And where he says he goes frow us to the faith and living thereof / he
must needs mean some faith and living that is allowed by that same true
scripture that he speaks of / that is as it seems by his words, none of
Crystes scripture nor of his apostles. And therefore when so ever he lust
hereafter to leave of our scryptures, that is as he confesses the scripture of
Christ and his apostles, and meddle no more with them, as it were well done he
did not, and onys I wene he will not i^ deed / but will for their

Then says he farther, And we rebuke them in like manner / that is to say that
saint Luther, saint Huchyns, saint Huyskyns, and saint Swynglius, in like
wise rebuke the catholyque church, as faynte John^ Baptyste rebuked the
synagoge of the Jews.

But now must Tyndale remember first, that though

And beside this these folk rebuke us not in like manner. For saint John^
Baptyste rebuked the vices of the Jews, not with words only but specially
with the sample of his own virtuous living / where as these rebukers of our
living, Matthe. 3.
live them self at the least wise as evil as we.

Saint John^ also preached penance for sin / but these fellows keep still
their own synnys them self, and call them virtue, and auow the break of their
vow for well

This was not saint Iohn^s manner.

Saint John^ showed an another manner of penance, exhorting to confession and
hearty contrycyon. And how a penyte^t should live he declared in his living / not
that he so neded, but to teach with his deed that he preached with his word.

Saint John^ therefore lyu^d in deserte, and fasted and fore hard, and lay
hard, and watched and prayed. These

But now knytteth Tyndale all the matter up / and shortly shows in the end
of this chapyter even in a few words, the thing that he has made us gape
after all this


Tyndale. And as they which depart from the faith of the true church are
heretykes / even so they which depart from the church of heretykes and falls
feigned faith of ypocrites, are the true church.


More. Lo good christen readers after long work at last, Tyndale has here
in few words showed you which is the very true church / that is to say as
many as depart out of the church of heretykes.

But has not Tyndale now brough^ us even in to the same dowte again has not
all our questyon been all this while, which is the true church / in which
questyon is

And now gives Tyndale such a counsel, as if one that could no good skylle
of money and were set to be a receyuour, would ask him counsel how he
should do to be sure always to to take good money / and Tyndale would advise him
to se well that he took no badde. And then if he said again, ye M. Tyndale but
I pray you teache me then how I may be sure that I take no badde. Mary would
Tyndale say again, for that shall I teache the a way sure enough, that never
shall deceive the if thou do as I bydde the, what is that I pray you. Mary look
in any wise that thou take none but good.

Such a good lesson lo did the tylar onys teach the maid, how she should
bear home water in a syue and spyll never a drop. And when she brought the
syue to the water to him to learn yt / he bade her do no more but ere ever she
put in the water, stop fast all the holes.

And then the maid laughte and said that she could yet teach him a thing
that a man of his craft had more need to learn. For she could teach him how
he should never fall, clymed he never so high, all though me^ took away the
lader from him. And when he longed to learn y^ point to save his nekke with /
she bode him do no more but ever se surely to one thing, that is to wit,
that for any haste he never come down faster then he went up. Now such a
good sure lesson Tyndale teaches us here. For now to

Now if Tyndale will say that he has all ready well and suffycye^tly showed
who be heretykes, in that he has showed which was onys the right church, that
is to wit Criste and his apostles / and that the catholyke church that now is,
is fallen from the faith and bylyefe of that church that then was, and so be
they the heretyques / and therefore the church that was, shows the heretykes
that be / that is say the church of Christ and his apostles that was the chyrh



And in this point though Tyndale to blere our yien with all, use diverse
ways to draw our minds from the very point of the matter / and to flater the
temporalty, tourneth

Then consider I say now, that where he says that the catholyque church now
is fallen from the faith of the old church of Christ and his apostles / we
can not deny but that Tyndale so says. But then se we well and so we say
again and say therein very true, that when Tyndale so says he lies.

For ye se your self that Tyndale proves this tale but by his bare word, ^n
that we believe not as he does, that

Now have we well proved you, that in all such points we have the self same
faith that Christ and his apostles had and tawght. And in these points we
prove that the scrypturys of them be on our part. And yet say we I^han. 16.
and by his own perpetual assystence and presence with his church for ever
as him self promised also. Of which things well known and yet unwritten,
Matt^. 2^.
is for ensample one, that we be bounden to believe the perpetual virgynyte of
our lady, wherwyth I have troubled Tyndale onys or twyse here

An other ensample of the tradycio^s without writing may be the putting of
the water in to the wine at the mass / wherwyth the kings noble grace in such
wise handeled Luther, that in answering thereunto Luther fares as one that
were fallen frantyke, and says now this now that and woteth not where he may
hold him / but says sometime that the water may be left out or put in as
the church ly^te to order. And then again he says that it ought to be
left out and not put in, for as myche as it

But holy saint Cypryan that blessed bysshope and very glorious martyr / and a
man one of the best learned that ever wrote in Crystes catholyke church,
writes plainly.xiii. hundred year before Luther was borne, that the water
must needs in, and that Christ put water in to it at his own maundy when he
consecrated and ordained it him self.

And this blessed saint Cypryane, thought him self bounden both so to believe
and to teache upon the tradycyons

Thus writes saint Cypryane contrary to Luthers doctrine clear.

But I can let no man to believe now whyther of them both they lyst^. How be
it I se not greatly why Luther should be better byleued then he, but if it
be because saint Cypryane would not wedde, and Luther has wedded a nonne.

But as I began to say, remember good reader that where as we say that in
the great varyaunce of our faythes, the faith I say of the catholyque
church and the faith which these heretyques profess to the contrary, we
prove our faith by the scryptures / and they say nay, and afferme that they
prove theyrs by y^ scryptures, whereunto

For as for which was holy and autentyke scripture and which not, we have be
a great while very well agreed / saving that Luther of late and friar Barns
after him, would feign put out saint Iamys pystle, ^
and says it has no smacke of any apostolyque spyryte, Iac^^i. 5.
because it says that faith waxes deed without good works and has a plain
place also for the sacrament of anelynge.

And now seems Tyndale to make a secret insinuacyo^ of some other scripture
than Christ's and his apostles / which other scripture he seems to call the
true scripture / and says that from the catholyke church which him self
confesses to have the scripture of Christ and his apostles, him self and his
fellows goo now to the true scripture.

But now lettynge his other new true scripture alone till he rehearse us some
thereof / ever hitherto all our debate and varyau^ce has been about the
exposycyon / each part layenge to the others charge false glosynge of the
true

Then sith the dowte between their faith and ours, rests upon that point:
consider good christen reader that we prove that the consent of all the old
holy doctors and saints of every age synnys chrystendome first began unto
friar Luthers own days, is upon our part against them.

And this have I proved. what say I, this have I proved? nay this have (I say)
them self proved, in that their head capytayne Luther prowdely rejects and
shakes of the saints with his sleue like flies by the whole hundred at onys /
and in one place in his book of Babilonica spekyng of the cano^ of the mass,
wherein he confesses that they stand all against him, he sets not a rysshe
by them all, but

And in this point all the ^able of them follow their master so far, that
they fall to blasphemynge of saints to take away their authoryte.

And yet if this proof will not satysfye them, but that they be so shameless
as to say yet still that the old holy doctors and saints are against us
with them: let them of so many tell us one, that ever so co^strewed the
scripture, that a man professynge onys vowed chastyte, was for all at his
lawful lybertye to wedde a vowed professed nonne. I speak of professed and
vowed, because of such as profess without perpetual vowys, as is the
relygyous house of saint Gerytrude at Nyuell, and other like in

Then consider good christen reader, that sith we have upon our part against
all their sects, all the old holy saints agreynge with us in bylyefe, though
we be not like them in living, there is no dowte but that in faith the comen
christen people by all these agys agreed with us also.

For how can we know the faith that in every time has been, but by the
writers that were in every time, sith we can not now speak with the men.



And as for any thing that him self proves / his words that he would were
taken for so plain to show us which is the church, leueth us as I said in
like dowte as we were / saving where they should prove him and his company the
church, they prove now clearly with this, that he confesses Christ and his
apostles to have been the church / and then this that we prove thereto by all the
holy doctors

And here ye se well good reders, I might of his chapyter make an end. But in
good faith Tyndals words well wayed, have so many merry folyes in them, that I
can not yet hold my fyngers from them.

For I require you for gods sake onys again consider his words well.


Tyndale. As they which depart from the faith of the true church are heretykes
/ even so they that depart from the church of heretykes and false feigned
faith of ypochrytes, are the true church.


More. I have in good faith good hope, that there shall not lyghtely so mean a
wytted man read his words here, but that he shall marvel myche where Tyndals
wit was when he wrote those words. For every child may se perde that these
two things be not like / that is to wit the going out of the true church
of Christ, and the going out of the false church of heretykes. For the true
church of Christ is but one. And the false chyrches of heretykes be many. And
therefore though every man that goth from the faith out of that one true church
of Crist, must needs be an

Now that a man may go out of a false church of heretykes and yet not into
the true church of Christ / Tyndale may well perceive by two samples of two
special heretykes of two contrary condycyons / that is to wit one heretyke

And thus in Berengarius may Tyndale well perceive that a man may go frow a
false church of heretykes, and yet not strayt into the true church of
Christ.

Tyndale may also perceive this point well by the the other new heretyke wyllyam
Huchyn, which first fell to the secunde heresye that was of the twain the
less evil, that is to wit the heresye that Luther holds, that in the
sacrament is both the very body of Christ and very bread. But now either
because he longed ever to fall unto the wurste, as long as he might find any
wurse then other, or else because he favored frete Huskyn, because his own
name was Huchyn / he fell in that point from Luthers heresye to his, and
affermeth now that there is in the blessed sacrament nothing else but bread /
and ^esteth and scoffeth upon it, and dysputeth in his blasphemy that it should

And thus where the old heretyke Berengarius began at the worste, and from
that fell to less evil: this new heretyque Huchyn goth contrary way,
beginning at the less evil and falling from that unto the worse. And
therefore is much the less lykely to follow yt the other in one point, in which I
pray god he may. For Berengarius yet after all this, revoked his later heresye
to, and lived long after, and dyed an holy virtuous man.

But by these ensamples I say Tyndale may well perceive that though he go
strayt out of a chirch of heretics, yet yt shall not follow yt he shall go into
ye true church / sith he may by the way step into a another false church,
of which there be so many beside.

I^^. 41.
which is king as the scripture says over all the children of pride, which
pride is as saint Austayne says the very mother of heretyques.

Now if yt be true that Tyndale here says, that the church which we call
the very church / that is to say, if yt be true that the catholyque known
church, be as Tyndale here takes yt the church of heretyques / and ye faith
thereof be as he also calls yt, a false feigned faith of ypocrytys / and
therefore like as this church because yt is as

Now sith Tyndale has brought yt unto this, I would fayn know one thing of him
/ sith it is so that all those sectys be the true church and very faithful
folk: how happeth yt that each of them calls other false shrewes, and says
true in that point and in allmoste nothing else?

And sith he has brought yt unto this / how can his fynall words also stand
with this co^clusyon, with which


Tyndale. Which thou shalt always know by their faith examyned by the
scripture, and by their professyon and consent to live according unto the
laws ^f god.


More. Now consider good reder whether these tokens do make us know, that all
the sects that are departed fro the catholyke church, be the true church.

How can their faith examyned by the scripture, or how can their professyon to
live according to the lawis of gos, make us perceive that all they be the true
church, because they come from the faith of ours which Tyndale calls false
and feigned / where as they being departed from owres,

For first in Boheme, what a sort of diverse false faythys be there, and what
dyuersyte and contraryete in the professyon of their living.

Then in Saxony and in some parts of Almayn, what a another sort is there of
sundry manner sectis, as well in artycles of the faith and bylyefe, as iu the
unmannerly manners and lawles laws of living, whereof ye may perceive a great
many by the book of M. wyllyam Barloo, that long was co^uersaunt in the
country / which detestynge thabomynacyon that he found among them, has of
a right godly zele given us knowledge of them.

And now by Tyndales tale they be the true church every

For all this lo yet shall we by the law of god and by the scripture of god
compared with all their bestely lyuynges and all their false repugnaunt
faythes, well and clearly know says Tyndale, that all they be the very true
church of Christ, because they can be none other, for as myche as they be come
away from the feigned faith of ours.

And so ye may se that Tyndale affyrmeth now not only those abhomynable
heresies that he taught before, but

And in good faith I never thought other yet from sone

Beside all this, consider well good reder, that if yt be true that Tyndale
here teaches us for the fynall conclusyon of all this chapyter / that is to
wit if it be true that all they that go out of the catholyke church, be the
the true church / then sith the sects that are departed out of this

And thus has he suddenly pulled here down to ground, the church unknown of
his only electys, that he has

Now if Tyndale when he shall perceive how blyndely the devil has led him
here about, and made him to fall in the dyche with his docer, and break all
his eggys, and quayle thus all his conclusyon, would for shame seek any farther
shyfte, and say that I mysse take his words, and that him self meant in them
some other manner thing: I dowte not but every wise reder will consider well
what he will say, and not be so far over seen as to believe him at his only
word. One thing I am very sure, that I have in this chapyter left never a
word of his vnwryte^ to hyde his intent, or deprave his purpose with all / but
have truly and plainly rehearsed them every one. By all which yt appears
plainly, that he both says and means as I have showed you /

How be yt if he will for auoydyng of the shame, surmyse yt he meant some other
thing: I can not well ymagyn what yt might be that he might dyuyse to say that
he me^t. For if he would say that he meant not, that all the sectys that go out
of the catholyque church which he calls the heretykes be the true church /
but some one of them, which one we should perceive well from the remenaunt by
their faith examyned by scripture, and by the professyon of their living
after the law of god: this can he not say that he

He would also if he had so meant, have specially commanded some one. And also
there is not one of the^ all whose faith either agrees with the scripture, or
the professyo^ of their living with the law of god / but if Tyndale call as in
deed he does, a godly professyon for freres and nonnes to fall from the
chastyte of their professyon / and like as they professed before to serve god
in chastyte, so to profess them self from hense forth to serve the devil in
sacrylege, and make him a daily sacryfyce of their own bestely bodies with
incestuous lecherye.



For first the general manner yt he uses where he says They that go fro the
church of heretykes (which he calls us of the catholyke church) be the very
church, This general manner of speech I say that excludes none, restrayneth
it not unto a few folk only uncertain and unknown, but extends it unto
all folk that ever go forth from us. And therefore he ca^ not excuse his folly
with saying that he meant it so.

Moreover if he so had meant in deed / that had been yet

yes says Tyndale Thou shalt always know them by their faith examyned by the
scripture, and by their professyo^ and consent to live according

How is it possible to know by these menes whyther he be a fynall elect or
not? while he may both lie and change, and say he byleueth otherwise than he
does, or believe here after otherwise than he does now.

But yet consider well here good reder, that when ye se Tyndale here go about
to teache how they may be known / he declares him self that of reason the
church must be a church known / and that it were a thing far out of
reason to have the very church unknown. And in this he clearly declares the
madness as well of him self as of Luther and Bar^s and them all, that would
have the church a co^gregacyo^ unknown / and yet labor to deuyse us marks by
all the menes they may, whereby their church unknown might seem to be
perceived and known.

Now when he says, Thou shall allway know them by their faith examyned by the
scripture, and by their professyon and consent to live after the law of god: I
would ^ayne wit which thou he means.

Thou learned or thou unlearned. wel^ ye wot that among the learned, the very
sense is in questyon / and upon the debatynge thereof, aryseth all the
varyau^ce. which thou means he than? Thou that art unlearned: Thou that
cannest scantely read it, or thou that cannyst not read it at all? when they
that are learned can not perceive it, then thou perde y^ art unlearned shall
perceive it a non, and examyne and judge by the scripture which of them say
best for their faith of whom thou understand neither another / but the
longer that thou hereste them dyspute upon the scripture but if ^
For as the prophet says, but if ye believe ye shall not understand. And
therefore for every man learned and unlearned for so far as touches the
necessary doctrine of true faith and living, and exposycyo^ of scripture that
apperteyneth thereto, the very fastenesse and surtye is, to rest unto the
church / which is as saint Poule says, ye pyler and sure ground of troth. 1.
(...)
And that can be no^e unknown church, which can neither learn nor teache, as
they that neither can have precher no^ herers / as well for that one of them
can not know an other to assemble about eleccyon and choice, nor can have any
by successyo^, sith there can be no succession perceived among

And if they fall after in aquayntau^ce together and flock to gyther, and each
know of others bylyefe and living / then begin they to be a known sect
and a false known church of heretykes, because they be gone out of the
catholyke, heretykes or scismatykes have risen, either have they by

And therefore to fynysshe at last this long chapyter of his solucyon / it is
impossyble for Tyndale or all the world beside, to soil that one argument, by
which the known catholyke church is proved to be the very church of Christ / in
that that from the beginning it has ever still be^e by ordynary course of
succession kept and continued one / and the old faith from the beginning (as
by the b^kes of holy saints of every age well appears) all way c^ntynued
therein / and the old right manner of interpretacyon Matthew. 28.
as it was promymysed and prophesied that the church of Christ should succeed
and put away the synagoge of Moses / and that all other chyrches and sects of
which every one calls it self the right church, be some at one time some at
an other arysen and rered them self against this church, and therefore both
gone out and cast out of this church, and there so many diverse faythes

These things I say being thus, that the very chirch can be but one, and
must endure as long as the world lasts, and can in this world have no new
church to succeed yt as the synagoge had / and then that all these chyrches
of these sectis be risen and gone out of the catholyke church, and yt
co^tynueth still: yt is impossyble I say for

And thus good christian reders have I plainly proved you, that Tyndale and his
fellows and all these sundry sectys, nor yet any one of them all, be not as
he blasphemeth and scoffeth to be resembled unto Christ and his apostles / as
gone out of the catholyque church, in like manner as they went out of the
synagoge that then should have an end, to begin a new that while the world
lasted should never have end, nor any church be true save yt self. But y^
Tyndale and all his fellows and all their sectys, be so gone

And like wise also as Cain was by god put out of the church of good folk,
for his obstynate malice in earth.

And like wise as Chore, Dathan, and Abyron with their felows, ^
made a sect of scysmatyques and bent away fro the church of Moses and Aaron
in deserte / for which they went quykke under earth, and as yt seems hell
swaloweth them up. Number. 1^.


And like wise also as the ten trybys of Israel departed with Hieroboam from
their very king Roboam the son of Solomon / with which rebellyous
departing from their king, all be it they were not well handeled with him,
but were thretened and put in fere of oppressyon, ^
as the great company of Crystes dyscyples went from him when he was about to
teach him the faith of his very body and blood in the sacrament of the altar
/ for which and from which Huchyn, Huyskyn, and Swynglius, be now gone away
to. And yet as the very church remained in these few that abode and continued
/ so shall the very church ever abide and continue in these few that persevere
in the stokke, be yt mynished and mynced never so small / and always those that
go therfro, shall be but wythered

These heretykes depart also from the catholyke chirch in such wise as Judas
departed fro y^ church of Criste at the mau^day souper, M^r^i. 14.
when he went to betray the head of tha^ church, and vterly to dyssolue the
body. And like wise do all these sects of heretykes, which in y^ point do more
then verily represent the scrybes and pharysyes, whom saint John^ called the
generacyon of vypars. For as the young vyper serpe^tes gnaw out their mothers
belly, Matt^^. ^.
and those scribes and pharysyes did by their false doctrine labor to
destroy the very true doctrine of the synagoge, whereof they were engendered:
so do all these cursed serpentyne sectys of heretykes, both with their false
errors and heresies, A^^^. 2.
which both heresies be now begone to be brought up again among the
sectys of these new heretyques in Almayne / which sects Tyndale calls the
very true church of Cryste^ because they depart only and go from ours /
where he sees well by the old books, that we have the same faith that
thapostles had / and hereth with his own ears that they have the same
heresies which thapostles dampened.

So se you good readers, that the many sects are come uote of the one church
/ the noughty out of the good, the false out of the true. And Tyndale argues
the contrary way / and thereby would make us wene that the good comes ever out
of the bad, and leueth the noughty behind. And by that way shall not only
Luthers lecherous church

And thus end I good christian reder this boke^ in which every child almost
that aduysedely redeth yt, may well and clearly perceive that Tyndales
solucyon is not worth one ryshe / but the reason that he would have soyled, is
and abides still so mighty strong and inuyncyble, as a reason before me made
by the strong and mighty champyon the inuyncyble martyr saint Cypryan^ / that
by that one reason alone yt is I dare boldelye say, well and plainly proved
that this known catholyque


Thus ends the.vi. book.
The.vii. book.
The defense of the second reason.
Tyndale. AN other like blind reason they have, wherein is all their trust. As
we come out of them and they not out


More. This reason good reader which Tindale would here so feign answer and
soil, is the thing wherwyth the king our sovereign lord as a most erudyte
prince in his most famous book of the assercyon of the sacraments, strayned
Luther so sore, that hitherto neither him self nor any companyo^ of his,
durst ever onys attempt any answer thereunto / till Tyndale now perceiving
the kings argument in that point, so strong that every man much allows it
and feleth it for invincible, wareth for anger so stark mad at last / that
he makes his assayes and assaute^s here thereat / and leseth not

But Tyndale all be it that he rehearse the reason ^n such wise him self, that
he soyleth it not afterward so surely as he reherseth it / nor never were like
why^e he lives, all though the reason had no more then he reherseth: yet does
the kings grace against Luther besides all this that Tyndale reherseth, put
an other pyece or twain of pytthe and strength therein.

For where as in the time of holy saint Austayne, such heretykes as then were,
played as these do now, denyenge the common known catholyke church to be the
very church of god, and the doctrine thereof to be true: that blessed

This saying of saint Austayne Luther him self allows. For though he will
in no wise agree, that the hole catholyke church gathered to gyther in a
general cou^sayl, has any authoryte or power to make any laws at all: yet he
grants that the certaynty by which we know and be put in suretye, which is
the very scripture of god, and which not, a man has his lernyng and teaching
of that point by the church of god, for the church has says Luther
according to the saying of Austayne, this thing

Then laid our said sovereign lord Luthers own words against Luthers
own heresies, for the faith of the catholyke church, in diverse places diverse
ways. For sith Luther confessed that the church has that gift of god, that
it can dyscerne the word of god from the word of man: it follows says his
grace that those things which the church says, is the word of god
unwritten and tradycyons of the apostles, (of which Luther would none believe,
because they were not written) be the very word of god as well as those that be
written.

And in that reason his grace gave Luther and Tyndale and all their whole sect
such a sure fall, that they shall never

Luther him self confesses yt god has given the church that gift, that it
can dyscerne the words of god from the words of men. And wherefore has he
given the church that gift, but because he will not suffer his church to fall
into such a perylous error, as to take the words of men for ye words of god
/ whereby men might fall to some evil

Now theruppon it very well follows, that god never will permyt and suffer his
church to fall in any dampnable

By this argument lo the kings hyghnes utterly confuted Luther upon Luthers
own words / and proved him that he may never say nay for shame, but that in
all necessary points the very true sense and e^posycyon of the scripture, is
in the church and the holy doctors thereof. whose exposycyo^s as by their
books appears, openly reprove such exposycyons thereof, as all these heretykes
have devised for the mayntenaunce of their heresies.



Sith god has as Luther confesses given the church that gift, that it
dyscerneth the words of god from the words of man / Luther well shows him
self such as he is, while he calls the pystle of saint Iamys the word of
man, which the church has so long dyscerned and judged for the word of god.

Finally the self same words of Luther as the kings hyghnes handeleth them,
fully do conclude Luther and Tyndale both, in prouyng the known catholyke
church to be the very church / which is now as ye know well, all our whole
matter.



Now good christen readers, consider well I require you these effectual
points, which our souerayn lord so substancyally laid unto Luther upon his
own words / and I dowte not but your self shall easyly perceive and se, that
the same things shall stand strong and sure / and over that answer and
overthrow all the substance of Tyndals solucyon here. whose words let us
now look on again and examyne.


Tyndale. This wise reason is their shote ancre and all their whole refuge, and
chyefe stone in their fundacyon / wheruppon they have bylte all their lies, and
all their myschyefe that they have wrought these.viij. hundred years.


More. This reason Tyndale here makes very light, and says that these.viii.
hadred year the catholyke church has byelded so many lies and so myche
myschyefe thereon / by all which time of viii. hundred years, if the whole
catholyke church have been in errors and heresies as Tyndale here says and his
master Martyne Luther before him, then has Christ broken all his promyses,
by which he promised to be with his church all days to the worlds end.

For by all this.viii. hundred years has Christ had none other church
contynuynge that any man can tell of / but if Tyndale will say yes / and when
he can neither tell which nor where, will yet say still yes, and nothing but
yes, and look that we should against our own experyence upon his bare word
believe him, because he says still

Tyndale sees well also, as ye shall after perceive though he dyssymyle yt now
/ that when he says this wise reason is their shote ancre, this reason yt he
mokketh is not only theyres whom he would seem to mokke, that is to wit the
catholyque church of this, viii. years / in which time have been men of such
holiness and virtue and now holy saints in heaven, whose faithful holy wrytynges
condemn his faythlesse heresies, that every good man I dare say will think
them full vnmetely to be mokked and iested upon by such a folyshe fellow as
this is / which while he sette^h so little by saint Thomas, saint Bonauenture,
saint Bernarde, saint Anselme, and all such other men as have Johan. 16
and ledeth yt into all troth as he promised, and will not suffer yt damnably
to err, and for that cause will not suffer yt to be dysceyued in mysse taking
of the very scripture, nor consequently for the same cause for such myssetakyng
of the right sense and understand thereof, whereby they should fall in any
damnable

These are the things that holy saint Austayne made that reason for, against
such heretykes as Luther and Tyndale be now. which other did then as these do
now, labor to make folk believe that their church of heretyques were the very
church, and the catholyque church were a church of heretykes. Against those
heretykes say I, and with them against these heretyques to, did that holy
doctor saint Austayn, not only eight hundred year agoo, which were yet a
longer time by almost half then ever had any sect of heretyques any
contynuaunce yet / but




Tyndale. And this reason do the Jews say unto our charge this day. And this
reason does chyefely blind them, and hold them still in obs^ynacy.


More. O good lord, what great pytye yt was that saint Austayne had not had
as myche wit as wyllyam Tyndale that he might have seen that his argument
would so sone be soyled / and that yt was no better for the church against
heretyques, then for the Jews against crystendome

But surely saint Austayn good man saw not so far. For sith her never found
in all his days, neither Jew nor heretyque so mad to make him that answer
which might so, sone be voyded / he trusted well good man that there would
never none be so folyshe in such wise to soil yt after.

How be yt if saint Austayne had had no more to say to the Jews for the
defense of his reason, then the heretykes had to say to him in the soylynge
of his reason: then might the heretyques well have mokked saint Austayne, as
Tyndale does now, and soyled his reason in the self same fashyon / and so
would they sone have done ye may be ^
to lead yt in to all necessary troth, ^
to thentent that his catholic church may be to every man that will learn
thereof and give credence thereunto as him self commands every man to do^ a
very sure stablyshement and a strong pyller of troth / as well in perceiving
which is the true scripture, as the necessary

Thus lo, with yet many better things mo then either my pore wit or learning
can deuyse, could saint Austayn have answered any such heretyque that would
have soyled his reason with the Jews argument, as Tyndale now

And farther then might saint Austayne have said to that heretyque, as we may
say to this heretyque, y^ what so ever the Jews would ^aber or ^angle again,
ye that are christian men and falsely profess Christ, which falling from h^s
faith still pretend his name, ye can not say but that the Jew is trewly and
reasonably answered.

And therefore may we say to Tyndale, that he can not say for the mayntenannce
of his solucyon, any such thing against the reason of saint Austayne, as
saint Austayn might have said against such other heretykes. For Tyndale can
not say that the church of Christ is at an end as the synagoge of the Jews
is / nor can not deny but that he took the scripture of the church, and learned
to know the scripture by the teaching of the church / and that none other

And thus lo good christian reders, here ye clearly se that Tyndales example and
symylitude of the Jews, whereby he would shake of saint Austayns reason made
against he retykes, to prove the catholyque church the very church, is well
and clearly voyded and proved far unlike / so that Tyndale must seek him
self a new solucyon for this. And so ye shall se him do anon / but ye must
give him leave to rail a little first.


Tyndale. Our spyrytes first fals^fye the scripture, to stablyshe their lies.


More. Lo good reders, I told you ye must give him leave to rail a little, ye
and to ly a little to / for else he can not speak. But yet god be thanked that
his goodness has made yt well perceived and known, that only the sectys of
heretykes departing out of y^ catholic church, have used ever y^ craft, not
only to refuse for scripture some part of the very scripture in deed / but
also for favor of their false he resyes, to change, corrupt, and of purpose
to falsefye, with rasynge and false writing, the true text of those books that
them self take and confess for the very scripture in deed.

Let Tyndale tell us any one peyce of holy scripture

Let Tyndale tell what one text, what one word, the catholyke church has
gone about to corrupt or change to make the text the more mete for their
matter. Now has yt ben an old pranke of heretykes, to use that fashyon of
malycyouse corruptynge the books of the holy scripture in in their hands / as
ye may read in autentyke stories, that the Arrianys did, and were shamefully
taken with all.

Of this falsefyenge we have also a fresh new ensample given us by Tyndale him
self in his translacyon / wherein

Of this falsefyenge have these heretykes also given us good ensample, in the
books that they have put forth, and in the calender of the saints have put out
saint Po^ycarpus that holy man the.xxiii. day of February, and set in in his
place a stark wreched heretyke, late burned at Maydeston and now burning in
hell called Thomas Hytton, whom they call in their calendar saint Thomas of
Kente

Such purpensed falsefyenge of books use always these heretykes, and none at
any time but heretykes.

Thus do they falsefye the books of the old holy doctors

And lately have they played that pagea^^t in falsefyeng the very text
ofscrypture, in such wise yt they show therein their honest playnnesse and
their substancyall truth.

For have not some of Tyndals holy elected sort changed the laten text of
saint Poule in the first pystle to the Corinthians. 1. Corint^. ^
For where the old translacyon has this word fornicarii and the new
translacyon scortatores, which sygnyfyeth in english, whore hunters / they
have put in this word sacerdotes, that is to say prestes.

And even as they have handeled the holy scripture of god, so have they used
them self in other writers that expoune

And Huyskyn also in his translacyon of the cunning bishop Theophylactus
upon saint John^ his gospel, left out in the exposycyon of the.xxi.
chapyter, not a few lines. And lest if it were perceived it might be laid
to his charge / he said that his book lacked somewhat in that place, where as
other men's books lack it not.

And holy saint Thomas alleges in his book called Cathena aurea, the words
which Huyskyne would have seem that they could not be founden in the work.
But for what good intent and purpose he so said, the place it self

How may Tyndale now good christen reders, considering this false shameless
fasshyon of falsefyenge, so daily founden in his fellows and him self to, as
well as in other heretykes of old time, be now so bold as in his raylynge
against the catholyke church, to name onys the name of falsefyenge the
scripture.

But now goes he forth and says, that they falsefy the sentence of the
scripture.


Tyndale. And when the scripture comes to light, and is restored unto the
true understanding, and their iuglynge spyed, and they like to suffer
shy^warke: then they cast out this ancre / they be the church and can not
err, their authoryte is greater then the sc^ypture, and the s^rypture is not
true, but by


More. Tyndale here speaks of iewglynge, which he says we use in
mysconstrewynge of the scripture, and which he makes as it were now spyed
out, and the scripture restored unto his right sense again. But here is it
ethe to spy and perceive his iewglynge well enough, how he iewgleth him self
over the style ere he come at it. For ere ever he get over the hedge, and tell
us what we do when our iewglynge is spyed / there is a little labor for him of
half a miles walking ere he come at the hedge, in which he should tell us and
rehearse us some of those textes of scripture, which the catholyke church or the
doctors thereof have falsefyed

Thus he should have showed us first, and then have showed us after what the
church says therein, and prove that exposycyon false, and that by such
exposycyon the true sense were iugled away. This way should Tyndale take.

But for as much as he loves well to walk in the dark, and there to iewgle as
men may not se to his hands: I shall light him a candell and let you se for
a sample some of these textes yt he meneth of, and for shame dare not speak of

He means all those textes of scripture that speak of Lucae. 11.
As where our savior says, That thing that ye have more then enough give out
in almoyse, and than lo be all things cle^e unto you.

And where ye scripture says, ^
Like as water quenche^h the fire, so does almoyse deed put of sin: ^
And this text also, A man's own richesse do redeem his soul.

He meneth also all such textes of scripture, as give us warning that god will
reward our good wurkes in heuyn, and that for lack of good wurkes men shall be
dampened in hell. As where our savior ^aythe him self in the gospel of saint
Mathewe, Matt^^. ^^^
The son of man shall come in his fathers glory with his angels, and then
shall he reward every man according to his dedys. 2. C^ri^^^. ^.
And by the Ap^^. ^.
I shall reward every one of you according to your deadys. And again in
the.xxii. chapyter, Apo^^. 22
Behold I come shortly, (...). 5
and my reward is with me to give every man according as his wurkes shall be. ^
And in many plain places of scripture more. ^


All these textes lo do Luther and Tyndale say, (...). 25.
that the catholyke church iugle from their true sense, because they teache them
as god and the holy ghost has spoken them and verily meant and intended by them.



And therefore says saint Luther enspyred with the spyryte of Lucyfer, that a
good man when he does any good deed, he does sin / and that there can no
thing dampne a christen man as long as he will believe. For what sins so
ever he do bysyde, if faith either stand still with him or come again unto
him, his faith does than suppe up in a moment all his sins at onys, without
any penance at all. He weneth he were suppynge up of a rere roten

with this goodly gloss lo restore these men these textes of scripture unto the
right sense again.

Then when we tell them that good works by which they set so lytle^ god
sets so much by, that by the mouth of his blessed apostle saint Iamys, he
gives all the world warning, Iac^^i. 2.
that the bylyefe wherein they put all the life, is without good works in him
that may wurke a thing as to wchynge any life of grace or glory clearly
des^ytute and deed: when we tell Luther, Tyndale, or Bar^s this tale, then
wrestle they with that text, and wrythe it and wreste it about, and feign
would wind them self out with iewglynge Iacobi. 5.
and of many sore words also, wherwyth saint Iamys does in the same pystle
as plainly preche against these heretykes, and as surely descrybeth them, as
though he had long been conuersaunt and in compauy with them / as the
kings highness excellently well marketh and reherseth: Luther lets not
upon the boldness and authoryte of his apostasye, to reiecte and cast out
as no scripture that whole pystle of

Then concerning the sacraments, all such as them self deny, that is to wit
five of the s^uen, all such textes as in the scripture speak of them / those
they gloss as it pleseth them. As in the sacrament of presthed, the words of
saint Poule unto Timothe, by which he plainly speaks of grace given unto
Tymothe 2. Thimot. 1.
by the putting of his hands upon him / that Tyndale says was but as a man

In the sacrament of matrimo^y, where as saint Poule says yt is a great
sacrament / those words gloseth Luther, and says that saint Poule
peradventure said that of his own head.

In the blessed sacrament of the auter, Mat^^. 2^
where as our savior said him self, This is my body / there gloseth Luther
his words, and says yt is as myche to say, as this is bread with my body.
And friar Huyskyn, Tyndale, and Swynglius, glosen yt, and says that these
words, This is my body, be as myche to say as this is nothing, and but only
sygnyfyeth my body, and is not my body at all.

And as concerning holy vows, where the scripture

And thus lo good christen reders, do these holy folk bring the scripture to
light, Psa^. 25
and res^ore yt to the true understanding / and spy out the iewglyng of the
catholyke church, that would iugle away such good gloses.

Now where Tyndale says that we say that thauthoryte of the church is
grea^er then the scripture / and that the scripture is not true, but because
the ch^rche says so and admytte yt: in this he says his pleasure as him
lysteth to ieste / for he hereth no man so mad to say so^ for the scripture
were true though never man looked thereon. But

And where he says that we say, that every thing that the church says, is
of as great authoryte as the scripture: we say that god shall never suffer in
matter of salvation or dampnacyon, the catholyque church to say but the troth
/ because of his promyses made which we have often rehearsed, and because he
will have the catholyke church

And thus ye se to what good effect Tyndales solucyon is come / wherwyth he
would answer saint Austaynes reason, by ferynge him that the Jews might lay
the same reason for them.

But now goth Tindale well fauoredly forth with a great face of a no^her full
^olucyon / and at a great length tells us in effect none other manner thing
but the self same tale again / and yet has he told yt us onys every dele in
his other solucyon of the first reason / before which solucyon I have soyled,
and from all wit and reason assoyled in my last book before.


Tyndale. Notwytstandynge as I said, the kingdom of heaven stands not in
words of mannys wisdom, but in power and spyryte.


More. This is very well said / and in his solucyon of ye first reason he said
y^ wot well ye same. And now se ye well yt for ye catholic church both ye
reasons be first brought forth by very spirytuall men / the first reason by
saint Cypriane, the second by saint Austayne. And yt has such power, that yt
forced Luther him self Tyndales own master, to consent and agree thereto. And
the catholyque church has also for her part the great power of the holy
spyryte of god, that in this catholyque church from the beginning unto this
present day, never has ceaced yet nor never shall I trust, to show many
meruelouse miracles. whereof let us now se whyther Tyndale speaking so myche of
spyryte and power,


Tyndale. And therefore look unto the samples of scripture, and s^ ^halt thou
vnder^tande. And of an hundred ensamples between M^yses and ^hrys^e, where the
Israelytes fell from god and were ever restored by one prophet ^r other, let
us take one even John^ Baptyste. John^ went be^^re Christ to prepare his way
/ that is to bring men unto the knowledge of their sins and vnt^ r^p^ntaunce,
through tr^w expoundynge of the law, which is the one^y w^^e unto for us the
remyssyon of our sins, but also the forgyuenesse of that gross

And as I said, they taught the people to believe in the deeds of the
ceremonies, which god ordained not to iustyfye but to be signs of promyses,
by which they that byleued were iustyfyed. But the pharysyes put out the
sygnyfycacyons, and quenched the faith, and taught to be iustyfied by the work
/ as ours have served us.

For our sacraments were onse but signs, partly o^ what we should believe to
sterre us up unto faith / and partly what we should do, to sterre us up to
do the law of god / and were not works to iustyfy^.

Now make this reason unto John^ and unto many prophets that went before him
and did as he did, ye and unto ^ryste him self and his apostles / and thou
shall find them all heretykes, and the scrybes and pharysyes good men, if that


More. Lo good criste^ reders here have I rehearsed you his long process, not
in pyeces but eue^ as it lies to gether / by which ye ^ay se that Tyndale
does nothing here, but tell us the self same tale that he told us before in his
solucyon to the first reason. For there he told us the same tale of the scrybes,
and pharysyes, and synagoges, and saint John^ Baptyste, and Christ, and his
apostles / with his resembling of the scrybes and pharysyes, and synagoge, to
the clergy and to the catholyque church / and him self, and his holy master
Martyn Luther, and friar Huiskyn, friar La^bert, and Swynglius, and such other
holy heretykes, unto saint

All this tale as he told yt there so now for a new thing he tells us again
here. And all this tale as I there answered yt and clearly proved yt naught,
so shall I desire the reder to resort thither, and there to read mine answer /
and then shall he find that like wise as this is but his old tale new told, so
needs it none other co^futacyon but even mine answer new read.

For where he begins again here as he did there, Lucae. 22.
by which he has promised to keep his church therfro / as when he said that
the gatys of hell should never prevail against his church / and that him self
had so prayed for saint Peter, (...)
that his faith which he confessed should never fail nor be put out of his
church / and that he ^old send ye holy ghost therein to teache it all troth
and led it into all troth / and that him self would be there with all days
unto the very end of the world.

Matt^. 23.
that though they which fall from this church, that is to wit such sects
of heretykes as go out thereof, may fall to idolatrye: yet the church it
self, that is to say the stock that stands still and remains, god shall
never suffer to fall from the faith, but if he break all these promyses /
which we be sure that the unchangeable treuth of his own nature, being as
him self said the very natural treuth, can never suffer him to do.

And so Tyndale can in this point never make the synagoge of Moses like the
church of Christ, that is to wit the known co^tynued catholyke church / to
the only which as saint Austayne says and Luther confesses, and Tyndale
can not say nay, god has given the grace

Besides this, if he will make his ensample like / then must he first name us
a good sort of those hundred prophets, that in that mean time between Moses
and Christ called the people home from idolatry. And then if he so do / he
shall find them such as the doctrine of the latter agreed and consented with
the doctrine of the elder / or if god by the lat^^r opened and reveled any
ferther thing, he yet by my^acles and other open means proved them for so
good and holy, y^ though the people and the princes both did dysalow them, and
hated them, and killed them to / yet when they were deed, varyed they never so
far from their doctrine, and were the never so far from the following of
their living

And therefore if Tyndale will now make his matter good and his ensample like /
he must rehearse us a like sort of some such other holy prophets, as god
has sith the death of Christ in this.xv. hundred year, sent hither to call home
his church from idolatry / as those other prophets were that he speaks of /
sent in shorter season, to call home again the Jews.

This must he show us if he show any thing to purpose. And then whom shall
he name us? Nicholaus and Cheryntus, Uigilantius Dormitantius, Manicheus,
Ualentinus, Arrius, Iouiniane, Heluidius, Ennomius, Marcion, Montanus,
wyclyffe, and Husse / and a sort of lewd wedded freres, as Luther, and
Lambert, and Huyskyn / or prestes apostataas from the christen faith, as
Pomeran, Suynglius, and Huchyn here him self. If he name you these / let him
prove them onys good men, or at ye lest wise some one among them all, let him
prove their doctrine agreeable, or at the least wise obstynately not repugnaunt
/ let him that shows any ferther thing then his fellows, by some manner mean
prove him self sent by god, or such a man at the least wise as the people
might have cause to

But thus ye wot well that of all these that are deed, the world hereth not a
good word that ever there was one good of them, but openly condemned for
false. And as for these that now live / we se well at our own eyes, they be
stark rybaudes all^ And agreement in their doctrine, neither is there none now
nor never was there yet. Miracles as shameless as they be, they can not for
shame say that ever they showed any. So that these were never any of the holy
men, whom god has sent to call home his church so often from idolatry to
^ayth, as Tyndale says that the

And therefore if these heretykes will now be resembled to Christ and his
apostles and to saint John^ / let Tyndale tell us which of them to which of
these? If these be now sent to call the catholyke church to the right faith
from which it was fallen before, as Christ was and his apostles with saint
John^ his fore goer to call home the synagoge / than let Tyndale now tell us
which of them he resembles to saint Johan, which to Christ's apostles, and
which unto Christ him self. And if he lyken Luther to Christ, then who
was Luthers saint John^ Babtyste and fore goer / or else whose fore goer and
baptyste

How be it of treuth, holy prophets has there been sent unto the world by
god and into the church of Christ, mo then an hundred sith the death of
Christ, to keep in the right faith and call home the people fro sin, by
the true doctrine of the spyryte, inspyrynge them the right sense of
scripture, and what so ever god would have known beside. whose doctrine in the
necessary points did agree together, and which were holy men, so known well
while they lived, and so taken after their death declared for gods messengers
by many a mighty miracle.

Of these men may I name full many of sundry times,

Now if Tyndale dare say that him self meneth these / then say we that none of
these called us to Tyndals faith. For none of them did constrewe the scripture
as Tyndale does. And therefore his faith is not Christ's faith, nor Tyndals
doctrine agreeable and consenting to theyrs. For if Tyndale dare say that his
doctrine and theyrs agree / let Tyndale then of them all name us now some
o^e that ever called relygyous persons to the brech and co^tempte of their
vows, and said that chastyte was an unlawful vow, and would that monks and
freres should ru^ne out and wedde nonnes.

Then sith that of his hundred prophets between

Also because he shows no miracles / he must prove us that his new Christ
to whom him self is the fore goer, must do such miracles as our old Christ
did / and

Finally if he will say as he meneth here, and plainly says in his other
solucyon to the first reason, that he and his fellows do now rebuke the
doctrine of the catholyke church, in like manner as saint John^ the baptyste
and Christ did rebuke the doctrine of the scrybes and pharyseys: he must prove
us that of those scrybes and pharyseys which taught the doctrine that saint
John^ baptyste and our savior rebuked, were holy men and saynte^. For else
says Tyndale no thing to the purpose / for ^s myche as him self can not
say nay, but that many of those that have taught the things that Tindal^ and
Luther now rebuke

And thus ye se good readers, that where Tyndale byddeth us look upon the old
ensamples, and then pyketh out specially saint John^ Baptyste to resemble him
self and his prechynge to, and his demeanure against the catholyke church,
unto saint John^ and his demeanure toward the synagoge / is as unlike as are
white and black.

Now shall ye well perceive, that the persons of saint John^ Baptyste and of
sir wyllyam Tyndale, be not much more unlike, no nor so far unlike neither
not by a great deal, as are the things that saint John^ reproved in the

How be yt Tyndale to make them seem like, dyssymulyng the greatest things and
of most weight, pyketh out a few things wherein he would make the matter seem
somewhat like / and yet fyndeth he none very like. And over that where they seem
like, he makes them seem like with lyenge.

For first he begins as ye have herd with the false gloss of the
pharysyes, by which many of them falsely co^strynge gods commandment of
honourynge their father and mother, mysse taught the people, that what need so
ever their father and mother had, yet if they offered unto As ours now af^erme
that yt is more merytory^use to ^f^re to god and his holy saints deed, then
unto the pore living saints.

Lo good reder here knows Tyndale well enough that he lies to make the two
thing seem like / and yet he makes them not like. For well ye wot, there is
no little dyfference between the thing that Tyndale says here, the church
teaches to be more merytoryouse to of^re to god then to give to a poor man /
and the thing that he says the pharysyes taught, that yt was more
merytoryouse to offer unto god, then help his father with y^ money, were he in
never so great need. For I am not like bounden to help

And yet in this lykenynge as unlike as they be, he lets not a little to lie,
to lynke them so nere to gether.

For I wysse Tyndale know^th very well, that no man teaches so precysely as he
reherseth / yt yt is better to offer to god and his holy saints deed, then
unto the pore living saints. But the doctrine of the church is as him self can
tell full well if he lysted not to lie, that which of those two things
offrynge or geuynge in almoyse is for the time more merytoryouse, depends
upon the cyrcumstaunces of the deed, and the persons at the time. For yt were

And therefore the catholyque church teaches, that both to give almoyse is
good, and to offer is good / and he that has wherwyth to do both, ought to do
the tone, and does well to do the the other. But where the tone is better and
where the the other / is to be consydred by him that does yt, upon the time and
persons, and many other cyrcumstaunce mo then well can be comprehe^dyd and
given men

1. Corinthians. 7.
The church says as saint Poule says, that vyrginyte is better then y^ work
of wedloke. yet meneth neither the church nor saint Poule that yt so were, if
there were but one man with one woman left a live in all y^ whole world.

Matthew. 26
Saint Mary Magdaleyn was more allowed of Christ for bestowyng that costely
oyntement upon his hedde, so fully and so freely that she brake the glass, and
all to s^ewe that she would none spare for her self / then if she had sold

And yet did she yt but to do him pleasure with, as men did then unto gestes to
make them chere with all / as folk do now cast damask water and burn
plesau^t perfumes. All be yt unware to her self se did in deed work a mystery
therein, that did betoke^ his beryeng. But god as I say the thank yt he gave
her, he gave her not for ye mystery whereupon she thought not / but for her
devout mind y^ she bare toward him. And yet peradventure neither she would nor
god would she should, have bestowed yt so in case yt had happened that there
had lain a man so like, that wtyhout yt oyntement he should have / dyed and that
she had well wyste

But all be yt there were pore men very many whom she might have refreshed, and
well wyste there were so: yet sith she neither knew their need for so great
that required so sudden help, nor other mennys devotion for so small, but
that they might be helped by other folk / she neither thought her self
bounden nor no more she was in deed, to follow the counsel of Judas in
geuynge the price to pore men, rather then in witness and testymonye of her
good will and devotion, te spend yt out in pleasure upon the blessed body of
Christ. And yet was he not rauyshed with the odor of her oynteme^t, but with
y^ delight of her devotion / in which he delyteth yet when any man does the like.



But now these new men begin to give a certain rule, that as they say shall put
us quyte out of all doubt, when we shall do the tone and when the the other. For
therein lo thus they say. Offrynge say they, to god or to saints, and like wise
byeldynge of chyrches, byenge of copes, books, surplyce, and chalyce, be
things voluntarye, to the doing whereof no commandment of god constrayneth
the. But as for geuynge of almoyse is a thing necessary, whereunto god by his
own biddyng byndeth the. And therefore first evermore give thy money to the pore
men that need yt as long as there be any, And then lo when there be no mo pore
men left y^ ye may bestow your money upon / go to then good crystyens in
gods name and bestow the remanau^t whereon ye will, even upon pylgremages if
ye list, lo and

Now to the end that ye may good reders the better perceive while they teach in
this manner, what their very mind is in the matter / ye shall understand that
it happed my self to be upon a time present in a certain assemble of
personages, both of great honor and also of great conning / in which
among other things that were there treated of, one that had in sundry
places preached

Then was he demanded farther, sith yt was not enough to give pore men when
they asked, nor where we found them by hap / but we were forther bounden
before we bystowed

And surely if these folk say well / then Mary mawdelayne did not well, but
was much to blame. Matthew. 26
For I am very sure, and our savior him self shall bear me record, that if
she would have sought and serched, she moughte have founden in Jerusalem even
at her hand, pore nedy men enough to have received twyse as much money as all
that oyntement was worth.

Christ blamed not those that offered into the treasory of the temple, Ma^^^.
12.
nor said that they offered to myche / but rather by praysyng of the pore wydow
that offered somewhat of her poverty, rebuked the rych folk for offering to
^ytle / all be it that as the gospel says, many offered much. And

How be it I marvel why they should call it all voluntary, for some of it be
things that must needs be done. For chyrches at the least wise must we needs
have / and yet thereto say some of these folk nay.

But holy saint Chrysostom calls upon folk to byeld chyrches there as it
seemed necessary / and that so farforth, that rather then to leave that wurke
undone, he would they should give the less to pore folk to do the the other
wythall. And then dare I say that he would have men bye both books and
chalyces and other ornaments thereto.



And surely that word of Tyndale in which he calls the saints that are
departed deed saints / all be it that there were none harm therein spoken by a
good man's mouth, yet has it a shrewde sygnyfycacyon spoken out of his / sith
Luther and he wene that there were not one of them all in heuyn, but that they
lie all in a sleep still no

And thus good christen reders, for conclusyon of this point, ye may clearly
se that concerning offerynges to god or his saints, or money bestowed about
those good wurkes that these folk call all voluntary, the church techeth
right / as appears well by plain and euydent scripture. And that the
doctrine of the pharyseys which Christ reproved, the church reproves also
and thereof techeth the contrary. And so the doctrine of the church and the
doctrine of the pharyseys in this point, wherein Tindale resembles them
together and lies to, to make them like / be no more like together, then is
chalk to colys.

Now is all the remanante of his process as ye have herd, nothing else but
raylynge upon the doctors of the catholyke church, for byleuynge that the
sacraments be not bare signs and tokens, and because of the bylyefe of
purgatory.

Now am I very glad that ye se so clearly, that those whom this new saint
John^ Baptyste calls pharyseys, be all those old holy doctors and saints
that have been in every age this fyftene hundred year. For all they have
byleued in the same sacraments that we do, and the same things that this new
baptyste rebukes.

And in likewise of purgatory Tyndale can not say nay. For I have in my
third book of his confutacyon, laid him plain words of diverse of the
eldest and most holy doctors / and among other saint Chrysostom,

And now se you plainly that Tyndale calls them all pharyseys therefore /
and is come as a new saint John^ Baptyste, to show us that by name this.viii.
hundred year, but by his declaracion this.xv. hundred year, the pharyseys, that
is to wit all the holy doctors and saints that have been all this while in
chrystendome from Christ him self hitherto / the treuth of whose faith, and the
holiness of whose living, our lord has illustrate and set^e out unto the
show with many a thousand miracle / have made the scripture crooked and rowgh
/ wrestynge it with

And how will this holy baptyste do all this gere, and thus turn the hearts of
the children and the fathers all in to one? surley by techynge the children as
well in faith as living, the very clean contrary of all that ever their old

Then techeth he us that confession is the deuyls inuencyon,

The sacrament of wedlock he says is such, that he could make as good a
sacrament of an old net / saving only when freres wedde nonnes / for tha^
is it holy in such holy folk.

The sacrament of holy order he iesteth upon, with shauyn, and shorn, and
oyled, and waggyng of the bysshoppes hand / and saint Poules hand laid upon
Tymothe, but like a man's hand laid on a boys hedde and call him good
son. The sacrament of extreme vnccio^ he calls but gresynge the syke man.
The sacrament of confyrmacyon he calls but smeryng of the chyldes face, and
butterynge of the boys forehed.

The holy blessed sacrament of the altar, the very precyouse

Lo good Christen readers here is the doctrine of this now baptyste / not
saint John^ Bapty^te but sir wyllyam Baptyste^ this holy wyllyam Tyndale
otherwise called Huchyn scolare to friar Huyskyn / which has here made you of
the synagoge scrybes and pharyseys, such a goodly painted process as he has
now told you twyse / a served you with a Iak of Paris, an evil pie twyse
baken, to declare you twyse the great fruit and profit that the world

And now if this gere be good / then have we surely great cause to thank god.
For then can we lack none holy baptystes to preche us. For there is not I wene
so pore a vyllage in chrystendome, in which there is dwelling any one
vyllayne knave, but he may be within three days (if he be not all ready) such
an other baptyste as this is / and rebuke all that good is with such
abomy^able blasphemye as now Tyndale does, if any christen man's ^a^ys can
abide the herynge.

But yet remember good readers, that in the conclusyon of all that tale / he
knytteth it up with a fresh lusty point,


Tyndale. Now make this reason unto John^ Baptist and unto many prophets that
went before him and did as he did, ye and unto ^rys^e him self and his
apostles / and thou shall ^ynde the^ all heretykes, and the scribes and
pharysyes good men, y^ that reason be good.


More This point is lo the old point, which here, and in his solucyon to the
^yrst reason, he has put forth four or five times before / saving that he
gives allway his old point at one end, or other some new aglette. But when
all his cost is done thereon / it is not all worth an aglet of

And therefore let us first se with what evasion Tyndale will avoid this
reason, for him self and his own sects. And then what Christ can say more
for him self and his company, we shall se somewhat after.

Tyndale lo teaches his dyscyples to answer the reason thus.


Tyndale. Therefore this wise thou mays^e answer. No thanks unto the (...)
that church that the scripture was kept, but unto the merry of go^. (...)

For as they have destroyed the right sense of yt with their seven, an^ as they
destroy daily the true preachers o^ yt, and as they ^e^e yt from the lay
people that they should not se how they (...) with yt / even so (...) they
destroy yt also could they bring yt about^ rather then we should come by the
true understanding of y^, were yt not that god provided otherwise for us. For
they have put the stories that should in many things help us, clean out of
the way / as nigh as they could. They have corrupt the ^egende and lives
almost of all saints. They have feigned false ^okes, and put them forth, some
in the name of saint Hi^rome, some in the name o^ saint Austayne, in the name
of saint Cypriane, saint Dyonyse, and other holy


More. Now good christian reders here have you herd one of his answers, which
how yt makes any thing to the purpose, surely that se not I. For where as the
reason of saint confesses, has god given that gift to dyscerne the true
scripture fro the false. And sith that god has given this great spyrytuall
gift only to the church, which gift is a beginning of spyrytuall lively
doctrine / yt thereby well and clearly appears to any man that will not
wylfully wynke, that this church is the very church, of which god will have
men learn.

Now good christian reder, this being the reason and purpose of holy saint
Austayne / and having in yt self such strength, that Luther could not him
self say nay thereto / not withstanding that the confessing thereof must needs
ouerturne his here^yes: now byddeth Tyndale his dyscyples, that they shall
answer thereto, that the catholyque church is not to be thanked for the
scripture that we receive

Now what goth this answer to the purpose? who byddeth him give the thank to
the church? let him like as he byleueth the church that the gospels of the
four euangelystes be the true gospel of Christ, so know thereby and believe
that the same church, by which he knows that point, and which in that
point he byleueth, is here in earth the very church of Christ / and then let
him give the thank to god, without whose grace workyng with him, he could not
believe the church neither in the tone point nor the the other / and for lakke of
whose grace, which grace he lakketh not but in his own defaut, he now byleueth
not

And now that ye plainly perceive that this answer of

First he rayleth upon the doctors of the catholyke church, and says yt
they have destroyed y^ right sense of y^ scripture with their leuyn. Now all
this ye wot well he means, in y^ they teach that folk should not trust in
only faith without good works of cheryte and of penance, and that they teach
that freres should not wedde n^nnys, and that christian men should pray for all
christian souls, and ^holde have Crystes holy sacraments in reverence, and
specially

This is the leven for which Tindale does now damn here the doctoures of the
catholyque church. But every man well woteth, and him self to though he say
nay, that this doctrine is of y^ leven wherewith the woman of whom Cr^ste
speaks in the gospel of saint Matthew, did leven all her whole dough and mele
/ that is to say of that leven with which not only all the old holy doctors,
but also y^ blessed apostles them self, and our sauyoure Christ also him
self, leuene^ ^he bread of their doctrine, which either in wo^des or wr^^ynge
they taught unto the christian f^oke. All which leven Tyndale would now take out,
and leave us the scripture unsavory.

Then rayleth he forth on and says, They destroy daily the tr^^ preachers o^
yt.

Here let him name which / and then s^all he name you such as would destroy
the leven that I now rehearsed you, which Christ has him self put in our bread
/ such as for the more part would take his own blessed body out of the
sacrament, and leave there for our souls nothing but unsavory bread, or as
Tyndale argues yt starche in s^ede of bread. I would he would name them all
that have now be burned here in England, by the mean of his own books. As
Baynam the iangler, and Hytton y^ Ioyner, and Teukesbery the purser, and
B^yfeld thapos^ata, a worshyppefull sort o^ preachers. And yet shall Tyndale
find none of all

Then rayleth he ferther on and says, They (...)ture from the lay people,
that they sh^^^e not (...).



Then forth he goes on ferther in his lies and sayth^ They have put the
stories that should in many things (...) way as nygh as they could.

How proves Tyndale this lie of his to be true ^ let him prove his lie true
in some one story that the church has put away / and then tell us this tale
again. For they never put any away, but such as were feigned gospels and
fables / which the church by the spyryte of god (whose gift Luther
confesses it to have in that point / did ever more consyderately reiecte and
avoid / as it partly appears by saint Hierom, concerning the book of the
infancye of our savior. But feign would Tyndale have some such falls and feigned
stories remain and taken for scripture, to the end and intent that as his
h^resyes be by the very scripture confuted and reproved, so they might be by
some such false scripture mayntayned again and allowed.

But then rayleth Tyndale ferther yet, and lies again They have corrupted the
legende and lives all most of all saints.

who has corrupted these legendes? let him name some one and prove it, or else
let him leave of his lyenge.

The legendes of saints lives were written in diverse times, as the saints in
diverse tymed lived, and in dyu^rs dyed / of whose lives the church none other
knows, but as they find written or herd by good folk that knew them /
saving that the spyryte of god by which it knows and dyscerneth as saint
Austayn says and Luther him self allows, which is the very scripture, shall
not suffer it as that holy doctor saint Thomas says, to err and be deceived,
in taking for a saint any dampened person, and thereby give to gods enemy the
honor dew to his friend.

And the church also does not precysely bind any man to the bylyef of every
thing written in a legend, as though every saints legende were part of the
scripture of god.

But the thing that Tyndale is offended with is this, that the legendes of
saints testyfye their holy living and miracles that god showed for them /
whereof we find no legende like that ever was written for any saint, that in
obstynate heresies departed and dyed out of ye catholic church.

Now confesses Tyndale that all the saints legendes be not so corrupted, but
he says almost all. In which word

yet goth he ferther against the church and says, They have feigned false
books and put them forth, some in the name of saint Hier^m, some in the name
of saint Augustyne, and in the name of saint Cipryane, saint Deonyse, and other
holy men / which are proved n^ne of theyrs, partly by style and laten, and
partly by autentyke stories.

Here would he feign good christen reders bring us all in dowte of all the old
holy doctors wurkes / because he were loathe by his will, that any were of them
all byleued.



But to the intent that ye shall plainly perceive that this tale of Tyndale
wherwyth he would feign blind us, shall nothing serve for his purpose / let
him take the books of which him self nothing douteth, and even by yt self
same shall he find his opynyons proved plain heresies. Or else let Tyndale
find us in some of their true books, which he douteth not to be their own in
deed, let him prove I say by them, that all those books be falsely put out in
their names / in which books he fyndeth if they

And first for the mean while, the book in which saint Austayn makes this
reason that we now talk of for the catholyke church / Tyndale does him self
confess to be the very book of saint Austayne. And then does this r^ason alone
plainly and perfytely prove this known catholyke church,

Now where he rayleth on and says, that Like wise as the Iewys had set up a
book of their Talmud to destroy the sense of the scripture, so the church
has set up he says their Dunce, their Thomas, and a thousand like draffe, to
stablysse their lies through falsefyeng the scripture: I can no scyll of the
Jews Talmud / but one thing I dowte not of, but y^ their Talmud in yt it gave
false expesycyo^ was a late thing at the coming of Christ, if they had the^ any
such book. And I dowte not but that the things that were falls therein, varyed
from the consent of their old exposytours, by which the falshed of it might be
spyed and controlled and be byleued the less.

But our doctors of these eyghte hundred years last passed / all whom this
worthy wild gose calls draffe, do consent and agree with the old holy
doctors of the the other.vii hundred year before. And as well all those old whom
he dare not call but holy, as these other thousand whom he calls draffe,
draw by one line all the mayny, to dreue Tyndale as a drudge of the devil out
of Crystes church for an heretyke / or else as I have almost a thousand
times desired him, let Tyndale tell us of all those old, which one taught it
for lawful a friar to wed a no^ne.

Now where the wretch rayleth by name upon that holy doctoure saint Thomas, a
man of that lernyng that the great excellent wits and the most conning men

But when the best has thus blasphemed them all / then would he wind out
with a wyle, and make men wene that he meant but the doctors of these last
eyghte hundred years / which were yet enough to lay such a raylyng knave
eyghte hundred mile deep in hell.

But sith he says a thousand like unto saint Thomas / he can not so escape, as
though he met but saint Bernard, saint Bonauenture, saint Ancelme, and such
other holy men of these eight hundred years passed last / but he must needs
take into them, all the old holy saints of the seven


Tyndale. And if a man allege any holy doctor against them, they gloss him
out as the do the scripture, or will not here, or say the church has other
wise determined.


More. Lo good christian reder this false pageaunt plays Tyndale in mo places
then one / making as though that in the matters of his heresies the new
doctors only were against him. And yet calls he the new, the doctors of

And then makes he as though the old of the the other seven hundred year before,
were upon his part all the whole mayny, and co^strued the scripture as he
does, and condemn these exposycyons that the new doctors of eight hundred
year old and under have made synnys.

And he says that against all holy doctoures when he lays any one against
us, we gloss him out, or will not here him, or say the church has otherwise
determined. Here must Tyndale understand, that we never bind him to any thing
of necessyte upon the saying of any one doctoure be he old or young / but
either by the comen fast faith of the whole catholyke church, growe^ as yt
ever does ^
And then the comen faith of old times before our days, we presume to be
such of lykelyhed / as we perceive by the old holy saints books that they
were of them self. For other wise then by books can we not know what the
people byleued a thousand year ago / but if we might talk with the men them
self and ask them.

Now if Tyndale could lay us for his purpose peradventure, a word of some
one holy man / yt were no reason to bydde us believe that one before the consent
of many, nor against the comen bylyefe of the catholyque church secretly
grown to consent by the holy spyryte of god, nor against the consent of the
catholyque church dyffynynge

Now when we thus do / Tyndale can not say that we refuse to here that one holy
man whom he shall peaduenture allege us for his purpose. For in thus doyenge,
we do here him and follow him. For every one of all the old holy men did ever
submytte his own mind to the determynacyon of the catholyque church, and
bode every man do the like.

And of them all we wot well Tyndale fyndeth not one, that says contrary to
this. How be it thus myche have I showed you, rather to tell us somewhat of the
authoryte of the catholyke church above any one holy man, then for any holy
man that ever I think Tyndale shall be able to bring forth for the confyrmacyon
of his heresies.

But now to put this matter out of all dowte and qustey on, and that every man
may se whether Tyndale speak here in ernest as he thinks, or else says all
this but for a shyft / let him now stand well to his tacklynge, and stykke
styffely thereto. Let us concerning the right construccyon of scripture or
corruptynge the true sense thereof, co^sydre some one heresye of his, for which
the church calls him heretyque, let us se now.

we say that yt is abomynable for a monk or a friar to wedde a nu^ne /
Tyndale says we say wrong, and that a friar to wedde a nun is very well
done and lawfully. when we forbede yt, we lay the scripture for us. Uowe ye and
pay yt. And saint Poule speaking of the wydows, which after their chastyte
vowed unto god would fall then

But then he says again that when he will allege any holy doctor for his
part against us, we will gloss him out, or ellis we will not here him, or
else we will say that

Lo good reders here are we comen to gether Tyndale and we to the very point,
where you shall se now how courteysly I shall handle him.

Let him lay forth for his part some one holy doctor, and I will here him,
and I neither will gloss him out nor say the church has determined
otherwise. For I wene the thing was never taken for so doutefull, that ever
the church should have neded. But though yt have determined yt / yet will I
wynke there at and dyssy^ule yt, and will not say, The church has other wise
determined yt.

And therefore I will allege no such thing. But let Tyndale lay forth any
one holy ^an for his part / and

But now on the the other side, if he can not bring so much as one, as I wot very
well he can not / and we can against him bring so many as him self can ^ell
w^ll ynough^ let him then for very shame confess that he bylyeth the
church, when he says we will believe no holy doctoure. And then let him also
for very shame confess, that in his own point at the least both Luther and
him self, and all the shameless harlottes of their sect, do shamfully mysse
constre the scripture / and with some new Talmude of the deuyls deuyse and
theyres, do corrupt and falsefye the very true gospel of god.

This lo ye se well Tyndale must grant at the last /

To this goodly pass has Tyndale brought this process, and showed us here
two solucyons, both one and both such as ye se.

But now shall ye se him play the man in the third. For thus lo he teaches
his dyscyples yet a third answer, because he sees well that the the other twain
were naught.


Tyndale. Now therefore when they ask us how we know that yt is the scripture
of god / ask them how John^ Baptyste knew, and other prophets which god
s^^red ^ppe in all such times as the scripture was in capty^yte under
ypocrytes. Did John^ believe that the scrybes, pharysyes, and prestes, were the
true church of god and had his spyryte, and could not err? who taught the
egles to spy out their pray? even so the children of god spy out their
father / and Christ's electes spy out their lord, and trace out the pa^hes
^f his fe^e and follow / ye though he go upon the plain and lyquide water,
which will receive no step. And yet there they find out his ^ote / hy^
elect know him, but the world knows him not John^. 1. If the world know
him not, and thou call the world pride, wrath, envy, couetousnes^e, slowth,
glotonye, and lechery, then our spyrytualtye know him not. Christ's sheep
hear the voice of Christ John^. x. where the world of ypoc^ites as


More. Lo good christian reads, here may ye clearly se what a strength this
reason of holy saint Austayne has, against which these heretics are feign to
find so many shyftes

Theffecte of all this answer is, that him self and such other his fellows as
take opynyons against the known catholyke church, need not to recognyse and
knowledge the known catholyke church for the very church / and that the
reason that saint Austayne made therefore is not suffycyent / that is to say,
that saving for this catholyke church they should not have known any truth at
all, not so much as which were the true gospel and which not / and therefore
should not have byleued the gospel save for this catholyke church.

This reason says Tyndale is nothing worth. For we

Here is lo good christen reader all this answer and this goodly solucyon,
nothing left out that has any strength or force toward the purpose^ but
laid yet more dyrectely for his purpose then Tyndale lays it him self /
save for leuynge out of the raylynge, whereof we may peradventure somewhat
touch by the way.

But first consider what blont sotletees and what folysh fallacys he brings
in this answer. He wol^ bring us from the point, with lykenynge the whole
catholyque church of Christ, that is to wit the whole multitude of

This sotletye of Tyndale is as blont as a block, and to great for any man to
stu^ble at y^ has any eyes in his head.

Nor I need not for this matter to defend that the whole synagoge could not
err in the choice of the scripture, nor that the whole synagoge was until
Crystes coming the very church of god neither, nor to admytte as Tyndale here
makes it every thing to go like between the whole synagoge of Moses and the
catholyke church of Christ / between which twain, all be it that the the other
was for that while the very church in deed, there is yet in manner as Ioh^n. 16
and that it should dwell therein for ever, Matthew. 28.
and him self be permanent also therein for ever.

And therefore sith all these infallible means of techyng known church has
that gift. And it is a clear thing to

And as that holy saint says of him self / so may every man well say of him
self, that by the catholyke church he knows the scripture / which no man
can reken him self surely to know by any other folk, then those whom he
rekeneth surely to be the very true church and the messenger of god to tell it
him. For else may every fool se, that as he dowteth of the messenger, he must
n^dys dowte

And therefore now let us look on this answer of Tyndale. I learned not says
he of the catholyke chyr^^ to know which is the true scripture. Of what man
than say we^ Of no man says he but even god him self / and so says he do all
my fellows that are the electes of god as I am. we learn it now of our lord
him self, as did of old our other fellows that are gone before us that were
elected of god as we be, that is to say saint John^ Baptyste and the other
holy prophets before him.

Here ye se good readers for aughte that ever I can do, Tyndale wylbe saint
John^ Baptystes fellow, and all his companyons fellows with the old prophets
and with Christ's apostles, and in some places with Christ him

But this will I promise you, that if saint John^ Baptyste and the old
prophets, each of the other prophets in their time, had had with the Iewys
the same things in questyon that we have with Luther and Tyndale and these
other heretykes in our time / that is to say if the Jews had said that they
had bysyde the scripture some other tradycyon delivered them by Moses, and
preserved fro mouth to mouth without writing / or that they had varyed
together upon the right understanding of the scripture, and then the Jews
would have said ye know not which is the scripture but in that ye believe us /
and then if ye believe us in y^, we tell you Moses wrote us this, why should
you not as well believe us when we tell you Mo^ses told us this If ye think we
lie in the tone, ye may think we lie in

But neither were these points the questyons then between them (though some
of this was afterward in debate between Christ and the pharyseys) and therefore
these ensamples of saint John^ and the prophets be laid here to no purpose.

And also if it had so been / saint John^ and those prophets had other
answers to have made the^, such as I have showed you in my syxte book.

And finally if they would have used this answer that Tyndale here makes,
both for them and him self / then if the Jews had laughed thereat, and said
how pro^^ you that god has taught you to know the true scripture without us
/ they had not only the known approved virtue

These things had they for their answer, with which the Jews well might and
of reason must, have holden them self fully content and satysfyed.

And now in like wise, for as much as I know well ye god is at his own
lybertye, having his power absolute free and vnbou^den unto any manner of his
ordynary course / and therefore may if it please him by some secret
inspyracyon,

But as for yet in the mean season, sith I se none other man say so of him
self, as Tyndale says of him self and his fellows, and holy saint Austayne
says the contrary of

But yet lest men should take him for a fool, if he should set forth such a
point so far unlikely, and therefore so far vncredyble, without any proof
at all / he prou^^h yt at the least wise by thensample of a very goodly byr^
and

But now ye se well good reders by this reason, that saint Austayne in
respect of these noble egles that spy this pray without the mean of the
church, was but a sely

How be yt is no great me^uayle, sith god is not so famylyare with such simple
chykyns, as with his gay gloryouse egles.

But o^e thing is there that I can not cease to marvel of / sith god
inspyreth Tyndale and such other egles, and thereby makes them spy this pray
them self: how could yt hap that the goodly golden old egle Martyne Luther
him self, in whose goodly golden neste this young egle bird was hached,
sakked that inspyracyon. For he aloweth saint Austayns saying / and denies
not but that him self spyed and perceuyd this pray of the true scripture

How be yt I wysse when our young egle Tyndale learned to spy this pray first,
he was not yet full fether^d, but scantly come^ out of ye shell / nor so high
flykeryd in the aer above all our heddes to ler^e yt of his father the old
egle heretyque / but was content to come down here and walk on the ground
among other pore fowls the pore chykens of his mother this known catholyke
church / of whom when he has all said, he learned to know this pray.

And now taking that for troth (as treuth yt is in

Now if he list to believe him self in things being yet but in questyon,
where he sees them vary and dowte:

Now go me then yet again to ^rere Luther his master and his maystresse the
nun. wherein he can not say nay but they condemn him all / and then shall ye
se for lakke of other shyf^e this fair egle bird foul befyle his nest.

But yet is yt a world to hear, what a goodly castle Tyndale byeldeth in the
air on high upon his egles bakke. For when he has told us ones that the egle
of him self without any teaching, spyeth out his pray / then goth he forth
goodly with an high spyrytuall process, and says, ^uen so the children of god
spy out their father and mother

He means of lykelyhed god for the father. But what church means he for
his mother? For he can not spy

But then goth he ^orth with his floryshe on this fashyon. And Christ's e^ec^e
spy cute their lord, and ^race out the ^athes of hy^ fete and follow / ye
though he go upon the plain and lyqui^e water, whyc^^ will ^eceyue no s^eppe.
And yet there they ^yn^e out his fete.

These wo^des walk ^o very goodly by the herers ear, and they make a man
amassed in a manner and somewhat to study and must when he hereth so strange a
tale told of such holy electes, so spy^nge out the foot where the soil
receives

But now if a man in the redynge forgete not him self with ^^^ynge, but
consydre what he redeth and e^amyne yt well / he shall not so myche marvel of
Tyndales far fette holiness, as he shall wonder in a man wenynge himself so
wise, to se such a folysh forgetefulnesse.

For where he says now that all thelectes ^^^ch out and follow the very steps
of Christ even foot for foot, where never a step appe^eth: he has him self
showed us in his other chapiters before, that the electes thor^^ the ^aute of
their frail members, though never into dedely sin, yet now and then among
step into theft and aduowtry, treason, manslaughter, and perjury, and other
such horrible deeds. And these things lo many right honest men teken not in
their reason any following of the steps of Christ, but if Tyndales elect
church have spyed out any special gospel. For the catholyque church in all
the four eua^gelystes, spyeth not that Christ stepped any such one step in
all the days of his life.

Some men would here look that I should also lay to


Tyndale. His elect know him, but the world knows him not John^. 1. If the
world know him not, and thou call the world pride, wrath, envy,
covetousness, slowth, glotonye, and lechery, then our spyrytualtye know him
not.


More. Those words of our savior saving for seeking of occasyon of
raylynge, Tyndale brings in here to very little purpose. But as he ly^teth
here to rail upon the clergy


Tyndale. Christ's sheep hear the voice of Christ John^. x. where the world
of ypocrites


More. Now good chryste^ reders here has Tyndale made the prophet Esaye, and
saint Poule, and our savior him self as his servants and instruments /
abusing their ho^y words against the catholyke church of Christ / which
words they spoke against Paynims Jews and heretykes.



Now the seed that has all this while ben sent unto this

But way well yet again good reder that ryall end of his raylynge, wherein he
says that the lord of hosts has to this flock of these heretykes given
ears to hear that the ipocretyshe wolves can non hear, and eyes to se that
the blind leders of the blind can not se, and an heart to understand, that
the generacyon of vypers can neither understand ne know.

I need not to put you in mind, that by the wolves and ipochrytes and blind
leders, he meneth the doctors and techers of the catholyke church / and by
the blind that are mysse led into the dyche, the lay people of the same
church / and by the the other flock yt have all these goodly gifts of god, y^
scatered flock of his unknown chirch of his electes, that believe it lawful
for freres to wedde nonnes / among who^ yet he names and men know many well
known knaves

Consider now that our present matter for which he brings in all these
words, and toward the proof whereof he brought in the words of Christ, that
Crystes own sheep here his voice, but the world hereth it not / is no thing
else but to show, that Tyndals church of electes

Consider than how far he goth ferther now then ever he went before. For here
in the end he not only concludes for his heretykes, that they here Cristes
voice / but also for the catholyke church the contrary / that is to say that
the catholyke church neither can here, se, nor understand, nor know the voice
of Christ, that is to wit the gospel and scripture of god. And thus he
brings all his painted process to this point in conclusyon / that like as
here before his master Marten and he, would that in the understanding of
scripture, no man should stand to the faith and

And here lo the goodly conclusyon of Tyndals third answer unto saint
Austayns reason.

But now shall ye se the wylynes.

For where as all this while he has dyssembled, and would not be aknowen that
this reason was taken of saint Austayne, because he would at more lybertye
lashe out his


Tyndale. If they allege saint Austayne, which says I had not byleued the
gospel except the authoryte of the church had ^euyd me! I answer as they
abuse that saying of the holy man, even so they allege all the scripture, and
all that they bring for them, even in a false sense. S. Augustyne before he
was converted was an hethen man and a philosopher ^ull of worldly ^ysdome, unto
whom the preaching of Christ is but folyshnes, says Pa^l^ 1. Corin. 1. And he
dysputed with blind reasons of wordly wisdom against the christen.
Nevertheless the ernest ly^ynge of the christen according unto their


More. Lo good christen readers, here have you Tyndals answer. And now let us
first suppose that in this answer he told us true, that saint Austayne meant
as he says here he did, and that he byleued the church but for the good
living and virtuous conuersacyon that he then saw therein: yet was at the least wise the church that he meant of, the known catholyke church, and not
an unknown church of electes. And so is Tyndale shortly quyte overthrown
therein to.

Also though Tyndale said here true of saint Austayns mind, that he byleued
the church because they were then good men: yet stands that order still,
that he first byleued the catholyke known church, and first knew and

ye says Tyndale that is true / but he was brought into the bylyefe of the
church that then was, by the good virtuous leuynge that then was in yt / as
saint Peter counsayled the christian wynes with christian living and virtuous
conuersacyon, to win their vncristen husbands unto crystendome. But if we
(says Tyndale) should not believe till the lyuy^ge of the spyrytualty convert
us, (...) be like to abide long enough ^n vnbylyefe.

well. Suppose first that Tyndale said true, yet follows yt at the last y^
saint Austayne was none of those holy electes, those gaye golden egles, that be
taught inwardely

But now would I that Tyndale here rehearsed us what was the living, and which
were the virtuous that so flowred in the church, that was in saint Austayns
time. First as for persecucyon that Tyndale speaks of / ye catholyque church
had not in his time any greater persecucyon by heretykes in Affryke, then yt
had now these late years in Almayne / and I wene as many good chryste^ men
have constantely su^^red harm, and as myche to, in Sa^o^ye, and Suycherlande,
and some other parts of Germany, by the Lutherane heretykes, and the Huyskyns,
and Swynglianes, as there did in his time in Affryque by the Dona^ystes.

Then as for the other virtues and manners that then

And yet if he so were / then must yt be ye wot well a known church. For of
an unknown church could he not be moved, nor take none authoryte / and so
were Tyndals church of his unknown electes clear gone again, for any

And therefore must we then wit of him farther, which of all his chyrches,
which of his false sci^matyke sects, were yt that should do this deed and
win us in s^ynte Austayn, that should be such a true doctor of true y^
church.

There is good reders a book which saint Austayne writes against heretyques
of his own time, that dyspraysed then the living of the christian people of the
catholyke church, extollyng the holy virtuous living of their own sect / by
which we may well se ye heretykes had yet at that day a right fair visage of
very virtuous living, and preached not their heresies with defense of open
shamfull lechery, as these bestely heretykes do now. But saint Austayne, all
be yt he could not say nay, but that in the

And what virtues be those? surely even the same that the known catholic
church teaches now, and which virtues in this catholyke church many a good man
both spyrytuall and temporal yet unto this day god be thanked very well keep
and observe / how be yt the fewer a great many, sith these deuelyshe heresies
came up.

And this dare I well promise Tyndale, let him read over that book when he
will, in which saint Austayn reherseth the virtues y^ he prayseth in the
church / and when he

And therefore sith Tyndale allows saint Austayne and the virtues that then
were in the church / I will bynd him to none other, but that that he now
prayseth and commends him self. Let him no more but believe saint Austayne
/ and then shall he believe the sacraments / and go to shryfte, which he now
calls the deuyls inuencyon / and shall take absolucyon, which he now calls
whystelynge / and shall gladly do penance, that he now calls

Hitherto good christen reder have I so reasoned this point of saint Austaynes
words, as though Tyndales answer unto them were true. And then if they so
were in deed / yet what good effect has Tyndale thereupon ye perceive. For
though it so were in deed, yet were Tyndale never

But now good reder, for as myche as Tyndale says that the church does
falsely take saint Austayne and contrary to his mind, even in like manner as he
says they do all the scripture, to blind and bygyle the people with: we be
very glad he says so. And as Tyndale has here him self put these words of
saint Austayne for ensample, how the church uses yt self in thexposycyon of
scripture / so shall we be very well content ye take yt / and that

Now say we then that where Tyndale says that the cause why saint Austayne
did believe the church, was because they were then good men / Tyndale does but
dyuyse that tale upon his own, head to seek some euasyon where he might get
out. For bysydes that yt appears plain by saint Hierome, that there were at
that time the same vices in the catholyke church that are now, all save
wedding of folk that had vowed chastyte / I say that in the place where
saint Austayne writes those words, ^e

And that in this book written against Cresconi^s, he alleges that holy martyr
saint Cypriane, and r^hers^^h his words written in his pystle that he wrote
unto Maximus / by which he shows that men may not leave the church because
of the evil f^^^e that be therein. For in the church there be both good and
badde, as there are in the feld of god whereof Christ speaks in the gospel
both good corn and cocle / and in a great house as saint Poule says ^
^
but also trene and erthen.

These words of holy saint Cypriane does holy Austayn rehearse and approve /
whereby me^ may well perceive, that both saint Cypryane and saint Austayn to,
did take the church for none other then the known catholyke chirch / and knew
that church right well, not for a company of only good men, but of go^d and
badde both, and so be they s^yll what ever Tyndale say.

But yet this one thing did both saint Cyprian and saint Austayne say, that of
all that depart out of this church, there is not one good nor can not be
good, until in heart they resort thereto again. And for that cause is yt
called holy church / not for that every man is holy that is in yt,

And to thentent that ye may the more clearly perceive, that Tyndale here to
blind us with, deuyseth of his own hedde this euasyon, that saint Austayne
byleued not the chy^che in his days but because of their constaunce in
persecucyon and their holiness of living: who so look upon the place where
he writes those words, that is to witin his book against the pystle of
Manicheus theretyke, of whose sect saint Austayne had been onys him self /
without any co^syderacyon of persecucion or holy living, lays other
consyderacyons that made him know and believe the catholyke church of his days
/ that is to wit

These causes ^o ^ayed saint Austayne, all which causes are in the catholyke
church still / these he laid I say for the authoryte of the catholyke church,
for which he said he gave so fast fyrme and undoubted credence to it, that for
y^ authoryte thereof he byleued the gospel at the teching thereof. And these
causes he laid unto the heretykes^ as ^^u^es that he thought should of reason
move them thereto also.

And yet to the intent ye shall the more clearly se^ how^ nor yet unto him
neither that does believe the scripture.

Let us se therefore what Manicheus techeth me / and specially let us consider
the self same book that ye call the pystle of the fundacyon, in which is
contained almost all that ye believe. when that same pystle was read unto us
at that time wrechys that we were, we were wont to vow down and say Amen.
Thus begins the pystle.

Manicheus the apostle of Jesus Christ, through the prouydence of god the father
/ these be the wholesome words issuynge out of the ever flowynge founteyne of
life.

Now I pray you and it please ye harken pacyentely what I shall ask you. I
believe not this man to be the apostle of Christ. I beseech you be not angry nor
begin to chyde / ye know well that I am determined nothing rasshely to
believe that ye bring forth.

I ask you therefore who is this Manicheus^ ye answer me y^ apostle of Crist.
I bileue it not. Now have ye nothing that ye can either say or do. ye promised
to teache me and make me to know the truth, and now ye would make me believe the
thing that I know not. ye will peradventure read me the gospel, and labor to
prove me the person of



Now if ye would then say to me, thou dydest well to believe the catholyke
church in that they co^me^ded the gospel, but thou doste not well to believe
them in y^ they dysprayse Manicheus: wene ye me so very a fool, that tellyng me
no cause wherefore I should believe what so ever ye bid me, and believe in no wise
what ye list forbid me. yet much more reasonably and more cyrcu^spectely do
now I, in that I dedeparte not from ye catholyke church which I have onys
byleued, and translate my self to you, but if that ye can first not bydde and
command me believe, but openly and clearly

Now if it so were that ye could by possybylyte find in the gospel somewhat,
that could clearly prove Manicheus to be Crystes apostle / then must it follow
theruppon (if I should believe you therefore) that I must then not believe the
catholyke church (...) byddeth me believe not you. And then again if I (...)
not the church, then can I not believe the gospel, sith I believe the gospel
for the church / and so could nothing serve you that ye should bring

And on the the other side, if ye found for Manicheus any manifest thing in the
gospel / then could I neither believe the church nor you / not the church
because they lied to me of you when they told me ye were not to be byleued, nor
you because ye prove your part but by that scripture, which scripture I
byleued not but through byleuyng them whom I ^ught not to believe, because they
prou^ them self false in making a lie of you. But god forbid that I should not
believe the gospel / for byleuyng the gospel I can not find how I should
believe you. For among all the apostles names y^ are there found, ye name of
Manicheus it not found.

Lo good christen reders here se ye plainly that Tyndale Matthe^ 16.
shall every day be strenger for the church then other, as long as ye world
shall stand.

For saint Austayne alleges there for one of the causes that moved him, the
contynuaunce of the church, which than had continued in s^^cessyon about the
space of four hundred year. How (...) is that stronger now after the
contynuaunce in succ^^^^^n the space of.xv.C. years? And as for miracles with
which as saint Austayne says they that believe not be first comenly moved to
give faith

And thus I say good reders, ye may perceive by that place in saint Austayne
which I have rehearsed you, and by his other four chapyters immedyate before,
that the mind and intent of saint Austayne is plain, that god of his
goodness offers men occasyon, and by good and substancyall causes helps
them that are willing first of all to know the true chyrche^ of which
every true precher is a member. And then like as god uses miracles and diverse
other means, by which means his^ help and grace makes the well wyllyng
person to percey^e and know whych^ is his very church: so does he after use the
same church for a ^eane, by which he makes a man ^now which is the

An this is the true order and the plain ^^tente and menynge of saint Austayne,
as yt plainly appears as well in his before remembryd book, as in the work
of his confessyons in the order of his own conuersyon / and very plainly in a
pystle of his against the Donatystes, which

Saint Austayne also in his third book against the pystle of Permen^ane
says in plain words, that there is no suertye of any unity but if the
church be declared and known / which according to gods promise set upon
an hill, M^t^^. 1.
can in no wise be hydden / and therefore must yt needs be, that the church
is through the wo^lde known. And none is nor never was thor^we the world

Saint Austayn also in his pystle to Uincentius, which pystle is in order
the.xlviii, says in this wise expressely^ How can we believe by the scripture
of god, that Christ is comen into the world and known, if we believe not thereby
that the church is also manifest and known? let any man who so will knyt and
put in against the plain trowth, all the hokes and handles that he can / let
him cast before our yien what mystes of wyly falshed that he list / and when he
has all done, look how he is accursed, that will tell us that Christ neither
verily dyed nor verily rose again / even likewise accursed shall he be, that
will tell us for the very church any other then this comen catholyke church
of all christian nacyons.

Lo good reder Tyndale said he^e before, y^ we would not believe saint
Austayne nor any of the old holy doctors, as though him self would. And now
have ye hard saint Austayne / whom if Tyndale will believe, all our questyon
is decyded. For he says as we say, that the comen catholyque church is the
very church. And if he will not believe him / then let him leave like as he is to
lay his own fault to other folk.

Good christian reders if my purpose were here to prove you by the consent of
the old holy doctors of Christ's church, that the known catholyque church
is the very church: the number of those authorytees would fill an hole book.
But my purpose is here only to answer Tyndale and confute his solucyon, with
which he falsely gloseth

And therefore sith he says that they mysse construe and falsely allege all
the scripture, even in like manner wise as they do saint Austayne / while ye
plainly se that in this point which Tyndale puts for the sample, the
church says true and him self lies: good cause have you to believe this
lewd fellow in the remanauntlyke.

But now shall ye se Tyndale deuyse you such a shyft,


Tyndale. And when they ask whether we received the scripture of them / I
answer that they which come after, recey^e the scripture of them that go
before. And when they axe whether we believe not that yt is gods word by the
reason that they tell us so / I an^were that there are two manner o^ faythes, an
hy^torycall faith and a feeling faith.


More. Lo good reder here shall ye se that the thing where about




Tyndale. The hystorycall faith hangs of the truth and honestye of the
te^^er, or of the commen fame and consent of many. As if one to^de me that the
Turk had won a city, and I byleued yt moved with the honesty^ o^ the man.
Now if there come a another that seems more honest, or that has ^^tter
pe^suasyo^s that it is not so / I think immediately that he lied and ^ (...)
and fauleth away, if a more gloryouse reason be made unto me, or if

But of a feeling faith yt is written John^. vi. They shall be all taught of
god. That is, god shall write yt in their hertes with his holy spyryte. And
Paul also testyfyeth Roman. viii. the spyryte bears record unto our
spyryte, that we be the sons of god. And this faith is none ^pynyon, but a
sure feeling / and therefore ever fruitful. Neither hangs yt of the ho^estye
of the preacher but of the power of god and of the spyryte. And therefore if all
the preachers of the world would go about to persuade the contrary, yt would not
preuayl / no more then though they would make me believe the fire were cold /
after that I had put my finger therein.

Of this ye have an ensample John^. iiii. of the Samaritanyshe wife, which left
her pytcher and went into the city and said / come and se a man that has
told all that ever I did / is he not Christ? and many of the Samarytanes
byleued because of the saying of the woman, how that he had told her all


More. Lo good christian reders, here have I given you his whole tale to gether,
to the end of his whole chapyter, which houerly looked on and read over
plesauntly with him that lyketh hit ere ever he look on yt for favor of the
sect, can not but seem very gay. But who so consider yt and advise yt well /
he shall find not one pyece of treuthe therein, farther then I have all ready
showed you in the end of his first solucyon / where I touched in few words
scant spending four lynys therein, that y^ mind of sayn^ Austayn was and is I
wene of all good men besides, that Johan. 15.
without me nothing can you do / so that the inward secret cause wurkynge
with us is him self.

But ordynaryly god uses outward meanys and instruments, such as every man
may sumwhat by the same give a reason and cause of his own faith to an other
man, and thereby tell him that for the same causes the man

And in these means like as god uses the bodyly senses which we call the
five wits, as ways and means toward that understanding which men attain
by reason, though there be sometime between the reason and the bodyly senses
some debate and variaunce: so does he use both the seruyse of the bodyly
senses and of the reason of the soul toward the seruyse of the faith /
adding therwyth because it is a thyyge far above the nature of them both,
his own supernatural aid and help of his supernall grace to prevent us with
occasyons and mocyons of bylyefe, and walking on with us except we leave of
our self to the perfaytynge of bylyefe in our hearts, and

And therefore as I before showed you, saint Austayne all be it that without
help of god he byleued not the catholyke church, nor without help of god
knew and byleued the scripture by the catholyke church / yet he alleged unto
those heretykes the Manichays, not that inward cause the secret help of god
that wroughte with his will and his reason, in geuynge credence to those
outward causes for which he says that he byleued the church / for therein

And therefore as I say saint Austayne laid them not that inward cause, but
the outward causes of his byleuynge the church / which were so good and
effectual, that the heretykes neither could nor never can be able to bring
the like for them self. And then lays he the same church by those outward
reasons so proved true, for the outward open cause of the knowledge and
bylyefe of the very scripture / and then does the scripture being by that

Now good christen readers this way went saint Austayne

And so plays Tyndale now, being feign to grant

But yet good reders we shall so set about him, and then set in such
terryers to him, that we shall I trust either course him abroad or make him
evil rest within.

For let us now resort again unto the gaye glorious process of Tyndalys
holy dystynccyon. And where as in the beginning thereof he calls the
hystorycall faith a cre^ence given to a story told him by men / and that such
of god / nor how probable a tale so ever be told us, never

And this order to be true Christ witnesses, where he says, 1 Io^an. 1^.
No man can come to me but if my father draw him. And saint Poule, 2. Corinthians.
3.
saying, we be not suffycyent of our self to think any good thing as of our
self. And therefore god as I said preuenteth us in the beginning, and goes
forth with us all the way / without whom we could do nothing by faith
toward god, nor ^y the outward occasyon of faith toward the inward consent
thereof, sith no 1^ Corinth. 12.
And that god is ever ready, but if we wyllyngly wythdraw / him self shows
where he says, I stand at the door and knock. Ap^^a. ^.


And that god helps us forward not without our own comfortable will, appears
plain by clear textes of scripture I wene mo then an hundred. As where he
says, woe be thou Capharnaum / for if in Tyrus and Sidon had been wrought the
miracles that have been wroughte in the, Matthew. 11.
they would long a goo have done penance in ashes and shyrtes of here. And
also where he said unto Jerusalem in this wise: Jerusalem Jerusalem how
often would I have gathered thy children together, Lucae. 1^.
as the hen gathers together her chykens / and thou would not. And where
he byddeth saint Johan. 26
And therefore is it in my mind false that Tyndale says, Marc^. 16.
that the hystorycall faith, that is to say the faith acquysyte and gotten by
gyuynge credence to the report and telling, does in the things of the
christen faith depend upon the troth and honesty of men, or comen fame
alone. For all be it that such things be the outward occasyons, by mean
whereof a man comes thereto: yet is there ever more in every such faith the
inward cause mouynge our will toward the consent thereof, the spe^yall aid
and help of the great goodness of god, without which out will had never
walked toward it.



Now the the other part, wherein he says that if there come a more honest
man, or one that has better persuasyons to the contrary / that then he that
had the faith upon the first mannys telling, loses yt again upon the
second man telling the contrary: I say yt this patche

For if a man may as in deed he may, so obstynately set his will unto the worse
side, that no persuasyon of good reason can remove him to the better: how much
it is more true, that when a man has coupled his will with god, by inclynynge
and cleuynge unto grace, there can none evil persuasyon of counterfeted reason
be able to plukk^ him from yt till the frowardness of his will do wyllyngly
fall therfro, as the towardnes of his will did wyllyngly cleue thereto / and as
yt again may when yt is fallen from yt, with help of grace wyllyngly return
thereto.

Now if Tyndale call this a felyng faith: yet were his dystinccyon then clean
vaynyshed and gone. For then were every historycall faith in matters in the
faith a felyng faith also. And thereby were then all his solucyon confounded.

But this peyce is also naught for a another thing. For in this patche he
supposes that for ye faith of Christ there could not be given so good an
outward cause, but that some better might be made against yt, or at the least
some such as might appear the better. But I say that except obstynacy and
forwardnes be in the mind of him to whom yt shall so seem / yt is else a
thing impossyble, that ever there shall be laid so great outewarde things
against the faith of Christ, as shall be laid for yt. But the reasons all ready
made, and the things all ready showed for y^ faith are such, as every
reasonable man standing but indyf^erent and void of ob^tinate forwardn^sse, if
the matter were but the troth of a ^tory and not the mean of ma^nis salvation,
might well descer^e all that may be made against yt

But our lord says unto the prechers of his says, whom he sent to preach
to all the world, that he would give them a ^outh and wisdom therein, that
no man should be able to resy^te the reasons with which they should conferme yt.
In ^hych words our lord meant not, yt every man would for all those reasons of
prophecyes miracles martyrs and many other things bysydes, consent and agree
to believe but / that all be yt of ab^tynacy they would not yet to them that
were indyfferent, yt should well apthat

Now is the second part^, his felyng faith, which is he says that bylyefe and
faith, not that a man has gotten and conceived in his heart by herynge of other
men, but by ye plain experye^ce of his own feeling. And with this

Now good christian reders, by this tale Tyndale tells us that all the
credence which he gave unto the church, in taking the books of the four
euangelystes for the very gospelles of Christ, was all to gether but like
Tyndales mothers blowynge upon her finger / and thereby making that pretty babe
her son believe that the fire was hot and had burned her / and that he
would have byleued her no less, if she had told him the same by a cup

Consider by the way good reder the dyfference between saint Au^tayne and the
good man Tyndale, in their credence given unto the church. Saint Austayne
byleued the church in teaching him why^h was the true scripture, because he
perceived well the same church to be so declared by miracles and many other
menes to be ye true chirch, that thereby he byleued that the doctrine thereof
could not be false, and that therefore yt could not teach a tale of Robbyn
hode to be the gospel of Cry^te.



But now does Tyndale he says believe the troth, that not a tale of Ro^ben
hode but the books of the four euangelystes be the t^^w gospel of Chry^te,
because our lord ^ath hem self so taught it him, and so showed yt him now,
that all that he has he^^^ the^^^ vyfore by the teaching of the catholyque
church, moves him nothing at all / for

And as he feleth yt thus in him self / so he perceyueth yt is with all y^
other electes the members of his true church and that therefore of all them
there is none that know the scripture by the catholyke church, but by their
own sure secret feeling, such as they feel when they burn their fyngers.

This is the tale ye wot well that Tyndale tells us. But now is yt perde
good reason that Tyndale tell us also, by what mean he proves yt / or else
at the least wise that he tell us some cause reasonable wherefore we should in so
strange a matter believe his bare word. For furely

Now therefore as I say, Ty^dale must prove us this feeling faith / at the lest
wise f^^ the faith of his fellows / or else shall he make us feel that for a
shyfte to escape away with, he has sought sore (...) found out for the artycles
of his heresies, not any tr^^ felyng^ fayth^ but a false fumblynge fantasye.

yet would Tyndale seem to prove his feeling faith by Of the feeling ^ayth yt
is written John^. vi. They shall be all taught of god. That is, god shall write
yt in their hertes with his ^oly spyryte. And Paul also testyfyeth Roman.
viii. the spyryte bears record unto our spyryte, that we be the sons of
god. And this faith is none opinion, but a sure feeling / and therefore ever
fruitful. Neither hangs yt of the honesty of the preacher but of the power
of god and of the spyryte. And therefore if all the preachers of the world
would go about to persuade the contrary, yt would not preuayl / no more then
though they would make me believe that the fire were cold / after that I ha^ put
my finger therein.

Now good christen reads here have ye first herd the words of god, with
which Tyndale would make us wene that he proves us his feeling faith of all his
heresies / and after have ye herd the words of him self declarynge the

First ye may sone se that the scryptures prove of his purpose not one peyce.
For well ye wot your questyon is not, whyther god with his inward wurkynge
write in mannys heart the faith which I have at length all ready showed you
that he does, and have also showed you what is meant thereby, that is to wit
his wurkynge with the towardness of mannys will, in ledynge him in to the
consent of bylyefe / which ledynge is the techynge whereof Crist speaks in the
words which Tindale here alleges the words of our savior, rehersyng the
saying of the prophet Esaias, (...). 54.
They shall be all taught of god / which words gave them by Moses a law
written in books either of

Now what church this is there needs no man to dowt, when we dowte not which
church it is that has by god that gift to know by bylyef which is the true
scripture / which is as me seems one great article of the faith.

That church that has the gift of that article, upon

Now what this techyng is, that is meant by our sauyoru in the words that
Tyndale alleges, ye ^e. And therefore as I said, now consider that the
purpose of Tyndale is not to teache us that god techeth his electes the faith,
but to teache and prove us by the textes that he brings forth, that god
techeth not only the true faith but also the feeling faith, of such a manner
feeling as him self has declared, by being wounded in the battle, and
burning his finger in the fire / so yt he can never after at any time believe
the contrary, no nor never after do any dedely sin.

Besides this, ye wot well that Tyndale puts this feeling faith to be the
faith of all electes / and than him self denies not but that there were
electes in every time from Adam unto Christ. And this prophecy that he now
brings in for his purpose, was as him self knows, spoken of the church of
Christ that should be after his own coming. And how can he than for shame say,
that it was spoken of the feeling faith of all electes, when they were only
spoken to declare the manner of excellence bytwen^

Let us now go than to the words of saint Poule in the viii, chapyter of his
pystle to the Romans, where he says the spyryte bears witness to our
spyryte, that we be the sons of god.

These words good christen reder which Tyndale here allegeth for him, not
only make nothing for him / but over that if we consider them well with some
wo^des before and after, they make so clear against hym^ that a man could not
wysshe for a place more effectual to tur^^ over utterly and destroy clearly
Tyndals hole gostely purpose. For lo good reder saint Poule after that he had
in the.vii. chapyter of that pystle, touched the great goodness same in the
eyghte chapyter / declarynge the excellence of

And all be it that in the old law, such as were good men received their
grace by the faith and bylyefe of our savior that after should come, and were
by virtue thereof made able to resyste the relyques of orygynall sin and

And sith our lord has now done so myche for us, as in such haboundaunce by
his own coming, to give out ^
For who so says saint Poule be led by the spyryt of god, they be the sons
of god. And then to show us that we should in mortyfyenge the works of the
flesh, and following the spyryte, not only do yt but also do yt gladly, not
for fere but for love / sith Christen people receive the spyryte of filialll
love, and are in such wise ascrybed for the sons of god, that our savior
has him self taught us to call god our father / so that in respect of our
state, the Jews were but in fere and boundage: therefore says saint Poule
farther unto the crystened, yt were among the Romans: ye have not received
again the the spyryte of bondage in dread, but the spyryte by which ye ben
adopted and chosen into the sons of god, by which spyryte also we cry Abba
father. Upon which words ^
For the same spyryte bears witness unto our spyryt, yt we be the sons of
god. And then if we be the sons, then be we heyres^ heirs of god, coheyres
of Christ / how be it that yt is to be understood if we suffer with him that
we may be gloryfyed with him.

Lo good christian reders, here have I somewhat recyted unto you the matter by
which your self may perceive to what purpose saint Paul spoke these words
that Tyndale here alleges / that is to say, the same spyryte bears record
unto our spyrit, that we be the sons of god. In all which words I wonder
what one word or what one syllable either, ye or so myche as one letter,
Tyndale fyndeth making toward a proof of his feeling faith. ye perceive ^
which are as saint Poule says to the Galaties, charity, gladness, peace,
pacyence, long suffrynge, goodness, gentleness, faith, mekenes, temperau^ce /
and by the same spyryte if we will work with him, causes us to kill and
mortyfye the works of the flesh, which ben as saint Poule says manyfeste
and open / that is to wit adultery, whorehuntyng, vncle^^^^^, wanto^es,
idolatry, wytche craft, enmytye, lawynge, emulacyon and strife, wrath,
contencyons, sedycyons, heresies, envy, manshlaughterr, dronkenes,
bankettynges: therefore

This is good christian reders the mind of saint Poule as ye may clearly
perceive. And therefore may ye well and clearly se, that these words make
nothing in this world for the proof of Tyndales purpose concerning his felyng
faith / but being understood right with the words going before them, they
clearly subuerte and destroy all his feeling says, which he feleth that
being ones one of the sons of god, he can never fall therefore, nor never
sin dedely after. For here as ye se saint Poule geuyng good warning of death
and dampnacyon when they do / plainly shows that they may. And thus is there
also by

Now that ye se these two textes of scripture which he brings for him, do
nothing make for him in deed / and the later of the twain clearly make
against him, being translated after the old latin translacyon, which he
^oloweth in those words / and yet myche more against him if yt were translated
after the greek, which in other places he follows, and in this purposely
flytteth fro, to

But this faith he says that those men had, was but an opinion and no faith,
that could have lasted or have brought out fruit.

Now ere we go any farther, how proves Tyndale this peyce of his purpose, that
this faith in those men was but a bare opinion / and so faynte that yt could
not have lasted nor have brought out fruit. How proves Tyndale Sodomytes and
cytezyns of Gommer both.

ye says Tyndaler but yet was it but hystorycall faith. For feeling faith
could yt not be, till they spoke with Christ him self. For then the spyryt
wrought says Tyndale, and made them feel. wheruppon they came unto the woman
and said, we believe not now because of thy saying / but because we have herd
our selfs and know that he is Christ the savior of the world.

what proves Tyndale now with all this? any more, then that their faith was
augmented and encreaced after their co^municacyon had with our savior him
self? But what is this for his purpose, does this proof y^ their faith was
before but a bare opinion, and y^ it neither could have continued nor have
brought forth fruit. Because yt was after increased and made more frutefully,
was yt before

Also in the self same gospel of the Samarytanys, the plain text says,
Many of the Samarytanis byleued in him for the words of the woman. But Tyndale
says nay / and says yt was no bylyef that they had but only an opinion,
where the gospel by plain words says they byleued / and him self shows
nothing why he should say otherwise, but only that their bylyef was after by
the co^munycacyon had with Christ more strong and more fastely co^fermed.
And yet fyndeth he no word that none of

And therefore these wordis of the gospel reprove ye tone part of his tale,
that their bylyef was no faith but an opinion / and no words prove the the other
part of his tale wherein stands all to gether, that is to say that those men
of Samarye had any such feeling faith as Tyndale descrybed us and tells us
this tale fore / that is to say, such a feeling faith that could never after
fail, like the faith of hete in him that has burned his finger. For where
fyndeth he in that gospel or any other, that all those men per severed ever
after in the faith / and not only were ever after faithful byleuers, but also
good virtuous lyuers, and never did dedely sin but were all finally saved.



Now if he think he prove us this suffyciently, by the reason that those men
were turned and waxen faithful at the prechyng of our savior him self in his
own person, which preched says Tyndale not as the scrybes and pharyseys did,
^^r as ours do, that make a man ready to cast his g^rge to here them rave and
rag^ like mad men / but he preched with power and spyryte, that makes men f^^e
and know and wurke to. If Tyndale I say look by this to prove that they had
such a feeling faith that never could fail, because the prechynge of Christ
was with power and spyryte: Johan. 16
to teache it and led it into all truth, Matthew. 28.
and him self also to dwell therein for ever. And that the known catholyke
church is it that only has the same spyryte, appears clearly by this that
only the known catholic church has in it declared and continued the power.
For none other church of Christ is there in which the miracles continue.

And therefore if there were any such felyng faith in any church / then must it
be in this church / and then were this church the church of Tyndals electes,
and then were there wythall his whole purpose lost.

Now if he will not in any wise agree, that any papystes (...). 6
that should be both mete and drink / went they not from him than as Tyndale
has done synnys for y^ self same cause because he will none other believe, but
that it is only ^ake bread and wine? And had not Judas Iscaryoth herd our
lord as often

Nay says Tyndale Judas never byleued. How proves Tyndale that agayne^ Matthew.
10.
For of all lykelyh^^ he did, Psalmo^ 54.
sith Christ took him and made him his apost^e and sent him forth to prech /
and forther as some good co^mentours expowne these verses, says of him, him
self: If mine enemy had cursed me I might have sustained and borne it. And
also if he that hated me had spoken high words to me, I would perauenture
have hid me from him. But thou man of one mind with me my guide and mine
acquayntau^ce, that dydest eat with me sweet mere, we walked together in the
house of god with one agreeable mind.

And thus ye se good reders how wisely Tyndale proves his dystynccyo^ of
hystorycall faith and felyng faith, by the sample of the Samarytanys / by which
he proves as ye se, neither one thing nor other.

And finally if we grant him that all was there true that he says / that is
to wit that the men had the feeling faith because they spoke with Christ mouth
to mouth, and that except his personal prechyng, their faith had been but an
opinion faint feeble and fruteles^e: then were Tyndale

Now se ye well good christen reders, that of all his co^clusyon of hystorycall
faith and felyng faith, wheruppon finally depends all his purpose: to wynd
away wythall and ^hyfte him self aside, he proves us never a pyece.

And yet as though there must needs be such a feeling faith as he descrybeth /
he proceeds forth and says.


Tyndale. The scripture says, cursed is he that trusts in man and makes
floshe his arm / that is to say, his strength. And even so cursed is he that
has none another bylyefe but because men so say. Cursed were he that had no
another why to believe then that I so say. And even so cursed is he that
byleueth only because the pope so says / and so forth through out all the men
in the world.


More. ye se good reders that these words way, to prove that of necessyte
there must be such a feeling faith as he assygneth. For else makes Tyndale
as though no man could have any other cause of his faith, but the trust that
he puts in the man that tells him so / and that says he is a thing
accursed in the scripture. A little before Tyndale alleged saint Austayne in
beleuynge the gospel for Matthe. 18.


But now good christen readers I have declared you

And yet follows it nothing the rather, that there should

And therefore is all this chapyter of his feeling faith, bringing no proof for
his purpose, utterly spent about naught. And unto as little purpose he
spends an other peuysshe chapyter after / in which because he would yet
feign have it seem necessary, that there should be such a

This chapyter he spends all upon rybawdouse raylynge, so shameful and
abomynable that I wene for very shame and offendynge of honest men's ears,
it were better burn it then rehearse it. How be it le^t some men might hap to
say that I mysse report him, and would make men wene that he were so
bestely as to write such fylthy raylynge lies, as honest ears might not well
endure to here: I shall of necessyte though I be loath thereto, be feign to
rehearse you for a sample some part of his bestely knavery.


Tyndale. If I have none other feeling then because a man so says, then is my
faith faythlesse. For if I have none other felyng that lechery is sin, then
that the pope so preaches, whom I se before my face set up in Rome a stews
of.xx. or.xx. thousand hours, taking of every one trybute yearly / and his
bishops with all other dyscyples following thensample myghtyly / and the pope
therwyth not content, but set up a stews of boys also against nature.


More. Fie no ferther here is to much all ready. what honest ear can endure
such a bestely process, so full of abomynable fylthy lies / whereof theffecte
and conclusyon is, that sith the pope and all the whole clergy be such in
every kind

But first he forgeteth yet again the point / and to seek occasyon of
raylynge, he tourneth the questyon from the whole catholyke church to the
clergy alone, and sometime to the pope alone.

Bysydes this, all be yt great sin yt is for any vycyouse person to take
upon him thoffyce of a preacher^ and to presume to tell other folk their
fautes before he mende his own, for as much as much of his audience may take
occasyon of his evil living to have the troth in co^tempte:

would god yet that Luther the l^chour would ^^ys grow

Finally to prove you that Tindale does in this raylyng but prove him self a
fool: ye wot well that o^^ matter is not of the living but of the doctrine.
And then can not him self say nay, but that in the points wherein him self and
the catholyque church varye, we agree / and he varyeth from all the old holy
doctors synnys thapostles time to his own / in whose holy living he neither
does nor can find defaute. And if he say that him self agrees with them,
and not we: let him yet again find of them all some one, that ever held yt
lawful for a friar to wedde a nun.

And then as for the doctrine of the catholic church (for of the doctrine is
our matter) the troth of that is so great and of such vygour and ^^rength, that
those which are in

But now does Tyndale after this to prove that the credence given unto the
catholyque church, must needs be weke and feeble / bring in the Turks and
the Jews against us in this manner wise.


Tyndale. The Turks being in ^omber five times mo then we, knowledge one god,
and believe many things of god, moved only by the authoryte of their elders /
and presume that god will not let so great a multitude err so long time. And
yet they have erred and ben faythlesse this.viii. hundred years. And the Jews
believe this day as myche as the carnal sort of them ever byleued, moved
also by the authoryte of their elders only / and think that yt is impossible
for the^ to err, being Abr^hams seed, and the children of the^ to whom the
promysses of all that we believe were made. And yet they have erred and ben
faythlesse this.xv. hundred years. And we of like blyndne^^e believe only by the
authoryte of our elders, and of like pride think that we can not err, being
such a multitude. And yet we se how god in the old testament did let the great
multitude err, reserving always a little flo^ke to call the other back
again, and to testyfye unto them the right way.


More. Lo good chryste^ reders, in these words Tindale gives

I marvel myche that Tyndale adds not unto them the Paynems also, as his
master Luther did in the same argument. For the Paynems passed both the
catholyque Christen church, and the false Jews, and Turks, and Sarasyns, and
the false heretyq^es to, as w^ll in time as nomb^^.

But yet I marvel myche more that he has so little wit as to wene, that the
bringing in any of them all were any thing at all to purpose. For well ye
wot good

Now as for this inward cause / we can not bind the hethen by. For though we
tell yt them / they will not believe us, or peradventure tell us the same tale
of them self, and say that god moves them.

But un the the other side unto all good christian men this

For sith among all christian men this is a plain bylyef, that the church of
Criste is governed by the spyryte of god in y^ truth, and that all those other
chyrches are governed be the devil in their falsed: now is to good christen
people Johan. 1^
may be deceived and err / ergo the church that is governed in truth by the
spyryte of god that ledeth it into all troth, may be deceived and err in
like wise, sith they be not so many as the false Turks be, nor have not
co^tynued so long as the false Jews have.

Is not this a substancyall reason trow you, first for the inward causes of
our faith and theyrs / which causes arre between us and them more far
unlike, then are their faith and ours.

And then as for the outward causes of our faith, Tyndale makes as though we
had none other but length of

But Tyndale will happily say to me therein, as Luther answered the kings
grace, that the Turk would laughe at all our reasons. But this is a wise
answer surely, that we should be ashamed of every reason that the Turk would
laugh at / and lay for^^ none but such as

But sith Tyndale will in no wise agree, that for the catholyke church we
could lay any causes unto the Jews or Turks, wherefore they should of reason
give any credence to it, and upon the credence of it to take the new
testament ^^r scripture, as saint Austayne says that him self dy^: then if we
would any send thither to preche the true ^^^ypture among them, and make
them first p^rceyue and believe which books be the very scrypturys, sith

But first how shall we know them ^yes well enough perde. For if they be
freres, we know them by wedding of nonnes. well send Luther then. How be it
that may not be / for he should be but laughed at there, because he allows
the reason of saint Austayne that he knows the s^rypture by the catholyke
church, because the church has he

well will we do well then, let us send so good a man as no man can dowte
of, but that he is an elect / and who should that be but holy wyllyam Tyndale
him self. what reasons will he lay to them. He will say by lykelyhed, O all
you Jews and all you Turks to, and all ye Saracenys hedes, harken here unto
me, and give credence unto me, and believe me, that these books be the very
scripture of god / but believe it never the rather though all the known
catholyke church say so, for they be all as badde as ye be, and each of you as
credyble as any of them / and then be you Jews of more antyquyte then they,
and ye Turks and ye Saracenys five ^ymes so many as they / and therefore

Lo when Tyndale would tell them this tale they could not ye wot well laugh
thereat, for it could not be but the feeling faith of his f^lse heart they
must n^des feel at their own fyngers end^.

^ath he not wisely ^andeled this obieccyon of the

But then comes he forth in the end of his chapyter, and showed us that god
ever in the old testament did let the great multitude err reserving, all
way a little floke to call them back again, and show them the right way. And
so he meneth that god has now sent him and his master and those other holy
heretykes, to teache the catholyke church the right way.

But as I have said before, god has promised to send his holy spyryte into
this church, to teache it all troth, and to remain therwyth him self also
perpetually to guide his church from such falling of his catholyke church

Also when he sent his prophets of old, he was wont always to send honest
men on his erand, that proved them self by miracles / and not such rascayle
rybauldes as call them self apostles, and prove it but by jesting and
raylynge.

Gods messengers were wont also to teache every man clennesse and honesty,
and not as these bestely fellows do teache folk to break their vowys, and
freres to fly forth and wedde nonnes.



And therefore sith in some places the heretykes be now the gretter multitude,
and the catholykes the little flock: there are then yet (sith the treuth
stands by Tyndales tale in the lytlenesse of the flock) the catholykes
becomen the faithful folk, and the heretykes the false, without any change
of bylyefe on either other side.

Finally chose few folk that god was wont to reserve

Finally that little flock that god reserved to call the great multitude
back, and to show the world the right way / they were ever yet a known
company. For if men might not have known them, they never could have herd
them nor byleued them as folk of the true flock, if no man could have
known which were the true flock.

And then must it theruppon follow, that yet the true church must be a
known church and not an unknown sort of electes only / with such an
unknown kind of feeling faith, as no man can feel in his fellow / nor no man
can feel in him self, but he whom all true faithful folk may well and
easyly feel for a false fumblynge heretyke, which by that false fumblynge
faith feleth that the blessed

But now when he has so well quytte him with y^ false turks and the Jews,
against the true catholyke church of Christ / he comes forth with an other
chapyter / and therein for the fynall conclusyon of all his matter concerning
the knowledge of the very church, and for the fynall solucyon of the second
argument made for the catholyke church, and for the fynall confyrmacyan of his
false feeling faith, he knytteth up all his dyspycyons with these wise words
that follow.


How this word church hath^ double interpretacyon. This is therefore a sure
conclusyon as. Paul says Romans 9, that not all they that are of I^aell are
I^aelyt^s / neither because the be Ab^ahams seed are they all A^rahams children
/ but they only that follow the ^ayth of Abra^am. Even so now none of them
that believe with their mouths moved with the authoryte of their elders only /
that is, none of them that believe with master Mores faith, the popes faith,
and the deuyls faith, which may st^nde (as master More confesses) with^all
manner abomynacyons, have the right faith of Christ or are of his church. But
they only that repent and f^le that the law is good, and have the law of
god written in their h^rtes, and the faith of our savior Jesus even with the
spyry^e of god. There is a carnal I^aell and a spyrytuall. There is Isaac and
Ismaell, Jacob and herd yt of the spyryte of god and red yt written in thine
heart.

And concerning outward teaching / we allege for us scripture elder then any
church that was this.xiiii. hundred years, and old autentyke stories which
they had brought aslepe where with we confound their lies. Remember ye not how
in our own time, of all that taught grammar in England not one understood
the latyne tongue? how came we then by the latyne tongue again? not by them,
though we learned certain rules and pryncyples of them, by which we were moved
and had an occasyon to seek forther, but out of the old authors. Even so we
seek up old antyquytes, out of which we learn, and not of our chirch, though
we received many pryncyples of our church at the beginning, but more falshed
among then truth.


More. Now good christen reders, here have I given you all his whole process
to gether upon an hepe, wherwyth he by which they can suffycyently judge
says he between good and evil, right and wrong, goodly and / so that by
this ye may well perceive that who so ever have any less knowledge then this,
he is by Tyndales own doctrine none elect.

But now sith god has him self wryte^ these co^clusyons so fully in their
hertes / Tyndale needs not yt seems to make them so long a sermon. But as
though he fered yet for all his words, that god had not so fair written yt,
but that some of them could not read yt / he goth forth with his collacyon
of a great length, and techeth them after his fashyon what is very
worshyppynge, and then a long process of images, pilgrimage, sacraments, and
ceremonies.

And thus with this goodly quyppe against me for his cum patre qui lakkyng no
more but an exhortacyon in the end that men should therefore pull down
Tenterden steple, and so should Sandwyche haven amend, and pull down all the
chyrches in ye realm and so should need no more policy to make a merry world:
the good godly man makes and end of his holy sermon, and gaspeth a little and
galpeth, and geteth him down of the pulpet.

But for as myche good reders, as all this long sermon of his goth far from
our present purpose, which is as ye wot well only to wit which is the very
church / which

Let us therefore now consydre what great thing this man has taught us in this
chapyter. To make us clearly

what a great high secret mystery this man teaches us here? any other then
the self same that I have told him all ready mo times then his hand has
fyngers that in the church there be both good and badde? And yet is yt for all
that the very church? as the arche of Noe was the right figure thereof that
had therein both clean and unclean, and of the men also not all electes and
good / for of Noe his own sons one ye wot well was so bad, Genesis. 9.
that his own

And as the parable of our savior sygnyfyeth his net, that is his church,
Matthew. 13.
catches and keeps both good fyshe and bad, till yt come out of the wauys of
this world unto the bank of the the other / where the net shall be taken up
and the fysh sorted, and the good saved and the bad cast away.

Matthew. 13.
And the field of god shall ^ere both wede and corn, till the heruest come that
both be reped / and ye corn conveyed in to the baron, and the wede cast into
the fire.

ye and many very elect is at some time full naught, and many sometime full
good, that yet will wax after naught, and go to the devil at last. And
therefore I can wyshe no better for my purpose, then the very thing that

Now where yt pleases him to ieste and say, Even so now none of them that
believe with their mouths moved with the authoryte of their elders only / that
is, none of them that believe with master Mores faith, the popes faith, and
the deuyls faith, which may stand (as master More confesses) with all
manner abomynacyons, have the right faith of Christ or of his church: every
man here well sees how loud he bylyeth

For first I never said that any man byleueth with his mouth / which though
it be the member with which a man is bounden to confess his faith, yet is it
not the member with which a man byleueth, no more then his h^le. And
therefore in this point Tyndale belyeth me onys.

More over I said never that men believe moved with the au^horyte of their
elders only / but I say that sauinge for the credence given to the authoryte
of the known catholyke church, Tyndale him self had not known nor yet were
sure at this day, which books be the true scripture of god. But I say
therwyth that like as god has ordered the bodyly wits as ways toward the
understanding

Now where he says that the faith which may stand deeds be they never so
great abomynacyons, he yet no

That Tyndale thus plainly says, ye have your self seen in my fourth book
before. And then that it plainly follows upon his tale, that with his own
feeling faith all manner abomynacyo^ may stand, and hours, and days, and
months, and years, abide and dwell together, ye se plainly your self. And
therefore ye se also as plainly, y^ sith I never said as Tyndale reherseth me,
that men may believe with their mouth, nor never commended faith alone for
suffycye^t as Tyndale here bears me in hand, making faith alone to be mine /
and in that I said that faith may be not alone only without other virtues, but
stand also with all abomynable deeds and vice: I said but she same and yet not
all the same for faith alone, that Tyndale says

I say to Tyndale yet again, that as ferforth as perteyneth only to the
nature of faith, that is to wit to the bare bylyefe alone / that faith that
may stand with all manner of ahomynacyon is a very right faith and a true.
But I say that though it be as it is, both right and true / yet is it not
suffycyent to bring a man to heuyn, if it not only

But now that faith alone, that is to say bylyefe alone is very right faith
and bylyefe / is a point which I have all ready proved him much more often I
dare well say then himself has said mass this month / and therefore I will
not now labor much about it. And to say the troth the thing is so plain
and open of it self, that saving for thimportune babbling of these heretykes,
no man should ever have neded to go about the proof at all.

For what should I go about to prove the thing that saint 1. Corint^. 1^
what need I now to go any ferther therein, sith saint Iamys reasons,
dysputeth, and dyssyneth the matter, co^cludyng that faith may be wethout good
wurkes / but then affyrmyng that when it so is, Ia^^^i. 2.
than it is deed / not deed in the nature of faith, but deed as unto the state
of salvation / as the men of whom our savior spoke, where he says, Lucae. 9.
Let the deed men very their deed men, and follow thou me / he meant not I
suppose that men naturally ded in deed should bear the deed corpse to beryenge.

ye says Tyndale but yet this is not the right faith of Christ. I say yes /
for as far as belongs to the only fayth^ that is to say to the only
bylyefe of these points and 1. (...). ^^.


yet says Tyndale those three be three systers that never be asu^der / so that
who so ever has any one has all. That is plain untrue. For if that heresye
were true / then who so ever had faith had all three / and who so ever had all
three had all that ever he neded. But now because of that false heresye, lest he
that byleueth right in all the artycles, should wene that therefore he lacked
not cheryte, and so were saufe 1. C^rint^. 1^.
labored so myche to tell us that Tindale lies, Iac^^i. 2.
and that a man may have faith and lack yet both hope and cheryte.

ye says Tyndale but that is but an hystorycall faith, that a man gets by
him self of his only natural power and is not the wurke of god in his soul /
and therefore y^ faith is but faint and feeble, and soon gone again / and is
therefore no right faith nor no christen faith. For the right faith is wrought
and written always by god him self in the man's heart, and therefore it is never
without hope and cheryte wrought and written within the heart together with y^
faith / and is therefore a felyuge ^ayth that never can fail, and there ^n never
can ceace both to hope well and wurke well.

This is of troth the whole sum and effect of Tyndales

I say forther that it is not true, that man in the bylyefe

For sith every man that seeks for the bylyefe, and endeuoreth him self
thereto, purposes thereby to seek the way to salvation: the corrupt nature of
man can never begin to enter into that iournaye, nor walk forth one foot
therein, but if he be both first prevented by grace, and have it walk with
him still. Johan. 15.
For our savior says, without me can ye nothing do.

But like wise as a man may by gods help that calls upon every man,
enter in toward the bylyefe, and yet leave again ere he get it / and believe
some one point and

For though the devil may beside such things as he verily knows, believe
some such artycles as we do with out any preuencyon of grace, for as much as
in him being perpetually dampened, the bylyefe can be no furtheraunce toward
salvation, and therefore can in him be no matter of the wurke of grace: yet in
man to whom the faith is by gods ordinance provided for a way toward
salvation

For our savor says, no man can come to me but if my father draw him. And
who so be fallen into a deep pytte, and thens drawn out / is not drawn from
the brynke but from the botome. And so like wise god that draws, draws even
from the beginning and casts down the cord of his grace to take hold upon,
wheruppon who so takes hold and holds still / is by god drawn unto god, and
helps him self to be drawn. For as saint Poule says, we

I say also that after that god has wrought with mannys will, and called him
by preuencyon of grace at the years of dyscrecyon, either from Iudaisme or fro
gentylyty / and finding no let in the man, has by baptysme fully infounded
the faith, and with hope and cheryte put him in state of grace, which is all
the writing in the heart that ever I herd of: this man having now not faith
alone but hope and cheryte to, and standing in such state of grace, that if
he then so deceaced, his soul should forth with fly in to bliss before his
body were cold: yet when he does after that infusyon of faith and grace, any
theft or auowtry, he leseth charity always, and by custom of sin sometime
hope to / and leueth but bare faith, that is to say

For some man that falls to theft, sometime remembereth yet his baptyme / and
being by the devil entyced to kill the man, makes a cross upon his breast,
and prays Crist keep him from it / and in aduowtry like wise. And god in that
good mind preue^teth the man by grace, and works with his will in keeping
him therefro, as he gave him good thoughts and offered him his grace if he would
have taken hold thereof, to keep him (...) the the other to. And I

And thus ye se that of Tyndales ryall tale, there is not one word yet proved
true, saving where he says that all which come of Abraham's seed, are nor
Abraham's children all / but they only that follow the faith of Abraham. Ioha^ 8.
For I will grant him this, and a great deal more so. For I say farther, that
all be ^ot Abraham's children that have Abraham's faith, but if they, have his
chary^e to, and thereby work his works. For our savior says, if ye be

well will Tyndale yet say, sith yt is so that M. More grau^teth him self, yt
though faith alone be a very faith and right and true, for so far as it
stretches, yet because yt stretches not far enough to salvation, in that yt
being but alone lakketh both hope and charity: wherefore does master More
speak so myche thereof, being as him self confesses but insuffycient / and not
rather let yt pass and exhort every man to my felyng faith, that is both
suffycyent and also can never fail.

As for the first point, the blame be theyrs that have geuyn the occasyo^.
For men have be fayn to speak so much Corin. 13.

Iaco. 2.


and saint Iamys both / that is to wit because these heretics now followed the
false sect of some such as were then in the apostles time, teaching that
faith alone was enough for salvation / as Tyndales master Martyne Luther does
manyfestly and plain in his Babilonica, where he says expressly that a
christen man can never be dampened if he will believe, nor no sin can damn him
but only in^rudelyte, that is to say lakke of bylyefe. For as for all other
^ynnys what so ever they be, faith says he if it either abide still or come
again, suppeth them all up in a moment / and that god has no need of mannys
good works, but that he has need of our faith alone.



But yet will Tyndale say, sith I do now speak of faith that is feeling and
works well, and by reason of the felyng a can not but work well: what should
master More eyle now to speak any more of the the other faith alone, that for
lakke of feeling works not / consydery^ge also that I bysyde the faith that
feleth and worketk well, add repentance also of all that men do amysse, what
fau^ there fore fyndeth he now? or what would the man have more?

First there is yet cause to speak of faith alone, because Tyndale is not an
heretyke alone, but yt there be many

Also there is cause, because of Tyndale specially, which would gloss Luthers
old heresye with these new words which will in no wise stand / with which he
would make the world to wene that in faith alone he meant faith, hope, and
charity / and that yt could not be that he any other meant, because there can
be none other faith but only that alone yt has both hope and charity
therewith: and by this bald gloss that three virtues be all one virtue, and that
one virtue were three, against both reason and scripture, would he mokke unlearned
people, and make them believe that Luther meant well, and that all other men were
so mad that they could not understand him. And therefore to make open this
wyly folly of Tyndale, is also a cause why that I

But yet has god of his great goodness begyled him, and made him so mad in
the brain, that he has vttred him self such things with his own pe^ne, as
(our savior saying him self yt the mouth speaks of the abu^daunce or
fullness of the heart) must needs make every man to feel even at his fyngers
end, that Tyndale in the botome of his heart with his fulsome feeling faith,
feleth a foul fylthy hepe of false sumblynge heresies.

For yet is his faith worse then faith alone, which he

Bysydes this, sith Tyndale teaches such a feeling faith as no faith as he
says can save a soul but yt / and then teaches therwyth all that toward the
getyng thereof, no man can any more do then the child can to the bygettynge of
his own father, that is to say all mos^e less then right naught: what does he
by this teaching but teach every man to sit still and go nothing about yt^
And when he says good works be nothing of our will, but necessaryly

And when he teaches repentance without shryft or penance and says ye
shryft is the inuencyon of the devil / could he ever have comen into the
felyng of that false faith, but if the deuyls own hand had fumbled about his
heart?

I pass over his false faith in all the other sacraments, his calling of
Cristes blessed body bare cakebrede or sterche,

This is Tyndalys teaching / and this is his own ensample, whereby he shows
us that we can nothing do in turnynge toward god, but god does all alone.

And this does Tyndale tell us and well and boldly dare / no thing aferde of
god that cries the contrary by Canti. 6.
Turn to me and I will turn to you / would the prophet wene you have said so
to his hachet? zachar. 1.
Now where he says also, Turn you to me and ye shall be saved: Like as if man
could turn without god, Christ would not say without me ye can do nothing /
so if on the the other side man could nothing at all do in the turnynge toward
him, Esaiae. 4 5
no more then can the hachette in turnynge toward the man, god would not so
often and so ernestely call and cry upon us, Apoca. 3.
nor ^tande and knock at the door of our heart, if our self could nothing
do to the opening thereof, and thereby to let him in.

Now Tyndale not only techeth us this ungracious

And sith that this is so high an heresye, so sore blasphemynge the high
majesty of god: I say that Tyndalys feeling faith is yet far wurse, not
only then bare faith alone, but also then no faith at all / as it were
less evil never to have herd of god nor never have

And where as Tyndale calls faith alone, the faith of the pope and of the
devil and me / what faith the pope has or my self either, god shall be judge
and not Tyndale. But surely as for his own feeling faith, him self here
^^erely declares that it is double as deuelyshe as the deuyls own faith in
deed.

First for the point that saint Iamys speaks of, because of his malepert
presumpcyon, affyrmynge that for the feeling faith he may do myche horrible
deeds without any dedely sin, and therefore is as saint Iamys says out of
the dread of god / and therein worse then the devil which both believes and
trymbleth also for dread.

And secundely is his feeling faith wurse then the deuyls is, in that the
devil byleueth that the very body of Christ is in the blessed sacrament of the
altar, and fereth, and trymbleth, and gives reverence thereto, ye and unto the
image of Crystes cross also / as has in every ag^ been proved in sundry
places of chrystendome, and daily appears yet / where as Tyndale calls
blessing and crossyng but waggyng of folks fyngers in the air, and fereth
not (like one that would at length wagge hemp in the wynd) to mock at all
such miracles, and say the devil flees from folks blessy^ges as men fle from
children faynyng them self aferd of them when they list to sport and play
with them nor fereth to mock the sacrament the blessed body of god, and full
like a stretche hemp, call it but cake bread

And finally yet is his faythlesse felyng faith far wurse then is the deuyls,
in that the devil I dare say byleueth and so says to men's charge, that
such as do not believe might if they would / and such as do not turn to god,
might if they list / and lays unto the dampened souls the cause of their
own dampnacyon, where Tyndale techyng us yt they could do no thing to the
contrary, lays of their da^pnacyo^ all ye blame in god. which plasphemouse
heresye is such an heighnouse kind of abominable outragyouse blasphemy, yt I
verily suppose in my mind, this point yt Tindals faith feleth in his heart, yt
very wurst dampened

And thus has Tyndale in jesting upon my faith, to this good point wisely
brought his own.

And now where he goth forth holyly and precheth us, that there is a carnal
Iraell and a spyrytuall, there is Isaac and Ismaell, Jacob Esau. And that
Ismael persecuted Isaac, and ^sau Jacob, and the fleshely the spirytuall, and
that saint Paul complained that he was persecuted of his carnal brethren.
what wise conclusyon will Tyndale make of this? Mary no little thing nor like
no small fool I warraunt you. For lo thus he concludes, and thus do we in ^ur
time and as the elect ever did and shall do till the worlds end. By this he
techeth us lo that ever more the electes be they that be persecuted, and they
be the very Isaackes, the very Jacobs, and the very spyrytuallys, and the very
apostles, and the very

And by Tyndals holy tale, 1. R^g^. 19.^3
when Dauyd was persecuted of Saul, then was Dauyd an elect. But when he
persecuted either the Phylystyens or the rebellys that rose with Absolo^, 2
R^gum. 1^
mary fie for shame for that was a foul faut, for then was he a reprobate.

And Moses when he was persecuted and fled / then was he an elect. But when
he pursued with the well byleuynge people the false idolaters of his own
company, then was he a reprobate and as many as went with him.

Saint Poule also when he was persecuted of his carnal brothern, then was he a
good man and a very electe^. 1. Tim^t^. 1.
and gave their bodies to the devil to teache them leave their blasphemye / then
Tyndale makes him an Ismaell and an Esau and but a carnal reprobate.

And our savior him self also while the Jews persecuted him then agrees
Tyndale by this reason yt he was all that while good and holy and spyrituall.
But when he made a whyppe onys and persecuted them, and bette them away all
that boughte and soulde within the temple, I^h^n. 2
the temple being but a temple of stone to (by which manner of temples Tyndale
sets not a straw) what manner man Tyndale here makes our savior that he
shall tell you him self for me, and in this wise reason of his he tells us
ye se well all ready.

And even in like wise now, when true men, catholykes,

But now what when the theuys, heretykes, and murderers persecute the true
men, the catholykes and innocents, as in Swycherlande and Saxony they do /
what will Tyndale call them than? will he call them by their right names
and tell what they be worthy? I fere me the turnynge of Tyndals felows to the
left side, will

Thus would (I wene) Tyndale be loathe to give any sore sentence upon heretykes,
what so ever they be ^esydes.

And also I remember me now that he can not in deed with his conscience. For
sith they be his own electes, and his euangelycall brethren, and felowys of
his felyng faith / he has perde told us all ready that do they never so great
horrible deeds, they do yet no dedely sin, and therefore worthy ye wot well
but little pretty penance, because they consent not to their sins but commytte
them all of frayltye.

He should be also in this matter in a meruelouse perplexite if he were made ye
judge. For how should he bear him self vpryght among all his fellows, when he
sees well him

we will therefore never ask Tyndale the questyon nor make him no judge in this
matter, le^te we make (if we follow him) the world swarm full of all myschyefe /
for thereto feign would he bring yt. But let us ask saint Austayn the questyon,
which against the Donatystes such heretykes then in Affryke as these be now
in Almayne, plainly shows and declares, that good men do very well, and
deserve thank of god in persecutynge and punyshynge them that be naught. And
he commends Sara for persecutynge and correctynge her maid / and says not
that if she would be an elect and spyrytuall, she must have let her maid
have persewed and beten her. And yet shows saint Austayne farther and by
good reason proves, that these heretykes and all such other as naught be, be
the very persecutours ever more them self / even then also when yt seems that
good men persew them.

But we shall let this process pass, which patche has Tyndale here brought
in, but for the saufegarde of heretykes, and impu^yte of all myscheuouse
people, a Iobbe Number. 12.
or the words following after upon yt / saving that in the words
nextensewyng, he puts us in mind of Moses, which being a very special
elect and an holy prophet, and as the scripture says a most mylde and
pytuous man, did yet persewe, punyshe, and kill heretyques, idolaters, and
scysmatyques, in great number among the Jews / which thing destroys all
that pleasant patche which Tyndale has there put in, to prove all such as
persew and punyshe such heretykes and scysmatyques, to be Ismaeles Esus, and
very carnal reprobates.

But forthwyth after that patche Tyndale goth forth


Tyndale. what a multitude came out of Egypt under Moses, of which the
scripture testyfyeth that they byleued moved by the miracles of Moses / as
Simon magus byleued by the reason of Philippes miracles Acts. viii.
Nevertheless the scripture testyfyeth that.vi. hundred thousand of those
byleuers peryshed through vnbelyefe and left their carcasses in the
wilderness, and never came into the land that was promised them. And even so
shall the children of master Mores faythlesse faith made by the persuasysyon
of man, lepe short of the rest which our seuyour Jesus is risen unto. And
therefore let them embrace this present world as they do, whose children they
are though they have to be called so.


More. The effect of Tyndales tale is here as yt seems, to teach us what a
great parell yt were to be by the persuasyon of men or miracles, persuaded to
believe in Christ / for as myche as of such as by Moses and his miracles were
induced to believe in god, vi.C, thousand left their carkeses in the wyldernes,
and never came to the land of behest, wheruppon his conclusyon is and his
intent as yt seems, that in likewise who so ever be by men or miracles induced
to believe in Christ, shall leave their souls in hell, and never come to heaven.
For that is our land of byheste.

Now if this thing be so perilouse to be persuaded by men or miracles / I
marvel somewhat wherefore our savior him self used those means to persuade
them / and so sore Iaco. 10.
that with the work of his miracles would not be persuaded to believe his
words / and also did rebuke his apostles for that they did not believe them
tha^ had seen him risen.

But to the intent that no man shall need to be ^ ferd for Tyndales tale, to
take the fruit of the miracles that god works daily in his catholyque
church, to cause yt thereby to be perceived for his very church, and theruppon
to be ferme credence given thereunto, both in learning which is the very
scripture of god, and also the true fruitful sentence of the same, with all
such other things as god has does and shall with his own spyryt teach unto
his chirch bysyde unto the worlds end. we shall a little examyne here Tyndales
high solemn words.



And therefore had they their bone granted them, and their bane given them
therwyth. For they were choyked therwyth / and so will some of these at length.

Some of them were also swalowed up quykke with ^
but nath^lesse for that vice which gooth next yt, that is to say for a scysme
in gatherynge to gether with Abyron, Dathan, and Chore / a bysye swarm of
rebellyouse company (as these scysmatycall heretyques do now) that swarued
from the obedyence of Moses and Aaron whom god had appointed for their
governors / whereof god by great miracle took open vengaunce.

And some other there were that there left their carcases in will dernesse, for
diverse other causes beside vnbylyefe, as by the process of the bible appears.

But now if they all that left their carcases in desert, had there peryshed
for vnbylyefe / what had this made Ex^^^. ^2.
that even among that people while they were in deserte, the number of open
vnbyleuers professynge their vnbelyefe, never were so many at one time, but
that the true byleuers were yet the stronger part / as yt well appeared when
the faithful folk commanded there to by Moses, arose and went with him, and
persecuted and bette, and subdued the faythlesse, and killed of them great
number.

And so shall it ever be by gods grace in cryste^dome, yt never shall there
rise so many mysse byleuers, but that the true byleuers shall be ^^yll the
strenger. And though the faythlesse be some time suff^ed to prosper in their
malycyouse rage by some evil softness of such as should resyste Psalm. 2^
and all to frushe and to break those erthely wreched h^retyques like a sort
of erthen pottes / and shall hold his dome day, and bring thereto and from yt
unto heaven, 1. These. 4^
and so shall we for ever be with our lord.

And even so were there of those byleuers in like wise, that byleued by the
mean of men and miracles, many a thousand that came in conclusyon to the
land of byheste. For this can make no matter touching Tyndales reason, whyther
they were the self same persons that came out of Egypt with Moses or other,
so that they were such as to believe, were i^duced by men and by miracles. And
such byleuers were all the byleuers yt afterward came thither. And therefore
Tyndales tale of them that left their carcases

For Tyndale has here no farther to say in that I can se, to make his tale
serve any thing for his purpose, except he tell us that as many as came to the
land of beheste, were electes and had the feeling faith bysyde / and that all
those that dyed in wilderness, were reprobates, and therefore had but the
faith of mennys teaching and of miracles alone.

But now is Tyndale tell us this / we will pray him prove yt. For till he do
more then say yt / we will not let to say again, that with as many as
byleued, god wrought him self with their wylles, and that else they had not

And we shall not let to tell Tyndale ferther, that of those byleuers which
were enduced by the mean of men or miracles, there dyed in wilderness such as
we may well trust to have been electes and to be now in heaven / and therefore
that they either had the feeling faith if none other might suffycyently serve /
or else such other faith as they had gotten by the mean of men or miracles,
was for their salvation suffycyent enough. And surely if it so were / then yet
again we shall not need to fere. For if we may get heaven we care for none
other land of byheste, nor for none other does Tyndale put the sample, but by
their coming to the land of byheste or their lesynge thereof, to sygnyfye
which manner faith should attain to heaven, and which

And in deed as it seems, Tindale meneth that all those which left their
carcases in the wyldernes, perysshed and lost heuyn for lack of ^uche a felyng
faith / and th^rfore he concludes, even so shall the children of mays^er M^res
fayth^es^e fay^h made by the persuasyon of men, lepe short of the rest which
our sauy^ur Jesus is risen unto. But now has Tindale forgote^, that the
prophet Moses him self that spoke with god and was taught by him, and not
pe^suaded by miracles either told him by other men's mouths, or wroughte in
his syghte by the mean of other men, but wrought by god by the mean and
instrument of his own hands / left yet for all that his carcays and his
bonys in the wilderness / and that hid so surely, the chirch because they
were tha^ good ^en / yet was he then

But yet sith Tyndale tells us he^e that this faith of ours is naught, and by
his wise reason the fay^h of saint Austayne to, because both he and we were
induced to the bylyefe by miracles and persuasyon of men: Let us beseech Tindale
being so special a prechour sent by god, to give

we might here say that the fault which saint Peter found with Simon Magus,
was not the fawt that Tyndale fyndeth with us, that is to wit the byleuynge for
miracles and by persuasion of men / but for that he would with money have bought
the gift of the holy ghost. How be it sith Tyndale I se well takes this fawte
of ours for as

He has given us plain answer all ready, that there is with us no remedy. For
sith we have so hyghly offended god, not of weykenes, fraylte, and infyrmyte,
as his electes do when they fall into their horrible deeds, by y^ fruit of
their sin remaining in their flesh and brekynge out at their frail
members / but even wyllyngely, and of purpose, and of pure malice, when we
endeavor our self to believe the artycles of Cristes faith by miracles and
persuasyon of men, which faith is as he says the deuyls faith / therefore as
for the rest that god is risen to, he tells

Is not here good christen readers a good lesson and a goodly gospel of this
euangelycall doctor? I wysse saint Peter answered not Simon Magus so sore ye
wot well. But what, sith there is no remedy with us, but that Tyndale will
nedys dampne us all in to Dymmynges day / yet let us beseech him of his
comfortable counsel for

If some such good fellow would now beseech Tyndale to teach him the means
how he might get his felyng faith / what counsel would Tindale now give unto
him: will he bid him repent his vnbylyefe^ if he so bid him, the man will wene
he mocketh him. For how can he repent the not byleuynge of any article, but
if he first believe that his duty is to believe it / and hard it is to
co^ceyue or imagyne that a man may believe that such a point or such a
point every m^n ought to byl^ue, but

And Tyndale has also showed us that concerning the byleuyng, the elect can
no thing do at all, till god make him first both for to se and feel and so
forth / and therefore when he tells him this tale of byly^f, and then byddeth
him go and repent his vnbylyefe before he tell him how he may first come to
the very feeling bylyefe / the poor man may well think that Tindale does but
mock him.

what counsel then will Tyndale give him ferther? will he tell him that it is
the lyberall fre gift of god, and therefore advise him to pray god to give it
him? If Tyndale tell him thus / then the man calling to mind Tyndals forma^e
tale that he has wryt^n and taught, that the will of man can no thing wurke
with god toward god,

More over sith Tyndale expressly mocketh all endeavor of mannys will in
subdewynge of his reason into the seruyse of the faith of Christ, and calls it
a betleblynd reason / the man will soon se that Tyndale is him self
betleblynde, if he se not that it is then but a betleblynde counsel to bid
him go pray therefore. For well ye wot

And yet whenne Tyndale has more over told us yet more plainly, that the man
can by his will no more do toward the getting of the faith, then can the
child in the begetynge of his own father / and every man well woteth that the
child can not pray god to cause his graundefather to bygete his father: this
man must needs perceive that in bidding him to pray for the faith, Tyndale
does plainly mock him.

Finally good faithful reder, I can not in good faith perceive what counsel
Tyndale can give any man toward

But now concludes Tyndale all his co^cclusyon thus


Tyndale. And hereby may ye se that it is a plain and an euyde^t conclusion as
bri^^t


More. who ever said that yt did? who was ever so mad to think that the
troth of gods word, depended upon the mouths of any mortal men or any
creature either in earth or heaven? but without any outward dependens, has
his solydyte substance and fastenes of and in yt self. But the thing that is
in questyon between us, is not whereby. Tondale knows and I also that gods
word is true. But whereby he knows and I to, which is the word of god, and
because Tyndale, and I be not agreed theruppon, but I say written and unwritten
and he but written only? I come nerer unto him therein, and ask him how he
knows which is the word of god written, that is to wit, which is the very
scripture. And the^ say I that

And that I say troth in this point / I think that every christian man that
knows which be the scryptures^ will for his own part bear me we^nesse / as
holy saint Austayn has all ready down for his part, in the words of his
before rem^mbred written agayns^ the Manycheis, where he says, I would not
believe the gospel / but if the authoryte of the church moved me thereto.
which saying of saint Austayne ye se your self that Tyndale has so falsely
and yet for all that so ^ayntly glosed for an answer, that they remain still
unanswered.

And therefore as for Tyndales co^clusyon, we will with

But now sith Tyndale has all this while proved in such wise as ye have herd,
that we be not able to give any good reason of our bylyefe, so farforth as we
give crede^ce to ye catholic church, no more then ye Jews or Sarasens:


Tyndale. And therefore when thou art asked, why thou byleuest that thou shall
be saved through Crist, and of such like pryncyples of our faith / answer,
thou wotest and feles^e yt to be true.


More. ye wot well good reders that the pryncypall purpose wheruppon we go, is
the argument which Tyndale would seem to soil, that is to say the argument by
which we prove the known catholyque church to be the very church of Christ /
because by that church and none other we know which is the true scripture of
Christ. wheruppon we conclude that the same church therefore and none other is
the very true church, by which we know the true doctrine.

To this Tyndale has as ye have herd scudded in and out like an hare that
had.xx. brace of greyhoundes after her, and were a ferd at every foot to be
snached up. For perceiving well that if he grant yt to be true, that he
knows which is the scripture by the catholyke church, he must needs then
grant also that the same church is the very church: he shyfteth in and out
now ye now nay / and where as he can not in co^clusyon avoid yt, yet he
f^nally

Now is yt therefore good reason that Tyndale carye us not away with other
questyon from this point, and deuyse a questyon him self, as why he byleueth
that he shall be saved through Christ. For both is that questyo^s not so dyrectly
to the matter, and also there may peradventure upon that question arryse a
another questyon, that is whether the salvation of any determynate person yet
lyuy^g^ be in the same person any article of bylyefe or not / and some men will
hold peradventure that yt is not properly any point of the bylyefe but of
hope.

But therefore lettyng that question pass for this present / I shall purpose
unto Tyndales discyple the questyon that

To this questyon ye here how Tyndale stands at his bakke, and prompteth him
in his ear in this wise, Say thou byleuest it because thou felest yt to be
true. Uery well and properly answered. Then will I ask him one questyo^ or
twayn more. Answer thou wotest and feleste yt to be true. And when he asks
how thou know that yt is true / answer, because yt is written in thine
heart. And if he ask who wrote yt / answer, the spyryte of god. And if he
ask how thou came first by yt / tell him, whether by redynge of books or
hearing yt preached, as by an outward instrument / but that inwardly thou waste
taught by the spyryt of god. And if he ask whether thou byleueste yt not
because yt is written in books, or because the prestes so preach / answer no
not now, but only because it is written in thine heart, and because the spyryte
of god so preaches and so testyfyeth unto thy soul. And say though at the
begynnyng^ thou w^st moved by redynge or preaching as the Samarytanis were by
the words of the woman /

Lo good reders here ye se that Tyndale has instructed his dyscyple to make
answer suffycyent to every thing that may be asked him / the whole e^^ecte
whereof stands all to gether in two things. The first, that all these
points of his faith he byleueth, because he feleth them written in his heart
by the spyryte of god. The second that though he came first unto them by
writing or preaching and first byleued them for that writing that he read or
preaching that he herd, as the Samarytanys did for the woman's words: yet now
he byleueth him not therefore, but only because he redeth yt written by the
spyryte of god

Now for as much as this outward mean of prechyng and redyng, is the first
mean by which he came thereto, which mean he regards not now, nor has no
le^ger any respect in his bylyefe thereunto / and therefore sith he is now comen
to that high point of feeling faith, by which he redeth written by the spyryte
of god in his heart, that the books of the.iiii. euangelystes be very true
scripture of god, he byleueth it not now the better of a point because the
catholyke church says so: I will therefore ask this good scoler of Tyndale,
whyther he feel written in his heart by the spyryte of god, that he has a
better faith and a more perfayte than saint Austayne had, after that god had by
miracle turned him to the faith and write against the Manicheys,

Peradventure this questyo^ will somewhat seem strange to this dyscyple of
Tyndale, because it is none of those to which his master has taught him to
make answer. But yet I think in conclusyo^ y^ his master will not advise him
to say that he feleth him self to have a more perfayt bylyefe then saint
Austayne, in any such thing as saint Austayne and he byleued both, lest
every man should feel the master of such a scoler to prove a proud fool.

Now on the the other side, if he confess that he feel not his own faith for any
more perfayt then saint Austayns was but believe in his own mind that saint
Austayne in any true point of bylyefe commune unto them both, had as full a
faith and as perfayte as he: then will I ask him

And thus as concerning the knowledge of the very scripture which is our
pryncypall matter: Tyndals answer in the very chyefe point of all, but if he
prove his scolers faith better then saint Austayns / his answer that

But now let us in those other artycles ask this good scoler of Tyndale, sith
it is so that he feleth and fyndeth in his heart wryte^ by the spyryte o^ god,
that freres and monks that have by vow forsaken flesh, may lawfully fall
from fysshe to woman's flesh, and under the name of weddyng make stewed
stru^pettes of nonnes / and feleth also by like felyng faith, that good works
are naught worth nor shall be rewarded in heaven / and feleth also by the same
false felyng faith, that in the blessed sacrament of the awter there is neither
the precyouse body nor blood of Christ, but only cake bread and wine or
starche instead of bread: I shall ask him I say therefore the questyon to
which his

For answer of this questyon, Tyndale says to his scoler, Tell him whyther it
were by redyng in books or heryng it preched. Uery well. Now sith his master
byddeth him tell us, I would pray him to tell us, whyther by prechyng or
redynge in books. To this he will I wene answer me y^ he learned those things
by prechynge. Then I ask him by whose prechyng he came to it. To this must he
be feign to say, that by the prechynge of his own master wyllyam Tyndale,
Luther, Lambert, Huyskyn, or Suinglius, or some such

Concerning ^utwarde teaching / we allege for us scripture elder then any
church that was t^is xliii. hundred years, and old autentyke stories which
they had broug^t a sleep where with we confound their lies.

Remember ye not how in our own time, of all that toughte grammar in England
not one understood the latyne tongue? how come we then (...) the laten tongue
again? not by them, though we learned certain rules a^^ pr^ncyples of them, by
which we were moved and hadd^ an oc^^s^on (...) further, but out of the old
authors. Even so we se^e (...) out of which we learn, and not of our chirch,
th^^^h w^ recey^^^ (...)

Lo good readers this dyscyple of Tyndale in these artycles of his felyng
faith, that good christen men's good works shall have no reward in heuyn,
and that frerys may wedde nonnes, and in his blasphemy against the blessed
body and blood of Christ in the sacrament of the aultare / he byleued his
master / and his master his master Marten Luther, and the other lewd
masters of these new sects, not without a cause, ye se well. For he says
that they allege for their heresies the scripture and old ancient s^oryes /
and therwyth as men have brought up now the true old grammar again, even so
do they now bring up the old true faith again / whereof though they took
some pryncyples of the catholyke church at the beginning, yet

Now which those things are that he calls the falshed that he says they
took of the church / ye know good christen reders well enough, those are the
points for which he so sore iesteth and rayleth against the catholyke church,
the techynge that good wurkes shall be rewarded in heuyn, and that folk should
keep the holidays, and fasting days, and pray for all christen souls, and
honor the precyouse bo^y and blood of Christ in the blessed sacrament, and
observe their holy vows made to god, and forbede that freres should wedde
nonnes, and many such other things. These things he says that the church
had taught him false, till that now Tyndale, and Luther, and Lambert, and
Huyskyn, and Suynglius, have restored

This is good reders the thing that this good scoler of Tyndale by the
counsel of his master answers.

But now good readers we must tell him again that his ensample of grammar and
the laten tongue, is nothing like the matter of faith that he resembles it unto.
For the laten tongue was no thing that ever our lord promised to preserve for
ever / and therefore it might by chauncys and

And therefore sith grammar in the laten tongue is a thing that may fail / and
the true faith is a thing by the spyrite of god according to Crystes promise
perpetually taught unto his church, Ioh^n. 1^
and therefore can never fail no not though all the books in the world
should fail: therefore his symylytude of gra^mer lykened unto faith, is no more
like then an apple to an oyster.

Now as touching any such old autentyke stories as he speaks of, which he
says the church had brought a sleep, wherwyth he says that Luther, and
Tyndale, and Huyskyn, and Suynglius, confound our lies: I would very feign
here some one story, by which he proves that fasting, and prayenge, and
almoyse deeds, done in faith, hope, and cheryte, be naught worth, nor never
shall have

By what old story proves he that folk should not pray for their friends
souls.

By what old story will he show us, that christian women be prestes and were
wont to sing mass.

By what old storye can he make yt good, that in the blessed sacrament is
neither flesh nor blood, but only bare bread and wine?

And by what old stories new founden out, can he now make us know, that
freres or monks professed, were of old wont to wedde nuns, and well allowed
and myche commended therein.

we be very sure that in all these points except the last, we shall find unto
these folk many old autentyque stories

Now come we then to the scripture. For therein they make as though they
reigned, we allege says Tyndale, (...) us the scripture elder then any
church that was these.xiiii. years.



Bysydes this, where Tyndale says that they allege for them the scripture /
we say that some things there are that god will have byleued, were of his
word was delivered unto his church without writing, and in his chy^ch
without writing preserved by the self same spyryte that endyghted the
writing. And this do we prove by old autentyke books of old holy doctors,
and by the authoryte

And over this for his fynall confusyon in that point, ye have your self
herd in my fourth book, that the perpetual vyrgynyte of our lady he has
him self confessed, that who so ever here yt taught must believe yt / and yet
is yt not proved by holy scripture. And therefore must he nedys give over that
false feeble heresye, which he was wont

How be yt in this that he says he alleges scripture / he does but walk
about in a maase. For well ye wot good reders, and so does him self to, that
between these heretykes and the church, the questyon is not for the more part
in the words of the scripture, but upon the right sentence and understanding
of the scripture. Now do we lay therein against them the old ancient
doctors, whose exposycyons they contemn. For both for the reward of good
works, and for fasting, and for the blessed sacrament, and for vows of
chastyte, if they would stand unto the exposycyons of the old holy doctors
upon the scripture / they can never avoid yt, but that the scryptures be

Therefore in conclusyon as concerning the scripture, First sor such points
as god has taught his church without scripture, as the article of the
perpetual vyrgynyte of our lady / Tyndale can not teach his dyscyple that
they allegge the scripture / for in scripture yt is not spoken of. If he will
say that they be at lybertye and not bound to believe yt / him self has in
that article confessed the contrary

And also in all such other like, if he believe not ye church / he might as well
not have byleued saint Poule. If he say yt he could not but believe saint Poule,
because god wrought miracles for him / by the same reason must he believe the
catholyke church, for as myche as god contynually in every good christian
country works miracles in yt for the catholyque church, and wythdraweth his
miracles from all chyrches of heretykes, and thereby declares that he does
those miracles not only in yt but also for yt.

And also Tyndale knew not that god by the mouth of saint Poule said so /
but because that the church taught him that god did so. If he say yes, he felt
yt by the writing of gods own finger in his heart: he must consider

And in like wise for the books of the written words of scripture, of which
these heretykes receive such as like them, and refuse such as they list /
sith yt in the beginning saving for the catholyke church, they neither knew
the tone nor the the other: why should they not believe the same church as well in
the tone as the the other.



If Tyndale would now refute mine obieccion of y^ Turks and their Alcharon,
with obiectynge in like wise against me the Jews and the old testament,
which Crist and his apostles taught them to constre contrary to their

Besides this, his ensample of the Iewis will not help him for a another cause.
For the old exposytours of their scryptures both of Moses and of the
prophets, were upon the part of Christ and his apostles, and consequently of
the catholyque church contynually against the false scrybes and pharysyes, and
the false doctoures sins, in such necessary points as they and we vary for
/ as appears well by diverse of their books, which be daily brought forth and
allegged by men at this day learned in their own

Now if Tyndale, and Luther, and Huiskyn, and Suinglius, can say yt the old
holy doctors expositours upon the scripture did ever expoune it, so that by
their exposycyon it might appear that the scripture of Christ appears it for
lawful and not abhors it as a thing abomynable, that freres should wedde
nonnes: I will agree with Tyndale to give over all the matter.

And thus ye se good reders, that as concerning the scripture which Tyndale
here techeth his dyscyple to say, that they allege elder then any church
this.xiiii.C. year, sith the debate and variaunce is not in the words wherein
they and we both agree but in the sentence / wherein not only

And therefore is he now dreuen in all that ever we vary for, to leave both
scripture and all / and when he ask wherefore he byleueth either this or that,
feign must he be to hold him only to his feeling faith / and as Tyndale for
a shote ancre techeth him, say that he byleueth it only because he feleth it
written in his heart, without any reasonable outward cause wherefore he first
byleued it with a story faith, whereof as ye have herd he can for his heresies
prove us none at all.

Then sith he is comen to that point, that without any 1 ^e^^i. 1^
that we should give a reason of our hope to every man that will ask us
wherefore we hope so. And therefore leuynge saint Peter his way / let every man
follow Tyndale and believe what he list, and say he feleth it written in his
own heart with gods own hand.

Men say that he which has been onys at Jerusalem may lie by authoryte,
because he shall be sure seldom to mete any man that has be there, by whom
his tale

But yet as wyly as that inuencyon was / Tyndale is therein begyled / and god
has gone beyond him, and made his wyly folly founden out more plainly then of
late appeared and came to controllement the self same wyly folly in Richard
web.

This web while I was chauncelloure to the kings highness, was by diverse
heretykes detectyd unto me, that he had sold and used contynually to sell many
of these heretykes books, forboden by the kings gracious proclamacyon to be
brought in to the realm / and ferther I was by good and honest men enfourmed,
that in Brystowe where he then dwelled, there were of those pestylent

Now being thus informed of him, and having very sure knowledge that he was a
great medeler in such ungracious matters, and vtteryng of such poisoned
books / of which I had a doser delivered into my hands by Michael Lobley,
whom I had attached for like matters and which had received the same docer
and books of web and afterward abiured his heresies. I gave out a
commyssyon to certain good wurshypfull folk at Brystowe to attache Richard
web. wheruppon after suertyes there fou^den to appear before me, he went at
large / and coming up to London the day before he came

But now was he shrewdely bygyled / for yet ere he came at me, Necton ferynge
that web might hap to tell the treuth thought he would him self be before
him, and sent me word in great haste of webbys being with hym^ and of all
the communycacyon that had been between them to. And so web unware thereof
being examyned on the morrow, first of diverse other things answered^ on his
oath many a false answer as I very well perceived, saving before / then he
cast down the head and said he had forgote

And as Dauy thought him self saufely defended against falsed, by that he
could not look into his wives grave to se whether she were in yt or no / so
thought web him self surely defended from any reprofe of perjury, because I
could not look into his breast to se whether he remembered

And in like manner hops Tyndale him self sure with his feeling faith against
all re^argucyon of his false heresies, because he sees that no man can look
into his own breast but him self, and find what he feleth written there.

But now as Dauy my man was bewrayed by my wives letter, and as web was
bewrayed by Robert Necton so is Tyndale myche more clearly bewrayed and his
counsel uttered by almyghtye god him self. For where as Tyndale would have
us wene, that he feleth yt written in his own heart with ye very hand of god,
that freres may lawfully wedde nu^nes, god has him self so plainly told the
contrary to all the old holy saints this.xv. hundred year before, and by all
the same space to all christen people

But yet if the felyng of all good men will not answer Tyndale / but that he
feleth always still written with gods own hand in his own holy heart, that
the faith of the catholyque church is but an hystoricall faith in any thing
that aught is, and that yt is full of heresies beside, and that therefore yt is
the church of heretyques, as he said in the end of his goodly solucyon to the
first argument /

And thus good reders ye may easily se, yt their felyng faythes so dissonaunt
among them self, so contraryouse and repugnaunte, be not written in their
hearts as Tyndale says by the hand of god, whose spyryte is the inspyrer of
unity, concord, and peace / but is as I told you before, brethed and blown
into the brothels breasts, by the spyryt of dyscorde, debate, and dyssencyon
the devil.

And yet for the better perceiving of Tyndales doctrine

Now good reders let us begin at his storye faith / and sith he says it ca^
neither endure nor work well: I would wit of him whether if the man dye forth
with as soon as he has yt, with a good purpose to be baptized and to work
well if he lived thereto, in such mind as many martyrs dyed before their
cristendome, should he be saved with such hystorycall faith without any other
ferther feeling faith

Now if he say nay / then sith the man can do no more for his part, but
believe well and do well / and the feeling faith that Tyndale speaks of must be
by god infounded, toward the getynge whereof the man can him self says

Now if Tyndale say that in all such cases god does unto him that byleueth
onys with a story faith, infounde the feeling faith thereto, except the man
have on his own part some other let and impedyment of sin: then say I that
thereby confesses he that the mannys endeavor inclynyng his vnderstannyng to
the service of hystoricall faith, has yet at the lest wise somewhat more done
in him toward the getynge of the feeling faith: which only faith Tyndale
calls the right faith, then the child can do to the getynge of his own
father. And so lies Tyndales tale in

I say also that yt should seem farther by Tyndale, that the hystorycall faith
ones gotten / god should not let of good congruence any more to infounde the
feeling faith into him, not wystandynge any other sins into which the man in
going, carried forth in his frayltye by the rage of concupiscence reygnynge and
rulyng his weke sykly members, then he lets to keep still without any
faylynge at any time that feeling faith in all them that onys have yt, not
wythstandyng all the horrible and abomynable ^edes that ever they can do after.
And so should yt appear by this, that who so get ones the hystorycall faith,
has always forthwith the felyng faith also, though he were in the way toward
the doing, ye or though he were doing in deed

I say also that if to the hystoricall faith gotten by man, with all other good
cyrcumstaunces that man by possybylyte may put unto yt, god does ever add and
infounde the feeling faith him self, supplyenge by the congruence of his own
goodness the inbecyllyte and lakke of power upon the mannys part toward
atteynynge of his own salvation, being the great high gift of god so far
above the proporcyon of mannys natural state: then is I say lost and
destroyed the effect of all Tyndales deuysyon between hystoricall faith and
feeling faith. For then

And thus for ye tone half of his dyuysyon that is to wit the hystorycall
faith, ye se now good reders to what point Tyndale is brought. And now consider
that I speak here of hystorycall faith, as of the faith in necessary points of
the bylyefe, atteyned and gotten by man / by outward meanys only not that I
think mine own self y^ hystoricall faith so attained without the inward
wurkyng of god, but because Tyndale so puts it, therefore I thus reasone it,
to thentent ye should thereby se what thing the troth would

I have also forborne in all this while to speak any thing of the sacrament of
baptysme, because that Tyndale here in all his matter of faith both hystoricall
faith and felyng faith, never makes mencyon thereof / as though the sacrament
had no part in this play. By which obstynate syle^ce, men may as well
perceive what he meneth, as though he spoke it out. But yet to make him somewhat
say therein / we shall in the second part of his dyuysyon, that is to wit
in the considering of his feeling faith, a little appose him therein.

I ask him therefore at such time as in the beginning there turned together
to the faith two or three thousand A^^u^^^. 2^
and theruppon were chrystened / what took they by their baptysme? had they
thereby bysyde the hystorycall faith, gotten by the prechynge any new kind of
faith, or new felyng of their formar faith infounded by god in their baptysme
or not? if not then as towchynge faith and bylyefe / the hystorycall faith
gotten by that outward mean, is as good and as full as the faith by god
infounded inwardly. For I trust that Tyndale does not think but that they
had such faith as was able to serve them to salvation, all those that there
truly turned, if they had forth with upon their baptysme deceaced.

Now if Tyndale take the the other part, and answer me yt in the baptysme they
had the feeling faith infounded / then follows it I say that every man of age
and dyscrecyon which

And yet it seems ferther by Tyndals tale and his master Martins added unto
it, yt if he come to baptysme vndewly that is to wit walkyng outward / yet in
way toward aduowtry, sacrylege, or murder, so he bring with him bylyef, his
baptysme perfyteth all. For by Tyndals granting that god infoundeth
snffycyent perfeccyon of faith in the baptysme, and affermyng that after the
perfayt faith had, the hauer thereof may do such horrible deeds and for all that
never fail in his perfayt feeling faith. I can not as I

when the children are baptized, which kind of faith have they? The
hystorycall faith or the feeling faith? For faith have they must, or else
they can never stand in gods favor and be saved / wytnessynge saint
Poule, that without faith it is impossyble to please god. And therefore of
troth faith they have. For though they come to the baptysme and be received to
the font, in the faith of their fathers and of the hole church that offers
them: yet with ye baptysme is there by god infou^ded into them his grate, the
habyt of faith hope and cheryte, wherewith they be made forth with perfayte
me^bres of his mystycall body the catholyke church i^ earth, and thereby made
i^heritable unto yt bless of heaven



Peradventure Tindale gessyng now where about I go will say that in the baptysme
god infou^deth into some the felyng faith, that is to say into his only
electes, and in their hearts he writes / and that into some other he
infou^deth it not

And beside this as I said before, god gives unto every

But yet sith I have proved that if the child have any faith, he has by
Tyndals tale the felyng faith: ^ow will Tyndale peradventure say that the
habyte o^ ^ayth is no faith, because it is not actual faith which (...) has
not, for lack of the use of reason / for want whero^ ^e can not think upon
nor actually consent unto any point of faith.

But unto this I answer, that he may by the same reason say that the child
has no reasonable soul, because

Also if the habitual faith be no faith / then is the child for all the
baptysme still out of the state of grace / or else must Tyndale say that
saint Poule said untrue, Hebrae. 11.
in tha^ he told the Hebrews that without faith it is impossyble to please god.

Besides this if habytuall faith be no faith at all for lack of actual
thinking theruppon / than dies every man out of the faith that happeth to dye
in his sleep, had he never so good and great actual ^ayth when he went to

Therefore the troth is, that the habytuall bylyefe is in the child, very
bylyefe, though it be not actual byleuyng and thinking upon the faith, as
the habytuall reason is in the child very reason though it be not actual
reasonynge and making of ^yllogysmys / and then it is as I say no story
^ayth / and therefore by Tyndals tale none other then very feeling faith, sith
he puts no mo kinds of faith nor none other ^ayth for su^^ycyent, and
gods wurke is so perfyte that he infoundeth in the baptysme none suffycyent
faith.

How be it though this be the troth that the habytuall

For ye shall understand, that though the church tea^heth that the habytull
faith is in the children suffycyent / yet comes Tyndales master Martyn
Luther, and in his book that he make^h against the Anabaptists, he teaches by
a long process that the young children have ^^founded the very actual faith
in deed. And therefore Tyndale that is his scoler, may not deny but that
crystened children have very faith / and then sith not hystorycall for lakke of
redynge of stories, they must needs have by Tyndales

Now y^ will ask peradventure what then? and wherefore I go about to prove
unto Tyndale that by his words the children in their baptysme have by god the
felyng faith infounded: Now shall I tell you that thing in few words lo.

I have proved him this point good reders, for because that upon this must yt
clearly follow by Tyndales tale magry Tyndales ^eth, that the pope, and the
cardynales, and the whole clergy, and all the christian people beside, be the
very plain electes of god, and shall be saved euerychone as many as ever were
crystened while they were ^hildren / and yt they can never sin dedely in all
their lives though

Now can Tyndale never get out of this net while he leueth, in which his
folyshe false feeling faith has wrapped him / but if he refuse not only the
doctrine of the catholyke church of Christ, but of his own master Martyne
antecryste also.

And yet follows yt farther upon Tyndales tale also, that sith all the
catholyke church have by his tale the feeling faith, and therefore are all
electes / and then he says that the electis having the feling faith, be the
very church: yt clearly follows I say by him, that ye pope, and cardinales,

And thus ye se good reders to what good purpose Tindale has by his feeling
faith suddenly brought his church so clean to the contrary of that he has
folyshely fumbled about all this while before.

And surely good christen reder, as for feeling faith if he mean thereby fast
and sure bylyefe without any mystruste 1. Corinthians. 13.
And this feeling both concerning hope and charity, is in the catholyke
church and in none other sect. But what so ever hope those heretyques have,
or feeling

And so finally any manner felyng that aught is / ye good members of the
catholyke church has, and no sect of all these heretykes. But where as
Tyndale says he feleth, that who so ever have his feeling faith may do many
horrible deeds without any dedely sin / and that who so ever sin onys
wyllyngly, shall never be after forgeuen /

And now good christian reders, ye se to what end Tyndales feeling faith is come
/ with which dyuyded from the hystorycall faith, he says he knows now
which is the true scripture of god, because he feleth yt wryte^ in his heart
by gods own hand / and that he byleueth yt no longer now for the reachyng of
the catholyke church, of whom he learned yt first with a story faith.

But yet ye se good reders that in all this process of his

And on ye the other side, if he say that him self feleth a better faith then
saint Austayne felt, in the self thing tha^ saint Austayne did then believe
as well as Tyndale does now: then dare I be bold to say that every man and
woman yt any felyng has, can not fail to fell Tindale for a proud fumblynge
fool.

And that he so is in deed / ye shall yet the more fully feel by this. For if
yt were all true that he said / yet has his own words double proved, that
the known catholyque church is the very church of Christ. First in that I
have upon his own words proved you, that if he said true, yt must thereof
needs follow that all christian people being baptized in childhed, must have the
felyng faith / and then were they by his own dyffynycyon the very church.

Secundly now consydre well this good reders, that as he says he byleueth not
now no longer which is the true scrypt^re, because the church so teaches him,
but because he feleth yt written in his heart by ye spyryte of god: so says he
that in like wise he byleueth not now no longer any article of the faith
because he fyndeth yt in the books, but because

Now says Tindale not nay, but that as he came first to the knowledge of the
artycles of the faith by the preaching or redynge of the books of the scripture
/ so came he first to the knowledge which was the scripture by the teaching of
the known catholyque church.

Now say I therefore, that grau^tyng him to say well and true in that he says
be byleueth no ledger now the artycles of his faith for the books of the
scripture, nor byleueth the scripture to be the true scripture for the
teaching of the catholyke church / yet follows yt for all that, that in
likewise as that by the preaching or redynge whereof he first

And thus good christen readers to make an end of this book / here ye clearly
se that I have not only reproved you clearly Tyndals false feeling faith, and
avoided his solucyon plainly, by which he would avoid that argument that
clearly proves the catholyke known church to be

And surely this is no marvel. For where as all heretykes very well perceive,
that by the plain promyses of our (...)
there were no suerty neither of doctrine nor of the scripture self, and on
the the other side if they should grant the doctrine of the catholyke church to
be true, then were all their heresies drowned: for this cause lobeynge dreuen
to confess that the church can not fall into dampnable error, they be dreuen
to seek about for some other church, because the sure treuth of the church
dampneth and destroys their heresies. And yet was there never any of them but
that in going from the known catholyke church to seek out another, he
walked so wyld about, that who so looked on and byhelde him, would say the man
were blind / and each walks a diverse way, and assygneth a diverse church,
never one like another.

And for ensample ye may consider twain / Tyndale

The secunde shall be friar Barons, of whose church I will some what show you
before I fynysshe this work.


Thus ends the.vii. book.
The.viii. book. in which is confuted doctor Barons church.
Friar Barons makes the title of his What is holy chyrche^ and who be thereof,
and whereby men may know her.

After this title of his process, he begins to play Tyndalys part /
first in flyttynge from the point, that is to wit from the whole catholyke
church unto the clergy alone, and after in like manner of raylyng. And surely
notwithstanding that a man might wen^ ^ Tyndale were in such fond scoffing
perelesse: yet does friar Barons as far outru^ne him in ^^ylynge, as he
draggeth behynd him in reasonyng / wherein with Tyndale Barons can hold no foot,
as downright as Tindale halteth therein.

Friar Barons lashethe out against them, pride and pomp, and all their lives
spent in whoredom / as though there were not a good priest in all the
catholyke church, till they leave the catholyke faith and fall to heresies /
for than can they not be but honest though they would / for than may freres
wedde whores and call them wyue^.

But yet he iesteth on them ferther, because they were crownys and long
gowns, and that bysshoppes were white rochettes. And when he has lykened them
to bullys, assys, and apys, and the rochettes to smockes: then he lyketh much
his merry m^ckes, and fa^eth as he were from a friar waxen a fydeler, and would
at a tavern go get him a penny for a fytte of mirth.

How be it as for crownys, and gownys, and rochettes,

But he forget^th in the mean while, how many good virtue (...) prestes and
relygyouse people be put out of their

How be it as for his tauntes, his mockes, his mowys, his jesting, and his
raylynge / I shall pass over and cu^ber you not much therwyth, sith yt such
as delight therein and

And one thing am I sure also, that among those with

And therefore sith it is no ne^ thing ^ mad wild bull to run out a^
rouers, and push at every man ^^ut he meteth / nor a rude ass to make his ^ude
to(...) a fond ape to make mockes and mowys / nor an (...) hoar to brawle,
chyde, and scolde / nor no ne^eltye the (...) nor the deuyls lymme to be false
and lie: I will as I say leave of this fellows folyshe apyshnesse, and all his
(...) exclamacyons, and all his bysy ^ullynge, and all hy^ abominable
harlotrye, and all his deuelysshe ^yes why^h ^e sp^^teth

Barons. This word ecclesia, both in the new test^ment and the olde^ (...)
taken oftentimes for the hole congregacyon, and the hole multitude of the
people both goood and bad / as it is in the ^o^e of (...) why have you
bro^ghte the congregacyon or church of god into (...)? Also in another place:
The king turned his face and b^^ssed the ^ole congregacyon or chy^che of
Israel, and all the church of Israel stood. Ly^^^^yse in the new te^tament
saint Paul to the Corint^ians: I have sent unto you Tymothe, ^he which


More. But this is the church good reders, that he must speak (...). For this
is in earth y^ very church of god, though it have ^ad folk in yt among the
good / as testyfye not only the parab^les of Christ, where he lykeneth the
kingdom of (...) unto the net, that out of the sea gathers and brings ^o
land both good fyshe and badde, as the church here out this whole world
gathered fyr^^e, and yet does good men


Barons. For in this church are there Jews and Sarasenys, mutthere^s and
theuys, ba^des and harlottes, though we know them not.


More. As for Jews and Sarasenys, there in friar Barons over sees him self
shamefully / and shows him self not to perceive and understand the self
same places of scripture, tha^ him self brings forth for his purpose. For
neither in the place of Numery were the paynyms any part of the church which
the king there blessed / but as the very plain text there tells, which
Barons has him self rehearsed, only the church of Is^aell / nor also the
church which saint Poule wrote unto, among the Corynthies ecclesia that is
to say ch^^ch in englysh, does as friar Barons says signifye in th^se ^lates
of scripture which him self alledg^th, the congr^^^cyon and flokke of as well
paynyms as Israelytes, and of Jews and Sarasenes, as christian folk.

But yet will friar Baron^ say^ that though Jews and

O holy pharasye, in whose proud heart the pore p^blycanes be so great
abomynacyon, that he not only ly^^eth not any thing to re^^^^^ them, but
also for the^^ ^a^es fetteth at naught the whole company where many virtues
people are among them / and fares by the ^hyrche of Cry^^ as did his fellows
the old pharysees with our sau^oure him self, whom they blas^hemed and
said, why eate^^ he with publycanes and sy^ners.

But yet must this great godly man, this high and holy heretyque, hold him
self content to knowledge at length

It is also to me great meruyle, wherefore friar Barons should so hyghly
dysdayne the known catholyque church, because there be murderers and theuys,
and whores and baudes therein, which he says men know not / while there is
neither Luthers church, nor Huyskyns church, nor

And as for whores and baudes / all the world knows I suppose that the head
masters the archeheretykes of all their sects, are the chyefe whore masters
being prestes, munkes, and fre^es, that have professed chastyte / and yet make
harlottes of professed ^unnes under the name of wives, and auow their le^hery
^oldely^ and have whole towns open baudes unto their bestely lechery. And sith
friar Barons dysdayneth not those chyrches, but rather does

How be yt I am glad that friar Barons is waxen so holy now, that can not
abide yt to have the known catholyque

Ma^ke well good reders this point, that the church which Barons ^uste
bring us, must be a church that has there in neither murderer nor thief,
nor whore, nor baude / and keep this point well in remembrance for the while,
and then shall ye se afterward at length how well he will keep his promise,
whereof he will for a while make us a proud face. For lo thus he descrybed his
church.


Barns. But there is a another church of the which saint Paul speaks, you
men l^^e your wives as Christ has loved the church, and has given him self
for her that he my^ht santyfye her, and cleanse her in the founteyne o^ water
thor^w the word of life to make her to himself a gloryouse church with out
spotte or wrynkyll or any such thing, but if at she might ^e holy^ and
without blame. Here have you the very true church of Christ, that is so pure
and so clean without spot. But where by is she pure and clean? not by her own
merytes, nor by her own might, not by exteryour array, not by gold nor ^^luer
nor yet by pre^youse stones, neither by myters nor cros^estaues, nor by pyllers
nor pol^xes / but where by them? by ^hry^te only which has given him self ^^r
that intent that he would make her clean. And therefore says saint Paul: He
gave him self that he might santyfye her, that he might cleanse her and make
her to him self ^ gloryouse church. Also in a another place: you are washed,
you are s^nc^yfyed, you are iustyfyed in the


Lo good christen readers, here have ye read his whole process to gether,
wherein he dyffyneth and descrybeth his church, with all his jesting
corolaryes intermedeled between. I^ which when he has all done, except such
things as the doctrine of the catholyke chyr^he teaches him, he has not of
his own one true word. And the the other are brought in to no purpose, but
only to plant in couertely some heresies between. And as for the places of
scripture that he brings forth, and of saint Austayne also / there is not
of them all any one that does any thing prove his purpose, that is to say that
only such clean pure people as he speaks of be the very church here in earth
/ but the same places of scripture and of saint Austayne as ye shall

For first as towchynge his goodly doctrine interlaced here and there by the
way, that all manner of people be he pope or pedeler, king or cobbler, carter
or cardynall, bucher or bishop, munke or myller, friar or fydeler, or any of
the remanaunt that this fond friar fydeleth forth here by letters, after the
rude rymelesse runnyng of a scottyshe ieste, be wesshed and made clean of their
synnys by god, and his grace, and his perdon, and his precyouse blood, and not
by their own merytes, nor their own might, nor by exteryour array, nor by
gold and silver, nor by myters nor

For that no man can be cleansed of his sins but by y^ mighty mercy of god,
and by the merytes of Crystes blessed passion: this point this friar learned of
the known catholyke Esaic. 1.
Be ye wesshed, be clean, and take a way out of my syghte the evil of your
thoughts. And by Ezechi. 18.
Cast of from you all your sins in which ye have transgressed, and make
you a new heart and a new spyryte / and why will thou dye o thou house of
Israel? For I will not have the death of him that dies says your lord god,
but return ye and live. Likewise says the prophet Dauyd in the xxxiii.
psalm: Declyne from evil and do good. And again in the same psalm: Psalm.
33.
Keep thy tongue from evil speech, and let thy lyppes speak no gy^e. And
Sachary the prophet says thus: zac^ar. 1.
Turn to me says the lord god of hoostes, Ecclesiastici. 17
and I will turn to you says the lord god of hoostes.

It is written also in an other place: How great^ is the (...)
and has sent him to bless you that every man should turn him self back
from his wickedness. Saint Poule writes also to the Colosseyes in this wise:
(...) 3.
Mortefye and slay your members which are on the earth. And to the Phylippyans:
(...). 2
with fear and tremblyng work your own salvation. And thapostle saint Iamys
says: (...). 4.
Draw ye nere to god and he will drawn nere to you / make clean your hands o
ye sinners, and pourge your hearts o ye that are double of mind.

More over where he says men be not wesshed by their own merytes / the known
catholyke church taught him (...)
For toward heuyn man can do no thing, but if he be prevented by grace. For
as Chyrste says: no man comes to me but if my father draw him / nor no
merit of man can be suffycyent to deserve heaven, but the greatenesse of that
reward comes of gods mere lyberall goodness, that ly^t to give so great a
pyrce for so simple a thing. (...)
For as saint Poule says, the passyo^s of this life be not wurthy the glory
that is to come that shall be showed in us.

And the catholyke church teceth that men should therefore put no proud
trust in their merytes, but stand in fere of their imperfect wurkynge,
mengled always for the more part with vnperfeccyon and spo^tes / sith that all
y^ (...)
(...)
and that the sterrys are not clean in the syghte of god. And therefore the
church techeth every man to say as Christ says in the gospel, that do we
never so well, Lu^^^ 17
we have done but our duty / and so give the thank of all the reward unto
gods mere lyberall goodness / of whose gift and grace we have taken all the
things that we wurke any good wythall, might, wit, faculte, fre will, body,
soul, and all. For as saint Poule says, what haste thou that thou haste not
received? 1. (...) 4.
And then if thou haste received / what gloryest thou as though thou haddeste
not received it.

These things lo does the known catholyke church teache, and in this wise do
they interpret and declare the scryptures. And therefore if friar Barons had
here meant

And that he thus means him self well declares by his mad poysened
process, that all only faith iustifyeth before god. 2. Corinthians. 5
And that the devil has taught it him appears plainly, Hebrae. 6. and. 13.
by that the spyryte of god has inspyred the contrary doctrine into his holy
apostle Paul, Ephesi. 6.
which writes unto the Romans, 2 Pet^i. 1.
Not the herers of the law are just before god, but the doers of the law
shallbe iustyfyed. Apoca. 2.14.22
Danie^is. 4.
Happy be they that here the word of god and keep it. Luce. 11.
And again also by the mouth of the holy and blessed apostle saint Iamys:
Iaco. 1.
be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only deceauyng your self.

Now where he says that all the blessings and all the holy water, can not
cleanse a man nor give him remyssyon: this learned he of the known catholyke
church, as far forth as it is true. For none of all these neither the men
nor the things can do any good of them self as of them self. For so says
saint Poule: 2. Corinthians. 3.
we be not suffycient of our self as of our self. For theffecte and effycacy
of all these things, comes of god. But friar Barons meneth that there is in
all the blessings, and all the holy water, and holy 1. Th^s^ 4.
appears very well by the words of saint Paul, where he says, every
creature of god is good / and nothing ought to be rejected and refused, that
is received with thanks geuyn. For yt is sanctyfyed by the word of god and
prayour.

And as concerning the holy sacraments / of anelyng thus writes the blessed
apostle saint James in his epistle: Iac^^i. 5.
Is there any man sick among you? let him send for the prestes of the
church, and let them pray for him, and let them anoint him with the oil in
the name of our lord / and the prayour of faith shall save the syk person, and
our lord shall raise him up / and if he be in synnys they shall be forgeuen
him. And of confession he writes in the same pystle immediately (...)
For the sacrament of co^fyrmacyon, yt is written in the Acts of thapostles:
then they, that is to wit saint Peter and saint John^, laid their hands upon
them, and they received the holy ghost. Moreover for the sacrament of
matrymony, we have the plain and open words of saint Poule to the Ephesies:
(...). 5.
This is a gre^ sacrament / but I say in Christ and in the church. And as for
holy orders, that at the geuynge of them grace is infounded into the persons
that receive them / the first pystle to Timothe and y^ second both, do plainly
prove. In the first pystle, saint Poule says thus: despise not the grace
which is in the, that was 2. Ti^^^^. 1.
I warn the to resuscytate and sterre up the grace, that is in the by the
laynge of my hands upon the.

Now that I have good readers opened unto you the covert purpose of Barons
deuelyshe doctrine, planted in among his mokkes and his iestes / and that
there is nothing well and trewly said in all his process, but that he has
learned of the plain comen teaching of the known catholyke church: let us
examyne and co^sydre now the church that he dyffyneth us / and then se whyther
the authoritees that he alleges here of saint Poule and saint Austaynte do
prove us the church that he promyseth.

The very true church is says he, pure and clean with

Also the very church is of gods eleccyon.

Also they that believe that Christ has weshed them from their sins, and
stykke fast unto his merytes and to the promyses made to them in him / only
they be the church of god, and so pure and so clean, that it shall not be
lawful, no not for saint Peter to say that they be unclean. Also the holy
church of Christ is nothing else, but that congregacyon that is sanctyfyed
in spyryte, redemyd with Crystes blood, and stykketh fast and sure all only
to the promyses that be made therein.

Now se ye well good reders, that the church which Barons here assygneth, is
all pure and clean / and not only

Remember now good reders, that if friar Barons abide by his descrypcyon: then
is there no man in the very church but only at such time as he is so clean
and pure without spot or wrynkell, that saint Peter may find no fa^te in him.
And then be there in deed very few of yt and very seld. And if any man be of yt
/ one self man is peradventure of the church and not of the church seven
times

But thereto answers Barons and says, This church is a spyrytuall thing and
no exteryour thing, but inuysyble fro carnal yi^s (...) faith is / and her
cle^nesse and pureness is before Cry^te only, and not before the world / for
the world has no judgment nor ^nowledge of her.

This is somewhat strange, that this church should be inuysyble, when yt is
made all of men and women, of which every one is vysyble. But thereto answers
also friar Barons and says, I say not that they be inuisyble that be of the
church, ^ut that holy church is her self inuysyble.



Uery well declared, as though he would tell us that there were a woman that
went inuysyble, and that he meant not that her hands, or her fete, or her head,
or any part of her were inuysyble / but all her parts being vysyble, her
self were yet inuysyble. And as he might tell us, that of Poules church we may
well se the stones, but we can not se the chyrce. And then we may well tell him
again, that he can not se the wood for the trees.

To say that the whole thing is inuysyble, whereof he

But peradventure he means if he could speak, that though we may se yt, we
can not know yt, because he says yt is spyrytuall. For I may se a man that is
spyrytuall, and yet not know him for spyrytuall, as a man might have seen
friar Barons when he came last into the land by the kings license, and yet
might happily not have known him, all though he had known him before, but
have taken him for a monstre / he had so monstrousely dressed him self
because he would be wo^dred on. And yet when he waxed after a shamed of hi^
self, because he could no better answer for his heresies, and that his false
folyshe hope had failed him: he shaved his berd and went like a merchau^t of
elys

But as far forth as concerns sight / a spyrytuall man is no more inuysyble
in this world, then is a carnal / and therefore the spyrytuall church may be
seen, though the spyrytualyte thereof be not seen, nor yt upon the bare syghte
perceived and known for such.

But I will not strive myche with friar Barons for a word. The man is so sore
bysyed about his rethoryque, that yt is no marvel though he can not entende
to speak reason nor true english neither / as appears where he tra^slateth
learning for teaching, in his first declaracyon of ecclesia, rehersynge the
words of saint Poule to the Corynthies thus: I have sent unto you Tymothe,
the which shall learn you my ways that be in Christ Jesus, as I do learn every
where in all co^gregacyo^s. As though saint Poule had learned in every
congregacyon where he came, and every man taught him and not he them. And
though that some unlearned use this word learn for this word teach, with his
accusatyue case set out, as Rychard lerneth Robert: yet says no man but
Barons, Rychard lerneth at Oxforde, for Richard teaches at Oxford.

But this is specially to be noted that he says after, that this chirch / can
not err / she cleueth so fast to y^ word of god that is the veryte. And for
this cause he says that saint Poule calls her the pyller and ground of
troth / not that

Now good reder consider that no man says that the church has his suerty of
yt self / but of god and of his spyryte ever abydyng in yt, according to the
manyfolde promise of Christ / and therefore we need not friar Barons to tell us
this tale.

But consider now well again, that B^rns here granting that the very church
can not err, but is as saint Poule says the pyler and ground or foot of the
pylare of troth because it cleueth to god / ought here to ponder that this
word, 1. These. 4.
the pyler, and this word the ground, or the foot of the pyler, do not barely
signyfye strength in the standing by them self / but they sygnyfy therwyth
the beryng ba^is, which is the thing that Barons mysse translateth here the
ground, is the thing wheruppon the pyller stands sure / so is the church
the pyller and the foot or ground of troth, upon whose doctrine every man may
rest and stand sure. And for this cause does the holy doctors use

Now good readers, if the very church which can not err, be a co^gregacyon
inuysyble, and a company unknown / though every one of them have the very
treuth in him self: yet if I can not know that church, I can not lene to that
church as to a sure pyller of troth, sith I can not know it for the very
church though I should happen on it.

And thus ye se good reders that friar Barns unknown church, can not be the
pyler nor the ground of troth for

Now consider also good reders, that friar Barns in all this his descrypcyon
and dyffynycyon of the church of Cristes electes, puts only these
propretees. First y^ they be gods electes / secundely that they be washed of
god from their synnys / and thyrdely that they be redeemed by Christ's blood /
fourthely that they stycke fast unto his merytes only / fyfethly that they
stycke only to gods promyses made in Christ's blood / syrtely that they be
sanctyfyed in spyryte / and finally for the seventh, that they

Now first as for the eleccyon / friar Barns plays as Tyndale does, walks
in the dark because he would not ^e caught. For he tells not which eleccyon
he speaks of / whyther the eternal eleccyo^ by which god in his eternal
prouydence foreseynge the end of every thing before the world was wroughte,
elected them for such causes as his own in^^nte wisdom saw conuenyent,
unto fynall salvation and endeles felycyte / or else the eleccyon by which
Christ elected and chose the^ into his church here in this world, into which he
chose and t^ke both fynall electes and fynall reprobates. For if he had
expressed which eleccio^ he meant / he was aferde of the repr^fe of some false
folyes that would have followed thereof.

As for the second point is veryfyed in every man of

And as towchynge the third / all we that be of the common known church are
redeemed in Christ's blood both good and badde. ^^^an. 2
For Christ has by his death paid every man's rau^some, and has delivered us
if we will, though many men there be that will not take the benefyte thereof /
but some will needs lie still in prison, and some will needs thither again, as
no man can keep some theuys out of Newgate / but let them be perdoned, and
their fees paid, and them self set on free foot and delivered out: yet will

Now where he says fourthely that all that are of the church of Christ, do
put their trust in the merytes of Christ only: if he mean that they do reken
that all their own merytes can not bring them to heuyn wyth^ut the merytes of
Christ, nor that they could nothing merit at all without the grace of god,
nor do put no bo^^ trust in their own merytes, but of humylyte little esteem
their own works that they have done be they never so good: that lesson has
he learned of the known catholyke church. And if he mean that no man is of the
church nor may be saved, that has any trust of reward in heuyn for his
own merytes 2. Timoth. 4.
and I have fulfilled my course, and I have kept my faith, and now remains
there and is laid up for me a crown of justice, which our lord y^ is a
ryghteouse judge, shall yield me in that day. By which wordys it appears, that
he had good trust in the m^rytes of the battle that he had fought, and the
cours^ that he had ^onne / when he rekened of justice to be rewa^ded and
crowned therefore. Now if he mean ferther as h^s master Luther and his fellow
Tyndale do, that no man is of the very church of Christ, that will with help
of grace go about to add Ma^^. 19.
If thou wylt enter into the everlasting life, keep the commandments. And
again in the gospel of saint Luke: Lu^^. 16
Make you friends with the wicked ma^mon, that when ye shall have need they
may receive you into the everlasting tabernacles. Mo^e over saint Poule
writes unto the Corinthies in this wise: 1 Corint^. ^.
Every man shall receive his reward according to his labor. And to the
Ephesyes thus he says: (...). 6.
^a^a. ^^
what so ever a man sows, y^ same shall he rep^^ For he that so weth in his
flesh, shall of the flesh repe corrupcyon. But who so sows in the
spyryte, shall of the spyryte repe everlasting life. Let us do good and faynte
not / for when the time shall be come, we shall repe without fayntynge. In the
Apocalypse thus says god by the mouth of saint John^: Ap^^. 2.
I will give unto every one of you according to your deeds. And again in the
xxii. chapyter: Apoca. 22.
Mark I come shortly, and my reward is with me to reward every man after
his deeds.

/ and yet we must if we will be saved stycke fast unto

Now towchynge the point that he says every man of the very church is
sanctyfyed in spyryte / that is veryfyed onys in every man of the known
catholyke church that is chrystened in his chyldehed. But Barons seems to mean
that they be no longer of y^ church, then while they be holy in spyryte / and
yt so holy, so clean, and so pure, without spotte or wryncle, as appears by
the last point, that saint Peter him self could find no fault in them.

But truly as all the other points requysyte unto the

Now se ye well good reders, that if none be of the very church, but they that
have these two latter points / that is to say y^ he so sanctified in spyryte,
that they be so ^ clean and pure without spotte and wryncle, that saint Peter
can find no fawte in them: ^hen is first friar Luther out of the church /
and friar Huyskyn both, for brekyng of their vows with incestuouse wedding /
and friar Ba^us also for his perjury falling in relapse of heresye, and now
runnynge

But now good reders let us resort unto the authorytees of the scripture and
of saint Austayne, which friar Barns brings forth / and consider whyther
that any of them all prove a^y such church at all here in earth, as friar Barns
appoyn^eth us, se sanctyfyed in spyryte that it has neither spotte nor wryncle.

The first text is the words of saint Paul in the secu^de chapyter of his
pystle to the Ephesyes, where he says you men love your wives as Christ has
loved the church, and ^ath given him self for her that he might sanc^yfye ^e^
and cle^se her in the so^^teyne of water through the word of life, to make her
to hy^ self a gloryouse church with out spotte or wrycle, or any such thing
but that she might be holy and with out blame.

what thing fyndeth friar Barons for his purpose in these words? saint Poule
here exhorts men to love their wives, so tenderly that they should be of the
mind, that to bring them to heuyn they could find in their hearts to dye
for them, as Christ has dyed for the Christian people to bring them to heaven /
and that men, to that intent that they may bring their wives to the gloryouse
bliss of heuyn, should here bring them well up in faith, in hope, and
charity, and in good works, like as god has washed his church of all
christen people, and has cleansed them by the water in the word of life, that
is to wit by the sacrament of baptysme.

Thus has god given him self to the death for his chirch of all Christian people.
to thentent that the sacrament of baptysme

And this meant there sent Poule / not that the church shall here in this world
endure and continue without spot or wryncle of sin, so clean and pure that
saint Peter could find no faut therein / and that as soon as a man had either
spot or wryncle, he were by and by none of the church of Christ in earth. For
this I wot well, that saint Poule him self called the congregacyons to which
he wrote the chyrches of Christ, and calls them sanctyfyed in spyryte / and
yet makes them not sure that they shall co^tynue holy / nor rekeneth the^ not
so clean and pure, but that he fereth for them

will ye se good reders that this is true. Consider well the first pystle of
saint Poule unto the Corynthies, out of the syxte chapyter, of which epistle
friar Barons alleges here these words: ye be washed, ye be sanctyfyed, ye be
iustyfyed in the name of our lord sons Jesus Cri^t^, and in the spirit of our
god. Does the apostle though he call them washed and sanctyfyed and i^styfyed
in the spyryte of god, and though he call them the church of god as he calls
them in the beginning of the pystle: does he mean that by reason of the
ablucyon and Exodi. 24.
and by that respect still sanctyfyed and by profession dedicate unto god, as
the scripture calls the priest sanctyfyed unto god by his dedycacyon and
special appoyntement unto his holy mynystracyon in the ^emple with the holy
oil upon him, though the man were not always holy and virtuous in his own

I can not tell you what saint Peter might have done. But well I wot saint
Poule did find mo fautes then one among them, and great spots and
wryncles, as him self writes at length through almost^euery chapyter of that
pystle, and the secunde pystle to. In which pystles ye be washed, and ye be
cleansed, and ye be sanctyfyed and holy, and ye be rich in Jesus Christ, in all
things, in every word, and in all knowledge, as the wyttenes of Christ is
confermed in you, so that ye might lakke nothing in any grace abiding or
lokynge for the reuelacyon of our lord Jesus Christ, which shall conferme you
unto the end without crime in the day of the coming of our lord Jesus
Christ: now like as he says there unto ye church, ye be such / so says he
even there also to the same church: ye be fallen into dyuysyon, and ye be in
debate and dyscorde, in strife and in contency ^n, and ye do naught and sew one
a another before paynym judges, and ye do one a another wrong, fraud, and
injury, and you use fornycacyon among you, and some of you 1. C^^n^^. 5
thereof / and when ye come to gether to your housell, ye keep not a reverent
order, nor abide till you come all to gether, nor the rich is not content to
sit and eat with the pore and put their disshes to gether in comen, but the
rych man will eat of his own / thus ye despise the church of god, and shame
the pore folk that have not of their own / and with such proud vncharytable
manner and such vnreuere^t fashyon, vsyng your self at your assembly to gods
board, ye show your self not to regard the body of our lord, no more in a
manner then ye do the comen materyall meat / for which cause god takes
vengeance upon you / for many of you fall syke therefore, and many of you dye
also.

to his apostles: Now be you clean / but yet all you be not Job. 13.
whole known catholyke church / in which for all the cure done upon yt in the
baptysme, yet are there many sykke members by many great new sins and many
old many times cured again by penance in their lives / and of such as either
perceyuer in the grace of their baptism vndefoyled^, and not rejected by any
dedely sin, or after dedely sins committed, be finally restored unto grace
again by the blessed sacrament of penance / of those sorts ordynaryly does
and shall our savior (the sore cancred members that will not in co^clusyon be
cured, left unto the rotte and shaken into the fire) bring forth and make
perfyte his gloryouse church, and present yt to his father bryghte

And therefore good christian reders, here may ye plainly se that saint Poule in
the places that friar Barons has brought us forth, means no such chyrthe
as friar Barons would here make us wene to begyle us with / but calling them
both good and badde, and meaning some of them good and some bad, and yet none
without spot or wryncle, meant none other church of any other manner, then only
the comen known cathlyque church / of which those chyrches Johan. 16
and sent his apostles diverse in diverse parts to instruct yt, and they set
other under them, as saint Poule set Timothe: so god has from age to age sent
into every good christian country Matthew. 28
wurketh with the toward wylles of the people of his known catholyke church,
to the consentyng and agreement of the same doctrine / so that the catholyke
church is the house of god, and the pyller and sure ground of troth, that
every syngulare person in the clerynge of all dowtes concerning the sure
avoiding of all dampnable errors, may stand and lene unto.

And if any person depart from the faith of this church, or that any
pertyculare church fall fro the doctrine of

Nor not every man that is in dedely sin is thereby forthwyth out of the
church of Christ in earth, till he either depart out or be put out / no more
then a secret traytoure in a kings household is by his secret treason
strayghte out of his checker roll / nor Judas him self after his conceived
treason though he were out of Crystes favor, was

And thus good christen readers here have ye plainly seen, that all the
scryptures that friar Barons brings, make even plain against him, and
plainly prove the known catholyke church to be the very ^hyrche of Christ,
and in this world none holy church ^esyde.

Now good christen reders, where as friar Barns alled geth us diverse places of
saint Austayne and some other doctors for this purpose: though I let them
pass by the way, and answer them not forthwyth / yet shall they not pass
unanswered ere we part. But for as much as he laboreth with in^erlacynge of
his heresies and his raylynge,

And first ye shall consider that he will now tell you where this church is
that he assygneth, of only so pure and clean persons without spotte or wryncle
that saint Peter may find no fault with them. Lo thus he says.


Barons. This is the very true church that is scatred through all the world /
and is neither bound to person by reason of dygnyte nor yet to any place by
the reason of feigned holiness / but she is a fre thing through all the world
as S. Austayne does witness in these words, The holy church are we but I do
not say we as one should say we that be here alone that here me now but as


More. In all this long tale good readers friar Barns tells us no more but
the church is fre, because him self loves lybertye / and the church is
bound to no man because him self would be bound to n^ pryours / nor the
church is bound to no place because such apostatas would be bound to no
cloister but have all the world to royle in.



Then he shows that Liranus says the church stands not in spyrytuall
power or secular dygnyte, but in confession of Christ and his blessed veryte /
and no man fyndeth fawte with Lyre for so saying / but we find fawte with
friar Barons for teaching false heresies instead of Christ's blessed veryte.
Now in tellyng us where the church is / he tells us it is in the world /
and truth it is the very church is in the world but he proves us not yet
that his own church is in the world for he proves no such church at all.

For consider good readers, that yet for his purpose is

And now shall ye se by his own words following, that as gaye a face as he
made before with the scrypturs that he brought forth: yet him self perceived
all the while well enough, that all that he has hitherto said proves in that
point wheruppon all depends, no thing at all for his purpose. For lo now
thus goth he forward and fyndeth


Barons. But now here wylbe objected, that I feign such a church as our
Logicyens do intentionem secundam / that is a thing that is no where. where
shall a man find a chirch that i^ so pure and so clean, that has neither
spotte nor wrynkle in her, and that is without all sin, seeing that all men
must of truth say, forgive us our trespass. And if any man say (be he never
so ryghtuouse) that he has no sin, than is he a liar and there is no veryte
in him.


More. Lo good readers, here may ye clearly se, that him self perceyueth all
that he has said hitherto able to serve of naught / but that for all the
scryptures that he has laid. to prove that there is such a church / and for
all the words

And therefore good reders, cuttynge of now for nowght all that he has said
before, as he takes it for naught him self: let us se what he will now say
better upon this better auysement. For now will he not fail of lykelyhed to
prove us plainly some people some where so pure and so clean without spotte or
wryncle of sin, that saint Peter can find no fawte in them. Lo thus good
reders he proves it.


Barons. To this I answer that this holy church has sin in her, and yet is
she pure and clean. Mark saint Poulys words. Christ has given him self for
her that he might make her gloryouse / so that the clennes^e of this holy
church is the mercy of good toward her through Christ, for whose sake he
lays nothing to her charge / ye and if any other person would / he is reddy
to give

And therefore says saint Poule, there is no dam^nacyon unto them that be in
Christ Jesus. And that this may be the playne^: I will bring you saint
Austayns words the which was vexed of the Donatystes with this same reason

This is will declared in saint John^ where our master Christ is compared to
the vine, and all the members of holy church to the branches / that as the
branches, can bring forth not fruit of them self / so can holy church of her
self bring forth no goodness except she remain in Christ by perfyte faith.
This is well proved by your own law whose words be these / therefore is the
church holy / because she byleueth right wisely in god etc. Here you not the
cause wherefore the church is holy? because she believes ryht wisely in god /
that is she byleueth in nothing but in him / and she byleueth nor hereth no
word but his / as our master Criste bears wytnes: my sheep hear my voice,
and another ma^nys voice do they not know / also in a another place / he that
is of god, hereth the words of god: how comes this that the church of god
has so sure a judgment,

This may be proved by your own law, ^h^se words be these / the whole
chyrc^e can not err. Also in a another place / the c^ngregacyon of faithful
men must needs be which also can not err etc. These words be plain, what


More. Here have I good reders rehearsed you the full declaracyon of his purpose
to gether / which as yt were well done that no man should vouchsaufe to read
over ones, so were yt good that who so would needs read yt ones, should
indyfferently without parcyalyte read yt and advise yt often. For in good faith
I doubt yt not but he that so would, had

For lettyng the authorytees stand for the while / what

How be yt perduenture I blame his with causeless. For I wene the man
perceived those points well enough. But for because he saw that Tyndale when
he brought them in, did thereby so intryke him self in the matter, and meshed
him self in the net of his own folly, that he could never well wind out:
friar Barons thought yt best therefore to take a ^urer way, and rydde him self
with only Tyndales rydelles of synnynge and yet not synnynge, and errynge and
yet not errynge, and leave out those other points

For now to prove us all his whole purpose, that there is in earth here a
church and a company that be clean without any spot or wryncle of sin, and
that so clean that saint Peter may find no fault / obiectynge against him
self the thing that he sees well every man would, that is to wit that both
by comen experyence of the people, and by the plain word of god the contrary
of his posycyon and purpose appears evidently true: he answers in conclusyon
thereunto, that the co^gregacyon which he calls the church ever has spots
and wryncles of sin, and that yet yt is for all that very pure and clean,
because that for her abiding

Consider now for gods sake good reders, how perfytly friar Barons has
answered you, and how perfytely he has proved his p^rpose. He promised us you
wot well to prove us a church pure and clean without spot or wryncle / and
now he brings us a church pure and clean as he says with spots and
wryncles both. Is there any man so bare wytted, that can so be satysfyed and
think him self suffycyently answered thus?

I had as live he told us that if there were a woman with a crooked nose, as
long as no man tell her of it so long

Now where he said the church is so without spotte, that saint Peter might
find no fault in her, he begyled me. For I had went she should have had none
for saint Peter to spy. And I marvel what he meant by y^ word, yt shall not
be laufull saint Peter to find any faut in her. For I thought that yt wold^
^lway be lawful for saint Peter

But yet good readers ye wot well for all this till she come there as she
shall be gloryouse, which is in heuyn and ^
who shall accuse the chosen of god / as who say no man can / else while she
is yet here in earth not gloryfyed, nor her spots fully wesshed out / but be
in

And thus good reders yet ye se onys again that friar Barons proves nothing
the church that he promised bnt when instead of one pure and clean without
spotte or wryncle he brings one, not so clean but that she is spotted and
wryncled / he would win the field with a face, and make saint Peter aferde,
to call her spots spots, or her wryncles wryncles. But it will not be
Barns, it will not be. For though saint Peter while him self was of ye very
church here in earth / and therefore yet wryncled and spotted, and so sore fered
reprofe, that at the word of a woman he

But now let us consider sumwhat of friar Barns holy prechynge by the way,
whyther it be so holy as he would have it seem.

The cause he says why this church is here so holy, pure, and clean, without
spotte or wryncle / and yet has he says ever spots and wryncles, while it
is in this world / is he

Now as for that he speaks of eleccion and merytes / w^ will not much meddle
with him. For we agree that god cheseth by preuencyon of grace, every man yt he
takes to him before the man may any thing merit, which can with out grace
nothing merit. But after may man by fre will wurke with grace and help, to
merit reward in heuy^ by good wurkes wrought in faith and cheryte, and not in
faith alone, what so ever friar Barns against fre will and good wurkes babble to
the contrary.

But now concerning that he speaks of satysfaccyon, and that Christ is our
satysfaccyon / the words are good and true: for Christ's death is able and
suf^ycyent, and so is the least drope of his blood for the satysfaccyon of the
synnys of all the whole world, and many be without any

And therefore where he says that the church is made clean and pure, by
knowledgynge her synnys: it appears well that though he speak the same words,
that saint Austayne spoke / yet he meneth not as saint Austayne meant. For saint
Austayne in diverse other places declares, that a sinner should knowledge his
dedely synnys, by shryfte and confession and do satysfaccion and penance /
appointed him by the priest, as he does both in diverse other placys / and also
at great length in his book de vera and falsa penitentia, Augusti. de vera and
fa^sa penitentia cap. 1^. and.15.
where he says in this wise, Therefore he that repents

And thus it appears as ye se good reders, in what wise

And therefore by friar Barns menynge, a man needs no more but knowledge him
self a sinner and all is saufe. And then may the church be sone a great
flock. For there be folk enough able to make a great flock, that wylbe
content to knowledge their sin if that may serve alone, and

And yet though there were no more required but even a bare knowlegyng of their
sin: yet would neither Barons, nor Tindale, nor Luther, nor Lambert, nor
Huyskyn do so myche for gods sake as to knowledge their sin / but they will
rather run to the deuell in hell, then win heaven with the bare knowlegynge
that their poysened he resyes and the abomynable sacryledge of freres and
nonnes marriage, is any sin at all.

And mark well this by the way good reader, that by Barons in such times as
men have between the beginning of their dedely sins and the knowledgynge of
their synnys, which times be in many one manne many times in his days: in all
those times they be not of the church /

And this is plain against Tyndals church. For he puts the church to be
a cumpany of only such as never sin dedely, and therefore be never out of
the church / how be it he calls them all way repentauntes, and yet shows
that sometime they repent not, but be carried forth in their sin long ere they
repent / and so neither agrees he with Barns nor with him self neither.



But then to show us that we should not reken our self sure of her doctrine,
wenynge that she should be at all times in such case and so taught of god
with his inward oyntement that we might be sure that she would teache us nothing
but such as god inwardely taught her: he tells us how long we may trust
her, and says she is but a woman, and must be ruled by her husband / and she
is but a sheep, and must hear the voice of her ^^epeherd. And so long as she
so does / so long can she not er^e^ as though he would say, some time
peradventure she does not, and then does she err, and therefore then believe
her not.

John^. 15^
I am the very vine, and ye be the braunches^ And like as the branches can
bring forth no fruit but if yt abide in the vine / no more said our savior
can ye^ do but if ye abide in me. And in this means Barons metely well in
part, and better then Tyndale. For by these words yt well appears, that those
which are good folk in deed, and at one time very branches of that very vine
/ may by the deuyls means and their own folyshe negligence and frowardnes,
fall of fro the vine and so bring forth no good fruit, but wyther away and
serve but for the fire / as did that scysmatike traytoure Judas, which was at
the time of these word spoken one of the branches of that vine.

And thus means Barns, that he which is at one time good, and of yt may be a
another time naught and fall from yt, and then is foul and unclean and full of
errors. But in this is Tyndale against Barons. For Tyndale says he which is
ones good and a branch of that vine, can never sin dedely after / because
he can not come into it to be a lively branch of that very vine, but by
gods eleccyon and a feeling faith, that can as Tindale says never fail nor
depart out or fall of.

But therein does Barons not err so far out as Tyndale does / but takes yt
according to Crystes meaning, that by this parable gives every man warnyng
that they may fall of, and byddeth them be ware they do not.

But then in a another point Barons seems to ru^ne out

And now sith yt is so that Barons puts in this case not every syngular
member of the church, of whom some

And so does appear all ready. For he has not in all y^ he

But now sith he says as ye have herd, and for as myche also as whether a pope
or general counsel either may dampnable be deceived and err, is not now
our matter / but whyther the catholyque known church be the very church, and
then whether the whole church may err / and sith the points of the catholyque
faith wherein friar Barons and we vary, and wherein wyllyam Tyndale and we varye,
and wherein friar Luther and we vary, and wherein friar Huyskyn and we vary, and
wherein we vary with all the other hundred sects of heretyques, and wherein each
of them varyeth with other as well as with us, except only one thing the
wedding of frerers and nuns / for in that


Barns. Now must we declare by what signs and tokyns that we may know, that in
this place or that place there be certain members of this wholly chirch. For
though she be in her self spyrytuall, and can not be perfaytly known by our
exterior senses: yet nevertheless we may have certain tokens of her spiritual
presens, whereby we may rekyn that in this place and in that place be certain of
her members. As by a natural exsample, though the soul of man in her self be
spirytuall and inuysyble, yet may we have sure tokens of her presence, as
hearing mouynge, speaking, smelling, with such other. So like wise where the
word of god is trewly and perfytely preached, without the damnable dremes of
men,

Also saint P^ule says, faith comes by hearing, and hearing comes by the
word of god / and therefore it is open in holy scripture, that when Peter
spoke the words of god, the holy ghost fell down on them all. Wherefore it is
open that gods word can never be preached in vain, but some men must needs
rese^ue it, and thereby be made of holy church, though that men do not know the^
neither by their names nor yet by their faces / for this word is received into
their hearts. The second token is, that the receyuers of this word do work
well

Now to our purpose, that where the word of god is preached truly, yt y^ a
good and a perfyt token that there be some men of Christ's church / this may
be proved by Chrys^stimus words, They that be in Judea, let them fle up in
to the mountaye^s / that is to say, they that be in chrystendome, let them
give them self to scrypturs. Wherefore commands he that all chrystened men
in men which be in chrystendome willing to reserve the steadfastness of true

These words need no exposycion they be plain enough they do also exclude all
manner of learning saving holy scripture / wherefore se how you can with honesty
save your holy laws / and defend them against Chrysostom. More over if
Chrysostom complain of the incontynency that was in his days / how would he
complain if he now lived, and saw the boudry and fornycacyon that is in the
church. Also he sendyth men to scryptures that will know the holy church / and
not unto the holy church for in the church were heresies but not in scripture.

Also saint Paul wytnessyth the same saying / you are bylte upon the
fundacyon of the apostels and prophets / here have you plainly that the very
true church is grounded ye and foundyd of holy scripture / and therefore where
so ever that the word of god is preched / that is a good token that there be
some men of


More. Here have ye herd good reders a fair tale with a proper ensample of
the soul / and then two tokens after / by which ye may know in which
company there be some of the church, though ye can not know which the persons
be that be of the church.

And in both these points ye have herd his whole tale no word in the way
left out / nor one word has he not after for any forther proof / but
spending a lefe and an half in rayly^ge upon the clergy, and seremonyes and
sacraments of the church, therewyth he ^ynyssheth and ends all his process.



I let pass that he notes in the mergyne these words how a man may know
the church / and then he tells us in his text not how a man may know it,
nor any pyece

But now let us suppose that he told us the first tale, which were yet more
to the purpose then the tale that he tells us now. And yet because he makes
us his tale so plain by the sample of the soul / let us put him again for
our part some sample of some simple soul / some good merchaunt that were
fallen in company with friar Barns in the house of his secret hosts at the
sign of the botell at

Now if friar Barns would say to this man ye be happy



First would I wit what he means by sure tokens, whether he mean only
tokens and signs whereby we may conjecture that some of the church be there
though we know not which they be as we may by a sign of a grene garlande,
perceive that there is wine in the house though we know not where about the
celler is, or else that we may so surely know yt, that we can not be deceived
therein / as we be sure by the smoke and the sparcles that there is fire in the
chymeney. If he mean of the first fashyon of sure tokenynge, then is yt no
sure sign and token but an answer, guess, and conjecture, for there is
peradventure no wine in that house at all / but the wine dronken up, and

Now if he mean on the second manner that by these tokens that we here the
word of god well and truly taught by the preacher, and se yt well received of
the hearers, and good gospel works wrought among people / we may

For when our savior said of hypocryte heretyques ye shall know them by
their fruits, Matthew. 7.
he meant that ye should perceive the same persons for heretyques and hypocrytes
by the evil fruts of their false doctrine, that under a cloak of virtuous
living and clennesse they should secretly sow and set forth false heresies
contrary to the known doctrine Matthew. 7.
if men took head and wached them well (as he bode them do) cause them to be
deprehended and taken, and their maske^s taken of and their hypocrisye to be
discovered. But Christ meant not that the tokens found in one person should leave
us unsure of him, and only make us sure that some herytyque and hypocryte were
there, as Barons here says by his tokens we shall be sure that some of the
church be there, but I can not be sure which person is any of them.

Now if he said this only in whole great regyons his reason might have some
place, for of a great multitude semynge

yet ask I friar Barons farther, how proves he that where so ever we find
these tokens, we shall be sure that though we can not tell which they be, yet
sure we may be that of his holy church some in that company there be.

In the answer unto this, he puts a dyffere^ce in deed between the token of
the good works, and the toke^ of the

And this he proves as ye have herd by the authoryte of the prophet Esaie and
of saint Poule, and by the sample of saint Peter in the tenth of the Acts,
where at the preaching of saint Peter the holy ghost fell down on them all.



But this is friar Batons logyque, and Tyndales, and Luthers also, and so is yt
of them all, upon a particulare they boldly conclude an universal.

Now as touching the words spoken of god by the mouth of the prophet Esaie,
My word shall not ret^u^ne agayn^ to me frustrate, but yt shall do all thing
that I will, and yt shall prosper in those things unto the wyche I did send yt:

what do the words prove for Barons purpose? If he prove us his purpose by
these words, he must prove us (...). 1
is none other word but only the preaching of the scripture. For that is the
word which friar Barons here speaks of. And therefore in the prophet Esaie
the word may sygnyfye that word of god, of which word saint John^ ^ayth, In
the beginning was the word, that is to wit the only begoten son of god, as
yt there sygnyfyeth in deed, and not the word written in scripture, though y^ of
that word be much wryte^ in scripture. Then se^th every learned man that those
words of Esaie nothing prove the purpose of friar Barons, though yt might
there sygnyfye also the word written in scripture. For yt proves ye wot will
not for the preaching of the word of god written in s^rypture, if yt be
doutefull and not euydent, whyther the prophet spoke of the scripture or not.

But now who so ever look upon the place in the bible

Of this word therefore spoke the prophet, that is to say of the son of god,
and of his retournynge again to his father / of whose going forth fro the
father and retournynge again to the father, Psalm. 18.
writes the prophet David: His going forth is from the high heaven, and his
meatyng is unto the height thereof / and is not properly meant by the

And yet over all this, if the prophet spoke there of the word written in
scripture, and of none other: yet would it not prove that in every place where
yt were preached, yt should needs take such hold / in some folk, that yt
should of necessyte make in every such place some very members of the church
pure and clean without spot or wrincle. For god has none other will for any
thing by Barns proved yet, yt his word should take such hold in every place
then in every man / but like as his word does his will and returned not again
to god void, if yt take hold in some men tha^ hear yt, though yt take not hold
in every man that hereth

And that it should not in every place take hold / appears by the words of our
savior, where he says to his dyscyples whom he sent to preche, In to what
house so every enter, first say ye peace be to this house. Luce. 10.
And then if the son of peace be there / your peace shall rest upon him, or
else your peace shall return again unto your self. In which our savior
shows us, that if a good man preche well, though there were not one in all
his audyence that would be ye better for it / yet should it not be void / for
the merit should at the least rebounde back upon him self, but not of
necessyte take hold in every audyence, so far Lu^ae. 1^
if any city refuse you and will not receive your doctrine, wype of the duste
of your fete at your partynge in witness against them / and I tell you
troth, the cytyes Sodom and Gomorre shall in the day of dome, be more easyly
handeled then they.

And thus good readers ye se that these words of ye prophet Esaye will in no
wise avail friar Barns / but utterly they leave his purpose all unproven.

Now has he than but one ancre more unto that ship and that is the words of
saint Poule, where he says, Faith comes by herynge, and herynge comes by the
word of god.

what manner an argument does friar Barons call this? Faith comes by herynge,
and heryng comes by the word of god / ergo in every place where the word of
god is herd, must needs be some faithful men.

Though there were never man faithful without herynge of the word of god, as
in deed there is not ordynaryly in actual faith / may it not be for all that
that there may be many that here it to gyther in one place, of all whom never
one will be faithful, but have the faith in derysyon. This argument is so
folysshe that I marvel friar Barons would be so fond to bring it forth.

And thus good christen reads here ye se now to what

And yet have I showed you also, that if he proved all yt he says / yet were
all his techyng of knowledge where some of the church be, without the knowledge
who they be, a very frutelesse knowledge, whereof the knower could never take
spyrytuall profit.

But now good christen readers, to the intent that the folly of friar Barons
inue^cyon may the more clearly appear in osculo charitatis, she would break her
mind unto him, and show him that by the good gracious mocyone of such a man
or such a woman, she had bygonne to enter in to the consyderacyon of her soul
health /

To this would friar Barns of lykelyhed make her great congratulacyon, and tell
all the congregacyon that they have all great cause to joy and rejoice in the
lord / whose high mercy has so goodly bygon to pour in the lively lycoure of
his grace into the dyenge heart of that good sister, and has thereby so
reuyued it with the warm breath of his holy spyryte, that he makes yt begin
to qnycken and look up, and to long to byholde and se the bright son of his
Iacobi. 5.
would pray for them both, because the saints be all departed hense and deed
and be no longer of our funccyon. And yet would he for his part to their
ferther consolacyon, make and send them over some new books of the
euangelycall doctrine in their mother tongue, for the better edyfyenge of their
sely simple souls. And this would he say for the comfort of the hole
fraternity and sororyte in general. And then for answer to ye good sister in
special, he would peradventure

But then is yt lykely that she might say, that the scripture

Then would he peradventure assygne her some special spedde man in the sects,
and tell her she may learn of him. But then were she lykely to say that he
might happily be dreuen away for fere of persecucyon / ye or peradventure dye
before she should be fully learned and instructed in the necessary trouthes by
the scripture: which she could not think her self to be, till she did in
every such troth understand all the places of scryptures that either made
for

Then would he peradventure tell her, that who so ever preach truly the word
of god, according to that scripture ^ she might be sure that he were a true
preacher, and of him she might surely learn.

But unto that she were lykely to say: Father Barons, This same scripture is
very hard / and in the most necessary points diverse preachers expowne yt
diversely, some for the sacraments, and some against them, some for the vow
of chastyte and some against yt, some for good works, and some for faith
alone, some for purgatory and some against yt, and so in such other things
/ so that except I may be sure of the true teacher, unto whose credence I may
trust in the construccyon, I shall always remayn still

what were friar Barns here lykely to say to this woman Ac^^r. 10.
taking an unknown church as he does. For if he would say, good daughter the
goodness of god shall ever suffycyently provide you a true teacher, as he
provided saint Peter for Centurio: she might tell him that Centurio was warned
by god that he was a true precher / and if I had such warning of any that
shall come, then were I satysfyed.

If Friar Barons would say, when so ever the true preacher comes, ye shall
know him and perceive his doctrine to be true, by the inward vnccyon of the
holy ghost, Johan 2.
that shall teach you inwardly as says saint John^ / for as our lord says:
They that are mine hear my Johan. 10
and hear not the voice of a stranger / and I know mine and mine know me /
and of this hau^ we a sample of Ennuchus, which as he was redynge in the
scripture and could not understand yt by him self, god prou^ded that saint
Philyppe should go by him and teache him, Act. 8.
and a non Ennuchus byleued him and was crystened / and how did Enuchus know
that Philyppe was a true preacher, but by the inward vnccyon and inspyracyon
of god? and so good sister shall you be moved inwardely to perceive the true
scripture: surely me thinks that unto this the woman were well lykely to him,
that one ensample at one time of one ma^nys deed, as Enuchus was, gives us not
for every man in every time a general rule. For though he were therein not
deceived then / yet some other that would so

But now has god establyshed his faith and his doctrine by the space of.xv.
hundred year, and sends not lyghtely any such one man to preach and teach
as was saint Phylippe, that can in teaching make the scripture so plain and
open to me, as saint Philyppe did unto Eunuchus / not that has learned yt so
fully and so surely, as the postles had of the mouth of the great master
Christ. And therefore should I not have so great occcasion to believe and to take
for the true teacher any one man that would constre me the scripture now,
namely constrewynge yt in

And therefore though our savior say, that such as are his do hear his voice,
and not the voice of strangers: he seems to mean there in to give us
warning do so, that is to wit, that we should hear and obey him, and not other
against him. For who so will hear heretyques and not him, be none of his.

And that the vnccyon and inward inspyracion of god, techeth us and makes us
perceive that is very true. For god inwardly works with the will of man
walkyng with god, in well using and applyenge conuenyent occasyons toward yt
outwardely given by god. But yt means not John^. 4.
For god byddeth us that we should not be light of bylyefe, nor by and by believe
every spyryte / but prove the spyrytes whether they be of god. And then if we
be not only simple as douys, Matthew. 1^
but also prudent and wise as serpents / his inward vnccyon will work with
our dylyge^ce / but not if we be slothful, or will be willyngely begyled, and
suffer the devil make us mad folys. And therefore he says not believe at
adventure / but byddeth us take heed and be well ware, that we be not begyled
by false prophets, Matthew. ^.
and inwardely be rauenouse wolves.

To this would friar Barns say. For soth dear daughter in the lord, those
wolves be these monks, and freres, and prestes that be the comen preachers of
this carnal church, that they falsely call the catholyque church, which do
tech^ bysyde the scripture dampuable dremes of men, and make men believe that
dome sacraments, and ceremonies, and good works, should do good to the soul:
which false prechers with all their carnal church that has now ben this viii.
hundred year led out of the right way, we new preachers of the very true
church which is spyrytuall, do now by the word of god written in holy
scripture conuycte and reprove.

To this were she well lykely to say again / verily father Barns here ye bring
me now even to the very point. For sith that the apostles of Christ begone
that learned of his own mouth, and no one man left now nor never sins their
time, whom men might so surely take for an undoubted teacher as them: yt seems
that god has left the sure crede^ce of doctrine in no one man, but in his
whole church. And therefore that man which agrees in doctrine with the very
church, I may reken sure that his doctrine is very true in the necessary
exposycyon of scripture / not for his own authoryte of suerty of his person,
nor for the suertye that I can have that his doctrine agrees well with
scripture / for I can not know that but by that I know him for ^
know these false prophets by their fruits. For look they n^uer so symplely
and speak they never so sayntely / yet if their living or their techyng be
contrary to the doctrine of the very true holy church, it is than very true
that their fruit is rotten and false, and them self false prophets of some
false church / and for all their shepyshe semblau^ce outwardly, right rauenouse
woluys are they within.

And therefore good father Barns I would have wyshed that ye had taken a little
more pain in declaryng and making open by what means the very true holy
church which

And surely me thinks that the chyefe commodyte that I can have of the
knowledge of it is this, that I may

But now peradventure friar Barons would answer to this, that it makes no
matter though we know not her. It is enough that she know us, and come and
give us good and faithful fode, and preche truly to us, though we know not
that it is she. But unto this the woman would I wene

But now be we (would she say) such as be thus far well warned, y^ not
only our mother holy church is only she that can and will feed us well, and
will gladly offer to give us good holsom fode / but that also there be a great
mayny of other wicked women which go about to poysen us / and which because
they know that we be well aduertysed that they so entend, and that only our
mother will feed us well, each of them laboreth by all the meanys that their
wyly malice can deuyse, to make us mysse take our mother, and each of them
calls her self our mother, and laboreth to be byleued

But now if we may onys know which of all these is our very mother, then are
we saufe and sure. For thanne are we sure that as all the remanau^t will give us
no meat but naught / so will she give us none but good. and therefore who so
love his life, will take all that she offreth us / all though it be bitter and
sour in taste and not very semely

And I verily think that the thing standing in such case, our father in
heuyn so mighty, so merciful, and so wise as he is, and so tenderly loving
his children as he does, perceiving the perell that might and must nedys
fall upon them by the mysse taking of some such false malycyouse woman instead of our very mother, will not leave us in such case, but that he will
cause our very mother to be well known from all the false counterfetes, to
such as list to look and attend well thereto, both by tokens of her and also
tokens of them.

And verily good father Barons, it seems that ye saw this your self full
well. For it appears upon your words,

Now wo^d friar Barns peradventure answer her and say: Therefore have I showed
you lo by what tok^ns ye may perceive where some of the very church be.

But unto that were she lykely to say agayn^: (...) father Barons well
fauoredly, for so fa^^e as ye (...) ^ut I would as I said have wysshed you ^o
have goo^ ther^^ somewhat ferther / which I think verily ye ^olde ^^ue done if
your laysoure would have served you. For now of your two tokens, y^ tone your
self confesses to ^e but f^ynt and insuffycye^t, yt is to wit good wurkes yt
ar^ commended (...) scripture / because y^ though it be well done ^ every dowt
to deem the best, yet hypocrysye may deceive us, and make us

And yet over this as well that same imperfect token whereby I should have
knowledge of the very church, that is to wit wurkes according to scripture,
as also the the other token that ye call the perfayt token, that is to wit that in
what company so ever I here the word of god truly preched, that is to wit
the scripture truly declared with out any dampnable dremys of men, there I
may be sure that in that congregacyon be some of the very holy church: both
these tokens s^rue but for cunning folk that are su^^ycyently learned in the
understanding of the scripture all ready / and these be they that have lest
need to know the

And also though the tokens both twain were sure and

Now good readers what has Barons holdyng his heresy of his unknown church,
what has he to say more to this woman? In good faith nothing that will be
worth a fly. But the woman may sone find more yet to say to him. For she may
say to him ferther: yet I remember me now father Batons a another thing. ye
will that I shall know y^ church by the true declaracyon of scripture. But how
shall I be sure which be the very books of scripture? For you say plainly
that the pystle of saint James is not holy scripture, and other men say yes.
And ye say that ye can prove

And then as ye say now by that peyce, so may there a another come and say by a
another peyce / and so go about ^o prove every peyce false by other, where so
ever any seem to say any thing which the words of some other part seems
contrary. And then when they shall i^ this wise co^tende and

To this when friar Barons would answer and falsely bear her in hand that the
pystle of saint James has been a^way douted of. And that such books as have been always by the whole church taken and accepted for holy scripture, of those
may she be sure that they be holy scripture / for god gives his church that
gift, that yt can trewely dyscerne the words of god from the words of man:
this will I wot well friar Barons say. For this says not only his old
master saint Austayne, out of whose rule and relygyon friar Barons is run
away / but his new master also friar Luther, after whom he runs out of
relygyon and

But when Barns would answer her so: then would she sone bring him to the bay,
and tell him that the church by which she knows which is the scripture, is
not any unknown church / but the known catholyque church of all christian
nacyons remaynyng in the comen well known faith.

And then sith she may boldly believe that church in y^ great point, and lerneth
that lessen of none other church but that, which is the first lesson of all
the faith, and wheruppon as friar Barons agrees all the whole remanaunt
depends, sith that by him there is nothing any sure truth but if yt be
written in scripture: she may therefore would she say take that church for the
teacher of all the remanau^t

Lo thus might a wise woman that could no more but read english, rebuke and
confound friar Barons upon the sight of his own ryall process, in which he
would now teach us to know which is the very church.

How be yt to confound him, we shall not greatly need to seek one that can
read. For what has he to say to a pore

If his own secret hostess the good wife of the botell of Botolphs warfe,
that but if she be better amended halteth both in body and soul, were in the
congregacyon present at this co^menyng / and then would hympe forth among them
and say, by saint Malkyn father Barons all your tokens of the very true church
will not stand m^ in the stead of a tauern token nor of a mustarde token
neither. For I may for the tone be sure of a new bake^ bune, and for the the other
I may be sure of a pot of mustarde / but for your two tokens of your holy
church, I can not be sure of one ferthyng worth of true doctrine for them
both. For how shall I perceive that any true members of your holy church in
Mat^. ^.
For I wene his hostess would sone have said som^what thereto. For I wot well
she is not ^ong ^ayed, I have herd her talk my self. She would I wene
therefore have said unto him thus much a^ the least wise: why father Barns,
when god calls upon us all, and we come to gether at his callyn^ ^ my
neighbor and I come both to church with one purp^^^ to learn the right way to
heaven / would ye make me wene ^^at god were so parcyall, that without any
dyfference of cause between her and me, I being as well wyllenge to learn to
please him as she, that when I have at his calling followed him so far as
well as she, and with some what more pain to, for I halt ye wot ye wot well
/ he

If he gave her more then me for his only pleasure, I could find no faut. But
mary sir y^ he would give her all and me not only nothing, but also condemn
me to perpetual fire because him self would not cause me to perceive the
troth / and no cause why he would not, but because he would not chose me, and
no cause why he would not chose me, but only because he would not: in good
faith I take god for so good that I can never believe you therein.

1. Timot^. 2.
yet me thinks that these comen preachers whom you ^^^ch. 18. and. 33
say better. For they tell us that it is in scripture, that god would all folk
should be saved and come to the knowledge of the trouh if they will them self /
and that therefore by o^e mean or other he calls all. But he choseth only
those that will come and here and learn and do thereafter / and who would so do,
he saw ere he made them, and therefore even then chose them.

But for because they be but few in respect of them that will not, therefore
there are few chosen though many be called / and not because god will call all,
and the^ of those that come and are willing to learn, will cause some to be
taught and some not, Matthew. 22.
without other cause or dyfference, but because him self list to chese the
tone and refuse the the other / as though yt were an evil master that would call
many (...). 12
that it is in scripture that the bond servant which knows not the will of
his lord and do it not, shall be beten because of his negligence / but except he
will not know it of purpose else he shall be beten but a little. But he which
knows the will of his lord and than do it not, shall be sore beten. And when I
herd this preched, me thought it went sore against the doctrine of our
brother Tyndale, that says as our own brethren report in his answer to
sir Thomas More / that when the wit perceyueth a thing, the will can not
chose but follow. For that is plain false, if ye

And me seems also yt the same scripture makes much against our brother
Tyndale and our brother Fryth, and against the prechynge of all our
euangelycall brethren concerning purgatory. For I dowte not but that many
which have known the will of the lord and left it undone, and yet were never
sore beten therefore in this life / do yet ere they dye so repent that they
escape from hell / and therefore do receive y^ betynge no where but if there be
a purgatory.

Nor it will not help that I herd onys one of our brethren answer and say,
that when he repents than he does the will of his lord / and therefore shall
not be beten at all. For if that scripture be as they prech it / tha^ though

But surely father Barns as I told you, me thinks that these common prechers
say well in that poynt^ that they say that god has provided suretye of
doctrine, that is to say of true prechynge the word of god / and making it
to be so understood, as men may be sure that they may void all dampnable
error if they will, or else they were not to be blamed for falling in thereto.

And they that tell us that we shall be dampened but if we believe right, and than
tell us that we can not know that but by the scripture, and than the scripture
can not be so learned but of a true techer, and they tell us we can not be sure
of a true techer, and so can not be sure to vnderstand^

Now good father Barns would his halting hostess say, ye seem ^ow by your
tale to make as though god almighty would use of a strange affection the same
fashyon that M. Henry used of folly / that is to wit to make us a proclamacyon

And yet abide I remember me lo father Barns upon an other thing would she
say, that if ye bring all to this point in conclusyon, that there is no more
but every man go where he will, and here whom he list / and always he that is
elect shall by the inward inspyracion happen upon the

what would friar Barns have answered unto his hostess,

But than would friar Barns have waxed a little warm, and bid them sit still
and hold their babble, and tell them that saint Poule wist full well what he
did when he would not suffer women to take upon them to preche and teache

But then would the wife of the botell have answered him again quyckely, and
tell hy^ that she had always taken him for wyser, and would have went he could
have taught better. And some sorrow would she say have I had for the favor of
the sects / and so has my husband had to. And my lord chancellor told
me that I was little

Now would with this the the other good honest wife of lykelyhed have resorted
again unto her ensample of her very mother and of these false wyches / of
which every one would be taken for her mother to grow first in trust with
her, and then after poysen her. And then would she conclude: if yt be father
Barons such an unknown thing which church is my mother holy church, and
then one there is with whom I was cristened and hitherto brought up / and
though I se many things in her which I would wysh were amended: yet for all yt
she counsayleth me to be good, and she tells what I must do if I will be
good. How be And I se also that each of your chyrches would feign seem

And thus are we now good reders with these only woman using no reason but
such as a woman might find, and yet such as no man may soil, comen to a
point of friar Barns vnperfayt tokens, by which we may so know his church,
as we be never the nerer for the knowledge of yt, for any knowledge that he
gives us of yt.

But now if he have not proved us his church at all / then is he ye wot well
myche ferther of from making us have any knowledge of her. For he must make
us first know that such one there is, before he make us know in what company
some of her parts be.



And all his places of the doctors of the church that he brings in for the
prove of that purpose, I have purposely differred, because I would answer the^
to gether last at all. For sith he takes in ye point another way then Tyndale

His first authoryte be these words of sayntt Austayn in his fyftieth
sermon, made upon the words of our lord, saying, Of Christ is y^ church made
fair. First was she fylthy in sins, afterward by pardon and grace made
fair. Upon these words saint Austayne none other means, but that all the
beauty of any that is in the church and in any man of the church comes of
god / and that every man Johan. 13
was yet a foul unholy member of that fair holy church. Like as if a good
king had in his chekker roll attendyng daily upon him in his household
diverse and many false traitors that went about secretly to betraye him, all
the while they be suffered there till they be taken for there treason and put
out / they be still of the court and of the kings household. And the household,
all be yt that some will say there was a shrewed household, because yt had
such shrewes in yt / yet was yt for all that a good household, because yt had
good beside.

And likewise as in the whole world, the varyete of good parts and bad, gives
a beauty to ye whole / so in the church of Christ him self sees how the
foul parts do set out Matt^. 26.
for those persons that are by dedely sin foul therein / as the euangelyste
said that the dyscyples murmured at the loss of the oyntement whereat none of
them murmured but one: so is she fair for all that in deed by the fayrenesse
that is in her, both by reason of Christ her gloryouse head, and of many other
fair members that are ever in her, and by reason of the goodly composycyon and
cu^ly temperature of the whole body. For which cause the church may well
say of it self, the words that she speaks in the cantycles: Can(...)
I am blacke^ but yet am I bewtyfull. ye and though there be mo foul tha^
fair therein, by reason whereof after the common use it might be called foul
and not

And therefore as I say, these words of saint Austayne

But first shall I peruse those other places of saint Austayne which friar
Barns brings in him self. The next place of saint Austayne that he brings
in is this.


Barons. The holy church are we / but I do not say we as one should say we
that ^e here alonely that hear me now, but as many as be here faithful
chrystened


More. Now good readers, this text of saint Austayne has friar Barns alleged
to be in his sermon.99. that he made de t^mpore / in which sermon I find it
not. And lest there might have been some ouersyghte, either in him self or in
the prenter, by mysse writing or by mysse prentyng those fygurs of algorysme,
because the figure of.9. and the figure of.6. be all in manner one if they be
contrary turned: I assayed them therefore every way / and sought and red over
not

yes says Barns / for here ye may se lo, yt neither pope nor cardynall be no
more of this church than the poreste man in earth. why who said him ever nay
thereof? But what is that to the purpose? for as a poor man is as well of the
church as is the pope / so is a cordener as well an english man or a french
man, as is the king of either other cuntre. But yet like as reason will not
agree, that the cordener in his cuntre bear as myche rule as the king: so will
it not agree with reason, that every man in the church bear as much rule as the
pope / whom friar Barons does him self here in this same process of the
chirch knowledge and confess for Christ's vicar in the church.

The church does not stand in men by the reason of spyryt: all power or
secular dygnyte / for many princes and many popys and other inferior persons
have swarued fro the faith. wherefore that church does stan^e in th^se persons,
in whom is the true knowledge and confessy^n of faith and veryte.

These words of Lyre has Barns alleged to be written in his exposycyo^ upon
ye.xix. chapter of saint Matthew. But I have looked over Lyre upon all that
chapyter / and there find I no such saying. And therefore of lykelyhed Barns
plays here with Lyre, as he plays with saint Austayn in the place that he
alleged before / that is to wit alleges it in a wrong place, because he
would not have it found for fere of some thing that would appear upon

But upon these words of Lyre, he makes a great exclamacyon and cries out.
Oh my lords what wyl^ ye say to Lyr^ I have great marvel that you burn him
not. It is high time to condem^ne him for an heretyke. For he speaks against
your law. 24. Q^ua s^^n^ prima Quodcunque, where as your gloss declares that
god suffers not the Rome c^i^che to err / and Lyra says plain that many
popys have erre^, and also that the chirch stands not in dygnite but in
co^sessyo^ of Christ and o^ his bles^ed verite.

Barns would here seem lo to have founde^ a great thing in Lyre his word. But
in good faith I find nothing here in Barons own words but his own dowble
folly. First he says Lyre condempneth the law / and than he shows that he
speaks not against the law but against a gloss. Is not that word wisely
proved?

Then se yet how wisely he proves that Lyre reproves

Now where Lyra says that the church stands not in the dygnyte, but in the
confession of Christ and his blessed veryte: what says he other then all the
hole catholyke church agrees / not only the good folk but the noughty to as
many as any wit have to perceive the thing. Like as a city and a realm
stands not so much by the dygnytye

And yet to make yt the more uncertain and the more unsure / Barons brings
the church here in earth to that kind of goodness, that except such as be new
crystened or very young, and yet scante they either, which be not yet ye wot
well very mete to be made preachers: else saint Austayne whom Barons
brings for him, says plain against him, that there is in earth no such /
as I shall a none by his plain words prove you.

But first for the place of saint Austayne which of Barons bryngyng in I last
rehearsed you / ye se that saint Austayne says in them no more, but that the
church was not only the christian people present at his sermon, nor only
those christian people and were in that city, nor only those that

For lettynge other places of saint Austayne alone for the while / look but
upon this place only that we be in The holy church are we / but I do not say
we as one should say we that be here all only, but as many as be faithful
Christen men in this church etc. How think you good reders. Does saint
Austayne here mean by faithful Christian, no mo but only such as this
faythlesse friar assygneth / that is only those that are not only faithful
in the byleuynge the necessary points of the christian faith, but that were in
their soul also bysyde so thoroughly pure and clean, that they had not so
myche

But yet when I say we be the church: I mean not you and I only, as though
there were no mo of the church but my self and such other of you, as being at
my sermon be such holy men as I am / but also all such other as be so pure and
clean without spot or wryncle, as you and I be, where so ever they be, either
in this town or in this country, or else where in all this wide world.

Lo good reders / if saint Austayne meant as Barns makes, that in this word
faithful christian folk making the whole church, he meant not all christian
people that agree in professyon of faith with the whole corpse of crystendom, but
only such as besides the profession of the true faith, were also so holy,
pure, and clean, that they neither have spot nor wryncle: then were this tale
in effe^te as I have rehearsed you, that he called him self such a perfyte
holy man / which word I wene never man herd of his mouth.

For there is no christian man, but he may and must profess of him self, that
he byleueth right and has the true faith. But there be not I suppose many good
holy men, that will say of them self, that they be holy, pure, and clean, and
specially without spot or wryncle. And therefore yt appears

And therefore ye may se that in likewise does Barons mysse take the gloss that
he alleges dis. 24. A recta / which says that the church which can not err,
is ecclesia omniu^ fidelium, that is to say the church of all faithful folk.
which words friar Barons takes, as though the writer there by these word
(all faithful men) had meant no mo but all such as were not only true
byleuers, but also such as were so pure and clean that they neither had spot
nor wryncle. But the writer of that gloss meneth nothing so / but means as
saint Austayne meant in his words before neither have spotte nor wryncle of
sin.

Now where that the gloss says, there must needs be such a church so say I
to. For I say plainly that ye church must needs be. For all the deuylles in
hell, nor all their instruments upon earth, shall never be able to destroy yt,
but pull they never so many from yt, and leave they the remanau^t never so few:
yet shall the remanaunt always be the church, and a well known church, to
byelded upon that high mountain, that is to wit upon Christ, that yt shall
always be syghtely and can not be hid. For as our savior says: The city
that is set upon a mountain can not be hyd / meaning that his church should
be well seen, and his true faith well known / and not that his church in
which his faith should continue, and in which and of which yt should be
learned, should be such an unknown thing as they

Also the the other gloss that Barons brings forth, De pene dis. 2. Si, that
says, The whole church can not err: what makes that gloss for Barons? He
speaks against Barons. For Barons says that his own church which him
self assygneth, though she can not err while she cleueth to her spouse / yet
she may leave him and fall from him, and then err. And so this gloss that Barns
brings, says clear against him / how be yt no more then he seems to do him
self. For if yt be true that he says of his church that she may fall from god
and not hear her husband, and then

I can not therefore marvel enough of Barns in bryngyng forth these gloses for
him, that make so clear against him / and than to se him so boldly say
thereupon, These words be plain what church it is that can not err. As
though these gloses had said as he says, yt the church which ca^ not err is
only the unknown church of folk pure and clean without any spot or wryncle /
of which things neither another gloss speaks one word. And yet where Barns
says: These words of these gloses be plain: as plain as he makes them of
them self / yet has him self made a plain change of one word in the tone
of them, to make it seem the more plain errat and deficit. For a man may fail
and yet not err. As he that does auowtry and woteth well he does naught / he
fails and falls from god, and yet erreth he not in faith.

A man may also err and yet not fail nor fall away fro god / sith every
error is not dampnable, As a man might err and not fail nor fall fro god
thereby nor be dampened therefore / as Jacob did in wenyng that Lya had been
Rachell / or as his father Isaac did in wenynge that Jacob

But I say not this, for that I care much for his change But I mean that I
would not have him come forth and make such great bostes of the playnesse of
the words, wha^ he has him self made a change in them, to make them seem
the more plain for him / and when the words for all his plain change, make
yet so plain against him.

But verily me thinks that in one thing he uses no good honest fashyon, in
that he says first: This may be proved by our own law, whose words be
these: the whole church can not er^e. Also in an other place. The congregacyon
of faithful folk must needs be which also can not err.

All they that read these words of Barns in english, he makes th^^m wene
that the words which he reherseth for his purpose, were the words of the
very law it

His quotacyo^ is in the mergyn in this manner. De pene. dis. 2. Si in glossa.
For these words, The whole church can not err. And than for the the other
words, that is, The congregacyon of faithful men must needs be, which also
can not err / his quotacyo^ is in the mergent thus.24. que. 1. A recta et in
glossa. So that he would we sholl wene that at the least wise those words were
both in the text and in the gloss.

But now who so look upon these two lawys, shall soon se that the cause why he
did not, was because he durst not. For the law.24. que. 1. A recta, speaks
clear against him. For that law says no thing else, but that the very true
faith without error, has been ever preserved in the sea apostolyke / and as
the law calls it there, the mother of all chyrches the church of Rome. And
therefore this law ye se well was not for his purpose to bring in / but instead of the law he lays us forth a pache of the gloss.

Now the the other law de pene. dis. 2. Si / that law durst he not bring forth
for fere of angeryng his euangelycall brother Tyndale. For that law is the
words of holy saint Hierom / wherein he confuteth at great length, those
heretykes that than held the self same heresies that Tyndale

But as I said, this law durst not friar Barns bring in for fere of Tyndale,
which would for hurtynge of his heresies have founden him braulynge enough for
all his life after. But Barns will I warraunt you give him no such occasyon of
dyspleasure.

Now if Barons answer me, that he had no cause to bring in any of both those
laws, sith they made no thing for his purpose but the gloses only: I shall
tell him again,

And yet when he has handeled him self so falsely, and yet so folyshly
therwyth in the alledgynge of these laws, that if he had any spark of shame
left in his body, he might not well look any man in the face for fere that
these his false folyes were espied: it is now a world to se with what a courage
and boldness he bosteth and rejoices, and what a joy he makes, as he were
even made a king by the finding of a been in a chrystmas cake. For now he
calls his lords about him and says, Now my lords gather you

what ground or color of ground has he to reign so They have not the voice
of god with them / but they must needs err in all their counsayles, by cause
they say mandamus, mandamus, praecipimus, praecipimus, excommunicamus,
excommunicamus. For he says that these words be the voices of murderers and
theuys and not of Christ.

This fellow comes forth with a proud face upon all the world, when he would
by his pryncely authoryte more than an imperyall majesty, proclayme all men
for murderers and theuys, that dare be so bold as to use any of these words
mandamus, precipimus, or exco^municamus. These words I se not sent out by
murderers nor theuys, but by princes and rulers against murderers and theuys
and against all other vycyouse and mysse ruled persons, and among other
against ungracious heretykes, which is all this mannys gryefe.

And that these words of co^maundynge have been used by folk somewhat better
then theuys and murderers, may appear by the scripture it self. For the holy
eu^ngelyste

And thus friar Barns may se, that the words of commaundynge, be not always
the voice of murderers and theuys.

But all the great gryefe of this matter is in excommunicamus. For that word
would friar Barns have dampened. But yet must he consider that saint Poule him
self used either that same word or some other in the language that

Saint Poule also commanded the Corynthies, that they should excommunicate and
accurse out of their company, 1. (...). 5.
that incestuouse lecherour that had abused his own faders wife. For thus he
says in the first pystle to the Corynthies Trewly I being absent in body but
yet present in spyryt, have all ready determined as though I were present, of
him that has thus done, when you are gathered to gether and my spyryte in the
name of our lord Jesus Christ, in virtue of our lord Jesus, delyuere him to
the devil for the punyshement

God also did accurse and excommunycate Lucyfer and all his proud fellows out
of heaven. (...)
But because there neded no voice in that / therefore will friar Barons say
that there was none exco^municamus. But yet at the day of judgment, our
savior shall say to them that will do no good works, but wene by friar Barns
doctrine that only faith should save them / to them shall he say: Go ye cursed
wreches into everlasting fire, which is prepared for the devil and his
angelis. Here shall our savior him self use an excomunicamus / from which I
pray god for his mercy so mende friar Barons and me both, that we fall not in
it. For that is a sorer exco^municamus then any man

But surely good reders ye must pardon him. For yt apreth that the man was in a
sore fyt of a fury, when he fell in to this rage / the fumes whereof ascended so
hot up to his head, that he raued and wyste nere what he said. And in that
disease he can not tell how myche harm he does him self, with lettynge his
crown grow so. For his here keeps his head to hot. It were more need in
such a fyt of fury, for fete of bredynge some impostume in his brain, to poll
his head of every whyt, and let yt lie bare, and lay there to refrigerans
Galen^, tend yt well with oxirodanon.

Here ye se that in this hete he says all the counsayles ^ather all your
c^^^sayles to gether, and yet of them c^n ye not make holy church. But
peraduen^ure there may b^ many in your c^^^sayles good and perfyte men and of
holy church. But they and you to gether make us^ the v^yuersall holy church
that can not err. And in a another place Barns says, It can not help to say
that the counsayll can not err, because that Christ did pray for his church
that her faith should not fail. For I answer to (...), that though the
general counsel do represent the hole universal church, ^euerthelesse in
very deed there is not the very universal church but representative. ^or the
universal church stands in the eleccion

By these swords of his ye may good reders perceive two things. One that
there shall never general cou^sayll (be yt never so great and be yt never
full) have any full credence or any great authoryte with friar Barons, in any
thing that shall be there concluded, if any one man, ye or woman either, of all
the whole catholyque church though the church were now all the whole world,
were absent from the treating thereof.

Now this point ye wot well would sone be ^ased / no more but the counsel
house if yt be happily somewhat to little, let make yt in gods name so much the
larger. For



The the other point is, that ye may se by these wordis^ that if all the whole
church were at the counsel / then would friar Barons agree that yt could not
err / and so would he therefore give undoubted credence thereunto, and believe
that such a general counsel could not be damnably deceived in the
construccyon of scripture.

Now think I that though friar Barons will not believe any general counsel,
but if the whole church be there yet he looks not that in any counsel every
thing should stay, and nothing pass till all the whole assemble were agreed so
fully upon one side, that there were not so much

But these chau^ges that I speak of, I mean in things to be done and not in
trouthes to be byleued. For in diverse times, diverse things may be conuenyent
/ and diverse manners of doing. But in mate^s of bylyefe and faith, which be
trouehes reveled and declared by god unto man / though that in diverse times
there may be mo things farther and farther reveled, and other then were
desclosed at the first: yet can there never any thing be by god reveled after,
that can be contrary to any thing reveled by him self before.

And when god shall give me a another leysour after such other things done as I
have intended first: I purpose to make this point appear well and plain, by
the self same counsayles that friar Barns has brought in for the proof of the
contrary. And that shall I then make plain and open

But now because friar Barns says yt the cause why the counsayles may err, is
because they be not the whole catholyque church, but only by way of
representacyon / and says that the whole universal church stands in the
eleccyon of all faithful men / and that all faithful men of the world make
the universal church, whose head and spouse is Christ Jesus, and the pope
vycare under Christ, and confesses and says that this church can not err:
lettyng now pass therefore for the while that he seems before to say the
contrary, where he says of this same church, that by falling



and royled about like a lay man, raylynge against relygyon

Suppose me now that in this full general counsel of the whole universal
church assembled, this matter were proponed, and there the same friar Frappe and
Kytte Cate his mate, and those other that would allow them were brought forth
to be herd / being at that time but these persons that I have rehearsed you,
what they would say thereto. And thereupon Luther him self having the words
whereof he would never lack plenty (till fransye lack folly) would there not
only defend, but also boste his bestely marriage

what would the general counsel of the whole church have said unto that
friar, and what unto flekke his make, and what unto that deuely^h doctrine?
There would saint Gregory have used those words that he writes of Ananyas and
Saphyra, saying: Ananias vowed his money

And I dare boldly say that all that whole general counsel of all the whole
catholic church of all faithful folk with all the secret unfaithful folk
y^ than were lurkynge in it, ^^d all the faythlesse heretykes that were at that
time gone from it or accursed out of it, except the friar and his nonne and
his few folysshe adherentes / would with one

And I am sure that so would it have been, if any man durst there have holden
any one of many other heresies, that these fellows hold now.

Than what might Luther and Barns have said to that general counsel. For
that were the counsel that could ^ot err. For there were the whole
catholyke church in which number we^e both the church of all elect
repentaunt sinners that Tyndale deuyseth, and the church of all faithful
people that Bar^s deuyseth / saving for lack of all spots and wryncles, for
that la^keth no man in this world. How be it if there were at that time any
such as

How if friar Barns, and friar Luther, and wyllyam Tindale, would than have
said that the very church did not condemn them / for the very church was
not that great multitude that there condemned them of heresye / but the very
church was them self that there were condemned and persecuted for the truth,
and such other good faithful folk as were unknown among that company, and
secretly agreed with them in faith, that no vow of chastyte should let them,
but that freres and nonnes might lawfully wedde when they list: To this would
saint Gregory sone have answered and said syrs they yt are ye good faithful
folk that ye speak of / which only folk for faith and goodness

To this must it needs have comen ye se well good readers, there were none
other remedy. And wha^ it were onys comen unto that / than were it no dowte but
that Luther, Barns, and Tyndale, would not have let to say / Mary we with
Luthers wife ^he nonne be the whole church. For we have the right faith, and
ye be all in the wrong. For we have the scrypturs for us / by which we will
prove the vow of

Saint Gregory would have lacked none answer to this / but would have said:
when all we think that ye understand the scripture wrong / and not only we,
but all learned men before us hitherto: why should we believe that you few se
ferther in the scrypturre than all they to whom it belongs as well as to you
few, and which have studied it as well as you, and have had both as much
wit as you and also ^yche more grace than you, as appears well by the
wrytynges of holy doctors and say^tes that cons^rewed the scripture against
your heresies before all our days.




Barns. They that ^e in Judea, let them fle up in to the mountains / that is
to say, they that be in chrystendome, let them give them self to
scryptures. ^herfore commands he that all chrystened men in that time,
should fly unto scrypturs. For in that time in the which heresies ^a^e
optayned in to the church / there can be no true probacyon of chrystendome,
nor no another refuge unto christen men, willing to know the ^eryte of faith,
but the scrypturs of god. Af^re by many ways was it s^^we^ which was the
church of Christ, and which was the congregacyon of gentyles. But now



Also saint Paul witnesses the same saying / you are bylte upon the
fo^^dacyon of the apos^les and prophets / here have you plainly that the very
true church is grounded ye and ^ounded of holy scripture / and therefore where
so ever that the word of god is preched / that is a good token that there be
some men of Christ's church. But now as to the fruits and works of this
church, she does alonely fetch out her manner of living / and all her good
works out of the holy word of god / and she fayneth not no^ dremeth any other
new holiness or ne^e in^ented works that be not in scripture, ^ut she is
^^^^^nt with Christ's learning,

Now my lords compare your self to this rule of saint Austryne / and let us
se how you can ^rynge your self into the church? or^^es to prove yourself to
be holy? The church s^f^erth persecucyons (for as saint Paul says / they
that will live devoutly in Christ must suffer persecucyon) and you wythstande
all things and suffer nothing / you oppress every man, and you will be
oppressed


More. If friar Barns had alleged all this in that general 2. Th^s. 2.
where he byddeth the Thessalonyans keep the tradycyons which ye have learned,
^yther by preaching or by our pystle. And in many places edyfyed he myche
people, where we find not that he gave them any writing at all. And the
Ephesians them self to whom

And saint Gregory would peradventure have meruayled, if saint Poule would
have said as friar Barons bears us in hand he said, that crystendome were
only byelded upon the apostles and prophets / for yt is most specially
byelded upon our sauyoure him self, and so might saint Poule in those
words very well and properly mean saying / ye be byelded upon the foundacyon
of the apostles and prophets / that is to say, ye be byelded Eph^s^. 2.
will well agree with his other words written unto the Corynthia^s, ^
where he says, no man can lay any other foundacyon then that that is all
ready laid, that is to wit Jesus Christ him selfe^ where as fr^re Barons so
takes saint Poules words there unto the Ephesya^s / as though saint Poule
had said unto them, The foundacyon that ye be byelded upon, is the writing
that the prophets and

And also if he meant but so / then took he away the authoryte from all the
scripture beside / except only the writing of the apostles and prophets, and
from all that him self told them bysyde by mouth.

But yet if friar Barons would there have said unto saint Gregory all those
words with which in his book here he rayleth on by and by against the
things used in the known catholyque church, belles, books, candelles,
vestymentes,

But then would saint Gregorye have said farther to friar Barons and to friar
Luther to / that sith they were so precyse, that they would have no works
wrought, but only Psalm. ^5.
De^tero. 23
and both broken their holy sacred vowis / and stubernly defend that work
which they find so fully condemned and abhorred in scripture. Ecc^esiaste. 5^


To the words of saint Chrysostom saint Gregorye would I trow have answered
friar Barns / that they were none of his. For yt is well perceived and known
that the work which is called Opus imperfectum, the unperfayt work upon the
gospel of saint Matthew, which was first by the error and ouersyght of some
writers intyteled unto saint Chrysostom, and the same title so suffered sins
to stand / was never his work in deed, nor never translated

And therefore that man albe it he was as it seems in the time when that
heresye of the Arrians was almost overwhelmed, and therefore durst not
plainly speak myche of it / yet could he not hold but somewhat show him self
in that work in his.xix. sermon that he writes upon these words, Attendite a
falsis prophetis, wherein he not only laboreth sore to mynyshe as much as he
may the credence of the catholyke church both concerning ye vertuose works
which were used therein, and the miracles which were daily done therein, which
two things he perceived to stand sore in his light for the knowledge of ye
catholic church / but also inueheth against

And yet if friar Barns would have styc^en still as styffely for y^ wurke, as he
does against the pystle of saint Iamys / and would needs have it taken for
saint Chrysostoms: than would saint Gregory have told him that the words which
him self brings out of ye work, be plain against friar Barns him self. For
well ye wot that friar Barns techeth that the very catholyke church is in
this world a church ever unknown. And he that wrote the words which Barons

More over these words of saint Chrysostom if they were his do confess that
the very church was onys known / and therefore would saint Gregory tell friar
Barns, yt they

Forthermore where in those words saint Chrysostom if those words and that
work were his says that to know which is ye church we must fly to the
scripture, saint Gregory would tell friar Barns that sith saint Chrysostom
sends us to the scripture to know thereby which of all those diverse chyrches /
being to gyther all at one time / is ye very chirch / he meneth y^ by the
scripture ye same church may be known: whereof it follows again against
friar Barns that the self same words by which he would prove us that the
church can not be known, do plainly confound friar Barns / and say that the
church may be known.

And saint Gregory could I wot well have given him

Also saint Gregory would have told friar Barns, that when saint Chrysostom
(if those words were his) does send us to seek the church by the scripture,
he thought it necessary that the church were founden. For else he might have
sent them only to the scripture, to learn the true faith and good living
every man by him self, and leave the church unsought. But it appears synnys
he sends them to seek it there / he means not only that they there may
find the means to find it and know it, as I said

Now if these folk would yet have stycked still, and say the decre of that
counsel made against them was naught, for they them self only be the very
true church of Christ: than would saint Gregory have said at last: why syrs
how can that be? For ye wot well that of known chyrches there was never none
that durst profess them self for the very church, but ever they found
them self so far in

And ferthermore, sith they were than proved to be not the very church after
their own doctrine, because they were than made open / sith of troth they
being open or secret, is not the thing that makes it the true church, nor
is the substance of the matter but an accydent thereunto / it appears plain
that they which by being made open, be proved after their doctrine not to be
the true church, were always a false church before they were made open.

But now suppose me farther that forthwyth after this / some man would among
them say unto saint Gregorye and to that whole assemble, that they were comen
thither to gether from all parts of the world, with their meruaylouse labor
and their importable pain / and that now repsent y^ whole people, and should
have the self same authoryte full and whole, in all laws after to be made,
and all doutes of scripture or Ioh^^. 16. and A^^. 2.
but that Christ which promised and performed the sendynge of his own holy
spyryte unto his church, to teach yt and led yt into every troth, and that
he would never leave them comfortelesse, nor like children faderlesse, I^ha^^. 14
but would him self be Ma^t^. 23. Matt^. 1^.
so far forth that where so ever were so much as two or three of that church
not scatered out thereof as saint Cypryan^ says, but being in yt and of yt
gathered to gether in his name, he was and would be him self in the very
mids among them, would fail to assyste them with his holy spy^yt when they
were assembled so many in such manner, where as either their deed and
declaracyon must needs stand and be ^erme, or else all run at rouers and
nothing be certain or sure: I doubt nothing but that is this had be thus
proponed, yt would have been there in that full counsel agreed and ordered and
decreed, that the general cou^sayles should be after, not of the whole number
of all christian people, but of some such conuenyent number as conuenyetly
might assemble / and the same though yt were not the whole catholyke church in
deed, but as friar Barns says only representatyue,

And thus ye se now that both in Luthers heresies and Tyndales to and Barns
also, touching the weddyng of freres and nonnes, and the authoryte of general
counsaylys, and the pro^e of the known catholyke church, and the reprofe of
their catholyke church unknown / I have even with this one example of all the
whole chysten people assembled at a general counsel, plainly confuted them
all.

But now if friar Barns will here say, that with all this ymagynacyon of such
an whole assemble at a general counsel I can nothing prove, because yt is
but an imagynacyon

who so consider well this argument of his, and many such other like made by
many right excellent wise and well learned men / shall either esteem them all
for folys / or else confess that upon friar Barons reason, grounded upon
the dyfference between the whole catholyke church in deed,

Now has friar Barons therefore none other shyft that I can se, but to say that
in that general counsel which I have put and supposed in saint Gregoryes
days, the heresies that I have spoken of, of Luther, Tyndale, and him self,
would not have been condemned, but rather approved and allowed for good things
and true / nor that general counsel then being such as I have put, wold^
never have ordained that there should be any general counsel after of any
fewer then all the whole christen people / or if there should, yet would they
not have d^termyned that ever any such general counsel gathered of any
fewer then all to gether, should have the same authoryte or cr^de^ce

If friar Barons or any of all his fellows be so bold as to tell us this / then
may they boldly bear us in hand what so ever they will in this world. For
this may every man well wit, that they would determine when they were comen to
gether, as they all knew to be good and true while they were a sundre. But then
are we very sure, whereof I think neither Barns nor, Tyndale nor Luther
neither, can for sham say the contrary / but y^ until within this twenty year
passed last, all the world good and badde, christian and hethen, wol^ have had
in abomynacyon that any man vowynge chastyte should have wedded a nun when he
list, and upon his own sensual frantyque fantesy, break his promise made
unto god, And therefore I dare be bold / and as I trust with the consent and
agreement of every good ma^nys conscience, to afferme in this matter a great
deal farther

And also that the dew assemble of certain parts representynge the whole
body, should have the full authoryte of the whole body / is a thing by the
comen assent and experyence

And well ye wot that in the first counsel that the apostles kept at
Jerusalem, they called not all the whole congregacyon of christian people to yt,
and yet all christian people obayed yt.

And where friar Barons says that the general counsayles

And where he says that men must examine the general counsayles by the
scripture, ^o se whyther they do w^ll or wrong. I say that the counsel in
the making so must do, and so do in deed, and that the spyryte of god guydeth
them therein and ledeth the^ into all necessary troth of faith. And that when
they have done their determinacyon, is not

Now shall I ferther say, that what so ever all christen people would
determyne if they came to one assembly together / look what strength it should
have if they so did, the same strength has it if they be all of ye same mind,
though they make no decre thereof, nor come not together therefore. For when all
christen people be by the same spyryte of god brought into a full agreement and
consent, that the vow of chastyte may not be by his pleasure that made it
broken and set at naught, but that who so does break it co^mytteth an horrible
sin / and that who so holds the contrary of this is an heretyke: than is
that bylyefe as sure a troth

And when this is a truth onys so reveled by god for a perpetual necessary
treuth, and the contrary thereof for a peryllouse perpetual falsshed, and the
textys of holy scripture touching that point by the holy men so taken and
taught, and through chrystendome with all men so byleued / than what time so
ever two or three begin upon their own heddys to vary from all the remanaunt,
and against all the remanaunt do s^yffely hold the contrary, they hold a
plain false heresye, and after that as many as fall to their opinion and take
their part, be in the like perell and in like da^pnable heresy, wax their
number never so great. For ever shall they leave the true known church byhynde
/ which

And thus ye se plainly that friar Barons has utterly di^ ecclesi^ / by which
our savior commands that who so find him self offended, except the party
by whom he is offended will amend by his own secret monicyon or else at his
aduertysement given him before witnesses one or two, he shall complain upon
him to the church, and the church shall order him / and than if he will not
obaye the church, he shall be taken as a publycane or a very paynym. This
place friar Barns brings forth and soyleth in this fasshyon.


Barons. But now will there be objected that our master Christ commands if
my brother offend me that I should complain to the church, now is this
church that I have set out spyrytuall, and no man knows her but god only
/ she is also scatered thor^wout the world / wherefore how can a man complayn to
that church? I answer our master Christ does plainly speak of a man that
has wrong the which must needs be a partyculare and a certain man. And
therefore like wise he byddeth him compain not to the universal church but to
the pertyculare chirch, now this particular chirch if she be of god and a true
member of the universal chirch she will judge ryghteousely after Christ's word
and after the probacio^s brought before her / nevertheless ofte^tymes comes it
that this partycular church does fully and holy err and judges unright and
exco^municateth him that is blessed of god, as it is open in our own law
whose words be these. Often ten times he that is cast cut is within, and he
that is without is keep within etc Here have ye plainly that the partycular
church may err / wherefore that


More. Here says friar Barns.iiii. things in this answer The first is that
Christ does there plainly speak of a man that has wrong. The second that
because he that has wrong must needs be a pertycular and a certain man,
therefore god byddeth him in like wise go complain not to the universal
church but to the partyculare church.

Now as touching the first point / friar Barons here says that Christ spoke
there of him that has wrong done to him sylfe, as though Christ meant of no
mo, but would only send him that had wrong to complain to the church for
his recompense. But me thinks surely that if Barons take it thus, he takes
it wrong. For I say yt though Christ does not so forbid the man that is
wronged to complain, that it were always dedely sin for him to complain:
yet he rather counsayleth him to bear that wrong 1. Corinthians. 12.
If one member takes hurt all the members Matthew. 13.
If he here the, than haste thou won again thy brother, he says not, than
haste thou gotten again thy good.

Now friar Barns in one of the artycles whych^ was laid against him at his
abiuracyon, had preched such words, that the thing which he says here
that Christ plainly meant / he seems there to take for dedely sin not in him
only that seweth when he is wro^ged / but over that All these ^^^es, and all
these lawyers, and all these iusticiarys that say a man may lawfully asks his
own good ^fore a judge, and co^tende in judgment have destroyed all pacyence,
devotion, and faith in christen people.

Surely if Barns words were true than do all these folk an high dedely
sin, and such a sin as there can of none other come any more hurt I trow.
But I am sure his article as him self reherseth it will never be defended with
all that ever he brings for it, nor all yt ever he may bring forth bysyde.
But lettyng the remanaunt pass till some other time / him self there
reherseth among other I answer that this place made not for s^wynge at the
law alledgyng saint A^ stayne f^r me, for it speaks of the crimes that should
be reproved by the congregacyon and not of the correccyon of the temporal
sword. For it follows if he here not the church take him as an hethen or a
publycane. This is the vtterm^st pain that our master Christ assygneth there,
the which is no pain of the temporal law.

Now good reders consider well that answer that him self says he there made
unto master wulman concerning those words of the gospel, If thy brother
offend the complain unto the church / and than consider therwyth this
exposycyon of his, with which he would gloss the same words

First it is not unknown that friar Barons has in mo places than one declared
his opinion plainly ^y which he would that the church as he meneth here
while he makes a dysticcyon between it and the temporal court, should have no
iurysdyccyon at all. And now h^ is content that they must have a court for the
reprouynge of certain crymys except he be so mad as to mean here that the
party wronged should no thing else but make some wonderyng upon his adversary
in the market place without any court or judge,

Now in this his exposycyon here / he restrayneth it only to the complaynt of
him that is wronged / and so will that

Also what crimes be there wherewyth a man may be wronged, that the church of
god does not reprove.

More over if Christ here speak specially of him that is wronged, and specially
byddeth him go complain to the church / he seems to send him for the
redress and recompense of his wrongs.

And therefore when all his whole tale of his exposycyon Matthew. 1^.
that the sentence of th^rche in earth shall be confermed in heaven.

And therefore what so ever Barons say / if any man sew a another upon any gredy
couetyce of worldely goods, though yt be the getynge again of his own / or
of any anger, or other corrupt effeccyon, whether he sew in spyrituall court
o^ temporal / in his own matter, or any mannys else, he does offend god and
sin more or less after the qualytes and cyrcumstaunces of his own mind /
and of the time, and the place, and the matter. And who so ever on the the other
side complayn and sew of good mind and effeccion 1. Corinthians. 6
And therefore friar Barns in his answer made to master wulman Ne suitor vltra
crepidam, had no very proper place / as though master doctor wulman being
doctor of the law, might no more meddle in that matter and questyon of sewyng at
the law, then a cordener might in making of a hose. was yt not well resembled?
And where he writes of master wulma^ these words: It is not yet and hundred
year a go, sins that same master doctor was butler in in the same house,
whereof I was master and pryour: when one of late told master wolman of
those words, he said if yt so were as Barns wrote, yet had there ben with in
ye same hundred year as great chau^ges as that, and not fully

But now to our purpose, if friar Barns restrain those words of Cry^te: If
thy brother offend the and will not amend, neither at thy secret warning
nor at thy warning with on^ or two wytnessys, then finally complayn unto the
church: if he restrain them thus as he seems here to do, to such folk
only as have wrongs done unto them self: he does expowne the place plain
wrong, both for the causes before remembered, and also for that it appears by
the text that Christ byddeth him at the second

Now when Christ would, he should take unto him as few as he might, because he
should not utter his brothers fault unto any one mo then very need should
require: if Christ had spoken those wordis unto none other but only him that
were wronged him self, he would never have said / take unto the one witness
or twain, but take unto the twain always at the least. For else taking to him
but one, there should have lakked half the proof. For he that did the wrong /
would not witness against him self, and



The second point is ye wot well, that because he that has wrong must
needs be a partyculare and a certain man / therefore god byddeth him in like
wise go and complain not unto the universal church, but to the partyculare
church.

By this yt appears, that Barns means yt he that is not wronged, is not sent
to the partyculare church. Let us now suppose that a man would in a corner go
teach a another man heresy, and labor to make him byle^e that neither

The third point is very subtle / and a thing that if friar Barons had not
said yt, I would never have thought yt possible / that is that the partyculare
church, if she be of god and a true member of the universal church that
Barons assygneth, yt is to wit of only men pure and clean with out spot or
wryncle of sin / she will judge ryghtuousely after the word of god, and
after the probacyons brought

The fourth point is, that this partyculare church may all wholly err.

This is lo so little marvel, and over that so little to the purpose, that I
will grant yt friar Barons freely, and a great deal more to. For I will
gra^^te him also the thing that him self says nay to, and yet is yt true /
that is to wit that so may the whole universal church do to, in such wise as
the law means by which Barons proves that the partyculare church may err.
And I speak her of his own universal church of all holy ve^^uouse men, clean
without spot or wryncle, if they were all suddenly known by reuelacyon, and
were as many of them as ever was a^

And therefore ye may se good reders where about Barns goth, when he puts you
here a dyfference between the partycular church and the universal church, in
that the tone may err and the the other can not / and than brings us in those
laws for the proof, which laws do speak of that kind of error, in which
kind of error they may err partycular and universal both.

ye may plainly perceive here y^ Barns does but tryfle

But I ask friar Barns whyther Christ did there bid the man so offended
complain to an unknown partycular church or to any other particular church
than unto such a partycular church as were a part of the whole known
catholyke church? let friar Barns answer this. Christ neither bode him seek
an unknown church, nor an unknown part of a church, nor a known part of
an unknown church / but bode him well and plainly go complain to the church
/ as a thing that was ethe to perceive without any sophysme or sotletye / for
every man might well know that he might another complain to a church
unknown, nor to all the whole church at onys. But because Christ would provide
that all the hole church should have one faith and one truth of doctrine in
rulys of living and necessary understanding of the scripture concerning all
such points / therefore our savior bode him go

And than if Crystes partycular chyrches to which he sends the man to
compain that is offended by false doctrine be chyrches known / tha^ it
follows that Crystes hole church whereof all the known particular chyrches of
Christ be known parts, is and must needs be a known church to / bu^ if Barns
be so mad as to say that of an hole tree growing together all the pecys of it
as it stands may be seen and known / but the hole tree stands it self
inuysyble for all that and can in no wise be known.

And thus good christen reders it is more tha^ shame to se how Barns answers
those words of Cry^^^, which plainly prove the very church of Christ to be
a known church. In avoiding whereof Barns tryfle^^ in such

yet says Barns that this known catholyke church can not be the very church
because it is not persecuted. For the very church (says Barns) inuenteth none
other way to heaven but follows Christ only / in sufferynge oppressyons and
persecucyo^s, blasphemynges, and all other things that may be laid unto her /
which as saint Austayne says she learned of our master Christ. Our holy
mother the church through out all the world scatered far and long, in her
true hedde Christ Jesus taught / has learned not to fere the contumelys of the
cross nor yet of death, but more and

These words every man sees well touch not the clergy only, and yet makes
Barns as he meant no mo but them / but he meneth that him self and his holy
fellows be the church because they be run away for fere of persecucyon. But
saint Austayne says not that the church is strengthed in sufferynge of
persecucyon for holding falls heresies, for techynge that men be not bounden to
fast the lent / but may eat flesh on good frydaye / and that the people
be no more bounden to come to gods service on whytsondaye than upon shroue
tuysdaye / on which day though they be boundeu to leave undone some things
that many men use to do / yet are they not so specially bounden to spend y^
day in the dyuyne seruyse as they be the the other

And as for persecucyon to be ^uffered by the catholyke church, it suffyseth
that men be of the mind gladly to suffer when necessyte of sufferau^ce shall
happen by paynyms and infydel^s / and not that they ceace to be Crystes
church, but if they suffer heretykes arise and remain among them self,
fy^ste with false doctrine to contend and inquyete them / and after with
rebellyon to beat, rob, spoil, kill them. For saint Poule says, Put away
the evil man from

And yet beside all this the church does in deed abide and endure the
shameful contumelyes of these wreched heretykes / nor is not ashamed of the
contumelyes of the cross / though these blasphemouse wreches rail against ye
cross and call it idolatrye to crepe and kylle the cross / and in some place
forbere not to cast the very fylthy mire upon the cross.

And yet ferther in some parts of Almayne this known church of Christ has
many times suffered and yet suffers no little persecucyon and very martyrdom
/ both in their goods and lands and their bodies to.

But yet says Barns that this known church can in no wise be the very
church of Christ / because it persecuteth heretykes / and for the proof thereof
he alleges the words of saint Hylary written against the Arryans, which are
these


Barons. The church does threten with banyshementes and presonmentes, and she
compels men to believe her which was exiled and cast in preson, now
hangs she on the dyghyte of her felowshyppe the which was consecrated by the
thretenynges of persecuters, she causes prestes to fly that was encreaced

How think you my lords? do not you all these things that be laid to the
Arryans charge / your own friends, ye your own conscience must needs accuse
you of all these things and yet will y^u be called Christ's children / I say
nothing to you but that holy doctors lay unto you.


More who so consider well saint Hylaryes words shall find therein the sorest
thing y^ lyghtely could have been brought forth against friar Barons. For in
these words appears that the catholyke church did never persecute heretykes
by any temporal pain or any secular power until the heretykes began such
vyolence them self. For yet in saint Hylaryes days the true catholyke
church did it not.

But afterward when that sect was by the goodness of god abated and the right
faith well and fully restored, and concord, rest, and quyete, grown among
christen people, and that yet again after that some heretics began which
in their wanton wealth they hated / for vexacyon (...). 1.
Matthew. 1^.
for which he bode his apostles fere him, that might not only kill ye body,
but cast also the soul into hell.

S. A^stayne
Saint Austayne in this point declares his mind plainly concerning the
repressynge of heretyques by temporal punisheme^t, both by his pystles
adressed unto such noble seculare men as he required thereto / and also by his
wrytynges wherein he plainly declares unto the heretyques the^ selfs, the
causes wherefore yt is well done: which save for the length I would here set you
in.

But saint Austayne was not in this mind alone, but so was saint Hierome and
many other holy men also. And unto the same have by the spyryte of god, for the
weal of

But yet lays Barns a another reason, to prove that the very church of Christ
can not be a known church in no wise. For he says that we believe the very
church of Christ by faith, and yt is an article of our faith / and therefore yt
is no known church, nor can be no known church. But that yt must needs be
a church unknown of only holy people, pure and clean without spotte or
wryncle / and that the very church must needs be such an holy company so


Barns. Mark saint Paul's words. Crist has given him self for her, that he
might make her gloryouse. So that the clennesse of this holy church is the
mercy o^ god toward her through Christ, for whose sake he lays nothing to
her charge. Ye and if any other person would, he is ready to give her his
clennesse, and to let her by faith claim of right his pureness for her own
/ for betweyne them all is comen as betweyne man and wife. So that if the
church look on her own merytes of her own works, she is full of sin, and
must needs say, Dimitte mihi debita, the which she neded not to say if she
had none. But if she refer her self unto the merytes of her blessed
husband Christ Jesus, and to the clennesse that she has in his blood / then
is she without spot. ^or by the reason that she stycketh by faith so fast unto
her


More. I have good reders somewhat touched the words before. But now ye se that
he says that this church has always sin in her, and so always spots and
wryncles. But yet because she stykketh fast unto her husband Christ in
faith, and abides in confession of her sin, and requires mercy for them /
therefore is there nothing laid unto her charge, but all that thing is
forgeuen her, and that therefore she has neither spot no wryncle left in her.
And this he proves as ye se by saint Paul saying, There is no

I have said unto Barns before and yet I say again, yt though Crist has as
saint Paul says unto the Ephesies, given him self for ^er, that he might make
her gloryouse: yet meant not saint ^oule that every man for whom Criste has
given him self to make him gloryouse, shall in deed be gloryouse: for some
will forwardely refuse to be made gloryouse. And that company yt shall be
gloryouse, shall yet not be gloryouse here in this world / but shall be here in
this world gracious, that they may in a another world be gloryouse. And yet
not at every time gracious in this world neither / but some time fall
frowardely or neglyge^tly from grace, and so stand long in such ungracious
state / and yet through gods calling on them, turn again wyllyngly

But Barons to make men wene that only faith were

But saint Poule to reprove Barons false doctrine, says not as he reherseth
him, that there is no damnacyon to them that are in Christ Jesus / but he says
there is no da^nacyon to them that are in Christ Jesus, that walk not after the
flesh / declarynge plainly that though they be in Christ Jesus, after such a
manner of being in him as Barons

But now is it a world to se how he laboreth to carry the reder away from the
perceiving thereof. And yet has god made Barns him self so blind, that ye more
blind he goth about to make the reder, the more he stumbleth unware upon the
troth, and takes it up and brings it so forth, and also shows it to his
own shame, the most folysshely that I never saw the like in all my life. For
lo these are his words forth with upon the the other.


Barns. And that this may be the playner, I will bring you saint Austayns
words, the which was vexed of the Donatystes with this same reason that is
laid against me. His words be these. The whole chirch says forgive us our
sins / wherefore she has spots and wryncles. But by knowledgynge, her
spots are weshed away. The church abides in prayour, that she might be
cleansed by knowledgynge of her sins. As long as we live here, so stands it
/ and when we shall depart out of this body, all such things be forgyuen to
every man. wherefore by this mean, the church of god is in the treasurers of
god without spotte and wryncles / and therefore here do we not live without
sin, but we shall ^asse from hence without sin. etc.


More. Now good christen readers, here have you herd friar Barns say that he
would rehearse you saint Austayns words, to thentent that he would make you the
matter the more plain for his purpose. But of troth he has played in

The whole church lo says, Forgive us out sins / August. de ve^bis (...)
se^m. 29.
but by confession of them the wryncle is streched out, and by confession the
spotte is wyshed out. The church co^tynueth in prayour to be cleansed through
confession / and as long as we here live so she contynueth still, and every
man when he departs out of his body, is forgeuen of his synnys / every man. I
say of such manner of synnys as he than had that were venyall. For they be
forgyuen also by daily prayours / and he departs hense cleansed, and the
church is laid up pure gold in to the treasurers of our lord. And by this
mean the church is in the treasures of our lord without spot and wryncle.
And than if the place where she is without spot or wryncle be there / what
thing shall we pray for while we be here? That we may obtain perdon of our
synnys. what good

Mark lo how the church is made without spotte or wryncle. She is streched
out in the strecher or tenter hokys of the cross, as a church well wesshed and
cleansed. Now here may ever this thing be in doing. But our lord does
exhybyte and present unto him self, a gloryouse church with

Now good christen readers ye shall first understand, yt where as friar Barns
makes as though saint Austayn had spoken those words against the Donatystys,
which vexed (says he) saint Austayne with the same reason that is now laid
against him: he makes us two lies at onys. For neither did the Donatystes vex
saint Austayn with that reason that is laid against him, nor saint Austayne
made not that sermon against them. First as for them, they vexed saint Austayn
with this heresy, that they affermed y^ very church to be only in Affryque /
and none to be of the

Now if Barns will say, that though it be not the same /

And over that when so ever the same contreys that are vnchrystened now, shall
here after as I trust onys they shall, bycome chrystened again, and be
byleuers of the common catholyke faith, and so become members of the common
known catholyke church / than say we that there shall

yet if friar Barns will say that it is like, in that that like as those
heretykes were called Donatystes, so these heretykes call the catholyke
christen people papystes: yet can it not be like for that. For saint Austayn
called the successoure of saint Peter the chyefe head in earth of the hole
catholyke church, as well as any man does now. And also friar Barns can not
allege that point against us. For him self ye wot well confesses that the
pope is the vicare of Christ here upon earth.

Finally the questyon that is between friar Barns and us, is not the same that
was between the Donatystes and saint Austayn. For between Barns and us, the
questyon is whyther the very church be a known church of christen people good
and badde both, or an unknown church of only good holy virtuous people,
pure and clean without either spot or wryncle. And in this point were both
saint Austayne and the Donatystys agreed, that the very church was a church
known.

And thus good reders ye may se that friar Barns says untrue in this point,
where he says that saint Austayn was vexed by the Donatystes, with the self
same reason that him self is now vexed with us. But this he fayneth,

But now to prove you that friar Barns makes us a ly in that point, ye shall
understand good reders, that saint Austayne spoke those words not against the
Donatistes, but against other sects of heretyques called the Pelagyanys

And to prove you farther, that friar Barns makes you therein not only a lie,
but also a very folyshe lie / ye shall se him conuycted in this point, by the
very words of saint Austayne him self in the self same sermon. For in all
that whole sermon is there not only no word spoken of Donatystes / but that
also he declares him self by plain and open words, to speak those words
against Pelagyans and the Celestyans, as I said before. For lo in the very
words next before those, with which friar Barns begins / saint Austayne
says thus: Vbi es tu heretice Pelograne uel C^^^^stiane, where art thou
heretyque pelagyane or celestyane?

And thus ye se clearly, that saint Austayne wrote not those words against
the Donatistes as Barons belyeth

But now ye will peradventure marvel, for what intent friar Barons has made
this false folyshe chaung, in which he may be so plainly reproved. ye shall
understand good readers, that he did yt not for naught, but of a great
wylynesse with a very little wit. For ye shall understand that those two
sects, between them brough up and h^^o the same heresye that Barons brings
forth now / that is to say that the church in this world is a company of only
good folk, and so good that none of them have either spot or wryncle of sin.
First Pelagyans said, that every man might by his only natural strength
make him self such one if he will. And then Celestius added unto yt,

For where as those heretykes said, that the very church had none in yt but
such as were so clean and so pure that they neither had spot nor wryncle /
saint Austayne says as ye have herd, that not only the mean sort of the
very church, but also all the whole church no number thereof except, no not the
very best, prays in the Pater noster god, to forgive them their sins. And
therefore says he that those heretyques lie, that say the whole very church
here in earth has none thereof, but only such as have neither spot nor
wryncle of sin.

And then goes saint Austayne farther and says that such as be in the
church, and therefore live not wyhoute sin, get forgeuenes by knoweledgynge
of their sin, and asking mercy, and by prayour, and with faith and
co^trycyon

And yet he says for all this, that no man lives here so clean, but that as
long as he lives here, he so spotteth him self again, and so caccheth ever
some wryncles, that he lives never without, nor long can not, not for
necessyte of our nature peradventure, but through our wylfull fraylty and
negligence. And then shows he farther yet, that in

For saint Austayn says here as ye have herd, that they which have such
sins as at the time of death should be remytted / that is to say that has not
then such as be at his dyenge dedely both for their own nature and for lack
of true repentance, with purpose of amendeme^t and well vsyng of the
sacraments, shall be fully forgeuen / that is to wit if he have for attaynynge
thereof, used him self suf^ycyently in such wise as saint Austayne here
declares / that is

But saint Austayne means not, that eue^y man that is of the very church,
nor that every man that dies out of dedely sin, and knowledgeth his sin
when he dies, and asks mercy, shall be forthwyth so fully forgeuen, that he
shall go hense so clean and so pure without spotte or wryncle, that h^ shall be
by and by laid up for pure gold in the treasours of god / but if he long
before with such other cyrcumstaunces as I have before of saint Austaynes own
words rehearsed you, well and dewly ben accustumed long

And that saint Austayne means here none otherwise then I do declare him: ye
may well perceive if ye well advise his words which I have truly translated.
And yet because ye shall the less doubt thereof / saint Austayn shall him self
declare y^ I truly declare you this place, by his own very plain words in a
another place. For in y^.xxxii. sermon of the words of y^ apostle, Augustinus
de verbis Apost sermon. 32
lo thus he says. No man ought to doubt, but that with prayours of the church
and with the

And therefore every man when he ends this life, can no thing receive, but
that only which he has deserved being here a live.

And in another place he says thus. what thing so ever of venyall synnys is
not redeemed of us / it must be purged with that fire, August. sermon. 41^ de
ai^a^us de^u^ ^^^rum.
of which the apostle says, that the work shall appear by the fire / and if
any man's wurke burn, he shall suffer the loss. For either while we live in
this world, we labor our self with penance / or else truly we with very
humylyte confess that we suffer less punishment

Lo good christen reders ye may clearly se by saint Austayns Iac^bi. 5.
Orate pro inuicem vt sal^emini.

Saint Austayne affermeth here also, that the blessed body and blood of
Christ in the mass, is a sacryfyce and an oblacyon to god against Luther and
all his adherentes.

Finally he techth us here, that the tradycyon of the fathers, and the comune
obseruaunce and custume of the catholyke church, is for the certyfycacyon of a
troth a sure undoubted authoryte.

Now good christen reders, if ye like to take so myche

For Barns has as ye may se, taken pecys of saint Austayne, and pached them
to gyther with a word or twain of his own, some where between as though the
words lay so to gyther in the text as he reherseth them / where as he leueth
out by the way the very chyefe point of all, by which saint Austayne
excepteth them from forgyuenesse at their death that than have ded^ly sin /
that is to say them yt do dye therein. And Barns leueth of before he come to
the point, le^t we should se that they which be forgyuen

Also where as saint Austayne having his whole words well understood, says
no more but that every such man of the church as dies out of dedely sin,
and with help of god in the virtue of Crystes passion, by faithful prayour
cont^ycyon and great heaviness of heart, with dylygence used in avoiding sin
and doing good virtuous works in his life before, shall at his death be fully
forgyuen and laid up pure gold in the treasures of god. quae talia habebat vt
dimiterentur, declares plainly the contrary.

Barns also concludes, wherefore by this mean the church of god is in the
treasures of god without spotte or wryncle. which words wha^ I read sowned
unto mine understanding, and so have they to many that I know have read them,
that the church is in the treasures of gods foreknowledge and predestynacyon
always pure and clean, where as saint Austayne says nor meneth no more, but
that as many of the church as be forgyuen, though many be not forgyuen because
they be the let of their forgyuenesse them self for lack of

Barns leueth out also these words of saint Austayne, that god is the most
cunning wu^keman, and goth about the clensynge of our spots, and stretchyng
out of our wryncles dylygently / but yet in this world in the course of our
life, he is always in doing of it, and has not fully done it till we part
hense by death.

These words of saint Austayne which Barons here leueth out, or purposely
leueth of ere he come at them / do plain and full agree with that exposycyon
that I gave you here have you lo the very true church of Christ that is so
pure and clean that she neither has spotte nor wryncle. which words of saint
Poule as I partly told him there, prove no thing his purpose, For saint Poule
says there, but that Christ gave him self to make her such / and says not
that he shall make every part of her such, nor save in heaven all that he has
sanctyfyed in baptysme. But like wise as 1. Thimot. 2.
yet as many men will never come into her, as Iewys, Turks, and Sarasyns, and
many y^ have come^ in to her have again gone from her, as have Luther,
Huyskyn, and Suinglius, Lamkert, Huchyn, Here have you lo the very true church
of Crist, that is so pure and so clean that yt neither has spot nor wryncle.

But now is yt a world to se how Barns after this boste in that place, ends
now saint Anstaynes words with the clean contrary sentence / against his
own part / and concludes all the whole matter quyte against him selfe^ and
utterly destroys his own church / and wenynge that pulling down were
setting up, bosteth as myche thereof to.

And therefore here d^^^e not live without sin / but we shall pass from hense
without sin etc. Lo these words are Barons own, so written as thought they
were saint Austaynes own with etc. And then he brings in upon them after his
own etc. these words following, Here have you clearly that the church o^ god
is cleansed and puryfyed by Christ for knowledgyng of her sins. But lettynge
pass that saint Austayne says not that the whole church of Christ here
passes he^se without sin, nor that every man that ones is of his church
here, shall after be of his church in heaven: let us take friar Barons own
words, as though they were as he would have them seem, the very words of
saint Austayne him self / and that they were none other wise meant neither by
saint Austayne, then Barns would have them taken, let us now se then first,
what says here friar Barons,

First friar Barons bosteth and says, Here have you clearly that the church
of god is clen^ed and puryfyed by Christ, for knowledgynge of his sins. But
then ask we friar Barns, of which church is our questyon? Of the church of
Christ here in earth, or of the church of Christ in heaven. To this friar Barns
must needs grant, that all our matter of the church between him and us, is of
the church of Criste here in earth. Then will we ask him, whyther our matter
be of men living or of men dyenge. And sith we speak of the church for the
doctrine of the church / I suppose that friar Barns will grant that he
speaks of the church as the men be living, quycke and quethynge, while they
may speak and talk, and confess what they believe / and means not to speak
of them, Here you se clearly that god cleanses and purifyeth his church for
knowledging of her sins. And which church yt is that he says is clean and
pure without spot or wryncle / you se that he means the very church here in
earth living and in good health, of which men have the true doctrine, because
that ye very church is yt he says that can not err. Now sith we se what says
friar Barns: let us now se what says friar saint Austayne Barns. He says ye
wot well, that ye church shall pass hense without sin, and that yt is in the
treasours of god without spot or wryncle / but he says y^ yt lives not here
without sin.

Lo good christian reders, where saw you ever any man give him self so foul a
fall as friar Barns has here done / which going about to prove us that the
church of Christ living here in earth, is a company all holy, pure, and clean
without spot or wryncle of sin, brings in for him saint Austayne / whose
words altered and framed by friar Barons after his own fashyon, plainly
declare and show that the church of Christ while yt lives in earth, lives not
without sin, and therefore is never pure and clean without spots or
wryncles of sin.

And thus were as Barns said in ye beginning, that he would bring in saint
Austayne to prove his purpose plain: he seems rather to bring saint Austayne
in / with plain

But now that he has so shamfully lost his own church of only good holy
people unknown, clean and pure with out spot or wryncle: yet that the very
church must needs be an unknown church of only good holy men at the least,
though somewhat wryncled and not all utterly spottelesse, and that it can in no
wise be any known church / this will friar Barns as he weneth well and
substancially prove, so that though he prove not his own that he promyseth,
yet will he prove that yt can not be ours, but some other


Barns. Such a church must there needs be, though that the carnal yie can
not se her, nor the fleshely reason can judge of her. Wherefore we believe this
article by faith, that holy church is a communyon or felyshyppe of holy men.
And we know yt not by seeing or feeling, as we do the felyshyppe of drapers or
mercers / for then were yt none article of the faith.


More. Now let us argue like. A false Jew might have said in Crystes days
while he preached in Jerusalem: To believe Christ must be a article of the
faith / ergo Christ must be a person unknown, and not be perceived by the
carnal yie, but only byleued by faith, and not by seeing or felyng, as men
know a draper or a mercer. Thus might in those

And this argument in a manner made the false Jews in deed, when they said:
John^. 7.
we know this man whense he is / but when Christ comes no man shall know
whense he is.

But as yt might have be answered them, that as Criste was both by faith
byleued, and yet was also by sight and felyng known, as well as was in such
wise known any draper or mercer either / for the false Jews knew him by the
tone mean only, and his true discyples knew him by both / and saint Thomas of
Inde after he had both seen him and felt him, did by sight and feeling know
his manhed, Iohan^. 20
and therewyth by faith byleued his godhed: even so we know the church by
syghte, herynge, and feeling, as we I^han. 16
and Christ the chyefe hedde thereof assystyng yt and preseruyng yt from
faylynge against all the gates of hell. Matthew. 16.
And we believe that yt is but one church by professyon of baptysme, holyly
dedecated unto god, and severed and openly known from all the manyfold open
sects of heretyques / as the comen creed says that is daily songe^ at the
mass, we believe one holy and apostolyke church. which word apostolyque
wherefore yt was put in, friar Barons will him self as yt seems not let to
confess, though Tyndale will not agree yt.

And we believe that the communyon and felyshyp of all

Also we believe the communyon of saints in a another manner besides that / that
is to wit, we believe that such as live here in this church, and in this church
also dye in the catholyque faith and in the state of grace, shall after this
life have the communyon and felyshyp of the saints that are before departed
into heaven, and that lived some time in this same known catholyque church,
and dyed in the same known catholyque faith.

Now if friar Barons ask me how I prove that these words of the creed,
sanctam ecclesiam catholicam, be understood

Augus^. sermon 181. in vigilia Penthecostes
ye must know that we ought to believe the church, and not believe in the church
/ for the church is not god, but the house of god. The catholyque church he
calls the church that is spread abroad through out the hole world. For the
chyrches of heretyques which be diverse, are not called catholyke or universal
chyrches. For they be contained every sect in some proper place, and in his
own prouynce. But this catholyque church is spread abroad with the shynyng
light of one faith, from the rysyuge up of the son to Matthew. ^.
The lamb is eaten in in one house because the very true host of our redemar
is offered up in the one catholyke church only. Of whose flesh god commanded
and forbade, that no part should be borne out of ye doors. For he forbydeth us
to give any holy thing to dogs. In this church only is a good work
frutefully done / and therefore none received the reward of the penny, but they
only yt labored within the vineyard. Matthew. 2^^
It is she only that keeps them with a strong bond of cheryte, that keep
Exodi. 33.
And soon after I shall take away my hand, and then thou shall se me on the
back half. For because the truth is perceived and seen only out of the
catholyke church / therefore says our lord that he has a place from which he
may be seen. Moses is set upon a rock to byholde gods figure. For except a
man hold and keep the sure fast ground of the faith / he can not dyscerne
and know the dyuyne presence.

Dysseuer says saint Cypryan the son beam from the whole body of the son
/ the unity of the light receives no dyuysyon. Break of a branch from a
tree / and as soon as it is ones broken of, it can not any more budde. Cut

By these words of Cypryan we perceive, that y^ light receives no dyuisyo^ in
the holy men that are predestynate unto the kingdom of god, which can in no
manner wise be dyuyded from the church. And that the branch broken of from the
tree can no longer budde / we understand it of the buddyng of the everlasting
life. And the dryeng up of the river that is cut of from the cundytte heed, in
this wise understand we, that they are void and empty of the holy ghost that
are divided from the unity.

The fellowship of the saints, that is to say let us hold our self in the
co^munyon and fellowship of hope, with those saints which are deceaced in this
faith which we have

Lo here have ye herd good christen reders how saint Austayn understands
and expowneth both sanctam ecclaesia^ catholicam the holy catholyke church,
and also sanct^rum communionem the co^munyon or felesshyppe of saints. whereby
friar Barns may se, that if he believe saint Austayn as he would seem to do,
tha^ is his own fond imagynacyo^ quayled, by which he divyneth after his
dyuynite, that these words sanctorum communione^ do sharply prycke ye
clergy, as he says


Barns. That church that can not err, is all only the universal church,
which is called the communyon and felyshyppe of saints / the which addycyon
was made by holy fathers (for in saint Cyprianes time was there no mencyo^ of
it) by all lykelyhed to declare the presumpcyon of certain men and of certain
congregacyons, that rekened them self to be holy church. wherefore my lords se
well to, lest the holy ghost have prycked you with this addycyon For you have
always made your self the holy church, ye and that without any holiness.


More. If there has never been any holiness at all in all the whole
spyrytualtye / than were those holy fathers y^ Barns says added in the creed
sanctorum co^munione^, some holy carnal fathers. well be it so than for Barons
sake. But I

By these words of saint Austayne, ye se also that friar Barns in his gay
babble, wherwyth he would make men by leave that the church can not be the
church but if it suffer persecucyon, and that no man might come to heaven nor
be a true christen man, but if he were persecuted: here lo good reders,
besides that it is a great persecucyon unto the church, and a right great
gryefe and heaviness, to se so many of her members wax so roten and fall away
from her body, by the incurable canker of these false fe^tered heresies

More over good christen readers, ye se that saint Austayne in these words,
does plainly show that the saints which are all ready in heaven, do pray for
us that are here in earth / which thing these heretyques will in no wise agree.

Here se you also that these words sanctam ecclaesiam catholica^, by which
friar Barns would make us wene that the holy catholyke church were a secret
unknown church scatered about the world / sayn^ Austayn well and plainly
declares if we consider well his words, that it must needs be this comune
known catholyke church.

But now that I have plainly confuted friar Barons by saint Austayne him
self, whose order and rule friar Barns professed, and whose words he so often
alleges for his purpose always proving against his purpose: I will now for
friar Barns ferther wurshyp, confute him by the self same place of saint
Austayne, which him self brings here forth for his special proof of his
unknown holy church, to prove it a company of unknown faithful folk being
holy by their only faith / whereof these ar^ friar Barns words.


Barns. This is well preued by your own law De con. di. 4. c. prima igitur
whose words be these. Therefore is the church holy, because she byleueth
ryghtuousely And the^ friar Barns goth forth with his own gloss upon these
words and says / Hear you not the cause wherefore the church is holy?
because she byleueth ryghtuousely in god / that is, she byleueth nothing but
in him, and she byleueth nor hears no word but his / as our master Christ
bears witness: My sheep hear my voice, and a another mannys voice do they not
know.


More. Barons here holds on his old craft, in furnyshyng his own gloses
with falsefyenge the scripture of god. For ye shall understand good christian
reders, that saint John^ the euangelyste, Io^^^. 1^.
out of whose gospel Barons has taken the words of our sauyoure Christ,
reherseth them not in such wise as Barns does / that is to wit, that the
sheep of Christ do not know the voice of any other man. But he Lucae. 1^^
that is to wit by heretyques, which be strangers from the household of
Crystes catholyque church, and which do straungely Titum. 3.
That man that is a heretyque after the first or the second warning estewe
and fle from.

And thus ye se good readers, how fere Barns here false fyeth and wrong
interprets the words of Christ in the gospel of saint John^.

But now let us return to consider the words of that law that Barons has
here rehearsed you / from which I have been as ye se a little let by this
other false point of

But now concerning that law good reders / you shall understand that the
words of that law be taken out of a sermon of saint Austayne, which he made
unto certain persons forthwyth upon their baptysme. In which sermon among
many other things that he preached unto them, both in the same and other two
sermons that he had made them before / he says unto them thus: where as we
have asked each of you, Byleuest thou in holy church, remyssyon of sins, and
resurreccyon of the flesh: we asked you not after that manner, that you should
even in the same manner as you believe in god, believe in the catholyque holy
church / which church is therefore holy and catholyque,

Lo good christian reders, here have you herd that in the self place where as
saint Austayne says that the church is holy and catholyque, because yt
byleueth right in god, because none of all the sects of heretyques can be
holy nor catholyque, that is to say universal / sith very holiness can none
be out of the right church, nor god shall suffer no sect of heresye to sprede
over all the world so as he sprede

And finally to put out of all doubt and question, that saint Austayn obhorreth
from friar Barns heresy, that argues upon that article of the creed, that the
church should be an unknown church / saint Austayne says plainly as I
showed you before against Tyndale, that likewise as he were accursed that would
say that Christ was not a man known, so accursed be he that says the
church of Christ is not a church known.

Lo thus are we now good christian reders comen unto an

And therefore will I (to end where Barns ends him self) let you somewhat se
how he handeleth saint Bernard, and there wythall fynyshe this book.


Barns. But let us se what saint Bernarde says on you. They call them self
the mynysters of Christ, but they serve Antechryste / they go gorgyousely a
rayed of our lords goods, unto whom they give none honor. And of those
goods comes the harlottes deckyng that thou see daily, the game players
dysgysynge, and kings apperrell. Of this comes gold in their brydelles, in
their sadelles, and in their spurs / so that their spurs be brighter the^
the aulters. Of this comes their plentuous wine presses and then full
sellers, blolkynge from this unto that. Of this comes their tonnes of sweet
wynes. Of this be their b^ggys so filled / for such things as these be, will
they be rulers of the church / as dekens, archdekens, bishops and
archbishoppes etc,

My lords, I had thought to baue added cardynalles and legates, abbottes
and pryours, to have made the company more holy. But I durst not. How think
you? Of whom does he speak when he says bishops and archbyshoppes? What
holiness does he reprove, when he speaks of gorgyouse array (...)


More. Now good reders here is an end of friar Barons pro^^^^ concerning the
chyrche^ which process he has ^n^^^ with saint Berna^de. By whose words
Barns would ^t s^olde s^^e that sa^nt Berna^de were of his opinion / that is to
wit that such as a^e evil a^e not of the church. and th^n were the church
and unknown church of only good ^olke alone / how be yt not yet precysely his
church / for his church is y^ wot well a church of folk not meanly good
but of folk so good so pure and so clean that there be not among them all so
myche as either spot or wryncle.

^ow be yt though saint Bernarde should not prove Ba^ons church / yet would
friar Barons that saint Bernard s^old some to prove the church to be at the
lest an unknown church of only good folk / and so to prove that the known

yet would friar Barons farther^ that saint Bernarde should seem to despise
and set at naught all holy ornamen^^s and call them harlottes deckyng / and
then by the same ^eanes despise all other holy ceremon^es of the church.

^ut ^ shall show you good reders^ ^yrst that saint Ber^^^^^ proves nothing
for friar Barns no^ against the ^^owen cathol^^u^ church though his wo^des
^ere but (...) ^arns reherseth them.

(...) s^all I show you that (...) Ba^ns playth with

For the first point, if saint Bernarde sa^d here all as friar Barns reherseth
him / yet what had he ^ayde for friar Barns concerning the chyrch^ do all
those wo^des amo^^t to any more^ then that there are in every kind of (...) of
the church, some that are naught. And who den^eth tha^ And then says also that
all such as so be / do serve An^i^chryste

He shows us no such word. And ^^t might (...) Bernarde^ and many an other
holy man ^aye such a word^ and yet mean no such thing th^rby. For he that
(...) say in a sermon^ that a monk that b^eketh ^ys (...) or any of his other
vows is neither monk^ nor (...) man^ but much wurse than a Jew / mean^th (...)
he is no longer a monk in deed nor a member (...)

The prophet speaks in the person of our (...) self: I am a wurme and not a
man, and yet meant (...) to deny that he was a very man in deed but (...) in so
vile manner ha^deled at his passion as thou^^ (...) no man but a very vile
wurme. A man (...) whom he gives meat drink and w(...)stelth do to some
other more seruyc^ th(...)ster / ye and secretly sometime agayns(...)

And therefore ou^ sauy^ur said not (...) masters but he ^ayd no man can (...)
if he have twain, while he serves the tone, he shall leave

Thus have I showed you good reders, that all though saint Bernard had said in
deed as Barns falsely reherseth

Now for the secunde point, ye shall understand that Barons has untruly
translated you saint Bernardes words. For lettynge pass some pieces that he
has left out in the mids, for no cause that I ca^ se but if it were for
lack of learning, and lettynge pass some such also as he has mysse
translated of ignorance: I will show you but one place or twain, which he
has with one word or twain so changed of malice, that he has turned the
sentence for his purpose clean against the mind of saint Bernarde that wrote
it. For even in the very first beginning where saint Bernarde says thus:
Ministri Christi sunt and seruiunt Antichristo / that is, They be the mynystres
of Christ and they serve Antichryst: Barns has translated it thus, They call
them self So that where saint Bernard says, that though they serve
Antichryste yet they be the mynystres of Christ in his church here / friar
Barns turns that an other way, and makes as though saint Bernarde said not
that they be so, but said only that they call them self so. And in like wise
after in the end, where as saint Bernard says, pro huiusmodi volu^t esse, and
sunt ecclesiaru^ ppositi / that is, For such things as these be will they be
rulers of chyrches, and so they be, as deanys, archdekyns etc. Barns has
translated it thus, For such things as these be, will they be rulers of the
church, dekyns, archdekyns etc. And these words, so they be / he leueth out,
as though saint Bernard said not y^ they were any rulers in the church, but
only says yt they would be so.

And than when he has in such wise falsely translated saint Bernarde to make
him seem to say so / than he lies Lo saint Bernarde says that you be neither
the church nor of the church. whereof as ye se saint Bernarde says by plain
words the contrary / which plain words of saint Berua^de friar Barns has as
ye plainly se, of plain and pure malice manyfestely and falsely changed. And
who so ever yt is learned and read ye same sermon of saint Bernard, shall there
euydentely se that saint Bernarde calls the very church of Christ, the comune
known catholyke church, and none unknown church. For he lamenteth there the
estate of the church, which he calls also there the body of Christ / whereby
ye may se that he speaks of the very church of Christ in earth.

Now than shows he there that this church has been in diverse times
dyuersely vexed / first by paynyms that A tim^re n^c^urno, a sagitte volantis
in die, a negocio perambulantis in tenebris, ab incursu et demonio meridiano /
assygnynge to every one of those.iiii. vexacyons one of those four kinds of
deuyls. By all which whole process together, who so be learned and read

Now where as Barns also says, that saint Bernarde calls all the holy
ornaments harlattes deckyng, and game players dysguysynge, as though saint
Barnarde did as him self does, ^ocke and scorn all halowynge of copys,
vestymentes and chalyces, and such other ornaments as are used in ye church
about the dyuyne service / which kind of hallowed things friar Barns in mockage
and scorn

Saint Bernard lykeneth apostatas unto the traitor Judas. (...) sermon. ^^super
^ersu^ ter^^^m Psalm^. 90.
I would friar Barons had spyed and brought us forth that / for in that place
he lykeneth unto Judas, not only those apostatas that cast of their habytes
and run out at rouers, as friar Barns does, and as Judas did after

Sa^nt Bernarde also detestynge such apostasy, and (...). 241
writes unto Hildefonsus the earl of Tolowse against one Henry an apostata,
run out of relygyon, and corruptynge the country with many such poysened
heresies as these apostatas do now. And to thente^t that ye may the better and
the more fully perceive the goodness of saint Bernarde in this matter, and his
fruitful labor and pain taken to the honor of god and profit of christen
people, and by god agaynewarde with many great open miracles allowed and
approved against the said Henry friar Barns double brother, that is to wit as
well in heresye as in apostasy: I shall rehearse you somewhat of the matter out of
the story, that was by a very virtuous holy man, in the same time that the
thing was done, written in the life of saint

The life of Christ was shyt from the babys of cryste^ folk, while the grace of
baptysme was denied. Prayours were mock at, and the oblacyons for mennys
souls, prayenge to saints, the sentence of exco^munycacyon, the pylgrimage of
faithful folk, the byeldynge of chyrches, the sparynge from bodily work on
the holy days, the consecratynge of the holy creme and oil, and finally all
manner ordinances of the church, were set at naught. In this necessyte this
holy man often thereunto instantely required by the cryste^ folk of that
country, at the last took his iournay / persuaded and brought thereunto, by
the most reuerente father in god Albericus bishop of Hostyens, and legate of
the sea apostolyque. And when he came thither, he was received of his
anthoryte, the subuerters, and all those that were obstynate

In this journey of saint Bernarde, god was in his said servant gloryfyed by
many miracles, while he called bak the hearts of some from their wicked
errors, and some also cured from diverse diseases of their bodies.

There is a place in the same country, called Sarlate, where after his sermon
fynyshed, they brought many louis

So great a number of syke people, by the tastynge of that same bread
recovered, that the tidings thereof was publyshed through out all the prouynce
/ so that that holy man retournynge by the places nere there about, was for
the intolerable concurse of people feign to turn out of his way, and tered to
go thither.

Now good christian reders, here may ye perceue that holy saint Bernard^, with
whose words friar Barons as though saint Bernard were his special patron, so
proudly

And farther have I showed you, that saint Bernard in the self same process
out of which friar Barns has pycked and falsefyeth those few words that he
brings / does plainly to friar Barons confusyon in his pryncypall purpose of
the church, declare and make open that the very true church of Christ his
mystycall body here in earth, is no secret unknown church, as friar Barons
goth about to make yt seem / but is out of all questyon, this one comen well
known catholyke church of all christian nacyons, as I before have specyfyed,
left to gether in the stock of unite of the known catholyque faith, dystyncte
and dyuyded

And in this wise good christian reders here end I this book against friar
Barons evil and vncrysten process / wherwyth against the promise of Christ,
Matthew. 1^.
the devil and he labor in vain to pull down Crystes church.


Thus ends the.viii. book.

