HANS BEER-POT HIS INVISIBLE COMEDY, OF See me, and See me not. ACTED In the
Low Countries, by an honest Company of Health-Drinkers.

Omne tulit punctum qui miscuitvtile dulci. LONDON, Imprinted by Bernard Alsop,
and are to be sold at his house by Saint Annes Church near Aldersgate, 1618.

TO THE HONORABLE SIR JOHN OGLE Knight, Collonell of our English Regement of
Foot, under the Lords, the Estates general of the United Provinces, and Lord
Governor of the Town and Garrison of Vtreicht.
MIne honored Lord, I here present unto your view, nor Comedy, nor Tragedy,
as wanting first the just number of Speakers: Secondarily, those parts or Acts
it should have, which should be at the least five; but a plain Dialogue or
conference between so many persons, consisting of three Acts, and no more. If
there be any Act in it, to make it savor in your Lordshippes palate, I shall
be glad: Wormwood or gall to make it distastefull, I am sure there is none, if
rightly understood: for howsoever I may by chance light upon a galled place,
my intent is not to rub it so hard, to grieve it or make it worse: but rather
to wipe it smoothly to cleanse it, and heal it.

If any man thinks himself touched in any thing that is amiss, let him
endeavor by Gods help to amend it; and if there be any good counsel in it,
tending to reformation of manners, or other advice, as I dare be bold to say,
there either is, or should be; let him make use of that, and follow it.

Moreover, my very good Lord, as in all actions done, or to be done, after what
kind soever, there be several reasons, if grounded upon reason or judgment:
why, or to what end they are, or should be done, so in this committed to your
Lordships hands, though soon conceived, and as soon brought into the world,
being not above sixeteene days labor therein, more aimed at then the verbal
sense: Which if it please your Lordship, give me leave to give you some
instructions, is thus to be taken.

In the person of the old Gentleman is figured forth a man of singular good
education, life and conversation, a man that had seen the World, tasted the
sorrows and troubles of this life with David, and toward the end of his
days had a peaceful possession of an happy estate given him: wherein also is
set out the benefit of contentation: A man truly virtuous, frugall, bounteous
and liberal, a lover of good company and hospitality, desirous to gain the
good will of his neighbors.

Moreover, are showed the wonderful preservation and blessings that God
bestows on them that serve him: first, his wife a good wife; then his
children, as a principal blessing, next, good children, and his care in their
education, besides his temporal blessings.

In the person of his wife is set out a virtuous, chaste and sober Matron, one
that was careful of her charge, not a gadding houswife, but such an one as did
spend her idle times in reading histories and other good books, as is easy
to be perceived. In them both the happiest union, and agreement that should
be in that blessed estate of marriage: and lastly, in them two, the praise of
a country life.

In the person of their son is set out an hopeful young Gentleman, whose father
had a great care to see him well brought up according to his estate, and to let
him know the world betimes; not to keep him at home under his nose, as many
too kind and foolish parents use to do, until they have marde their
children, which otherwise might have been better. Secondly, in him is showed
how a young man should carry himself; first, to serve God, to please his
parents, to follow that which is good, to read good books, and to make choice
of his company.

In the person of the Merchant, the noblest profession of Trade; from whom
diverse Worshipful houses in England have had their original, is set out in
some part their disposition, who being for the most part exceeding rich, are
also exceeding miserable, till they are disposed to get out and warm their
bloods with this element of good liquor, and then as far exceed in
superfluity, as by experience I have known some.

In the Serieant is set out, a well-deseruing soldier, who sticking in the
first place of preferment, can get no higher.

In the Sentinel, an honest private soldier, one that loves a pot better
then a Wench, and indeed the natural disposition of all Soldiers, who for the
most part lead a merry life, careless of any thing, so they may in a
reasonable measure be provided for of meat, drink, and apparel.

In Beerepot is set out an honest servant, who howsoever, he will keep
company, and be merry sometimes, yet nothing can draw him from the performance
of his business, and the due respect of his service, and duty to his master.

In Flutterkin, a Merchant of good Beer, a merry companion, one that will give
content to his guests, set out his wares, and help to utter them himself, and
rather then no body should be drunk, he will make one.

In the Moore, a man that had tasted the inconstanstancy of Fortune, one that
bare his crosses bravely and stoutly, and in despite of Forune, would be
merry, and sing while others wept.

And for the names which are significant, if you take them according to their
Dialect, as less material, I leave your Lordship, at your leisure to guess
at: and commending my self, and those my poor endeavors unto your Lordships
Honorable patronage. I rest: Vtriecht from my lodging the 14. of November,
1617.

Yours in all humble service, to be commanded, Dabridgcourt Belchier.

The Prologue.
EXpect not here a stately Tragedy,
Nor Comedy set out, with graceful shows,
Of diverse kinds, to please men's greedy eyes:
Yet what we have, we give, accept it then
With patience, kindness, and with thankfulness.
The Author's no Mechanique, writes not for gain;
Nor with this dish, thinks to fill all your tastes,
Only, for the learned, and iuditious sort;
Yet would please all, and no man here offend.
Here is no gall, nor any bitter stuff
To quippe men's vices in particular,
Such snarling tricks, are free from him and his:
Then wrest not sense, to what was never meant;
If ought be wanting, it is want of skill,
Not want of willing minds to give content
To high and low, to all of each degree;
Then give me leave, kind friends, to beg this boon,
That you will be silent, if we do amiss;
And if ought please you, though we dare not crave
An open plaudit, in our ears to ring:
Yet do us right, commend it afterward;
And though some few of us, do take this pains,
Yet one man's head did only ache for this:
He makes me speak for him, and he for us;
And altogether join in this request,
That you will hear and see, and say the best.
See me, and see me not. OR A Dialogue between these persons following.
Cornelius Harmants, a rich Country Gentleman, Hanneke, his wife, a grave
matron. Hans Beerepot their man. Younker Harmants their Son. Jacques Garland,
a rich Merchant which married his sister. Serieant Good fellow an old Soldier.
Pasquill Beeremond a Sentinel. Ioaske Flutterkin a Tapper. Abnidaraes Quixot,
a Tawnie Moore.
See me, and see me not.
Enter Hans Beerepotte singing a verse or two of a Song, etc. YOunker, I come,
your Father sends me forth,
To sell his corn, and bring him money in,
Each day he walks, and pryes, and looks about
With watchful eyes, and ever in mistrust,
Least that my Dame,or I his trusty man,
Should nimme from him, or put up more then right;
I by my Dame am watched, and she by him,
And twixt them both in equal balance hangs
Poor Hans their man, their wakefull Argos eyes,
Do seldom wink, yet must I have a trick
To make large measure, fill the bushel full,
And iogge it soft unseen, while they look on,
And still cry out for more, the measures scant;
And then the overplus.
Cornelius within. What Hans, Come here.
Hans. My Master calls, and I must needs be gone. Exit.


Enter Hanneke sola. Han. As God does bless the earth with great increase,
And in great measure sends us ten for one:
So must those blessings carefully be kept,
And not with wretchlesse heed, let run at large,
For so huge heaps of wealth consume to naught,
And like fair buildings vnrepayrde, decay.
Yet must not beastly miching niggardize,
Cause us forget our selves, and those that want,
But give relief from our abundant store:
We have enough, our charge it is not great,
One daughter she is bestowed richly, and
Her portion paid, no penny more in debt,
Two sons besides, and they provided for;
The yongst at School, the other trayles a Pyke,
And for preferment looks each day, each hour:
What friendship fayles, his fathers purse supplies;
He does not want, nor shall, nor have too much
To please the fancies of unbridled youth:
Mine husband bids him use his means, no doyt
That he will send him, but alas poor I,
Must lick my cream-pots, shake my winnow sheet
And all for coin, and often send him some.
Mine husband sees and knows, yet nothing says,
But is content with what he thinks I do;
My man plays fast and loose, I see it too,
And nothing say, for why, the knave is true,
And wrongs us not one cross, but what he gets
Is for my sons, not for himself, I am sure.
I see, but see not, give him often a shilling,
Because to do for mine, he is so willing.
What Hans?
Enter Hans. Your servant at command,
To run, to ride, to go by day or night.

Han. How now sir sauce, your tongue so early glyb;
What though the days be short, there is time enough
Ere night to make your pate ring noone.

Hans. Indeed,
Madame, you never saw me drunk as yet,
So much as to forget that due respect
I owe your service.

Han. Well sir, then be gone,
Make haste, dispatch, and get you to the town;
Look to your business, what you buy and sell;
But ere you go, take that and give my son.

Han. The heavens bless you mistress, that sayre hand,
Once more for the Se^ieant.

Hann. Away you Knave,
Take that Dutch shilling, drink among your Comrades.

Exit. Han^. She Is gone, the best that ever trod on shoe:
I would not change my life to be Lord Mayor
Of the thy crown of London: my service
(...) freedom, labor but a pleasure,
(...) what I ask, but half a word,
It Is done, she knew my mind, I would I have said,
That with the Serieant I must crack a pot,
But (...) I could bringt out, she stopped my mouth
With Knave and shilling too: well let her doot
As often as she will, See who gets most
Of she or I. He sings.
As I went to Walsingham,
To that holy Land,
Met I with an old balde Mare,
By the way as I came.
Indeed you do full little think, how I
Am taken up among Soldiers in the town;
Hans Beer pot is a man of note, well known
To all under the degree of Officers.
But Serieant Goodfellow, I love him best;
And why? because he loves my masters son*
My Master loves him too, for his honesty
And never sees him, but he gives him gold,
And sends him much provision for his house;
Heel drink his cup, swears not and hates a whore,
Which if he used, I am sure my master
Brooks not the company of any such
To haunt his son: but with an angry frown,
Would look upon him: for he and Beeremonde
Are the only lads of all the Garrison;
I come my laddes, my markets once ore-past,
At Flutterkins we will have one brideling cast.
Exit. Enter Cornelius with his wife. Come wife, help me on with my band:
indeed
This fair morning inuites me take the pains
To walk on foot, and see the town, visit
My friends, and children, drink some Spanish wine:
And why, that wine? I am not yet grown old,
I can bestride, a bouncing Gennet still,
And with mine arm to frush a sturdie lance.

Hann. Talk you no more of martial exercise,
Good Sir, but take you to your Country Farm,
Keep you at home, leave that to younger bloods,
Your son is young enough, let him go forth,
And prove his fortune among those armed troops,
I am contented, God his will be done.

Corn. I think dear wife thou speakst more then thou think.
Thou would be loath to adventure him so much.

Hann. Not I sweet Sir, for God is God at sea,
And land, a God always omnipotent;
He can defend him from the gaping jaws
Of roaring Canons mouth, that dreadful flash
Cannot come near him, if it be his will;
Yet if he die, it is honors lofty bed
That shall entombe him, then I care the less.

Cor. Well spoke, brave Less, I think fair Pallas shine,
Begirt thy temples with her glorious rays,
At thy days birth, the wonder of thy sex.

Hann. How now my Love, what do you Court me still?
This Phrase befits not, twixt a man and wife,
It Is time for you to leave such courting terms,

Cor. What courting calst thou them, thou rubst me up,
To think upon the times forepast, I saw
In Englands Court so famous and renowmde
Of great Elizaes blessed memory.
That aided so these troubled Netherlands
With men and money; still oh, oh still me thinks
I see those Worthies marching on earthes stage;
The famous Essex, Norreis, Sidney too,
And wisest Vere, that held Ostend so long,
Against hells foul mouth, and Spanish tyranny,
As yet his accomplices can testify.
That saw his works beyond the bounds of wit,
That now do live in noble fame and name;
Whom I Will ore-passe, for fear I should offend.

Hann. Offend not then (my Spouse) I counsel you,
But leave the mighty to their best contents,
And pass in silence, what they have to do;
Let us not meddle with the Magistrate,
But see, unseen, and hope for what is the best.

Cor. What has Apollos sacred Oracle
Infusde thy Soul with high Divinity,
Or deeper judgments, of I know not what,
Made thee know more then thy frail sex should do
I wonder: lets along, we will to the town,
Where I not doubt but I shall find your son
A drinking, not at's book.

Hann. What if you do?
The elder Priest forgets that he was Clerk,
When you were young, you did as he now does.

Cor. It Is true indeed, but yet I Will tell thee what,
It Was strange to see a younker once but drunk
In Englands Kingdom, when I lived there,
For to be drunk, was beggar like they said,
Now Beggars say they are drunk like Gentlemen,
As since I have heard an old fantastique rhyme,
That thus imports if I be not deceiude.

Gentlemen are sick, and Parsons ill at ease,
But Serving men are drunk, and all have one disease.
Han. God bless my son from such base foolerie,
As to delight in drink, a beastly sin,
Yet with a friend, to drink a cup or more,
I Will not find fault, the times are now grown such.

Cor. Well wife, give but an inch, he takes an elue.


Han. What then? his nature, education,
Composde him otherwise, you did your part
To give him learning, which will make him know
The good from evil: but his blooming youth
May be corrupted by bad company;
But that he seeks not, loves not, flies as much
As in him lies, I heard't with comfort too,
Else would I not.

Cor, My dear, what would you do,
Or not do, Women's witless wilful will,
Is strange sometimes, with reason limitlesse.

Hann I will not tell you.


Cor. Why?


Hann. Because I will not.


Cor. A reason reasonlesse, Women,
Have often such reason, for their wilfulness,
When as they ouerth wart their too kind husbands
In things not mere indifferent, else

Hann. What else?
Sometimes we know more then our husbands think,
And give advise worthy to be followde,
Not to be scorned, or to be contemnde
In weighty matters, matters of estate,
As (...) wife to great
(...); and Neroes mother too,
Another Agrippina, less virtuous,
But wise and politic, one that knew much,
And that great Queen, the Queen of Caria,
Nausolus wife, the wonder of her time.
And she whom former times nere paraleld,
She whom you namde but now.

Cor. O stay, my wife,
Your mouth runs ore, she makes all women proud;
Are you so read in Roman Histories?
And I not know it: Welcome to the town;
We Will to your daughter straight, she will be at home,
I hope, where ere her thriuing husband be.
Exeunt. Music. Enter Pasquill. My back thin cloathde, my belly thinner
linde,
Keeps out no cold, I like not I these plankes,
But when my belly is full of double Beer;
Oh then I sleep like to mine Hostess Pigges,
And feel no cold, nor hardness; Feather-beds,
Stand further off, three stiuers and a half,
The can of English Beer: my money's spent;
Pay days to morrow: tut, hangt, to day, I Will shifte,
But yet were younker Harmants here; one can,
My mornings draught were good; or if to day
Hans Beere-pot come to town: Oh furious Mars,
He Is come, his Wagons yonder, now cock-sure,
For this whole day I am provided for.
Enter the Merchant, Master Garland, and clappe him on the shoulder. Good
morrow Pasquill, where is my brother, where is
That Younker? and the Serieant Goodfellow.

Pas. You are welcome sir, what M. Garland?
Is It you, you know my mind; one tooth is dry,
Since yesternight I have not had one drink;
I am so cold.

Gar. Why do not answer me?


Pas. What did you say? sure I remember not;
My wits want freshing.

Gar. I will thrash them straight
With good strong Beer, one cup will do no harm.

Pas. Will drive cold out, and keep my belly warm.


Gar. What riming so early, and thine eyes not
Washed yet: but where is Younger Harmants?
Where Is his Companion, Serieant Goodfellow?

Pas Fast a sleep, his troubled head is so vexed
With this worlds cares.

Gar. What both.


Pasq. The Serieant, him
Lonely mean, lies sleeping yet within;
I Will call him to you, if you will go drink.

Gar. Not else.


Pas. Yes that I will, and more then that;
I Will do for you, or for your Brothers sake;
Like burning Drakes i will split the empty air,
And run through thick or thin, at noon or night:
If you command, poor Pasquill will obey.

Gar. Where did thou learn such high stilde complements?


Pas. Out from the smoking of my Muskets mouth
Fetched from the fragments of some Poetry:
My nimble Muse comes from the Aquilone,
And flaps her wings against Austers frothy beard;
While Eurus blasts do pinch my tender sides.
And gentle Zephir, glads the Seamans heart;
Driving his ship, cross Neptunes foaming front.

Gar. How now turnde Poet, or turnde Coniurer;
Stares not mine hair: shall I be scarred hence:
I Will make a circle least Hobgoblin come,

Pas. You are disposde to jest M. Ganland.
I have many such conceits without book.

Gar. Of thine own making sure, they do so well
Concur in sweetest Diapason.

Pasq. Die a pace on sir: what is that?
That Is quite past
The reach or Center of my shallow brain:
But since with terms you think to put me down:
Once more have at you, i will not yield it so.

Then did he make Heavens vault to rebound,
With rounce, robble hobble,
With riffe raffe, roaring, thwick, thwack,
Thurlerie bouncing.
Ga. O Heavens! why made you night to cover sin?
Had it been day, such things had never been.

Pas. Once more with patience, silence, and be still:
You shall have Rhetoric against your will.

Mount thee my Phlegon Muse, and testify
How Saturn sitting on an Ebon cloud,
Disroabde his Podex, white as Iuorie,
And through the Welkin thundered all aloud.
Gar. Read thou my riddle, and take thou my fidle^^
I met a man that wept and wailde,
I grieved to see him how he aylde;
He fared strangely, in such taking;
He said he was not of Gods making.

Pasq. The Cuckoo sings not worth a groat,
Because she never changes note:
The man you speak of, young or old,
Indeed he is a plain Cucquolde.

Gar. O brains of a Burbate, wool of an Owl:
Where had thou so much wit? now tell me thine.

Pas. My Grandame taught me, and I learnt by heart
This riddle of Saturnes far-fetcht sigh,
But here me Sir, you know that honest man
M. Flutterkin our Iouiall Host.

Gar. Go seek my brother out, and then I will,
Show thee the way, and give thee thy desire.

Pasq. I must not stir without my Corporal
Gives his consent, I must not so offend
For fear the varuels catch me by the feet.

Gar. Go to the Serieant, I dare warrant thee,
And tell him that I stay to speak with him.

Pa. Swifter then thought, your errand shall be done
Exit. Enter Serieant Good Fellow, and Pasquill, walking by the Guard door.
Serieant Goodfellow. Good morrow M. Garland, what abroad
So early, can you leave so sweet a Froe;
By gisse I swear, were I so fayrely wedde,
This hour yet would I have kept my bed.

Ga. Good morrow Serieant, dreaming, yet not wakt
You are mistaken man, you see not well,
Such ware's not dainty, though you think it dear,
Where is enough, and market all the year.

Ser. I am glad to see you in so pleasant vain;
I hope we shall have a merry day on it.

Gar. Deed, Pasquill and I have been riming.


Ser. What?
That pretty Stripling, that mad Pastie-crust,
He rimeth best with lugge or Pewter-can,
And often does quarrel with our honest Host
For spiced Ale, that hisseth with a toste:
But let these matters pass, I Will tell you news;
Last night your brother and I fell flat out
About an Argument we stiffly held
Which service was best on horseback, or on foot:
But what say you?

Gar. For Horsemen tooth and nail.


Ser. He calde me ass, but since one predicament
Contains us both, I care not I Will not yield;
You know he is learned, had I but so much,
I Would make him fret, and stamp, and scratch his head;
Do you but second me, i will vex him yet.

Pas. While you do talk, then I am sure of drink.


Gar. Let Pasquill seek him.


Ser. Sir, make haste, run;
My Captain calde him, when I went to sleep.

Pas. I go, I run, I haste, I skippe, I fly;
With nimbler heels then ere did Mercury.

Ser. Ah poti maia sitis, how fast he
Runs for the liquours sake; now thinks he,
To stuff his guts with Huffcappe English Beer;
But hear me Sir, lets walk in the Churchyard
Until he comes again; for I must think
My self of pro and con, what is to be done
Against this lusty Younker; Oh he is here.
Enter Younker Harmanis. Good morrow brother Garland, why did you
Send Pasquill for me posting in such haste;
What is my Sister sick, or your young son,
Or some misfortune happened, that I know
Not of as yet, unto your house or goods,
Or ships at Sea: Speak, I am in suspense.
What? do you fool me, flout me to my face;
Is that for my good will? why then farewell.

Gar. Be not so angry brother, I protest,
I laugh not at you, but at Pasquill, what
Said he to you, what message did he bring?

Youn. The fool comes gaping, sets up such a throat,
Staring so madly, as if foul Cerberus
From pitchy Acheron, were come to affright
Poor men on earth: or else some accident
Of wonder strange, worse then a blazing star,
Had made men gaze, I know not what to think:
You sent him for me, and I must come straight:
I must not stay; my Captain asked him, what
The matter was: if the town were on fire:
There Is fire in the town, quoth he, quite out
Of breath and wit, forgets to move his cappe,
Cries out on's throat, that it was almost burnt
With soote and smoke, and dust I know not what:
My Captain gave him twelve pence, bad him go
And wash his face, he looked so reechilie,
Like Bacon hanging on the Chimnies roof;
Faring so ghastly, that we both did think,
Him worse then mad.

Gar. But whether is he gone?


Youn. I Will tell you, as we crossed the market place,
He spies my Fathers man, and then from me,
He flings as fast, as erst did Hercules,
Send that his fastest shafts to Nessus side;
When he from him stole Deianira fair
For whom he lost his life: I saw my youth,
And looked behind, to see what they would do;
In at next Tap-house, round as Iuglers box,
Went they two first, and then two Soldiers more.

Ga. Why then your Captains piece is half consumd
By this; if he have got such company.

Youn. Twill not belong, I am sure, befort be drownde,
Four men four Cans, what is that, but four fair draughts.

Ser. Yea for a Brewers horse, not for his man:
Oh my rumbling guts do ache to think ont;
A Can a draught, I never sawe't but once,
And then I thought that man had burst his guts;
His eye balls started, as the strings were cracked;
And though sometimes I love to drink my pot,
Strong drink should never more go down with me,
Before i would swill so much at such huge draughts;
One civil glass or two, that warms my blood,
It is enough, me thinks.

Younk. Why? now I know,
Thou art not tong-tyde Serieant, else I thought
It had been pawndith Lumbard for two doytes:
I Will buy a Calves tongue for four, that's good meat
For them that love it.

Ser. Why? there is none but Calves
Refuse good meat, or offered courtesies,

Yon. Why? how now Serieant, do you call me calfe?


Ser. No sir, not I, but by chance speak of them,
As by the way you light upon their tongues.

Gar. So now the game begins: fly to him, give
Him not one ynche, let him wear gold that winnes
It first: shrink back, I will never own thee
For a Serieant.

Ser. Now we are two to one,
I care not.

Younk. What say, thou speakst Ebrew, Greek,
Or English, Welsh, I know not what thou meanst.

Ser. Sauf vostre grace, vous estes bien venuz.


Youn. Hangs the French Ideon at thy tongs end too
Speak two words more, i will make thee Port-enseigne
Si ce iemais aduient, en ma puissance.

Ser. Perform your words, and then I swear, I will.


Younk. I will.


Ser. Swear first, i will not believe you else.


Younk. Without an oath I will.


Ser. Why, hear you then;
Admiranda canunt, sed non credenda Poetae.

Younk. That's Latin Serieant, wiseman, that's not French.


Ser. You namde no language, bid me speak two words,
And you would do it, i will be iudgde by all
Here present, if the wager be not won.
I Will get a staff, the colors they are mine.

Gar. It Is well said Serieant, I am on thy side,
I Will bear thee witness they are thine by right.

Youn. Though I meant French, yet will I yield, I lost;
Take thou the colors, I bestow them free,
In my conceit, as ere did Emperor,

Ser. I thank your greatness in conceit,
I do enjoy them, and I rest content.

Gar. A good conceit, for now me thinks I see,
The Serieant Enseigne, only in conceit
Stepped up in place, and office of command;
I see, but see not, what I hope to see;
That once performde which now is but conceit.

Ser. I thank you M. Garland, your good word,
Is ever pressed to do an honest man good,
For my preferment think you would disburse
A score of pounds; or so, were come to that,
Rather then I should fail.

Gar. Sure that I would;
Thou should not want to furnish thy conceits;
If I have gold and silver at command,
It Is ready: Serieant I would do thee good;
Get thou a place, try thy friends, thou shall see
What I will do.

Ser. I thank God and friends, it is done;
I have bethought me, you shall see ere long
A Metamorphosis of me reformde.

Younk. Transformde, thou would say.


Ser. Call you it transformde;
Transformde, reformde; or call it how you will:
I do remember what I learned at School
In Ovid: Oh these verses made me whipte;
In noua fert animus, mutatas dicere formas
Corpora Dij caeptis, nam vos mutastis and illas,
Aspirate meis.

Gar. Let thee alone Serieant, thou will be like
To Pasquill, wild as a Bucke, or Liueret
Bred in March: this or be it not contains thee
When thy brains flow with skillful Poesy;
Have thou forgot what we came hither for.

Youn. I like thee Serieant, when thou bringst out paires
Of Verses; one and singles alone is not
So good; as when by two and two in ranks,
They march in order: then they please mine ears.

Se. You want a fellow to my the other verse,
Do you not.

Youn. Yes marry do I, make but one
To wipe my mouth, like to the first, I swear,
I Will give thee a pair of good stagges leather gloves.

Ser. A match it is done, i will fit you presently;
M. Garland will you see it performde?

Gar. Upon mine honest word, I will.


Ser. Why then,
I have it by this time: since your mouth is clean;
My noble Younker, wipe your nose with this;
Sic faciunt stulti, quos gloria vexat inanis.

Youn. You have hit me home with your Rhinoceros
Did near make that, that famous learned Knight,
Sir Philip Sidney, Scholars, soldiers pride
Was his, not yours.

Ser. What, though he made that verse,
Those words were made before, he made them not;
It Was well I hapt on his inventions.

Youn. Good wits do iumpe, good witty, witles sir:
You hatch those eggs that other birds have laid:
I bid you make me one, by your own wit.

Ser. Why so I did, that which sir Philip made,
Is now grown old, and like my Fathers gown,
Spunne, weaude, and made, boue fourscore years ago;
But this I made is new: as fresh as May
Or flowers in June, or eggs, but this day sprung,
A plain case Younker: sir the gloves are mine
Upon your honest word: forestoe you dat,
A merchants word, no price set down, i will have
Them richly made, with gold and silken fringe.

Younk. I think the Serieant is grown Mountebancke
To cling by shifts, hey pass, pass,
Italian grown; a sharking Charlatan.

Ser. Italian, Spanish, English, Dutch, or French;
Sharke what you will, you shall not sharke me out
Of my stagges leather gloves with Charlatan:
Your Glouer knows my hand M. Garland,
To morrow morning early, Charlatan
Goes for his gloves, look to the payment sir,
Your honest words at stake; it is good I know,
You Will keep it sure, a merchant break his word,
His credits gone, no not for twice so much.

Gar. Go fetch thy gloves, i will see the Glouer paid:
Brother, it is lost, you shall pay me again.

Younk. Upon condition I will be content,
So he will make me but one true French verse.

Ser. I will and if I can.


Gar. Yea, that's well said;
That can was well.

Ser. I can and will; not for naught;
My learning cost me something; and my wit
Works quick and nimbly, if ought be to be got,
The Roman Consuls after victories,
Did crown with Bays triumphant Conquerours.
Set but a prize, auferre gloriam
Infuseth spirit to a working brain,

Gar. It shall be done, what is it?


Ser. Why what you will.


Gar. A pair of Garters.


Ser. Garters? yea content.
I want a pair; What gloves and garters too,
I rose on the right side to day I am sure.

Yo. What time, a bargain wisely made's half won.


Ser. Ere you can go to Flutterkins mine Host,
And come again, or else i will leese two faunes,
Or Beer, or Claret wine, or Spanish wine.

Youn. Beer, what Beer, Scar-Beere?


Ser. No of English Beer.


Youn. I Will not go thither, I was there too late,
Ere I can tell threescore distinctly: say
A match; I Will tell them plainly, one by one.

Ser. Agreed, begin.


Youn. I Will tell then, shall I?


Ser. Yes.


Young. One, two, three, four.


Ser. Iesuis.


Youn. Seven, eight.
Nine, ten, eleven, twelve, thirteen, foureteen, fifteen.

Ser. Soft, you are too hasty for a parish Priest,
I am sure of your good word; five and six
Are lost, are they nothing: tell rightly, tell on,
And do your worst: some honest French man lend
Me but one hansome word or two.

Younk. Thirty.


Ser. I.
Gods me, half out, but two words yet, Vostre.

Gar. Thou make a verse, then i will bake in a well.


Ser. There,s one word more, humble, nay treshumble


Younk. Fifty.


Ser. Seruiteur, life of my life, it is out:
Be it what it will, stand on thine even feet;
Then gloves and garters both are quickly won.

Youn. Brother, you have lost.


Ser. Then know I who must win.


Gar. I Will not believe you, I will have it scande,
Let them that know speak true: is it good French.

Youn. Ie suis vostre treshumble seruiteur.
The verse is true, consisting of five feet;
The case is plain in common law: no book
Can save you: Serieant thou have won; the garters
They are thine.

Ser. Younker, it is well; and your gloves too;
Both gloves and garters, they are fayrely won;
Scratch not your head, its but a Iacobin
At most; Come let us in to Flutterkins,
A cup and toste will do me now no hurt.

Younk. Why then farewell, I care not I for Beer,
My Captain gave me some Canarie wine:
The Churl he shall not ride the Gentleman.

Ser. You shall not flinch, if that your cap be wool,
You shall along; What, would you leave us so;
Turnde Micher, that were not tolerable.

Younk. I will go with thee, do but promise me,
Rightly to construe those lines of Ouids,
Which thou readst but now.

Ser. I will, then let us hence;
I thank great Jove that blessed me so this day;
How others speed, I bear the prize away.

Exeunt. Enter Hans and Pasquill. Pas. This way he went, and here they were ere
while,
But now they are fled like birds that cut the air,
With clipping wings, and leave no trace behind.
But Hans my nose is quick and sharp of sent,
Like those great Bears in noua Zembla found,
Whose smelling sense was better then their sight.
I cannot see, but smell where they are gone.

Hans. Whether do thou think? straight to Flutterkins,
My iouiall Host that longs to see my face,
My beauteous face, my proper physnomie;
I soon despatcht, sold all my corn at once,
And bought my meat.

Pasq. As straight as Circes vvande,
Not looking back, as often Meander does,

Hans. What of Meander? now my things be done,
I care not, i will go where thou will; lets on;
But what is Meander? man, or maid, or wife.

Pasq. A river fool, did never see a play,
Or hear these verses which I have by heart.
What Is he that talks of the banks of Poe,
And of the milk-white swans that in Meander swam
I Will down from hence and scour the Stygian lake:
To raise a fiend shall make his soul to quake.

Hans. O terrible, my Mistress sent you that,
And bid you drink it, not to hoorde it up.

Pas. An English shilling: hey; did she indeed?


Hans. Why Widgin, think thou I would give thee't else?


Pas. I Will drink her health upon my bended knees,
Until the Welkin roar, and ground looks blew;
Two shillings have I, not one penny spent;
I bless my stars, good fortune set me free;
This days mine own.

He skippes, or capers. Hans. Take heed, your supple joints
Are tender, Bones are soon thrust out: a vvrinch
Comes quickly.

Pasq. I am free from pox, good face.

Hans. If they be free from thee, it skils the less:
Do you remember, how you serude me once,
When to the Leaguer I was sent from home
With some provision to my masters son;
You brought me to a whore, a Leaguer whore;
Such stuff blind Polipheme would loath to touch:
An wholesome piece, I near loud Mutton since.
Near blush for shame.

Pasq. It Was for thine honesty;
Now its on record, it is prooud, it is past the tutch.

Hans. Can you accuse me? no, and speak but true.

Pas. I saw no hurt, i will sayt, and swear it too:
But good cause why; thou could nor go, nor stand
Thou were so drunk: unfit for Venus game,
A cart became thee better then a Coach.

Hans. Why thou telst all, thou might have hid some part,
And no I have shamde me so fore company,
But i will requite you, if I live ten days.
It was no marvel, I will tell thee rest.
As through the camp I past in strange amaze,
Driving mine Ass before me with his load;
I thought to be devoured Ass and all
By hungry soldiers, they did look so thin:
My heels they were flung up, and headlong I,
Fell on a Sutlers hut a fortnights space,
I had no legs, nor could I quit that place.

Pasq. What were thou shot?

Hans. And lamde: you know too well,
The grievous moan our Alips made for me,
Alas, poor gyrle, she thought I had been slain,
But had the Bullet hit me, as the wind,
Poor Beere-pot had been squasht, these hansom lims
Had flowne in pieces, nor splinter left unbroke.

Pas. That had been pity, which way went the shot

Hans, To Callais as I think, or further off,
I escaped I am sure, that dreadful malling knock.

Pas. O hold my head my thumb begins to ache,
From hence to France if this be not a lie.

Hans. Is that good manners for to take my tale,
Out of my mouth, before I make an end.

Pas. I have no manners: had I such an one
As Amptill is, to which seven Parkes belong,
I would keep thee to be my worships fool.

Hans. Why? where is Amptill.


Pas. In the Fayery land.
Where men eat mutton, pigge, and goose, and beef,
Rabbets and chickens, partridge, pheasants, quails,
And drink rich wine, that France or Spain sends in,
And strong March Beer, of five or six years old,
But on with thy tale.

Hans. I Will hang thee first,
The Fayery land, where is that? I am with child,
Good Pasquill tell me quickly, else I die;
My mind is ravished from this lower Orb,

Pas. It Is not far of, we will go to Flutterkins,
And talk more on it.

Hans, Why then thou winst my heart,
I long to seet, to taste such wine, such cheer,
But more, I long for such unheard of Beer.
Exeunt. Enter the Moore singing a verse or two of a Song. If that I speak my
language natural,
I think there is few that understands it here:
Its Hebers tongue left with the Abderites;
Hestron, pangaeon, cacobomboton, Aphnes halenon,
Mydras, myphrasman, tyltura, pantha, teman,
Hogdon, camthompos, parathasta pidarda laronta,
Clastriae campharides, bulgida bartra bela.
I am a Moore borne in Numedia,
Parcht with the suns extreme and scorching heat;
My mothers name Abdela Sydan hight,
My Father was Don Ian de Vechia,
A noble Spaniard, brave Castilian:
I serude the King of swart Numidia,
And did command ten thousand barbarous horse
For two whole years; and then my fathers love
Drew me from thence to seek mount Atlas out;
And so to Spain: my Merchant playde the jade,
And hoysted sails for great Byzantiums town;
From whence I ran, and so through Germany,
With weary steps I poasted to this place.
If that you ask my name, and feign would know,
It is Don Abendaraes Quixot,
A Spaniard, Moore, half Turk, half Christian,
How ere my flesh escapte the whizzing shot,
My tatterde doublet sure, escaped not.
He sings. Exit. Enter Ioash Flutterkin. Good Wine, good Beer, they say, it
needs no bush;
Yet have I looked abroad, and no man comes;
I have ore-peerde the market hill quite round,
My goodly front, mine eyes, my neatest bearde.
My well fed corpse: why, these are Adamants
To draw men's minds to lend me many a look,
But yet (none hears) all pass, none steps aside,
The soaring Falcon stoopes not at my lure,
But clippes her wings, flees on, heedes not her prey,
I see no Younker, nor no Serieant yet;
But Hans is busy with his masters corn,
His Markets done, I am sure he will be here,
O there is a man lives bravely, keeps an house,
Releeues the poor, his gates be never shut;
His tables free, there is meat for honest men:
He liude in England, learnt that countries guise,
For Hospitality, few such be here:
Yet frugall too, was never prodigal,
Spends nothing more, but what he well may spare,
He borrowes naught, nor lends on usury:
Yet has enough.

Enter Younker. Merchant, and the Serieant. Younk. Mine Host, what all alone?
And market day, why this is wondrous strange.

Flut. My noble Younker: Welcome Gentlemen,
I want such guests, heeres beer was never drunk,
Fresh set a broach: puts down the Diamont
For lively sparkling: of transparent view,
More clear then amber, or fair orient pearl,
Fetched from the farthest Inde,

Younk. How now mine Host?


Gar. Spare so much courtesy, lest we suspect
Some hidden craft.

Flut. In me? you know me well,
Plain Flutterkin, a down, right dealing man,
I have no guardes to set me bravely out;
But what I think I speak, and freely too,
Without deceit or simulation.

Ga. Why then two cans of your best English beer


Flut. It shall be done with much celerity.


He goes out for Beer. Youn. Come Serieant, I must have construction
Of Ouids verses, i will not bate an ace
Before you drink, I will not stay so long.

Ser. You are too hasty, spare me yet a while,
And then i will fit you.

Younk. Pray thee quick, dispatch,
I have some business calls me soon from hence.

Ser. Think you I cannot, am I such a fool?


Younk. I know not truly, but I love to learn,


Ser. Why then give ear, take heed, and mark me well,
You often watch to take me at the worst;
But I Will bar that, I Will have no cunning trick.
Fert animus; my mind prouokes me: Dij
Coeptis aspirate meis: Ye gods
Bless my proceedings: dicere, to speak
Of: Corpora mutatas: Bodies changde,
In noua formas: to new shapes: nam vos
Mutastis and illas: for you transformde
Those bodies strangely; yea and altered sore
Their shapes to that they never had before.

Youn. That same addition, adds life to the rest,
And wipes poor Priscians head, that's foully broke:

Ser. Why, is it not right?


Younk. Yes, there is none can mend it.


Ser. And now sir, for our other argument,
I Will not give of, before I am satisfied.

Gar. Fly to him Serieant, I will take thy part,
To serve on horseback, is best service still,
I will maintain it, while I live one day.

Yon. Against him and you, but give me leave to speak,
I Will show my reasons what I think are fit.

Enter Pasquill and Hans, and Flutterkin follows them with a Can of Beer in
either hand. Pasq. They are here before us.


Hans. We come in time,
Here comes mine host propt up between two cans.

Hans. Tha'ts well, all good.


Youn. A pair of pretty youths;
Show me but one six pence Pasquill, then I Will say,
Thou Wilt quickly thrive.

Pasq. Why, that I can, see there.
There Is four, and all unspent. believe your eyes.

Youn. God bless mine eyes, but Hans what news at home.
How fares my Parents, are they both in health?

Hans. They send their blessing, but your mothers, it
Is to be felt: it is leaquer on de tangde,
It cleaues fast to your palms: nay sir, it is gold,
The purest metal that the earth affoords.

Youn. Fill out some Beer mine Host.


Flut. Heeres to that hand;
That blessed you so with crosses of that kind.

Ser. It shall be pledgde.


Pas. Hang him says nay.


Hans. Not I.


Gar. Nor I, nor he, but with as good a will,
As ere I came from School, with leave to play.

Flut. Then give me leave I will begin this round;
This swelling cup I will drink lively out,
Not one word more, before I seet about.

Youn. In this i will please you, but i will drink no more.
They drink round, the Younker and Serieant rise from the Table, The question
which I prosecute is this,
If horse or foot should have pre-eminence:
They are needful both, to make an army up:
Yet those great Armies which the Tartars used,
Were all of horse; so were the Persians
Till later times the English Shirleis taught
The use of foot, and how to entrench a Camp.
What can they do but in such huge, vaste plains,
As are Tyrauna, and that Cossoua
So often made red with Turks and Christians blood,
And great Pharsalia famous for the fight
Twixt Pompey and Caesar worthy Warriors both,
Both which did strive for Romes sole Monarchy.
On mountains, bogs or woods, or broken rocks:
Where are your horse, ore-turnde and swallowed up
What can they do against a stand of Pykes,
Well linde with shot in such vantageous place.

Ser. But what say you unto that Persian Prince
That beat the Turk with thirty thousand horse,
Selim the first, the bloudiest Ottoman
Of all his race; who brought into the field
Two hundred thousand strong of horse and foot.

Youn. Indeed you touch me now, that history,
Makes much for you, that Sophy Ismael,
Did meet the tyrant in the open field,
Whose multitudes did think to swallow him
With open jaws, like to a mighty whale:
But as an anchor he stuck in his throat;
And made him kecke and shrink, to quit himself.

Gar. As how good brother, I desire to hear:
This likes me well: mine host I drink to you.

Flut. I thank you sir, you shall not go vnpledgde:
Here Pasquill, Hans, you two shall have your shares:

Both. We thank you both, we mean not to refuse.


Ser. Yea, toot and spare not, it will be your own,
Good drink breeds blood, and blood makes able men

Youn. This warlike Prince diuides his troops in two
The right hand battle he himself did lead,
The left, his vassal namde Vstan Oghlie,
When Turks divided they did do the like,
And so escapte the thundering Ordinance.
Unhappy Vstan could not get so clear
As did his Master, for the Canon shot
Fell among his troops, and did him greater harm.
This dreadlesse Prince with valor bravely armde,
Falls on amayne, with Turkish routes enclosde
On every side, and from each side he sends
Such fiery balls, as made them know his force.
They forwards ride, and backewards send their shot
On either hand, no place from them was free,
He onward flings, amongst the ^anizars,
The chiefest guard that this grand Seigneur has,
And drives them back within their strongest hold,
Amongst their packes, and Camels bound with chains,
No words, nor blows, nor fairest promises
Could make them budge, or move, or stir one foot.
The wounded Prince, that fainted bleeding sore,
Unable scarce to keep his Coursers back,
Perceiving this, with slow pac'te steps retirde,
And wheelde about, leaving his richest tents
Unto their spoils, that durst not stir to see,
For three days space, what was become of him.
In this I yield, the worlds best service known
That ever Horsemen did, themselves alone.

Ser. Well Younker, have I caught you. I am glad
Of any thing, wherewith to stop your mouth.

Youn. Nay soft, good Serieant, what can Horsemen do,
Before a town, when we beleaguer it.
They Will scale the walls, pass trenches, give assaults,
Or enter breaches, yes I warrant you.

Ser. They scour the Country, bring rich booties in,
While we lie staruing here, they live at ease,
Eat, drink and sleep.

Youn. The more they answer for:
When they ride struggling forth for lawless spoil,
We keep our works in danger night and day,
No spoiled peasant cries on us for's goods,
Nor ravished maid, for lost Virginity,
Nor wronged wife for forced dishonesty.

Gar. What? would you have no Horsemen then,


Younk. Not so.
Mistake me not, but i will not yield them chief,
Each body well composde, it does consiste
Of diverse members, framde by art, yet natural;
The body where are lodgde the chiefest parts,
I liken it unto the Infanterie;
The exterior parts to the Cauallerie.
The heart commands, the members execute;
So they to us, not we to them give way.

Ser. But where they are alone, all absolute:
What they can do, against your self you proud.

Youn. Why that's Barbarian, and not Christian-like,
Where multitude preuayles, not discipline,
And in such places, as I namde before;
As witness are those three days cruel fight
Huniades maintaind against mighty Amurath
The second: in Cosso^as fatal plains.
He kept an hill with thirty thousand men;
Ten thousand horse, the rest were all on foot
Against the Turks that lay like Grasshoppers,
Filling those plains, eight miles in compass round:
This little handful, roulde and turnde about,
On that hills top in strong and close array,
Flamde like a Candle among a world of flies,
That burnt themselves, ere they could put it out:
At length with travel tyrde, with blows and wounds
All rent and torn, choakt up with smoke and stench
Of bodies dead: match, poulder, bullets spent
This light did glimmer, flasht, and so went out*

Gar. What did the horsemen there, did none escape?


Yon. They quit their horse, and made them as a wall
For their defense, and fought it out on foot,
Almost to the last man, some few escapte;
And swamme the river, got into a wood
Among the which, Huniades was one
The half beat conquering Turks had all enough,
Stood still and gazde, and glad to see him gone.

Ser. Was not the Seigneur proud, ons victory,
Rejoicing much at his Hungarian spoils.

Youn So proud, he mournd: was sick with grief and hate,
Of this his Conquest, at so dear a rate.

Gar. This likes me well, but ere you do proceed,
I Will drink to you: now am I for the foot,
Heeres to you all, my noble Fantassines.

Pasq. Sir, one health more, your Fathers health, I mean,
That good old man, he must not be forgot.

Youn. Drink't out I pray thee, I will have no more.


Pas. Were you a Younker, made of beaten gold,
You should have this; What nor your Fathers health?

Youn. No, not his health* to drink away mine own*
But drink to Hans, I see by his lips he is dry;
He wants it, I do not, heel drink for me,
Or to the Serieant, he can get no drink.

Pasq. Nor him, nor he, i will drink to none but you,
I Will keep my man, I learned that trick at School.

Youn. Am I your man, god Bacchus, tossepot Knight,
Would glass and drink were both besides thy guts;
I tell thee, i will no more.

Flutt. Come Pasquill, I
Will pledge thee, I can yet hold out, two cups,
Two slashes on the legs will not be felt.
I am as strong as Hercules near out.

Ser. Why how now Hans? what Planet struck? quite mute,
Or Bagge-pype-like, not speak before thou art full,
Not one wise word; why, where is all thy mirth.

Hans. Nor so, nor so, I can speak yet, if need,
I hear, I see, yet nothing say at all:
Mine Host has learned, to play at Fox mine host;
He will grow kind, we shall have drink enough.

Flutt. Enough my Ladde, wilt drink an Ocean?
Me thinks a Whirle-poole cannot ore drink me.

Ser. Yet am I still for horse a Kingly fight.
Oh finely mounted, what a pleasure it is
A troop of brave Launcers, a stately show,

Youn. More show then service, for our good Dragons,
Do wheel about untouched, and gall their sides,
Nor do our Pykemen care a straw for them:
Those troops are good for execution,
To spoil a Kingdom, waste or havoc all:
Where Is no resistance, or at least small head,
Or else to run, when as a battles lost,
But for a strength, a brave battalion
Of Pikes and shot, empald two hundred square,
And flanckt with carts and packes on either side:
Your horsemen may go whistle, where are they,
This iron wall is impenetrable.
Witness that battle was at Varna fought,
A shame to Christians for their breach of truce.

Ser. Why? what was that? twixt whom, what was there done


Gar. He pays you Serieant now, you are well most gone.
Come I Will go home, I Will stay no longer here.
This Beer has pepper, it begins to bite.

Ser. Yet stay a while, and I Will wait on you home,
I must needs hear an end of this discourse.

Younk. The Cardinal Julian mooude this lucklesse War,
Causing the King and States of Hungary
To break their truce; which they had solemn sworn;
The Pope dispenc't with them, so would not God,
If he be witness: he wills faith be kept
Without exception, be it with Infidels,
As this was here; the sequel proud it true,
In manner thus: Huniades that mannadgde all,
Dislikte this war: yet Vladislaus
This youthful King, eggde on by Julian,
Would needs break faith with mighty Amurath,
And near to Varna both their armies met,
Where he so placed his battles as a Lake,
Flanckt the left side; a wood was on the reere:
And on the right hand all their wagons went:
Had they kept so, Byzantium had been ours:
And Greece once more it had been Christendom;
The battles joined, and after furious charge,
The Turks turnde back, like birds with scarlions scarde;
So dreadful were those well known colors which
Huniades did bear: he gives them chase,
Heedes not the meaner troops; but at hard heels,
Follows the fearful Amurath: mean while
The warlike Priest, more happy at his book
Does quit his strength, falls on, thinks all is woone,
Some chase the Turks, while others seek for prey,
And spoil their tents: they rued this greediness.
This when the Turks perceyude, they soon rallide,
And chac't them now, by whom they erst were chac'de.
Here dies the periurde King, the lucklesse Priest
Falls in a ditch, and there was choakt with mudde.

Ser. Where was the General? what did he this while?


Youn. His warlike troops, stood firm both horse and foot:
Held on his chase, none durst against him make head:
But when he saw all lost, with watered eyes,
True signals of his grief, all safe retirde,
And watched the Seigneur till he left those bounds.

Gar. Why, this was strange, Oh fie on perjury,
I Will not believe spensations of the Pope,
Had that foul Cardinal, choakt in's mothers womb,
This shameful loss had escaped Christendom.

Ser. That's true sir, pray drink one cup to me,
Deed I am dry.

Gar. I care not, soes not I.
Filt up, drinkte out, you are an honest man.
How do Pasquill, perceiu'st thou nothing yet.

Pas. All well sit; nothing: I am pretily well,
And soes mine host, I think his brains do crow.

Youn. But leaving these to come near to our times,
And nearer home, I Will give you one for all.
When Henry the eighth of famous memory,
Wan Bolleigue from the French: near Ardres town
A great Commander lighted from his horse,
When against the English they were to make head,
And serude on foot, using such friendly speech:
You are the men I love, this like I best;
With you i will live and dye: Let me ask this;
What service ever did the horse alone,
In these our Belgicke wars, without the foot?
Can they endure hunger, thirst or want,
Or march in cold, or heat, like to the foot:
They Will dye like dogs, and you must eat them up;
Or they will eat you.
Cornelius discouers himself. His man creepes behind mine Host Flutterkin.
and slippes out behind him. Why what is the matter there?

Ser. Well Younker well, I will with you dispense,
I Will yield the foot the chief pre-eminence.

Enter Cornelius. He reeles against him. Flut. Your Worships welcome, you do
grace mine house.


Corn. Thanks, good mine Host, is Phoebus past his height,
Or be times changde, is it Noone beforte be night?
Your house is altered, its grown a School
Of good discourse; of martial discipline.

Ser. Wilt please you sir to drink?


Corn. Some Claret Wine;
No Beer, I seldom use to drink twixt meals,
Observe good diet, to preserve mine health.
Drink fasting in the morning strong March Beer,
Small Beer at Meals, and when my stomachs raw,
A Cup of Spanish Wine: Eat light Suppers,
Near sit up late at night: and rise betimes;
Often walk abroad, and use much exercise:
These midnight Revels, Surfets, Wine, and Whores,
And private quarrels, have deuourde more men
Then have the wars of late.

Ser. Sir, heeres a Chair,
Please you to sit and take Tobaccho with us.

Cor. Not I good Serieant, I Will no Trinidade,
My nose shall not be reeyde, nor guts did black,
That dainty likes me not, that wholesome Weed,
Makes fulsome smell: a dying hound would choke
With Belgicke fire, and with Spanish smoke.

Gar. You can endure the smell sir?


Corn. Wondrous well,
But not to take it; It does purge mine head,
And makes me sneeze, as though I tookt my self.
Its well done Serieant, you have held him up
With good discourse: All times not lost, I see,
Nor yet ill spent: place makes not men or good
Or bad, its lewdness, ill condition,
As vice or virtue does in men abound;
Virtue from Heaven, Vice it comes from Hell,
And dragges men's souls where monstrous Furies dwell.
Flutterkin brings Wine, and drinks to him. Please you sir, I will drink one
hearty draught
Unto your Worships welcome to the town;
In generous Claret, sparkling; this for me,
The only drink.

He drinks. Cor. Drinkt out. -- I thank you kindly.
To drink one hearty draught, will do me good.

Flut. Yea twenty, if you will, heeres Wine enough.
The town is full, good lyquor wais it round,

Cor. The Moate thou meanest; thou speakst in Metaphors:
You have been busy, I perceive the cup
Works his revenge, for ioaling it so often.

Ser. A little sir, one civil cup or two.


Cor. That civil cup breeds inciuility.
When wine sometimes makes men be not themselus
How do thou Pasquill, I am glad thou art well?

Pas. I thank you sir, I want but Holidays.


Cor. What do thou work so hard?


Pas. Pay-dayes I mean,
To make one meet another, and shake hands,
On even terms, is all that I care for.

Cor. It Is well thou leadest a merry life.


Pasq. Thank God.
My Mistress, and you sir: you are my friends
You make me drink, when others will not doot.

Cor. What news mine host, I like your humor well
It Is merry harmeles, free without offense:
But where is my man, was not he here to day.

Pas. He was indeed, but went before you came
About his business.

Cor. Since you might have said;
I saw him when he slinkte behind mine host

Pas. Gods blessing on your heart, what ere you think
You find no fault.

Flut. What news sir? did you ask?
Here is small news: our Churchmen disagree
About opinions, which nere troubles me:
I am a man, I hope, believes the right,
There Is but one God, one true religion;
One way to heaven, two or three to hell,
If they teach right, according to Gods word.
I will believe them, otherwise i will choose.

Cor. Why that's well said, indeed those deep disputes
Are fitter for the Universities
To be discust within the College walls
Amongst the learned, not to come abroad
In open Pulpits among the meaner sort,
Whose faith is weak, whose judgment cannot reach
Unto the depth of things: the Magistrate,
Whose sword I dare not touch, should look to this:
It Will breed combustions, hazard many souls;
Besides this place befits not this discourse;
Therefore i will break it off, Come lets away;
I Will to my wife, I left her at your house:
Son Garland, there I mean to dine;
To morrow I enuite you to my house
To eat some venison, here it is nouelty;
It came from England, baked in Rye paste,
Look that you come, mine host this recknings mine:
Let not my son score high: for if you do
It Is lost for me, I Will not pay one penny.

Flut. No sir, he does not, needs not, will not sir;
I will not miss you, if it shall please God
Nothing shall stay me, naught shall keep me back.

Pas. And I Will come too, and though I go on foot.


Co. Why come and welcome, that's your chiefest cheer
I keep no feast, but what lasts all the year.
Exeunt. Music. Enter Hans solus. If I escapte unseen, why so it is:
If not I care not much: it is but so;
Perhaps a chiding, sour look, or rappe,
Its but a storm, it will be soon ore-past;
May be, just nothing: but i will haste me home;
Set up mine horses, dress my stable up,
And do such things, as I do use to do,
So I be doing, it is no matter what:
If it be not ill, and may bring profit in,
Or otherwise, prevent a wilful waste.
Things must be handsome, idleness is naught,
My Mistress loves me for my cleanliness.
Our yard lies handsome, there is no scattered straw
Nor sticks, nor chippes, but all things be as neat,
As some man's house, not rooted hog-stye like;
Or else poor Hans his iacquet hums: my coat
Is sure to pay for it: ere my master comes
I Will be at home; if Pasquill ere come there
I Will sit on's skirts, fear't not, for out of doubt,
I Will use him so, the boys shall find him out.
Exit. Enter Cornelius and his wife. I told you wife where I should find your
son;
Your sons I might have said: for they were both
Fast at the pot, some talked, some drunk as fast;
The cups flew high, and brains waxt something light
I do perceive wise men sometimes lash out,
And thrifty too: would you have thought my son
The Merchant M. Garland would have stepped
Into a tappe-house, there to spend his time,
And money both.

Hann. Why not? it is recreation,
Sometimes for company, always at home;
It makes it loathsome, duls the brain and sense:
We must not think on profit always, win,
Spend now and then, though not to please our selus
For others sakes.

Cor. Well: you will still excuse,
Your son, this gives too much encouragement
To his amiss.

Hann. I speak not fore his face,
Nor do I like in him, what you dislike:
My will is yours; but should I say as you
We should not reason, so to pass the time;
For when I speak, and speak the same you do;
You Will not reply, then both our tongues are still;
But if I cross you, though it be not much,
I hear more of you, sometimes learn more wit*

Cor. Your answers sharp, it cutteth razor like,
A woman's wit is quick, as quick her tongue,
As Aspin leaves, some say it is the last
Part of a woman dies.

Han. Alas poor souls, we women must bear all
We weaker vessels must abide your frumpes:
But it is no matter, while they break no skin,
Our backs were made to bear.

Cor. Your bellyesfull,


Han. Our children do you mean? that's Gyptia^ like:
For so they bear them, in their slats or sheets;
If otherwise, my modest cheeks would blush
To answer you.

Cor. Better and better still;
Your apprehension takes like tutch; its hard
To find a woman quick of wit, so mild,
So modest, shamefac't, and so debonnaire.
It joys me much, a woman's modesty,
And grieves my soul to hear a scoulding queen,
That sets her husbands nightcap on with horns.

Hann. Be there such women?


Cor. No, there should not be,
I do not say there are; I know none such;
All women are alike to me, I Will swear,
If my skill fail not, thoult not cuckolde me,
Nor bring more children, so thy planet says,
I found it, casting thy Nativity.

Hann. Oh sir, those studies are but fopperies,
They are conjectures, there is no certainety,
Scarce warrantable, by the word of God,
Yet Scholars use them, if not good, the more,
Their fault, my fancy tells me so.

Cor. It Is true:
The art is lawful, it is Astrology,
But th'arts abuse in those predictions
Stretching a string too far, marres all;
We must not attribute to creatures that
Which the Creator wills; its he alone,
That guides our bodies, not the influence
Of stars or Planets, without him their power
Is nothing; nor does he reveal his will
In them; yet wonders strange they often foreshew,
Which men may guess at, none knows til it is past;
Therefore I hold them idle vanity.

Han Now sir, you are welcome home, this idle chat
Has shortened our way: I Will to my Dayerie;
I must spare time to see my house wifery.
Exeunt. Enter Pasquill solus. Shall I not have a pleasant journey on it
Think you, that must take such provision
With me: a Tankard full of Spanish Wine
Like those in London Water-bearers use;
The which the Merchant sends to his Father
A baked Swanne, and two huge Turky-cockes;
Two bottles of French Wine, the Serieant sends
And M. Flutterkin. I am their man
Must do their business, must haste on a fore,
While they take leisure: Nay I Will get two more
To wait on me, and row me in a boat
With this my luggage: when I am dry, I Will drink,
And taste a bit: but that the Pies are whole;
O there is the grief: but yet I Will have a trick
Shall serve my turn, ere I will sterue for meat.
Three English miles, and neither drink nor eat?
It is too great a journey, I shall scarce hold out
Without refreshing, something by the way,
Will do me good, but for mine honest men;
I Will keep them sober, give them never a drop
Till they come there, unto the Younkers house,
Where they shall have enough; too much I doubt
Without more heed; yet none will force them drink;
But if they will takte, their Butterie is so free.
A drunkard will be caught, before he is ware;
There Is Hans his man, that rascal Beere-pot,
He will be doing, though he gets the worst;
And when his head flies light, why then he runs
To look to his horse, and there he falls a sleep
Ore the ears in litter; but I Will watch him now.
I Will keep him from the Stable; then I am sure
To nogge him soundly; I Will eorroborate
My Peare-pot bravely; I Will buffticulate,
And counter-ieere him with my terms of Art;
Ribrost his downs, fling up my Gallants heels;
Make him take heed hereafter: be he wise
To deal with Soldiers in a drinking prize.
But time hastes on, and I must hence with speed;
What Is left with me in trust, I Will do it indeed.
Exit. Enter the Moore Singing. Burston dantmarden, calaminthay pindara toekson,
Marnuta maltalton, tintima marra tolon.
I brought with me great store of Barbary gold;
But all is gone, my parrell quite worn out;
And in this fashion am ashamde to go,
For fear my father would not look on me;
But if good fortune furnish me again.
With your free wills I Will run from hence to Spain.
Sing again. Here may you see how fortune turns her wheel:
I that before did many men command;
Am now constrainde to serve my Masters man;
For Fortune I care not, that fickle Whore;
I will be merry still, though near so poor.

Sing another Song, and go out. Enter the Younker, the Merchant and the
Serieant. Ser. I thank you both, for you have made me fine;
These gloves and gartars they were quickly won:
Each day so set on work, I should be rich.
Blessed be my Grandame brought me up at School
Where I learned wit, more then you thought I had.

Gar. He has drild us both, and mocks us to our teeth
What shall we do with him? weel' canuase him.

Ser. I am too big.


Youn. We Will fling him in the graffe,
T'wil cool him sweetly; oh it will do him good.

Ser. Were I an Anabaptist, you might do it,
And witness for me that I were baptizde;
But that I had in the town where I was borne,
Ere eight days old, I do remember't yet.

Youn. O monstrous, fie, thy mouth is foully torn,
Art not ashamed?

Ser. As well I swear,
As the first smock that ere my Father wear.

Gar. Let him alone and he will maintain't with oths.


Ser. See, see how you are deceived, you thought I lyde,
There Is no such matter, altered is the case,
As surely as I live, and walking in this place.

Gar. Riming again, I Will deal no more with you;
I had enough of late, I paid too dear
For your conceits, I Will have no more of them.

Ser. As often as you will, you know the price;
And for my skill I pass not, am not nice.

Youn. Well to him Serieant, now i will take thy part
Against him, as he did thine before against me;
I Will be reuengde for his discourtesie.
I marvel much where is Master Flutterkin?
He stays so long I think he has forgot himself.

Ser. O here he is, his guts they are so stuffed,
With his fat liquor he can scarcely run.

Gar. Scarce run, scarce go, this barreld Sturgeon
Is out of breath, his grease begins to melt.

Flut. Mock on my Gallants, see what will come on it,
A shame on Lurchers, you have kilde me up.
I ran so fast, ere I could oretake you.

Gar. A child of two year old would run as fast.

Flut. Then I Will be hanged, good sir, how can that run?
That does but dade, can hardly go or stand.
Where Is Pasquill is he gone?

Ser. He Is there by this?
I saw him at the Ports, that Gentleman
Is ats two men; takes boat, sits down at ease,
And takes Tobacco, while they row him on,
He keeps a bottle just betwixt his legs,
Drinks when he list, and so he sets it down.

Flut. Would I were with him in such aequipage;
Or he were here, for I am almost choked.

Draw out the Aqua vitae pottle and drinks. Gar. Why, how Flutterkin, at your
Brande-wine?
I pray thee give me some.

Flut. Not the least drop.
Drink again. Were you a thousand Merchants; Serieantes, drink again.
Or Younkers not a drop,
Think you I Will dye
For want of wholesome drink? all is out, see there:
So now I am well, can walk a mile or two,
As lustique as a Boore, and near complain.

Youn. My fathers yonder, he comes here to meet's.


Flut. So nigh already; Oh, I see the house;
I smell the Kitchen, see the Chimneis smoke.
Come Serieant; put the better leg before;
You shall speak first, if well, I Will second you.

Ser. Thanks good mine Host, your wit would help me much
For good conceits your wholesome guts have hatched,
When sodde in sack, your brains begin to flow.

Flut. Out from the horror of infernal deepes;
Pass forwards on; for I must stay behind:
Some small occasion biddes me stand aside.

Cor. Its' well your come, for I did think you long:
And that you had forgot to keep your words.
I bid you welcome to my Country farm;
Take that for all, I Will use no ceremony.

Ser. I Will warrant you sir, we did not mean to fail,
To stay at home, and miss so good a feast,
It Is Christmas now, It comes but once a year;
And when it comes, men say, it brings good cheer.
Here Is Flutterkin takes leisure, comes behind;
Good man he sweates, his guts keep him so warm.
But fear of fainting by the high way side,
He has provided to preserve his health;
Brande-Wine a creuse, which he drinks out himself.

Flut. I hear you Serieant, I can bear your mocks:
You never knew fat men but honest yet;
A good companion, full of mirth and wit;
Lean iades cast off, lie staruing in a ditch;
When plumper steeds are steemde among the rich.

Ser. Are you so nigh, I thought you had been lost:
By your leave sir; I Will welcome here mine Host.

Cor, Ha Serieant I have known thee to serve long,
And yet thou stick'st, belike thou like thy game:
Try friends and fortune, may be it will hitte
To make thee higher on preferments step;
Stand not on thorns: adventure, draw a card.

Ser. So may I draw, and draw my self quite out:
And striving to get more, loose that I have.
Times are not now as they were erst, when you
Did haunt the fields, and led a Soldiers life:
Men had respect, and then were looked upon
For their deserts; but now it is nothing so.
Reward goes backward, honor on his head,
And due deserts are slight regarded now:
He that wants gold, seeks place, may stand aloof;
Stand fast he that would rise, or else he falls;
That now is sold, which then was but free gift;
Promotions fall not, but are bought before;
He that mounts now, he does not as of old;
Rise by his virtues, but helped up with gold.

Youn. With leave and reverence may I speak my mind;
What though my friends be rich? it grieves me much
To see poor Soldiers walk in mean attire;
And less respect that have deserved well,
Grown old in wars, and got nothing but blows,
Wide gaping wounds, lost limbs and broken bones,
And just preferment, which another gets,
And they deserved, and perhaps a man
That never saw the field, nor chimneis smoke;
But those at home within his native soil.
Each man would up, there is none I am sure would down;
And they may use their talents as their own
To their own good and glory; not the hurt
Of poor or rich, of Kingdoms, Commonwealths;
I blame not those that seek to increase their wealth,
Or better their estates by honest means;
I wrong not Princes, touch not their affairs.
Carpe not at men, but times corruptions;
Some climb too fast, and climbing catch a fall;
If please God he can help it, he helps all.

Cor. The Romans vsd to make their Worthies known,
By honourde titles, and with ornaments,
As rings and chains, gilt swords, and spurs of gold,
Which none might wear but such as were allowde.
But now Jack Sauce will be in's gilded spurs,
Whose father brewde good Ale for honest men:
Lodged Pedlers, Tynkers, Bearewards such a crew,
The scumme of men, the plain rascality,
Such was Auratus Eques miles calde;
The French men now, call him Vncheualier;
We call them Rydders, the English name them Knights;
It Was strange to see, what Knighthood once would do;
Stir great men up, to lead a martial life,
Such as were nobly borne, of great estates
To gain this honor, and this dignity;
So noble a mark to their posterity.
But now alas, it is grown ridiculous,
Since bought with money, sold for basest prize;
That some refuse it, which are counted wise.

Gar. But here is the difference; for we use to say,
Is such one Knighted? he deserude it well;
He Is learned, wise, an hopeful Gentleman;
Has been abroad, has seen and knows the wars:
He speaks more language then his mothers tongue,
He can does country service, or his Prince
At home, abroad by Sea, or else by land,
Maintain the sword of civil government:
But such ones made a Knight: What that Arch-Clowne!
His wit is like his mothers milking payle:
Brought up at home, or at Hogsnorton School:
His Father near gave arms, writ good man Cluneh,
And he kept sheep, or beasts, drove plough or cart:
The first on's name, first Knight, then Gentleman.
God give him joy; his honor cost him dear:
A sotte in Crimson, grown a golden Knight;
Well may'te become him, he becomes not it:
More then an Ass, a rich caparison.

Cor. You are two bitter son, you speak too townsman like,
As one that enuies Country Gentlemen:
He that does raise his house, although a Clown,
Is happier far, then he that pulls it down.

Gar. Indeed that's true, for he may have a Son,
Whose better breeding may help those defects,
That beins father; may be fit to rule,
The Sword of Justice in a commonwealth,
Raises his house and name, sets it higher,
Writes second Knight, a Justice, or Esquier.

Cor. When I was in my flower of youth, and liu'de
In Englands Court, that swarmde with Martialists,
Seamen and Soldiers, there had great respect,
Were set by; honored more then other men,
As Drake and Candish. Hawkins, Frobisher,
Williams, and Baskernile two valiant Knights,
Those worthy brothers known by Norreis name:
The Veres, the Shirleis, and the Constables,
Sir Thomas Morgan, brave Lord Willoughbie,
Whom Spaniards termde the fierce, the devil of hell;
Renowned Essex, famous Cumberland,
And both the Howardes prooude so often at Sea
With tempests, roaring billows, Canon shot;
George Summers Knight, Carlisle and Lancaster,
Were not the least; these lived in my time;
And diverse more whose names I have forgot,
That serude in Ireland, whom those bloody wars*
Made famous unto all posterity,
Some living yet, some foulded up in lead,
That did in honors lap; sleep in her bed.

Ser. Then was a time that soldiers were esteemd,
And if they liude they had preferment sure,
And those that did were well provided for;
Then did men rise from meanest parentage
By their deserts, to places of account,
As some you nam'de, not borne to any thing;
Did raise their fortunes to a great estate,
And gave no bribes, did not one penny pay,
To any cogging Claw-backe Sycophant,
And for deserts had freely what they had;
For happy was that man, though near so great,
That could do honor to a man of war,
As those that served in France amongst those broils,
And civil discordes yet can testify,
When that rich kingdom pitteously torn
All stainde with gore, half marred with fire and sword
What there was got, how much account was had
Of them: when back they made their home return:
When happy Bourbon got those lillyes three;
Began their peace: did end that misery.

Cor. I saw those wars, and saw that nauall fight
In eighty eight twixt Spain and English fleet.
With Norreis went I unto Portugal,
And was with Essex at the sack of Cales,
From thence to Ireland where I was a while,
But Newport battle that made up my mouth,
The last great service that I ere was at,
Where being sore hurt, was weak, and sick long time,
Ere I was well, and had my former health
Before that time, if ought were to be done.
Each summer was I wandering still abroad,
And what I got, encreast my liuelihood,
Each year a little, till I had enough,
I thank my God, he tossed me to and fro,
And sent me home at last to live in peace;
Per mare, per terras, per tot discrimenarerum
Tendimus in Latium: this Aeneas said.
In Latin land when Trojan wars were past,
To live in peace we are arriude at last.
Blessed be that hand which brought this blessed peace;
And blessed be those that pray it never cease.

Flut. O happy you, that so did spend your time,
In dangers great abroad, by sea and land,
While lazy Lurdaines lay and slept at home,
You rayzde your fortunes, got a brave estate,
And after all, now lead a Country life,
Amongst your neighbors with a virtuous wife.

Ser. Why that's a comfort, far beyond compare*
This happy life cannot be paragonde,
My own conceit has rapt me from my self,
Me thinks I am such one, my state is such,
And how I sit by mine own fire side
With my sweet wife, the life of my dear life,
And tell my children, what I erst have seen
To encourage them, to tread their Fathers steps;
To make them bold to banish servile fear.
It Is heaven on earth; the minds and hearts content,
A Kingdoms riches: can a man have more?
Then Gods sweet peace: the love of Commonwealth;
His minds desires and bodies perfect health.

Cor. Here comes my wife, and Pasquill with my man,
Think Dinners ready, we will leave discourse.

Hans. Please you come in, your meat is taking up,
And you may talk as well by th'fire side.

Cor. We come sweet wife, come give me thy fair hand;
We Will walk in couples one turn round about.
It Is Temple fashion, there observed yet.
By the ancient Seniors, dancing in a ring,
Their stately measures, hand in hand by two
And two; upon their solemn revel nights,
And then we will in, and drink full Nectar cups,
And taste such meat, as God has given us,
Yet midst of mirth remember them that want,
To comfort them, with some part of our store
In harmless mirth; thus have we done our parts;
If you be pleased, how joyful are our hearts.
Exeunt. Manet Hans. Revenge, revenge for Pasquils ugly whore,
I Will make him drunk, was never creature more.
Pasquill within. You would but cannot, thank you good Sir Hans,
If I be drunk, your self shall lead the dance.

Hans. What? did he hear me? now this bargains made;
Once warnde, half armde, so does the Proverb say.
Now if I would, I cannot, he will none,
He not adventure, least I first be gone;
He saw me not, yet sees what I would do;
Him i will requite, see not, and yet see too*
I Will give him what he wants, or drink or meat,
And all you too, if that you please to eat,
At your own costs, for my store will not do it,
My means are short, they will not reach vntoo't.
In such excess, I will not do amiss;
My mind is altered, you may see by this:
And for what is past: if it have moude delight,
I take my leave rejoice, and so good night.

Music, song and dance. THE SONG.
WAlking in a shadow Grove,
Near silver streams fair gliding,
Where trees in ranks did grace those banks,
And Nymphs had their abiding.
Here as I stayde, I saw a maid.
Abeauteous lovely creature,
With Angels face, and Goddess grace,
Of such exceeding feature.
Her looks did so astonish me,
And set my heart a quaking,
Like stagge that gazde, was I amazde,
And in a stranger taking:
Yet rouzde my self to see this elfe,
And lo a tree did hide me:
Where I unseen beheld this Queen,
A while ere she espide me.
Her voice was sweet melodiously,
She sung in perfect measure:
And thus she said with trickling tears,
Alas my joy and treasure.
I Will be thy wife, or lose my life.
There Is no man else shall have me,
If God say so: I will say no,
Although a thousand crave me.
Oh stay not long, but come my dear,
And knit our marriage knot,
Each hour a day, each month a year.
Thou know I think, God wot,
Delay not then like worldly men,
Good works till withered age
Boue other things: the King of Kings
Blessed a lawful marriage.
Thou art my choice, I constant am,
I mean to die unspotted,
With thee i will live, for thee I love,
And keep my name vnblotted.
A virtuous life, in maid and wife,
The Spirit of God commends it.
Accursed he, for ever be,
That seeks with shame to offendit.
With that she rose like nimble Roe,
The tender grass scarce bending,
And left me there, perplexed with fear,
At this her Sonnets ending.
I thought to move this dame of love,
But she was gone already:
wherefore I pray, that those that stay
May find their loves as steady.
An Addition to the Moors last speech.
HEre may you see how fortune turns her Wheel;
I that before did many men command:
Am now constrainde to serve my masters man;
Regnau^, regno, regnabo, sum sine regno:
She makes the world her stage, or Tenniscourt:
Where men like bals are banded to and fro:
Or Player-like, come forth, to act their parts;
Speak big and strut, and stride Colossus like,
And when his turn is out steps in at door;
Another takes his room. comes out no more.
Soon up, soon down, now higst, then lowest of all,
Like Codrus poor: and straight as Croesus rat,
Thus glories fortune in inconstancy;
For her I care not, she is a fickle whore,
I will be merry, be I near so poor.
FINIS.

