THE TESTAMENT OF WILLIAM BELL. GENTLEMAN. ^EFT WRITTEN IN HIS OWN HAND. SET
OVT ABOVE 33. YEARS AFTER HIS DEATH.

With annotations at the end, and Sentences, out of the H. Scripture, Fathers,
etc.

By his son FRANCIS BELL, of the Order of Freers Minors, Definitor of the
Province of England: Guardian of S. BONAVENTVRES College in Doway: and
Professor of the sacred Hebrew tongue, in the same.

Electo meo foedus excidi (...) Vulgat. Psalm. 88. Disposui testamentum electis
meis. Permissu Superiorum.

AT DOWAY, ^. BALTH^^^^ (...)

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL MR. EDWARD SHELDON of Beoley, etc.
SIR.
Anciently, when after the rihgt of nature, the earth was Common, and all the
gooddes thereof: that a man Could say to his neighbor (...) have thou not all
the earth before thee? Genes. 13.9.
separate thy self from me, if thou go to the lef^ hand I will keep the
right, i^ thou go to the Right hand ^ will howld the left. Men gau^ in their
testaments to they^ children only celestial doctrines, that to whom they had
given being, they might also give well-being. Psalm. 77,
By thee^ means we have heard an^ known so many things: declared to us by
our fathers which in the next generation were not hid from they^ children,
declaring the praises of our Lord, his virtues, and mervailes done by him, that
reised up testimony in ^acob: and gave a law to ^srael* how many things did
he command our fathers ^o make known to their ^onnes to the end that the
^ext generation might know them, that the children that should arise and be
borne of them, might tell them again ^o their children, and all, that they
might set their ^ope in God, not forget his ^orckes, and search out his
^ommands. Moses. Deuteronomy. 32.
Re^ember the days of oulde think upon every several generation, ask thy
father and he will declare, thy elders and they will tell thee. Men gave, I
say, from hand to hand the law of God, his fear, and love: with benediction
to the keepers, malediction to the breakers of it* Commending virtue,
condemning vice: foretelling pain and glory the reward^ of both. Epist. Iud.
ca. 1.14.
Such testament* the seventh man from Adam, Genesis 48 49.
Enoch made. Such wa^ the Patriarch Jacobs testament disposed to his 12.
sons: such also those, of these 12. Patriarchs themselves. A most ancient
Hebrev book, called, the testament of the 12. Patriarchs
But of that new and everlasting testament of JESUS CHRIST the son of God
what shall I say? therein is all knowledge of the heavenly kingdom: the
aeternall beatitude and foelicitie of man. After this incomparable Testament,
in which are all the treasures of the riches and wisdom of God, I may bring
in that godly testament of my holy Father S. Francis, which after he was signed
with the sacred stigmats of our Savior JESUS CHRIST, full with fervor, and
the holy ghost, near the end of his life, he left to us his children, that more
sincerely and catholickly we might keep his Evangelicall rule.

Diverse pious testaments have been by sundry devout persons, at several times
ordained: And not among the last do I accoumpt this testament of my father, a
man known and esteemed of your worship no less then of M.r Raphe your father
of happy memory. It has been kept in his own manuscript thees 44. years
and more. By divine providence, it has at last come to my hands: who having
been above 18. years out of my country in foreign lands, neither sought for,
nor thought of any such thing (although seeing it now, I remember that in my
younger years I have seen it before) when a grave father of our seraphicall
order venerable for his well spent, years from his infancy till 67. (so ^owld
he is at this day) and no ^ess for his profownde judgment and eloquence both
in ^peach and style, lighting upon it sent it out of England to me, with no
small commendations thereof. His censure animated me to put it in print. And for
a patron to whom I might dedicate it I had not far to seek: your Constant
Christianity and professing of the Catholic Religion: who like the great
Patriarch Abraham, to follow God, have gone out of land and Country and
fathers house and friends and kindred, and familiars, or like Saint Peeter out
of all, does Challenge so christianlike a testament: especially from me who, as
appears in the 34.. of it, am severely charged to be serviceable toward you
and yours.

That service together with my self I offer here to your worship, for us all
that have the charge there laid upon us: that we be not challenged with the
vile vice of ingratitude: or breach of the dead man's will. my self have had
part of my education from M.r Francis Daniel, my uncle, of whom mention is made
in the 32.. who now lives not on earth. Of the Throckmarto^s of Coughton or
Fekenha^ mentioned in the 33.. I have yet no knowledge, nor of Sir Ihon
Littletons house, spoken of in the end of the 34.. I may live to do them
service. your self only remains the man that most extended his godnes toward
us in accomplishing this will: in bringing up my brother Edmund together with
your own sons to learning to music, and to the university of Oxforde, as
was required. your sister also the Religious Lady Russell gave educatio^
successively to two of my sisters Margarit and Dorothe.

Receive therefore from me this last will of my father as my first will to serve
you, which with my life shall last, and be my last* so shall I fulfill that
iterated precept of the holy ghost (...) Proverb. 1.8.

hear o my son the instruction of thy father.
(...) Proverb. 6.20.

keep o my son the precept of thy father.
God praeserue your worship long to his highest glory, the good of our
family, and chiefly of our seraphicall order to which you have always showed
a charitable affection: and finally chosen in our Convent at Namur Abraham's
double cave for burial to your happily decessed wife and you. From our celle^
in S. Bonaventures College in Doway this 7. of January* 1632.

Your worships obliged Br. FRANCIS BEL^

^N THE NAME of God. Amen.
THE twentieth day of October in the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred
fowerscore and seven: and in the nine and twentieth year of the reign of our
sove^igne Lady Elizabeth. I William Bell, alias, ^ellne, of Temple-Broughton
in the County of Wigorne, Gentleman: being (...) good health of body, and of
sound and perfe^^ memory, (our Lord be blessed and thank^ therefore) calling to
my remembrance th^^ all flesh is grass, according to the sayi^^ of the
Prophet Esaia, and borne to di^ and that in this decaying age of the wo^^ and
triumphing time of sin; besides t^^ course of nature, many new and
dang^rouse diseases do arise: and many malitio^^ complottes and practices of
Satan and (...) ministers are taken in hand; whereby our li^ is continually
endangered and sodeinly taken away whereof there be infinite natural and some
ruefull and tragical examples. A^ having respect and regard of my frail
su^stance: of my short pilgrimage in the world, and long account I have to
ma^^ to my Maker in the world to come. A^^ desirous to make known to my
posteri^ the state of my soul and body. I do no^ declare, ordain, and
publish, my will a^^ testament: as a farewell to the vain and disembling
world: and do thereby give, a^^ bequeath, devise, and declare, in manner (...)
form following.

. 1.
IN PRIMIS. I give, and as a true Christian Catholic man, bequeathe my ^oule
into the hands and mercy of Almigh^ie God; by faith confessing and in hope
re^osing my salvation to be in the only me^ites death, and Passion of CHRIST
JESUS, ^rusting to reign with him in glory, that ^or the redemption of me
and all man^inde reigned and triumphed over sin, ^eath, and hell it self, in
the Altar of the Cross. Whereunto I implore, and beseech ^he assistance by
prayer of the blessed and ^mmaculate Virgin MARIE, and of all the ^oly company
of heaven, who being now ^n glory, members of the triumphant Church, have in
Christ compassion of the members of the militant Church. And I will that my
body, when it shall be dis^olued into his first substance, be decently
^uried in the parish Church of Handburie, ^r wheresoever else it shall please
God to ^ppoint.

. 2.
And, for as much as in this ruefull decay ^f the Catholic religion, and in
this most ^iurious and troublesome time, I as a true ^hristian, and careful
father, have a zealouse care to leave to all the world, and especially to my
Children, for their imitation, a Confession of my faith.

. 3.
Be it known to them, and to all the world, that I profess, and from my
heart protest to live, and die a member of Christ's true Catholic and
Apostolic Church out of the unity and fellowship whereof, there never was, nor
is, nor can be, salvation, what plausible persuasions or pleasing pretenses
soever now be, or by the devils drift may hereafter be devised, to the
contrary. In which faith, and unity of which Church, I acknowledge God the
Father my Maker, God the Son my Redeemer and God the holy Ghost my Sanctifier
three persons, and one very and eternal God.

. 4.
I believe and hold the twelve Articles o^ the Christian faith, as the
Catholik^ Church teaches them: The Nicen^ Creed, and Athanasius Creed. I hold
an^ acknowledge the ten commandments, a God declared them to Moses, to be the
substance of the Law. I believe there be in Christ's Church, seven Sacraments
or fountains of grace whereby the holy Ghost does by our receiving and use of
the same work in our souls grace, that is to say, Baptism, Confirmation,
Matrimony, Confession, Orders, Supper of our Lord, and Extreme Unction, and
that to be deprived of the use of these, is an impediment and stopping of Gods
grace in us; whereof many a Christian soul does in this time of ^inne feel a
ruefull loss.

. 5.
I believe that in the Sacrament of the ^ords Supper; otherwise called the
Sacrament of the Altar, after the words of Conse^ration, in the sacrifice of
the Mass, done ^y the Priest duly ordained, there remai^eth the very Real
presence of Christ's Body, and Blood, without any other substance of ^reatures,
and that all figurative speeches, all ^pirituall meanings, all glosses of
words, all ^^rmises of false spirits, that suppose or teach ^he contrary, are
derogatorie to the power ^f God and injuriouse to the salvation of ^hristian
souls, the words of the Gospel ^ying. Take eat, this is my Body, and ^ke
and drink, this is my Blood.

. 6.
I believe that the examination of conscience and Confession of sins to a
ghostly father, is a work necessary to salvation, as the Church of God does
require it: and that it is the most comfortable mean to stir up the soul,
sunk into sin, unto repentance and amendment, that can be: and that by the
often use thereof Gods grace does wonderfully work in our minds, and that by
the neglecting of the same Satan works his will.

. 7.
I believe that the doctrine of the Catholic Church concerning invocation of
saints, prayer for the dead, and holding of the place for purgation of souls
dying in the state of grace, and of christian works to be effect of christian
faith, is a most sound and wholesome doctrine, and that the new found Doctrine
of sole faith is the fine force of Satan to deceive the world.

. 8.
I believe, and firmly avow, that the holy Ghost, since Christ's ascension,
has bin and continued with this Catholic and Apostolic Church, teaching her
all truth, and so shall continue to the end of the world; and that the gates of
Hell shall never prevail against her, according to Christ's promise: And that
the pretended reformers of Religion are Devils, transformed into the shape of
Angels of light, fallne into the delicacie of wordly men's delights, in this
latter age of the world. And that this is true may be proved by a sensible
consequent. First of the new pretended reformed Religion there was never,
public profession in the Christian world before these forty or fifty years
last past, or thereabouts; then, it being fifteen hundred years since Christ
established his Church, either it is to be confessed, that the Church and
Religion that had beginning and continuance from Christ's time until these
pretended reformed days, is the true Church, and true Religion, and that the
contrary is f^lse, or else, that Christ has not kept promise when he
ascended, saying, that he would send to his d^sciples the comforter, which
should teach them all truth, and continue with them to the end of the world:
but to say so were blasphemy, as I trust every Christian heart will affirm.
And Christ's Church is no hidden thing, for in the scriptures she is compared
to a City set upon an hill, that every one may see; to a Candle set upon a
ca^dlesticke, to lighten all that come into the house: And a most ruefull and
lamentable thing, my dear infants, it is, that we should now condemn that
Religion which we received first into this Realm, above thirteen hundred
years past, and continued in until about fifty years past, and then altered
into such a liberty of life, a discharging of the conscience, a carnalitie of
pleasures, a security of salvation, a rash believing of spirits, a condemning
of the Fathers, a pride af opinions, a setting up of sects, a pretending of
piety, a performing of impiety, a dissolving of obedience, and generally into
such a pleasant safety of sinning, as I can not but (in the charity toward
all Christians, and especially of you my dear children, that may happily live to
see and feel the truth of these things) with an inward sorrow of heart
remember.

. 9.
For conclusion, I hold and believe all that the Catholic and Apostolik^
Church holds and believes, in the sum and substance of faith, and in the
godly ceremonial rights of teaching thereof, and I protest to hold it, and
affirm it in the passage of my soul: And I desire the eternal God for
Christ's sake to grant you my children his grace to do the same, without the
which you can never possess the joys of heaven. And I beseech you, in the
mercies of CHRIST JESUS, and charge you all, as a father, upon my blessing,
that with continual prayer you call unto God to direct you this way, to bring
you to this faith, and then no doubt but he will also bring you into life
everlasting: which CHRIST JESUS grant you, and me, and all people. Amen.

. 10.
And from a resolute heart, and settled Faith, I do now here make
protestation, that if hereafter, either by weakness, or debilitie of body,
by means of sickness, or for the shunning of any worldly dangers, losses, or
persecutions, whereof no part of the world ever knew half so many and so great
as we now do, or for any torment or trouble; whereof there be tragical, and
wonderful inventions: or for any carnal affection of wife or children: or by
any temptation, subtilty, or shift of the adversary whatsoever, I shall be of
any other mind, or my senses abused to offend against this faith, which God
for Christ's sake forbid, that then I do now in perfect mind, by the
assistance of God his spirit utterly deny, detest, and renounce, the same, as
wicked, and do adhere and abide, in life, and in death, to the former
declaration of my faith. Which protestation and resolution, I will you my
children and all men to witness with me, before God and his Angels in the
dreadful judgment. And I beseech our Lord I may then see the same found in
you and all other men.

. 11.
Thus having briefly made known unto you the faith and religion wherewith and
wherein I mean to pass (by Gods grace) out of this world: For as much as I may
leave you young and tender, and your ^eere mother and I by country far
divi^ed, and yet lastly conjoined by God in ^ariage, whereby you may be ignorant
of ^ome things not impertinent for you, in worldly respects, to know: I have
thought good, before I dispose of other things, to ^cquaint you with what you
are by me. I may, I hope, commend you by descent of honest parentage, as the
world knows: whose predecessors have tasted of such infortune as in the world
is not strange, and for more. Albeit true generositie consist in virtue, and is
lawful for every one to obtain, and not tied to the only descent of flesh and
blood: yet are you not ignoble that way. Which I leave you, not by way of a
vain vaunt, but rather to excite you thereby to endeavor the obtaining and
continuing of true generositie.

. 12.
The first of mine Ancestors by name, within this County of Worcester, was
Hugo de Belne, a Gentleman; who, (as by tradition it has continued in our
family) was advanced, as I take it, in the time of Edward the first: for
service to him done by the long Bow; being an excellent Archer. Et haeredibus
masculis as it is said.
This King gave unto the said Hugo d^ Belne, and his heirs, the fee-farme of
diverse lands and teniments in Kingsnorton within the County of Worcester:
Which fee-farme comes every year in charg^ to the Sheriff of
Worcester-shiere out o^ the Exchequour, to this day, under the title De terris
and tenimentis quondam Hugonis d^ Belne, etc. the lands are called Black grieve
and Bells, in value better then an hundred marks by year.

. 13.
From him the lands descended, from on^ to another of the heirs males, by
lineal descent, whereof the Court Rolls of the manours of Bromesgroue, and
Kingsnortton, remaining in the steeple at Bromesgroue, can witness and all in
the title o^ gentilitie; until the time of my great grandfather, in the days
of King He^rie the eight, whose name was William Bell, or William de Belne,
who marying to a second wife, the bace daughter of Sir Arthoure Plantagener,
was, for the maintenance of her dissolute life, forced to sell all his
patrimony: part whereof he sold unto Sir Edward Littleton of Staffordshiere,
and part to ^r Sheldon of Spettesley, whose heir ^ilipp Sheldon, at this day
enjoys the ^ne, by means whereof my grandfather ^n Bell, his heir by the first
wife, was (...) inherited.

. 14.
My father, whose name was also John: in ^s lifetime understanding that the
lands ^ere entayled to the heir male, with re^ainder in the Crown, made
entry into a ^essuage, and lands called Blackgreue, but ^eing not able to
proceed in the trial, for ^ant of ability, was forced to give over; which
moved him to extend his ability for ^y maintenance in learning, hoping there^y
to procure a recoverie of our inheri^^nce, for that the commune report of him
^as, that the lands were but mortgaged, ^ith condition of redemption at any ^me.

. 15.
At school I continued in the County ^f Warwick until I was 18. years of
age. From thence I went to the vniver^^tie of Orford, where, with good
allowan^^ of my good father (whose soul our Lo^^ bless) I continued 7.
years, proceeded b^chelour of art, and was fellow of Ball^ Celledge there, and
being ready to pr^ceede Master of A^te by time of years, was envied by some
ungrateful, God fo^giue them, accused of discontentation Religion, and called
to answer the sam^ But declyning the malice of time, I retire my self by
favor of my College with cause allowed for on year. And after r^turning and
finding the malice continuin^ for the quiet of my conscience I was force to
leave my society, and to commit m^ self to the favor of God in the world: b^
whose direction, and upon earnest reque^^ to me made, I came then to a right
worth^ Magistrate, and worshipful Gentleman Sir John Throkmarton, Knight,
chief Iustic^ of the Marches of Wales, with whom ^ continued in especial good
favor, an^ credit, and in entertainment as a dear friend of his, by the space
of 12. years: i^ so great contentation every way, and suc^ liking both in
mind and body, as, respec^ting the security, I found not else where t^ be
hoped for, at that time. But perceiuin^ my years increasing and mine ability
a^ ye^ nothing, I was in part persuaded by the ^d Sir John Throkmarton to
undertake the ^die of the common laws of the Realm, the Innes of court.
Whereupon admitting (...) self a Fellow of Clements Inn, in ^amber and bed
with that Worshipful ^entleman M.r George Sherley, I fell to the ^^die of the
Laws. Where finding, upon ^o years experience, that the air of the ^ttie did
utterly overthrow my heath, ^eing never well in health one whole ^onth
together, I was forced to return (...) to the country: where was willingly
af^rced me, by Sir John Littleton knight, the ^xecution of the Office of the
Clercke of ^he Peace, of the County of Wigorne: which with the good favor of
Sir John ^hrokmarton I accepted, and executed with ^uch liking and favor of my
country as I ^eaue in modesty to speak off.

. 16.
Shortly after dyed Sir John Throkmarton: ^ man whose virtues and rare gu^fts
were worthy a longer time, for one to wise and politic in government, in
counsel, so grave and provident; in justice so sound; in ^earning, (f^r one of
his calling) so rare; in company, so affable and pleasant; in his disports, so
gentlemanlike; so pitiful to the poor; so plentiful in hospitality; to goo^
men such a patron; to offenders such a te^ror; and generally so complete a
man ev^rie way, as lived not his like in Englan^ The loss of him, to me a
principal friend moved me eftsoons to return to the Innes of Court,
determining to have go^ through with the study of the Laws: bu^ still finding
the decay of my health. I wa^ eftsoons forced to retire into the country to
my house at Templebroughton, which Sir John Throkmarton had granted me During
mine aboade in the Innes of Cou^ many crosses and troubles befell me, putting me
to long trouble and charges.

. 17.
In this time I resolved to marry: wherein commending my hap to the good
direction of God, he so guided me, as I became acquainted with the Worshipful
Ge^tlewoman your grandmother Daniel, who for her virtue, piety, and liberal
housekeeping, was not then in many places matchable. Among her daughters I
made choice of your mother for a wife, and she, with the good liking of her
friends, content to become mine, wherein I can not account my ^fe so happy with
the best fortune of the ^orld, as in having her to me a wife, and (...) you a
mother. A woman I assure you ^wards God so Religiouse, in love and ^fection
toward me so liberal, in faith ^^d vowed chastity so sound and inuiola^e, in
patience so perfect, in obedience (...) humble and ready, in housewifely care,
and discreet government of her house^ould, so wise and provident, to you, ^y
children, so loving and naturally affec^ed, to all my friends so kind and
^entle, and generally toward all so mo^est and courteouse, as her match is not
^asily found: And therefore both you and (...) owe much to God in such a
blessing: which for my part, as I am resolved to be thanckefull for whilst I
live, so I ^equire you, my children all, that you do the like. And if it shall
please God she do surviue me in this world, I require and charge you upon my
blessing, and upon all the duty that by the laws of God or nature you owe me,
that during your life you love, honor, and obey her, in word and deed, that
you cherish and comfort her, that you be serviceable and dutiefull unto her:
that you never murmr, n^ grudge against her, that by any means yo^ provoke
her not to anger, or displeasur^ that for any vain pleasure you never do^ nor
consent to the thing that may offen^ her, that you be ever ready to relieve
he^ in all distresses, with all the ability of you bodies, and with all that
God shall giu^ you in this world, that you continuall^ pray for her and me, and
in so doing* be right well assured, that Almighti^ God will bless you, he will
multiply and increase you, and you shall see in this you^ posterity blessed
upon the earth, and all tha^ you take in hand shall prosper, and go well with
you; yea, the dew of heaven will fructify all that you shall have; God hat^
so promissed, who will never fail you i^ you fail not your selves. Remember
it is he that in the commandment has promissed long life to them that honor
their parents: The wise man has said, that the fathers blessing builds up
the roof of the house, but the mothers curse rooteth up the foundation. Behold
all the histories, both divine and profane, from the creation of the world to
this day: and you shall never find but the obedient child was favored of God
and man: and contrariwise, the disobedient was hated, and never failed of his
just punishment in this world, either in him self, ^r in his succession.

. 18.
And to the intent you may the better ^erforme this, and all other good actions
^ou take in hand, for as much as nothing ^s, nor can possibly be profitable
unto man ^n this world, without the grace of God, and assistance of his holy
spirit, and that he ^s our God, and we his creatures, and the work of his
will: who has commanded ^o knock and it shall be opened unto us, ^o seek and
we shall find, and to ask, and we shall have, I now most instantly, and
before all things, require and charge ^ou, that with continual prayer you call
upon God that he may indue you with his ^race, that he will in this time of the
Pro^inciall darkness of England, wherein ^ou are borne, open unto you the
know^^dge and light of the true Catholic and ^postolike Faith, that he will
confirm and fasten you therein, that you never warn from the same, nor
stagger to your ^ues end. What greater joy or comfort can any worldly man have,
then if he were in ^ant or necessity of any thing, to have his Prince, or some
great man that were of ability and power, to say unto him: ask me a^
lordship, a farm, an office, or great store o^ treasure and thou shall have
it, and might thereupon in deed have it; were not such an one that would loose
all this for want o^ asking worthy to want and abide in mos^ miserable
beggarie? it cannot be denye^ but he were. And then, what an injuri^ were it to
your selves, and what an ingratitude to so merciful a God, that hat^ heaven
and earth and all the rich conten^ thereof to dispose of at his pleasure, an^
that so freely and willingly offers to the^ that seek, ask, and knock, not
to pray t^ him in our necessities, and for our relief who can have nothing in
this world but o^ his free mercy. The minds of worldl^ men are mutable, who
oftentimes promis^ and pay not, though we never so much entreat them: but God
is so just as he will no^ alonely perform all promise, but give wit^ increase
of measure and in abundance: for a full demonstration whereof, look, amon^
many, unto the Prophet David, who in a his distresses, persecutions,
adversities, an^ crosses, ever humbled himself to God b^ prayer, and was heard
and delivered.

. 19.
This prayer of yours must have faith and trust in God, charity and the
fervencie of zeal, such as was in the Prophet when he said. Exaudi me Domine
quoniam clamavi ad te, and again. Dominus mihi adjutor, non timebo quid faciat
mihi homo. Dominus protector vitae meae, a quo formidabo? and infinite other
places, whereby he ever obtained of God comforr, and deliverance.

You are, my children, as David said of himself: In te proiectus sum ex vtero:
So from your mothers womb were you cast upon God, where our Lord grant that
you may fasten your selves forever.

. 20.
Of the effect of prayer, and the most sweet comforts thereof, no man can
speak more effectually then I your father, and herein I protest before the
sacred Majesty of Almighty God, to whom I must yield account of all my words,
deeds, and thoughts, that I will speak no more then truth: That from the time
of my infancy, wherein I was taught to pray, to this present day, as I have
many and sundry times in my life felt sickness, need of many worldly things,
sorrows, loss of friends, false accusations, the sting of envy, as a matter
that did ever oppress me, cloase imprisonment in an innocent cause, householde
troubles, false friends, and infinite others, and above all, the lack of the
highest mysteries, and sweetest comforts to both soul and body: so ever in
all my necessities repayring unto God by prayer, I have ever found relief,
comfort, and deliverance thereby. Whereof no creature under heaven could show you
more rare and notable examples then I; which in this place I omit. Only crying
unto you from my whole heart, to be earnest, zealous, and perseverant in
prayer, and if you had nothing in the world to relieve you, yea, all the world
opposed against you, yet shall you prevail and receive the blessing from God
by faithful prayer.

. 21.
Hitherto having made known unto you the Confession of my faith, my worldly
course, and my counsels in the same: I am now to make my purposed legacies, and
bequests among you: wherein I first give, and commend you all to the merciful
care and protection of God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost,
and to the assistant prayers of all the blessed company of heaven: beseeching
CHRIST JESUS, that bought us all with his precious blood, to bless you, save
you, and make you heirs of his Kingdom, And I desire Almighty God so to
dispose of you in your several callings, in this world, as may be most to his
glory, and your own souls health, and that it may please him to power down
the dew of heaven upon you, bless you, increase you, and all your labors, and
all things that you shall take in hand, and evermore deliver you from the power
and evil purposes of your enemies. Amen.

. 22.
Concerning my worldly goods, as I received nothing in this world from my
parents but mine education, to them (considering the course of my life) both
careful and costly, so having not much, in respect of the time (an enemy to
the thrift of a distressed conscience) I can not much bestow, and yet, (blessed
be God for his increase) shall leave you something.

. 23.
The worldly goods I have, I give, and bequeathe to Dorothe my dear and loving
wife: therewith charging and requiring her, in the faith she bears me, and
in the love she bears my children, to see them vertuousely brought up, and
instructed in learning, the more readily to prepare them to the service, of
God, and true knowledge of him.

. 24.
The chiefest thing I do desire therein, is, to have Edmund and William
trained in school to learning, as their capacities will admit, and so to go
to the university of Oxford, if by any means they may obtain that
preferment: and there to Balliol College, of which house I was fellow, and
where Doctor Bell founded two schollerships for Worcestershiere men: or else
whereas it may be obtained.

. 25.
After they are entered in their learning, and are 7. or 8. years of age, I
would they should be taught plainesong, and pricksong skilfully, and to play
upon the lute, and virginales: a shill not alonly comfortable in it self to
the haver, but a very good mean of preferment, or a grateful entertainment
with the best, and to such of them as shall best affect the same, I bequeathe
my best lute, sythorne, and gittorne. Item, if either Edmund or William shall
be enabled, and have a desire to study the common laws of the Realm, which I
greatly desire, then to him so affected, and enabled, and doing the same, I
give and bequeathe al my law-bookes, which I wish should be duly preserved
together for that purpose.

. 26.
Item if Francis my son do hereafter recover speech, then I will that he be,
according to his birthright, mine heir, and to have all my lands, tenements,
and hereditaments, to him and his heirs males for ever, and not otherwise:
yielding and paying to my son Edmund out of the same, after my said son
Edmund shall accomplish the age of 21. years *** by year, during his natural
life, at two terms in every year, that is to say, at the feast of S. Michael
the Archangell and the Annunciation of our blessed Lady the vergin by equal
portions. But if Francis my son do not recover speech and good discretion,
then I do now give and bequeathe to Edmund my son to be mine heir, and he
to have all my manor of Templebroughton and lands, tenements, and
hereditaments, to him and to the heirs males of his body lawfully begotten,
and not otherwise.

. 27.
Item I give and bequeathe to Marguerite my daughter, to her preferment in
marriage, when she shall accomplish the age of 18. years *** and if I have no
issue male, then I give unto the said Marguerite all my lands, tenements, and
hereditaments, to have to the said Marguerite and her heirs for ever.

. 28.
Item, albeit I have formerly given all my goods and chattels to Dorothey my
wife, yet is there in the same gift an employed trust which she has promised
me, and which I do most certainly assure my self she will never break nor
violate toward me and those that are hers and mine.

. 29.
Item, I would that every one of my children should have a ring of fine gold
weighing 3,l wherein should be written this sentence well enameled: Iacta super
Dominum curam tuam and ipse te enutriet. Which may be engraven in two rou^ds,
because it is too much for one, and these rings to be made presently after my
decease, and to be delivered them at 18. years of age. Which rings I charge
them on my blessing, never to depart withal to their dying day. And which of
them soever wilfully breaks this charge, it will go worse with him, be he
well assured.

. 30.
Item if my wife be now with child, such care as I have had of my other
children, I would should be had of it, be it man or woman, which care I must
commend to my dear wife: and she with that God has lent us, to provide for
it, and the rest, as God shall enable us, and my will is, and I do give to
Dorothey my wife, the issues, and profits of all my lands, teniments, and
hereditaments, till my sons come to 18. years of age, and then so to allow
Edmund *** yearly during her life and she to have the rest of the profits of
my lands during her life.

. 31.
Item I would that Marguerite my daughter should, so soon as thee is able to
go to school, and be applied in her book, and with her neelde, so far
forth as she shall be of capacity, and if it may be, that she be also taught
her pricksong, and plainesong, and to play on the virginalls, and if we cannot
prefer her farther, this will be (with Gods grace to guide the same) a
competent preferment in the world. Item I will that Dorothey my wife shall
fully possess my goods to the use of my children: as I am assured she will
do no less then if she were my sole Executrix, but Executors or Executrix, I
will (for some private respects) make none: and so to do concerning my will,
so far forth as she shall be able, to execute the same, in all points,
according to the conference, and promise between us made and agreed, and that
do assure my self she will do. Notwithstanding, for as much as we are all
mortal, my will is, that if Dorothey my wife do die before she perform my
will, and deliver my children their portions, or for any other respect do
refuse to do the same, then I do constitute and appoint all my children
jointly to be my Executors, and they to do the same, as by the sound advice
of their friends (whereunto I ever advise them to give ear) they shall be
directed.

. 32.
Item, I will that William my third son* shall have *** by year, paid him
during his life, after he comes to 21. years o^ age, by Edmund. Item, for as
much as the greatest peril of infants is in their education, if the same be
not wisely governed and provided for, if God call me away leaving my Children
young and tender; and that if God continue their mother, they shall ever be
assured of an especial comfort by her, so far forth as she shall be able:
yet for as much as many accidents in the world may hinder her good endeavor, I
do instantly desire my very especial good mother M.rs Marguerite Daniell, and
my good brethren M.r John Daniell Esquier, and M.r Francis Daniell, the Right
Worshipful my very good friend, M.r Ralphe Sheldon, and all the friends I
have in alliance to me by my wife, and in consanguinitie to my children, that
they will assist my wife in the care and regard of her children, and for their
education in virtue and learning; wherein they shall do a work of merit, and
worthy their profession toward God, and affection to me.

. 33.
Item, in respect of the great favors I have found, and the many obligations
of friendship wherein I am bound to be grateful: I do now comme^d to my
children, and their posterity: that they ever show themselves inwardly
affectionate, and, as may concern them in duty, serviceable, to the
Worshipful family of the Throkmartons of Coughton, and among those, in
especial to the posterity of my dearest friend Sir John Throkmarton of
Fekenham, whereof there is in the eldest line but only one young Gentleman,
John Throkmarton, the son of Francis, the son of Sir John: this young John
Throkmarton is my Godsonne: I humbly beseech our Lord to bless him, defend
him, and increase and multiply him with his grace, that he may, in the favor
of God, repair the ruins and worldly accidents that unfortunately
and......... fell on his father and grandfather. Whose rare and wonderful
gifts both of body and mind God grant may, in dutiful obedience to his
Prince, descend upon him, and he use them to his glory.

. 34.
In most ample merit, and for greatest favor, I require, and charge all my
children, with all that ever they shall be able, in body and mind, to be
grateful, serviceable, and loving, to the right Worshipful M.r Ralphe Sheldon
of Beoley, Esquier, and to all that family, by whose great and inward
affection borne me, after the decease of Sir John Throkmarton, I was not alonly
comforted and favored, but releeved and helped with all that I have in effect,
as my wife by particularitie of knowledge can well witness. They are a
fortunate family, and have relieved and bred up more men of account, than all
the gentlemen of Worcestershiere. And I would that all mine should serve and
follow them, before any other family whatsoever. With these I require them, to
be both grateful, and dutiful, to Sir John Littleton, Knight, and that house,
of whose good favor I did also taste.

. 35.
And now to bid farewell, and conclude with mine advice, to you my children,
after you have resolved, and indeed become the servants of God, and ever to
use prayer, as the means to make God mindful and careful of you. Resolve
with your selves to use truth, in word and deed, never to lie, nor dissemble
with any man, for any cause: for albeit the same be counted now (the more is
the pity) with many ungodly, but a worldly policy, yet assure yourselves,
that those subtle shifts have in conclusion a shameful detection: and leave
behind them a star of discredit, that will not be blotted out, seek to
please good men, and pray for the evil.

. 36.
Delight not in ribawdrie, scurrilitie, nor unclean communication, for such
stuff as men utter with a pleasing tongue, wise men will judge there is store
thereof in the heart.

. 37.
Among all the virtues, make choice of humility, and abandon pride, for it is
such a horse as will sure give his master a fall, sit he never so fast: you
shall find more men exalted from mean estate by being humble, courteouse, and
affable to all, than by any other worldly occasion.

. 38.
Entertain all men with gentle speeches, and be not dainty to put off your
cappes to the poorest creature: for, let me your father be believed, that there
is nothing that wins the hearts of so many with so little cost.

. 39.
Accompany your selves with the best, with all humility, and ever desire to
be among wise men; with them rather the meanest, then to be Captain of an
unruly rabbell of Roysters, for with whom men flock most, of such shall they
be judged to be.

. 40.
Be not rash, and hasty in judgment of any thing: nor prone to anger, for the
one ^s a short madness and the other the mo^her of error.

. 41.
Use few words, and those with discre^ion, especially among your betters: where
^t is ever more seemly to be a hearer then ^peaker, without you be required.

. 42.
Be not curious medlers with other men's matters: nor busy lookers into other
men's ^ues; but amend your own, and pray for them that do amiss.

. 43.
Be secret and silent in all things commit^ed to your credit, for the blab is
not liked, ^^ough he have never so many other orna^ents.

. 44.
Above all other things, in worldly respects, I warn you my children not to
meddle with matters of estate; but to look to your calling, live in obedience,
and leave Kings, and their causes to God: for the busy intermedling with Gods
counsel (which I take the affairs of Princes to be) has destroyed more rare
overreaching wits, then any one thing else.

. 45.
Use temperance in diet, and beware of drunkenness, for besides that it is a
thing displeasant unto God, no man will trust the Drunkard.

. 46.
Beware of sudden passion, either i^ disport, or otherwise, for the rash man
never wants woe: and no man will willingly have friendship, with such an one.

. 47.
Be constant, and resolute, in all honest offices; and fast in friendship, for
a turner with the wind is worthy the reward of a wethercocke, and that is,
still to be fed with the wind.

. 48.
Use patience, and in any wise forbear revenge, as a property peculiar unto
God: for I can by experience assure you, that to be patient, and pray for them
that offend you, will kill more enemies, and win more friends, then the
sword, had you the power of a Prince.

. 49.
Be not too liberal in expenses, but learn to use frugalitie, proportionating
your charge, according to your store.

. 50.
Be not overhastie to believe the fair words of every seeming friend, and
trust not without trial. Be thanckfull for every courtesy, and requite it as
you may; but let time breed the friends you commit secrets unto. Quia defecit
veritas a filijs hominum.

. 51.
Let the familiarity you have with your Superiors, if they thereunto admit
you, be ever with due reverence, and not saucy: for though lions play, yet
have they long nails, to scratch at their pleasure.

. 52.
Be ready to relieve all that are distressed, as it shall fall to your
ability, for he shall never want a friend that has been a friend.

. 53.
Have charity with all men, and pity the poor, forward their suites, and
relieve them for you may be assured that God will give an abundant blessing
therefore.

Quod tacitum velis nemini dixeris.

. 54.
Embrace chastity, as a sweet ornament of the soul, and beware of the
allurements of the harlot: for they destroy the body here, and after draw
soul and body into hell.

. 55.
Beware of suertieship, as a means of the undoing of many: neither be busy
borrowers above ability to pay, which will either with the canker of usury
consume your substance, to the very synders of beggerie: or drive you into
exile, from country to country, or leave you consuming in prison.

. 56.
Apply your selves in company to a modest mirth, agreeable to the delights of
such as you are with: for sir Sulen, and sir Solemn, are seldom welcome to
any place.

. 57.
One thing is my meaning, and full purpose, and I charge and adjure you,
Edmond, and William; to perform it. That albeit I have made a grant to each
of you by lease of my lands in possession, yet I require you before the
majesty of God, that you never presume to take one foot thereof from your
mother, so long as she lives, nor to trouble her in the occupation thereof,
otherwise then she shall freely give you; as before I have appointed: and if
you do, look for a sharp revenge at the hands of almighty God, who will
severely punish contempt to parents, and breach of the dead man's will.

HERE FOLLOVV certain fragments of the same Testament, that were left
written in the same coppie, but out of their order.
ITem, I do give to William Turner my black silk rash dublet, a coat and
cloak.

Item, to the intent my wife may make William Turner beholding to her: I
requier her to bestow on him, as it may appear I did love him as a friend.

Item, I do give to Arthur my son my gaffell bow, my best lute, and
gitterne: and my will is, that every of my four children shall have a joined
bedsteed, with a fetherbed, and the furniture: and look what portion I did
assign unto Francis, whose soul God pardon. I would should be assigned
between William and Arthur, and to Marguerite my best virginalles.

Item, to every of my children a silver cup, and two silver spoones: the
choice, as they are in age.

Item, to whom so ever my lands descend, I will he or she to have my greatest
clock.

Item, I give to William my son, my gilded watch, which cost 3. pounds
twelve shillings: which I commonly carry about me: it was made the same year
that William was borne 1589. which year is graven by the name of the maker,
on the watch: by the fly: and my gold ring with a crapon stone.

Item, I give to Edmond my son, my round gilded watch, which is the larger
of the two: and my ring of gold with the red sealing stone but I will my wife
shall have the use of my round watch during her life.

Item, I give to every child two old starre-Riolles.

Item, I do give to Edmund my son my crosse-bowe, hand-gunne, and short
dagge.

Item, I give to William my son my stone bow and my longer dagge.

ANNOTATIONS UPON the precedent Testament. And first of the reason of them.
SEeing the Author to call the Sacrament of Penance, by the name of Confession,
and the Sacrament of our Savior JESUS CHRIST'S Body and Blood, the Lords
Supper: and fearing the weak might take occasion of offense where none was
justly given: I undertook to note those places, and all others, if any of like
sort were found different from the usual manner of speaking in these times; yet
not so as I would make any great treatise, or discuss matters in controversy,
so much handled and rehandled now a days: but only with reason to show, by the
practice of good men, that in such use of speech there is no other thing than
may well become a Christian man.

This I thought to have done by way of marginall notes, but perceiving it
increase to more then could with conveniencie enter in the margents, I dilated
my self and adjoined it to the end of the Testament, adding withal, some
sentences of the saints, and renowned men, upon several passages thereof
applied.

THE TESTAMENT.] The original had no title prefixed, but thus I thought good
to style it, rather then to call it a last will, or codicill, or donation for
cause of death, etc. Because although, generally speaking, a last will do
comprehend a Testament, yet every last will is not a Testament: in a codicill
there cannot be given inheritance. c. de codicill. in l. si idem. And donation
for cause of death, is but as it were a last will.

A Testament, speaking properly, does not comprehend every last will, for a
Testament is the just sentence of our will, concerning that which one will have
to be done after his death, with institution of an heir, l. iuncta glossa. ff.
e. therefore without institution of an heir there is no Testament. insti. de
leg. in. ante haeredis. And consequently a Testament comprehends not a
codicil.

This, whether we respect the spiritual doctrines, or temporal distributions,
may have the name of a Testament, of the first all, of the latter each one
respectively are instituted heirs: the Author, with full ^ower of testation:
for every man may ^ake a Testament that is not specially pro^ibited. no. glo.
and Bart. in l. si quaeramus. ff. e. and ^e. in ti. de instru. edic. in.
compendiose.

Faculty of making Testaments is a thing graciously granted men: be ause ^he
testatour disposes of that time, wherein ^e is not to be Lord of any thing, for
a Testament is confirmed in death. Vt in c. ^um Marthae. de cele. miss. That
is, after his death when he cease to be Lord or have any dominion. Whence,
although the disposition be made when he is Lord and at ^u^h time as he is
able, yet the effect is bestowed at such time as he is unable: which of mere
right, or law, should not be ^a^full. l. quod sponsae. c. de dona. ante ^nup.

Testamentum, according to the etymology of the word is testatio mentis, a
testification or witnessing of a man's mind. the Hebrews call it (...), a
compact, or covenant between the dead and the living, which as the dead
cannot, so the living may not change. Paul ad Heb. 9.16. Where there is a
Testament of necessity the death of the testatour must come in; for a
Testament is confirmed in the dead, otherwise it is of no force, while he
lives that made the Testament. God Almight^ in the death of CHRIST JESUS
disposed t^ new Testament to his elected, the sonn^ of adoption,

Aug. Epist. ad Gal. circa medium exposi^ lib. 1. Tom. 4. A humane Testament is
much more infirm then the divine, and yet the confirmed Testament of a man,
none da^ make void, nor ordain any thing a ne^ upon it: for when the
testatour changes h^ Testament, he changes an vnconfirme^ Testament, because
it is confirmed by the testatours death. And look of what valu^ is the death
of the testatour to confirm^ his Testament, because he can now n^ more change
his counsel: of the same valu^ is the incommutabilitie of Gods promise t^
confirm the inheritance of Abraham, whose faith is reputed for justice.

The Author of this Testament confirmed the same in his death 11. years after
the making of it, dying in the same profession of the Christian faith, with all
the rites of the holy Catholic Church: leaving the Testament whole and entire
in all, except the disposition of his goods; which by reason of the death of
some, and birth of other children, increase of his goods and other occurrences,
he left crossed in some places* and in others imperfect; all which places ^o^
noted in the margent with semicircles, (...) with asteriscs, or interpunctions
in the ^ddle of the line.

IN THE NAME OF GOD] A Christian ^me of beginning, not only Testaments, ^t
every good work: and with great ^son does he call upon God in all his ^rks
that cannot be, much less work of ^mselfe: man that is by the will of God ^st
do all things in the name of God.

Enosch the son of Seth, Genesis 4.26.
the son of A^n, being borne, then was the name of our lord first begun to
be invocated, that is, ^th more express form of words, and ^es then before.

Every one that invocateth the name of ^r Lord shall be safe: Joel. 3.5.
vulgata* 2. 32.
not that every one ^at says Lord, Lord, shall go to heaven: ^t that there
is no salvation for any, upon whom the name of the true God is not in^ocated.

Hieremias 14.9. And thou Lord art most ^ward to us: and thy name is invocated
of (...), forsake us not.

1. Reg. 18. vulgat. 3. Reg. All nations do ^vocate the names of their Gods.

Elias. Ye shall call upon the names of our gods, and I will invocate in the
name ^f the Lord.

Coloss. 3.17. All things whatsoever ye do in word or work, do al in the
name of o^ Lord JESUS CHRIST.

Psalm. 123, Our aid is in the name (...) the Lord that made the heaven and
eart^ When others have confidence, some i^ their chariots, and others in their
horses, (...) will invocate the name of the Lord o^ God. Psalm. 19.

Iudic. 11. Invocate the gods that ye hat^ chosen. Jonas 1. Arise and invocate
thy God*

Many invocate not but in swearing, cu^sing; or blaspheming, contrary to the
Exodus 20. Thou shall not assume the nam^ of thy God in vain; and Levit. 19.
Tho^ shall not periure the name of God. Tho^ shall not pollute the name of God.

Esaia 4. Let only thy name be invocate of us, etc. To those that invocate him,
o^ Lord is of much mercy. Psalm. 85. To a^ that invocate him in verity. And
therfo^ is always adjoined Amen (...)] Verity, particle of one assenting, and
yeeldin^ trust, as if it were said, let it be firm, be ratified, be it truly
so, be it done indee^ truly, certainly, in very deed, constantl^ which if it
be redoubled becomes s^perlatiue after the use of the Hebrew tongue, Amen,
Amen, most truly, most ce^tainely.

Esaias 65.16. He that blesses himse^ earth, shall bless himself in God Amen.
(...). Who is this God Amen, de^andeth Rabbi Racanat upon the 15. of ^odus.
Whereto the Cabalists answer by ^e rule of Notariacon, where a letter stan^eth
for a word. For (...) Adonai. Our lord.. For (...). Melech. A King. ^. For
(...). Neeman. Faithful, true: Which is no ^hit dissonant from the faith and
confi^e^ce which he that prays ought to have, ^ut rather much confirms it,
when at the and of every prayer he adds Amen, that (...) Dominus, Rex,
Fidelis: Our Lord is a faith^ull King: Our Lord is Potent and of good will to
grant us our Petitions made in his ^ame.

Greg. Nazianz. in Apologetica. The best order of every word or work, is, that
we ^ake our beginning from God and refer the consummatio^ thereof unto him
again.

OUR SOVEREIGN LADY ELIZABETH] She was proclaimed Queen the 17. of November
1558. the same day that Queen Marie dyed.

TEMPLE BROVGHT ON] This Manor belonged in former times to the order of the
Templars.

HEALTH OF BODY: AND OF SOVND AND PERFECT MEMORY.] The first is necessary,
in as much as it conduces to the latter, which is absolutely necessary. For
whatsoever is by a man done without it, although it be the action of a man (as
the action of a brute beast is the action of a brute beast) yet is it not a
humane action. Which proceeds from a deliberate will, having free faculty to
work, or not to work, and also sufficient light in the understanding to
consult and deliberate upon the things that are to be done, and to discern
between moral good and evil. Which actions alone, and no others, do merit
or demerite, serve to the end of a man, and bear away reward. Want of health,
and old age, do oftentimes diminish, and oftentimes quite abolish the
necessary use of reason in a man at that time when most of all he should have
it: at his end, when he is to dispose of his house, his earthly in habitation,
and leave the same, (...). Ecclesiastes. (...).
Remember thy creator in the days of thy elections: before the evil days do
come, and the years lay hold on thee of which thou may say I have no will
in them. The days of elections, the vulgate calls the days of youth, as
wherein a man has most vigor to extend his hand to fire or water and choose
good or evil; and the days in which we have no will, is the time of dotage
when a man's actions are scarcely humane, or the days of infirmity and
sickness which the vulgate calls the days that please us not.

Greater madness can not be, then to defer the thing that most concerns,
and that of necessity we must do, until such time as we be most unable to
do it: as if a man that were to carry an hundred weight, should let it alone
when he were strong, with purpose to bear it when he were fainting through
feebleness: yet such is the want of reason in many men as they defer and
putt off, not only the disposing of worldly goods, but even the profession of
their faith, or conversion to God by penance and good life, until they be
hardly able to exercise any act of life.

Let us not, says S. Augustine, Aug. 1. de salutarib. documenti^ cap. 39. Tom.
4.
so secure our selves of Gods mercy, as to heap sin upon sin, nor say,
while we be in the vigor of our age, let us exercise our concupiscences, and
at last in old age we will do penance for our evils, because our Lord is
pious, and merciful, and will no more remember our crimes. Let us not, I
beeseech you, think so; for, thus to think is folly in the highest degree,
being it is impious for any man to will to have such license from God, whereof
the very beginning, is, to separate us from God: therefore, I say, let us not
think of such things, being we know not what day we are to die: for no man
living knows the day of his departure. All die not in old age, but in
diverse ages they depart out of this world; and in what acts soever a man is
found, in the same shall he be judged, when the soul goes out of the body:
for the Psalmist says, no man shall confess thee in hell. Let us therefore
make haste to be converted to penance, etc.

Come hither mad man; the disposing of soul and body which thou have at thine
own will, is it a work to be done in time of sickness, which time yet thou
art not sure to have, or in old age, of which thou have as little certainty,
or rather a work that requires health, and strength of body, with perfect
use of all the powers of thy soul? Age and sickness, thou say, will force
a man, to look about him. How Alas, shall then that habit come upon thee of
which there has been no precedent, act? thou art habituated in deferring, and
that habit will still follow thee: thou will yet defer, and if for ever thou
could defer, for ever thou would not serve God: of whom it is yet
doubtful whether he will accept of this thy last will, which was, never to
give God but ^he last, and that is now rather necessity ^hen will, and in it
thou seek not God, ^ut thy self, because thou fear to be ^ost for ever.
Seneca in Agamennone. Seneca epist. 32 Bernardus sermo. 10* in psalm. qui
habitat. Aug. epist. 13^
How miserable a thing it is not to know to die! how goodly a thing it is
before death to consummate life, and then secure to expect the rest of our
^ime! Being in agony thou will do, as commonly the afflicted use, repute it
the ^ighest felicity to be exempted from those molestations, and judge it the
greatest beatitude to want that misery; whereas that temporal molestation
ought rather ^o admonish us how we should think of that life, wherein we may
live without any labor: escaping, not the turmoiling anguish of a little
time, but ^he horrible pains of everlasting fire: for, if we now deal with so
much care, ^o great intention, and such labor, that we fall into no
transitory vexa^ion; how much more solicitous should we be to avoid
everlasting miseries? And if death that finisheth temporal ^abour be so
feared, how is that to ^e feared that casts us into never^nding sorrows; and
if the foul and ^hort delights of this life be so lo^ed; how much more
vehemently are the pure and infinite joys of the world to come, to be sought
after? then in the time of youth and health, and not of crazie old age.
Sickness coming on, a man seeks only how to get ease, which had, he is then
as far to seek as before, in tha^ conversion which before he pretended.
While we have time, says the Apostle, le^ us do good, he that deferreth,
sins ever, in as much as if he should never leave to live, he would never
leave to sin, and perchance that is the sin to death, whero^ S. John.
Epist. 1. c. 5. Tom. 3. cap. 71.
I say not that any man pray for such an one. Among the sentences of S.
Augustin^ is this: The remedies of conversion to God are not with any delays
to be deferred, le^ the time of correction perish by our sloth for he that to
the penitent has promise^ indulgence, has not to the dissembler promised to
morrowes day. Life is not much worth, Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 120.
if a man live to no other end, bu^ that in the few years of this life, which
with a short end is to be cut off, he heap up to himself eternal pains to
last without end. But lest any one become too secur^ or wax remiss by the
felicity of such new^ credulity, lest perchance any one do say in his heart,
let not my guilty conscience s^ far gripe and trouble me, nor my culpabl^
life so far contristate me, I see in a moment, ^ see in a small space of time
the good theefs ^rimes forgiven him, etc. First in that ^heefe is to be
considered, not only the ^ompendiousnesse of his credulity, but his devotion,
but the occasion of that time wherein those things were done, in which ^ven the
perfection of the just is said to have been shaken. Then show me first the
^heefs faith, and after promise thy self the ^heefs beatitude; the devil
casts in secu^itie that he may draw on perdition. It cannot be numbered how
many this shadow of vain hope has deceived. Let, I beseech you, the
innumerable company of people, under color of such security taken out of
this life, void of all good, full of all evil, deter us from this
persuasion. By daily fearing the uncertainty of our passage and departure
hence, which even now are unlooked for, and yet at hand, and are to want all
remedy for ever, the day must be prevented which is wont to prevent us. He
seduceth himself and plays with his death that thinks thus, the indulgence
of the last hour may help me; security promissed at the last day is most
perilous. Then again, it is a most foolish thing to commit unto the
unprofitable extremity of the now faliing life, that cause which treats of
eternal necessities. It is odious before God, when a man sins more freely
through confidence of penance that he will do in oulde age. Believe me, my
dearest, it is a difficult thing for crafty dissimulation of ordering a man's
end, to be found worthy to obtain perdon: with that interpreter of the heart,
there will be admitted no art to salvation. But that blessed thief of whom we
have spoken, did neither wittingly defer the time of his salvation, nor with
unlucky fraud put the remedies of his state in the last moments, nor reserve
the hope of his redemption, to the last of desperation; Before that time he
neither knew Christ nor Religion; which if he had known he had been perchance
amongst the Apostles, not the last in the number who became the first in the
kingdom. In this therefore he pleased God at the last, because to the obtaining
of the faith, that was not the last hour, but the first. Necessary therefore
it is that by daily acts a man provide for himself, and procure his
consummation, it is necessary that all our life be such in conversation, as we
may deserve to be free in the end. Thincking incessantly upon the day of our
passage, and the time of judgment.

Admit thou have at last both health and memory, thou art not sure the grace
shall then be offered, which often offered thou have refused. Thou that
despisest, Isaia* 33. Eccles. 7.40.
shall thou not also be despised? Remember in all thy words, thy last things
and thou will not sin for ever. Hieron. Epist. ad Paulin. in fine. tom. 3.
Aug. sermon. 10 de Sanctis. tom. 1^.
He will contemn all things with ease that always thinks how he is to die.

If men would always bear their day of death in mind, they would restrain
the same from all covetousness or malice. But that which wholsomly now they
will not think upon, necessarily hereafter, and without all remedy they shall
sustain: For the last day will come upon them, the day of judgment will come,
when neither it shall be lawful for them to do penance, nor can they by good
works redeem themselves from everlasting death: then with such deep thought
the sinner is strooken, as dying he forgets himself, who whilst he lived did
forget his God.

They that were hired to the vineyard, Aug. de verb. Domini sermon. 59. tom. 10.
when the father of the family went out and hired; for examples sake, those
that he found the third hour; did they say unto him, expect, we will not go
thither till the sixth, or those that he found the sixth hour, did they say,
we will not go till the ninth; or those that he found the ninth hour, did
they say, we will not go till the eleventh? for he will give all alike and
wherefore shall we weary our selves more then the rest? What he is to give, and
what he will do, is in his own power, the counsel is to himself, do thou
come when thou art called: for equal reward is promised to all, but about the
hour of working there is a great question: for if they, for examples sake,
that were called at the sixth hour constitute in that age of body when the
youthful years are fervent, as at the sixth hour it is hot; if those young
men called should say, expect for we have heard in the Gospel that all shall
receive one reward, we will come at eleven, when we be old, being to receive
alike wherefore shall we labor? it would be answered them and said; will thou
not labor that know not whether thou shall live to be old? thou art called
at the sixth hour; come, the father of the family indeed has promised thee
thy penny if thou come, even at eleven; but whether thou shall live till the
seventh hour no body has promissed thee. I do not say till the eleventh, but
till the seventh. Wherefore then do thou put off, and defer him that
calls thee being certain of thy wages and uncertain of the day? Look ^o
it, lest perhaps what by promise he is to give thee, thou by deferring take
from thy self.

If a man do penance when he has power to sin, and while he lives,
correct his life from all crime; there is no doubt but that dying he passes
unto everlasting rest. But he that living wickedly does penance only in peril
of death; as his damnation is uncertain, so is his remission doubtful. He
therefore that in death desires to be certain of indulgence, let him do
penance while he is sound, let him sound, and in health, bewail his passed
heinous facts. Isidorus lib. 2. de summo bono. cap. 13.

If any one being now in the last extremity of sickness will and does accept
of penance: and immediately is reconciled, and depart^th hence; I confess to
you, we deny him not what he asks, but we presume not that he departs
hence well. I do not presume, I deceive you not, I do not presume. The
faithful living well, departs hence secure, he that was baptized but an
hour before, departs hence secure: he that does penance and is reconciled
while he is in health, and after lives well, departs hence secure: he that
does penance at the last and is reconciled, whether he depart hence secure, I
am not secure. Aug. lib. 50. hom. 41.

In vain does he power out his prayers before the tribunal of Christ, who
neglects the time of penance given him. Aug. sermon. 71. ad fratres in eremo.

Integrity of the mind, and not health of body, is required in the testatour,
at that time when he makes his testament. Digest. lib. 28. tit. 1.

Genesis 47 ^.
SHORT PILGRIMAGE] Jacob said to Pharao, The days of the years of my
Pilgrimage, are 130. years: short and bad have the days of the years of my
life been, and they have not reached to the days of the the years of my
ancestors lives, in the days of their Pilgrimages.

By way of malediction was man's life first cut from the ordinary length of
500. or in some 900. and stinted to 120. Genesis 6.3.

Psalm. 89
The days of our years in themselves are 70. years: And if in able men they
be 80. years: what is above that is labor and grief.

Psalm. 38
Behold thou have set my days measurable: how short is our life that is to be
measured, not the days of it only, but the hours, but the moments: not by the
divine, or Angelical science alone, but by every man that has but a little
tasted of Arithmetike?

Well may his days be measured, whose very substance is as nothing in the
sight of God.

LONG ACCOVNT] Long and strict, Mat. 12.36.
when of every idle word which men have spoken, they shall render an account
thereof in the day of judgment.

Every one of us shall render to God an account for himself. Romans 14 12.


. 1. Page 17. A TRVE CHRISTIAN CATHOLIC MAN] By this title did S. Augustine
style himself: Sed de me quid dicam, Lib. de vtilitate crede^di.
qui iam Catholicus Christianus eram? But of my self what shall I say who was
now a Catholic Christian?

The name of Christian was given to the Disciples first at Antioch in the very
beginning of the Apostles preaching of Christ's Gospel. Act. 11.26.


The Apostles themselves in their symbol called the Church Catholic, and the
members thereof Catholics.

As many as being baptized have put on Christ are called Christians; this the
use of the name has obtained; although with some nations he is not holden, in
common understanding, for a true Christian that is not also a Catholic, and
the one name comprehends as much as the other, and they be convertible.

Besides these so ancient names whereby ever since Christ's time those of the
true Religion have been known, whosoever brings in another, does injury to
the catholic cause, which the Heretics of our times have labored much in, to
have us called Roman Catholics, that consequently themselves might also be
called catholics of other particular Churches, suppose, of Amstelrodam,
Geneua, or the like. This they do pricked on by the sting of envy seeing us
alone to bear away from the^ that most ancient and glorious name: while they
thereby shut out of the whole, must of necessity remain sects, and by one
name, whatsoever they be, be called Heretics. This fraud, and the poison of
their malicious intention some Catholics not perceiving, take upon them the
addition of Roman: Which although it be good in it self because the Roman
Church is the Catholic Church, yet more glorious it were for us, and more
confusion to our adversaries to stand fast to that our first name of Catholic
which we have prescribed from them and never suffered to go out of our hands.

Aug. de vera Religione, Tom. 1.
Taking Catholic in the true sense, it signifies a man that professes the
only true Religion wherein one God is worshipped and with most purified piety
known, and acknowledged for the beginning of all nature, by whom all the
universe is both begun, and perfected, and contained, in the one, only, and
universal Church which is called Catholic, and not tied to one place, but
diffused into all places and all times.

We, Says S. Augustine, Aug. de vera Religione, c. 7.
must hold the Christian Religion, and the communicatio^ of that Church, which
is Catholic, and called Catholic, not only of those that are her own, but
also of all her enemies. For whether they will or not, the very Heretics
themselves, and nourtured in schisms, when they speak not with their own
co^pagnions, but with strangers, they call Catholic, nothing else but
Catholic, for otherwise they can not be understood, unless they discern her
by this name, by which she is called of all the universal world.

Of universal Says S. Augustine, Aug. contra litteras Petiliani. c. 38 Tom.
7. Act. 1.
Catholic took the name: our Lord himself saying: It is not for you to know
the times which my Father has kept in his own power: but you shall receive
the virtue of the holy Ghost coming upon you, and ye shall be witnesses for me
in Jerusalem, and all Judea, and Samaria and through all the earth. Behold
from whence Catholic is called.

A Christian I am, and a Catholic I am of the same Christian faith that the
Disciples were at Antioch and the same Catholic faith that was founded upon
saint Peter and continues in his successors the vicars of Christ at Rome:
which is to be a Christian Catholic man simply, and absolutely. He that
calls himself a Roman Catholic does like him that calls a man a risible
reasonable man, giving no more distinction in the last then at the first: for
all that they will have a Roman Catholic to signify, is but the same that is
signified by a Catholic.

A Roman Catholic, sounds in some sense as if one should say a particular
universal. Augustine. Aug. contra Gaude^t. lib. 5. tom. 7.
Mark a little what Church Cyptian called Catholic when he defended the
unity thereof, the Church, says he, spread through with the light of our Lord
streacheth out her beams through the whole world. Yet it is one light which is
every where diffused, and the unity of the body is not separated. She
extends her branches over the universal earth with copious plenty: her
large spread streams more broad she lays forth: yet the head is one and the
origin one: and one mother copious in successions of fecunditie...... if yours
be ^he Catholic Church show her stretching ^er beams over the whole world:
Show that she extends her branches with co^ious fertility over the universal
earth: For hence is Catholic of the Greek lord (...) named. and (...) holon
in Greek makes in English the whole, or ^niversall, so that through the
whole, or according to the whole is (...) or (...) Catholon, from whence
Catholic ^s called.

To be a Christian is glorious, and may suffice us in as much as he that is a
good Christian must necessariely be a good Catholic, for he is a Christian
that being baptized professes the whole doctrine of JESUS CHRIST in his
Church, and the same is also a Catholic, which name was given to distinguish
between some and others of the baptized that not professing the whole
doctrine, of Christ did stick to parts and making a doctrine of their own,
leaving the whole, are therefore Heretics: which only name is condistinguisht
against Catholics, that whosoever is not a Catholic is by the same an
Heretic: and not a Luthers Catholic as, the Germans call it, nor a Calvin's
Catholic, nor no Catholic: for no other sort of Catholic is there, or can b^
then a Christian Catholic, S. Peeter Ma^men dyed a Martyr at Damascus about
the year of our Lord 742. Slain by the Ar^bians, for saying: Every one that
embrace^ not the Christian Catholic faith, is damned, like as Mahomet your
false proph^ is. Mart. Romans 9. Kal. Mart. Theophan. in hi^ Miscell. lib. 22.
Anno 2. Constant. 6. Imp.

Aug. l. 1 Quaest. ex Mat.
Good Catholics and evil Catholic S. Augustine admits. Calling those evi^
Catholics, who, although they beleeu^ those things to be true which
appertain^ to the true doctrine of faith; and if the^ be any thing that they
do not know the^ think it is to be sought out, and without breach of piety
do discuss it, without any prejudice to the truth it self, and in a^ much as
they can, do love and honor those that ar^ good, and whom they think^ to be
good; yet they live wickedly and full of heinous crimes, otherways then the^
believe that they ought to live. And good Catholics are those which follow
both entire faith and good manners.

Aug de Civitate Dei. l. 10 c. 32.
What is the universal way, but tha^ which every nation has, not proper only
to it self: but is given from God, that i^ may be common to the university,
of nations, to all people: this is our piety, which therefore is called
Catholic, because it is not delivered to any certain people, as to the Jews,
but to all humane kind, and excludes not any one; by this all may be saved,
and without it none; and in this every nation has not his own religion, like
as with the Gentiles; for with the Romans other Gods were, and worshipped after
another manner then with the Greeks; others with them then with the French,
Spanish, Scythians, Indians, Persians: all nations that have professed Christ
do worship the same God, and with the same kind of sacrifice; and Augustine
Aug. Breuiculi co^t.
calls the Church Catholic not alone for the plenitude of sacraments therein,
but also for the university of nations, and people that therein communicate.

S. Athanasius, Luc. Act. 11.26. Mart. Romans 8. Kal. mart.
in his dispute against Arrius, gives the reason of the Disciples being called
Christians, thus: All that believed in our Lord JESUS CHRIST, were not called
Christians, but only Disciples: And because there arose many Authors of new
opinions, contrary to the Apostolical doctrine, they called all their
followers Disciples; and there was no difference in name between true and
false Disciples, whether they were Christ's, or Dosithees, or the followers of
one Judas, or of John, that confessed themselves, as it were, of Christ's
Church, but all were called by that one name of Disciples. Then the Apostles
coming together (as by S. Lukes narratio^ the Acts bear witness) called all
the Disciples by one name Christians, differencing them from the common name of
Disciples; and that the saying of the divine Oracle pronounced by Isaias 62.2.
might be accomplished, which has; And thou shall be called by a new name which
the mouth of our Lord shall declare, etc.

Epipha. haeret. 27.
Not long after the Heretics had emulation to this name, and the Carpocratians
first usurped it, whom others followed, reproaching so great a name with false
doctrine, and evil manners, as now they would do with the name of Catholic.

Romans 10.
Page 17.. 1. lin. 4. BY FAITH CONFESSING] With the heart we believe, to
justice, and with mouth Confession is made to salvation. Faith in the heart,
confession in the mouth. This is the word of faith which we preach (says the
Apostle) that if thou confess our Lord JESUS in thy mouth, and believe in thy
heart that God has raised him from death, Aug. de fide ad Petrum, Tom. 3.
thou shall be safe. S. Augustine to Peter the Deacon. I am glad indeed that
thou have so much solicitude for the keeping of the true faith, without any
vice of perfidiousnesse without which faith no conversion can profit, nor yet
be at all: for the Apostolical authority says; that without faith it is
impossible to please God: because faith is the foundation of all good things:
faith is the beginning of humane salvation; without this faith no man can come
to the number of the Sons of God: because without it neither in this world
does any one obtain the grace of justification, nor in the world to come shall
he possess life everlasting. And if any one do not walk here by faith, he
shall not come to the vision. Without faith all man's labor is in vain, for
such it is, as without the true faith whosoever will please God by contempt of
the world: as if one bending toward the country in which he knows he shall
live blessedly, should leave the right way and improvidently follow error, by
which he cannot come to the blessed City, but fall into precipice, where will
be no joy given to him that comes, but destruction brought in to him that
falls.

IN HOPE REPOSING MY SALVATION] A right order first to believe and confess,
then to hope. I have believed and therefore have I spoaken, and am over much
humbled; says the Psalmist, as it were betwixt hope and fear.

Augustine. Encheridion ad Laurentium. Tom. 3. What can be hoped for which is
not believed: and yet something may be believed which is not hoped for. As,
which of the faithful believes not the pains of the damned, and yet he does
not hope for them? and whosoever believes that they be now at hand, hanging
over his head, and with a flying motion of his mind does abhor them, is
better said to fear then to hope. Which Lucan distinguishing, has set down
thus: Let him that fears hope. Faith is both of evil things and good: for
both good and evil things are believed and that with good, and not with evil
faith. Faith is also of things past, and present, and to come, for we believe
that Christ dyed, which now is passed: We believe that he sits at the right
hand of the Father, which now is: We believe that he shall come to judge, which
is to be. Faith is also of a man's own things, and of other men's, for every
man believes of himself that he had a beginning, and that he was not ever,
and such other things: nor only of other men but also of the Angels we believe
many things that appertain to Religion. But hope is only of good things, and
those to come, and belonging to him that is said to hope for them. All which
being so, for these causes faith is to be distinguished from hope, as well in
reasonable difference as in the name. For in that belongs to the not seeing
either those things that are believed or hoped for, it is common to faith and
hope. In the Epistle to the Hebrews, the testimony whereof the illustrious
defenders of the Catholic rule have used; faith is said to be a convincing of
those things which are not seen. Although when any one says himself to have
believed, not words, nor witnesses, nor any arguments, but the evidence of the
present things, that is, to have given credit to them, it seems not so
absurd, that he might rightly be reprehended in word, and it should be said
unto him, thou have seen and therefore thou have not believed; whence it may be
thought not to be consequent that whatsoever thing is believed must not be
seen, but better we call that faith which is taught by the divine word, of
those things, to wit which are not seen.

And of hope the Apostle says, hope which is seen is not hope; for that which
one sees, what does he hope for? but if we hope for the things that we see
not, we expect with patience. When therefore future good things be believed of
us, they are no other thing then hoped for.

Now what shall I say of love without the which faith profits nothing? and
hope without love cannot be: To conclude, as S. James says, the divelles
believe and tremble, and yet they do not hope, or love, but rather that which
b^leeving we hope for and love, they fear shall come upon them. Wherefore the
Apostle Paul approoveth and commends the faith which worcketh by love, which
verily cannot be without hope, nor hope without love, nor both without faith.

D. Thom. 2.2. quaest. 17. Eternal beatitude is the proper object of hope. For
we may not hope for less of God then himself, in enjoying of whom consists
life everlasting. And supposing our union to our neighbor by love, a man may
by the virtue of Theological hope, hope for beatitude for him as well as for
himself: Psalm. 145. Hierem. 17.5.
but to confide in Princes or the sons of men, concerning salvation, or to
set our hope in man, the holy Ghost forbids and gives a curse to him that
does it. That faith being old will I keep in which a child I was borne.
Hieronymus ad Pammachium and Oceanum, paulo ante finem. Tom. 2. Now does faith
swim in many men's lips, when in their heart there is either none at all, or
that that is does vehemently languish. For who does not profess that which we
read in the Deuteronomie. Hear Israel, Deuteronomy. 6. and 10.
thy Lord thy God is one Lord? And, thou shall adore thy God and serve him
alone? Who does not daily recite with mouth, I believe in God the father
Almighty? notwithstanding he believes not in God, that does not place in him
alone all the trust of his felicity: neither has he one God and Lord that by
harlottrie, by riotte, and avarice, does the commands of Satan: nor does he
serve him alone, that serves his belly, that is given to this world which is
set all upon wickedness. The heathens think there be many Gods, and do thou
seem to thy self a perfect Christian, because thou art persuaded that there
is but one God? What great matter do thou? the Jews do the same, who daily
blaspheme the Son of God in their Synagogues; the same do the devils
believe and tremble at it. If truly thou beleevest in God believe him to be
just and true. Just in rewarding the good, and punishing the evil: true in his
promises: believe that there is no hope of salvation but only in his Son
whom he delivered to the cross for all of us, and to death, believe that no
evil can fall to them that deliver themselves wholly over unto his will; and
do persever in the same, this is to believe in God the Father, this is to
believe in his Son, this is to believe in the holy Ghost. Cyprian. de duplici
martyrio long ante finem. Tomo 4. Unexercised faith soon languisheth, and
idle is tempted with frequent discommodities: the crafty enemy breaks in
upon remiss sentinels: but externe fraud instructs the man that's exercised in
war and bears him gloriously to the palm of victory. Peace therefore to the
faithful is matter of corruption. Ambros. sermon. 11. in Psalm. 118. longius ante
fine^. Tom. 4.

Psalm. 141.
I have cried to thee O Lord, I have said thou art my hope, my portion in the
land of the living.

Psalm. 26
Abide our Lord, deal manfully, and thy heart shall be comforted, and sustain
our Lord. Because the world, what it promises seems here to give in the land
of the dying; and our Lord, what he promises is to give in the land of the
living, many are weary of expecting the true joy and are not ashamed to love
the deceitful; of such the Scripture says. Eccle. 2
Woe to them that have lost their patient sustayning, and diverted into wicked
ways. Aug. de verbis Apost. sermon. 25. Tom. 10.

Spe salvi facti sumus. Spes non confundit. by hope we are saved, hope
confounds not. How hope should be without faith I do not find, for no man
hops that he can attain that which he does not believe to be. It behooveth
therefore that al three be in the mind, faith, hope, and charity: that both a
man believe the things be true to which he is called, and hope that he may
attain to them, and that he love them. Aug. lib. 21. sententiarum, sent. 8.

One hope is of the eternal rewards, another of comfort in the humility of
tribulation. Aug. enarr. in Psalm. 118. super, Memor esto verbi tui servo tuo
in quo mihi spem dedisti. Tomo 8.

Because the man that is converted to God has his delight changed; the things
that he delights in are also changed, and not taken quite away; for all our
delights in this life, are not yet in deed: but the hope it self is so
certain as it is to be preferred before all the delights of this world. Aug.
enarr. in Psalm. 74. Tomo 8.

Page 17.. 1. lin. 5. IN THE ONLY MERITS] All our merits are founded in the
merits of Christ's incarnation, life, and passion: which ground work taken
away, no man has, or ever had, or could have since Adam any merits toward
life everlasting, which by his demerits he lost and merited damnation. Aug.
Co^fess. cap, 13. tom. 1. Et de Trinit. l. 13. c. 10. tom. 8.
Whosoever reckeneth up his merits to thee, what does he but reckon up thy free
gifts.

What was so necessary to erect our hope, and deliver mortal minds, dejected
with the very condition of mortality, from despairing of immortality, as that
it should be demonstrated unto us how much God weighed us and how much he loved
us? And what token of this more manifest and more excellent, then that the
Son of God, immutably good, remaining in himself what he was, and taking of
us, and for us, what he was not, without detriment of his souls nature,
vouchsafing to enter into our fellowship, first without any evil merit of his
own, he would bear our evils: and so now believing how much God loves us,
and hoping for that which before we despaired of, with bounty no way due, he
would bestow his gifts upon us without any good merits of ours, yea, with many
precedent evil merits; for even those things that are called our merits, are
his gifts: for that faith may work by love, the charity of God is diffused in
our hearts by the holy Ghost given us. Aug. enarr. in Psalm. 144. tom. 8.
Gratia salvi facti estis. Where thou hear grace, understand gratis, if
therefore gratis, then thou have brought nothing, thou have merited nothing: For
if any thing be rendered for merits, it is wages and not grace: by grace, says
he, you are saved through faith. Expound that more clearly for the arrogant,
for those that please themselves, for those that are ignorant of Gods justice
and will constitute their own. And this self same thing more openly. And
this, quoth he, that you are made safe by grace is not of your selves, but the
gift of God, But we perhaps have done something to merit the gift of God. What
then? do not we work well? yes, we work, but how? he working in us because
by faith we give place in our heart to him who in us and by us works good
things.............. Hearken to the same thing; what did thou merit sinner?
Contemner of God, what did thou merit? see if thou can meet with any
thing but punishment, see if thou can meet with any thing but pain: thou
see then what was due to thee, and what he gave thee that gave thee gratis.
Perdo^ is given to the sinner, the spirit of justification is given, charity
and dilection is given, wherein thou may do all good things: and above all
this, he will give both life everlasting and the society of the Angels: all of
mercy, boast no where of thy merits because thy merits themselves are his
gifts. Dominum Deum tuum adorabis and illi soli seruies* Thou shall adore thy
Lord thy God and serve him alone, and thy neighbors erring and laboring thou
must help as much as is lawful and commanded; so as this very thing when it is
well done, we do understand God to do it by us, and deceived with vain
glory challenge nothing to our selves, by which one vice we be from height
drowned in the deep. Aug. De quantitate animae, lib. 1. cap. 34. tom. 1. and de
libero arbitrio lib. 1. cap. 14. Of our merit that it is volunrarie. For this
that eternal law has with immutable stabilitie confirmed, that merit be in
the will, reward and punishment in beatitude and misery. When therefore we say
that men are voluntarily wretched, we speak not as if they had a will to be
wretched: but that they be in such will, as whether they will or no, misery
must necessarily follow: and therefore it repugneth not in the superior reason
that all have a will to be blessed and yet cannot: for all will not live
uprightly, to which only will, blessed life is due. And again. De morib.
Ecclesiae Cath. lib. 1. cap. 25. tom. 1. Life everlasting is the whole reward,
in whose promise we have joy: and the reward cannot go before ^e merits and be
given a man before he be ^orthie of it? for what is more unjust then ^his, and
what more just then God? we ^ust not therefore demand reward before ^e have
merited to receive it.

Aug. lib. de Beata vita. Meritis matris se vivere ^edit. Augustine thought he
lived through ^is mothers merits; and lib. 1. Soliloquiorum. He disprooveth the
error of those that ^hinke the souls to have no merit with God: of merit, see.
Aug. most copiously in many places. Impressione Basileae 1543. Tom. 2. col.
161. a. 163. a. 161. c. 464. c. Tom. 3. col. 204. B. Tom. 7. col. 770. a. and
Tom. 2. Epist. 105. What merits then of his own, shall he that is delivered
boast of, who if he had according to his merits, should be nothing but damned?
Are then the merits of the just none? they are verily, because they are just,
but that they might become just there were no merits; for they were made just,
when they were justified: but as the Apostle says, justified by his grace
gratis. Multa ibi vide. Tom. 2. col. 466. a. 486. B. Tom. 7. col. 1306. B. Tom.
8. col. 1104. B. Tom. 9. col. 26. a. Tom. 4. col. 1014. a. 1234. a. Tom. 10.
406. a. Tom. 3. 191. a. 162. B. 189. d. 190, B. 437. a. 584. c.d. 186. d. Tom.
4384. B. 169. d. 171. d. 1305. c. 876. c.d. 919. d.

I IMPLORE THE ASSISTANCE ^ PRAYER OF THE B. AND IMM^CVLATE VIRGIN MARIE AND O^
ALL THE HOLY COMPANY O^ HEAVEN] Concerning Prayer to Saint it is in vain to
ask of what opinion h^ was that thus actually prays to our ble^sed Lady and
all the Saints. So praye^ S. Augustine to the Saints. You therefore tha^ have
merited to become companions o^ the heavenly citizens and enjoy the clariti^ of
eternal glory, pray for me to our Lord that he will take me out of this
prison wherein I am holden bound and captive, etc. Tom. 3. l. de spiritu and
anima, col. 898 And de ecclesiasticis dogmatibus, cap. 73. The same S. says,
the bodies, and chiefly the relics of the blessed Martyrs are mos^ syncerely
to be ho^ored, as if they were the members of Christ, and Churches called by
their names, as holy places dedicated to the Divine worship, with most pious
affection and devotion to be most faithfully frequented we believe: and of the
mane^ how the Saints ought to be honored; at large. Lib. 8. De Civitate Dei:
cap. 27. and Tom. 6. contra Faustum Manichaeum, lib. 20. cap. 21. The Christian
people celebrateth the Martyrs memory with religious solemnity, both to
excite themselves to imitation, and that they may be cuppled in ^llowship to
their merits, and helped by ^eir prayers: yet so, as to none of the ^artyrs,
but to the God himself of the ^artyrs we constitute Altars, although in
^emorie of the Martyrs. For which of ^he Bishops assisting at the Altars in
places ^f the holy bodies, has at any time said: ^e offer to thee Peter, or
Paul, or Cyprian: ^ut that which is offered, is offered to God who crowned the
Martyrs, at the ^emories of them whom he crowned: that by the admonition of the
very places ^reater affect arise to whet charity, both ^owards them, whom we
can imitate, and toward him by whose help we be ^ble to imitate. We therefore
worship the Martyrs, with that worship of love and ^ocietie, wherewith also in
this life holy men of God are worshipped whose hearts ^e perceive to be
prepared to the like passion for the Evangelical truth. But those by so much
more devoutly, as more ^ecurely after all uncertain things overcome, and with
how much more confident praise we preach them now victours in a more happy
life, then as yet fighting in this ^ife. But with that worship which in Greek
^s called latria, and cannot be spoken in one word in latin, being a certain
servitud^ properly due to the Divinity, we neith^ worship nor teach to be
worshipped, b^ one God, etc. Aug. in Psalm. 85. prope fine^ Tom. 8. Our Lord
JESUS CHRIST does yet intercede for us: All the Marty^ that are with him make
intercession for (...) their interpellings do not pass until o^ sighs have
passed, etc. Lege de Ciuitate D^ lib. 21. Tom. 5 and in Psalm. 105. Tom. 8.
vers^ Si no^ Moses electus eius stetisset in cons^actio^ in ^on^pectu eius.
Aug, sermon. 2. de anuntiatione fine. Tom. 10. sermon de Sanctis. O Blessed MARIE
who is able worthily to repay thee in th^nkes and preachings of thy praises who
by thy singular assent did succou^ the l^st world? what praises can human
fr^iltie pay thee, which in thy only commerce h^th found an entry to
recoverie* Receive ^herfore how small soever, how soever to thy merits unequal
thancks-g^vings, and when thou have received ou^ v^wes, by prayer, excuse our
falts. Adm^ our prayers within the sacrarie of thy hearing and bring us ba^ke
an antidote of reconciliation: be it by thee excusable which b^ thee we
intrude, let that become impetrable which with faithful mind we ask, receive
what we offer, give again, what w^ ask, excuse that we fear, because thou
ar^ the only hope of sinners, by thee we hope for perdon of our sins, and in
thee most blessed is the expectation of our rewards: Holy Marie succor the
wretches, help the pusillanimous, refresh the sorrowful, pray for the people,
stand for the clerecie, make intercession for the devout woman kind, let all
feel thy help that celebrate ^hy memory. Assist readily to the vows of
those that ask, and to all, repay the ^ished effect. Let thy daily studies be
to pray for the people of God, who blessed ^ast merited to bear the Redeemer
of the world that lives and reigns world without end.

Very worthy and just is it to glorify he mother of our God ever most blessed
and undefiled, Chrysostom. in liturg.
more honorable then Che^ubins, more glorious far then Seraphins, ^ho
without all corruption have brought ^orth God, we magnify thee the true
mo^her of God, hail Marie full of grace our lord is with thee, blessed thou
among ^omen, and blessed the fruit of thy womb, because thou have brought
forth the Sa^iour of our souls.

To thee we call most holy virgin, Athan* in Evag. de S. Maria Deipara
be ^indfull of us thou who even after thy ^eliverie did remain a virgin.
Hail ^arie full of grace our Lord is with thee, the orders of Angels and all
men do call thee blessed. Blessed art thou above all women, and blessed the
fruit of thy womb. Make intercession for us O Mistress, O Lady, O Queen,
and Mother of God.

Greg. Nazian. Traged. Christi.
Thrice blessed mother, light of virgins, that do inhabit the bright temples
of heaven, free from filth of mortality, adorned now with immortalities stole,
yield a benign ear to my words from on high, and receive I beseech thee O
virgin my prayers.

Bernar. sermon. 2. de Advent.
O blessed inventor of grace, bring forth of life, and mother of health, let us
b^ thee have access to thy son that by the^ he may receive us, who by thee
was give^ to us.

IMMACVLATE] This is the prope^ epithete of the Conception of our blesse^
Lady. Others there are appropriated to he^ virginity, as most entire, most
pure, undefiled, not corrupted, not stained, untouched, etc. Whence may be
gathered the authors opinion of the immaculate Conception to be the same that
our Seraphica^ Order has even from the beginning raise^ and maintained both in
Quire and school that the B. Virgin was always Immaculat^ even in the first
instant of her Conception as beco^med the Majesty of God, that w^ to be borne
of her unspotted flesh. Ca^t. 4.7. Thou art all immaculate, etc.

Page 17.. 1. lin. 15. MEMBERS OF THE TRIVMPHANT CHVRCH HAVE IN CHRIST
COMPASSION ON THE MEMBERS OF THE MILITANT CHVRCH] By reason of their union. For
we believe in the holy Catholic Church the communion of Saints. The right
order of confession required, Aug. in Encheridio. c. 56.
that after the Trinity the Church should be adjoined as a house to the
dweller, and to God his Temple, and to the builder his City. The which is here
to be taken whole, not only in that part in which it is a pilgrim here on
earth, from the Sun ri^ing to the setting of the same praising the name of
our Lord, and after the captivi^ie of oldnesse singing a new song; but ^lso in
that part which always has adhe^ed to God in heaven from the time that it was
first created, and has experienced no evil of his fall: this stands fast,
blessed ^n the holy Angels, and helps as it ought, ^o do his part that is in
pilgrimage: because both shall be one by company of e^ernitie, and now is one
by the band of ^haritie, which whole is instituted to ^orship one God.

Psalm. 118.63.
David said, while he was yet living: I am partaker, with all that fear thee
and keep thy commandments.

1. Cor. 12.12.
As the body is but one and yet has many members and all the members are but
one body, so also Christ, for in one spirit we were baptized into one. The eye
cannot say to the hand I need not thy help, nor the head to the feet you are
no^ necessary for me. God has tempered the body, giving to it that wanted
the more abundant honor, that there might be no schism in the body, but
that the member together might be careful one for another and if one member
feel any smart, all the members do condole with it, or if any on member
receive any comfort, all the members do congratulate with it, and you ar^ the
body of Christ and members of h^ members, etc.

S. Maximus, sermon. de SS. Octavio, Adve^titio and Salvatore martyribus
Taurine^sibus.
All martyrs are most devoutly to b^ worshipped but especially those are to b^
honored of us whose relics we have (...) possession, for those help us with
the prayers, but these with their passion; wit^ these we have familiarity for
they be a^waies with us, they dwell with us, that i^ they keep us whilst we
live and receive (...) when we dye; here, lest we offend, the^ lest the
horror of hell invade us. To the end it was ordained by our forefathers, that
our bodies should be laid by the Saints boanes that vvhilest hell fears them,
pain may not come at us, vvhilest Christ illuminateth them, our darcknesse may
fly away: Resting with the holy Martyrs we escape hell by their merits, but
not unless we be fellows with them in their sanctity.

Page 17.. 1. lin. 18. In opinione Doct. subtilis.
INTO HIS FIRST SVBSTANCE] This can not be physically understood; but is
morally taken for death; He dyed the 29. of June 1598. of a consumption,
vvherof he lay sick almost a year at his manor house of Temple broughton,
and was, according to his will, buried in S. Mary's, the parish Church of
Handburie, in the place where the high Altar stood in the time of Catholic
Religion.

Of what age he died I know not but gather that he could not want much of 60.
It is evident in the Testament that he lived 40. years and upward unmarried;
afterward he had 12. children borne him by one wife at 12. several births.
Howsoever, the life was short for a man of his vvorth, and yet long by reason
of the vvorth of it: As it is said. Sap. 4. He that is consummate and perfected
in short time, has accomplished many times and ages.

De fato sane in^ellige.
Seneca Epist. 4. de breviori vita non curandum. Our care must not be to live
long, bu^ to live sufficiently. To live long we have need of fate: to live
sufficiently, a mind* Life is long if it be full: and it is full when the mind
has gotten the maisterie o^ good, and into its own hands power over it self.
What avail a man 80. years passed in sluggishnesse? Such a man has not
lived, but made a stay in life, nor is he late dead but long.

He has lived 80. years; all the matter i^ from what day you count his death.
He has lived 80. years, rather he has been 80. years: unless you mean he
has lived, so as trees are said to live. Let us not measure our life by time
but facts. As in little stature a perfect man may be, so in a little term of
time a perfect life may be. Age is an external thing: how long I am, is
another: but how long I am good, is mine. To live unto wisdom is the space
of mos^ ample life. Idem, lib. 1. de tranquilitate vita^ cap. 10. There is no
viler thing then an aged old man that has no other argument bu^ years to
prove that he has lived long.

Lin. 21. IT SHALL PLEASE GOD TO APPOINT] Man purposes and God disposes.
Therefore says S. James the Apostle. Epist. cap. 4. Say if our Lord will, or if
we live, we will do this or that, because we know not what shall be to morrow.

So the soul be safe, it is no great matter where the body lie: many a holy
body lies in the sea, many burned to asks, many devoured by wild beasts,
etc. Yet every man ought so much to esteem of Christian burial, as he ought
to seek for it by all lawful means, and is bound to ordain as providently
as he can; and a good reason why is given in the leaf here before, out of S.
Maximus.

Page 17.. 2. RVFVLL DECAY OF THE CATHOLIC RELIGION] Begun in England by
Henry 8. breaking obedience with the sea of Rome by act of Parliament, 1533.
and made more full by Q. Elizabeth.

AS A TRVE FATHER] A true father is he that, according to the law of nature,
provideth for those whom he has gotten into the world, not only bodily, but
spiritually: which law is so firmly engraffed in nature, as it needs no
express law written, to command it: as the children have to honors their
parents: the care of providing corporally for children is in some parents over
much, and the provision for their souls (the chief part) too little.

These are not true fathers, that care not to leave to their children a true
inheritance: but false fathers, leaving inheritance of false riches; such as
when they have slept their sleep, they shall find nothing in their hands. The
true father has his principal care to instruct his children in the law of
God: that as, not only the earthly goods, but celestial doctrines were by his
forefathers delivered to him; so he, keeping them in the customs and manners of
his life, deliver the same to his posterity at his death. The sons, most
commonly follow the steps of their fathers, and think all lawful to do that
they see them use. Great is the obligation of parents in the education of their
children.

Joan. 5.19.
The son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees his father do; for
whatsoever he does, the son likewise does.

Isaias 38. Mat. 10.32. Marck 8.38. Luc. 9.26. and 12 8.
Page 18.. 3. BE IT KNOWN TO THEM AND TO ALL THE WORLD] The father to his
children shall notify thy truth. Every one tha^ shall confess me before men,
I vvil^ also confess him before my Father which is in heaven. And he that
shall deny me before men: I will also deny him before my Father which is in
heaven.

S. Aug. sermon. 181. de tempore, Vide supra. ^. by faith confessing.
Tom. 10. Heb. 11. Sine fide. Without faith it is impossible to please God,
this faith he acknowledges in our hearts, that searches reins and hearts,
but for conserving of the Churches unity; for the dispensation of this time,
with faith of heart, is also necessary confession of mouth; because with the
heart we believe to justice, and with mouth we make confession to salvation,
not only of preachers, but also of those that are instructed: Otherwise one
brother of another could not have notice, nor the Churches peace be conserved,
nor one teach another, nor learn of another, necessary things to salvation,
unless what he has in his heart, with signs of voice, as it were, with
certain chariots he sent to the hearts of others* Faith is therefore both to be
kept in the heart, and brought forth with the mouth: for faith is the
foundation of all good things, and beginning of humane salvation: without this
no man can come to the number of the sons of God, and without it, neither
does he obtain the grace of justification in this world, nor shall he possess
life everlasting in the world to come. And if one walk not by faith, he shall
not come to vision. The holy Apostles, having regard to this, delivered a
certain rule of faith, which, according to the Apostolical number,
comprehended in 12. sentences, they called the symbol, by which the believers
might hold the Catholic unity and by which they might convince heretical
pravi^ie, etc.

A MEMBER OF CHRIST'S TRVE, CATHOLIC, AND APOSTOLIC CHVRCH] Signs of the true
Church are, that it is one, holy, Catholic, and Apostolic, therefore he
adioyneth [OVT OF THE UNITY AND FELLOWSHIP WHEREOF THERE NEVER WAS, NOR IS, NOR
CAN BE SALVATION] No more then was for those that were without the ark of Noah.
The true Church can be but one, in as much as truth is one, and can be but one:
error manifold, and in a manner infinite. A man that going a journey, bent to
one place if he leave the right way, which can be but one, it is no more matter
which way he take, of so many ways as lie round about him, for in all he
erreth, and shall not come to the place intended, because he has left the way
that only leads thereunto. Aug. sermon. 181. de te^pore, prope finem, Tom. 10
Symbol. Apost. The holy Catholic Church. It is to be known that we must
believe the Church, and not believe in the Church, because the Church is not
God, but the house of God. Catholic, he says, diffused over all the whole
world, because the Churches of diverse Heretics are therefore not called
Catholic, because they be contained in places, and every one in their own
Provinces, but this, even from the Sun rising, to the setting of the same, is
diffused with the splendor of one faith. There are no greater riches, no
treasures, no honors, no greater substance of this world, then is the
Catholic faith: which saves men sinners, illuminateth the blind, cures the
infirm, baptizeth Cathecume^s, justifies the faithful, repayreth penitents,
augmenteth the just, crowns, martyrs, ordeyneth clerks, consecrateth Priests,
prepares for the kingdom of heaven, and in the everlasting inheritance
communicates with the holy Angels. Whosoever he be, and of what condition
soever he be, he is no Christian that is not in the Church of Christ.

Our Lord JESUS CHRIST like a whole perfect man, both head and body: Aug. in
Psalm. 90. Co^cio. 2 Tom. 8.
the head woe acknowledge in that man which was borne of the Virgin MARIE,
suffered under Pontius Pilate, was buried, arose, ascended in to heaven,
sits at the right hand of the Father, from thence we expect him, judge of
the living and the dead: this is the head of the Church; the body of this head
is the Church, not which is in this place; but which is in this place, and over
all the world: nor that which is in this time, but even from Abel unto those
which are to be borne, and to believe in Christ even till the end, all the
people of Saints, pertaining to one city, which city is the body of Christ;
whose head is Christ.

Whosoever separated from the Church is conjoined to an adulteress; is
separated from the things promissed to the Church; neither does he appertain
to the rewards of Christ, that leaves the Church of Christ, he is an Alien, he
is profane, he is an enemy; he cannot now have God his father, which has not
the Church his mother. If he could escape that was without the ark of Noah,
then he shall escape that is without the church. Cyprianus tract. de
simplicitate Praelat. sive de vnitate Ecclesiae.

I following no first but Christ, am consociated to thy beatitude, that is, to
the chair of Peeter: I know the Church was built upon the Rock, whosoever out
of this house eats the lamb, is profane. If any one be out of the ark of Noah while the flood rages, he shall perish. Hieronymus, epist. 1. ad Damasum,
tomo 2.

The Roman Church in all I seek to follow. Ambros. lib. 3. de Sacramentis,
cap. 1. post ^edium, part 1. No man blotteth out of heaven the constitution of
God: no man blotteth out of earth the Church of God. Aug. epist. 162. in fine.

That is the holy Church, the one Church, the Catholic Church, the true
Church, fighting against all heresies: fight it may, be vanquished it cannot.
All heresies have gone out thereof, as unprofitable sprigs cut from the vine,
but she remains upon her root, upon her vine, upon her charity, the gates
of hell shall not overcome her. Aug. lib. 1. de symb. ad cathecum. cap. 5. in
fine.

The sun is easier extinguished, then the Church obscured. Chrysostom. hom. 4.
in 6. Esaiae.

Theodosius the great, Aug. de Civitate lib. 5. cap. 26.
gloried more that he was a member of the Catholic Church, then that he
reigned upon the earth.

What is more honorable then the Emperor to be called a child of the Church,
Ambro. de Eccl. no^ trad. Haereticis. Heb. 11.
this is that Moses preferred before the Egyptian treasures, denying himself
to be Pharaos son, and choosing rather to be afflicted with Gods people then
to have the pleasure of temporal sin. Gregor. Naz. epist. ad 150. Episc*
For before God there is nothing so magnificent and illustrious, as pure
doctrine, and a soul instructed and made perfect with divine opinions.

Page 28.. 3. lin. 11. I acknovvledge God the Father my maker, God the Son my
redeemer, etc. Matthew. 28.19. Going teach all nations baptizing them in the name
of the Father and of the Son and of the holy Ghost. Aug. l. 1 de fide ad
Petru^, c. 1. Tom. 3.
The faith of the Trinity. In what place soever thou be constitute,
because, according to the Rule promulgated by the command of our Savior, thou
know thy self to be baptized in one name of the Father, and Son, and holy
Ghost; principally, and without doubt, retain with thy whole heart, that the
Father is God* the Son God, and the holy Ghost God; that is, the holy and
ineffable Trinity, to be naturally one God; Deuteronomy. 6. Mat. 4.
of whom in Deuteronomie it is said: Hear Israel, thy Lord thy God is one God:
And thou shall adore thy Lord God, and serve him alone: Yet because this one
God, who only is naturally the true God, we have said to be neither Father
alone, nor Son alone, nor holy Ghost alone, but together Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, we must beware, lest as we truly say the Father and Son and holy
Ghost, in that belongs to their natural unity, to be one God; so we dare
say, or believe, (which is altogether unlawful) that he which is Father is the
same that the Son, or holy Ghost; Or ^e that is Son, either Father or holy
Ghost; Or he that is holy Ghost, called properly, in the confession of this
Trinity, to say or believe, that he is personally the Father or the Son. For
that faith which the holy Patriarchs and Prophets, received from God before the
incarnation of the Son of God; which also the holy Apostles heard from our
Lord him self in flesh; and, by the magisterie of the holy Ghost instructed,
not only preached in word, but also to the healthful instruction of posterity
left in their writings, preaches the Trinity to be one God: that is, Father,
Son, and holy Ghost. But it were no true Trinity, if one and the same person
were called Father, and Son, and holy Ghost: For if, as the substance of the
Father, and Son, and holy Ghost, is one, so the person were one; there were
nothing wherein it might be truly called a Trinity. Again, it were indeed a
true Trinity, but that Trinity should not be one God, if as the Father and
Son, and holy Ghost, are in propriety of persons distinct from one another,
so they were distinguished in diversity of natures.

But because in that one true God Trinity, not only that it is one God, but
also tha^ it is a Trinity, is naturally true; therefore that true God is in
persons a Trinity, and in nature one. By this natural unity, all the Father
is in the Son and holy Ghost; al^ the Son in the Father and holy Ghost* all
the holy Ghost in the Father and Son none of these is without any one of
them* because none is before another in eternity, or exceeds in greatness,
or surpasses in power; because, in as much as pertains to the unity of the
divine nature, the Father is neither before nor greater then the Son, nor
holy Ghost: nor the eternity and immensitie of the Son, as it were before,
or greater, can naturally precede or exceed, the eternity and immensitie of
the holy Ghost.

Aug. de Trin. cap. 4. Tom. 3. All that ever I could read of, that before me
wrote of the Trinity, which is God, the Catholic handlers of the divine
books both new and old, have intended to teach this out of the Scriptures:
that the Father, and Son, and holy Ghost, of one and the same substance, with
inseparable equality, do insinuate the divine unity: therefore they be not
three Gods, but one God: Although the Father have begotten the Son, and
therefore the Son is not, whom the Father is: and the Son is begotten of the
Father, and for that he is not Father which is Son: and the holy Ghost is
neither Father, nor Son, but only the spirit of the Father and Son:
himself also coequal to the Father and Son, and pertaining to the unity of
the Trinity: And yet not the same Trinity borne of the Virgin MARIE; under
Pontius Pilate crucified, and buried; to have risen the third day and ascended
into heaven; but only the Son. Nor the same Trinity to have descended in
likeness of a dove upon JESUS baptized: or on the day of Pentecost after the
Ascension of our Lord with sound made from heaven as if a vehement blaste were
carried along, and in divided tongues like fire, to have sitten upon every one
of them, but only the holy Ghost. Nor the same Trinity to have said from
heaven: thou art my Son: when either he was baptized by John, or upon the
mount, when the three disciples were with him, or when the voice sounded,
saying: I have both clarified and again will clarify: but only the Fathers
voice to have been made to the Son; although the Father, and Son and holy
Ghost, as they are inseparable, so do they inseparably work. This is also my
faith, because this is the Catholic faith.

Page 18.. 4. lin. 1. I BELIEVE AND HOVLD] The Apostles Creed, the Nicene
Creed, Athanasius Creed, the 10. Commandments, the 7. Sacraments: and in a
word, all that the Catholic Church teaches and holds; for, to believe
profits nothing unless we also hold and keep in work, what we believe; and
that wholly, and entirely. Epist. Iacobi. c. 2. 10.
Whosoever keeps otherwise the whole law and offends in one point:
becomes guilty of the whole, as if he had transgressed in all. That the
Sacraments are the conducts whereby the grace of God is derived unto mankind:
Their number, order, names, etc.

1. BAPTISME] He rekoneth the Sacraments in such order as they occurred at the
present to memory, Matthew. vlt.
Whose right order is, first baptism: whereby we are, regenerate, and borne a
new in Christ to spiritual, and everlasting life; who before were borne of our
parents in the world, to corporal, and, without this Sacrament, to everlasting
death.

Ioa^. 20. Act. 2.
Confirmation; whereby we be spiritually strengthened and grow, as in our
infancy we be lapped and bound corporally until our joints be knit and we
made able to stand by our natural forces.

Eucharistie, Joan. 6. praedicatur Euch. Mat. 26. Jacob. 5 Ioa^. 20. Mat. 16.
whereby we be nourished and fed in soul, as by corporal food we be fed in
body.

Penance; whereby the wounds of sin that we receive in our souls after
baptism are cured.

Extreme unction: Jacob. 5 Marc. 6.
which strengthens us in our passage out of this life, when of our selves we
be too weak to resist the assaults of the devil, who then most of all rages;
tendens insidias calcaneo nostro. Of these five; see Scotus in 4. D. 2. Q. 1.
Conclusione 1. Whose words are these: Like as in the natural life first is
generation, after follows nutrition, and corroboration, and reparation of the
health lost, and these 4. appertain to every singular person: and yet besides
these, something is requisite pertaining to the community, by which a man is
constitute in necessary degree toward some act necessary for the community.
So spiritually, to complete perfection outwardly, there must be some help
pertaining to spiritual generation: and secondly, something pertaining to
nutrition: thirdly, pertaining to roboration or strengthening: fourthly, to
reparation after falling: and fifthly, besides these things is required some
being, whereby he that departs be finally prepared: For this spiritual life
is a certain way, ordaining that he who lives well in the same, may without
impediment pass out of it to the other, for which he is prepared. These things
therefore are required as necessary helps to every person for himself.

Of the other 2. Order, and Matrimony. Scotus ibi.

And for the good of the community observing this law, is required also
carnal multiplication; because the same is presupposed to the spiritual good,
as nature to grace: and spiritual multiplication of others in the same law. So
therefore it was congruent to have seven helps bestowed upon the observers of
the Evangelicall law; wherein might be both intensiue and extensiue perfection,
and sufficient for all things necessary to the observance of this law; and
these are, as the Master of Sentences has in his text: Baptism, appertaining
to spiritual generation: Eucharist, necessary to nourishment: Confirmation,
for strengthening: Penance, to the reparation of those that are fallen: Mat. 19.
ex 1. and 2. Genesis. Mat. 26. Ioa^. 20.
Extreme unction, to the final reparation: Matrimony, to multiplication in
the being of nature, or carnal being: and Order, to multiplication in the
being of grace, or spiritual being.

CONFESSION] By this name the Author calls the sacrament of Penance, as by
the part of that Sacrament which then was, and allwaies has been by the
devil, and his ministers the Heretics, most opposed. The first part of the
Sacrament of Penance is contrition, or inward sorrow of heart through
consideration of Gods goodness and our own wickedness. No Heretics are so
barbarous, nor any people in the world, that acknowledges any God, but they
hold this part necessary, as indeed it is, and has always been, to
salvation. This they call ^epentance, and not improperly, if rightly
understood. But whereas they hold this to be sufficient to blot out sins
committed after baptism, it is false: for since the coming of our Savior
Christ and preaching the law of grace (which takes not away, but accomplisheth
the former law) sin is not remitted by only contrition, but confession of it
to a Priest is also required: and moreover Satisfaction must follow: that the
party wronged, whether God, or our neighbor, may again be appeased, and
satisfied: yea, even before the time of our Savior Christ these seem to have
been in use: 2. Reg. 12.13.
David confessed his sin to Nathan the Prophet, and did satisfaction by
penal work, adiudging also him that had wronged the poor man, by taking his
sheep, and sparing his own, to fourefould restitution, The people of all
estates that came confessing their sins to S. John the Baptist, Luc. 3.10.
demanded, and were by him enjoined what they should do. Luc. 19 8.
The rich Zachaeus offered our Savior to give the half of his goods to the
poor, and restore four times as much, to any man that he might hap to have
defrauded. In confession is the greatest humility, a man will easier part with
his goods, or pain his body, to satisfy, or be contrite in heart, than in
Confession to accuse himself; which kind of Pride we inherited from our first
parents: Adam would not confess his sin to God that knew it, Aug. de Civis.
l. 13. c. 11. in fine.
but cast the fault upon the woman: nor she confess, but cast the fault upon
the serpent: deceived in this, that to God rebuking and chastizing, he esteemed
he should bring a just excuse, and such as easily he would admit, if he should
say he did it, to gratify his companion; and that companion, not which he had
assumed to himself, but which our Lord had given him.

How many hard labors, and painful pilgrimages have some men undergone to
expiate their sin: which never the less they could never disburden their
conscience of until they confessed. So much avails confession, as when it
can be had, without it no contrition does suffice; and when it cannot be had,
to make contrition valuable to salvation, we must have confession at least in
desire and will.

Aug. lib. 50. hom. Tom. 10. hom. 12. Dearly beloved brothers, in all the
divine Scriptures we be profitably, and healthfully admonished, that we ought
to confess our sins, continually, and humbly, not only to God, but also to
holy men, and those that fear God: For God will not therefore have us to
confess our sins because he cannot otherwise know them, but because this the
devil desires, that he may find what to object against us before the
tribunal of the everlasting Judge; therefore he had rather we would defend than
accuse our sins. On the contrary side, our God, because he is pious and
merciful, will that we confess them in the world, that we be not confounded
for them in the world to come. The devil therefore knowing the virtue of pure
confession, with all his forces endeavoreth to hinder a man that he do not
confess, and as at first he suggested to make man fall, so after the fall he
hinders us from rising, because he knows we cannot rise without confession.

It is worse that a man will not confess, then to contemn the law. That a man
will not by satisfaction appease the offense of God, is worse then by sinning
to offend the goodness of God: for although sin be forgiven by contrition,
yet vocal confession is necessary, either in deed, when opportunity is had,
or in purpose, when the article of necessity excludes the same, and not
contempt of Religion; and so, the necessity of confessing after contrition, is
not in such case, for necessity of the remedy, but for the obligation of the
precept.

Conveniently was confession instituted, that he who being in his own power
had departed from God, put under the power of an other, with humility, and
devotion, may return. Chrysostom. hom. 3. op. imperfect. de Confessionis vtil.
Confession of our sins is a sign of a good mind, and the testimony of a
conscience that fears God. Perfect fear breaks through all shame, and
there only is the turpitude of confession seen, where the pain of the future
judgment is not believed. And because the very shame is a grievous pain,
therefore God commands us to confess our sins, that we may suffer the
blushing for pain: for this very thing is part of the divine judgment. He is
worthy of perdon that seeks not to excuse his sin, for where confession is,
there is remission, because shamefaced confession holds the next place to
innocence.

Aug. de poenitentiae vtilitate. Because it is a great shaming to confess ones
sins, he that undergoes this shame for Christ, is worthy of mercy.

Greg. lib. 12. moral. c. 14. Let those that will mervail at, in every just
man, the continence of chastity, let them mervail at the integrity of
justice, let them admire the bowels of piety, I do no less admire at the
most humble confession of sins, then so many sublime deeds of virtue.

Aug. vbi supra. O fool, why art thou ashamed to tell to a man, that which
thou were not ashamed to do in the sight of God? Remove from thee shame, run
to the Priest, reveal thy secret, confess thy sin, otherwise contrition of
heart will nothing profit thee, unless confession of the mouth, if thou
cannest, do follow it. Confession is the health of souls, dissipatour of
vices, restorer of virtues, oppugnatour of the devils: what will you more? it
stops the gates of Hell, and opens the gates of Paradise.

Page 19.. 5. SACRAMENT OF THE LORDS SVPPER] Although, not only in many other
places, but even in the immediately ensuing words the mind of the author he
sufficiently declared, yet because the wise (that few are) must speak with the
multitude, and accommodate themselves to wise and unwise, to whom we are
debtors, with the Apostle: It is here to be noted, concerning this manner of
speaking. Every word absolutely set down stands first for his principal,
and more general signification. So that Dominus, unless it be limited, and
drawn to more particularitie of signification, by some term of restriction,
must after his general signification be called, A Lord: or, The Lord: and not
our Lord, more then your Lord, or my Lord, or his Lord, or their Lord; which
signification it must take from some of these adjoined expressly, our, their,
his, mine, etc. Which of it self it has not, but a more noble, because less
limited. Far more it is to be The Lord, by which we understand The Lord of all,
then Our Lord: which, according to the very letter, does not sound Lord of all,
but rather excluding others, would seem to be ours, and not theirs. In some
places, as where it is said, Ego Dominus: it ca^ have none other sense but, I
The Lord: for senseless it were to say, I our Lord, and not much better to say
I your Lord: the true is, I The Lord.

The Lord, and Our Lord neither kind of speech is to be reproved but according
to the occurrent matter both used indifferently.

Dominicam Coenam, says S. Paul, 1. Cor. 11.20. The Lords Supper, and verse.
26. Mortem Domini, the Lords death: which is better expressed in the other
sacred tongues as (...) eth Adonai (...); the death of the Lord.

When this speech, Our Lord, is used out of a more fervent devotion toward
God, it is to be applauded, because we will show therein a particular relation
that we have to him more then all other creatures have: and that he is Our
Lord, with dominion over us that are after his likeness, more then over other
creatures, that are less, or nothing after his likeness: which is insinuated
to us in the book of Genesis, where God is never called The Lord, before the
creation of man, but 35. times (...) God, and after Genesis 2.4. (...) The Lord.
What dominion has a man unless over men, that are of his likeness and using
reason? Over the brute beasts he uses no special act of lordship or dominion,
but as he serves himself with them, so also he serves them. Over insensible
more improperly is man said to have dominion: because they cannot obey his
command, but are disposed of by the labor of his hands. Those things we are
most properly said to be Lords of, which do most immediately obey the power of
our will. Man's will is immediately subject to Gods will, and not as other
creatures are, by the government of Angels, or influence of the heavens: And
man ought to call Our Lord, and not The Lord, when the matter spoaken of is
directly belonging to his will subject only to God and to no creature
whatsoever. Which freedom he has given us, because he will show himself a
loving, and not a tyrannical Lord. In these places as of the Lords supper,
etc. There is no special mention of our subjection, but of his voluntary
gift, etc. Therefore it may well be called, The Lords supper, The Lords death,
etc.

Page 19.. 5. lin. 3. OF THE ALTAR] The Heretics of these times have none:
only Catholics have an Altar. Heb. 13, 10. Mala. 1.10.

Lin. 3. WORDS OF CONSECRATION] How can that which is bread be the Body of
Christ? Ambros. de Sacramentis. lib. 4. cap. 4. By consecration. Consecration
then with what words, and by whose speeches is it? by the words and speeches of
our Lord JESUS: for, by all other things that are said, praise is given to God,
prayer is made for the people, for Kings, for others, when they come once to
make the venerable Sacrament, the Priest uses not his own words, but the
words of Christ. The speech of Christ therefore makes this Sacrament. What
speech of Christ? verily that by which all things are made. Our Lord commanded
and the heavens were made: Our Lord commanded and the earth was made: Our Lord
commanded and the seas were made: Our Lord commanded and every creature was
engendered: you see of what operation the word of Christ is. If therefore there
be so much force in the speech of our Lord JESUS, as that which was not,
begins thereby to be, of how much greater operation is it, to let the things
be which were, and change them into other things? the heaven was not, the sea
was not, the earth was not, but harken to him that says: He said the word, and
they are made, he commanded, and they are created. That therefore I may answer
thee, there was not the body of Christ before the consecration, but after the
consecration, I say to thee, that now it is the body of Christ: He has said,
and it is made; he has commanded ^^d it i^ ^^^^ted

SACRIFICE. MASS. Malach. 1.11. In every place i^ sacrifized and offered to my
name a pure oblation which none have but the Catholic Church.

FIGVRATIVE SPEECHES] By connection of one place with another, by comparing the
antecedent with the consequent words of Scripture: Scotus in 4. D. 10. Q. 1.
number. 3. Will have us to gather whether things be spoken figuratively or not:
and argues that here they be not figurative, out of the words following; for
when Christ had said; Take and eat this is my body, to declare that he meant
his very body, and no mystical body, he said immediately, which shall be
delivered for you; and his body was the same night delivered to death for all
mankind, betrayed by the false Apostle Judas.

Page 20.. 6. lin. 1. EXAMINATION OF CONSCIENCE] Whereof the Apostle. 1. Cor.
11.28. Let a man prove himself: and 31. if we would judge our selves we should
not be judged.

No pain is more grievous then a wicked conscience. An evil conscience is
tossed with his own prickings: if public fame condemn thee not, thy own
conscience condemns thee, because no man can fly from himself. Will thou be
never sad? Live well: good life has always joy, the conscience of the guilty
is always in pain. Bernard. Tract. De interiori domo. cap. 45.

Among the manifold tribulations, and innumerable molestious afflictions of a
man's soul, there is no greater affliction then conscience of sin. Greg. in
septimum Psalm. poenitent. verse. penult. And, on the contrary, there is no
greater consolation, then a conscience adorned with virtues. Vide Aug. sermon.
10. ad frat. in eremo, Tom. 10. and sermon. 45.

How beautiful is the brightenesse of the soul! How happy the conscience
full of good works! If he be potent, that commands the world, how happy is he
that in his conscience bears God? Aug. sermon. 7. de Tempore.

By good life a good conscience is gained, that by the good conscience no pain
may be feared: let him therefore learn to fear that will not fear, let him
learn for a time to be solicitous that will always be secure. Aug. sermon. 214.
De tempore.

No man rejoices in God, that lives i^ vice. Aug. lib. 50. Hom. hom. 33. in
medio. and sermon. 215. No man has unjust gain with out just damage: where
gain is, there i^ damage, gain in the coffers, damage i^ the conscience,

There is no better pleasure then the grace of a corrected conscience, Amb.
lib. 2 de Abraham, cap. 11. Tom. 4.

REPENTANCE, AND AMENDMENT] Confession makes contrition or repentance more
intense, and as it self is caused by them, so it does again cherish and
increase them, and of them both proceeds amendment: for he that with
contrition confesses, submits himself also to make amends, and do
satisfaction according to the judgment of him to whom he confesses: and not
only to amend by leading a new life, but as well by satisfiyng for that is
past. Of satisfaction* or penance for sins, Daniel. 4.24. Matthew. 3.8. Luc.
3.8. Whereupon see. Greg. hom. 20. in Evangel. Bernard. sermon. 66. in Cant.
Chrysostom. hom. 10. in Matthew. Aug. aut poenitendum, aut ardendum. Look to do
penance, or to burn.

Page 20.. 7. lin. 2. INVOCATION OF SAINTS] Who being like the Angels of God,
can both attend to our need and the vision of God. Mat. 22.30.18, 10. Luc.
15.10.

PRAYER FOR THE DEAD] Saint Peeter instructed us, to have a guard over the acts
of our life every hour: he instructed us also to bury the dead, and to
perform their exequies diligently, and to pray for them, and to give alms.
Clemens, epist. 1. ad Iacobum fratrem Domini.

Dionys. de Eccl. Hierarch. cap. 7. Then coming the venerable Prelate reads
a most holy prayer over him, that the divine clemency will forgive the dead
all his sins committed through humane infirmity, and place him in the light
and region of the living, in the bosom of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, in the
place whence is banished all sighs, sorrow, and sadness.

Chrysostom. hom. 69. ad populum. It was not rashly ordained by the Apostles,
that in the dreadful mysteries, there should be commemoration made of the dead.

They that love their friends, dead in body, and not in soul, with spiritual
love, and not carnal alone; let them carefully, and instantly, exercise those
things that help the souls of the dead: as offerings, prayers, and alms. Aug.

Lin. 4. PVRGATION OF SOVLES] Matthew. 5.25.26. and 12.32. Luc. 16.22. 1. Cor.
3.13.

CHRISTIAN WORKS] The just man is judged by his works. Jacob. 2.22 2. Petri
1.10. Apoc. 22.11. Which places mak^ also against sole faith. 1. Cor. 15.58.

Page 21.. 8. lin. 4, TEACHING HE^ ALL TRVTH] Ioannes 14.16. and 16.13.

Lin. 6. GATES OF HELL] Mat. 16.18

Lin. 10. ANGELS OF LIGHT] A^ Gal. 1.8. But although we, or an Angel from
heaven, evangelize to you another thing besides that we have evangelized to
you^ Anathema. Idem 2. Cor. 11.13.

Lin. 11, DELICACIE OF WORLDL^ MEN'S DELIGHTS] Contrary to the delights of good
men, who, renouncing the world, have fixed their delight in God. O^ such the
Apostle warned his Disciple 2. Tim. 3. Know that in the last days ther^ shall
be dangerous times, and there shall b^ men loving themselves, covetous, lofty
proud, blasphemous, disobeying Parents ungrateful, wicked, without affection
without peace, laying crimes upon others incontinent, rude, without benignity,
traitors, saucy, puffed up, and lovers of pleasures more then of God, having
the appearance of piety, but denying the virtue thereof. Avoid these.

Lin. 17. FORTY OR FIFTY YEARES] Luther fell from the Catholic Church anno
1517. Yet there was no public profession of Lutheranisme, or liberty, so
soon.

Page 22. lin. 5. A CITY SET UPON AN HILL] Mat. 5.14.15. Where also of the
light of it: and, Marc. 4.21. Luc. 11.33.

Page 22. lin. 12. THIRTEEN HUNDRED YEARES] England first received the
Christian religion from Joseph ^b Arimathia, that buried Christ and came after
into England, preached there the Gospel, and baptized them that believed, as
Gildas Sapiens, wrighteth, Venerable Bede, Polydore, Vergill, and others: And
Baronius, at the year of our Lord 35. number. 3.

But more fully it was converted 180. years after Christ in the reign of King
Lucius, by S. Fugatius and S. Damian, sent thither from Rome by Eleutherius
Pope.

And also 400. years after that, by S. Augustine and his fellows, sent
thither by S. Gregory the great, about the year 600.

Page 22.. 9. I HOLD AND BELIEVE ALL THAT THE CATHOLIC AND APOSTOLIC CHVRCH]
If any one come to you and bring not this doctrine, receive him not into the
house, nor say to him, God save you. 2. Joan. 1.

Ambrose. He denies Christ that confesses not all, things that are Christ's.

Hilarious. It becomes the ministers of truth to profess true things.

Aug. lib. de fide ad Petrum, cap. 39. Most firmly hold, and no way doubt,
that every Heretic, or Schismatike, baptized in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost, if he be not aggregated to the Catholic
Church, how many almesdeeds soever he do, although he shed his blood for the
name of Christ, can by no means be saved: For to every man, that holds not
the unity of the Catholic Church, neither Baptism, nor Alms, how copious
soever it be, nor death for the name of Christ undergone, can be of any value
to salvation, as long as he persevereth in that heretical, or schismatic
pravitie which leads unto death.

Cap. 40. Most firmly hold and no way doubt, that not all which are baptized
within the Catholic Church shall receiu^ life everlasting, but they which
having received baptism do live a right, that is, wh^ have abstained them from
the vices an^ concupiscences of the flesh. For the kingdom of Heaven, as
Infidels, Heretics and Schismatikes shall not have it, (...) wicked Catholics
can never possess it.

Vincentius Lyrenensis. He is a true and natural Catholic, that loves the
truth o^ God, the Church, the body of Christ, who before the divine religion,
before the Catholic faith, prefers nothing, not the authority of any man,
not love, nor wit, nor eloquence, nor Philosophy; but despising all these, and
there remaining fixed and steedfast, whatsoever universally, from all
antiquity, he knows the Catholic Church to have holden, that only he
decrees with himself to hold and believe; and whatsoever afterward he
perceives new and unheard of to have been introduced by any one, otherwise
then all, or contrary to all the Saints, that he understands to appertain,
not to Religion, but rather to temptation.

Lin. 4. GODLY CEREMONIAL RIGHTS] He that will condemn the ceremonies of Gods
Church, let him first try if he can himself lead a humane life amongst
civil men without all ceremony; let him separate all substance from his
accidents and see whether it be worth the looking upon. As in accidents there
is difference, and some make the substance to be better accepted then others,
for examples sake, in color, in savor, etc. So ceremonies do, according as
they are better or worse, set out the substance of the thing wherabout they be
used. What is any artificers work, although according to the substantial part
it be wholly finished, unless i^ be also polite. As God gave to his people i^
the old law precepts Moral, Judicial, and Ceremonial, so in the new
testament there are Doctrine, Sacraments, with their ceremonies, and
Discipline. Deuteronomy. 6. Keep the precepts of thy Lord God, and the testimonies,
and ceremonies, which he has commanded thee.

Lin. 13. CONTINVALL PRAYER] Luc. 18. We must always pray and never fail:
Psalm. 118. Psalm. 5.
Vtina^ dirigantur viae meae, ad custodiendas iustificationes tuas. Dirige
Domine Deus meus in co^spectu tuo viam meam. Be instant in prayer, watching
therein, with thanksgiving. Coloss. 4.2. Pray without intermissio^. 1 Thessalonians.
5.17. Psalm. 24. Dirige me in veritate tua and doce me...... dirige me in
semitam rectam. 89. Opus manuum nostrarum dirige.

Page 23.. 10. FROM A RESOLVTE HEART] No temptation does so soon seize, or
overthrow, him that is well resolved, and constantly settled in his mind; as
it does him that is doubtful and wavering. 2. Cor. 8.12. If the will be
prompt: according to what it has, it is accepted.

The works of our will that spring immediately from it, cannot suffer violence
from any power, but in those works or acts that are of other powers, commanded
by the will, she may suffer violence.

S. Thomas. 1. 2. Q. 6. A. 4. Violence, Fear, Concupiscence. Ignorance, etc.
May assail the will, but, cannot overcome it, to cause it do a thing: for
that no agent in his action can be compelled. Violence, and fear, may
diminish, and make an act less voluntary; Concupiscence ofter encreasseth,
and makes it more voluntary, Ignorance makes it, not to be voluntary; but
not involuntarie, or against ones will.

He that does but foresee the dangers, is less strooken by the dint of them.
Heb. 13, 9.
The best thing, says the Apostle, is to establish the heart with grace. And
Ecclesiastic. 2.1. Coming to the service of God stand in justice, and fear,
and prepare thy soul for temptation. Our wavering mind adds forces to the
temptation.

Prosper. 3. de vita contemplativa. Every man, until by certain definition he
confirm himself in that he has chosen; being as it were in a forked way of
uncertain deliberation, is torn in pieces by the very diversity of wills.
Virtue exhorts, and provokes a man, that, all ambiguitie of definition
deposed, he undertake his spiritu^ll purpose, tha h confide, not in his own
possibility, but in the miseration of our Lord, to persever in the labor of
his conflict undertaken, 1 Thessalonians. 5.24. He is faithful that has called you,
who also will do it. Esai. 40.31.
They that hope in our Lord shall change their strength, they shall assume
wings like Eagles, they shall run and not labor, they shall walk and not
faint.

Page 24. lin. 6. AFFECTION OF WIFE OR CHILDREN] Luc. 14.26. If any one come to
me and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brothers,
and sisters, and moreover his own soul, he can not be my disciple. Idem,
Matthew. 10.37.

Page 25.. 11. By COVNTRIE FAR DIVIDED] She being of Acton, by Long
Melforde, in the county of Southfolke.

TRVE GENEROSITIE] Seneca lib. de moribus. The nobility of the mind is the
generositie of the sense: The nobility of body, a generous mind.

NOT IGNOBLE] Evil nobility it is, that by pride makes a man ignoble before
God. Aug. sermon. 127. de tempore. Summa ingenuitas ista est, in qua servitus
Christi comprobatur. Off. Agath. 5. Feb.

Page 25.. 12. lin. 6. EDWARD THE FIRST] This was the son of Henry the third,
King of England, and began his reign the 16. of November, 1272. the same day
that his father dyed.

Page 26.. 13. lin. 8. and lin. 11. HENRY THE 8.] By the death of his father
King Henry the 7. began to reign the 22. of April 1509. Of one Arthur
Plantagenet; there is mention in Stow, at the fourth year of this King, anno
1513.

Page 27.. 14. FORCED TO GIVE OVER] In suites of Law it is not enough to have a
just cause, or good title; but a man must have a good head, understanding and
insight in the laws, ability and strength of body to follow the suite by ones
self; and above all other things a good purse that will never be drawn dry.

Quam praestat, pro Deo, renuntiasse mundo: Matt. ^.40.

Auferenti tunicam, dimisisse pallium!
Page 28.. 15. GOD FORGIVE THEM] Pater dimitte illis. He prays for his
enemies, according to that; Matthew. 5.44. Love your enemies, wish well to those
that curse you, do good to those that hate ye, and pray for those that
persecute and reproach ye. Idem Luc. 6.28. and ad Romans 12.14.

Blessed are they that suffer persecution for justice, because theirs is the
Kingdom of heaven. You are blessed when they shall curse you, and shall
persecute ye, and speak all evil against ye, for me, lying against the
truth. Matthew. 5.10. Idem. Luc. 6.22.

If sinning, and beaten ye suffer: what glory is that? but if doing well ye
sustain patiently, this is grace with God. 1. Pet. 2.20. and 3.14. and 4.14.

Page 29. lin. 20. I LEAVE IN MODESTY TO SPEAK OF] If I presume to speak a
little, I hope I shall not sin against modesty: ^. Cor. 12.6.
Veritatem enim dicam.

First, for his Eloquence he was esteemed, where he was known, for an other
Cicero; and so much grace was in his speech, as therewith he was able
presently to appease whatsoever tumult or commotion risen among the people. In
his younger years when Queen Elizabeth came in progress to Worcester, he made
there an oration before her, at the request of the city, for which they gave
him 20. pounds: The Queen commanded also to give him a reward, but Sir Robert
Dudley making answer, Madame, he is a Papist, he Lost that reward.

Always going in circuit with the Judges of Worcestershiere he employed the
spare time he had, in visiting the prisons, speaking with every of the
prisoners in particular, exhorting them, and giving them counsel how to
answer in their own causes, the best way for their good, and giving them
encouragement. Those that by their cause he saw would receive sentence of
death, he would both before, and after, dispose to die in the most Christian
manner, and if he saw any good to be done, and that a Priest were to be had
without imminent danger they should not want him: according to his ability he
would also relieve them with his worldly goods.

For many years after his death, if any thing were done in the commonwealth
against justice in commutation, or distribution: no other voice was heard among
the people then this alone: things were not thus when M.r Bell was living, nor
would not be if now he lived.

Briefly, I may justly return upon him all those commendations which he gives
Sir John Throkmarton in the. 16. Page 29. For he had in himself whatsoever he
required in his children, or commended in his friends.

Page 31.. 17. lin. 5. TOWARD GOD SO RELIGIOVS] Rightly does he call her
Religious, that did not content herself with exercise of ordinary perfection,
but aspired to the proper exercises of religious profession; delighting in the
abnegation of her self, and corporal austerities, and in the same instructing
her children: being so much given to prayer, as besides the office of our B.
Lady, of the Dead, the Graduall, and Penitential Psalms, Hymns, Litanies,
Office of the holy Ghost, and H. Cross, prayers of the Manual, which were her
daily exercise: in the time of lent she would never sleep before she had read
over the whole Passion of our Savior, according to one of the 4. Evangelists,
in Latin; which she understood well. Living many years a widow with all the
care of a great family. She meditated notwitstanding continually the Law of
God, reading also, with license of her ghostly father, the new Testament, with
the Rhemes notes, Sir Thomas Mores works, and other books of Controversies
very much, by which she often defended the Catholic faith against the
heretical Ministers that would come to dissuade her from it; but found her
ever immovable, as a Rock. Ecclesiastic. 26. Everlasting foundations upon a
solid rock the Commands of God in the heart of a holy woman: Whose praise in
holy Scripture is manifold. Proverb. 11.16. A gracious woman shall get glory.
12.4. A woman of virtue is a crown to her housband. 14.1. A wise woman
builds up her house; and 31.30. The woman that fears God shall be praised.
18.22. He that has found a good wife, has found a great good, and shall get
good will of our Lord. Ecclesiastic. 25.11. Blessed is he that dwells with a
prudent woman. 26.1. Blessed is the man of a good woman, and double is the
number of his days. The gift of God is a woman silent and prudent, and no
change is to be given for a well instructed soul. 16. Grace above Grace, is a
modest and faithful woman, and no weight is worth her continent soul. The
Sun rising in the highest of Our Lord, and the beauty of a good woman in the
ornament of her house. 7.26. The woman that honoreth her own man shall appear
wise before all. Depart not from a wise and good woman, for her grace is above
gold* 25.1. Beautiful before God, and before men: The concord of brothers:
Friendship of neighbors: Man and wife that agree well together, etc.

Line 7. VOWED CHASTITIE] That is, conjugall chastity, or as they vow that are
of the third order of S. Francis in the world, and amiddest the cares thereof.

I REQVIRE AND CHARGE YOV] That is here charged, is like the charge of old
Tobias, laid upon his son. Tob. 4.3. Son if I dye, bury me, and despise
not thy mother: Honor her all the days of thy life, and do what is pleasing
to her, and do not make her sad, etc.

Page 33.. 18. CONTINVALL PRAYER] Again, the author urges this point, as a
thing for this life most necessary. Ask and it shall be given. Mat. 7.7. and
21.22.

PROVINCIAL DARKENESSE] This term he uses because in respect of the whole
Catholic Church, from which it received the light of faith, this Kingdom, as
also any other, is but a Province; and, as it is a province in the respect of
the light, so also in respect of the darkness, which it has fallen into by
shutting it self from the whole.

So in regard of S. Francis whole Order, spread through all the world, this
Kingdom is called the Province of England.

Page 35.. 19. FERVENCIE OF ZEALE] The first condition he requires in Prayer,
is FAITH] whereof Jacob. 1.6. Let him pray in faith, not wavering: for he that
straggereth is like a vvaue of the sea, moved and tossed with the vvind. Let
not that man think he shall receive any thing from God. Marc. 11.24. Luc.
11.9. Joan. 14. 13. and 16.23.

Prayer is an ascent of the mind to God. Damascen. lib. 3. de Fide, cap. 24.

Augustine. Prayer is a pious affect of the mind directed to God. Vigilate and
orate vt non intretis in tentationem. Cyrillus. Christ prays with 3.
companions, so must we; with Peeter, that is, faith; with James, that is,
sequestration from the world, which to us is suppla^ted; John, that is,
fervor of grace and Charity. Frequent prayer our Savior taught praying the
same thing 3. times. Iterate not a word in thy prayer. Ecclesiasticus 7. That
is, make it so full as thou need not to supply that was by negligence
omitted, and 53. The prayer of him that humbles himself penetrateth the
clouds, etc. CHARITIE] He that turns away his ears from hearing the law,
his prayer shall become execrable. FERVENCIE] The end of prayer, well made, is
more fervent then the beginning, for the motion increases the heat Eccles. 7.
Better is the end of prayer then the beginning. Of Prayer Clem. Alex. l. 4. and
7. strom. In the last acclamations of our prayer we stretch forth head and
hands, we stir our feet to heaven, by promptitude and alacrity of spirit
flying toward the essence, of which none lays hold but by intellectual
touch: we strive together with our speech to raise our bodies above the ground:
we strain our erected and elevated souls by desire of better and better
things to go forward into the holy of holies, through greatness of courage,
scorning to be kep^ down by the clogge of the body.

Page 35.. 20. OF THE EFFECTS OF PRAYER] Let Moses or Elias speak* To win
in fight; Exodus 17. 3. Reg. 17. 4. Reg. 6 17. and 20.
to stop the plague; to bind the clouds, and let them loose. Ask Helisaeas,
or king Ezechias, what it is. S. Peeter, S. Gregory, S. Anthony of Padua,
some one, or all the multitude of Thaumaturgs, since Christ, or preaching of
the Gospel shall declare. And of the most sweet comforts thereof, believe the
Author here, or seek by experience in thy self, which better is, to find it
out: enquier among the hardly numerable number of Extatike Saints within the
seraphicall Order even from S. Francis and S. Giles, until these times, wherein
the B. Mother Louysa lives and many more, of little lesser note. (...) Rapt,
ecstasy, which is an abstraction and alienation, and illustration, proceeding
from God, by which God draws back the soul, from above, fallen to inferior
things, again from inferior to superior, and so she is left half dead
bereaft of the senses. Pythagoras. If thou, leaving the body, do pass
freely in to the sky, thou shall be an immortal God, dead to this world.
Cicero. When the soul is come to that state which is the highest degree of
contemplative perfection, then is she ravished from all created likenesses,
and understands, not by acquisite species, but by looking into the Ideas, and
by the light of them, knows all things: of which light Plato says, very few
men in this life are made partakers.

(...). Attention or intention, is of so much force in work, as the more
secret Divines do say, that by words and prayers, nothing can be done without
intention. Hence is the commun Proverb; Imagination makes chance, as
Avicenna, and others write. Hence the Apostle, I will pray in spirit, I will
pray in mind, I will sing in spirit, I will sing also in mind: insinuating that
unless the mind attend, the prayer is none, and altogether void. Although
working in holy things, the defect of this attention do withstand us, because
the reasonable number and harmony most efficacious in work, is wanting: yet a
greater obstacle it is to us, when our domestike works are contrary to the
sacred works. Isaias 1.15. When ye shall multiply prayers I will not hear,
because your hands be full of blood. In things of Religion, no work of any
mervailous efficacy can be done, unless some of the supernall powers be
present, spectatour, and accomplisher of the work. Humane nature can neither
undertake speech, nor prayer of God, without God, nor yet do any divine work
without him: for it is so weak and dull, as it has no remedy of its
nullitie, but only some portion of divine light coming from above, without
which no divine thing is done by us. Iamblicus de Aegyptiorum mysterijs.

Those that can draw any thing more of the spectacle of God, or of good, do
oftentimes, as it were, oversleeping themselves at the most beautiful vision,
dye............. Then shall thou behold it, when thou may have nothing to
say of it: for the knowledge and contemplation thereof, is silence, and rest of
all the senses; for he that has understood it can understand nothing else nor
can he speculate any thing else, that has seen it, nor hear of anything
else, nor move his body at all: for all the correption of the corporal senses
and motions rests. But searching over all the mind and all the soul, it
enlighteneth and withdraws from the body, and changes the whole into the
essence of God. For possible it is, O my son! that the soul be deified in
the body of a man, when it has seen the beauty of good, which is, to be
deified.............. oftentimes the mind flies out of the soul, and at that
time the soul neither sees nor hears, but is like a brute beast. Hermes
Trismegist. clavis, fol. 129. a, 6. and 132. a. 6.

Plato in Tymaeo. The soul that often, and with greatest intention
contemplateth divine things, with such nourishment waxes so strong, and able
to get out, as it overgroweth the body, and overgoeth it more then the nature
of the body is able to bear, and with the most vehement tossings thereof, does
sometimes, as it were, fly out of it, or as it were, seem to dissolve it.
Marsilius Ficinus de studiosorum sanitate tuenda, lib, 1. cap. 4.

S. Bernard. sermon. 52. de modo been viuendi. When in the sight of God thou
singest Psalms, and Hymns, handle that in thy mind which thou singest with
thy voice. Let thy mind agree with thy voice, let it accord with thy tongue;
do not think one thing and sing another. If thou sing one thing in thy mind,
and another in thy voice, thou loosest the fruit of thy labor. If thy body
stand in the Church, and thy mind wander abroad, thou loosest thy reward.
Whence it is said: This people honors me with their lips, and their heart,
is far from me. But as the Apostle says I will sing in spirit, I will sing
also in mind, I will sing with mouth and heart. Good therefore it is, always to
pray God with mind. It is also good with sound of voice, and Hymns, and
Psalms, and spiritual Cantikles to gloriefie God. Idem in meditationib. c. 8.

Ineffable is the dignation of the Divine bounty, that daily sees us
wretches, averting our ears, hardening our hearts, and nevertelesse calls
unto us, Isaias 46. Psalm. 45.
saying: Return prevaricatours to the heart, take heed, look to it, for I am
God. In the Psalm God speaks to me, and I to him* and yet when I say a
Psalm, I attend no^ whose Psalm it is. Therefore I do great injury to God,
when I pray him to hear my prayer, hich I that make it do no^ hear: I pray
him to attend to me, and I do^ neither attend to my self, nor him: bu^ which
worse is, tossing unprofitable and unclean things in my heart, I cast a
horrible stink before his face.

Franciscus Georgius Harmonia, Cant. 3. modul. 20. When v^e come once to the
first and highest, we must rest, and go no farther, because farther then the
highest, nothing can be give^: hereof Ieremias: She shall sit solitary, and
hold her peace, because she has elevated her self above her self. Psalm. 4.
And David: In peace, in the thing it self, will I sleep and rest: and again
Psalm. 65. vulgat. 64.

(...). Silence is thy praise God in Syon. Which said she must be silent,
because she is now come to the place where silence is, because there every one
becomes inward and most inward with the highest; so that forgetting all
exterior things, and separate from them all, she has none to whom she may
speak, co^versing only with him before whom there is no speech required,
because he beholds all things; and withal, because she beholds and is
delighted with those things, which if she would, she cannot express: hence
therefore she must be silent, unless by the command of her Prince she manifest
something to inferiors, according to the capacity of them that are to receive
it, for their profit. As S. Dionys. says of the Angels; That they be declarers
of the divine silence, as clear lights, interpreting that which is in secret,
etc.

Page 36. lin. 7. INPRISONMENT IN AN INNOCENT CAVSE] Non poena sed causa. As
death in an innocent cause, makes a Martyr, so imprisonment and other
sufferings in like cause, makes a Confessor: in whose number I am very
confident, in the goodness of God, I may place the Author of this Testament,
who, not only in death, but all his life, and in every occasion, has
confessed Christ and his Church with constancy and perseverance. S. Max. hom.
59 2. de S. Eusebio
And the caution of the Divine word; Praise not a man in his life, is, as it
were, a command to Praise him after life: Praise him after his consummation.

Page 37.. 21. lin. 9. YOUR SEVERAL CALLINGS] He speaks of states, by which
men are settled in the world to become apt members in the body of the
commonwealth; as Governors, or Magistrates, Doctors in Theology, Law,
Medicine, or Practitioners in any of the sciences, or liberal arts. Religious
in any of the Regular Orders, that serve the commonwealth in Preaching,
administering Sacraments, Sacrifices, Prayers, Comforting the afflicted,
disposing to life everlasting the dying, and all works of mercy: in any of the
several states of the Plebeians, or the Mechanike arts, whatsoever, and not
alone of those that the Prince-Apostles speak of, vocation to the faith, 2.
Pet. 1.10. Do your endeavor brothers more and more, by good works to make
sure your calling and election. Et Ephesians. 4. I beseech you walk worthily in
the vocation wherein you are called, etc. Yet of the former callings S. Paul
seems to have admonished. 1. Cor. 7.20. Every one in what vocation he is
called, in the same let him remain: Thou art called, to be a servant, let it
not trouble thee; but if thou cannest become a freeman do in Gods name. He
that in our Lord is called a servant, is our Lords freeman: And he that is
called to be a free man is the servant of Christ.

Page 37.. 22. lin. 6. TIME, AN ENEMY TO THE THRIFT OF A DISTRESSED
CONSCIENCE] Riches, that are seldom gotten together with a good conscience,
are with more danger of detriment to the conscience, gotten together in short
time. Matthew. 19. A rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. id.
Marc. 10. And Luc. 6. Woe be to you rich men. Whence the Apost. 1. Tim 6.17.18.
Command the rich men of this world to give easily.

Every rich man is either unjust, or the heir of some unjust man. Hieronym.
lib. 2. in Ierem. cap. 5. paulo ante finem, and epist. ad Hedibiam. q. 1. in
medio. All riches descend from iniquity, and unless one man loose, another
cannot find, whence that common saying seems to me most true; That every
rich man is either unjust, or the heir of one unjust.

B. Laurent. Justinian. said that rich men could not be saved but by
Almesdeeds. We burn in Avarice, and disputing against money, lay open our
lappes to gold, and nothing is enough for us. What is said of the Megarens may
well be applied to the miserable churles: They build as if they were to live
ever, they live as if they should die the next day. Hieron. ad Geront. de
monogamia. Tom. 1.

Not he that little has, but he that much coveteth is poor. Seneca lib. de
paupertate.

No man lives so poor as he was borne: Seneca, lib. de providentia divina.

Children of Adam! a covetous, and ambitious kind, hearken; What have you to
do with earthly riches, and temporal glory, which neither are indeed, nor
are yours? gold and silver is it not earth, red and white, which only man's
error makes, or rather reputeth precious? If they be yours take them away with
you. But when a man perishes he shall take nothing with him, neither shall his
glory descend with him. True riches therefore is not wealth, but virtues,
which the conscience carries with it, to make it rich for ever. Bernard.
sermon. 4. de Aduentu Domini.

Whom God enricheth no man shall make poor. Cyprian. Tom. 1. epist. 2.

Those only are good riches which we have in hope and expectation. Greg. Naz.
orat. de Machab.

Neither is any thing a greater terror to us, then lest we should fear any
thing more then God. id. ibid.

He is abundantly rich, that with Christ is poor. Hieron. ep. ad Heliodor. de
vita solitaria. Est quaestus magnus, pietas cum sufficie^tia. 1. Tim. 6.6.


The beauty of riches, is not in the sacks of rich men, but in the poores
sustenance. Amb. lib. 7. epist. 44.

The Bishops glory is to provide for the poores wealth, the ignominy of all
Priests is to look only to their own riches: Hiero. ad Nepotian. Tomo 1.

To the faithful the whole world is riches. Amb. lib. 1. de Jacob. and vita
beata c. vlti. Tom. 4.

Poverty and riches, are two names of want and satietie, neither is he rich
that wants something, nor he poor that wants not. Amb. Tom. 3. l. 7.
epist. 44. Victuals and clothing are Christians riches. Hieronym. ad Paulinum.
Tom. 3.

To me all plenty which is not my God is want. Aug. Conf. l. 13, c. 8.

Page 38.. 23. lin. 6. INSTRVCTED IN LEARNING] And the reason is, because
knowledge is a great help to serve God with; for as nothing is in the
understanding which was not first in the senses, so nothing is in the will
which was not first in the understanding. Discipline and science are two wings
that with swift flight carry a man to heaven.

Ambros. in offic. expos. Psalm. 118. Life is to be sought before
Doctrine......... Good life, even without doctrine has grace, Doctrine without
life has no integrity.......... Again, speaking of moral, and mystical
things, he says: In those is life, in these knowledge: so that, if thou
require perfection, let neither life be without knowledge, nor knowledge
without life, let one help another. The end of all knowledge is to give a man
the true knowledge of his creator that accordingly and in truth he may serve
and worship him.

There is no secure joy in knowing many or hard things in the divine Writ, but
in keeping of the things that we know. Greg. 22. Moral. c. 4. in fine.

As long as thou art ignorant so long must thou learn; and, if we believe the
proverb, as long as thou live. Senec. lib. 10. epist. 77.

So great is the profunditie of Christian letters, as I should daily profit in
them, if from my very infancy until decreped old age, at greatest leisure,
with greatest diligence, and the best wit, I shoul endeavor to learn and
apply my self to them alone. Aug. ep. 3. Tom. 2.

The studies of science without facts, I know not whether they do not more
involue us. Amb. lib. 1. offic. c. 26. ^n fine. Tom. 1. and lib. 2. c. 3. in
medio. Innocence, and science* make a man blessed.

Page 33.. 24. lin. 3. TRAINED IN SCHOOL TO LEARNING] Not only these two
children, but of 12. 8. that lived; were, both sons and daughters, brought up
at school, all together till they understood the latin tongue.

Page 39.. 24. lin. 7. A GRATEFVLL ENTERTAINEMENT] Music is not alonly so, but
moreover, a thing celestial and divine, above all the objects of humane sense,
and none does so much raise the mind, or elevate the soul toward God, the
chief and beginning of all order, of all mesure, and of all number, as this
harmoniacall number, and therefore above all others, God is served with it in
his Church; and how much it pleases God, so much it offends the devils and
casts them far off. Consult David through all his facts and writings.
Music ioyeth the heart, forbid it not. Eccli. 40.20. and 32.4.

Page 39.. 26. lin. 1. ITEM IF FRANCIS] This was his first son, and dyed in
childhood. I gather hence that the Author was devoted to S. Francis,
considering that none of all his ancestors was called by that name. This. and
the 27. and 28. were noted, as it were left imperfect, or other wise ordained.

Page 41.. 29. lin. 4. IACTA SVPER DOMINVM, etc.] This was the Authors Motto,
or Devize. The. 30. and 31. were noted as before.

Page 44.. 32. lin. 17. Mr. FRANCIS DANIELL.] Here, in gratitude, and for
conscience sake, I must acknowledge my self to have perpetual obligation to
this my uncle, not only for 6. years of my education, but also for his
assistance and furtherance to put me into the course and state of life in which
I am, and by the grace of God shall and will die.

The. 33. Goes noted as before, and where a word is left out in it, lin 21. I
suppose the Author would have said, Unjustly, but durst not, considering the
dangers of that time.

Page 46.. 34. IN MOST AMPLE MERITE] This. the Author had himself noted with a
hand monstrant, in the margent, which gave me the first motion of dedicating
this work to whom it is, and ought to be dedicated, as is mentioned in the
epistle dedicatorie. Here I cannot but commend and extol the gratitude of the
Author to every man of whom he had at any time received a benefit, according to
the Apostolical precept. Coloss. 3.15. Grati estote. Upon which precept read
S. Bernards sermon, entitled by him: Against the most vile vice of
ingratitude. Bern. sermon. de diversis, page 403. 404. etc. This. was also noted
as the others, 4. lines before the end.

Page 47.. 35. lin. 7. TO USE TRVTH] 3. Esdras 3. Truth surpasses, and
overcomes all things, and 4. And all said; great is the truth. David 116. The
truth of our Lord remains for ever, and 117. Lord, all thy commands, all thy
ways, the beginning of thy words, are all truth. Prou. 26. The deceiptful
tongue loves not truth. Zach. 8.16. Every one speak truth. Matthew. 22.16. and
Luc. 20.21. Thou teach the way of God in Truth. and Joan. 14.6. I am the
way, truth, and life. Ephesians. 4.25. Laying away lies, speak truth every one
with his neighbor. 2. Cor. 13.8. We cannot any thing against Truth. What more?
all the new and old Testament is full of the commendations of truth: and as
much in the reprooving of lying, dissimulation, and falsehood. Coloss. 3.8. Lay
away all Anger, Indignation, Malice, Blasphemy, Foul speech, ly not one to
another. Idem, Ephesians. 4.13. and 1. Pet. 2.1. Laying a^ay all malice, and all
deceit, and dissimulation, and envy and detraction. Et Heb. 12. What desires
the soul more strongly then truth. Aug. tract. 26. in Ioa^. No man can long
bear a fained person: for feigned things fall soon to their own nature.
Things that are borne up by truth arise from solid ground and by time proceed
to better and better. Seneca, de clementia, lib. 1.

. 35. lin. 15. PLEASE GOOD MEN] Paul. ad Gal. 10. If yet I should please men, I
should not be the servant of Christ. Know this most certainly, that no man can
please God and wicked men, your brotherhood therefore make account that so much
more it has pleased Almighty God, as it knows it self to have displeased
perverse men. Greg. l. 8. Regist Indict. 3. c. 36. Principibus placuisse viris
non infima laus est.

Page 47.. 36. lin. 1. DELIGHT NOT IN RIBAWDRIE] Apost. ad Ephesians. 5.3.
Fornication and all manner of uncleanness, or avarice, let it not be so much
as named amongst you: or filthiness, or foolish talk, or scurrilitie, which
do not appertain to the purpose: but rather thanksgiving. Speak no baudie
thing, for by little and little shame with words is shaken off. Senec l. de
moribus. Matthew. 12.34. From the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks.
Idem, Luc. 6.45.

Page 48.. 37. MAKE CHOICE OF HVMILITIE] Prou. 15.33. Before glory goes
humility. And 29.23. The pride of a man shall humble him: and the humble of
spirit shall attain glory, and 13.10. Among the proud are always
contentio^s. And 15.25. The house of the Proud our Lord will overthrow. Deuteronomy.
17.12. The proud that will not obey the Priest or Judge, let him die. Prou.
16.18.
Before a fall goes pride and before a ruin, loftiness of spirit. Pride is
not greatness, but a swelling, that that swells seems great, but is not
sound. Aug. sermon. 26. de temp. So great is the utility of human humility, as
by his own example the divine sublimitie would commend it (and that most of
all appeared in the washing of Judas the traitors feet.) For Proud man had
for ever been lost, unless humble God had sought him out. Aug. tract. 55. in
Ioann. Behold O man! what God is become for thee. Acknowledge at last the
doctrine of humility, even before thy Doctor speak. Thou were once in
Paradise so eloquent, as to every living soul thou could give a name. And
for thee thy creator, lo, lies an infant in a manger and calls not so much
as his own mother by her name. Thou, in the most spacious orchard of fruitful
wood did loose thy self, neglecting obedience. He obeying came mortal
into the wide world; that dying he might seek the dead. Thou being man
would become God, that thou might perish: he being God would become man
to find out what had perished. Humane pride did so much depresse thee, as
nothing but the divine grace could sublevate thee. Aug. Tom. 10. sermon. 25. de
temp. in medio.

Those that of our Lord JESUS CHRIST have learned to be mild and humble of
heart, do profit more in considering and praying, then in reading and hearing.
Aug. Epist. 112. He that without humility does good works, carries dust in
the wind. Aug. sermon. 70. ad fratres in eremo.

There is no other way that leads unto life then humility, which is by him
defended, that, as God, sees our footsteps, and the same is the first
humility, the second humility, the third humility, and as often as thou
should ask me I would say the same thing; not because there be not other
precepts to be said: but because unless humility do go before, and wait
upon, and fellow all things that we do, both the things proposed us to look
into, and things apposed us to stick unto, and things imposed us to repress
us: when we now rejoice of any good thing done: Pride wrests it all out of our
hands. Aug. epist. 57.

A very mervailous thing it is, when humility of manners reigns in the
hearts of the sublime. Whence ye may think that all the potent, when they
savor of humility, they attain the top of virtue, estra^ged, and set, as it
were, a far off, and rightly by this virtue they eftsoons please our Lord:
because they humbly offer him that sacrifice which mighty and potent men can
hardly get. It is a most subtle art of living to hold height, and depresse
glory; to be in power, and not know that we be powerful; by bestowing of good
things, to know ones self to be potent, and in repaying of hurt, to be
ignorant of all the value of power. Rightly therefore of such is said, Job 36.5.
God casts not away the potent, being himself also potent: For he desires to
imitate God who administreth the height of power more busily in other men's
profits then elevated in his own praises: who being put over others, desires
to profit them, and not to be above them. The swelling of loftiness is a
crime, the order of power none. Power God gives, but the elation of power, the
malice of our mind has invented. Let us take away that which of our own we
brought, and the things are good which of Gods gift we possess. Creg. lib. 26.
Moral. c. 24.

Page 48.. 38. ENTERTAIN ALL MEN] Leviticus 19.31. Before the hoarie headed
arise, and honor the presence of the old man. Prou. 22.2. The rich and poor
God made them both.

Page 48.. 39. lin. 3. AMONG WISE MEN] Prou. 1. The wise man hearing will
become wiser. 3. Reg. 10.8. Blessed are thy servants that stand before thy
face, alwaie^ hearing thy wisdom. Prou. 10.13. In the wise man's lips is
wisdom found, and 11* 2. Where humility is, there is wisdom.

Lin. 6. SVCH SHALL THEY BE IVDGED TO BE) Psalm. 17. With the holy thou shall
be holy: and with the man that is innocent thou shall be innocent* With the
Elect thou shall be elected; and with the perverse perverted.

Page 49.. 40. BE NOT RASH] Define no doubts, but hold thy sentence in
suspense: Affirm nothing without experience; for every thing that has
appearance of truth is not forthwith true; as also what at first did seem
incredible is not still false. Truth sometimes retains the face of a lie, and
a lie is hid under color of truth. Seneca, de 4. virtutibus. And again: Let
nothing be sudden to thee but look into all things before hand; for he that
is prudent, says not, I never thought that this would have been, because he
doubts not, but expects; nor does he suspect, but takes heed. Enquire the
cause of every deed, and when thou have found the beginning, thou shall think
upon the end.

Between an angry, and a mad man, there is but one days difference; the one
is ever mad, the other every day angry. Seneca, lib. de moribus.

Page 49.. 41. USE FEW WORDS] Proverb. 10.19. In much sgeech sin will not be
wanting: and he that keeps his lips, shall be understanding. As chozen
silver, is the just man's tongue.

Let thy opinions be judgments, vagabond cogitations and like to dreams
receive not; in which if thy mind take delight, when thou have done and
disposed of all, thou remainest sad: but let thy cogitation be stable and
certain, whether it deliberate, search out, or contemplate, let it not depart
from truth. Let not thy speech be vain, but let it either persuade, or move,
or comfort, or command. Praise sparingly, dispraise more sparingly, for
overmuch praise is as reprehensible as immoderate dispraise; that, is suspected
of flattery; this, of evil nature, or malignitie. Seneca, lib. de 4.
virtutibus.

Love silence, where much speech is, there is oftentimes lying; where lying,
there is sin. The speech shows what the man is. In the mouth of the Priest
or Religious let never any word be, wherein the name of Christ sounds not.
Tom. 4. epist. Eusebius. ad Damas. de morte Hieronymi, in medio.

WITH DISCRETION] Coloss. 4.6. Your speech always gracious, with a grain of
salt: that you may know how to answer every man.

Young man, speak when there is need of thee; if thou be twice asked, let thine
answer have a head. Ecclesiastic. 32.9. According to the septuagint: Bring thy
answer to a brief su^me or answer co^pendiously.

Use thy ears ofter then thy tongue, and whatsoever thou art to say, say to
thy self before thou say it to others. Seneca, lib. de moribus.

. 42. BE NOT CVRIOVS] Nothing is sweeter to men, then to speak o^ other men's
things, and to have care of other men's matters, chiefly if it chance that they
be prevented with love or hatred toward some: from whom always the truth is
hidden, or, at least obscured. Greg. Naz. in Apolog.

Only observe thy self, Deuteronomy. 4.9. 1. Cor. 10.11. Matt. 7.3.
and keep thy soul very warily. He that thinks himself to stand, let him
look he do not fall. What see thou a mote in thy brothers eye, and do
not see the beam in thine own eye?

O man that iudgest, thou art inexcusable, Romans 2.
for in judging another thou condemnest thy self, doing the same things that
thou spendest thy judgment upon.

. 43. BE SECRET AND SILENT] Prou. 25.9. Reveal not the secret of another. Id.
31. (...). Isaias 24.16. My secret to my self, my secret to my self.
Ecclesiasticus, 32.5. Where others hearken, power not out speech, and with
importunity have not a will to seem wise.

Page 50.. 44. lin. 3. LOOK TO YOUR CALLING] Ecclesiastic. 3.22. Seek not
things above thee. Romans 11.20. Be not overvvise, but fear.

Lin. 4. LIVE IN OBEDIENCE] Ephesians. 6. Col. 3, Children obey your Parents;
Servants obey your Lors, and masters. Heb. 13. Obey those that are put over
ye. Tit. 3.1. Admonish them to be subject to their Princes and superior
powers, to obey their word, etc.

4. Reg. 9 1. Par. 11. and 28. Prou. 21 Tob. 12.6. 1. Pet. 2.13. and 17
LEAVE KINGS AND THEIR CAUSES TO GOD] They be supreme governors under God. The
Anointed of God. The elected of God. Their hearts are in the hand of God, and
he directs their counsel. To hide the mystery of the King is good: and to
be subject to him and honor him is commanded.

Prou. 16 14.
Lin. 8. HAS DESTROYED] The Kings anger is the messenger of death, and a wise
man will appease it. In the light of the Kings face is life: and his good will
is like a cloud of the evening rain.

Page 50.. 45. USE TEMPERANCE] S. Aug. Tom. 1, l. 1. de lib. Arbit. c. 13.
Temperance is an affection brideling and keeping in the appetite from those
things that are coveted with foul desire. Et de morib. ecclesiae Cath. lib. 1.
c. 15. Temperance is love, yielding it self entire to that is loved. Fortitude
is love, easily tolerating all things for that is loved. Justice is love,
serving the beloved only, and therefore rightly bearing rule. Prudence is love,
wisely selecting the things by which it is helped, from those by which it is
hindered. But this is not the love of whosoever, but of God, that is, of the
chiefest good, of the chiefest wisdom, of the chiefest concord: therefore you
may define it so, and say: temperance is love keeping it self entire and
vncorrupt to God, etc. And Tom. 4. l. 1.83. Q. 31. Temperance is a firm and
moderate rule of reason, over lust and other, not right motions of the mind.
The parts thereof are continence, cleme^cie, and modesty. Continence, by which
concupiscence, by the governeme^t of counsel, is ruled. Clemency, by which
minds rashly provoked and stirred up to hatred of any one, are by gentleness
retained. Modesty, by which honest shame gets clear and stable authority.
And Q. 61. Prudence is knowledge of things to be desired and to be shunned.
Temperance, the refraining of concupiscence from those things that do
temporally delight, Fortitude is a firmitie of the mind against those things
that temporally molest us. Justice, which is diffused through them all, is the
love of God and our neighbor.

BEWARE OF DRVNKENNESSE] As a thing tumultuous, Prou. 20 and 31.
and that can keep no secret forbidden by the Apostle. Romans 13. and Gal. 5.
With drunkenness is always joined luxury. Hieron. l. 3. in Ep. ad Gal. c. 5.
I will never believe that the Drunkard is chaste. Hieron. in c. 1. Ep. ad Titum,
page 246.

Eccles. 9.25. Eccle. 5.
. 46. lin. 2. THE RASH MAN] Is odious in his word. Speak nothing rashly, nor
be hasty to bring forth thy word before God, for God is in heaven and thou upon
earth, therefore let thy words be few: for as sleep comes in multitude of
business, so the voice of the fool in multitude of words.

Page 51,. 47. BE CONSTANT] Act. 23.11. Sap. 5.1. The just shall stand with
great constancy. A good man, what he thinks he may honestly do: although
it be laborious, he will do it: although it be loss to him, he will do it:
although it be perilous, he will do it: And again, that which is
dishonest, he will not do it, although it bring in money, although it bring
pleasure, although it bring power. From the honest he will by nothing be
deterred: to the dishonest he will by no hopes be invited. Seneca, lib. 10.
epist. 77. in medio. Horace. Iustum and tenacem propositi virum, etc. Impauidum
ferient ruinae.

Jacob. 1.8. The man of two minds is unconstant in all his ways.

Sap. 4.12. The inconstancy of concupiscence, perverteth even the mind that is
without malice.

Eccl. 6. and 9. and 12.
FAST IN FRIENDSHIP] There is a friend only at table, a table fellow, but do
not thou forsake an old friend. A new friend is like new wine. A friend cannot
be known in good, but in malice you shall know him, etc.

Page 51.. 48. USE PATIENCE, Psalm. 9. Prou. 19 Luc. 21. Jacob. 1
] The Poores patience will not be lost in the end. A man's doctrine is known by
hi^ patience. In your patience you shall possess your souls. It has a
perfect work: The arms of the just are by giving way to overcome. Amb. lib.
1. off. cap. 5. Tom. 1.

If any adversity befall thee, and it seem grievous and bitter to thee, bear
it so as thou think nothing to have befallen thee but according to nature when
thou read naked was I borne, naked shall I go hence, what our Lord gave our
Lord has taken away: and he had lost both goods and children, and thou shall
in all keep the person of a wise and just man, as he kept that said: As it
pleased our Lord so is it done, be the name of our Lord blessed, etc. Amb. lib.
1. off. cap. 38.

No man can be blessed, no man becomes a citizen of heaven, no man is
constituted the friend of God, that among evils is not found patient. Aug.
sermon. 32. ad fratres.

Humane impatience will not have the patience of God. We wretches that will
have God to be patient, and ar^ our selves impatient with our enemies. If at
any time we sin, we desire God should be patient, if another sin against
us, we will not that God have patience with him. Hieron. in Psalm. 93. ad,
vsquequo Domine peccatores gloriabuntur. Tom. 8.

FORBEAR REVENGE] That it is peculiar to God, see Deuteronomy. 32. and 2. Reg. 22.
Psalm. 17. and 139. and 149. and Romans 12. Leave the revenge to me and I will
repay them. Et Ezech 9. Eccl. 35. Esaias 1. etc.

If thou be Magnanimous, thou will never think thou have injury done thee:
thou will say of thine enemy, he has not hurt me, but had a mind to hurt me:
and when thou see him in thy power, thou shall esteem it sufficient revenge,
to have been able to revenge. Know that it is honest and a great kind of
revenge to forgive. Seneca, de 4. virtutib. l. 1. and de Clementia lib. 2.
Clemency is a temperance of ones mind in the power of Revenge, or, lenity of
the superior to the inferior in constituting punishment, and cruelty is
fierceness of mind in exacting of Punishment. He is better that contemns an
injury then that grieveth at it: for he that contemns it, despises it, as
if he felt it not: but he that grieveth at it, is vexed with it, as if he felt
it. Amb. lib. 1. off. c. 6. Tom. 1. Magnarum virium est negligere laedentem.

. 49. Seneca, lib. de moribus
BE NOT TOO LIBERALL] Liberality is the mean between avarice and
prodigality, and consequently a virtue: which always holds the mean,
flying the extremes of too much, ever a vice.

To have, and give to others, is an argument of a Welthie man. Basil. hom. 29.
de poenitentia.

Avarice in old age, is like a monster; for what greater folly is there, then
as the way grows shorter, to increase the viaticum. Seneca, lib. de moribus.

These things withdraw from right: Honors, Riches, Power, and the like, which
in the opinion of men are dear; in price vile. Seneca, lib. de Paupertate.
Vide Chrysostom. Tom. 5. hom. 15. ad Antioch.

All vices wax old with a man, only avarice waxes young. Aug. sermon. 48. ad
frat. in eremo.

. 50. lin. 3. BE THANKEFVLL FOR EVERY COVRTESIE] Not to render thanks for
benefits is foul, and so holden with all men; therefore of the ungrateful even
the ungrateful do complain; when notwithstanding, this same that displeases
all, sticks to all, and so far men go on the contrary side as some are to
us most odious not only after benefits, but even for benefits. He is
ungrateful that denies the benefit he has received: he is ungrateful that
dissembleth it, he is ungrateful that repayeth it not, he is most ungrateful
that forgets it. Seneca lib. 3. de beneficijs.

Some, when a gift is sent them, do untimely restore another, and say they owe
nothing. They are to be rejected: it is a pledge to send presently another gift
to him that sent to thee, and extinguish gift with gift. Sometimes being able,
I will not restore a benefit, when I shall detract more from my self then
help another: when he shall receive no increase by the receipt of that, which
restored me would stand me in good steed. He that makes haste to repay, has
not the mind of a grateful man, but of a debtor. And, to speak briefly, he
that desires to repay too soon, owes against his will, he that unwillingly
owes, is ungrateful. Seneca lib. 4. de beneficijs.

Lin. 4. LET TIME BREED THE FRIENDS] Thou know not how great the price of
friendship is, if thou do not understand that thou give him much to whom
thou give a friend. A thing not in houses alone, but in ages rare, which is
no where more wanting, then where it is most of all believed to abound. Seneca
l. 6. de benef.

He can not be friend to man, that is unfaithful to God. Ambros. l. 3. off. c.
16. and l. 6. epist. 40. True love is proved by constancy.

Slender friendship is that which follows the friends felicities and riches:
such men seem to me not to love their friends but themselves. Hieron. in c. 7.
Micheae. Tom. 6. page 161. and ad Ruffin. Tom. 2. page 195.

True friendship must not dissemble what it feels. Prosperity gets
friends: Adversity is the surest proof of them. Seneca, lib. de morib. ante
medium.

Page 52.. 51. lin. 3. Romans 13
WITH DVE REVERENCE] Let every living soul be subject to higher powers.

When thou sit to eat with a Prince, Prou. 23.
considering consider what is before thy face, and if thou be thine own man,
set thy knife to thy throat. Eccl. 32 13.
In the midst of great men presume not to speak. Where Ancients are speak
not much. Romans 12.10. Romans 13 7.
Preventing one another with honor, give honor to whom honor is due. In the
midst of the brethren their Ruler shall be had in honor. Eccl. 10 24.
Fools have decreed to yield to no man, nor to regard distinction of persons,
or degrees: on such as do regard the same, they cast the crime of flattery,
or acception of persons: And being great friends of confusion, to beware of
pride in their betters, they take no heed of it in themselves: in stead of
order, they show irreverence. S. Bon. spec. discip. c. 6.

Page 52.. 52. RELEEVE ALL THAT ARE DISTRESSED] Jacob. 1.27. Pure and
immaculate Religion before God and the Father is this: to visit pupils,
orphans, and widows in their tribulation, and keep ones self unspotted from
this world. Psalm. 40. Blessed is he that has consideration of the poor and
needy, our Lord will deliver him in the evil day. Matthew. 5.7. Blessed are the
merciful, for they shall obtain mercy. Jacob. 13. Judgment without mercy
to him that has not done mercy.

A FRIEND] Forsake not thy friend, and the friend of thy father. Prou. 27.10.

Page 52.. 53. HAVE CHARITY WITH ALL MEN] He shows us, with the Apostle. 1.
Cor. 12.31. Yet a more excell^nt way: For to speak with tongues of men or
Angels; to have the faith that removes mountains; to feed the poor; to yield
the body to Martyrdom, is of no value without charity.

The latitude of the commands is charity; because where charity is, straites
are not. Will thou not be driven into straites on earth? dwell in latitude.
Whatsoever a man does to thee he cannot vex thee, because thou love that
which hurts not. Charity therefore is not brought into any straites.
Augustine. tract. 10. in Epist. Joan. and Epist. 62. I do ever owe charity,
which alone being paid holds me still debtor. The bestowing of it pays it,
and although it be bestowed, yet is it still owed, because there is no time in
which it ought not to be bestowed: and when it is bestowed, it is not lost, but
rather in the bestowing is multiplied, for it is bestowed by having and not by
wanting it. As it cannot be bestowed unless it be had, neither can it be had
unless it be bestowed: And when a man bestows it, in the same man it
increases, and is so much more gotten as it is ofter bestowed.............
Charity therefore is not so bestowed as money; for besides that in bestowing,
this is diminished, that encreassed, there is between them this difference,
that to whom we give money we are so much the more benevolent as we seek to
receive nothing again, but of charity; he cannot be a true bestower that is
not again a benign exactour: for money when ^^ is received comes to him to
whom it is given and departs from him that gives it; but Charity,
increases, not only in him that exacteth it from whom he loves, al^hough he
do not receive it of him; but also he from whom he does receive it, then
begins to have it when he yields it. Wherefore I do gladly render mutual
Charity, and willingly receive it: that which I receive I do yet require
again, that which I render I still owe.

Charity being one and the same thing, if it fully possess the mind, does
manifoldly enkindle it to innumerable works. Greg. l. 10. Mor. c. 7.

He that follows charity, is humble toward all. And the keeper of peace,
provokes none to brawling. Amb. in illud 2. Tim. 2. Iuvenilia desideria fuge,
Tom. 5. page 415. What thou will have secret, tell it no man, if thou have not
commanded thy self silence, how shall thou hope for it in another. Seneca,
lib. 2. de moribus.

Page 53.. 54. EMBRACE CHASTITIE] Commended in Judith 15. and 16. Exhorted, 2.
Cor. 6. 1. Tim. 2.3.4. and 5. Chastity without Charity is a lamp without
oil, take away the oil and the lamp gives no light: take away Charity, and
Chastity pleases not. Bernard. Epist. 4^. Chastity without her compagnions,
Fast, and Temperance, soon decays, but strengthened with these helps, will
easily be crowned. Chrysostom. hom. 1. in Psalm. 50. Tom. 1. and de praeparat.
advent. Domini. Chastity of body alone suffices not to the integrity of the
heart.

The flesh cannot be corrupted, unless the mind be first corrupted. Amb. ad
virg. lapsam, c. 4. Tom. 1.

Do thou command continence? Lord, give that thou command, and command
what thou will. Aug. l. 10. Conf. c. 29.

To live in flesh, not according to the flesh is not an earthly, but a heavenly
life. Whence, in flesh to attain the Angelical life, is of more merit then
to have it: for to be an Angel is felicity; to be a virgin, virtue: Whilst
the virgin by her own forces with grace, endeavoreth to obtain that which the
Angel has by nature. Hieron. ad Paul. and Eustoch. de Assump. B. MARIAE, Tom.
4.

BEWARE OF THE ALLVREMENTS OF THE HARLOT] Her lips are a dropping honniecombe.
Prou. 5. The fornicator sins against his own body. 2. Cor. 6.

Page 53.. 55. lin. 4. CANKER OF VSVRIE] Prohibited. Exodus 22.25. Levit. 25.37.
Deuteronomy. 23.19. Nehem. 5. Ezech. 18.8. Foenus pecuniae, funus est animae. Use of
money is the souls funeral, and he that by others loss coveteth to be
enriched, is worthy to be punished with everlasting want. S. Leo, sermon. 6. de
ieiunio decimi mensis.

Page 53.. 56. APPLY YOUR SELVES IN COMPANIE] Romans 12.15. Rejoice with those
that are glad, weep with those that are sad. Seneca, l. de 4. virtutibus. Let
not thy poverty be indecent, nor parsimonie vicious, nor simplicity neglect,
nor lenity languishing, and if thy goods be slender, yet let them not be
pinching..... fear no man more then thy self... Have not scurrility, but
grateful vrbanity: let thy jests be without tooth, thy disports without harm,
thy laughter without noise, thy voice without clamor, thy gate without tumult,
thy quiet not sluggish; and when others play, do thou also some good and
honest exercise... Fly flattery, and be as loath to be praised of the
dishonest, as to be praised for dishonestie: be glad when thou displeasest the
evil, and think their evil opinions of thee, thy truest praise. Fear not
bitter, but fair words... fly vices thy self, and of others vices be neither
curious searcher, nor bitter reprehender, but without reproaching, a
correctour; so as with cheerfulness thou prevent thy admonition, and give
lightly way to pardon error: Extol not, nor deiect thou any... Be to all
benign, but fond of none: familiar with few, equal toward all... Be a
concealour of thy virtues, as others are of their vices: a contemner of vain
glory, and no bitter exactor of the good wherewith thou art endued... Be
docible, and covetous of wisdom, men when they teach, do learn; what thou
know, without arrogancy, impart with those that require it, what thou
know not, without hiding of thy ignorance, pray others to impart it to thee.

Page, 54.. 57. lin. 14. BREACH OF THE DEAD MAN'S WILL] The laws have: Let them
in all things obey the will of the Testatour. If any one will do contrary
to the will of the testatour; Let him go without the inheritance. Aug. orat.
de 5. haeresib. c. 6. Tom. 6. Careat aeterna haereditate hareticus
contraveniens voluntati testamenti IESV.

Page 55. lin. 8. TO ARTHVR MY SONNE] This was my name in baptism, not once
mentioned in all the testament before: whence it is manifest that these
fragments were not written at the same time with the Testament, but added by
the author after 1590. the year that first bereved me of a years life.

Prima quae vitam dedit hora carpsit.
Nullius vltima rapuit plus quam prima.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page Lin. Err. Correct. 26. 23. Arthour. Arthur Plantagenet. 28. 2. Orford.
Oxford. 29. 10. heath. health. 29. 13. afforced. afforded. 43. 14. that do.
that I do. 69. 29. falyng. failing. 74. 14. of the the. of the years. 107.
25. vv^. we. 110. 3. Page 28, Page 18. 156. 26. Author. Author. 165. 29. Lors.
Lords.


