THE TVRKES SECRETORIE, Containing HIS SUNDRY LETTERS Sent to diverse
Emperors, Kings, Princes and States, full of proud bragges, and bloody
threatenings:

With several Answers to the same, both pithie and peremptory.

Translated truly out of the Latin Copy.

LONDON Printed by M. B. and are to be sold at the Swan in Paul's Churchyard.
1607.

TO THE MOST Worthy, Liborius, Theodore, Adolph, Lodowick, and George, sons
to the most noble Nicolas of MVNICHAVSEN, favorers of all good learning,
health.
MOST noble and worthy Gentlemen, the birth and growth of Mahomets tyranny,
which, like the inundation of some great and mighty river, has overflowed the
greatest part of the world, is very memorable. For that Arabian impostor and
false Prophet, being descended of mean parentage, under color of a certain
new and plausible Religion, made his way to the Empire; and having therewith
good success and fortune of war, was the first that gave name to that
superstitious sect, and most prodigious kingdom. And indeed this enterprise
was more easily achieved, because, in all counsels and contractations he had
an excellent apprehension, and affected always in his designments and
resolutions to be popular. For being by nature composed all of Subtlety and
Flattery, he became by means thereof so powerful and mighty in his
persuasions, that in short time he drew all the people to his party, and
purchaste himself a great name and reputation amongst them.

The laws and institutions which he published, were embraced of his
contrymen with wonderful applause and liking, partly, for that he
pretended to have received them by Divine inspiration, and partly, because they
held good correspondence and proportion with their own wicked inclination, and
dissolute course of life. And this course seemed unto him to be the shortest
and most compendious way to attain and establish his greatness, being
persuaded that where he could not obtain in a Lions skin, there doubtless he
should prevail in a Foxes case. For he called to mind, how Lysander had once
advised to that purpose, deriding the folly of those men, who (as if they were
borne of Hercules) seek to accomplish their designments rather with force than
with policy.

But of the manner of government among the Lacedaemonians, being very like to
this, and of that wicked Alcoran which was patched together by the labor and
travel of those lewd confederates, John of Antioch, Sergius the Arrian, and a
certain Jew that was an Astronomer, in the year of our Savior Christ, 624.
and in the time of Heraclius the Emperor, and of Pope Honorius the first;
though a great field is here opened unto me to discourse, yet at this time,
and at this place I hold it needless and impertinent. To return therefore to
our former matter.

When he had ordered his affairs after this manner, he persuaded the people,
that were mad with desire of liberty, to take arms; wherewith he enlarged
the narrow confines of his new Monarchy, and in short time brought great and
mighty Provinces to be subject to his tyranny. The people were encouraged
herein the rather, through a vain hope, wherewith this false Arabian prophet
did abuse them, making them believe, that they should be Masters of the whole
world: which (as he said) both by Divine Providence, and right of inheritance
did apperteine unto Abraham's posterity, and consequently unto them, who
derived their petigree lineally from Sara their mother. This vain conceit was
a strong goade to prick them forwards to make sharp and cruel wars against
all nations. And to this day, the Turks made proud with this fancy only,
have with their arms invaded diverse Kingdoms and States, and like an heard of
hungry wolves, lying in wait for a flock of sheep, they lie in ambush to
destroy all Christendom.

Neither was Mahomet the second less agreeable in conditions than in Name, to
that Enthusiasticall seducer, exercising more tyranny and cruelty, than all
the Ottamanes besides, as if the same had been bequeathed unto him by the last
Will and Testament of his predecessor. For his father Amurathes being himself
of all that ever lived, the most barbarous and cruel, declared him to be the
heir apparent of all his kingdoms and seignories, upon condition, that he
would be an everlasting enemy of the name of Christ, and would bend all his
studies, and thoughts, to be tyrannous, cruel, and unmerciful. But so
straight a band and caution needed not, seeing the exceeding palenesse of his
countenance, having swollen cheeks, and a crooked nose which touched almost his
lips, together with many other signs and tokens of a monstrous nature,
showed evidently in his childhood, what kind of man he was like to prove in
his riper years. For he that reads the Histories of former times, shall
find many examples of such misshapen and deformed Thersites, the monsters and
wonders of Mankind, which have been in their time, the ruin and confusion of
Kingdoms and Commonweals.

His Mother, being the daughter of the Despote of Seruia, and Duke of Mysia,
was careful to instruct him in the rules of Piety and Christian Religion. For
holding in deep detestation the wicked heresies of the Saracens, and the
savage cruelty of the Barbarous Turks, she desired earnestly to have him
consecrated to the obedience of Christ, and service of the Commonwealth:
which, being herself a wise and religious woman, she preferred as a heavenly
treasure before all the wealth and kingdoms of tho world. But, Naturam
expellas furca, etc. Nature will not be bridled, and what is bred in the bone
will never out of the flesh. For Mahomet no sooner came to man's estate, but he
cast all into the wind, and took no care of any religion. In private he was
an absolute Atheist, reposing all his hopes in a good Fortune, making no
account of the Divine providence, and with many scoffs and scorns testing at
those which affirmed that humane affairs are disposed and governed by God.

Wherefore following the example and direction of his predecessor and father,
his chiefest care and study was to enlarge his dominions, and with the yoke of
Mahometane slavery to oppress those kings and people whom he subdued. So that
in the space of 32. years, that he reigned, many Kingdoms, Dukedomes, and
Cities were conquered, and became subject to his tyranny. For which cause he
was compared to Alexander the Great, and for his noble and great exploits,
surnamed the Great amongst his people.

The first and fearefullest feate of war which he did, was the winning of
Bizantium the most renowned and Famous City of Constantine the Great, which is
acknowledged of all, to have been the glory aad beauty of all Christendom.
There is no man living (as I think) that is able with fit words, and due
compassion to express so grievous and so great calamities. For then the great
and mighty Empire of Greece that was wont to be the wall and bulwark of the
Roman Empire, in less than two months siege was dissolved, and utterly
subverted. The Emperor Constantinus Paleologus, a Prince endued with all
commendable parts of piety, and virtue, seeing his estate was desperate, and
thinking to escape with his people at a back gate, was miserably smothered and
killed in the throng: at what time, the bloody and cruel tyrant caused
Proclamation to be made, that no person of what age, sex, or condition soever
should be saved or pitied in that common massacre. This lamentable tragedy was
acted in the 1453. year after the recovery of our salvation by the Son of
God, when Frederick the third swaied the Empire of Rome, and Sixtus the fourth
governed the Papacy.

Now God of his infinite goodness and mercy break the rod and power of the
Turks, and stop their rage and fury, that in these latter days which are yet
remaining unto the day of judgment, the Church may enjoy peace and safety. For
we are come now unto that time, wherein many grave, wise, and learned persons,
among whom Luther was not the meanest, foretold that the Turk should reign in
Germany. And truly so it appears. For all their studies and forces are bent
only, that by a short cut they may invade our borders. And if we mark with
what civil dissentions, and intestine broiles the whole country of Germany is
set on fire, we cannot but confess that it will be an easy enterprise for
them to subdue it; except our most gracious and merciful God being pacified
with our humble devotions, will with his invincible arm defend us and avert
these dangers.

The Turks (we see) with all diligence and watchfulness, do observe such
advantages, and seldom or never do they slip these occasions, but with great
joy embrace them, as the only signs and abodements of their good fortune:
whereas we are possessed with such dullness and stupidity, (what shall I call
it else? more properly I can call it nothing) that, besides it depriueth us of
all sense of our own miseries, it causes also in our enemies themselves so
great an admiration and wonderment, that they jest at us for it with extreme
laughter and derision.

How happy were it for us, if the great wealth whereof the Exchequer, and
common Treasury is daily emptied, were employed on this service, and the
subjects were not suffered to be so much impouerished as they are? For so long
as they are rich, and able to contribute to their Sovereigns wants, it will be
an easy matter to raise an Army and to make war upon any occasion: But if
once they be exhausted and drawn dry with unnecessary exactions and
impositions, our armies will soon be dissolved, and our wars will prove
ridiculous and unfortunate, for want of means to prosecute and maintain them.
And if then necessity compel us to seek for peace, and Christian amity with
our foes, is it not strange that in time of prosperity the very name of peace
is so odious and hateful? especially considering it happens many times, that
whilst two are striving and contending together, they are made (like the frog
and the mouse in the fable) a pray and booty to a third enemy, whose malice
never cease till he has destroyed them both, and sent their souls (that I
may use the Poets words) to fery over the Stygian lake, which is the black pit
of hell.

Why then are we afraid of any foreign Turks? Seeing we, even we, are Turks
unto our selves: yea far more cruel and injurious than any Turk, or (as the
name imports) any destroier in the world. For the Turks, being at peace
within themselves, do bear one common hatred against all Christians, that
they may subdue them, and destroy their name and memory from the earth: But on
the other side, we make peace with Turks, and turn our swords against our own
sides, having our pleasure only, with civil wars and domesticke broiles, to
destroy one another, as if we had conspired with the common enemy, to make
ourselves an easy conquest unto his tyranny. And if this be not madness and
fury, I know not what is madness. But let us return to Mahomet:

Who, although he was of such a tyrannous nature, as I have declared, yet
contrary to al other Barbarians, has this praise and commendation given him by
all Historiographers, namely that he burned always with an incredible desire
to understand all good Arts and Histories. For he caused the Histories of all
Nations, having to his infinite charge gathered them together out of all
places, to be translated into the Turkish tongue, that they might serve him as
a well-furnished storehouse of grave examples, fit for imitation and practice,
in the use of war, and military discipline: What kind of stratagems and
warlike policies he has gathered out of them, his own manner of Government,
and the Commentaries of Vicentinus, his freed-bondman, and of many others that
have written thereof, do declare at large. Among the rest, these Epistles,
being so wittily, and gravely written, deserve not the least nor the last
commendation. For they were written by himself, either as he marched and set
forth against his enemies, or else when he encamped: against whose testimony,
being most privy to his own resolutions and warre-like affairs, there is no
exception can be taken. And where he uses in them a certain kind of
Laconicall breuity, it is not for want of time to write more largely, but
because his desire was always to express his mind in a full and plain kind
of speech, without vain and needless circumstances. For they that are wise
indeed, are ever accustomed to deliver much matter in few words: which praise
Homer gives unto Menelaus the Spartan, and many other great personages are
commended by others, for the same quality and virtue. Yet I deny not, but this
witty and concise kind of speech which Mahomet uses, does savor very much of
tyranny: because it is common with Tyrants to deliver their minds in few
terms, and those also very imperious and menacing, as their own verse
declares; Sic volo, sic iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas. So do I will, So I
command,
And let my will for reason stand.


As for the responsory letters, which are wouen in the same loome, I have no
more to say, but that they show a manifest contempt of the Tyrant and his
threatenings, holding it far better to hazard the worst of Fortune, then to
yield their nekes to the cruel yoke of his intolerable slavery. But to let
pass all Histories, is it not a lamentable thing to consider, how he has
subdued and conquered all places that he came unto? so that he may truly say
of himself, as once said Julius Caesar: Veni, Vidi, Vici. I came, I saw, I
overcame.

And thus much shall suffice of him. Now concerning the Translatour of these
Epistles, (one Laudinius a man famous and well known to the world, as well for
his learning, as for the honor and place which he had amongst the Knights of
Jerusalem) he deserves no less praise for translating, then the Author
himself for composing them. For he has so lively and significantly expressed
the conceit and meaning of a strange tongue, that he seems altogether to
relish of Tullie his elegancy and sweetness. Therefore my hope is, that good
men will not dislike my travels in publishing the same; which having finished,
I thought good to dedicate the same to you, most noble and worthy Gentlemen.
For I understand by good and credible report, that you do apply your whole
study unto learning and knowledge, and that no day passes you without some
time drawn to that purpose. Assuredly, though you are descended of many most
ancient and noble Gentlemen, and may justly boast the honorable badges and
arms of your Ancestors; yet the best and readiest way to raise your titles,
and to make you more honorable, is to be learned. Which way if you will pursue
with your accustomed diligence, you shall shortly reap the happy fruits of
your long studies, namely, variety of all perfect and true knowledge, and a
noble reputation graced with the best preferments both with Prince and people:
The one being enabled through your grave and learned counsels, will govern his
estate virtuously, and the other having confidence in your virtue, will fear
no dangers. O happy, and thrice happy are they, to whom such blessings are
given of God. Indeed the common sort of Gentlemen, of whom Carneades sometimes
spoke, because they learn nothing but to ride horses are in no estimation, no
not with the meanest of the multitude. For is there any thing in them, that
appears worthy or commendable? Cannot every vulgar and base fellow learn to
manage a horse as well as they? Which I speak not to disgrace riding and
horsmanship: but wish rather it may have it is due honor and respect: only I
would not have you to be of their number who giving themselves wholly to this
quality make slow proceedings or none at all in the way of learning; wherein I
doubt not, but your fathers judgment does concur with mine, as I might well
perceive at my first acquaintance with him, when in the Castle of Stradthag I
taught that worthy and noble Gentleman, Count Ernestus, the true and sole heir
of the County of Schoumburg. For considering with himself, what great
commodities learning brings with it to all sorts of persons, his principal
care and study was to commit you to the hands of grave and learned teachers, to
be instructed, and to provide for you according to your estates, competent and
necessary exhibition. For all which his fatherly care and bounty, he requires
no more of you but to be diligent to furnish your selves with all good learning
and knowledge. Which if you will do, you will rejoice the hearts not only of
your parents, but also of all those that love you, and you shall be highly
esteemed amongst the chiefest Nobility. But it is needless to spur a free
horse, or to exhort you that are already prepared and addressed to this
virtuous course. Therefore I will stay my self here, humbly beseeching you
to take in good part this slender signification of my dutious affection toward
you and your studies. Fare you well.

Your Hon: most devoted M. HERMANN. VASTELLAB.

THE PREFACE OF LAVDINIVS Knight of Jerusalem, written to Francinus Beltrardus
concerning the letters of the Great Turk.
TO whom rather (my dear Francinus) should I send the letters which I have
lately published, then unto you? wherein I have sought more to please my self,
then to be praised of others: for having retired my self for my recreation to
Cicianum, a town in Campania, I thought good to present these unto you, that
thereby I might tender you an account both of my diligence and studies. The
Commentaries which I began to write to the Pope, the greatness of the work
compelled me to give over until an other time. I know that herein I do
expose my self to the detraction of many; considering how most men are so
froward and peevish in their opinions, that they will judge nothing according
to right, but will measure all things by their own reason. And so seeing we
have lost the truth long sithence, I am contented to leave this censure of me
to the posterity. Nunc pueri nasum Rhinocerotis habent. *

THE ARGUMENT of these Letters.
MAhomet Emperor of the Turks, sur-named for the worthiness of his
exploits, the Great Turk, when (having increased the forces which his father
left him) he had conquered Asia, he transported over Hellesponte an infinite
army into Europe, and with the same won BiZantium the famous and noble city
of Constantine. He brought also to his subjection Mysia, Galatia, Thracia,
Achaia, Peloponnesus, Acarnania, Aetolia, Ambrachia, Epirus, and all that coast
of Illyria, besides twelve kingdoms in the lesser Asia: namely, Pontus,
Bithynia, Cappadocia, Paph^agonia, Cilicia, Pamphilia, Lycia, Caria, Lydia,
Phrygia, and Hellespont. All which are at this day under the government of the
Turk: who, (as occasions presented themselves unto him) directed of late his
letters unto diverse persons and people of the world; partly in the Syrian and
Greek tongue, and partly in the Scythian or Slauonian. These coming into the
hands of Laudinius Knight of Jerusalem, who understands these languages
perfectly, were translated by him into the Latin, and are now published in
English for the good of those that desire to know the affairs and proceedings
of the Turk.

The Turk to Sancassan king of Persia.
I Do hear, that thou have passed Euphrates, and have brought a great power
unto Lepta, that thou art entered with the same into the confines of Parthia,
and there put all to the fire and sword; that with thy forces thou have
invaded Armenia, and conveyed thine army thither; and that, having spoiled the
cities, thou have divided the towns, villages, and fields as a pray to thy
soldiers. Surely I wonder much that thou bear the mind not of a conqueror,
but of a robber. Therefore having mustered our people out of all Greece, we
make ready to fight with thee, that thou may war with thine enemy with
equal forces. For it is base and dishonorable for great and mighty kings, to
make war like thieves.

Sancassan to the Turk.
Having encamped at the foot of the mountain Taurus, I went presently in all
haste with the army to lay siege to Thesiphon: and having wasted all the
borders of Armenia, I forced all the country for fear of my power to obey me.
Which makes me the rather to wonder, that thou do call my deeds in
question, considering that as they are many and famous, so they have been all
achieved after the due course of war and law of Arms. Know therefore, that
of our enemies we seek not praise, but victory.

The Turk to Sancassan.
I Came with my army to the straights of Cilicia, where with a memorable
overthrow Alexander the Great overcame Darius. Neither do we promise to our
selves any other success of our wars: seeing we have already matched
Alexander in the glory and fortune of our exploits. For great enterprises are
not performed by the fury and rage of a rude multitude: but victory
consists in the prowess of a few.

Sancassan to the Turk.
When I do consider my own power, and the greatness of my noble acts,
wherein I have been as fortunate as the immortal Gods, I cannot but laugh at
thy rash and foolish preparations: especially, having always commanded a most
invincible army, by whose valor I am styled The most fortunate King. All the
Bactrians, Persians, Medes, Armenians, Parthians, and almost the whole East: I
have subdued with my arms: and since Alexander the Great, none but I durst
make wars upon the nations. Cease therefore to boast of the great fortune of
the place at the straights of Cilicia. An Indian Elephant does not fear a
Gnat. There is nothing so hard and difficult, but the constant resolution of
soldiers will overcome it. And there is no place so inaccessible, but valor
will enter it.

Sexuares King of Armenia to the Turk.
WE have sent our Ambassadors as far as Thesiphon unto Sancassan, who with
incredible preparations, has entered Mesopotamia, and marches with a great
power to besiege Babylon and Carras. Also he purposes that Syria and all Egypt
shall be a pray unto him. So numberless an Army and so mighty an Host, we
remember not to have ever been assembled in one place: so that for his great
strength, he seems to exceed Xerxes, Darius, Pyrrhus, and Alexander. Add
hereunto six hundred thousand horsemen, and so many footmen. His magnificent
and sumptuous provision for the war, and his tents beset all about with
pearls and precious stones declare evidently that it is a royal preparation.
They say that he has in his Tents seven hundred concubines and as many boys.
Also the Eunuchs and Camp-masters following the carriages are reported to be
six thousand. Finally, they have armor and weapons of all sorts appertaining
to the war: namely, French curans, Spanish targets, Roman buskins, Candian
arrows, Parthian bows, and Egyptian spears. All which things being
carefully discovered by our spies, we have signified unto you at large. For who
dares attempt any thing rashly against him, that seems to be able to contend
for sovereignty with the Gods themselves? Or will any man neglect to provide
the best he may for his safety, when he stands so near to destruction?

The Turk to Sexuares.
THe things thou have signified unto us by thy Ambassadors, touching the
provision Sancassanus makes against us, are so far from amating us, that they
have animated the minds of our soldiers, and increased their wonted courage,
for that confidence they have always had in war, and hopes, to carry away
the spoils of their enemies, are redoubled by the report: as for concubines,
jewels, and other accidental ornaments of an army, pertaining to the
unnecessary bravery, and not the true being of a soldier, I esteem them to
avail not a rush unto victory: for whiles they are rather a hinderance to the
enemy, they seem to inflame the appetites of our soldiers, and whet them
unto the pray: neither yet do we contend about kingly bravery, delights and
dainties, but for victory, and military manhood, whereby kingdoms are
purchased: as for his numberless heaps of men, we scorn them; for the base
unlettered multitude is fitter to fly then fight, readier to take them to
their heels and run away, then to stand for victory, and win the day.

The Sultan to the Turk.
When news are brought me, how many fields are won by thy sword, and when I
hear the great woonders of thy exploits, it will not sink into my head, that
so great things come to pass, either by thine own, or by thy soldiers
valor; its the hand of Fortune, I rather believe, who ouerrules all actions;
yet do I not for all that, envy any whit thy praises: for what generous mind
will not commend virtue, even in an enemy? but such verily is the reeling
weakness of humane things, that all things except they be ruled by fatal
necessity, seem to be at Lady Fortunes pleasure, and after her countenance,
rather then to be directed by the wisdom, and concluded by the hand of man.

The Turk to the Sultan.
THou art far wide, man, and not a little deceived, to think, those men
commit all to Fates and Fortune, who work all by counsel and good advise.
Virtue is not subject to be ruled, nor ouerrul'd by Fortune; but its reason,
the Lady regent, and mistres of man's house, that ouerswaies in all things, by
which we come nearer in nature to the gods, then other creatures.
Notwithstanding, lo thee here a reason of the things have been done by us, so
many and so great. If we want no trusty wakefull centonels to watch; if we
have good store of well disciplined, and old trained soldiers; if we have
plenty of fresh water soldiers of good hope, picked out of all degrees; if
our army be puissant, accustomed well to overcome, but knows not how to be
ouercom'd; an army, that can live long winters a most hardy life in tents;
exercised with great iourneies, exposed to many dangers, hardened with manifold
labors by sea and land; wearied with no occasion of war, whose forefront
never yet yielded one foot of ground, no man daring to turn his back; an
army that has learned patience to endure both hot and cold, neither cast down
with adversity, nor lifted up with prosperity; that by virtue has made
triumphs of all evils, that by warfare tho far from home, has brought under
their girdle innumerable nations of the world, and often put to flight
incredible troops of men; for which I my self stand established Emperor of
almost all the East. Now, if you call all these things Fortune, if you will
have all these to be played by hap hazard, then I confess all things are
turned up and down, to rise or fall, as Fortunes smile or frown.

The Turk to the Pope of Rome.
WE have invaded Corinthus with arms, the most noble city of Achaia; we have
besides set foot in Aetolia, advanced our color in Macedonia, and marched the
pace of victory through all Peloponnesus from end to end; the villages,
cornefields, and towns, that stood in our way we have spoiled far and near
by fire, and turned them into smoke, to make way before us, that without any
let, we may make war upon Italy, and Rome at last to stoop. All these things
do we let thee to understand to the great terror, and greater loss of all
Christians.

The Pope of Rome to the Turk.
WE mind to revenge, not so much thy bloody cruelty in putting all Greece to
fire and sword, as the spoils and ruins of so many famous Cities; for how may
we hope thou should so temper victory, that thou will show mercy and use
clemency toward thine enemies, who never yet sparedst thine own in cruelty,
wickedness and lust? neither can there be any thing kept right or holy in
actions tweene man and man when God is had in contempt, and Gods religion in
neglect; we have not deserved so at thy hands, that thou should bring war
upon Italy, and bear arms against Rome; yet shall we be able, to contemn
with ease the unjust arms of wicked men, who have the arms of God to guard us,
and dwell secure under the wings of heavens protection.

The Turk to the Pope of Rome.
IN vain, by great God Mahomet I swear, do thou reason the case with us,
who mean not to strive with thee about holiness; nor is religion the golden
ball we run for; nor yet is Justice the end and aim of our swords; but the
bent of our desires is to enlarge the bounds of our Empire; let the better
cause be counted his that has the field, let him be iuster in his plea, that
stronger is in arms: as for cruelty, and lust, two things thou have so
burdened us withal, know thou, we therefore practice them upon our captives,
because we would not have our fame to belie us, but that men may find me the
very same indeed, whom fame reports me in words.

The Pope of Rome to the Turk.
ALthough our cause which moves us to war against thee be most just, yet have
we taken arms upon us not with like wickedness to thee, only in a lust of
Lordly raining, but in a necessity of defending our liberty. For who can with
patience bear a Tyrant? What man can endure so damnable and unmanly manners?
For look, what is usual in others, when fear, hate, or anger mooues them unto
bitterness against their underlings, thou of thy self and voluntary motion
without any other motive art more barbarous then they all, who gloriest more in
cruelty then victory it self, vpbraiding the captives with their misery, to
make them more miserable. Expect therefore to pay, what thou owe, deserved
punishments for thy misdeeds; for God though he has leaden heels, yet he has
iron hands, and will recompense the slow pace of revenge, with the greater blow
of payment.

The Turk to the Venetians.
I Came unto Patra with so mighty an Army, that I overcame with a look; the
first step was victory; and at first sight all was mine own. These are the
things we let you to understand with the no little damage of your
Commonwealth.

The Venetians to the Turk.
IT was neither by experience of war, nor valor of soldiers, thou
ouercamest us at Patra: fortune must have all the thanks. Who seeing she is not
in the hands and power of men, well may thou fear one day to prove, what
others now feel; look thou therefore for a change, and an ebtide of that
fortune, thou now so fondly and lightly boastest in; for peace has the praise
of victory, where more is done by the will and pleasure of Fortune, then is
foreseen by the counsel, or brought about by the strength of men.

The Turk to the Magistrates of Grecia.
IT will not grieve you, I know, neither will you think much, to give over
arms at last, and begone; who notwithstanding, I have so often vanquished you in
the field, yet, as I hear, you still repair your broken forces, and still
prepare for war: It becomes conquerers to bid battle, and the conquered to
obey their laws; we hold it therefore safer for you to entertain equal
conditions of peace, then to be vanquished again in war, and so to lose both
peace, and arms; for when the field is lost, deliberation comes too late.

The Magistrates of Grecia to the Turk.
WE will not give our backs with a farewell to arms, before we encounter
thee and beat back again those injuries by which thou so often gloriest in a
foolish madness, thou have triumphed over us in the field; for, thou can not
be ignorant, how doubtfully hangs the event of things, and how changeablely the
common fortune of war reeles from the one to the other side. We scorn that
peace, thou offerest us with slavery, and would have us accept as conquered
men; as for thy good counsel, keep it to thy self; enemies are not to be
consulted with for the good of actions twixt us and them.

The Turk to the Venetians.
YOu trouble, I hear, and molest the sea coasts of Licia with your Navy, you
provided so great a one for the use of war by sea; and not only so, but after
you had wasted with fire and sword the borders of my Kingdom all over, you
have besieged, I hear, Athalia, a City of Pamphilia: Co^^^^er, I pray you,
what conclusion will follow upon these premises; he is foolehardy and unadvised
that by war assaults another man's estate, when he can hardly defend his own;
for it behoues and stands you upon, since you lost Colchis, to preserve rather
the common wealth, and uphold still the old dignity of your name, then by
unlikely arms to seek after anew Empire.

The Venetians to the Turk.
NEither Peloponnesus, nor Colchis, themselves, tho lost long since by the
destiny and sentence of war, can dant or discourage our minds from new
assaults; howsoever thou broughtest those cuntries under thy command, not by
manhood of soldiers, but won to thy hand by a treacherous betraying of our
men; we notwithstanding, who seek not to gain kingdoms by treachery, but
victory by arms, have labored by our Navy to make all things by all means
offensive to thee and thine by sea and land; for he is far from the virtuous
mind of a generous Prince, that inlargeth his dominion with Cities not taken
by the Law of arms, but stolen by the false play of hidden guile.

The Turk to the Genuensians.
I Hear that Menedorus in his Orations before the people, does often brand my
name with the blackness of foul disgrace, as if by his ill speaking, he could
work us any injury, who have learned long since to fear no words: but you are
greatly deceived; for we war with you not by bitter gall of words, but by
deeds of arms and dint of swords; he can easily contemn what men say of him,
and laugh to hear his enemies rail on him, who for the love of Lordships, and
desire of more Kingdoms, would not shun infamy it self.

The Genuensians to the Turk.
NEither does Menedorus by the authority of our Senators, neither do our
Citizens by the decrees of our City pursue thee with disgrace, but by a
certain inbred and unappeasable hate of thee, who have made all men thine
enemies, and provoked them unto injury: as for the injuries we have received at
thy hands, be thou well assured, we go not about to requite them with words,
but mean to repay them with our swords: it skils but a little in our opinion,
what men say of thee; thy deeds will not let fame belie thee; and thy
shameless dishonesty of an ill led life is now become senseless against all
regard of honesty.

The Turk to the Naritians.
WE accuse, o Naritians, your foolish madness, not in a fear of war, but in
that you persuade your selves, I purposely and of mine own accord bear arms
against you, as if silly worthless mice were a worthy pray for the kingly
Lion: is it not ashame, if the Elephant should strive with Gnats?

The Naritians to the Turk.
WE would to God thou did so scorn the Naritians, as an object of too low
degree, and as a pray too base for thy brave mind; then should our eyes be
less fixed on thy power, and hearts less troubled with thy might. But pardon
us that have suffered so many evils of our enemies, if experience and
remembrance of bypast times make us look about, and have a care of time to
come.

The Turk to the Corcyrians.
YOu have confessed an injury, o Corcyrians, whiles you make havoc in the
borders of Ambrachia, and spoil every where the fields of Acarnania, turning
all things to your own pray, notwithstanding I have so often formerly forgiven
you. But let those men that are so forward, as to be first in injuries toward
others, expest a day of payment with usury.

The Corcyrians to the Turk.
THou art much and more, mistaken, if thou supposest, we only confessed an
injury, and did no more. For we have besides brought desolation upon thy
countries, and left behind us every where the sensible testimonies of war;
therefore did we first raise war against thee, to inuit our virtues unto
greater exploits, and to rowse up our resolutions for greater endeavors; For we
cannot with patience endure the inhumaine cruelty of a Tyrant, that by all
kind of inhumanity and lawless lust has offered violence to all sorts of men.

The Turk to the king of Cyprus.
AT the Calends of August I came with an Army into Cilicia to win the most
opulent city Tharsia; as for Lupus, the Legate of thy navy, we slew him taken
prisoner not far from Phreata. See thou therefore unto whose hands thy
fathers kingdom now is come, fear Fortunes inconstancy, for in humane things
nothing is in all respects, and always happy, or constant in happiness
without change.

The King of Cyprus to the Turk.
When by force of Arms I demanded Cyprus, mine own, again, I put to flight
mine enemies at the mountains Ceraunia, not by any power I borrowed of my
fathers kingdom, whose fortune was then to live at Carree a banished man,
destitute and far distant from mine own; yet notwithstanding by and by, so
soon as I once entered the Island with but a little band of men, I vanquished
with a handful, incredible heaps of our enemies, in so much that all men
said, I had outgone Euagoras. Its not then by chance and peraduentures, but by
wisdom and soldiers valor, that we manage our affairs, neither do we
glory so much in what we have well done, as we fore-thinke and provide for
things to come. As for Fortune, she is more to be feared of thee, whom she
seems to have lifted up so high that she may give thee a greaterfall, and whom
she seems now to fawn so much upon in the fortunate success of things, that
she may more easily deceive thee brought a bed in a fools paradise with too
much felicity to commit all things to Fortunes hazard; and to stay our selves,
on her restless wheel, I know not whether it be more uncertainty or more
foole-hardinesse in a man.

The Turk to the Methonensians.
NEither will we, o Methonensians, as yet set upon your City, neither yet will
we that it free and secure from the assault of our Army, till by long
protracted and continued war, your Citizens turn war into hatred, and hate
arms, as their greatest harms. For so fares it with men, whose lives are in a
continual labor with a trucelesse siege of sickness, till in an irksome
tediousness of weary languishment, death becomes more desired then length of
life; life now held their foe, and death their friend.

The Methonensians to the Turk.
LIttle, or less then nothing, have we always esteemed those arms, which
strike terror to cowards, and bring with them faint-harted fear to white
liuered men; but add no virtue to valorous minds. Thou may do well to
spare thy self, and save that care thou have of us; for we have learned to
bear adversity, without the counsel of our enemies. We would thou should
well know, those arms can never be turned to hate, which worthy Citizens have
tatken up to defend their country, and countries liberty, with Parents, Wives
and Children, against the unbridled lust of lawless Tyrants.

The Cretians to the Turk.
IT has always been lawful, even by the ordinances of our ancestors, to
answer violence with violence, and to cry quit for quo with craft; neither yet
do we transgress the rules of friendship, when we only revenge the injuries
of our enemies: but with what face do thou call on us, for fidelity,
branding us with so black an imputation, as is falsehood under the color of
faith, seeing thou thy self have never kept truth with any?

The Turk to the men of Chios.
WE have returned you again, o Chions, your tribute money; for when we
considered the greatness of your merits toward us, we presently decreed your
freedom, and commanded, Be you free; for its not money, but affection and
fidelity that's required of friends.

The men of Chios to the Turk.
NOt what we desire, when we remember thy so great liberality toward us; (for
then even wishes come short of our desires, needs must then our ability come
far behind, as never able to give a body unto our wishes, nor
accomplishment to our desires) but what we are able, we give thee now and
ever, immortal thanks; our comfort yet is this; well may our friends surpass
us in faculty, and go beyond us in ability, but overcome us they shall not
in liberality.

The Turk to the Epidaurians.
THe Abideans, Phrygians, and Dardans, as I hear, who before were the only
Pirates on all the seas, are now intrapt and surprised at Milas, as also put to
death by sundry sorts of torments. You have done well, I would think, by the
laws of arms; yet we cannot but account it absurd, that you burned the
galleys and gally-foists with fire; for war is not with senseless ships
(what should they feel?) but with the men that manage them.

The Epidaurians to the Turk.
NOt only the death of captiued pirates, but also the fireing of the ships is
warranted by the rules of war, the one for that they have so often troubled and
indammaged us by invasions; the other for that they lodged traitors, and
brought thieves into our borders: we thought it therefore meet to burn the
ships, together with the shipmen, for often had they run away with the booty
of our goods, and transported our spoils into Asia. Now are not the weapons
wherewith we are set upon, to be numbered amongst our enemies.

The Turk to the Nauplensians.
Will you never give over, nor make an end of injuries, o Nauplensians?
because you have set foot within the borders of Achaia, and by your often
invasions, led away many a man for spoil; because you thrive in ill doing,
will you not cease to do ill? for how can it be, that men shut up with siege,
and close prisoners to fear, should put to sword the towns of the conqueror,
and waste his fields with fire? do not they seem too late to provide for the
good of their country, who when all things are desperate, venture upon
impossibilities, and cast themselves on all extremities?

The Nauplensians to the Turk.
FOr our native countries sake, the common mother of us all, and for the
safety of our Citizens, as the common good that sits so near us all, to which
two things we owe our selves and all that's ours, do we willingly sacrifice our
lives, and object them to all extremities. For either will we die with honor
in the defense of our country, and maintenance of our freeborne liberty; or else
(as victory may fall on our side) our hands shall keep our necks from the
heavy yoke of tyranny, and preserve us still for term of life, our ancient
freedom. For we esteem nothing more glorious then to prefer our countries
liberty before our parents, our children, and all things else.

The Turk to the Pannonians.
Howsoever, o Pannonians, you have often given trial, how great your manhood is
in war, yet have you always found it in experience, how little you have got
by it, if you compare your goods and ils together. For they that bear stomachs
greater then their strength, and carry minds larger then the measure of their
own power, have ever been too rash in undertaking, and impotent in undergoing
war.

The Pannonians to the Turk.
WE come not to ask counsel of thee unto our wars, we challenge thee not for
want of wisdom to order thy affairs, neither will we require a reason of our
enemy for those arms he bears against us, for they have wit enough to do
their business, and manage their actions, that by valor of mind and
constancy, have purchased themselves victory with praise:

The Turk to the Macedonians.
YOur Ambassadors brought me that you gave them in charge: whereby you prouokt
me rather unto pity than unto hate; for it seemed to become you far better,
who have been conquered so often, and brought so often to be suitors on your knees,
to receive with thanks, and not to offer with such impudency the conditions of
peace: is it not shame, that men in misery by war should stand on proud terms
with their conquerors?

The Macedonians to the Turk.
WHat just and equal peace can there be twixt thee and the Macedonians? we
desire and endeavor to defend our country, and our laws; thou not content with
thine own, thirstest after other kingdoms by force of arms, and seek to
stretch out thine Empire beyond thy bounds: we cannot but speak touching our
commonwealth, as it becomes our constancy and generous minds, that we hold
nothing dearer, and sweeter among men, then liberty; yet this has always
been the common vice and fault of tyrants; free states they hate to death,
free cities stand too much in their sight.

The Turk to the Asiaticks.
YOur Ambassadors delivered their embassage at Zizicus. In words, it seems,
you are our friends, and confederates unto arms; but in deed and truth, you
are our enemies. Either therefore send us in all haste large ships for
assistance, or choose unto you war: for the affection of friends consists not
in words, but in deeds, when need requires.

The Asiaticks to the Turk.
THat we promise many things before thee by the mouth of our Ambassadors, and
perform but few things, of what we promised, the one was the issue of
thankful minds; the other must be ascribed to wants. We sent thee presents by
Mearchus, which if they seem less then thy desert, and too little for thy
greatness; yet well may thou think them greater then our ability is able
well to give; howsoever thankfulness makes us stretch out our hands beyond our
reach.

The Turk to the Bithynians.
YOu neither sent us ships for the use and service of war, nor yet money in
due time. We accuse therefore and charge you with unfriendly backwardness.
Take heed, I pray you, how you make them angry with you, and provoke them to
hostile indignation, whom you now seem to contemn with neglect. For its
better always to take up voluntary arms against our enemies, then after many
damages and manifold indignities to be enforced to the field.

The Bithynians to the Turk.
THe ships we lost of late, conquered unto ashes by the fury of the fiery
conqueror, come to the number of twice ten in all; as for the rest of our
ships, some split themselves on hardy rocks at Malea, and found to their own
undoing, that stones are stronger; some perished in the conflict with our
enemies; the sea swallowed others up, by drowning saved from other deaths; yet
dead and drowned are both but one; this perishes as well as that. For our
money, its run low; our treasury is near drawn dry, by feeding the fire of
war so long: thou therefore for thy humanity pardon, we pray thee, those
whom Fortune has made so miserable; for how can they give that have their
hands cut off? and what can they give, that lick their knife?

The Turk to the Coronensians.
ARe you not ashamed, o Coronensians, after you have been thrice overthrown
in open field, and overcome on even ground, to revive battle yet again, and
yet again to patch up an army? do you therefore so often reiterate arms, and
renew old wars, that late repentance, may the oftener make rods for your
folly, and bring a potion in her hand when all is too late and life is gone?
If the bent and aim of those arms you bear against us, be for the purchase
of peace, we pardon your fear; if in a hope of victory, considering your case
so desperate, your state and strength at so low an ebb, we accuse your
madness.

The Coronensians to the Turk.
VVHatelse do they that often raise war against their enemies, but show
themselves more then most desirous of peace? For no peace can be secured, nor
security established to Citizens with hope of continuance, without warring with
their adversaries, and opposition to their opposites. The arbitrament of war
and peace, consists in victory.

The Turk to the Florentines.
YOur Merchants, which traffic in Pontus and Galatia, sent to entreat us at
Thessalonica for freedom from tribute, and toultakers, with free carriage and
recariage. We therefore, that delight in nothing more, and hold nothing more
honorable, then to exercise liberality toward our friends (liberality, the
fairest and loueliest of virtues:) have granted and freely given the liberties
and privileges of our City to your Citizens; for, who bestows a benefit on
weldeseruing men, seems not so much to give any thing, as to requite a good
turn.

The Florentines to the Turk.
WE will easily yield to thee, as far inferior to strive with thee in
greatness of good-turnes: but pardon us, if we will not be overcome in
thankfulness of mind: the abundance of our hearts shall make some amends for
the shortness of our hands: for we have always prized it highly, and valued
it in the height of affection, that thou should do a thing so plausible to
our Citizens, and so worthy of thy self; yet can we not, but account it a
matter of more worth in loves estimation, that we repay thee with more then
our purses are well able to bear; for the worth of a benefit goes not by the
greatness of the thing it self; but it is the mind and good will of the
giver, that sets the price on what is given, which can be recompensed with
naught but with the same again.

The Turk to the Pontians.
WE have sent you home again the Merchant-ships we took prisoners in the
Aegean seas, which molested the Ocean as so many blockehouses: but not to curry
favor, I call the Gods to witness, nor yet to be rewarded, have I done so
with you; for we verily hold it greater glory to give, then take; and out of
our liberality to return all men double for what we take.

The Pontians to the Turk.
TO be large hearted, and liberally handed toward all men, what else is it in
very deed, but to deserve the hearts and tongues of all men? so gracious a
virtue is liberality, and of such an attractiue power. Thy humanity and
vnmerited favor in sending us home our ships again, has made them that
were once thy foemen, now for ever thy fast friends and sworn confederates to
bear a part in all thy wars, so comely and lovely is it to change injuries
into favors, and make peace of war.

The Turk to the Cretians.
ITs very dishonorable to us and our State, o Cretians, to embrace and continue
a league of friendship, with them, that in their deeds show themselves to
practice war, rather then peace, and under the vizor of friends, to play the
part of foes: but consider I beseech you, how safe and good it will be for you,
to fear them anon as your enemies, whom before when they were your friends,
you contemned without right or reason. Repentance is the follower of rash
attempts; and has often overtaken many a bold beginner.

The Great Turk to the Delphians.
NEither the Oracles of your God Apollo, nor Aesculapius your God of Physic
could clear you altogether of frenzy, who so unadvised have ordered matters,
that even Minerua herself, the Gods of advice, cannot give advice in so
great folly and madness. For the inrfirmities of the body be oftentimes
healed, good means being used; but no remedy or medicine is of force to cure
the disease of the mind.

The Delphians to the Turk.
IT seems indeed that we have taken small advice and used but little
discretion in managing our affairs; yet it falls out with us as it does for
the most part with Physicians, who have skill in other men's sicknesses to find
the cause and work the cure, but seldom or never help and heal themselves.

The Turk to them of Pergamum.
KNow you, the Governors and inhabitants of Pergamum, that we have undertaken
a voyage, intending to bend our forces against the Euboeians. Wherefore it is
our will and command that you meet us at Marathon, that by this means you,
who have always manifested your faithfulness toward us as occasion was
offered, may now also show your readiness and speed when need requires. They
deserve double thanks who not only bestow kindness very frankely, but give
that which they bestow, if not without asking, yet without delay.

The Pergamenians to the Turk.
WE are ready to set forwards to the wars with a great fleet, not only to
multiply and increase your forces, but also to give a more fierce assault and
lay sorer siege against the Chalcidensians. They deserve but small thanks who
cheerfully perform their bounden duty, when they have ability and opportunity
to do it.

The Turk to the Mitylenians.
ALthough the faithfulness of you of Mitylene has been evermore so apparent
that we never made doubt of the same, notwithstanding you never manifested the
same more then in this (which I hear of late) that you have not suffered your
enemies and ours to take possession of your city, but shut the gates against
them: For you are far from that perfediousnesse which is in some, who are
ready upon every profer to entertain new friends and new factions. You hold it
a matter so glorious to defend with force of arms your country and state, when
you may do it without violation of the Laws of friendship.

They of Mitylene to the Turk.
THe Mitylenians, who having now no face of a commonwealth left must live in
perpetual subjection and slavery, have thought it far better to remain
under the government of one, then to make trial of the regiment of many;
wherefore you ought not so much to approve our fidelity in this, as admire our
providence and policy. For we do not propound them to our selves as paterns
and examples for imitation, who being sick of an incurable disease take advice
of a multitude of Physicians; and notwithstanding they use many and diverse
medicines, yet are never restored to health of body.

The Turk to the Amazonians.
IF that for the maintenance of the franchisment and liberty of Citizens you
Amazonians did wage war against me, I should not so much hold you my enemies
as good citizens who took arms in defense of their Country, Children, and
Parents: but there is no reason of force to persuade us that they will now
refuse to subject themselves to men, who heretofore so long time endured the
dominion and principality of women.

The Amazonians to the Turk.
THe reign and government of the Amazons, which you seem to cast in our teeth
as a reproach and disgrace, does encourage and provoke us not to give obedience
to any other; for nothing can be more disgraceful for men, then to be found
effeminate, yea more faint-harted than women; wherefore think such men to be
in war invincible and most worthy of Sovereignty, amongst whom even silly
women have learned to sway an Empire.

The Turk to the Sclauonians.
YOu are neither able to defend your city by force of arms, nor any longer to
endure the siege wherewith you are begirt; therefore you must needs either take
laws as men conquered, or else remove the siege, by putting to flight the
forces of him that seeks to bring you into thraldom. Certainly they have but
little wit, who being deprived of all aid and succor from their confederates,
prolong the war to the great loss and hinderance of a commonwealth.

The Sclauonians to the Turk.
Whereas you are not ignorant that we always have had a desire and resolution
to maintain and hold our freedom, we have not yet given over the hope
whereon we anchored; neither indeed is it possible that Fortune should make our
state more miserable, whose case is so bad, that it is even desperate and past
cure.

The Turk to the Rhodians.
IF you Rhodians had but as much might as will, and as much strength as valor,
I should think you were not to be conquered by any whatsoever: but seeing the
necessaries and nerves of war be men, horse, munition, money and victuals,
you ought rather to have regard to your own estate, then unadvisedly to
provoke us to come in battle against you; for it is not all one to exceed your
enemies in courage of mind, and to be able to overcome them by might and force
of arms.

The Rhodians to the Turk.
IT is not unknown unto you that we have always had as well might and
strength, as courage and will, and that you have sufficiently proved by the
many, and them no small, overthrows your men have received by us: we have made
plentiful provision and preparation of all things that can be expedient, or
necessary for us in these affairs, so that the policy, providence, and
wisdom of the Rhodians at home, will drive you to no less admiration of
them, then their prowess and manhood abroad: And we are thus resolved, though
our forces be not so great as yours, that you shall vanquish us rather for want
of good Fortune then good courage.

The Turk to the Rhodians.
I Understand that you of Rhodes have already environed your city with deep
trenches, and fortified the walls with three great rampires, and have linked up
the harborough toward Mandrachium Colossi with iron chains, that your City
may be free from incursion and inrodes of enemies, and we discouraged and with
held from laying siege unto you. A matter indeed worthy to be remembered and
spoken of. For what is more glorious for a man then to venture his life in
fighting for his liberty, country, children, and parents, that the
commonwealth may be preserved? But I pray you by that immortal God whom you
serve, what courage have you to resist our forces by sea and land, with so
great preparation? For seeing we have after assault overcome and vanquished
that famous city Constantinople, the I Will Metelin, the countries of Morea and
Colchis, it were better and more befitting you, to beware by others calamity,
and follow their example in yielding, then to make your selves a spectacle to
others of misery and destruction. They who audaciously attempt matters beyond
their strength, for the most part suffer condign punishment of such
foole-hardinesse.

The Rhodians to the Turk.
YOu ought not so much to make relation to us of the captivity of the
Grecians, as to set us before others as a pattern of fortitude and valor: who
as we have a more just cause to take up arms, so we have greater confidence of
better success. You had the overthrow by us once at the Island Coes or Langa,
and twice at the city Calymnum; we also besetting the armies of the Sultan
king of Babylon, overthrew him, and put him to flight. Yea moreover, the
Admirals of Rhodes have often made war against the Egyptians, Syrians, and
Phoenicians. Do not therefore blame and reproach us for confidence, who have
prevailed and got the better against so many nations, who may sooner make
others more resolute against you by our example, then any whit be discouraged
by the rehearsal of them you have made your vassals.

The Turk to the Epirotes.
WE understood by the Ambassadors of Molossia of late that Dyrrachium,
Apolonia, and all that part of Sclauonia, is annoied and molested by the
incursions and forraging of our armies; and they told us that thieves lie in
wait by the way side, in every narrow passage, and that nothing in Macedonia
is in safety. You inhabitants of Epire, we have long since given sufficient
credit to all they have informed us of: but our manner is to try our right by
dint of sword: wherefore I suppose it a matter more beseeming you, (if you call
to mind your former valor) to take revenge on them that do you wrong, then
by your Ambassadors vainly to make complaint to us of them; for the violence
of a man's enemy is hindered not by oratorie, but by force of arms.

The Epirotes to the Turk.
INdeed if it were free for us, and we had power to do it by deeds of arms,
we had rather our selves be revenged on our enemies that offer us injuries,
then entreat of these things before you by our Ambassador: but seeing we are
too weak to compass it, we have thought it more for our safety to sue to our
enemies for peace, then undertake war to no purpose or profit. For it ought
to be thought no less valor, then policy to foresee and order all things by
good advice.

The Turk to the Dalmatians.
WE enjoined you the payment a certain tax and subsidy, which seeing you
brought in later then was requisite, you make us to think that you do it
grudgingly and unwillingly; wherefore either approve your faithfulness
toward us in deeds, which need requires, otherwise we will proceed against you
in hostility, and manifest to the world that we esteem you as enemies.
Dissembling and double dealing is as unmeet amongst friends as may be.

The Dalmatians to the Turk.
YOu should rather blame our want of ability in this case, then our
backwardness, for it is not possible, that he should pay subsidies, that has
no means to get money, where nothing is to be had, the king must lose his
right; wherefore they are not to be esteemed as enemies, who are still
faithful to their friends, though they cannot express it by their bountiful
gifts.

The Turk to the Apulians.
WE are purposed once again to return unto the Cities of the Brutians, and
all Apulia, far and near, to make just war against them, who as we have
forcibly brought into subjection the Grecians, and joined them to our Empire,
now also make preparation to invade with our forces that coast of Italy, which
heretofore was called great Graecia. You therefore wisely imitating the
ancient inhabitants of those parts, make surrender of your selves, and your
cities into our hands: it seems to be a great shame for good Citizens to
revolt from the customs of their Ancestors, and Laws of their country.

The Apulians to the Turk.
THey which make their own will a law, do declare that all the right and
title they have, is by their force in arms. But you (although you will us to
follow the lamentable example of the Grecians) do not so much endeavor to
persuade us to the embracing of their laws, as to the entertaining of that
government which they are brought under: but it is impossible that we should
become more ready to yield our selves to your mercy then others, seeing you
have most cruelly put to death such men of ours, as you have taken captive,
omitting no torments that you could inflict upon them: For kingdoms are easily
gotten, and enlarged by mercy, liberality, and justice; but can hardly be kept
with any force whatsoever if they be tyrannically dealtwithall.

The Turk to the Brundusians.
WE have intelligence by the Ambassadors of Calabria of your gallant havens
and ports to harbor our ships in, and of the situation of your City.
Therefore we appoint you together with the men of Otronto to associate us to
the wars, for we are preparing to convey over our forces into Italy,
intending with an huge Army to accomplish our victories. Therefore it does not
beseem you, nor is it good for you to contemn, or set light by him, whom his
own subjects may love for his justice, and his enemies fear for his strength
and force in arms.

The Brundusians to the Turk.
ARe you not ashamed to inuit them as confederates to take part with you in a
most wicked and detestable war, who have always showed themselves of all men
most bitter enemies against you? It is most detestable to serve in the wars
under such a Tyrant, who after victory will have the captiuated subject
themselves unto him, notwithstanding his cruelty, villainy and abominable lust.

The Turk to them of Saragosa.
YOu Syracusians, I understand, that you, they of Agrigentum, the Messanians,
and Cathanians have combined your selves together and conspired against us, for
the restoring to the Grecians their former liberties and franchises: we
therefore are providing an huge Army to conduct to Syracusa from Morea in
Greece, that now at last you may feel the hostility of them, whom before you
without all equity scorned to be your confederates.

The Syracusians to the Turk.
IF we have presumed in confidence of our ability, and policy in waging war
to take up arms against you, we are not to be thought to have attempted any
thing rashly and unadvisedly against our enemy. For with how much the more
equity, and right men fight for their country and kingdom, they are made so
much the more resolute and in better hope of victory.

The Turk to the Governors of Italy.
I Understand that Germany, France, and Spain are in arms against us, and
that you have exhibited to them Captains and Generals for the managing of the
war. They seem to have little care, and regard of their own good and
security, who unadvisedly without any cause at all provoke their enemies to war.

The Governors of Italy to the Turk.
THe cause of our war cannot but be most just, who in detestation of the
cruelty and villainy of a most unmerciful Tyrant do take arms against you, as
against a public enemy of nature. We have not only conspired with the
Germans, French men, Spaniards, and all the East countries, but have solicited
the free-townes every where to rebel against the Turkish Nation: and therefore
the most rich and puissant Kings of the Christians by our persuasion have
mustered up their forces, and are risen in arms to be revenged on you for your
cruelties, fury, massacres, murders, abominable lust, burning and sacking of
Cities, and to set free the whole world from such outrageous injuries. That
war is most justly undertaken which being neglected, the common safety of all
is endangered.

The Turk to King Ferdinand.
I Am very glad to hear of your worthy praises, invincible courage, and
managing of your affairs to your great glory and estimation* who, when you
have so often overthrown your enemies, have only respected this in your
victories, that you might be gracious in pardoning them whom you conquered: and
not so much that your enemies might feel your just revenge, having provoked
you thereunto, as that every one might know, and have experience of your
mercifulness and clemency. And that which we account a matter of greatest
commendation in a Prince, you have always showed your self invincible, and
not cast down in adversity, when Fortune has crossed you; and in prosperity,
neither proud nor puffed up. We have willingly made relation of these good
parts, and the rather because virtue as it is commendable in a man's adversary,
so it wants not due commendations oftentimes from the mouth of an enemy.

Ferdinand to the Turk.
ALthough we hold it a glory and credit to be commended of our enemies for our
great deserts, because their testimony and approbation is for the most part
true, and friends in show prove flatterers in deed, and so deceive us in their
testimony of us: Notwithstanding we do not so much stand upon, or delight in
any man's commendations in words, as we desire that our own worthy and notable
deeds should make us famous. Howbeit I willingly embrace this your testimony
of me, that you think me to be such a one, whom for virtue and good parts ever
his enemies may admire, and for just dealing, his subjects and Citizens may
honor, and reverence.

The Turk to the Sicilians.
THe Carthaginian captains, who in times past, so long while contended with
the Romans for principality, have given you many overthrows, and brought you
to great ruin, because you seldom kept league with them, but took part with
their enemies. And now I understand that you have sent aid to the Rhodians at
Halicarnassus, and have conveyed thither in your ships of carriage all
furniture and provision for war. Wherefore we denounce you to be our enemies,
and will declare the same by all hostility, that they which were so unadvised,
as to so little purpose to offend us, without any cause to wrong us, may suffer
condign punishment of such audacious rashness. For it will be not only for
our safety to revenge the injuries that other men do unto us, but it will
make our enemies to fear us the more.

The Sicilians to the Turk.
NEither have we taken up arms against you, howsoever you accuse us that we
sent aid to the Rhodians in Halicarnassus, nor may we be thought to do any
man wrong if we choose rather to aid our faithful confederates, then a most
cruel tyrant. You may but badly cast in our teeth, the perfidiousnesse and
unfaithfulness of our ancestors, who your self never kept truce or oath with
any, and you are unwise to go about with bugge-bearers and threatening words
to fear and terrify them, who are more ready to refer the supposed injuries
to the trial of fire and sword, then determination of words.

The Turk to the Alexandrians.
I Have interdicted, ye men of Alexandria, all Pontus and Asia to your
merchants. For the cities of Bithinia being indebted in great sums of money,
sent their Ambassadors from Callipolis to complain unto me, holding also in
great detestation the usury of the merchants, wherewith all cities are emptied
of their money. We hold it therefore better, to provide for the good of many,
then for the profit of a few.

The Alaxandrians to the Turk.
THough it belongs not to us to contend with thee about private matters, yet
if these things whereof thou writest, have been done or attempted by any, thou
can deserve for this at our hands neither love nor hate, seeing every man is
permitted to do as he list in his own affairs.

The Turk to the Tartarians.
Whereas others are many times made wicked either by some fear, or through
necessity, you by the nature of the place where ye live, are of all men
living the woorst and vildest, being a rude and barbarous multitude without
government and without law. But forasmuch as you have sent neither money nor
Ambassadors in time unto us, you show evidently that we must get both with
force.

The Tartarians to the Turk.
TRuly thou art worse then mad to exact any thing of us, who do live our
selves upon the spoils of others: and in vain do thou expect an Embassage
from those who never learned to entreat, but to fight. Neither ought thou to
wonder at our manners, seeing they are so little differing from those of
beasts. For they which have been taught by their ancestors to have no law but
arms, use massacres for a pray, and spoils for law.

The Turk to the Athenians.
YOur Schools, o Athenians, whereby you have attained to a most flourishing
Estate, and to the chiefest name and reputation of all good learning and
Philosophy, do persuade me much to spare your city, as well for the
reverence which I bear to the wisdom and honor of our ancestors, as also
through the love which I have ever carried to the study of those good Arts,
which I have heard were first invented, and afterward made perfect in Athens.
But on the other side, when I consider your malice always against me, I cannot
but think, my kindness does rather provoke you to hate me, then move you any
way to be thankful. Therefore having wasted the whole territory of Eleusina,
from Pyerus to Megara, I have given the same to be the pray and spoil of my
soldiers, and am ready in like manner to sack the city: For the insolency
of an offendour many times exceeds and destroieth the mercy of an enemy.

The Athenians to the Turk.
WE bear no hatred to thee, for our liberty saved; what cause have we? But
we have taken arms for our country, for our children, for our parents, to
whom we owe all we have. Neither can we be said to deal with thee like
enemies, when we defend our own, considering thou thy self do fight to
take from others. But it behooves thee to have regard what thing does best
comport with thy greatness. Have we offended thee? Sylla forgave the
Athenians: and twice was Alexander pleased to pardon them. Truly, thy victory
cannot be great, if thou will destroy us that are the glory of thy conquest.
Therefore thou ought to save us for an example of thy clemency, that so
thou may allure all men to love thee, rather then by exercising thy
cruelty, lust, and fury, upon poor captives, to provoke all the Greeks to
abhor thee. As for us, who have no other hope or confidence left us, if thou will not pardon us, we are resolved valiantly to try the woorst of Fortune.
For what is more honorable, or more pleasing in the world to men of spirit and
resolution, then to die courageously for the preservation and safety of the
commonwealth and country?

The Turk to the Thebanes.
Ye men of Thebes, I hear you are angry that I have spoiled Athens, whom I
have observed long since to have been companions in arms, and of counsel
against me. To you therefore, who are already possessed with an horrible
fear of the enemy, the same end, the same destiny, and the same miseries,
that the Athenians felt, are reserved, which I thought good to signify unto
you, that you may be tormented, first with fear, and conscience of your
misdeeds, and then with more grievous punishments, and tortures.

The Thebanes to the Turk.
THe ruin of the Athenians has doubled the strength and courage, not only of
the Thebanes, but also of all the Greeks, whom we have many times restored to
their liberty; so as now growing mad with fury, they do earnestly pursue
thee, to chastise all thy villainies. For in deep afflictions, desperate
resolutions are ever wont to promise an assured safety. Neither can they that
have used to command others, be easily persuaded to obey a tyrant.

The Turk to the Lacedaemonians.
I Hear, ye men of Sparta, that you are afraid of the army which under the
conduct of Cleander, I sent to besiege your city, wherein are twenty thousand
chosen footmen, and eight thousand of light horsemen: whose noble courage in
war and firm faith to me, not only my self have often tried, but the enemy
also has feared. Therefore it becomes you being tossed with so many miseries
of Fortune, to look well to the preservation of the commonwealth, and safety
of your people: lest if following the virtue of your ancestors, you undertake
a war against me, which you are not able to maintain; you be compelled to
pay dearly for your rashness. For it is an excellent thing with yielding to
deserve well of an enemy. Which who so refuses now to do willingly, shall be
constrained ere long against his will.

The Lacedaemonians to the Turk.
CLeander being with his army against our city of Sparta, of our own accord
we surrender our selves unto him: for the Lacedaemonians hold it safer to yield
to the counsel of the enemy, when it is profitable, then to hazard the
fortune of a battle. Neither do we esteem victory to be so glorious unto
us, as it is to deliver our country from the rage and fury of war, without
hurt or detriment to the estate.

FINIS.

