A TARGET FOR TILLAGE, BRIEFLY CONTAINING THE MOST NECESSARY, Precious, and
profitable use thereof both for king and state.

By JOHN MOORE Minister of Gods word, and Parson of Knaptoft in Leicester
shire. Anno 1611.

PROVE. 14. 4. Where no oxen are, there the crib is empty; but much increase
comes by the strength of the ox. RA. SPEI..AN CHO



LONDON, Imprinted for WILLIAM JONES.

1612.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, SIR WILLIAM TVRPIN knight, etc. his approved good
friend and Patron, the increase of all Gods blessings and graces with the sound
joy and peace of a good conscience be multiplied continually through Jesus
Christ.
PErusing my paper notes, and finding some heads of doctrine touching this
argument of tillage, delivered upon occasion of my calling to the public
place: and withal considering, and unfeignedly bewailing the hard hap of the
general expected hope, for the necessary redress of the dangerous decay
thereof; as a welwiller of the common good of my country, I have added these my
second thoughts to my former meditations, to be (if may be) as a further spur
for the more speedy reforming of this gross abuse, or at least a Christian
warning to prevent a further mischief. Which my best endeavor I present to
you (right worshipful) not only as a pawn of greater duties purposed for
your kind deserts, but for that I am persuaded of your innocence and
harmelesnesse herin, as also of the honesty and uprightness of your heart for
your countries good. For howsoever some in secret may uncharitably censure you,
and put you in the catalogue of the justly accused: and so nibble at your
credit, as one not altogether free from this great offense: Yet dare I be bold
to engage my poor credit, that whatsoever action of yours has but a show of
any hinderance, you would be ready to redress, and most willing to redeem
with any tolerable private loss for the public gain. And so beseeching the
almighty to increase your love to our Church and commonwealth, that still you
may procure the profit and welfare of them both, by all possible purpose and
practice; I commend you to Gods grace, with the good success of this needful
business. From my poor study in Sheas by this of April. 1611.

Your Worships thoroughly devoted in the Lord Jesus, JOHN MOORE.

TO THE CONscionable Reader.
MY purpose is not (discreet Reader) here to plead with pen and paper for the
belly and back of Libertines and Epicures, of Swilbolles and Swaggerers, or of
any other idle drones, and wretched Atheists, neglecting all lawful callings
and Christian means, to live orderly and honestly either in Church or
commonwealth. All these I acknowledge to be the greatest wasters and spoylers
of our country, worse by many degrees, then any depopulators, oppressors or
decayers of tillage: (which yet I no further justify then did the Prophets
Sodom and Gomorrah before Jerusalem, Ezec. 16. 48. 56. Esa. 1. 10.
for her rebellions against the Lord) for these I assure thee do good to none,
no not to themselves, nothing at all regarding the private or public good: but
making havoc of the creatures, do live of the labors of other men for the
present time, and surfeiting upon Gods blessings, do take a course to bring the
whole world to confusion, and so with all expedition to have the earth for
their intolerable looseness to spew them out. Leuit. 18. 25. and 20. 22.
Our land swarmeth too full of such vermin, who like the grasshoppers of Egypt,
Exodus 10. 14. 15.
begin to cover the face of our country, eating up all the fruit they can come
by, that no green thing shall grow by their wills, and so darken the land and
obscure the glory thereof. So that look what left of the palmer worm (the
oppressors Iocl. 1. 4. 5.
of the land) that have these malt-worms devoured, and the residue of those
canker-wormes and cormorants, have these caterpillars consumed. The truth is,
this viperous brood and wicked generation have mutually conspired, if not the
destruction, yet a mighty consumption of our dear commonwealth, the damme
and nourse of us all. I abhor to speak of the damnable crew, and cursed
company of drunkards and belly gods, whom the devil has taught a new trade of
eating and drinking by measure, and method. Their yards of cups, and order of
carowsing with such low courtesy, and salutations of their honest mates
absent; after an idolatrous sort prostrating themselves to their Bacchus and
belliegod, I shame to dilate. Besides the trick of Tobacco to temper their
westie brains, and to add both pleasure and thirst to Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
their unmeasurable desire of drinking. I cannot reckon up the thousands of
malt and good grain, wasted and hellishly spent by these Helluoes and
Harpies. All these. (I know) abhor the plough, and are enemies to the state:
who yet (I confess) in their high talk do justify tillage, and will be ready
(no doubt) to reform the decay thereof, with spade and peckaxe. The humors of
any such I detest to please, as being most horrible. Here only I solicit the
pitiful case of painful plowmen, tradesmen, and poor laborers, not able by
their pains, and gains, to furnish their families with sufficient food, who
sometimes for want thereof, break out into fearful clamors against the
tyrannous dealing of unjust inclosers and needless ouerthrowers of tillage,
who are here only taxed. Neither am I so senseless, simply to condemn all
kind of pastures and feedings, knowing that every creature in the kind have
their proper place and portion of the earth allotted of the Lord: Besides the
Christian liberty of men to use them for their best gain and good. Yet does
God allow such care of sheep and oxen, that Christian men shall be forgotten?
and 1. Cor. 9. 9.
that so much provision shall be made for these, that the poor shall want
their food? God forbid. I know there is a profitable use of hedging and
ditching for the division of mownds, and property of men's right and
inheritance; not to speak of the necessary provision of wood, maintenance of
peace, and increase of many other profits amongst neighbors, who otherwise
(perhaps) would prove contentious and injurious one toward another: yet quite
to hedge out the poor, and by this means to overthrow the plough, is a
hellish practice. And thus having unfolded my mind and true meaning, I commit
thee to him that has the hearts of all in his hand to make them pliable to his
service and public good, both of Church and commonwealth.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, JOHN MOORF.

THE PRINCIPAL points of the Treatise following.
1. The fruit and profit of honest labor and husbandry; it yields plenty
and abundance. 2. The earth used in her kind is very sufficient to relieve all
the inhabitants thereof. 3. There is no worldly blessing comparable to the
excellent fruits of the earth, by the means of tillage. 4. Gods wonderful
wisdom and providence for the preservation of the society and fellowship of
mankind, that as the inferiors cannot be without the superiors, no more can
these without the other. 5. The singular use and necessity of tillage; kings
themselves cannot be without it. 6 There is no ground or field so necessary
and fruitful as that which is in tillage.
A TARGET FOR TILLAGE.
And the abundance of the earth is over all: the king also consists by the
field that is tilled. Ecclesiastes cap. 5. verse. 8.
KIng Solomon after his Coherence.
most fearful fall, recovering himself by true repentance (through Gods grace
and powerful working of his holy Spirit) does testify by this book the
undoubted marks thereof to Gods Church, to which again in his old age he was
reconciled and received. And purposing herein to set out the true happiness
and felicity of Gods children, and so to confute all contrary opinions of the
conceited vanities of men concerning the same; which he had proved so to be by
his own too dear experience: And having in the former chapters by an argument
of inductio^, strongly concluded against many particular actions and things so
highly esteemed and valued in the world, he comes now in order to examine the
trade of husbandry and tillage. As if one should have demanded of him: But
what say you Solomon, to the great abundance and plentiful increase of the
fruits of the earth by the means of good husbandry and tillage? Indeed
(says he) I must needs confess that the abundance of the earth is over all,
that Sense.
there is no worldly thing so necessary and profitable to the natural life and
being of mankind; and that even kings themselves and the greatest potentates of
the earth have need of the poor husbandmans travel and toil in tilling of
the ground, for that the use of the fruits thereof are far to he preferred
before gold, silver, and all other worldly pelf: yet with the rest they have
their miseries and afflictions, and can in no wise make us truly blessed.

So that these words contain a Division.
commendation of the husbandmans life and calling, and that in three respects.
First, in regard of the subject 1.
of his labor, being the earth. Secondly, for the manner and kind of 2.
his labor, which is tillage. Thirdly, 3.
for the fruit that follows his pains, which is here set out and amplified:
first, by the quantity, yielding abundance. Secondly, for the quality, being
over all; and that in two respects. First, for the excellency and preciousnesse
thereof surmounting all. Secondly, in regard of the community and universal
use thereof, fit and sufficient for all men, and those not the basest, but the
highest kings themselves.

The sum of all is this, That the Sum.
abundant and plentiful fruits of the earth (by the means of tillage) are an
incomparable earthly blessing, without the which, neither king nor state can be
maintained.

And the abundance of the earth, etc. The husbandman by his tillage and
Doctrine 1.
labor has abundance: whence we learn the fruit and profit of honest
labor and husbandry; it yields plenty and abundance. He which tilleth the
land shall be satisfied with Prou. 26. 19.
bread, but he that follows the idle shall be filled with poverty, viz. he
that painfully trauelleth in his lawful calling, to maintain and uphold the
state wherewith God has blessed him, shall have abundance of all necessary
and good things: but such as are idle shall be poor and miserable, Prou 23. 21.
for beggerie is their end. The sower went out sow, and although his labor
Math. 13. 23.
and seed were the same, yet the soil was not alike, but the good ground made
him amends, that his travel was not in vain, where some one corn yielded an
hundred fold, some sixty, some thirty: for he that sows 2. Cor. 9. 6.
liberally shall reap plentifully. And those that break up the fallow ground
and sow in righteousness, shall surely reap after the measure of mercy: and
God will rain down a blessing upon their pains, as the Prophet truly Hos.
10. 12.
alludeth and applies it to spiritual endeavors.

One reason hereof is Gods blessing Reason 1.
upon his own ordinance, in prospering both the work and the workman. The
blessing of the Lord (says Prou. 10. 22.
Solomon) makes rich, not man's wit, and labor, nor any other means. And he
only shall with joy eat the Psalm. 128. 2.
fruit of his hands that fears God, and is blessed: for otherwise it is in
vain to rise early, and to lie down Psalm. 117. 2.
late, and to eat the bread of sorrow: our pains are to no purpose, our carke
and care to no end: though we eat and fret our hearts with worldly grief, for
the bettering of our estate: all the means we can use shall be misspent and
unprofitable, without Gods special blessing be present with us. He that
planteth and he that waters 1. Cor. 3. 7.
are nothing of themselves, but God alone, who by his gracious blessing gives
a most happy increase. For as the earth is the Lords, and the Psalm. 24. 1.
fullness thereof: so he makes it barren and fruitful at his pleasure. Beware
therefore (says Moses to Israel) lest thou say in thine heart, My Deuteronomy. 8. 17.
18
power and the strength of my own hands has prepared me this abundance, but
remember that it is the Lord thy God that gives thee power to get substance.

Secondly, the state and condition of the earth is such, by the means of
Reason. 2.
Gods curse upon the same, for man's sin, that now by nature it is so barren
and fruitless, that except Adam and his brood get their bread with Gen 3. 17,
18 19.
the sweat of their brows, the earth will yield them nothing but briers and
brambles, thorns and thistles, etc. Force it they must by their great toil
and travel, or else it will not be fruitful. So that now the hand of the
diligent Prou. 10. 4.
makes rich, but a slothful hand makes poor. Such only as with diligence
and honest labor go about their business and affairs, God will bless: but
such as are given to idleness and sloth (neglecting their duties, or trusting
to unlawful and indirect courses) shall surely want and come to naught. I
passed (says Solomon) by the field of the slothful, and Prou. 24 30, 31. 32.
lo it was grown with thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof; I
considered it well, I looked upon it, and received instruction. See the
confusion that idleness works, and the bitter fruits thereof, barrenness to
the ground, and beggary to the person, even to such as have the means and use
them not.

Therefore as the sight hereof was for Salomons learning, so let it be for Use.
1.
our instruction: that we use all diligence and industry in our places and
callings, upon the poor means that God has lent us to that end. Let us as
Gods stewards be painful and faithful in our places, use his gifts and graces
1. Cor. 4. 11.
well, employ our talents to his gain and glory, and so to our own Mat. 24. 5.
good. For to him that has shall be given, and to him that is negligent and
Math. 25. 29.
careless, and so wants and has not, shall in the end that little be taken
away which he has. And seeing that the hand of the diligent makes rich, and
that God promises a blessing to his own ordinance, and has sanctified all
lawful means for the removing of the curse, let us be careful thus to avoid
it, and obtain a blessing: for God the good householder cannot abide to see any
man stand idle Math. 20. 34.
in the market place of this world, but thrusts them out, and sends them into
his vineyard, so that they that 2. These. 3. 10.
will not work must not eat.

Secondly, it reproves those that Use 2.
think their own industry sufficient to make them rich, and procure them
food: whereas all the means in the world is in vain without his blessing and
care.

And here let those of the Ministry Use 3.
learn, that as their office and calling is a spiritual husbandry and a
painful plow, so it must be thoroughly 1. Cor. 3. 9.
followed: for who so slacketh his Luke 9. 62.
hand from his plough, and looks back in this business, shall quickly make
balkes, and so procure a barrenness of his soil. And as Gods word Math. 13.
is the only seed that they must sow: so let them be careful for the
prospering and preservation of the same in the hearts of the people. And then
let them not be discouraged, but comfort themselves (in this thankelesse
calling to the world) by the example and experience of the poor husbandman,
that if they do their duty they shall have abundance of fruit by Gods
blessing. And although the soil of men's souls by nature be both barren and
fruitless of good: yet their labor shall not be in vain in the Lord. The
husbandman must 1. Cor. 15. 58. 2. Tim. 2. 6.
labor before he receive the fruits, he must plow and sow, etc. before he can
look for his crop and happy harvest. He must wait for the precious Iam. 5. 7.
fruit of the earth: he goth forth weeping Psalm. 126. 6.
(as it were) to low his seed: but at the appointed time returns with joy,
and brings his sheaues; he may sow in tears, but he shall reap in joy.

Secondly, abundance of fruit Doctrine 2.
being attributed to the earth, it further teaches us: that the earth used in
the kind is very sufficient to relieve all the inhabitants thereof.

God no sooner had made man, but he provided meat out of the earth for man;
yea for men and beasts and all living creatures in their kind. First, God gave
man life upon the Genesis 1. 30 31.
earth, and then gave him living out of the same. So careful was God for man's
sustenance, that the things which should maintain him were made before him,
and produced out of the earth for his provision. See Gods wonderful and
particular providence herein for all living creatures. God sends the springs
into Psalm. 104. 10. 11.
the valleys, which run between the mountains, to give drink to all the
beasts of the field, and to quench the wild Asses thirst: where likewise the
fowls of the heaven do dwell, and sing among the branches. He makes also
grass to grow for the cattle, and herbs for the use of man, that so he
being strengthened by the virtue of those herbs and fruit of trees (his first
appointed food) might bring Genesis 1. 20.
forth by his labor and travel, bread and all manner of sustenance out of the
earth (husbanded and tilled in the sweat of man's face) that so both man Genesis
3. 18. 19.
and beast may have all manner of food ministered unto them out of the ground,
for the maintenance of their life. Yea God provides wine (says See Tremel.
David) to glad man's heart, and oil Psalm. 104. 15.
to make his face to shine, and bread to strengthen his heart. No provision is
wanting, either for his necessity, pleasure, or profit: for all the earth is
filled with the fruit of his works: So much as the birds have their nests and
food in the high trees and Cedars of Libanon, and the Storke her Ver. 17. 18.
dwelling in the Fur tree. The Goats Roes, Does, and Conies, are not
forgotten: 23. 24. 27. 28. 31.
for whom he has made the mountains and rocks for their refuge and relief.
Thus is the whole earth full of thy riches, o Lord, all creatures in their kind
wait upon thee, thou give them meat in due season, and they gather it: thou
openest thy hand and they are filled with good things, Glory be to thee for
ever.

Now the reason why God has Reason.
made the earth so plentiful for all kind of provision, is, for that as he
has ordained it to be (as it were) the mother of al living creatures here
below: so likewise has he fitted and furnished it to be as an able and tender
nourse to suckle them (as I may so speak) with her breasts, to bring them up
and sustain them. And therefore when through drought and dearth it fails therein
and deceives the inhabitants, Men (says the Prophet) shall lament for the
teats, even for the Esaias. 32. 12.
pleasant fields and the fruitful vine.

Which doctrine serves, first, to confute the muttering and murmuring Use 1.
of wicked and unreasonable people, that blame the earth for her barrenness,
and cry out of the unkindness of the times and seasons. But misery (says
Eliphaz to Job) comes Job. 5. 6.
not out of the dust, neither does affliction spring out of the earth; but man
is born to travel as the sparks fly upward. The cause then of all wants and
defects in the earth, is not in it, but in us, who have angered the Lord by our
sins: for as sparks come from the hot fire, so does sin proceed from our
corrupt nature, which procures Gods curse upon the whole earth and our selves.
So says the Prophet: A fruitful land God makes Psalm. 107. 34.
barren, for the sins of them that dwell therein. And he threatens by Moses
that for the sins of the people, the Deuteronomy. 28. 23.
heavens that are over their head shall be brass, and the earth that is under
Agge 1. 10.
their feet, iron: that is, that the heavens shall give them no more moisture
for increase, then if they were of brass; and that the earth for want of rain
should be as iron, and so altogether unfit to yield them any fruit. Again, it
is many times man's idleness and slothfulness that causes barrenness and
want: and the cruelty of oppressors in decaying of needful tillage, that
procures penury.

This point also serves to condemn Use 2.
all wretched Atheists, who so mightily cry out and complain of the increase
of mankind, supposing the earth cannot suffice them; praying still for plagues,
that so they might have plenty. And what is this else but to rail against
heaven, and so hellishly to blaspheme the Lord God of hoasts himself? and to
make the earth (so kind and fruitful) as an unnatural mother and stepdame to
the creatures?

Is over all: That is, excels all other increase. Whence we learn in
Doctrine 3.
the third place, that there is no worldly blessing to the excellent fruit of
the earth by means of tillage. Now to omit many thousand commodities which the
ground brings forth, and to come to our bread which the earth procures by
corn and grain arising from husbandry and tillage: what is able to weigh with
this blessing in the balance, which is so necessary for the life of man, that
our Savior teaches us to pray especially for it, not so Math. 6. 11.
much as once mentioning any other thing? For what are gold and silver, pearls
and precious stones to this our daily bread? And therefore it is rightly called
the staff of bread, being the Leuit. 26. 26.
stay of our life, as the staff to the impote^t and aged; which God threatens
Esaias 3. 1.
to break when he will punish a wicked people, so that they shall eat their
bread by weight with care: and on Ezeck. 4. 16.
the contrary, that he will bless the bread and water of those that serve him:
so that they shall eat their bread Exodus 23 26. Leuit. 26. 15. Psalm. 65. 13.
with plenteousnesse. Therefore says the Prophet, when the valleys shall be
covered with corn, men shall shout for joy and sing; yea and all the creatures
shall clap their hands (as it were) in their kind, and rejoice with mirth, when
our garners and corners Psalm. 144. 13.
of our houses are full with diverse sorts of store (the want whereof causes the
husbandman to be ashamed:) Joel 1. 11.
this is a blessed thing even in the censure of Gods Prophet.

Now the reason why this plentiful Reasons.
kind of increase is so incomparable, is, for that it is welnigh the life and
living of man and beast. And for this bread in particular, it is the strength
of Psalm. 104. 15.
man's heart, and the stay of his life as we have heard; even Esau that wretched
reprobate being almost famished for want of food, could say, Give me Genesis 25.
32.
bread, and take my birthright: what is it to me being almost dead? And how
pitiful is Ieremies complaint for his desolate people in the famine, for want
of food? All the people sigh Lam. 1. 11.
(says he) and seek their bread, they have given their pleasant things for
meat, to refresh their soul. The children and sucklings swoone in the
streets, they have said to their mothers, where is bread and drink, when Cap.
2. 11. 12.
they gave up the ghost in their mothers bosom? They that did feed
delicately, perish in the streets: they Cap. 4. 5.
that were brought up in scarlet, embrace the dung. The Nazarites that were
purer then the snow, whiter Verse 7.
then the milk; that were more ruddy in body then the red precious stones, and
like the polished Saphir; their skin, now for want of food, Verse 8.
cleaves unto the bones, and withers like a stock, their visar is now
blacker then a coal; so that they that are slain with the sword, are better
then they that are killed with hunger, Verse 9.
for they fade away as they were stricken through for the fruits of the field.
So sharp are these evil arrows of Ezeck. 5. 16.
famine for want of food and fruits of the earth. Hunger pierces the heart of
man with as sensible a pain as does the sharp point of a dagger or dart,
because it directly fights against the life of man, and he dies a most
painful death (though not so violently) whose deadly wounds do longer prick
him. A shorter punishment (though heavier) does not kill the heart so much as
that which is of longer continuance, though lighter. Therefore to avoid this
extremity of famine, the poor people are constrained Nehem. 5. 3.
to gage their houses and their vineyards and their land, to take up corn for
their family. And the Egyptians gave to Joseph for corn and Genesis 47. 15.
bread, not only all their money that they could make, but sold to him their
Horses, Asses, Sheep, etc. yea themselves as servants and slaves to Pharaoh
for want of bread. And Elies sons will bow for a morsel of 1. Sam. 2. 36.
bread: and therefore Jacobs suite to God in his journey, was, that if God Genesis
28. 20.
would but only give him bread to eat, and clothes to put on, that then he
should be his Lord and God, etc.

The use is, to teach us: first, that whenever God pincheth us with Use 1.
the want of this blessing of bread and store of the fruits of the earth, that
then in anger he threatens the taking away of our lives, shooting his evil
arrows of famine to wound our very Ezeck. 5. 16.
souls. Evil indeed in regard of the evil effects and consequents thereof.

Secondly, we must learn to set a greater price, and far more highly 2.
to esteem and value these outward blessings of increase, that whenever the
Lord does load the earth with plentiful store of fruits, and makes pleasant
fields (as it were) to laugh upon us: when he bursteth the winepresse, Joel. 2.
24.
and fills our storehouses, that then (I say) we enlarge our hearts and have
store of praises for him. And as these earthly blessings manifest his love and
care to us: so let us express our kindness to him, by our publishing and
proclaiming of our thankfulness, in remembrance of his mercies. Let us say
with the Princely Prophet, What shall we render to the Psalm. 116. 12.
Lord for all his benefits toward us? etc.

Lastly, it serves to reprove all carnal 3.
Epicures and unthankful Atheists, which when they are fed to the full, and
swim in their delights and pleasures, make their belly their god, and their
Phil. 3. 19. 1. Cor. 15. 32. Esaias 22. 13.
flesh their shrine; that fling out their heels like wild colts and fat
horses that are prouender pricked, against their rider: that are more unkind
then the Ox and the Ass that know their masters crib; yet these men that are
Esaias 1. 2. 3.
fed so full, and fare so finely (being so kindly nourished of the Lord) will
not know him, but rebel against him; and like to Bores in the frank, and swine
at mast, wallowing and tumbling in their own dung of their uncleanness, never
regard nor look up to the store house of heaven, from whence they have their
food and fullness. Like filthy Sodomits, their fullness of bread leads them to
fullness of idleness, Ezech. 16. 49.
villainy, and all kind of uncleanness: not unlike the carnal Israelites whom
God had fed with the fruit of the field, and caused to suck honey out Deuteronomy.
32. 13. 14 15, etc.
of the stone, and oil out of the hard rock, butter of kine, and milk of
sheep, with the fat of lambs and Rams fed in Bashan, and Goats; with the fat
of the grains of wheat, and the red licour of the grape had he filled them.
But he that should have bin upright, when he waxed fat spurned with his heel;
thou art fat, thou art gross, thou art laden with fatness; therefore he
forsook God that made him, and regarded not the strong God of his salvation.
Neither let any man loath Gods good creatures, or despise any or the least, for
the abundance thereof, nor yet abuse them to licenciousnesse (as the manner of
many is) in drunkenness and gluttony, in chambering and wantonness, (adding
drunkenness to thirst) or yet Deuteronomy. 29: 19.
without due respect, in bestowing them upon their hounds, dogs, and horses,
lest in the time of necessity they be not forced earnestly to desire but the
superfluity of that, which heretofore they have given to their beasts. So was
the prodigal person Luk 15. 24. 26.
plagued, (not keeping himself at home) nor content with Gods blessings in his
fathers house, but running riot, wandering, and wasting his wealth and honesty,
was forced in the famine to scramble with the swine which he kept, for their
food, which yet was glad of the husks, when they had eaten the kernel.

The king consists by the field that is tilled. viz. Has need of the
husbandmans Text.
labor to till the earth by the fruits whereof he and his ^ubiects are
maintained. Whence we may further observe Gods wonderful Doctrine 4.
wisdom and providence for the preservation of the society and fellowship of
mankind: that as the inferiors cannot be without the superiors, no more can
these without the other; even the king himself has need of the rusticke
carter and clown (as he is miscalled) to till the ground. As there must be
such as rule, without confusion of all things: so there must be such as will
obey. As there be masters, so there must be servants. The king cannot go to
plow, yet if he will consist and be vpholden with his subjects, the land must
needs be husbanded. As God has appointed to every one their place, so he has
fitted them with several qualities and gifts, and enjoined them special
employments for the common good. There is the head and the body, and there be
many members: yet every one has his peculiar place, every one his office and
order for the common good of the whole. The eye cannot 1. Cor. 12. 17. 21.
say to the head, nor the head to the feet, I have no need of you. All is not
an eye nor an ear, etc. Yea those Verses 2^. 23.
members that are reputed the basest and vilest, nature has most honored and
respected. As without all the members the body is imperfect: so without these
necessary callings the body politic of the commonweath is lame. So is it also
in the Church. Are all Apostles, are all Prophets, are all teachers? No, God
has ordained some Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for
the Ephesians 4. 12. 23. 14.
work of the Ministry, and edification of the body of Christ, that so we may
grow up in him, which is the head, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of
the age of the fullness of Christ.

The reason of which doctrine is for that it specially makes for Gods Reason 1.
glory, whose wisdom and providence is seen in this goodly order of all his
creatures, when as we see and behold how he has made every one so profitable
in their place, and nothing in vain, but for the mutual help and good each
to other.

Secondly, God will have it so to be, to link us all together in love and
Reason 2.
care one of another. This debt is always owing, and must still be paid Romans
13. 8.
amongsts Christians, not only for the community of nature, but for that our
God has made us so serviceable and profitable in our several places, and for
one another use.

And to conclude, God has so fitted Reason 3.
us to serve one another turn, to humble the highest, standing sometime in
need of the meanest poor man. Even the king has need of the very clown, and
noble Naaman of his 2. King. 5. 3. 5
slavish handmaid; and that to beat down our pride and selfloue, who
otherwise would not be beholding to any, no not to God our maker, if we could
shift for our selves.

The use is, first, for our instruction Use 1.
to teach us to know that we are not borne for our selves, but for the good of
our brethren. Our graces and gifts are not our own, but given us of God to the
edification of others; which therefore must make us to lean and look one
toward another in the time of need, when just occasion serves: The superior
to respect the inferior, the rich the poor, the wise the ignorant; and so
with holy Job to be eyes to the blind, and feet to the Job 29 15, 16. 17.
lame, and a father to the poor. If (says he) I did contemn the judgment of
my servant, and of my maid, when they did contend with me: what shall I do when
God stands Job. 31. 13. 14. 15.
up against me? what shall I answer? He that has made me, has he not made
him? has not he alone fashioned us in the womb? So the Apostle Paul infers
upon the former point, that we rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with
them that Romans 12. 15. 16.
weep, that we be of like affection one toward another, not high minded, nor
wise in our own conceit.

Again, it serves to reprove all Use 2.
such as abuse their headship and pre-eminence, and such as by this pretense go
about to trample all their inferiors under foot, who urge the duty of
others, and neglect their own. Am not I a king, a Lord, a master? Am I not a
Magistrate, a Landlord, a father, etc. And do thou know me? Yes, but do
thou know thyselfe and God; and why he has preferred and promoted thee? Namely
to do good and no harm, to help and not to hurt? Know thou not that there
is a King of kings, and a Lord of lords? My brethren (says James) be not many
James 3. 1.
masters, knowing that we shall receive the greater comdemnation. Speak and 5.
6.
not evil one of another, grudge not one against another, lest ye be
condemned: behold the Judge stands before the door. And therefore as the
Apostle exhorts the Hebrews, Heb, 13. 17.
that they despise not their teachers; (for that they watch for their souls)
so let not the highest Potentate, and greatest men in place, contemn the poor
husbandman that labors for their bodies. God will have a mutual subjection
amongst all, and a reciprocal respect, and reflection of the beams of love,
and all holy duties, amongst Christian brethren. From which iniunction, Christ
Jesus himself was not exempted, who washed his Disciples feet, to teach them
humility, Ioh. 13. 5. 14.
who became poor to make 2. Cor. 8. 9. Esaias 53. 4.
us rich, etc. Surely he has borne our infirmities, and carried our sorrows,
and so must we bear one another Gal. 6. 2.
burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ.

The king consists by the field that is tilled. viz. Neither he nor his
subjects can live without tillage: whence observe the singular use and
necessity Doctrine 5.
of tillage. Kings themselves cannot be without it, neither in regard of their
own estate, nor their subjects: for as all must have food and sustenance, so
must the necessary means thereunto be used and embraced. The sweet fruits of
the earth will not now be gotten without the sweat of man's face. Adam himself
the hei^e of all Genesis 3. 2. 3.
the world, must first till the ground, before he have his food, and not only
he, but his heirs must go to plow, if they will have any profit. Neither was
it infamous at the first, for the greatest men of renown, to be seen and very
expert in this trade of tillage. It was Noah's calling, as before, so after Genesis
9. 20. Genesis 26. 12. 1. King. 19. 19.
the flood. And to pass over the Patriarchs and Prophets, as Isaac, Elisha,
and many other: Christ himself is not ashamed to call his Father an John 15. 1.
husbandman. And this is the title of Gods Ministers, they are Gods husbandmen,
his people their field and husbandry, and his word and the obedience thereof,
the seed and fruit of their labors. Yea God himself is said to be the teacher
of the trade, in the Prophecy of Esaias: Does the plowma^ Esaias 28. 24. 25. 26.
plow all the day to sow? does he open and break the clods of his ground? When
he has made it plain, will he not then sow the Fitches, and cast in Wheat by
measure, and the appointed Barley and Rye in their place? For his God does
instruct him, to have discretion, and does teach him. Who then dare despise
this necessary calling, whereof God is the Author, and the knowledge whereof he
himself is the teacher? and not rather glorify God who gives seed to the
sower, 2. Cor. 9. 10.
skill to the plower, and increase to his labor, to rid the earth from the
curse of penury and barrenness, and so by this sanctified means to make it
yield food for man's relief? But howsoever great men have undergone this
calling (to omit the ancient and famous houses of the Romans recorded in
histories, being called Cicerones, Fabij, Pisones, of the grain they sowed,
and labor they delighted in,) this is most sure, that there were never any
mighty Potentates, which maintained not the plow, whether Pagans or Professors.
Pharaoh that Egyptian king how famous Genesis 47.
was he for his treasury of corn, by that means, throughout all the world,
becoming a nourse to all nations, and the keeper alive of the whole Church of
God? And it is recorded of Nebuzaradan 2. King. 25. 12
the king of Babels steward, after the sacking of Jerusalem, that he left of
the poorer sort (no doubt by the kings commandment) to dress the vineyards,
and to till the land. So Vzziah 2. Chro. 26. 10
the king of Judah, not only builded towers, but increased plowmen, and
dressers of vines, without the which it had been in vain, to have meddled with
the other; and the reason is added of this his indeauor and care, for that he
loved husbandry.

Moreover, how is it possible for Princes guards and troops at home, besides
their huge hoasts and scattering armies abroad, to be maintained without the
plow? For if in the multitude of the people the honor of the Prou. 14. 28.
king consists, for the want whereof he comes suddenly to destruction: and
if many people cannot be maintained without much food: and if much provision of
food cannot possibly be come by, but by much tillage (since the plow according
to the proverb, brings enough;) then must this consequent be as necessary,
that neither the king himself, nor his subjects and followers, can be vpholden
without much tillage: for what can the king do when he wants food for his
people? As the king of Israel said to a woman in the siege of Samaria, crying
out to him; saying, Help my Lord o king: Seeing the 2. King. 6. 27.
Lord (says he) does not succor thee, how shall I help thee with the barn or
with the winepresse? And how fearful and lamentable was the estate of the
honorable Lords and delicate Ladies in the siege of Jerusalem, for Lam. 4 5. 7.
want of food as before we observed?

The reason is Gods ordinance and iniunction, that Adam and all his issue
Reason 1.
shall labor for their living, and so provide their bread with painfulnesse and
sorrow, a just reward for sin. Man I co^fes, lives not by bread alone: yet as
the end of Gods providence is, that man should live, so the means of his
providence is, that man should live by bread: which bread must needs be got by
his travel and tillage. A corporal substance is to be maintained by corporal
sustenance, and as man at the first was taken out of the earth, so will God
have the fruits of the earth to be his food as the fruit of his travel: that
so by the bread of the earth our bodies of earth may be norished and relieved.
Our mortal life is vpholden by earthly means, and as meats are ordained 1.
Cor. 6. 13.
for the belly, and the belly for meats: so death shall dissolve both it and
them to earth again.

The consideration whereof must Use 1.
cause us with all cheerfulness to honor God in the means, and so to use
them to his glory, and our necessary good. He that will eat must labor in a
lawful calling, and get his living by his Christian painfulnesse. The
slothful man lusts, and his Prou. 13. 4.
soul has naught: he will not plow because of winter, therefore he shall
Prou. 20. 4.
beg in summer, and have nothing. Therefore love not sleep, lest thou and 20.
13.
come to poverty, but open thy eyes, and thou shall be satisfied with bread.
His meaning is, that the slothful person shall fall into extreme poverty: and
though he beg to get his living, yet men shall have no remorse of his misery.
And therefore such careless persons must take heed in time, and apply their
businesses, if they will have plenty and abundance, against the time of need:
for as much food is in the field of the poor; so is the field Prou. 13. 23.
destroyed without discretion. Be the ground never so barren, yet by Gods
blessing it will yield the poor husbandman increase enough, by his diligent
labor in tilling, and sowing the same in due season. And many a one (who has
a good stock and fruitful soil) by neglecting the means, and not ordering
things aright, waste all that they have, and come greatly behind hand. For he
that will not sow, shall not mow; and justice it is with God, and men, that he
that will not work, shall not eat. Christians 2 Thessalonians 3. 10.
must not now look for miracles, but use all lawful and ordinary means for
meat: Christ would not turn stones into bread (as the devil would Math. 4. 4.
have him) but reaches us to be diligent in our callings (though without
carking and distrustful care) and then Math 6. 34.
sufficient for the day will be the travel thereof.

Secondly, it reproves and condemns Use 2.
all such as hinder this abundance of Gods blessings, by intercepting, or
utterly abolishing this mystery of tillage, to wit, all such persons as decay
both houses and husbandries, that lay the land waste, and labor to make it a
wilderness in regard of men, fit only for a few such monsters in men's shape,
and all kind of their cattle which they desire to keep; having rooted out men
(the image of the eternal God,) turned houses into bushes, and poor people
into sheep, preferring the fellowship of beasts before the society of men,
made like to God. Such kind of spoylers of their country may in stead of their
neighbors (whom they have rooted out) salute their oxen, sheep and horses,
which they have nourished and increased. A fearful woe is pronounced against
all such as thus dwell alone with the destruction of their brethren: Joining
house to house, and field to field, till there be no place for the poor, that
so they may be placed by themselves in the midst of the earth. This is in
mine ears (says Esa. 5. 8. 9.
the Lord of hoasts) and for this shall their own houses one day be desolate,
and their great and stately palaces without inhabitant. These are wasters of
their country, who delight rather in Abimelechs plow, to Judge. 9 45.
sow the land with salt, (as he did the city) to make it barren and fruitless,
then with good seed of corn and grain for the plentiful provision of food
for Gods people: and take greater pleasure to sow the soil with the innocent
blood of their poor brethren, then in procuring the means of abundance of
bread, by good husbandry and tillage; and so in Gods account do make their
possessions fields of blood, purchased in effect Math. 27. 8. Act. 1. 18.
with the hazard of the lives of Gods inheritance, for the want of food. And to
speak the best of them, the seed which they sow in such waste and decayed
places, is for the most part no better then sheep tritles and dung of their
beasts, to make their pastures profitable only for themselves. If beasts
(says one) could speak, they Bernard. in Cant.
would exclaim against such men, and call them beasts, or worse then beasts,
who only raven when they are hungry, and being full do spare their prey. Aug.
But these neither full, nor fasting, will abstain from devouring One forest
is sufficient for many Elephants and beasts of diverse kinds to live in, and to
feed together. In the woods and wilderness are an unknown number of Bears,
Wolves, and Tigers; of Lions, Leopards, and Panthers, to omit so many
Ostriches, Dragons, Satyrs, and serpents. All these (after a sort) endure one
another, and live together in their several continent: yet these most cruel
and unreasonable oppressors, as wild Bores root up the forest of their
country and commonwealth, and like Wolves, delight in the devouring o^ men,
who are their own flesh and proper nation. Their woods and parkes, and
pastures, will not suffice them, but still they pale in, and put out. One
Lordship, one country, nay a whole world (I warrant you) will not stanch and
quench the hellish thirst of these insatiable cormorants. They lick up the
poor and Number. 22. 4.
their possessions, as the Ox does the grass; they eat them up, as it were
Psalm. 14. 4.
bread, and yet like greedy dogs can never be satisfied. This is the generation
Psalm. 59. 14. 15
that the wise man speaks of, whose teeth are as swords, and their chawes as
knives, to eat up the afflicted Prou. 30. 14.
out of the earth, and the poor from amongst men, that tread upon the poor,
and take from them burdens Amos. 5. 11. and 8. 6.
of wheat; such as buy the poor for silver, and the needy for shoes: such as
pluck off their skin from the^, and the flesh from their bones, and Mich. 3.
2. 3.
chop them in pieces as for the pot, and as the flesh within the cauldron. The
Lord has sworn by the excellency of Jacob: surely I will never forget any of
their works. Shall not the land tremble for this, and every one that dwells
therein mourn? Thou Amos 8. 7. 8.
have consulted shame to thine own house, by destroying many people, and have
sinned against thine own soul: for the stone shall cry out of the dust, Hab.
2. 10. 11.
and the beam out of the timber shall answer it: Woe be to him that builds a
town with blood, and erecteth a city by iniquity. The jaws of these Lions
would be broken by godly Job. 29. 17.
Magistrates, and the poor oppressed people (that are as their prey) would be
plucked out of their teeth. But they are great ones, and fear not the Princes
sword; yet let them know, that there is a great God, who is a righteous judge,
and a revenger of these wrongs: who one day will proceed against them; whose
word has passed sentence already, neither will it be long before the execution
come. They covet fields, and take them by Micha. 2. 2. 3.
violence, and houses, and take them away; so they oppress a man and his
house, even a man and his heritage. Therefore thus says the Lord against this
family, I have devised a plague whereout ye shall not pluck your necks.
Though such men dwell in desolate cities where none inhabit but themselves,
and where houses Job. 15. 28. 29 30.
are brought to ruinous heaps, which they caused by depopulation and
oppression of the poor; yet shall they not be rich^, nor their substance
continue, neither shall they bring their sumptuous houses to perfection: the
flame shall dry up his branches, and he shall go away with the breath of his
mouth: fear shall dwell in his house, because it is none of his, and brimstone
shall be scattered upon his Job. 18. 15. 16 17. 19. 21.
habitation; his roots shall be dried up beneath, and above shall his branches
be cut down, his remembrance shall perish from the earth, and he shall have
neither son, nor nephew, amongst his people, nor any posterity in his
dwellings. Surely such are the habitations of the wicked, and this is the place
of him that knows not God. Yet these men will not be reclaimed, still they
build with one consent the towers of confusion; they will not be hindered and
stayed, but Gyant-like make war against God Genesis 11. 6.
and the good of their country, to bring it to confusion upon the face of the
earth, and so openly in effect publish to all, that they neither fear God in
heaven, king on earth, nor devil in hell: and proclaim to all the world, that
there is no fear of God before Romans 3. 18.
their eyes. But a fire shall consume them, and as they have devoured
substance, Job. 20. 15. 19. 20. 27. 29.
so they shall vomit up their sweet morsels, for God shall draw it out of
their bellies; and as they have undone many, and forsaken the poor, and
spoiled houses which they built not: so surely shall they feel no quietness
in their body, neither shall they reserve of that which they desired: the
heavens shall declare their wickedness, and the earth shall rise up against
them. This is the portion of wicked men from God, and the heritage that they
shall have of him: for desolation and destruction are in Esaias. 59. 7. 8. 9
their paths, and the footesteps whereby you might trace the^, are wasting,
spoiling, and ruinating whole houses and families. Like Ravens they build their
houses high, and love to live alone; and like devouring Kites, that prey upon
the carcasses of the poor. No seed can grow, for these Crows, in the furrows
of the field, nor scant in the church, if they might have their wills. For
having destroyed the commonwealth, they seize upon the Church, and having
wasted and taken away the bread of men, they challenge the bread of God, yea
the shewbread and consecrate things, Leuit. 21. 6. 8. 17. 21.
most unlawful for them to have. They seek to live of the altar though 1.
Cor. 3. 13.
they belong not to the altar, but rather take a couse to overthrow the whole
service and sacrifice, and the servants of God, that otherwise would more
chearefully and painfully attend upon it. David would not drink 2. Sam. 23. 15.
16. 17.
that water which was drawn with such danger out of the well of Bethlehem by
his Worthies, though he longed and thirsted after it; yet he powered it out, for
an offering unto the Lord: but these men (though they have no need) will drink
and carouse (in the consecrate vessels) not water, but wine, (adding
drunkenness Dan. 5. 23.
to thirst) though it be to the Deuteronomy. 29. 19.
destruction and hazard of themselves and Gods servants. Oh how much better had
it bin for such, rather to have spilt it on the ground with remorse (as a note
of repentance) then in the end to be sure to drink the dregs of Psalm. 75. 8.
Gods fearful cup of vengeance, as a just reward of this sin? Yet see a
little further the dropsy of these men's minds, and their horsleach humor,
Pro. 30. 15.
that makes their hearts as a grave after all unlawful gain, and a very
devouring hell that will never be cloyed: Esai. 5. 15.
they claim all for their common, the whole world is not spacious and wide
enough for their walk. These Moles (to speak the truth) undermine the
foundation both of Church and common wealth, Prince and people: for though the
king and subjects consist by the field that is tilled, yet still they decay it,
and lay the earth waste, overthrowing poor men's plows in every place, not
letting so much as a poor Mill to wagge for all this, but are ready to take
their tole (most basely and busily) of every poor man's bag; taking both tole
and tithes: all is fish that comes to their net, and a prey for their teeth,
if they can once fasten their tallants, and tentors on the same. Is there no
balm in Gilead? is there Ier. 8. 22.
no Physician there? Why then is not the health of the daughter of my people
recovered? But why speak I so loud and earnestly to the back and belly, that
have no ears? Alas I see no salve sufficient to heal this sore, no medicine
available to cure this malady. Let us therefore look unto our God who is the
alone Physician sufficient, and most excellent at such a desperate disease.

In that he seems to distinguish between field and field, as expressing Text.
his mind, what field he means that brings forth such abundance, so
necessary, and sufficient for the king and his subjects: we learn in the last
place, Doctrine 6.
that there is no ground or field so necessary and fruitful as that which is
in tillage. The seed which the sower Math. 13. 18.
went out to sow in good ground (by his good husbandry, labor, and Gods
blessing upon the same) for one corn yielded an hundred fold, for some other,
sixty fold, and for another thirty. And it is reported of Genesis 26. 12.
Isaacks crop of sowing seed, in the land of Abimelech king of the Philistians,
that he reaped the same year an hundredth sold by estimation: so the Lord
blessed him, says the text. And indeed, who is able to reckon up the great
increase of corn and grain that God does raise out of the earth, by this his
blessed ordinance of tillage and good husbandry, filling our houses, barnes,
and garners, besides our rickes, houels, stackes, and heaps of grain without
number and measure, sometimes gathered and got together in one land, (as in
Egypt) and sufficient to serve and provide for not only one country but many
nations, as in the days of Joseph: who gathered wheat like to the sand of the
sea, in multitude out of measure, until he Genesis 41. 49.
left numbering, for it was without number.

The reason why such abundance Reason 1.
of fruit proceeds of tillage, is first, the natural barrennes of the
earth, in regard of Gods curse upon the same, by the means of manssinne, which
now without painful plowing will not be profitable and plentiful.

Secondly, the blessing of God upon his own ordinance, when man 2.
does diligently and chearefully submit himself unto the same, in the
Christian use thereof, as more largely was showed before in the reasons of the
second doctrine.

Which serves to confute the proud conceit of many graceless Graziers, and
the presumptuous resolution of many greedy decayers of tillage, which set
their acres decayed at such an incomparable valuation, so exceedingly
multiplying their rents and revenues. Their great stocks and store of all
kind of cattle, so easily heeded, and maintained, without great charge or
toil, makes now their present state (as they suppose) unmatchable: so that now
they scorn at Jobs wealth (like Atheists) being far beyond him, in oxen,
sheep, and all kind of cattle. Yet here (I assure them) is some difference,
that his land cried not out against him, nor Job. 31. 38. 39
the furrows thereof made any complaint in his conscience: and that he never
eat the fruits thereof without silver, nor grieved the souls of the masters
thereof, as these men do in every place.

Their innumerable tods of wool, their herds and droues of fallings
sufficient for the service of Court and country, they esteem to be an
incomparable credit, and gain. Nay some of the^ are not ashamed to say, that
by this short course, they avoid the curse of digging and deluing in the Genesis
3. 17. 18. 19.
earth, of plowing and sweating for their living, so justly enjoined them of
God to sinful man. Thus they dare open their mouth not only against Psalm. 7^9.
men, but even against their Maker, and heaven it self. These men will live by
their own wits and ways, despising Gods will and word, which they cast behind
them. Yet here let me reason a little with this greedy Psalm. 50. 17.
gripe, and decayer of tillage for his own private gain. What field is so
fruitful as that which is tilled? the abundance of this earth is over al
(says he that is wiser then the wisest of the^ all) whose experience so
dearly bought, far surpasses their conceits; who tried all their vanities,
and many more, and therefore we may trust his resolution, and assuredly
prefer it before all others.

These kind of men (perhaps) reason well for their own persons and places: but
where is their care for the Prince, and Gods people; for the Church and
commonwealth? Their fields (I confess) find many beasts, but the field that is
sown, feeds both men and beasts. And here note thy charity toward thine
own flesh: Thou carest for cattle, and art careless 1. Cor. 9. 9.
of Christians. Thou art kind to thy self, and regardest not the state of the
king and his subjects, that consist by the field that is tilled. But let the
very beasts convince thee, the Bees, and all creatures in their kind who are
not made for themselves, but for the common good. The sheep yield both fell
and flesh, the birds and beasts, their young ones and themselves; the Bees their
honey, the Ox treads out the corn, and the horse 1. Cor. 9. 9.
bears many heavy burdens, and all the creatures help for the common
service, and relief of mankind: yet thou alone amongst the rest (and worse in
this respect then all the rest) seek only thine own gains, and live to
thy self, with the hurt of all others.

But admit thou had thine own will, in turning commons into pastures, and
tilled fields into closing for thy cattle; where in the end would be thy bread,
without plowing and seeds time? Therefore when God would take away the curse
of the world, he brings in this blessing, that seeds time and harvest, cold
and Genesis 8. 22.
heat, summer and winter, day and night should not cease, whilst the earth
remained. But these men by their cruelty would bring all to confusion, that
the world cannot stand, if they be not stayed. And so justly incur the curse
of God, and his people: for as a blessing shall be upon the Pro. 11. 26.
head of him that sells corn: so he that withdraws it, the people will
curse him: for as the one provides for their necessity, so the other
merciless men (by decaying of tillage, and keeping in of corn) do procure
poor men's misery. Now if it be such a cursed sin, to withdraw the corn in
the days of dearth, to make it dearer, that so men may utter the very reffuse
of their grain at any Amos. 8. 5. 6.
rate: as those tyrannous oppressors did in the days of Nehemia, who caused
their brethren to gage their Neh. 5. 3. 5. 8. 9
lands, vineyards, and houses, yea to sell their sons, and themselves as
slaves, for corn: how much more intolerable an oppression is it, to take away
all necessary means of provision, by tillage and husbandry? For if these men
might prevail, no corn would be come by for any coin, for any suite or
service, for any prick or prise. For where no oxen are, there the crib is
empty, but much increase Prou. 14. 4.
comes by the strength of the ox. Where the means of good husbandry is
neglected, there is want of necessaries, but by the diligent tilling of the
land by teames and strong cattle fit for plowing, there is plenty and
abundance both for man and beast. How can such men pray, Give us this day our
daily bread, that daily take away Math. 6. 11.
the means of bread? Will they have their bread, and not use the means for
bread, which is tillage? Is not this in plain dealing to tempt the Lord? Math.
4. 7.
Will they have God to feed them miraculously, with Manna, as he did Israel in
the wilderness, to manifest Exodus 16. 15.
his power? No, no; in Canaan God will have plowing and sowing used, and
therefore when Israel came thither Manna ceased. I spare here to speak Josh.
5. 12.
how these unnatural oppressors of their brethren, cause the people (many
times) to murmr against their God, and to blaspheme his name. Besides the
strange rebellions, and outrageous vproares and vprisings against their Prince
and country. But is it not a wonder (to use the words Lib 1. Vtop. Tho. Moore.
of no mean man in his time) that sheep that were wont to be so mild and
gentle, and fed with small cost, should now become so wild and ravenous, to
eat up men, and lay waste whole countries? For these men (that enclose all the
commons) they pull down houses, they overthrow towns leaving Churches to stand
alone in some places, serving only as a pen for their sheep. And so causing
poor me^ of all sorts to flit from their dwellings, and many of the^, finding
no houses to hide their heads in, do fall to sell their goods and household
stuff; and at last (having nothing left) are forced to steal, and so justly
be hanged for their labor, or at least go wandering abroad, as vagrant persons,
never set on work: there being now small business, so many good husbandries
and tillages being mightily decayed. And is it not unnatural (says another)
to turn men out to bring in sheep? Yet if they will needs maintain large
pastures, and stock them with sheep, remember what God says by Ezechiel: The
sheep of my pasture are men, and we Ezech. 34. 31.
are his people and the sheep of his pasture; and the image of God in one Psalm.
95. 7. and 100. 3.
man is more worth then all the sheep in the world.

Therefore to conclude with exhortation, Conclusion.
let such as bear the face and have the feature of me^, cease now to be such
monsters any more: let not those that are called, and would needs be accounted
Christians, be worse then Cannibals. Let them learn of savage beasts, to spare
their own sex. Yea let them know and acknowledge, that all creatures here
below, are a thousand fold far inferior to him that is fashioned so like to
the very Creator himself, and for whose sake all other things were made to
serve. And since that God and nature enjoin them this duty, let them be
serviceable for the best good of their poorest brethren, and still remember
that the earth is no step-dame if it be not abused, nor our God any niggard (in
providing for many millions of men and beasts) if his own sanctified means be
not despised. Let them not therefore now labor any longer to reduce the world
to a confused Chaos, by inuerting, deforming, and quite defacing the most
sweet and amiable order that God has instituted. Let not the Courtier (I say)
contemn the Carter, by whose toil and tillage of the earth, both king and
state consists. And as they love the life and honor of their Prince, so let
them labor to uphold the plow, the abundant profit whereof surpasses all.
Let them tender the state of the country, Church, and commonwealth, wherein
they live and breathe, the life of God and nature. So shall they be free from
great offenses, most justly ministered by their former wicked ways, to al sorts
of men that hither to have sustained the smart threof. So shall God be better
served, Christian Magistrates and Ministers more worthily and honorably
maintained and respected: and (which is a joy surmounting all) they shall have
profit sufficient, with sound peace of conscience, besides the praise and
prayers of all that fear the Lord; in steed of many bitter curses, most justly
caused by their former wicked courses, etc.

FINIS.

