A LIVELY ANATOMY OF DEATH: Wherein you may see from whence it came, what it
is by nature, and what by Christ.

Together with the power, strength, and sting thereof: as also a preparatiue
against the same.

Te^ding to teach men to live, and die well to the Lord.

By JOHN MORE, preacher of the Gospel.

Imprinted at London by G. S. for W. Jones, and are to be sold at the sign of
the Gunne near Holborne Conduit. 1596.



Omnia mors aequat.
Death spares none estate, no pomp,
no wealth, no power at all:
No threats, no prayers can avail,
when pleases him to call.
He steemes no more a mighty Prince,
his Scepter or his port,
Then Mattocke of a laboring man,
one of the poorer sort*
The King, and Subject, Rich, or Poor,
in substance dead be one:
No Lion better is then Cur,
when both their lives be gonne.
So still the glory of this world,
out of this world does pass
With him, who living in this world,
once in great glory was.
T. P.
The Printer to the Christian Reader.
GEntlemen, our Divines do tell us, that Joseph of Arramathaea made his Tumbe
in his life time, and in the midst of his Garden; to this end questionles,
to put him self in mind of death, in the midst of his pleasures: And seeing
the life of a Christian should be continually exercised in the meditation of
Death, by reason of the continual conflictes which we suffer: not in respect
of any open enemy, but in regard of our secret sins. Every day, every
hour, every moment, and in every place, the Devil fighting against us: the
world with his delyghtes, and the flesh with his pleasures in so hot an
assault, as does admit no peace, nor suffer any truce, I thought good to
present you with this Anatomy of Death, that in the midst of your delights,
you may take a view of him, who will in the end, cut off all your delights.
Accept it as I import it, the Pawn of my good desire to pleasure you, and Bill
for your assurance, to receive greater things at my hand, when opportunity
shall serve: in the mean time, as you tender the health of your body, so
likewise care for the health of your soul: remembering, that Death to the
wicked, is the high way to Hell: but Death to Gods children, is the pathway to
Heaven.

Yours in all love, W. Jones.

To the Worshipful M. Thomas South Esquire. The fulness of comfort in Christ
our Savior, to supply the sorrows for his deceas sed Father.
GOod Sir, I have received your Letters, the messengers of your sorrow, and
the workers of my grief: for that I now miss alouing kind Neighbor, as you
do want a kind loving Father. And if the most renowned king David,
notwithstanding the great enmity betwixt Saul and him, did shed as many tears
from his eyes, when he heard that his enemy was murdered, as there did issue
drops of blood from Saul's body when it was wounded. I trust my Christian
sorrow for my friend, shall be christianly excused, since that it is a natural
thing for one man to have compassion upon an other: and of all worldly losses
which we receive by death, the loss of such a friend is very bitter; although
now by death he has gained an estate which is incomparably bet^^r* God having
taken his vnbodyed Spirit, to the fruition of his Divine essence in heaven:
but left his vnspirited Body, to be laid by you, on his last bed in the earth,
and your self, to the practice of your Fathers forepassed virtues: that in the
end of your race, you may enjoy the benefit of your Fathers foretasted
comfortes: which I must acknowledge to be the sweet fruits of his godly life.
And where as I understand by your Letter, so many in number, so excellent in
quality, so comfortable in his extremity; both for the quicknes of his sense,
and the quietness of his conscience, and readiness of his memory: that if he
would have wished longer life, then that he lived, or more Worship, then that
he inioyed, or greater wealth then that he possessed, yet he could not have
desired at the hands of God, a more heroyicall gift, then the grace he had, to
die in his grace: because, as punishment is joined to his displeasure, so
glory is always knit to his gracious favor. Therefore (good Sir) henceforth
surcease your sorrow, least you be charged to grieve at his solace. And seeing
the preuiledge to die well, is only allotted to them whom God has given the
grace to live well: endeavor as you are by nature, so in life and death, you
may show your self his Son: that as death took Manasses cutting his Corn,
and binding up his Sheaues; so death, when death knockes at your gate, may
find your August past, and your Harvest at an end: (I mean not of your Corn
which grows in Swallowclisfe-fielde) but of the thoughts which flow from
your heart. To this end, my friend has bestowed upon you this little
Treatise, made by a Divine endued with an excellent spirit, requesting you to
patronize it with your favor: but especially to follow it with your best
endeavor. For so you shall live full of good works, as your Father died full
of good days, and leave a testimony of righteousness unto your Children, as
their Graundfather has left, both to you and them. Thus, with hartiest
resalutations to your self, your wife, and sister, I commit both you and
yours, to the Almighty God, whose you are, and whom you serve. London. 27. of
January. 1595.

Lovingly and assuredly yours, William Barforde.

A lively Anatomy of Death, etc.
WE see it verefied by experience, that all earthly and transitory things have
their end, to the which they tend. Our very years are limited, God has
measured out our months, the days of our lives are dated, how long we have to
live. So that our first lesson (even at the beginning) that we have to learn,
is this, to think of our ending. We see that the longest day passes, and the
night succeeds: how summer follows winter, and winter summer. The sun it
has both his rising, and his setting, his shining and his shading. The spring
time has his course in covering, and clothing the ground with fruits. Summer
it rypens them, Harvest gathers them, and winter spends them. Thus one thing
follows another: and both one and another pass swiftly to their end. The
generation of one thing is the destruction of another, and the death of one
thing is the life of another: first is our generation, then our conception,
after comes our birth in wonderful weakness, our cradle is our castle, when
we have once crept out of that, we come to a little strength: yet long is the
time ear we come to ripeness. And here (behold) we never continue in one
state: for as our strength increased at the first, so by little, and little it
diminishes at the last. As youth succeeds childhood, and age youth: so
childhood, youth, and age, have all their end. We prove by experience, that
the freshest and sweetest flower soon fades, and has his fall: our garments
wax old, be they never so gay: our buildings become ruinous be they never so
stately: And as our life is vpholden by the death of Gods creatures: so death
shall be the end as well of us, as of them. But to come near to my purpose, you
see the former year, which was new, is both old, and ended: the new year
which is now entered, requires a new gift, a debt I may call it, which your
deserts may challenge for a duty. That which I write, I wish, God only must
give it: yet (through him) I offer it, God grant you may well accept it. A
posey therefore I present, most fittest for your state, which is both fresh,
and fair, sweet, and sauerie: which neither the frost of Winter can so bite,
or the heat of Summer so parche, or any storm or weather whatsoever so
assail, but that it springs, smells, tastes, and lasts for ever.
Memento mori: Remember to dye. Recordare nouissima, Remember your latter end:
this is your Poesey, and you shall never do amiss, this is the smell, this is
the sent of your Nosegay, which if you apply daily to your senses, it will
perfume your soul and body, that all without you, and within you, shall be as
a sweet odor, and flagrant incense, to the Lord of Hosts.

Now to make profit of this posey, remember (I beseech you) that sithence we
live, move, and have our being in God, that therefore our lives are not our
own, but lent us for a time. Remember that we are borne to dye, and dye to
live: If this once were beaten into our brains, we would not so much deceive
our selves. For the forgetfulness of death, and hope of life, makes us so
secure, and careless, as that we desire no other heaven, then earth. Many make
a covenant with Death, and clap hands with the grave, hoping thereby to escape,
and so bathe themselves in their fleshly pleasures, and wallowe like Swine in
their filthiness, following things apparent to the eyes, never regarding the
time to come, till death prevent them of a sudden, and sommon them to appear
before their Judge: so it comes to pass, that as they lived wickedly, so they
dye most miserably. Their hope is as the wind, and their confidence like the
Cobweb. Death is a terror, and a tormentour, both to soul and body: and this
is the reason, they have not learned to dye. Death is strange unto them, he
seems an vglesome monster, they dare not once behold him. True it is, that
Death in it own nature is most terrible to behold, that the sight thereof
amazeth all our senses: yet he that is armed with faith, is well assured, that
it is sent for his profit, to be his packhorse to carry him from earth, to
heaven: from pain, to pleasure: from misery, vexation, grief and woe, to
endless mirthe, melody and joys unspeakable with God for ever. To the end
therefore that the remembrance of Death drive us not to despair, but may
rather comfort us in our conflicts, it will not be amiss (if according to my
skill) I show you some Anatomy, in which you may see (as in a glass) the
original of Death, and from whence it came, what it is by nature, with the
power, strength, and sting thereof: and what through Christ to the faithful.
Lastly, a preservative, or at least a preparatiue against the same, so that it
may rather help us then hurt us.

First, touching the original and beginning of Death, it seems doubtful
from whence it came, and what Auctor it had: for although the issues thereof be
in the hand of God, and that it is his handmaide to execute his will (as he
also fetters the very devils themselves, who can do nothing without him) yet
all the creatures that God made were very good, and as he is the very goodness
it self: so can nothing but good proceed from God. And therefore since Death,
and the devil, be enemies to God and goodness, be destroyers and corrupters
of nature, which he had made, they are none of his creatures, he is neither
their Auctor, nor they of his offpring. From whence then came Death? it
proceeded from the devil. God (says the wise man) created Adam without
corruption, and made him after his own Image: yet through envy of the Devil,
came Death into the world, and they that hold of his side, prove it. So that
the father of Death is the Devil: and as he is ill by nature, so is Death in
it self issuing and proceeding from such a Fountain. The Devil is the Auctor
of sin, and consequently of Death: for by Sin, Death entered, and Death is
the wages thereof. He that commits sin, is of the devil: for the devil
sins from the beginning, he is a murderer from the beginning, he is both a
liar and the father thereof: not by creation, but by corruption. God made him
an Angel, he made himself a devil. So falling from God, he fell from
goodness, and became the father of sin and wickedness. Non stetit in
veritate: he stood not in the truth. Now being thus transformed, from an
Angel to a devil, and that of himself, not of God, who made him good, he
lost the prerogative of his creation, and so was altered both in name and
nature. Now being fallen, observe his fetches, (being that envious man) he
repined at the state of man, made like to God: He came covertly to Heuah in
the similitude of the Serpent, and after long allurements, caught her in his
snare, that she consented. So being snared, she bends her force to catch her
husband also: and indeed prevailed. Mark the devils proceedings, and see what
hooks he had hidden, under his fine and pleasant baits. First he bewitches
her senses with a fair show, and goodly taste of the fruit forbidden.
Secondly he assaileth them with infidelity and doubtfulnesse of Gods word
pronounced: namely, that they should dye the death, and puts in peraduentures.
Thirdly, he opposes himself to the undoubted truth of God, setting down the
contrary, You shall not dye. Lastly he pricks them forward to pride and self
love, You shall be as Gods, you shall be as cunning as the highest in good and
evil. So the poor creatures, not leaning to God, nor asking counsel at his
word, but trusting to themselves, and believing his vain and strong
delusions, they yield and came to his lure: and in yielding, were seduced, and
so snared, and holden with the cords of their own sin, and fetters of their
own finding out. Then through this disobedience, comes the justice of God to
revenge it self on man, and the penalty which it exacted, was death
appointed, and due by God to their disobedience.

See therefore now the petigree of Death, and of what parentage it proceeded.
Came it from God? (I say) no; but was derived from the devil, by the means of
sin, which he brought into the world, whose stipend and wages, is death and
damnation: the oucrthrowe of mankind, an enemy to nature, the breach of Gods
law, the power of the devil, the strength of Gods wrath, and most heavy
displeasure; And albeit that Death (as I have said) be derived from the devil,
yet it is also attributed to man himself, to leave him inexcusable, as it most
plainly appears in Paul's comparison between Christ and Adam. As by the
offense of one man (says he) Death reigned over all, and sin came on all to
condemnation: so by Christ, which is one, the benefit of grace abounded toward
all men to justification of life: and as sin by Adam, reigned unto Death: so
grace reigned by righteousness unto eternal life through Christ. In which
opposition we may likewise see Death attributed unto all, through Adam, and not
unworthily: so that man and devil, are partners in sin, and so in Death.
Here two things run together: the tempter and the obeyer. Satan tempted, and
persuaded of envy, intermingling the matter, with lying and slandering of the
truth to break Gods commandment: yet notwithstanding all this, Satan had
nothing prevailed, had man resisted, and not consented: therefore we may
conclude, that in respect of Satan's envy, and root of his evil temptation
and lying, tending all to man's undoing, and utter destruction, that so he may
be called (as he is indeed) the Auctor of Death: yet in respect of the assent
and consent of man in transgressing Gods law, Death may well lie on his neck,
and he may most boldly be accounted his own bane, though indeed there were no
other Author, being created to the likeness of God himself, and flourishing
with free will, which (as then) he possessed. The devil then is not the
absolute and proper cause of sin and death, because the nature of the
absolute, and proper cause is such, that it going before, the effect cannot
choose but follow: but it falls not out so in man, provoked of the devil:
who although he continually assail, and most vehemently assault Gods children
to sin: yet sin does not always follow his assaults. His work is not
effectual, for many of Gods saints and servants very mightily resist him,
being armed with faith: which weapon he flies. Again, let us imagine (says a
godly father) the devil himself never to have fallen from God and man (as yet)
to have stood in his creation: yet man by nature might have declined, and
should have had indeed the cause of sin in himself: the reason is this; God
gave him free will, and so left him to himself: free it could not be, but that
he had full choice of good and evil: yet not so unarmed and naked was he left,
but that God gave him power and strength sufficient to continue in his upright
state: albeit he leaning too much one way, and sliding from Gods law, and not
using, but rather abusing the means that God had given him, he fell of
himself from his creation, and so was entangled in the snare of the devil,
death, and everlasting condempnation: so that in this supposition the
suggestion of the devil is not simply the cause of sin and death (the
devil as yet not degenerating from God.) Neither also has the devil power of
man's will to bow it (as he lists) to his purpose. Furthermore, we must not
think that God is to be blamed, for not shutting all gates, and stopping all
gaps tending to sin: for that (as I said before) he gave to man, armor
sufficient to defend himself, and to keep him from falling. Neither yet was it
vnagreeable to Gods justice, to make a distinction between himself and his
creature, for that he himself is only good, without change or alteration, all
his creatures good, yet subject to change: yea in the very Angels of heaven
themselves (in respect of God) there is found imperfection, the Cherubins hide
their faces with their wings, for the brightness of his glory.

Thus does God humble all his creatures to exalte himself, to teach them this,
not to go from him, of whom they had, and have their goodness, nor to lean
only to themselves (though by creation good) yet subject to corruption. Though
man's nature (says Augustine) was upright and sound, and nothing sinful, yet
it was capable of sin and apt to receive corruption. Though man in his
nature were immortal (standing in his state) yet was he inclinable to
mortality. As for example; we see our flesh apt to receive a wound, yet every
one is not wounded. The body of man is subject to sieknesse, yet many often
dye, not subject to sickness: so the state of Adams body was such, that
although he might have dyed, yet (except sin had come between) he might and
should have been preserved of God from death. Even as the hose and shoes of
the Hebrews in the desert by Gods mighty power never waxed old, by wearing
or consumption. Therefore to hedge up this gap, man was subject to death by
nature, yet not necessarily, as though he saw no way to shun it: for now I
go no further then man's knowledge, setting Gods election and secret working
aside: for he had sufficient force given him of God in his creation, to avoid
it. Gods law was written in his heart agreeable to his nature: he thought it
no yoke or slavery to observe it, his shoulders, and other parts being strong
enough to sustain it. Sin therefore we may see, has diminished our
strength, and altered our nature, that now we are slaves to those, who before
were our subjects. Gods law now written, is the same that before were engraven
in nature: yet now it is a huge weight, and heavy yoke, which neither we, nor
our fathers were able to bear, except we be first newborn in by the holy
Ghost, given us of God through Christ. So that to conclude this point, not only
the devil, but even we our selves are the cause and auctor of sin, and so of
Death. Although indeed (as Augustine alleges) An ill thing has no cause
efficient, but rather deficient. And if any man (says he) will go about over
curiously to search out the efficient cause of Death, it is all one, as if a
man should labor with his eyes to see darkness, or to bend the sense of his
ears to hear silencc, which since they be of themselves mere deprivations,
have no essence in nature, though existent in some subject, and known unto us.
The sight sees nothing but bright things, and the ear hears nothing but a
noise of loud things: these things are known to our senses, not by use, but
by deprivation only. The deficient cause, and Autour therefore of sin and
Death, is Devil and Man: the devil by suggesting, the other by obeying: both
their actions not urged of God, but voluntarily of themselves. Learn therefore
this by the way, whosoever commits sin is of the devil: whosoever sins
is the servant of Death. Neither let us so rage against the Devil, as that we
altogether exempte our selves from gilte, but rather knowing the readiness of
the devil, in assayling, and our own willingness in obeying, we may both
renounce the Devil, and forsake our selves, and cleave only in this
extremity to the Lord. Out of this original of Death, we may fetch the
definition: wherein let us consider what it is in nature of it self, without
Christ, what sting it has, and of what power and strength it consists? Death
in it self, is not only a killing of the body, but also a sleying of the
soul: not only a separation of soul from body, but a division and cutting
off, both of soul and body from God. Death therefore is two fold, to wit,
corporal and spiritual: yet both of them, the stipends and rewards of sin,
and both of them due to all without exception: For all sinned, and are
destitute of the grace of God. This corporal death (as I said) is a separation
of the soul from the body, and is called the first death. Spiritual death, is
a cutting off, of the soul from God, and excluding and shutting out of the
same, from the blessed and sweet countenance of God, which is life it self:
and this is called the second death; common (I say) to all by reason of sin,
yet not preuayling over Gods children, for whose sins Christ has satisfied.
Death therefore at a word, is nothing else but a departing from life, and the
life of the body is the soul: therefore the separation of the soul from the
body, is death. And as the soul is life to the body, so the life of the soul
is God: therefore the going or departing of the soul from God (to cleave to
sin) is the death also of the soul. Without God there is no lyse: therefore
Adam and Euah, departing from God, departed from life: and although their
souls were not presently separated from their bodies, yet being gone from God,
their life; they lay (as it were buried) in their bodies, as also their bodies
themselves, every moment subject to corruption. So soon as man by sin turned
himself from God: even so soon was he destitute of his grace and favor, that
he could not so much as once aspire to felicity, so tha^ presently the
soldiers of death besieged his body, to wit; hunger, thirste* sickness,
sorrow, and all kind of calamities. So soon as ever they had sinned (says
Chrysostom) even so soon did the Lord pronounce sentence o^ death against
them. And even as those that are condemned of the Judge, although for a while
(perhaps) they may be reserved alive in prison, and be repriued, yet in effect
they are accounted but for dead men. Even so our first parents, though (through
the exceeding great mercy of God) after sentence pronounced, they did long
enjoy their lives: yet forthwith in effect they were as good as dead, for no
day, or hour, or moment, did after wards ensue, that they had assurance of
their life. Whereby we have to learn, that the life of sinners is no life
(indeed) but a death being estranged from ^he life of God, and all remain as
dead, which lack belief in Christ: for only Christ (who is eternal life
through ^aith) does quicken his children, so that truly to acknowledge Christ,
and through faith to possess him, is indeed ^o be freed from Death, and to
have ^ternall life. Only in name to profess ^im is the part of dead men: for
whosoever believes not, remains in ^eath: because the wrath of God tari^th
upon him. He which has not the ^onne of God, has not life: hereof ^aith John
to the Angel of the church ^f Sardis. Thou have a name that thou li^est, but
thou art dead. Hereof Christ calls the Pharisees painted sepulchers, whose
souls were dead in their bodies for want of faith: hereof he said to the young
man, Let the dead bury the dead. And Paul to the wanton widow, that being
alive she was but dead: Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead,
and Christ shall give thee light: you has he quickened, which were dead in
your trespasses and sins. By this that has bin spoken, we may see, not one,
but all are subject to the spiritual death, being full of sin and
disobedience, and so remain, (those only excepted) which are quickened by
Christ, and are buried by Baptism into his death, to die to sin, and live to
righteousness, to the glory of him that does quicken them. And as faith in
Christ, is the life of the soul being dead through sin: so no faith can
quicken us, which is not lively in it self, namely which apprehends not
Christ, which works not by love, which flourishes not with fruits: for
faith without good fruits, is dead. And therefore to the end we may be revived
(being buried in our sins) we must first believe in Christ, which is our
life. If our belief be lively, we must show it forth by our fruits: otherwise
we may have a name to live, and yet be dead. Now to understand this point the
better: learn what it is to be dead in sin. They are said to be dead in
their sins, whom Death still holds in the fetters and cords of their
sin, who cannot so much as move themselves to any goodness, who have no
sense or feeling either of Gods mercy or their own miseries. Those to whom
all goodness is unsavory, whose bodies and souls are holden captives of the
devil, whom they serve as slaves, which are like the deaf Adder, that
stops her ears, and will not hear the voice of the charmer, charm he
never so wisely: such as are wedded to their own wicked wills, whom the God
of this world has so blinded, that they can neither hear nor believe the
truth: whose conversion is as hard, as to raise up sons of stones unto
Abraham. Here we ought to learn to loathe sin, which brings us in such
thraldom to Death and devil, which cuts us off from God, shuts us out of
heaven, robs us of salvation, brings the wrath of God upon us: which is
unmeasurable and infinite, and never able to be fully satisfied, but by only
Christ, who is infinite and of like majesty with God his father. Now to the
end that the goodness of Christ, and his grace, (which hereafter I mind to
speak of) may more appear, in so miraculouslie delivering us from the power
of death, and the devils tyrranie; it will not be amiss to set out the force,
strength, and sting thereof, that the power of Christ in vanquishing the same,
may more be magnified. The original you have heard already, as also the
description, who be subject to it, and their state in this their thraldom: Now
therefore mark, that as the devil, and man together brought in death, by
sinning, so it now being entered, is become the very kingdom of Satan, wherein
he exercises his tyrranny. By this death he shows his triumphing over man,
whom he so seduced in holding him so fast fettered in the linkes of his own
sins, and so has him as his slave, is counted as his Prince, and rules over
him as a head. God did renounce us, although he created us, and cast us of,
whom he had made: even to the form of his Image. And as through sin, he gave
us over to the devil: so he justly appointed the means to hamper us: neither
was this his doing contrary to his justice; nay rather if he had not so done,
he should have seemed to deny himself, and to be repugnant to his word
pronounced. In the beginning he created man, in righteousness, and holiness,
according to his own shape and likeness. So long as he kept this form, he
enjoyed his blessed presence, his protection and providence ruled over him. He
wanted nothing that was necessary for him, all creatures were his servants,
they came at his call, and bowed at his beck, even the beasts of the field,
the fowls of the air, and the fishes of the sea, he put all things in
subjection under his feet: so that it forces the Prophet to cry out, and with
a loud voice to exclaim. O Lord how excellent is thy name, in all the world?
what is man that thou art so mindful of him? or the son of man that thou so
regardest him? thou made him lower then the Angels to crown him with glory,
and great worship, he wanted nothing that heart could wish, he was placed in
Paradise amongst all passing pleasures. The ground of it self yielded forth
her increase, without toil or travel. He was made Subject to no creature, but
was Lord of all (him only excepted) who had so preferred him. This God, and
this Lord, for all these his graces and blessings unspeakable, required no
great homage or service at his hand, he exacted no high rent, he did not over
charge him: But only this (to show his sovereign authority over him) he gave
him a commandment, no weighty thing to be observed, but a matter easily to
be performed: to wit (that he having abundance of al things beside, he should
absteyne (for his pleasure) from tasting of the tree of good and evil: and all
this he did, to try his obedience. Mark now on the other side, this unkind
creature: this ungrateful wretch, and wicked man, forgetting God, and what he
had done for him, casting all aside behind his back, most traiterouslye,
villanously, and most like a monster, rebels against his Lord, contemns his
Creator, and sets his God at naught, and so listens to the devil, believe his
lies, following like a beast his sensual appetite: and even in that one thing
forbidden, spighteth his God, regards not his word, fears not Death that
was threatened, but eats of the forbidden tree, maugre the beard of God and
his judgments. See therefore the greatness of his sin, and the due deserts
of this everlasting death (which I spoke of) could any punishment be great
enough, or any bitter plague bad enough for such a heinous fact, that whereas
God had given him such liberty, and freedom of all things, he would not so
much as obey him in one. Again, God did not only bind him to obey him, but
threatened his disobedience. If thou eat thereof, thou shall dye the death.
Notwithstanding both Gods commanding, and his threatening, he is most
careless, and swiftly runs headlong to sin and wickedness, and so entered
into such a mass of miseries, whence neither he himself, or his posterity,
could ever unwind themselves. For so abusing his own freewill, he lost it,
and was made a slave unto himself: defacing Gods image, he became like unto
the devil: and contemning life, he found out death, even death erernall. This
was the wages of his sin, this was the hyer of his labor, this great profit
reaped he for his pains. Mark now the fruit of his disobedience: God thrust
him out of Paradise, and being extruded, kept him out by Cherubins, so he saw
his own shame, and could not cover his wickedness: his Fig leaves would not
serve his turn, but God accursed him, and his seed: he plagued the earth with
barrenness, and made all creatures feel the smart of this fall: and as he
disobeyed God; so caused he disobedience in the creatures toward him. Hereof
comes thefearcenesse of Lions, Bears, Tigers, Wolves, and all wild beasts:
hereof arised all rebellions, and war, disorder, scarcity, dearth, hunger,
cold, nakedness, plagues, murder, and all kind of miseries that are in the
world: all which, are forerunners of this eternal death, and ringleaders to
damnation. And to convince us of this our accursed state the better, God
renewed his law first written (as I said) in nature: but blotted out by our
fall, even in tables of stone, to show us the hardness of our hearts, that so
(as in a glass) we might see our own condemnation. For amidst the heaps of
other sin, pride so possessed our hearts, that although we were nothing but
sin: yet we thought our selves clean, holy, and righteous. We were so
blinded, that we knew not sin, until the law laid it open, and showed us our
nakedness. Without the law (says Paul) we had not known sin. I knew not
(says he) sin, but by the law: for I had not known lust, except the law had
said, Thou shall not lust. But sin took an occasion by the commandment, and
wrought in me al manner of concupisence: for without the law, sin is dead. Not
as though there were no sin in the world before the publishing of the law
(for even the Gentiles them selves which had not the law written, showed the
effect of the law in their hearts, their conscience also bearing witness, and
their thoughts accusing one another, or excusing) and therefore being convinced
of sin in their souls without the law written, are a law unto themselves:
and sinning without the law, shall perish without the law written, by the law
of nature ingrafted in their hearts. This is proved by many morrall virtues,
that they naturally followed, and by many vices which they naturally hated.
This knowledge of the law of nature (though imperfect) yet sufficient to
confound them. Albeit sin indeed was then hidden in respect, and their best
knowledge of the law so ouershadowed, and well nigh blotted, that sin could
not appear in his nature. But when the law was renewed, sin (that seemed to
be dead) revived, and showed it self: all our spots did then appear, which
before were darkened, by ignorance of Gods law, which we gained by our fall.
The law then convinced us of sin, and revealed our nakedness, which our Fig
leaves had hidden, it opened the inward man with all his concupiscence, it
showed us our shame and confusion, our vgelsome shape, most monstrous to
behold, how we were transformed from the Image of God, to the similitude of
the devil: it put us in remembrance of our divine nature, which we had lost:
it showed us hell and the wrath of God. Nothing but condemnation appeared by
it: it let us understand how far we were fallen from God, how all things both
within us and without us, were corrupted: it painted out God in his nature,
according to his most pure holiness and justice: how he requires all our
heart, all our soul, all our mind, all our might, all our strength, all our
force, in this his service. All our members, both head, hands, and heart (yea
all parts that we possess) are tide to his obedience. The least sin could
not shadow it self, but it showed it in us, not condempning only our outward
acts, but giving sentence against our wicked thoughts: yea, all our idle
motions, without consent. And therefore since all flesh (created of God) is
corrupted: so that the very imaginations of man's heart, are only evil
continually, since that by the Law it is co^^inced, that there is none that
does good, no not one, but all are concluded under sin, and subject to the
same guilt of damnation. Since by the Law comes the knowledge of sin, and
that it stoppes every man's mouth, and makes all the world subject to Gods
judgments, and summons them to appear before his seat: since it was added,
because of transgressions, and that our sins might more appear and abound:
therefore it is called (to the unregenerate man) an importable yoke: the
occasion of sin, hence it is called the law of sin, and of wrath, the
administration of condempnation, and the oldnes of the letter, which can not
give life, but pronounces all our works accursed.

And here behold the strength and sting of death. How did death enter? By
sin. How did sin appear? and what is the strength of the same? The Law of
God, which gives sentence of condempnation against all flesh, and leaves not
one justified in his sight: And yet notwithstanding all this, the Law of God is
holy, just, and good, opening his very will, setting a blessing before our eyes
as well as a curse. It was not contrary to our nature before it was corrupted,
but agreeable for the Image of man, in which he was first created. It teaches
the very pattern of true obedience, what is agreeable to God and his nature,
how much he hates sin, and delights in goodness. It offers both life and
death: life to the obeyers, death to the breakers.

Therefore let us all glorify God, let every man's mouth be stopped from
accusing him or his Law. Let us confess against our selves our sins, and say
unto him: Shame and confusion belonges unto us, Death and dampnation is our
due: the heavy anger, wrath, and hell, are our desartes: And thou O blessed
God, art just, righteous, good, and gracious, in all thy doings for ever. Let
us thus (I say) give sentence against our selves, that God may be found clear
(even to the most wickedst men) when he is judged. Well then, let us bear in
mind that God is not too rigorous in punishing us with eternal death, by
reason of our sins so convinced by his law: and that Gods infinite justice
thus broken and disobeyed, could not otherwise be answered of man, but by
infinite susteyning of eternal death.

Mark therefore (I pray you) the whole kingdom of the Devil* He first
fights and warreth with temptations, which are as darts to wound our souls
to death* which if we resist not, (being so tempted, but yield to sin) then
comes the Law against us with his force, and by virtue of the Law, death
enters and triumphs. For the sting of death is sin, and the strength of
sin is the Law: for it shows us Hell, which is the palace of Death, and
leaves us in perdition. So that you see (according to my promise) what Death is
it self, what Prince it has, and what strong Soldiers it has to keep his
kingdom: to wit, the Devil him self, sin, law, wrath of God, and all to
uphold it: Wherefore it is no marvel if the remembrance of death be bitter to
many, and that they abhor and hate it. I say it is no wonder if all their
joints do tremble and shake a sunder: for the horror thereof made the Son of
God often to pray against it, to sweat drops of bood for the agony of it, and
to cry out to his Father as a man forelorne. Why have thou forsaken me?
Neither yet was this so strange a miracle, to see the Son of God so amazed at
death: for it set both Devil, Law, Sin, Hell, Grave, and wrath of God
against him: all these were armed to overthrow him: all these were Death his
Soldiers, and appointed captains to conquer Christ. And any, or the least of
these without him, will quite destroy us.

But now (to your comfortes that believe) let us see who got the victory,
whether Christ or Death, or which of them was spoiled: that so we may learn to
confirm our faith in the midst of our conflictes? You have heard already
what death is in it own nature, and now hear what it is through Christ. Our
estate without him we know: we are even holden in the shadow of death, being
fettered in our finnes. The weight of our finnes is the Law of God laid upon
us. Hell is our prison, and death is our Iaylor to hold us. See how we are
locked from God: yet most justly (as I noted.) In this distress and deep
dungion, Jesus Christ came to visit us, even God and Man a right redeemer for
us: he takes our cause upon him, and he reasons and wrastles with the Devil,
that held us captives. This mighty Savior took flesh and blood, to take our
part, that he might destroy through death, him that had power of death, that is
to say, the Devil, and that he might deliver all them which for fear of death,
were all their life time subject to bondage. He suffered for our sins, the
Just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, and was put to death
concerning the flesh, but qui^kened in the spirit, that he might be our
ransom.

Mark therefore diligently (I beseech you) this his combat and conflict. For,
he had to deal with the Devil, who held us captives. The Devil for his
defense had the Law, even the righteous law of God: which man had transgressed,
and therefore now worthily subject to his power. The objections therefore that
he made against man to Christ, are these. Whosoever breaks the Law of God,
shall die the death: but man has broken the Law of God, therefore he shall die
the death: and by the virtue of the Law (says the Devil) I will hold him in
death. Again, the Law of God is according to his nature good, holy, and
righteous. And therefore the death of man pronounced by the Law, is just, and
his damnation righteous. God the Law giver, is infinite and eternal: therefore
his death must be endless and everlasting. God is just, and can not deny
himself. He said, that man (if he should break his law) should die the
death: and therefore death shall hold him. God is perfect and pure: and
therefore the satisfaction must be according to his nature. His law binds both
soul and body, even thought, word, and deed: and therefore let man perform
this, and he shall live. These, and many more are the darts of the Devil,
which he throws against our fowls to wound us to death: the least of which,
assuredly will pearse us through, were it not that the strength of Jesus Christ
rebounded them back, and bluntens them. He is our sheilde and our buckler, our
helmet of salvation, our castle, and house of defense: he covers us with his
wings, and we are safe under his feathers: his faithfulness and his truth
does still preserve us. For all these dangerous darts, and a thousand more,
are nothing to his power, their force is less, and their violence is weaker
then straw or stubble to the furnace.

Now therefore, mark now these darts are dasshed. Gods justice in deed was
gone out, it could not be revoked. Man must keep his law, or man must die an
eternal death. Hereupon it pleased Christ to become man for our sakes, and so
as man, to satisfy the Law of God for our sins, that Gods truth might not
be altered. No Angel or Saint could be our savior in this case, but man who
had offended God. Now man of him self being too weak to bear this heavy
burden, Christ was God and man, that so he might suffer as man, and save as
God. Our mediator was God and man. Man and God were foes: and therefore, being
God and man, he reconciled man to God. And as the first Adam by transgressing,
brought death upon all: so the second Adam through obeying, brought life to
all believers. Gods purest justice could not exact the thing which he fulfilled
not: it required the fulfilling of the Law. This he accomplished, being the
end of the Law and the Prophets. He was the very substance of all the
Ceremonies, and the body of all their shadows of the Law. He was circumcised,
he paid tribute, he was obedient in all things, and was under the Law: so that
his coming was not to break, but to fulfill the Law. It required perfect
holiness in man: he therefore was a man without sin, conceived by the holy
ghost. And therefore he is not afraid to say to the faces of his foes, Which
of you can rebuke me of sin? Yea, the Judge him self that condemned him,
washed his hands, as a witness of his cleanness, I find no fault in this
just man. True therefore is the saying of the Apostle, That he was made sin
for us, that knew not sin, that we should be made the righteousness of God
through him. He is truly called the Pascall Lamb, most pure and unspotted,
that takes away the sins of the world. To him all the Prophets bear
witness, that justly through his name is preached the remission of sins, and
that there is no other name under heaven by which we can be saved. Thus he
fulfilled the law for man, being man him self: his obedience was most perfect,
he left nothing ^nfulfilled. And as he kept the Law, which man had broken, so
likewise he ^id pay the penalty for his trasgression. The breach of the Law,
was the curse of God, and eternal death: He therefor became accursed, and
sustained ^eath, even the death of the Cross, ac^ursed of God: And so by death
ouer^ame death, and by this cursing brought he blessing of God upon us. He
can^elled the handwriting and obligation that the Devil, and Law had laid
against us: he nailed them to his Cross, and made it void. So that now the
^aythful may triumph through Christ. Death being swallowed up in victory, ^hey
may boldly excleayme and say* O Death where is thy sting? O Grave where ^s thy
victory? For the sting of death being sin, and the strength of sin being
the Law: and both sin and law being taken away through Christ, there ^s no
condemnation that now remains. And therefore thanks be unto God, who has
given us the victory through Jesus Christ our Lord. For he has taken our
sins upon his back, he has satisfied the Law o^ God, not for him self,
but for us* He dyed, that we might live: he was accursed, that we might be
blessed: he was buried, that we might rise from our graves: he descended
into hell, that we might ascend into heaven: his righteousness is our
righteousness, and our sins are his.

This exchange did he make for our sakes. And therefore through him, by faith
(being dead in our sins) we are revived, quickened, and strengthened. All his
merits are reputed unto us, as though they were our own, and our sins are
truly his: for which he suffered and satisfied, to the uttermost. Christ is
our only Sacrifice, the fountain of grace and virtue, the portion of our
inheritance, our righteousness, wisdom, ^atisfaction, and redemption: our
^oore to heaven, the way, the truth, and the light, our atonement unto God,
our Sheppard, Master, Lord and King.

To be short, he is all in all to us, that ^re nothing. This our Christ has
brogated the Law, and has redee^ed those that were under the Law, nd he him
self is the end of the Law: and that which the Law could ^ot do, he has
accomplyshed.

And therefore, O Devil, let Gods people go, for the Law cannot hold them.
And therefore, O Death, yield ^p thy power: thy sting and strength ^s nothing,
the Law being fulfilled, and sin removed.

The seed of the woman has bru^ed the Serpents head. Christ has ^edde
Captivity captive, and given gifts to men. He has reconcyled and made as
one, all things both in heaven and earth, he has plucked down the partition
wall, in abrogating through his flesh the hatred that remained. There is neither
Jew, nor Gentile, bound nor free, Scithian nor Barbarian, for all are one in
Christ. He has made the Wolf to dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard to lie
with the Kid: he has made the Calfe, the fat Beasts, the Lions so tame, that
a little child may lead them, the Cow and the Bear with their young ones, not
only feed bu^ lie together, the sucking Child does play upon the hole of
the Aspe: yea* even the weaned child most safely puts his hand into the cave of
the Cockatrice: Christ has now dissolved the works of the Devil, and broken
his snares a sunder, that all believing sinners should be made righteous by
him, waiting for eternal life. He has opened the eyes of the blind, and
brough^ the prisoners from their dungion, and them that sat in darkness, has
he placed in light. To conclude, By his death and passion, he destroyed sin,
and so was death in the same victory maimed. For sin is the sting of death.
And when death had lost his sting, and was conquered in Christ's resurrection
from death; Satan also lost his strength and power, which rested only on them
which through sin were in danger of death: For the wages of sin is death.
Finally, because hell only deuoureth them that through sin and death are
slaves to Satan: It follows that the other three, were by him so mightily
vanquished, that hell also with all the danger thereof was subdued, and we
delivered from al their tirrany, according to the saying of Zachary, He has
performed the oath which he swear, to deliver us from our enemies, that we might
serve him without fear. Now then, all we which believe, are freed from the
slavery of sin, kingdom of the devil, gulf of hell, and chains of death.
So that henceforth death is no death to Gods children through Christ, but
great advantage: and appointed for a passage to a better life. And therefore
though wicked reprobates tremble at the name of death, (to whom they are in
thraldom) yet Gods children (being conquerours through Christ) may well
triumph: for now through him, we have an entrance made to heaven, and death is
the very door to life, a passage out of this world to the Father, from the
prison of this body to go to Christ. It is a returning to our heavenly
country: from which we were exiled. And this is the cause why the godly sigh
and sorrow, to be loosed, and to be with Christ, being subject to sin. And
here let us note, that whereas death is a dissolution of the soul from the
body: that therefore the body is nothing else but a prison, in which our souls
are bound. And he that desires to live, is like a mad Prisoner, that is
delighted in his gives, that may be free from his fetters, and cares not: that
may go out of the Iayle and will not. Wherefore we must consider of Death, not
as it seems in it self, but as it is Christ, naturally we covet to be, and
consequently we shun Death, which depriues us of our being. Death is horrible
to the best, for a while, because it is repugnant to their nature: but on the
other side, we see how we are held as in a prison, so long as this body of
sin compasses us about. Therefore we ought to long for the everlasting life
which is promised us after death (for when we draw toward death, then come
we nigh unto it, and Death is the very gate of life) assuring our selves, that
for as much as Jesus Christ has passed the same way, we need not be afraid
that Death shall overcome us, for it is through him, a reba^ed and blunted
sword, whose point is broken, whose edge is taken off, so that it cannot hurt
us: and although it draw some blood of us: yet notwithstanding the same shall
be but to purge us, and rid us of all our diseases.

Since therefore we have learned what Death is in it self, and what in
Christ, and know the worste: since Death is advantage to the faithful, and
the very high way to heaven: let us learn how to prepare our selves there to,
which is the last thing which I promised to perform.

First therefore in this our preparation, let us arm our selves against these
temptations, with which both devil, world, and flesh, will mightily assail
us. What man (says the devil) will thou dye? why then, behold the company of
thy sins, the wrath of God, the grave, and hell are ready to devour thee:
the Law is thy Judge which does condemn thee. To these temptations of the
devil we must oppose Christ's righteousness, satisfactions, and merits, in
which God holds himself fullye appeased. The world it sets abroche his
baits. What, will thou die (O man) why see thy goodly buildings, thy bags of
gold, thy lands and livings, thy rents and revenues, thy pastime and thy
pleasures, thy Jewels, and thy treasures, thy delights, and all that thy heart
desires. In deed, O world, this felicity is good: but yet no otherwise then
it stands with the favor of God, it is to be kept; but yet so far forth,
as by the keeping of it we loose not God: and yet we see the vanity of thy
pleasures, the frailty of thy glory, and the fickleness of thy goods, are
therefore nothing in respect of the joys of heaven, and happy life, which
after death I am sure to have. Wherefore I desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ: in whom, are hidden all the treasures of God, who is the keeper of
our life. For, this our life which now we lead, is no life in deed (but a
death) for we are dead, and our life is hid with God in Christ, we walk by
faith, and not by sight: yea, so long as we are at home in this our body, we
wander and go astray from God our Lord.

And O thou world (which allurest me so to love this life) What is thy wages?
If I should serve thee, I am sure to be a foe to Christ, who loves thee not,
who prays not for thee, whose kingdom is not of thee: and therefore to love
thee, is to hate my God: which to do, is worse then death. Thy reward I know
is nothing but nakedness: for naked I came unto thee, and naked I shall go
from thee. And therefore I am willing to forsake thee, and desire to be losed,
and to be with Christ; who will cover my nakedness with the robes of his
righteousness: lastly comes the flesh with trembling and quaking.

And will thou die (O man?) why, see thy friends and thy family, thy wife and
thy children, thy father, and thy mother weep and wayle, cry and call unto
thee, and will thou depart thus? will thou needs go from them? But O thou
flesh, fight not thus against my soul; it is good in deed to tarry still
amongst our friends, yet so that we abide not there in Gods displeasure, and
hereafter to dwell in hell with the devils, in fire everlasting. There is
nothing under God, but it may be kept, so that God (being above all things
which we have) be not lost. He that loves, father or mother, wife or children,
etc. better then Christ, is not worthy of his presence. And therefore though
they lament the loss of my life, yet can they not redeem it: for what man is
he that lives, and shall not see death. And shall hedeliuer his soul from
hell; No, no, neither riches, nor strength, neither power, nor policy, can
prevail in this point: for whether we sleep, or whether we wake, we draw
toward death. God has set us our bounds, which we cannot pass: and as the
green leaves in a thick tree, some fall, and some grow: so is the generation
of flesh and blood, one comes to his end, and another is borne: we came
not altogether, neither must we return altogether.

Therefore (O flesh) be content. O my friends be quiet, for needs we must
depart: yet to meet again we are sure. And in going from you (my fleshly
friends) I go to the Saints of heaven, to the mount Sion, and to the city
of the living God, the celestial Jerusalem, to the company of innumerable
Angels, to the assemblye and congregation of the first borne, and to God the
Judge of all, and to the spirits of just and perfect men: I know that so long
as I am in this flesh, I cannot please God: and therefore I desire to be losed,
and to be with Christ. We have here no continuing city, we look for one of
God. And I know, if this my earthly house of this tabernacle, be once
destroyed: I shall have a building given me of God, a house not made with
hands, but eternal with God in heaven. Mark, our bodies be earthly houses:
Dust thou art, and into dust thou shall return again. They are as Innes,
wherein we soiourne for a season: they are as tabernacles set up for a time,
and quicklye to be removed: (being without foundation) our bodies are like an
old ruinous cottage, still in danger to fall. David counted himself a
stranger upon the earth, and a soiournour, as all his fathers were.

Hereof Abraham obeyed God, to go whither he would: he abode in the land of
Promise, as in a strange countric, as one that dwelte in Tents. For he looked
for a city having a foundation, whose builder and maker is God. Job called
this our body a house of claye: therefore the godly groan in this tabernacle
(being loded with corruption) that this mortality may be swallowed up of
life: flesh, and blood cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Gods children
therefore are grieved (not because they bear about their bodies, (for it is a
grief to them to lay them down) no, they sigh for this, to be cleansed from
their sins. Wretched man that I am (says Paul) who shall deliver me from
this body of sin. And therefore we ought not to long for this present life,
which indeed is but an Image of Death: but rather loathe it, that we may be
vnloden of our sins.

This preparation to dye, perteyneth unto all: for neither rich, nor poor:
old, nor young: Prince, nor people: Death lets escape. It respects no
person, no sex, no age, no condition, no estate whatsoever, no power, no
riches, no learning, no policy, can resist it. There is no remedy for this
sickness, no physic to be found against it. It is the way of all the world:
it is an Axe that heweth down, not only the low shrubs and Osiers, but also
the great Elmes and Oaks: yea, all the high and tall trees of Lebanon. The
days of man are but as Grass, and as a flower of the field: in the morning
it is green, and flourishes: but in the evening it is cut down, dried up,
and withered. We bring our years to an end, as a tale that is told. Our life
is like a stage, on which men play their parts, and pass away.

Man is like a thing of naught, his days are like a shadow. God bids Esaias
to cry, that all flesh is grass, and all the grace and goodlinesse thereof,
is but as a flower of the field. O that the Lord would open the eyes of all,
to see themselves in this bright Glass. What? are we all but grass? and shall
we wither as Hay? alas we cannot so persuade our selves: for if we could, it
would pluck down our pride, and set our lofty looks aside. It would then
shorten soon our ruffes so long, and make our monstrous attire more modest. It
would mittigate our madness, and make us humble minded: we would then throw
down our selves with Abraham, and say to God, We are but dust, and ashes: this
is a common case, that all flesh is dust. Now for avoiding extreme sorrow,
(which at the hour of death will mightily assail us) Let us against that
time be even with the world, at agreement with our brethren, and especially
with our own conscience, which then most straightly will accuse us. The
consience is like a Crystal Glass, wherein (if we will) we may lively
view our selves. It will show every thing that is amiss in soul and body.

Let us therefore take our spundg in hand, to cleanse our spots: to wit, true
faith in Christ, and good fruits that follow it, that so being at one with
the world, in charity with our brethren, and clean in our conscience
through Christ: we may be ready to go the way of all the world. And that
this our journey may be more easy, and this rough way (as it seems to the
flesh) more plain: let us arm our selves with these contemplations which
shall follow; let us say unto our soul: Why art thou so sad, and why art
thou so disquieted within me. Put thy trust in God, which is the help of my
countenance, and my God.

Why should a Christian man so fear the force of Death, whose sting is quite
destroyed? Can Death deprive him of Christ, which is all his comfort, joy,
and life? No, but Death shall deliver him from this mortal body full of sin
and wickedness, which beats down the spirit. Feign would this flesh make
strange of that which the spirit does embrace.

O (says a godly martyr) how loathe is this loytering sluggard to pass forth,
and go forward in Gods pathe to heaven. So that were it not through the force
of faith, plucking it forward: and the bridle of Gods most sweet promises, and
of hope pricking on behind, great adventure there were of fainting by the way.
Who would be sorry to forsake this life, which cannot but be most certain of
eternal lyse? Who loves the shadow better then the body? Who can love this
life, but they that regard not the life to come? Who can desire the dross of
this world, but such as be ignorant of the treasures of everlasting joy in
heaven? I mean, who is afraid to die, but such as hope not to live eternally.

A greater token (next faith in Christ) there is not of our election, then not
to stand in fear of Death, which like a Tailor puts off our rags, and
arayeth us with the royal robes of immortallitie, incorruption, and glory.
Shall the brute beasts, and senseless creatures (being subject to vanity)
groan in their kind for the redemption of the sons of God (at what time they
shall be freed from their slavery, and shall we, which are endued with reason
(yea and above reason enlightened) with Gods holy spirit (especially, when it
stands upon a joyful being, and everlasting dwelling with God in heaven)
shall we not, I say, lift up our minds beyond this rottenness of earth.

And therefore, that these things may pearce the deeper: let us brieflye
consider (for a conclusion of all) what this life is that we so love: what
death is that we so fear: and what is prepared for us after death, which
we so little regard. Which three considerations (for the most part) I have
rather partly collected out of others, then added of mine own: for that they
are so ready at hand, and fit for my purpose: yea and so exquisite in
themselves, as that my pains should be but superfluous to trouble my self
with studying any further for this conclusion.

First therefore, concerning this life, you know it is full of misery, vanity,
vexation and vvoe. It is a plain exile from God: for if heaven be our
country, what is this earth, but a place of banishment?

If the departing out of this world, be an entering into life: what is this
world, but a grave wherein we are buried? what is it else but to be drowned
in Death? If to be delivered out of this body, is to be set at perfect
liberty: what is this body else, but a prison, a Iayle, and a dungeon? If to
enjoy the sweet presence of God, be the highest felicity: why then, to be
kept from it, is it not the extremest misery? And certainlye till we be
escaped out of this life, we wander abroad from the Lord.

If we consider, that this unsteadfast, faulty, corruptible, frail,
wythering, and rotten Tabernacle of ourbodie, is therefore dissoluted by Death,
that it afterward may be restored again, into a steadfast, perfect,
incorruptible, and heavenly glory: shall not faith compel us feruentlye to
desire that which nature fears? If we consider that by Death we are called
out of banishment, to inhabit our Country: yea, our heavenly country: shall
we obtain no comfort thereby?

Alas, this our vvretched life, is a vapoure, a smoke, a shadow, a
warre-fare, a Wilderness, a veil of vvretchednesse: wherewith we are
compassed about on every side, with most fyerce and fearful enemies.

And should we desire to dwell here? should we lust to live in this
lothesome and laborious life? should we vvishe to tarry in this
vvretchednesse? should we have pleasure to remain in this perilous estate?
Daniels Den is not so dreadful, as is this dungeon we dwell in.

Secondly, concerning death (as you have partly heard) what is it now else,
then a Waspe without a sting, a sword without an edge, a dagger without a
point? What is it else now to all Gods children, then the dispatcher of all
displeasures: the end of all our travels, the door of heaven, the gate of
gladness, the port of Paradise, the haven of health, the rail of rest, the
entrance of felicity, the end of all miseryes, and the beginning of all
blessedness. It is the very bed of Down (faieth a godly Father) and therefore
well compared to a sleep for the doleful bodies of Gods people to rest in:
out of the which they shall arise and awake most fresh and lusty, to life
everlasting. It is a passage to the father, a chariot to heaven, the Lords
messenger, a leader unto Christ, a going to our home, a deliverance from
bondage and prison, a demission from war, a security from all sorrows, and
a manumission from all miseries: So that the very Heathen in some places, did
cause the day of their death to be celebrated with mirth, melody, and
minstrelsie. And shall we, which are Christians, be dismaide at it: should we
be afraid of it? Should such a friend as it is be vnwelcomed? should the
foulness of his face fear us from his good conditions? should the hardness
of his husk hinder us from his sweet curnell? should the roughness of the
tide, tie us to the bank and shore? there to be drowned, rather then the
desire of our home drive us to go aboard? should the hardness of the saddle,
set us on our feet to perrishe by the way, rather then to leap up, and
endure the same a little, and so be where we would be.

Lastly, touching the life prepared for us after death: if I should go about
to express it, the more I should so do, the further I should be from it. For
the eye has never seen, nor the ear heard, nor the heart of man can ever
conceive, the joy, mirthe, melodye, pleasure, power, wealth, riches, honor,
beauty, fellowship, dainties, odours, glory, wisdom, knowledge, treasures,
security, peace, quietness, and eternal felicity, which the faithful shall
have, and enjoy, world without end: with God the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost, with Angels and Arche-angels, Patriarchs, and Prophets, with
Apostels and Evangelists, the martyrs, and confessors, and with all the Saints
of God in the Palace of the Lord, in heaven the kingdom of God, the glory
of the Father.

O woe to the blyndnesse of our eyes, that we see not this: woe to the
hardness of our hearts, that feel not this: woe to the deafness of our
ears, that hear not this in such wise as we should do: where through we
might be so far from fearing Death, that rather we should wish it, crying
with Simeon: Now let thy seruante depart in peace. And with David: When shall
I come and appear before thee? Woe is me, that my babitation is thus prolonged.

But alas, great is our unbelief, full fainte and weak is our faith: or else
night and day, tears and cryings should be our Bread and Drink, whilst
it is said unto us: Where is your God? We should rather wish to be door
keepers in the house of the Lord, then to dwell in these ungodly tents: for
one day in his court, is better then a thousand.

It is a token of little love to God, to be so loathe to go unto him when he
calls. Herein we ought to lament the weakness of our faith: and seeing
our need, to prepare for remedy against the time of need, and to beg of
God his aid, strength, and comfotre, against the pinche: which undoubtedly,
(If we ask with faith) we shall obtain, and find his promise true.

Thus to knitte up all, (least I should seem to tire you) my promise (I trust)
in some sort is performed, touching this short discourse: wherein I have
rather tied my self to the matter, then my method. I always prefer the
substance before the shadow: and thus I commend you to the Lord, beseeching
him for Christ's sake, to keep us, souls and bodies to his kingdom and
glory: and to lead us, order us, and dispose us, as he will in all things,
in all places, and for ever: that at the length we may come whither we would:
that is, into his own blessed presence and fruition of immortallitye, with
Christ and his Saints, world without end.

AMEN.

