A MIRROVR FOR CHRISTIAN STATES: OR, A Table of Politic Virtues considerable
amongst Christians.

Divided, into Three Books.

Reviewed, and augmented, by E. MOLINIER, of Tolose Priest, and Doctor of
Divinity.

And by him Dedicated, to the most Illustrious Lord, the Lord Cardinal of
Valette, Archbishop of Tolose.

Translated into English, by WILLIAM TYRVVHIT, Sen. Esquire.

PSALM. 2. Be Taught, ye, who Judge the Earth.

LONDON, Printed by THOM. HARPER. 1635.

Iulij 20. 1634.
Perlegi hunc Librum cui Titulus (A Mirror for Christian States) una cum
Epistola Dedicatoria and ad Lectorem, qui continet in toto folia 63. aut
crciter in quibus nihil reperio sana Doctrinae aut bonis moribus contrarium,
quo minus cum publica utilitato imprimi quaant, it a tamen ut si non intra
annum proxime sequeniem typis mandentur haec Licentia sit omnino irrita.

GVLIELMYS HAYVVOOD. Capel. Domest. Archiep. Cant.

TO THE RIGHT Illustrious Prince, JAMES STEVVART: Duke of Lenox, Earl of
March, Lord Darnley, Aubigney, Torbolton, and Methuen, Baron of Leighton,
Bromswoulde, Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privie-Councell.
My Lord,
IN the wisest Counsel of the happiest Kingdom you sit Eminent, and
judicious; that, by the advantage of your Princely extraction, this by the
Industry of your own endeavors. Hereby, your Grace has confuted time; proving
Experience is not always wrinckled, nor Wisdom gray-hayr'd. This Greatness
of Your blood, has placed you near to the most glorious Monarch, and the
splendour of Your Virtue adds yet a higher Title. Among these universal
Acclamations, it were a Crime black as Malice, should I be silent, who to the
Memory of the great and Good Duke of Richmond Your Graces Uncle, owe a
Religious Tribute. You are His heir, and I by the Law of Gratitude Your
Vassal. Receive (then) with a gracious Eye this first tender of a Service,
than which none more humble, none more sincere. And by the Indulgency of Your
Favor, give life to this Translation, which by Your Acceptance, shall triumph
over Envy. Though herein I may seem presumptuous, yet shall I not (I hope)
prove unserviceable, esteeming no man's happiness above mine, being admitted
the Honor of Subscribing my self,

Your Graces most humble, and most Devoted Servant: WILLIAM TYRVVHIT.

To the Reader.
HAving ever esteemed, that the employment of those Talents, either naturally
bestowed on man by God, or acquired by study and industry, ought more properly
yea and of duty rather to be employed in the service of our King and Country,
than to be made use of in the satisfaction of our private humors. I do here
(in acquittance of that general obligation) adventure to offer up this poor
mite of my endeavors, among the many learned and elaborate works which the
choice wits and learned pens of our age produce in all kinds. It is but a
translation: the original belonging to a very learned and reverend French
Author, whose fluent style, and profound learning so happily appearing in his
own language, made me not a little timorous to undertake to make him speak
English, being justly apprehensive as well of doing him wrong, as disgracing my
self: but the zealous desire I had to be serviceable to all such studious and
worthy persons, who happily not understanding the French language, are yet
desirous to enable and adorn themselves with those virtues and qualities
requisite for such who by an honest and noble ambition do any way aim to be
rightly useful for the service of our Sovereign in the most eminent offices
and charges of this great Empire, did so far overruled me, as I rather choose
to undergo that hazard, than to bereave them of so great a benefit by my
overmuch bashfulnesse. Now though the practice of those things contained in
this Treatise, belong properly to such choice persons whose virtues, excellent
endowments, or advantage of birth, together with our Sovereigns favors make
capable for the conduct of weighty affairs, yet does the speculative part
thereof indifferently appertain to all generous spirits. I shall not need any
further to commend the Author, his work will sufficiently speak for him. The
only favor I am to require is for the Translator, who if he have not
sufficiently acquitted himself, or have come short of those lively expressions
appearing in the original: consider (gentle Reader) that few Painters have
ever been able to equalize the purtraits drawn by Apelles in any there most
exact copies. It would therefore prove an unexcusable arrogance in me, should I
have the least imagination of entering into comparison with so excellent a
French Pen, by any English of mine: if you please therefore to excuse my
defects, and accept of my good desires you shall therein much encourage me to
undertake the like labors in whatsoever I shall suppose may conduce to
public utility.

Vale.
TO THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS, AND RIGHT REVEREND FATHER, MY LORD; THE CARDINAL OF
VALETTE, ARCHBISHOP OF TOLOSE.
My LORD,
BEhold a young Eagle, which his Father presents before the rays of the rising
Sun, to try if his vigor be suitable to his Courage. He is Eagle-like in
daring to soar so high, and in that the Luster of your new Purple, causing you
to shine as a rising Star in the French Church darting upon him does not
dazzle him. But should he Encounter the awefull Eye of your censure, presuming
to implore the gracious aspect of your benignity. I already see his
misfortune, and must confess, that Rashness has ruined the Child, and
blind Affection the Father. But supposing this disaster, yet may the first
notwithstanding frame his excuse out of his small Experience, the second upon
Nature: the one and the other upon their Zeal and Devotion to your name. But
they expect a more favorable Event. Hoping the Orient of your Glory will prove
no less gracious, than that of the Sun, never showing it self hot, or
scortching upon his first appearance, but rather mild and favorable, strowing
the earth with Pearls and Roses. Their hope and confidence is not a little
increased, in that TOLOSE (Mother to the Author) acknowledging your Grace as
her lawful Pastor, this Work (in that respect) seems not so properly to be
presented, as paid unto you. Since the Law says, the tree belongs to the
field, and that the fruies thereof depend not only on the tree, but on the
soil also. The Field therefore being yours, the Tree and Fruits are likewise
yours. But if the fruit be not well relished, or distastefull, the Tree
committed to your care, receiving (as the Apostle says) Its watering from your
hands, and its increase from God, may happily more prosperously (hereafter)
fructify to his Glory, and your service. If you daigne to accept it from him
who desires ever to be esteem

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble and most obedient Servant E. MOLINIER.

TO THE READER.
YOu may perhaps wonder (gentle Reader) to see me add this little abortive to
the importunate spawne of so many Books, which (as the Soldiers of Cadmus)
rise up, and iussle each other, appearing and perishing in a moment. And truly
J must confess, that this conceit had almost persuaded me to commit Paricide,
and (as the Lamias) to smother mine own Creature in his Cradle. For it being
perhaps like those untimely Productions, which according to Physical tenets
are not vital: it had been more advantageous for him to have received death
with Patience, than to have expected it with Apprehension: specially since
parents have absolute power of life and death over the babes of their brain,
and that in this case only, a voluntary death may with honor prevent, an
ignominious end. But fatherly affection taking advice in favor of his
children, has suppressed this first motion, persuading me it tasted more both
of Humanity and conveniencie to abandon it, than to kill it. Now whether Reason
has rightly advised me, or Self-love deceived me, I blame not my Friend. If
any fault be committed, I desire not they should bear the blame, I will
therefore expose it to thy Judgment, and lay it open to thy mercy: It may
happen upon the like good Fortune as those forlorn children do, whose hazard
often proves more advantageous to them than their Parents providence; their
Fates relieving the infelicitie of their birth: but howsoever it shall please
God to dispose thereof, I dedicate it to his Honor, and thy service, and the
design it has to become useful to those who please to entertain it, will
(as I hope) cause it to deserve from them, if not praise, yet at least favor
and pardon. The subject is not new, as touching the matter, but only in the
invention, order, style, and way of handling the same. Now to the end to
deliver thee a just account of my design, and that you may know what you are
to expect from me in this work, and how I proceed; I am to let you understand
that here I speak of the Political Art, as Cicero did of the Oratorial, in
his Book, De Oratore, where he rather treats of the Eloquent, than of
Eloquence; of the Orator than of this Art: so my object in this discourse does
not properly touch upon the Art of Policy, but on the Politic person; not on
the matter, but the man, not on the Forms, Laws, or Maxims of States, but on
the virtues and qualities proper for him who governes by his Council, or by
administering Justice, under the Authority of asoveraigne. Now since God is the
final end of man, and consequently whatsoever concerns man, the soul and
body, the spiritual and temporal, ought equally to aim at God: and for the
taking a true sight, to receive the rule and conduct thereof from his divine
Law, I therefore consider Politic Virtues, with the Order, habitude, and
reference they ought to have to this final end. Since humane Society, whether
Ecclesiastical, or Civil, ought only to tend to the happy society of
Saints, and that in vain the Ecclesiastical part endeavoreth to draw them
thereto, if the Civil divere them.

The Name. Arist. Non est amicitia inter Deum and homines.
The same Subject gives it the Name of Christian Politics; for the Pagan
Philosophers who have treated upon this Subject, having not acknowledged God as
the final End of man, but holding there could not be any amity or
correspondency between two so infinitely distand: they have therefore not
referred, either civil society, or the direction thereof to this end. So that
Christians, who knowing and adoring the true God, and apprehending by
Revelation his great love toward us, and how he being our Center and
Beatitude, we ought to refer all to him: cannot in this case find in the
Books of the ancient Sages, any exact, or perfect rule herein, but are to
deduce their principles from a higher spring, and to level their mark at the
true object, if they desire to draw a true and direct line. Besides (as the
Apostle says) JESUS CHRIST is the only Corner stone, that ought to be placed:
which is to be understood, not only of what concerns Faith, but of
whatsoever belongs to manners, life, administration of Offices, and conduct
of affairs.

The order and division of this Discourse follows the nature and quality of
the subject; and as the Politic life consists not but in Action; and since
in every Action three things are necessary, that is to say, What we are to do,
our Will, and Power to effect the same: so do I divide all my Work into three
parts. The first, whereof treats of the qualities causing the ability, to
know what is requisite or profitable for public good. The second speaks of
such parts as are fitting for the perfectionating the honesty, and integrity
to will, and desire the good he knows. The last discourse to of such
sufficiencies as add vigor toward the production thereof. The Wisdom, Love,
and Power of God go verneth all things on Earth. The light, heat, and force of
the Sun inspire soul and life into all this Elementary World. Wisdom,
Goodness, and Power, are the three motions in Policy. These are the three
darts of Jupiters Thunder, the three tines of Neptunes Trident, the three
Lillies, adorning the Arms of our King. Funiculus triplex diff^^^ (...) pu^^
The Style.
It is the triple cord whereof the wiseman speaks, very hardly to be broken.

As for my style or way of writing, I have desired to follow the judgment of
that Roman, who says, The most efficacious way of speaking or writing is to
join Eloquence to Wisdom, persuasive words, to firm and solyde reasons. And
in this sort have all the Ancients proceeded, not Ethnicks only, but the first
Fathers, likewise of the Greek and Latin Church. The merely Scholasticall
strain is good, and profitable in other subjects: but in this it would appear
over punctual and smallie civil: and the Orator only adorned with a pomp of
ill placed words, tends rather to ostentation than instruction. But when both
these, the one having quitted her strictness, and roughness; the other her
colors and curiosity, do unitedly join (in the same Oration) the one by
contributing sinews, the other ornaments; the one force, the other lively
Graces; the one what profits, the other what pleases; they jointly yield
what severally they are unable to afford: Flowers and Fruit Pleasure and
Profit. But though I be far from attayning this point; yet have I (at least)
endeavored to approach: It being sufficient glory for me to have known and
followed the better form. Those who only affect rhapsodies of resemblances,
adaptations, similitudes, and heaped Authorities, who frame not a body, but a
monster of discourse, shall not perad venture find here wherewith to satisfy
their conceptions. For I will at first confess I have not employed my time in
searching common places, nor in turning over the tables of Books, to swell my
volumes with the spoils of others. The precise and necessary authorities for
the proof of what I speak see me to me sufficient, leaving superfluities to
those who are at better leisure to transcribe whole Authors, and to cause the
world daily to see the Metempsychosis or transmigration not of Souls from one
body to another, but of books from one paper to another. Or to imitate that
Roman Emperor, who appropriated to himself the pourtraicts of the gods, by
only taking away the head and title, substituting his own in their stead.
Besides, I will not defend this Book from the Tongues of Zoiles, and
detractors, (as ordinarilymen do) since it were a vanity couched under pretext
of Fear, to suppose so small a Work as this, were worthy to be assaulted, and
a mere fancy to forge Enemies: and as in Theaters to arm them with intention
to assail them. It were too presumptuous an attemp, and no less than to
usurp not upon the persons only, but even upon the spirits of a more violent
Empire than that of Tyrants, should I seek to force the liberty of judgments
with purpose to subject and captivate them to private opinions. Let therefore
(who please approve of what I write, or reject it who list. Let every man
remain free in his own conceit, permitting me to rest at liberty in my good
and honest intention, inciting me to contribute my poor endeavors to Gods
glory, and public utilitie.

Farewell.
THE TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
The First Book. Of Virtues forming a Politic Sufficiency.
THe Preface, and Division, of the whole Subject, into the Members, and Parts.
Chap. 1. Of Politic Wisdom. Chap. 2. That Politic Wisdom is rare, and what
parts are requisite for the forming thereof. Chap. 3. That true Politic
Wisdom is to be derived from Heaven, and God, against Machiavellists. Chap.
4. Reasons to prove the same. Chap. 5. Sequence of the same Discourse. Chap. 6.
Of the means to conserve and augment this true wisdom in the Soul. Chap. 7.
Of other Virtues forming Politic Wisdom, and principally of Prudence. Chap.
8. Of the necessity, excellency, and offices of Politic Wisdom. Chap. 9.
That politic Prudence is rare, and how it is acquired. Chap. 10. That true
Politic Prudence is to be derived from God against Machiavellists. Chap. 11.
How the Law of God is useful for the acquiring of true Politic Prudence.
Chap. 12.
The Second Book. Of those Virtues which form honesty, and Integrity for the
Right employment of sufficiency.
OF Politic Justice in general. Chap. 1. That an unjust action cannot be
profitable to to States, against Machiavellists. Chap. 2. That Injustice, even
against strangers, cannot be profitable to States, against Machiavalists. Chap.
3. A digression from this discourse of Justice; upon the title of Just;
wherewith our King raises his Name, and Reign: and of the Illustrious art of
Justice, Valor, and Piety, he lately performed in Bearn. Chap. 4. A division of
Politic Justice into three parts, and members: What the Politician owes to
God, what to himself, and what to the public. Chap. 5 Of Religion and Piety,
the first duty of politic Justice reflecting on God. Chap. 6. Of the
particular duties, and fruits of the Religion and Piety of a Politician. Chap.
7. Of the uprightness of the intention in Councels, and actions, being the
other duty of Politic Justice, reflecting upon God. Chap. 8. Of the care of a
good same, being the first duty of Politic Justice toward our selves. Chap. 9.
Of the Obligation to conserve a good same, for public profit. Chap. 10. Of
means to acquire and conserve this good same. Chap. 11. Of the government of
life and manners, which is the other head of Politic Justice toward our
selves, Chap. 12. Of good Example, being the first duty of Politic Justice
toward the Public. Chap. 13 Of Vigilancie, and Solicitude, second duty of
Politic Justice, in a Magistrate toward the public. Ch 14 Of Integrity, being
the third duty of Politic Justice, in a Magistrate toward the Public. Chap.
15. Of those Mischiefs which private respects and profit bring to the public.
Chap. 16. Of the love of public good, last duty of Politic Justice toward the
public. Chap. 17. The Epilogue of all this discourse of Justice, in form of
an Epiphonema. Chap. 18.
The Third Book. Of those Virtues and Qualities, which give vigor and
gracefulness in matter of Execution of Offices.
THe Proposition, and divisio^ of matters handled in this last Book. Chap. 1.
Of Authority, and how necessary it is to cause good, and just designs to
appear. Chap. 2. Whence this Authority comes. Chap. 3 Sequence of the same
Discourse. Chap. 4. Sequence of the same discourse, and how we should employ
the good parts wherewith one is endowed, to gain Authority. Chap. 5. Sequence
of the same Discourse: Chap. 6. Of good Fortune, and whence it comes. Chap. 7.
How good Fortune attends some: and the means rightly to manage it. Chap. 8. Of
Fortitude, and Magnamitie, being a necessary virtue, for the execution of
great designs. Chap. 9. Of the necessity of Fortitude in case of Execution.
Chap. 10. That effeminate, and faint hearted people, are not fit for any
eminent matter. Chap. 11. Certain parts requisite for the acquiring and
conserving this magnanimity of Courage. Chap. 12 Sequence of the same
Discourse. Chap. 13. Of Eloquence, which is as the Ornament of Politic
virtues, giving them both vigor and gracefulness to make them estimable.
Chap. 14. Of the efficacy of Eloquence. Chap. 15. How Eloquence appears most
in popular States, but how it may be very useful likewise in Monarchical
Governments. Chap. 16. Of the Counterfeit Eloquence of this Age. Chap. 17. Of
that Eloquence which is proper for a Politician. Chap. 18.
CHRISTIAN POLITICS.
The first Book. Of those virtues which make a Politic sufficiency.
CHAP. I. The Preface and division of all this work into three members or
parts.
IT is reported that an ancient Philosopher, discoursing in a public assembly
before Ha^ibal of the Art Military, and of the virtues requisite in a great
Commander, ravished the whole auditory with admiration; but from that famous
Captain he received only scorn: I ought in a like subject to expect the
like disgrace, should I enter these Lists, incited by the same motive of idle
ostentation. But my desire to be profitable and not to appear, being the
principal Engine giving motion to my Pen. I beseech all such who perhaps may
wonder at the unsuitablenesse of the title (which this Treatise seems to
bear, with the condition of the Author) not to reflect upon the Writer, but to
consider what he writes: since it were not reasonable, the Artificers name
should by way of prejudice bring disfavour or disgrace upon his work. Besides,
(the cause being more nearely examined) there will not appear any so great
disproportion between them, as is supposed. For not to allege that the
treating of Policy appertains to the Civil-Lawyer, is permitted to the
Philosopher, and is not inconvenient for the Divine, who contemplateth the
primary cause, as it is the rule and measure of all things, I will only in
general affirm, that the Theoricall and Universal consideration of Virtues,
whether Politic Oeconomicall or particular, to be both honest and profitable
to all men who have the faculty either to argue, or discourse: though the
practical part of the Politic appertains only to those, who besides
knowledge have authority, practice and experience. Policy affords not
offices, nor offices practice, not practice experience but to a few only. But
God has bestowed reason upon all, and study acquireth knowledge to diverse: and
what the former put in execution upon casual occurrents of particular
affairs, the latter contemplate in immutable principles, in primitive causes,
and universal verities. If therefore it be lawful not only for Pylots who
have stood at the Helm amidst the Winds and tempests to treat of Navigation;
but for Geographers likewise, who never saw Sea, but shadowed in Mappes, nor
Tempests but painted; If it be allowed those to speak of Music, who never
have either governed nor so much as sung in Quire or Consort: And if diverse
dispute with much approbation both of Physic, Geometry, Limming, and
Architecture, who never touched rule, to square a stone, pensil to suce a
color, compass to trace a line, or sick person to dyer, why should any find
it strange for those who live remote from public affairs, in rest and peace,
to employ their spare time in considering the qualities requisite for the right
ordering these several vocations: since of all arts and disciplines liberal
and mechanical, (though the Action belong but to a few) yet may the
Contemplation appertain to all.

But to enter upon the matter, and to use the grave saying of the Angelical
Doctor St. Thomas. As man never performed any thing of greater consequence,
than the erecting of Communal^ies, Republiques, and Empires; so could they not
execute any thing of more eminency, than rightly to govern the same. Now if
the establishment of Graces be the Masterpiece of humane industry, doubtless
the right and just government thereof may well be accounted the most exact
proof of humane wisdom. As Gods providence appearing in the particular
conduct even of least matters, shines yet most gloriously in the universal
administration of the Universe: so humane wisdom showing it self in the right
ordering of our private actions, is yet more perspicuous in the government of a
Family, but of greatest luster in the exact direction of the general body of
Civil society. For good is always by so much the more eminent, by how much
it is more capable to extend and diffuse it self. Corporal things do
sufficiently show us this ground; that the sight ablest to extend it self to
most objects, is the sharpest. That hand to be the strongest, which throws
the farthest. That taste to be the best tempered which can distinctly discover
the difference of most relishes. That fire to be most active, that is able not
only to consume wood and stone, but water also though its contrary, as it is
said of the fire of Thunder; And that light to be most lively and clear, which
does most communicate it self. Briefly, all corporeal things of greatest
extent in their action, are likewise of most vigor in their nature. The like
may be observed in spiritual matters: since that Understanding which pierces
the pith of most truths is most solid. That Memory strongest, which conserveth
most species. That Judgment of most capacity which is most universal. That
Wisdom greatest which apprehends most reasons. And that Prudence most
divine which can dexteriously manage greatest affairs. The virtue therefore
which employeth it self in the conduct of a private life only, is inferior
to that which reflects upon the Government of many: but that which undertaketh
public rule, ought to exceed all the rest, and to have so much the more
abilities as it ought, the farther to extend it is actions. But to handle this
subject with more order and perspicuity, before I proceed, I intend to frame
and lay for a Basis and foundation of all this discourse, a general division
of Political virtue divided into three members or parts, which as with three
several stages shall perfect this little fabric. Those three members are
three ranks or orders of qualities requisite to perfectionate Political
virtue. The first affords sufficiency and capacity; the second a good
disposition and honesty; the third vigor and gracefulness. Those of the first
rank, instruct the Understanding to know what is convenient for the public
good. Those of the second, dispose the will to desire, love, and search the
known good. Those of the last, add force and efficacy to be able to execute,
and produce to the Worlds eye, the good we know, will, and love. To know, to
will, and to effect good, are the three perfections of God the worlds moover
and governor; so as among men, who so has the greatest share in these three
perfections comes nearest God, and is most worthy, as most capable to afford
(by his counsels) motion to the authority which swayeth Empires. Wisdom,
Prudence, and the virtues thereon depending, making a man sufficient and
capable; thereby acquireth to him the first of these three perfections: Justice
and her assistant virtues, making him good and upright, affords him the
second: Authority, success, fortitude, courage and eloquence, arming and
adorning him both for persuading and executing good, adds the last. These
three sorts of qualities shall make up the three books of this Treatise. Let
us begin with those of the first rank, and first with Wisdom.

CHAP. 2. Of Politic Wisdom.
THe Ancients have long disputed whether or no a wise man ought to intermeddle
in public affairs. But I see not the ground of their doubt; for necessarily
either wise men must manage the same, or fools must misgovern all; either must
the eye conduct the body, or the feet misguide it: The Sun must lighten the
earth, or darkness over cloud it. What the Sun is to the world, and the eye
to the body, the like is the wise man in Civil Societies; having received from
God both more wisdom to govern, Wisdom and Reason move and govern all in this
world, in man the works of men, in assistance and in art: It is therefore a
great confusion and against nature when ignorance and rashness rule in
Policies.
and more dexterity to conduct than other men: since it appertains to
knowledge to direct, and to ignorance to follow prescripts. See we not in
Nature, how God being the primary reason, is likewise the principal Rule, Law,
and Resort of the motions in all things, which being in their order so well
disposed, in their course so regulated, in their tranquillity so constant, in
their relation and connection so admirable, cause even the blindest to see, and
the most insensible to perceive, that a sovereign wisdom guides them? See we
not how under this primary increated Understanding, (namely the First Mover)
the created Intelligencies move the Heavens, and are as Souls not united, but
assisting and directing, giving as it were, life to these great bodies, who
regulate their revolutions, who circle their courses, and cause the braull of
their contrary motions to fall into the concordancy of so just a cadence, as
Aristotle himself acknowledges such a harmony in so great a contrariety could
not possibly proceed from any rash or sudden encounter, but from the sage
conduct of some intellectual spirit. Perceive we not how (in man) Reason
either does or ought to conduct, both the will the appetite, the senses, the
members, the body, the passions, affections, habitudes, virtues, cogitations,
words, actions, resorts, motions, and all the economy of this worlds
abridgement? Is it not apparent that humane reason governes all this sublunary
world, guides all the inferior creatures, appeaseth the Lions fury, surmounts
the Elephants force, reaches the Eagle-high flight, danteth the Tigers rage,
bridleth the Horses toughness, stays the Bulls mad heat, applies to his
particular use the most indomitable beasts, and causes that to become as it
were reasonable by direction, which is otherwise unreasonable by nature and
extraction? Is it not evident, how in all the parts both of Art and Science,
Reason is the first mover; and how she disposes Words in Grammar, Clauses in
Rhetoric, Cadencies in Poetry, Arguments in Logic, Reasons in Natural,
Virtues in Moral, Laws in Civil, Measures in Geometry, Numbers in
Arithmetic, Tunes in Music, Drugs in Physic, Stones in Architecture, Colors
in Painting, and Materials in all sorts of Workmanships. A mavelous thing
that the wit of man communicates a kind of reason even to insensible things,
as wood, stones, iron, and the like, in bestowing on them so beautiful an
order in these works, which, as those of Dedalus, do insensible move, and do
live inanimate, and (though unresonable) do yet carry upon them the Workmans
understanding. If therefore Reason move, and govern all in Nature, Science, and
Art; should not Reason likewise in civil society direct all? And that the wise
who in this great body is as Reason and the Intelligent Soul by his wisdom,
should also be the moving Soul thereof by his counsels? Is it fitting Reason
being the leading card in petty matters, that folly should proceed in important
occasions? or that imprudency give the motion? or ambition preoccupate the
place wisdom ought to possess? or that rashness snatch away the steerage or
helm which Reason should guide? I have seen a great vanity under heaven,
(says the Spirit of God in the Scripture) fools raised upon the Tribunal, and
the wise sitting on the ground: it is like as to see the Saylor at the Poop,
and the Pilot at the Prow. But yet a slender talent of wisdom is not
sufficient for such as ought (by their counsels) to procure public peace, and
by their judgments to maintain justice among men, since it is necessary that
whatsoever communicates any goodness should possess the same in eminency. As
God does essence; the Primum mobile, motion; the Sun, light; Fire, heat,
Musk, good sent; Salt, quick savor; and the Fountain, water: whatsoever
seeks to diffuse, ought to be well filled and redound to it self to suffice
others; as Nature first rayseth plants and other creatures to their perfect
essence, before she form in them seeds for the communication of their essence
by propagation; so wisdom ought to have well ripened and perfected judgment,
before it be able to produce the seeds of sage counsels, whence springs the
good and tranquillity of States.

CHAP. III. That Politic Wisdom is rare, and what parts are requisite for the
framing thereof.
BUT Wisdom (as says Aristotle in his Ethics) being an excellent knowledge
of things, esspecially of most high and universal matters; as it ought to be
the Squire, the Rule, and Measure of the meanest and most particular affairs,
(such as those ordinarily happening in civil affairs) so is it requisite for
the raising it self to a higher pitch, it be adorned with a capable spirit, a
powerful judgment, a strong nature, a deeper study, and a very great
experience, qualities (which though separate) are not very ordinary, being
united, are admirable. Nature without study, is by so much the more dangerous,
by how much it is more violent; for as without husbandry the fatness of any
field serves only to bring forth the more brambles, which choke the good seed;
so without study, which cultivateth nature, the strength of spirit serves only
to produce the more violent passions, which darken reason, and hinder it from
seeing clear into affairs. It is true, experience and honesty may in some
sort rectify this fault, but never either sufficiently, nor perfectly repair
it: for still (without Science) experience remains blind, honesty feeble,
and both of them faulty. Honesty desires good, but knows it not, experience
knows it, yet only by the events which are but particulars, and daily
changeable, and not by immovable principles, universal, and applyable to all
occurrents, so as experience without science, walks still either fearfully or
rashly; but knowledge seeing all things in their sourses and infallible cause
perfecteth nature, guides honesty, lightneth experience, and causes it to
march confidently upon all occasions, to the end it be not timorous, and
understandingly, lest it be precipitate.

On the other side, study without a strong nature, is rather chargeable than
useful, as solid meats to a sickly stomach, oppressing it with his
ponderosity, instead of nourishing it by natural digestion; and in truth, wits
for the most part resemble several soyles, the strong bear good corn, weak
earth either choakes the grain, or change it into cockle. A good natural wit
and study matching together, open the passage to high employments. But before
exercise have put them into practice, they are as tools in the hand, or
reasons in the thoughts of a workman, who has Art, but no practice; so as
without experience these two qualities, though right commendable, are not yet
sufficient to frame what is termed wisdom, being an excellency in the
knowledge of things. One attayneth the Art of Fencing upon the Theater, Limming
upon the Picture, and (as Plato says) the Potters Art is finished upon his
earthen ware. A good natural wit disposes study, forms experience,
perfecteth man, and these three parts happily united, make up a right wiseman,
requisite for the conduct of weighty affairs. And as three things are fitting
for tillage, fertillity, of soil goodness of seed, and the husbandmans
industry, so (in point of our subject) these three pieces are necessary; a good
wit, a better instruction, and Art acquired by use. Wherefore it is, that in a
well ordered war, soldiers are never raised to the highest ranks, before
they have passed through the meanest offices, to the end that having learned
this exercise in inferior charges, they may come thoroughly instructed to more
important places: So likewise in well policed States, highest dignities are
never conferred, but upon such who have gained experience in meaner offices.
The ancient Romans mounted not at once to the Consulship, but by degrees, as by
the Oedility, the Tribunat, the Pontificat, these being the steps whereby they
ascended, and as schools of honor where those were framed for affairs, whom
they after intended to make capable for the government of so mighty a
Republique. The faults of Potters who work only on clay and sand, are not
greatly hurtful; but those of the Physicians, who exercise their Art upon the
bodies of men, are pernicious, and utterly irreparable. They learn to our
great dangers (says an ancient Author very elegantly) they make their
experience by our deaths, and their prentiship breaks no pots, but cost men's
lives. In petty places, faults are not heavy, but may easily be reformed. In
eminent offices, they are of farther consideration, and often without remedy.
There is no failing there the second time, the first error is irremediable;
wherefore the well ordered Policy ought to imitate Nature, which (in her
operations) works slowly, and step by step, causing the blade to come from
the grain, the tree from the graft, from the tree, the blossom, and from
blossoms, fruit; so ought Policy to raise great persons from one degree to
another, to the end that having made their assayes in meaner matters, they may
finish their masterpieces in more eminent affairs; as Goldsmiths who make
trial of their skill upon Tin, or Silver, before they work in gold or
precious stones.

CHAP. 4. That true Political wisdom is to be received from God and heaven,
against the Machievalists.
PLants though fastened in the earth by their roots, yet take they their
vigor and influences from heaven. Politic wisdom and the regulating of
civil affairs have relation to the earth: but they ought to take their
directions from heaven, and their grounds from the eternal decrees of Gods
wisdom For a good wit, humane knowledge, and experience, do but imperfectly
frame it, if divine (...) was do not finish it in the essence, and give it
perfection Humane affairs are its ^a^ies, but divine verities are to afford it
the so^m^; as precious stones receive their substance only from the earth, but
take their form and beauty from the Sun. This is right necessary for all,
but yet chiefly to be wished in some particular persons, who but over often
derive their maxims from earth, their wisdom from flesh, and their
propositions only from what falls under the senses, as though divine reasons
ought not to be the rule of humane, or as though the ear^h should not receive
its light from heaven, or as if God were not as well the God of States, as of
the Church, as if the soul only should acknowledge his law, and the body
follow concupiscence, or as though it were lawful (as the Prophet Elias
speaks) to halt on both sides, here on Gods side, there on Baals; or as if
counsel could be either just against original verity, profitable against
God, or permanent against his power. God reproves such counsels (where he
says) they have dreamed counsels which they are not able to establish. There
is no counsel against God, (says the spirit of God in holy Writ) God speaks
it, Nature proclaims it, Reason shows it, and if we be not blind, Examples
for the confirm^tion of this verity.
the experience of all states and ages verifieth the same. Pharaoh by a false
maxim would needs bandie against God: what got he? several plagues and the
total subversion of his Army. The Kings of Israel, often enterprised to
establish Idolatry: what fruit reapt they from their designs: ruin and
desolation. Aman (Counselor to King Assuerus) proposed to his Master (under
pretext of State) to extirpate the people of God: what was his end? the Halter
and Gallows. Antiochus endeavored by all means he could to abolish the
worship of the true God: what was his gain? worms, death, and despair. Herod
out of a vain fear, took a wicked way to support his state: what advanced
he? the glory of Jesus Christ, and his own confusion. The Jews out of a far
fetch: apprehension of the arrival of the Romans and of the loss of their own
state, crucified the Messiah: what befell hem? they sought the assurance of
their City, and advanced the destruction thereof. They laid on the Romans the
fault of their execrable fact, and God made use of the same men as instruments
of his justice against them. The Emperors by the advice of their Vipians,
their Sages, and Coesarean Lawyers, raised an infinite of persecutions against
the rising Church, under pretext of public good to the Empire: what have all
these deluges of blood done against this Arc? save only that which the deluge
of waters did against the Ark of Noah. The waters were multiplied (says
Genesis) and the Arc raised. What have all the counsels of so many worldly
Sages performed against Gods designs? they have fallen under his force, showed
their own weakness, and have advanced his puissance. Julian transported with
fury, renewing the war against Gods Church in a more bloody manner than ever,
forbidding Christian schools, favoring the Jews, re-edifying their Temples,
re-erecting Idols, honoring Art Magic and superstition, employing whatsoever
either worldly wisdom could not in vent, or divilish malice advance, he
imagined (it may be as did the Giants in fained stories) to drive God out of
the world, there to reign without rival: But a direful Catastrophe followed
his damnable counsels, a sudden, unthought of, and unknown shot did shut up his
days, haling his soul from his body, and drawing from his dying mouth this
public confession of the vanity of those designs he had plotted against
God: Thou have overcome O Galilaean! See, and survay all such who in the
administration of States and Empires, have either strayed from the law of God,
or banded themselves against the Almighty, to follow the foolish maxims of
Machiavel. If their counsels have not been (at all times) not only vain
against God, but pernicious to themselves, and whether they have not produced
great ruins, remarkable mischiefs, and lamentable conclusions: a fitting
harvest of seed so foul.

CHAP. 5. Reasons to prove the same.
GOD is Author of States, he will likewise be the director, his providence is
the Basis, his will is that his law should be the rule: he has laid the
foundation, and is jealous lest humane wisdom should (by foolish maxims)
bereave him of the conduct. Whence can their conservation come but from whence
their establishment proceeds? who can preserve our being but he who gave it?
God is the founder of States.
God has founded Empires established Kingdoms he has consecrated Kings,
conferred Majesty upon their persons, vigor on their laws, force to their
justice, terror to their Arms, (even to such a height) as their decrees
(though temporal) draw notwithstanding from the very authority the divine
laws allow them a spiritual effect. It tieth the conscience (says the
Apostle) and obliges it under eternal pain. Wherefore he ought to be the
director, and it is fitting his law should be the rule of their conduct: a
reason deduced at large, both by demonstration and authority
For though men by nature equal, yet so it is that being borne to live in
society, and this society not being able to subsist without peace, peace
without union, union without order, order without distinction, distinction
without dependencie, or dependencie without authority: the same nature
therefore which made men equal, has immediately commanded them to be subject
to one head, and to wave their natural equality for the avoiding of
confusion. Now it is a certain and a generally received maxim among the wise:
that all the uniueriall and general propensions in Nature, came from God. It
is an uniuersall inclination in humane Nature, to be subject to some one for
maintenance of order and society. Conduct presupposes the authority given to
that man who is constituted for the government of others, so as by necessary
consequence, temporal power is derived from God: since it proceeds by the
law of Nations, from the law of Nature. This natural demonstration is
confirmed by divine authority: There is no power which proceeds not from
God, says the Apostle to the Romans. God himself in the Creation framed not
many men at once who might the sooner haee stored the earth: he made but one
man only: yea, so as that he made not man and woman together of earth, but
first drew man from the earth, and extracted woman from man, to show (as St.
Chrysostom divinely notes) how his intention was to establish Domination,
Principality, and Monarchy among men, and to reduce them all under one
superior, causing them all to proceed from one only, to the end all might
depend upon him. He then has at all times instituted temporal Princes over
his chosen people; first Patriarchs, then Dukes, (after this) Judges, and in
conclusion Kings: his providence concluding in Monarchy as the most perfect
form of government; As Nature which proceeds by degrees in her works; first
makes Mercury out of the vapors of the earth, after, out of Mercury, Silver,
and out of silver, Gold; (the Crown and perfection of all Metals:) so IEVS
CHRIST coming after into the world, has (by his word) confirmed temporal
authority, commanding to give unto Caesar what is due to Caesar; and the
Apostle enjoyneth us under pain of eternal damnation to yield to our
temporal Sovereigns, obedience, tribute, respect, honor, and our prayers
tribute, because he defends our lives and goods from violence, Obedience, since
he deriveth his power from God; Respect, in that he is his Minister; Honor, by
reason he bears his Image; Prayers in reflection upon the great need he has
of Gods assistance in defending us. Divine, and Evangelicall law obliges us to
yield him all these duties. Obedience in regard of his authority, tribute to
defray his great charges, respect in regard of his Ministry, Honor for his
dignity, Prayers for his necessities.

If then, both Nature, Reason, and the Evanglicall law, show us so apparently,
how God has established all States, does both defend, maintain, and has so
particular care over them: Is it not reason all States should range themselves
to the rule of his law, to the end, that as his providence has erected them,
his truth may conserve them, his discipline raise them, and his justice cause
them to flourish? Is it not requisite that from whence they derive their
original, from thence likewise they should expect their continuance, and that
these heavenly plants, whose roots are extracted from Heaven, should thence
draw their influence to the end to receive life? Since the power of those who
govern States is derived from God, it is necessary that the wisdom which
directs this power should be deduced from the Law of God. Whence their
authority proceeds, thence should their Counsel come; to the end their
beginning and stablitie, may proceed from the same spring, and that as well in
Policy as Nature, production and preservation may flow from the same
Fountain. Ex cisdem nutrimur ex quibus sumu^.
It is a Philosophical Maxim in the Metaphysickes, that each thing draws
nutriment from whence it extracteth essence. Living creatures who have taken
their essence from the Elements, from thence receive their aliment. The tree
taking birth from the earth, does from thence likewise receive life. The fruit
owing his extraction to the tree, depends thereon for its maturity. The
mother suckleth the child she produces; the Sun affords perfection to the
gold it has formed: So as all States holding their being from God ought from
him to expect their growth. And since his providence has given the inspiration
to those who have established them, his truth must necessarily afford the
illumination, his illumination the law, and his law the rules to such as
govern them. O God (says David) give thy judgment to the King, and thy
justice to the Kings Son. Thou have imparted unto him part of thy power,
bestow likewise upon him some parcel of thy wisdom: his authority proceeds
from thy establishment, let his conduct come from thine illumination. Thy
justifications are my counsels (says the same King) I have taken my directions
from whence I had my power, to the end I may draw my conservation from whence I
had my being. So he acknowledged afterward; that the counsels he received from
Gods law, were the foundation of his greatness, and the ^^^sis of the obedience
which his people yield to his laws, confessing that it is not his industry,
not his prudence, not his forces, not his arms, not his treasures, not the
luster of his magnificence, nor all the pompous vassals of his Royal Majesty;
but it is God himself, whose providence conserveth in the hearts of his
Subjects, the respect they owe to his authority. Qui subdit populum meum sub me.
It is God who subjecteth my people under me. And truly who cannot but clearly
perceive that it is not a work of humane wisdom, but a masterpiece of the
Divine providence, that so infinite a multitude of men so different in humors,
opinions, affections, and interests, should unite, and assemble themselves to
become subject to one man, to obey his laws, follow his motions, depend on his
pleasure, commit to his justice, their means, their honors, and lives: That
so great a submission could be maintained amidst the natural pride of men,
such respect among so many froward and refractory humors, so excellent order
in the throng of so many contrary passions, so firm an unity in so manifest an
Antipathy:

If the order we observe in the words contexture has taught Philosophers (as
the Apostle says to the Romans) the guidance of a Sovereign wisdom, I
suppose the so admirable order discovered in States, and Commonwealths does
no less declare the same; And if the harmony resulting in Nature out of the
contrariety of Sphericall motions; from the quality of the Elements, and
Elementarie bodies, cannot otherwise proceed but from the direction of a
supreme wisdom; the peace and concord arising in the regulating of so great a
diversity of humors, affections, oppositions rancounters, events, and changes,
can no way proceed from any meaner conduct. All whatsoever, greatness, power,
laws, menaces, fear, recompenses, penalties, and what else the inventions of
humane wisdom (out of God) are able to exact, or draw from men by force, or
win of them by a sweet hand, is but constrained not voluntary; painted, not
pure; frail, not permanent; The Nature of Man is so noble and generous, as
there is none but God only who can truly subject the same. Make thy self
(says David) a Lawmakers over men to the end they may know they are men. It is
God alone who is able to humiliate the spirit of man, to abate his sternenesse,
tame his heart, and cause him to acknowledge his condition, and the respect he
owes those he has placed over others; who hold his place, represent his
person, and bear his Image. The true Wisdom (therefore) of such who by their
counsels give incitation to Princes, and by Princes to several States, is to
take their motion from God, their rule from his will, and their counsel from
his word, as (in truth) there is neither true counsel, nor true light, save
that only which (as the Apostle Saint JAMES says) flows from the Father of
light. All wisdom deriveth it self from God, says the Scripture.

Heaven is the Author of all, both corporal and spiritual light, the Sun is
the light of the one, God the fountain of the other. The Eye which takes not
its from God, Heaven, is in darkness, and the Understanding which receives
not his from god follows a falsitie. Vain are all men who order not
themselves according to the knowledge of God; says the spirit of God in
Scripture. The world may well term them Sages, God calls them vain. What
counsels can come from lies and vanity, either for the good or honor of
Empires? That which it self is not at all, how can it confer or conserve
essence? Can soliditie proceed from a non-subsistance? or firmitude, from no
foundation? Honor, from what truth condemns? or good from what God reproves?

CHAP. 6. The sequel of the same Subject.
REason can not so much as understand these propositions; and God said unto his
people by the mouth of Samuel, at what time he spoke unto them concerning the
establishment of their state: Trust not in vain things, 2. Reg. c. 12.
which will not at all avail you, nor can deliver you because they are vain.
All the true good of man, both particular and public, depends upon the sage
conduct of good counsels, good counsels on true wisdom, and this true wisdom
on God. Now since (according to Philosophical Maxims) one cannot deliver an
assured judgment of things, but in considering the reference, relation, and
connection they have with primary causes: God (therefore) who is this first
cause, ought to be the primary object, and principal rule of all our
judgments and counsels, if we desire to secure our judgments from error, and
our counsels from temeritie. So whatsoever men have at any time established of
good, or just in temporal laws, either imprinted in them by Nature, or
deduced by Reason, or known by inspiration, or manifested by revelation; if it
stray from this principle, it is unjust; and what is unjust is violent; and
what is violent cannot challenge the name of law Whereupon St. Augustine in his
book of True Religion, delivers this advice and instruction to Statesmen:
The man (says he) who counsels, proposes, or establishes temporal Laws,
if he be an honest man, and a just, he first takes council of the Eternal
Laws: whereof it is unlawful for any man to judge, all men being enjoined to
follow the same, to the end, that according to these immutable rules, he may
see what he ought (considering the dispositions and necessities of times)
either to command or prohibit. An advice drawn from the commandment God made
to the Kings and Judges of Israel, to have at all times his law before their
eyes, by reading, and in their hearts by meditation. As King David who said
unto God. Thy Word is as a Lamp to my feet, and as a light to my ways.

This is the solid ground of the most eminent commendations we can give to the
truly wise Politician, who over and above the natural capacity of spirit, and
of human wisdom acquired by study, and experience of affairs, adds divine
knowledge which he takes as the principal guide of all his motions, reasons,
maxims, counsels, decrees, and actions; he does not as the Lesbian builders,
whereof Aristotle speaks, who fitteth the Squire, or Ruler to the Stones; as
they do who seek to accommodate God to affairs, and Justice to times: but he
fitteth and fashions the stones to the Squire or Ruler, affairs to God, and
the times to Justice. He imitateth good Pilots, who holding the hand on the
helm, lift their eyes to heaven, to receive from the Pole the conduct of their
Ships: so whilst he manageth the steering of civil affairs, he has his eyes
fixed on eternal verities, and upon the divine law, whence he takes his
directions. And as the High Priest of the old law, drew the answers and Oracles
he delivered to the people, from a precious Stone he carried on his breast,
which in a mavelous manner represented unto him Gods pleasure by its color,
sometimes red, at another time black; one while pale, then white, then
changeable, according to occurrents: In like manner, the true wise man, takes
his counsels and resolutions from Gods Law, a precious Topace (as David terms
it) not hung at his breast, but fastened to his heart. O God I have hid thy
words in my heart, says he with David. There does he find (in eternal
reasons) the true rule of things passing in all seasons, and contemplateth in
immovable verities, the constant Idea of whatsoever is subject to change and
revolution; whence taking his measures, he (after) guides the inconstant, by
the constant, causing it to slide into stabilitie; the temporal, by the
eternal; the figure of the world which passes, by Gods verity, which is
eternally permanent.

CHAP. 7. Of the means to conserve, and augment in the Soul, the light of
this true Wisdom.
But to conserve and augment in the soul the light of this true wisdom, being
the rule and measure of all things. It is necessary to make use of the Wisemans
advice, and so to husband our hours as actions that we may spare (at least)
some small time for consideration and contemplation: He who takes away
sometime from affairs, to converse with himself, Qui minoratur actu percipit
Sapientiam. Eccles. 38.
becomes more capable of Wisdom, says the spirit of God by the mouth of
Wisdom. For to pass over in silence, that to yield our whole man to others,
and never to enjoy our selves, to give our selves to all, our selves excepted;
to receive the whole world into the bosom of our solicitude, and only to
exclude the reflection on our particular guidance, is one of those follies
committed in the world under the name of wisdom: since (as St. Bernard says)
He cannot be wise who is not so to himself: Non est sapiens qui sibi non est.
D. Ber. l. 2. de consid. c. 3.
I will only say, there is not any thing so prejudicial to action, as to be
continually bent upon action without intermission. For as the corporal eye
sees not the objects touching it, but those only more remote: so the
understanding continually plunged in affairs, is not so quicke-sighted in
occurrents, as his who sometimes retireth himself from public action,
beholding it aloof off by consideration: As it is reported, how the noise
which the waters of Nile make, do cause all those who liveneere the false or
Cataracts to become deaf; Or as the Roman Orator in his book of the dreams
of Scipio, was of opinion, that the harmonious and musical sound, resulting
from the diverse motions of the celestial Spheres, is not by us understood, by
reason the sound is so strong, so quick and violent, that our ears are
thereby deafned; Or as they who nourish silk-wormes, hinder those little
creatures from hearing the thunder, by the sound of brazen or iron vessels,
when at any time it is excessive: So those who are continually amidst the
tumults and tempests of affairs, become insensibly besotted, and deaf to the
voice of Reason, and Gods law, which ought to give the conduct and motion to
active life. Besides, experience teaches us, that the eye having lost its
quicknes with too much looking upon the light, recovers it again in the dark:
The spirit in like manner, dazzled, weakened, and distracted among the
multitude, and variety of affairs, ought to recollect and recover its force in
the privacie of some small retreit. Moreover, see you not how the vapors
rising from the earth, darken the Sun-light, and would utterly over-cloud it,
did not the Sun recollecting its vigor, at length dissipat them by the point
of his beams? In like manner, worldly affairs send forth certain mists,
invironing the interior eye, where the light of wisdom resideth, and by
little and little coveting the soul with darkness, transports it to
inconsideration, and from thence to a thousand stumbling blocks, forcing it to
retire with shame, if the soul preventing this danger, did not now and then
recollect it self, and by the attentive consideration of its estate, duty, and
end, cause it to disperse those clouds which darken reason. This has caused me
to admire that excellent sentence of Ezekiel the Prophet. That the earth is
desolate, for that no man uses consideration and reflection in his heart, and
he seems to say, that it is the only sourle of all human errors, not only
in what concerns eternal salvation, but even in what touches the conduct of
temporal affairs, whether domestical or public. For whence arise so many
mischiefs, ruins, and desolations, be it is in families, Cities, or Estates,
but only out of the want of wisdom among men, and whence this, but from the
defect of consideration? It is a thing natural; that as a stone cast into a
calm and settled water, causes there a circle, this circle a second, the
second a third, this third makes a fourth; Circle, after circle, till the
water from one side to the other be all troubled: so worldly objects beat upon
the senses, the senses touch the appetite, the appetite exciteth motions in the
will the will stirred, and tickled by delectation, darkeneth the Understanding;
disordered motions, engender desires; desires, adors; ardors, breed passions;
passions, temeritie; temerities hatch follies; and from thence issue all the
troubles, calamities, and disorders, falling out in the life of man: and all
this happens by reason that men being incessantly busied out of themselves,
either with pleasures, vanities, or affairs, never take time to recollect
themselves; and (as the Lamiae in feigned Stories) keep the eye of their
Reason fastened to the Gates of their Senses, and wittingly, either scorn or
neglect to wear it within the interior part of their house, thereby to
consider, know, and regulate themselves. I say not this, as seeking thereby to
send the Civil or Political Person into a Desert or Cloister, but only to
give him the counsel which Plato gave to Dionysius King of Sicil, Plato Epist.
ad Dionys.
to take some hour in the day, at leisure to contemplate, not upon the
subjects of vain Philosophy, but upon the eternal verities of divine Wisdom.
But the advice of Gods Spirit ought to be more efficacious, than the precepts
of Philosophers: Consider and see that I am God, says he by his Prophet,
Vacate and videte quoniam ego sum Deus.
speaking in general to all men: Give (says God) some ease to your
occupations, to consider who J am, and how in comparison of me, all therest is
nothing at all, and shall be soon even as that which never was; That I am
permanent, and how all other things are sliding and transitory; That I am the
first law, whereby all should be directed, the eternal verity, whereto all
should conform themselves, the sovereign power, under which all ought to
tremble, the Wisdom all ought to acknowledge, the Justice none can escape, the
final end, whereto all things should tend. This consideration is a light,
dissipating the Clouds of ignorance, a bridle restraining the rage of passions,
a rod correcting excesses, and discipline composing our manners, an Oracle
inspiring good counsels, a rule directing actions, a book wherein a man does
insensibly, and with delight, learn the science of human and divine things. In
this sort does the Scripture propose the Patriark Isaac unto us; retiring and
recollecting himself toward Sunset, walking pensive, and solitary in his
Garden. Moses the Lawmaker, divided between contemplation and action, one
while coming down toward the people, and otherwhiles re-ascending toward God.
The Judge Samuel, sometimes giving sentence, then contemplating, after
disposing of the affairs of Israel, and opening the eye of his Soul toward
Heavenly illuminations. King David sometime giving laws to his people, then
meditating divine laws. The wise Solomon, now deciding the suits and
controversies of his Subjects, and presently applying himself to the study of
divine wisdom. Briefly whosoever have at any time managed state or temporal
matters according to Gods rule, have at all times shared time between
affairs, and recollection, between God and the world, between Earth and
Heaven: as those Creatures called Amphibions, who are not always in the water,
nor continually on shore, but do now and then converse with Beasts on land,
and presently take water joyfully and naturally to divide the Waves among other
aquaticall Creatures. Now that which herein is to be observed, is, that even
Pagan Politicians have acknowledged the necessity of these small intermissions
in active life, to the end, to take some time for contemplation. For (not
again to repeat what I have formerly spoken, conserning the counsel given by
Plato to Dionysius King of Sicily,) who knows not what the Roman Orator writ,
concerning the great Scipio, whom he represents unto us often solitary, and
being never better accompanied than when he was alone by himself; beside, who
has not read how those ancient Law makers, Numa, Zaleuxis, Lycurgus, Solon,
and others, made use of frequent retirements, as well to reenforce their
spirits, dissipated by the throng of affairs, as the better to discern what
was good and necessary, during this solitary tranquillity, for the further
authorisement of their laws and decrees, by the esteem of Religion. If
therefore Heathens have attributed so much to mere opinion, what ought
Christians do to manifest truth? I will now conclude this subject by a notable
speech of Saint Bernard to Eugenius then Pope. To the end your charity may be
full and entire, exclude not your self from the bosom of that providence of
yours, which receives all others: What avails it thee to procure the good
and salvation of all others, if this happen by the loss of thy self? Will thou alone be frustrated of thy private felicity? All drink at thy breast as
at a public fountain, and thy self remainest behind, panting, and thirsly
amidst thy own waters? Remember (I beseech thee) I will not say always, nor
will I say often, yet at least sometimes, to allow thy self to thy self;
Enjoy thy self with many, or at least after many. And in another place: Take
example (says he) of the sovereign Father of all, D. Bern. l. a. Eugenium.
who sending his WORD into the world, did yet retain him nere his person. Your
word, is your thought and consideration; which if it part from you, to employ
it self for the public good, let it yet be in such sort, as it may still
remain within thee. That it communicate it self without leaving thee void,
and diffuse it self over others, without forsaking thy self.

CHAP. 8. Of other Virtues which cause a Politic sufficiency, and chiefly of
Prudence.
I Have sufficiently spoken of Wisdom, the smalnesse of this work considered.
I will therefore proceed to speak of other parts, instructing the
Understanding for the knowledge of such things as are necessary for public
good, and which finish the perfection of a public sufficience. The Philosopher
in his Ethics, Arist. l. 6. Eth.
assigns five kinds of intellectual virtues, the Intellect, Science,
Wisdom, Art, and Prudence. Intellect is no other than the habitude and
disposition to know the primary principles, which are perceived by themselves,
and presently apprehended by the intellectual power without the assistance of
ratiocination. Science is a demonstrative habitude of necessary things which
cannot otherwise be, and this habitude is acquired by the discourse of Reason,
sounding and searching the causes, thereby to know the effects: Now this
knowledge of effects by the causes is called Science. Wisdom is a very perfect
and exact Science, knowing both the consequences deduced from the principles,
and the principles themselves with the most universal causes: so (according to
the Philosopher) the excellent knowledge of every Science, Discipline, and Art
may be called Wisdom. Art is an habitude and just reason of certain
workemanships which are to be made, and produced to the show, as building and
painting, with the like. Art reflecteth not upon the interior residing in the
soul, but on the action passing and flowing from the interior understanding
to imprint it self upon exterior substances. Prudence is a just reason of the
actions of human life, and of what man ought to do and practice, according to
his estate and condition. Now of these five habitudes or virtues which instruct
and perfectionate the intellective power, Art suteth not with our subject: The
Intellect and Science have bin cursorily touched, when I said; that a good wit,
and the study of Letters were requisite as necessary parts for the forming of
Wisdom. There now remains only Prudence: which being the right rule of of
human actions, is as it were the soul and life of the active, civil, and
Politic life. For Intellect, Science, and Wisdom, are only serviceable for
the understanding the universal reasons of things, and the true ends whereto
they are to be referred. Prudence ought (after this) to apply^^^ (...) ^^^eral
reasons to the occurrencies and particularities of affairs, presenting
themselves, and to find out the convenient means to arrive to the proposed
end. The Intellect, sees the first principles, Science is acquainted with the
universal causes of particular effects: VVisdome, is the perfection of the
Understanding, the flower and Cream of Science. Prudence is that which puts
in practice, the Intellect, Science, and Wisdom. The Understanding affords the
light. Science frames the reason, Wisdom perfecteth the knowledge Prudence
directs the action: briefly, Intellect, Science, and VVisdome, do show in
gross what is fitting to be effected, why it is to be done, and to what end it
is to be undertaken. Prudence shows (in each particular action) how it is to
be effected: the former do only propose the end: This: besides the way does
likewise afford the skill, and delivers unto us the conduct. This is that of
which the Philosopher speaks in his Ethics, that it is the proper office of
Prudence, to dispose the means to arrive to the end. The Understanding
searches it, Science finds it, VVisdome shows it, but Prudence conducteth
it.

CHAP. 9. Of the Necessity, Excellency, and Offices of politic Prudence.
PRudence (as the Philosopher says in his Ethics) regards (as its object)
things either good or evil, profitable or pernicious, honest or reproveable in
a man, following his calling and charge, and it is proper to the prudent to
consult, and solidly to advise with himself in each affair, and particular
action, what is fitting and convenient to the present subject, to his duty,
rank, and office. So as (to say truly) look how requisite Art is for the
works of industry, so fitting is Prudence for the affairs of virtue. An
ancient Author terms Prudence, the Art of living; Now to live as a man
ought, is to live according to reason. A man without Prudence, is as a workman
without Art, who has tools in his hand, but wants act to make right use of
them for the impression of convenient forms in the matter whereon he is to
work. Man likewise who has Science and VVisdome without Prudence, sees well
the Reasons, and the end whereto he is to aim, but is destitute of the right
application of reasons, whereby to find out the means, and attain to the
end; And as the unkilfull crafts-man spoils the matter thinking to polish it:
So the imprudent man ruins affairs presuming to rectify them; nor is there
other difference, save only that the former spoils Iron, stones, wood, or
some other matters of slight consideration, the other ruins himself, his
particular fortunes, yea whole States and Empires if he have thereof the
administration. Wherefore Saint Ambrose terms Prudence, D. Amb. l. I. Do
offic. c. 27. Cas. Collat. I. cap. 27.
the sourse and fountain of virtuous actions; and Cassian expounds this
saying of the Gospel, Thine Eye is the Lamp of thy Body, understands by
this eye, Prudence being the eye of the soul; Or if the understanding be the
eye of the soul, and wisdom the light of this eye, Prudence is the Apple of
this Eye, and as the lamp of this light, distributing and disposing
brightness to all the rest: and as the apple of the eye cleared by the light,
tiluminuteth the whole body, shows it the way, keeps it from stumbling, and
directs all its paces toward the end it aymeth at: so Prudence enlightened by
wi dome, illuminateth the whole Soul, shows her the way to arrive to good,
hinders her from tripping, directs her thoughts, guides her motions,
disposes her counsels, regulateth her affections, ordinateth her powers,
manageth her habitudes, arrangeth her virtues, and composeth her actions; since
without Prudence, Understanding is vain, Science unprofitable, and Wisdom
idle, plain dealing, faulty; zeal, indiscreet; justice, unjust; Force full of
temerity; Temperance, distempered; all virtues become vices, and perfections,
faults. For as wisdom is the eye of speculative life: so is Prudence the light
of practical Reason; and as without the light of wisdom, the understanding
erreth in the knowledge of truth: so without the light of Prudence, it cannot
but err in the conduct of actions. It is the first office of Prudence to see
what is to be done in the occurrence and circumstance of each particular case,
then to find out the means of compassing them, this being done, then to
prescribe the measure, and limits of the action; since (as the Philosopher
says) it appertains to Prudence to allot a requisite medium to all virtues;
having waighed what is fitting for time, place, subject, and affairs; after,
to gain the dexterity of attayning thereto, and to prescribe the measure he
therein ought to observe: his last office is to put commandment in action by
prompt and diligent execution, by means of the souls faculty, having the
charge of executing the sentence of judgment, and the Empire of Reason. Now if
any one of these four parts of Prudence, either counsel, means, measure, or
prompt commandment be defective in action; how can it merit the title or
glory of a virtuous work? If counsel fail him, it is foolish; if it want
means, it is vain; if measure, it is irregular; if prompt and oportune
execution, it is idle; unusefull; fruitless. If foolish, how can it beright?
If vain, how good? If irregular, how virtuous? If idle, how laudable?
Wherefore, as Queens and great rincesses, are attended by along train of
Ladies of Honor: so Prudence (as Queen of virtues) is followed by four other
virtues: The first is called Eubulia; well to consult of whatsoever is to be
effected, to examine and ponder what is necessary for the well ordering of
actions in all sorts of affairs. The second carries the name of Synesis; a
virtue requisite to judge aright and to draw solid conclusions our of the
principles of the universal Law. The third is called Gnome, well to examine in
particular what is to be done according to natural reason, when there is (in
some case) no express law. The last likewise is named Gnome to resolve and
command after due research and judgment. There are three acts of Reason, which
reflect upon humane actions to consult, judge, and command. And to the end this
may pass in due place, and conformably to reason; It is necessary that
Prudence be accompanied with these four virtues; the first whereof serves for
consultation, the second and third for judgment, the last for commandment.

CHAP. 10. That politic Prudence is rare and how it is to be acquired.
IF it be a difficult matter to accompany every particular action with these
four virtues attending Prudence, and with those four perfections thence
yssuing, how much harder is it to associate them to all the actions of our
life; and if to the comportments of a private, how much more to the actions of
a public life? There are three sorts of Prudence, as there are three general
conditions of man's life: For either man has only charge of himself, and has
therefore need only of an ordinary Prudence, or he has moreover the guidance
of a family requiring an oeconomicall Prudence; or else the administration of
public assayres, which requires a Civil and Politic Prudence. Now if common
Prudence (necessary only for particulars) be so rare among men, the
oeconomicall and Politic is far more extraordinary; and if the right and
Prudent conduct of our selves, requires such parts; what shall we say of the
conduct of others? Of the guidance of Republikes and government of Empires? The
Scripture says: That God founded Heaven by Prudence: and the Philosopher: That
this is the proper virtue for him who governes and proceeds: not that it is not
necessary for private persons, but that it is in such sort requisite for him
who has public charge: that as light is to the Sun, and heat to the fire; so
this to him is a proper essence and inseparable quality; without which he is no
more capable to manage affairs, than the Pilot is to guide a Ship without the
Helm and Sea-Card. God having chosen losyph to govern the State of Egypt under
King Pharath, endued him with so perfect a prudence, as (though young) yet was
he able to instruct the Ancients. And Solomon, together with his Diadem,
received from God the wisdom to discern judgment, as the book of Kings
speaks, to wit, the Prudence causing decernment in the occurrences of all
affairs presenting themselves. And truly since Prudence is the right rule of
such things as we ought to execute (the whole life of public persons
consisting in execution and practice) they cannot escape from falling into
manifold errors, if they be not adorned with much Prudence. And since this
virtue, as the watching and open eye over the scepter of the Egyptians, ought
to spread its circumspection on every side, over places, times, persons,
humors, appurtenances, accidents, and dependencies; over things past, present,
and future; over reasons, conjectures, suspicions, briefly over the smallest
particularities happening in this subject; the oppositions rancounters and
varicties of affairs in a Commonwealth being infinite, and the circumstances
accompanying these affairs yet more endless; It is needful (were it
possible) to have an infinite Prudence perfectly to perform business, and to
be armed against all occurrents in this case. Aristotle in his Rherorickes
says, That the most excellent among men are the Counselors of State. Plato,
that good consultation is a certain divine and sacred thing. Saint Basil, That
Council is a divine thing; and God himself by the mouth of the wise man in
the Proverbs, Pro. 3.
That the acquisition of Prudence is more precious than the negotiation of gold
and silver.

But as diverse things must concur to form gold (King of Metals) to weet,
the preparation of the matter, the earths disposition, the Suns heat, and
length of them: so for the forming this Prudence (Queen of Politic virtues,
the gold of Kingdoms, the treasure of States, the pearl of crowns) great help
and happy advantages are to be required, strength of spirit, soliditie of
judgment, sharpness of reason, and docilitie to learn of Ancients, are the
dispositions: Instructions received from eminent persons, the study of
Sciences, knowledge of history, a happy memory in things past, in all Ages and
States, are the beginnings; The practice of important affairs, long
experience, and the gray maturitie of years, are the consummation. For this
word of the Ancients never deceived any, Council of old men, Arms of young
men; sound consultation, circumspection of circumstances, foresight of
consequences, precaution against impediments, prompt expedition, are the
beautiful actions of Statesmen, and (in fine) the peoples repose, the safety
of States, the common good of men, are the divine fruits of this perfect
prndence. Who so possesses this treasure, enjoys a Diadem; and if his origin
has not conferred Crowns upon him, Crowns will seek after him; and if his
condition have not made him a King, his sufficiency will make him the Oracle
of Kings. What he pronounces, are decrees, what he says, are laws, his bare
words ought to pass for reasons, and as the Philosopher says, His naked
propositions, have the authority of demonstrations; since the practice he has
acquired by experience enableth him, (in whatsoever he proposes) to consider
the causes and principles. But what is said of the Phoenix, which being so
frequent in Books, was (happily) never framed in nature: or what is related of
that Orator, among the Ancients so highly extolled, but never heard? or of the
Philosophers Republique? the so well depainted Idaea whereof could never really
appear: the same may be said of this perfect Prudence, (whom the contemplation
of Sages has so excellently expressed) and which the imbecilitie of humane
Nature could never yet perfectly produce. So many rare endowments required in
one man are more easily imagined then met with, sooner desired, than acquired.
To abuse our selves with Ideas, is to feed upon fancies. Wishes rule not the
world, and since things cannot be suitable to our votes, we must proportion our
votes to things. We are to acknowledge our own ignorance in the truth of this
passage of Scripture; How irresolute are the thoughts of men? and how
uncertain their foresights? and (to confess the truth) in all things, but
chiefly in Politic Prudence, which governs the incertitude of worldly
affairs, that he who has the fewest defects, has a great share of perfection.
One single circumstance susficeth to alter all in this case, and very often the
effect of greatest, and most important actions; as the cure of desperate
diseases in States, depends upon a very instant, which Prudence either sees
not, or fortune ravisheth away; and after all we are to avow, that in such
cases wherein ordinarily ways are hidden, the causes obscured, the council
incertaine, and the events independent of us: he who seldomest stumbles, has
no small sufficiency, and who so (oftnest) does happen rightly to hit, has a
great deal of good fortune.

CHAP. 11. That true Politic Prudence ought to be derived from the Law of
God, against Machiavilians.
BVtas true wisdom ought to be deduced from the law of God, so does true
Prudence flow from this divine fountain: For God has spoken by the mouth of
the Wise man, Council is to me, Equity is mine, Prudence is mine; and David
said to God; Lord thou have made me wise by thy word. Wisdom without God is
mere folly, and Prudence no better than malice, the one follows salle
principles, the other uses the means opposite to the true end of man; the one
depraveth the understanding, the other deregulates life, the one deceives us
in what we ought to understand, the other in what we ought to do; the one
adoreth lies instead of truth, the other embraces iniquity for virtue: in
brief, the one diverts us from the true way, the other leads us to a
precipice. The Prudence of the flesh, produces nothing but death (says the
Apostle) So as if it be pernicious to particulars, what profit can it afford to
Republiques? if it ruin men, how can it relieve Empires? Is not God the final
end of States in general, as well of men in particular? if he be their end,
ought he not to be their aim? if their aim, ought they not to level thereat
by means conduceable to their end? What other means are proper to cause all
States to tend toward God, than those which the Prudence derived from God
dictates unto us? If therefore fleshly and vain prudence supposing to maintain
it self, makes use of unjust means, and those contrary to God; is it not
apparent it diverteth them from their mark, their end and happiness, ruining
instead of establishing them? Wherefore Moses called the people of Jsrael, who
would not guide themselves according to Gods law, but by their private spirit,
a Nation without Council and Prudence. And the spirit of God gives us two
advertisements, as two general rules of our life; the one by the Wise man,
Rely not on thine own Prudence; the other by the Apostle, Derive not your
prudence from your selves. Plato reports of Hyparchus (in a Dialogue
entitled by his name) how this man, (desirous of the public good, placed
great Pillars in all the crosse-waies of Athens, whereon were engraven, grave
and wholesome inscriptions, advertising men of their duties. If this custom
were still in use among us, it were fitting these two sentences, as two Oracles
from heaven were engraven in Marble and brass in the most eminent and chiefly
frequented places of all Cities, to admonish men, not to guide the course of
their lives, affairs and offices, by the foolish Prudence of the flesh, but by
that Prudence derived from God, being the infallible rule as it is the final
and firm conclusion of all humane actions.

CHAP. 12. How the Law of God is useful for the acquisition of true Politic
Prudence.
THe Law of God does in two sorts serve toward the acquisition of true
Prudence, not only of that which is ordinary and oeconomical, but of the
civil and Politic likewise. First, in proposing to every particular action
its due end, direct means, and just measure: secondly, in appeasing and
calming the passions of the soul, which (as the Philosopher says) cause a
certain thick fogge to arise in the superior part thereof, darkening the eye
of reason, and hindering the wholesome counsel and right judgment of things
which Prudence ought to afford. For passions imprint in the soul a kind of
malignant disposition, causing counsel to ere in the election of the true end,
judgment in the choice of the means, and the commandment of reason in the
definition of times we ought to take, of the place whereof we are to make
choice, and of the measure we are to observe in making an Act truly Prudent.
The covetous and ambitious person who propounds to himself no other end than
his particular profit and honor, will not make use of other means, but such
only as may conduce to the raising of his revenues and dignities; yea, and
often (carried away by the flood of this unbrideled desire, as by the force of
an impetuous torrent) he is not able to observe either time, place, or measure.
What counsels can be expected from a spirit so indisposed toward the safety of
Commonwealths? Choler likewise, with Envy, Fear, Voluptuousness, and other
passions drawing the soul to their side, cause it to become evil affected
toward the true end, tempting it to undertake wicked ways, transporting it to
foolish and rash inconsiderations. Whereupon Julius Caesar in Salust sets
down this maxim of State; Sal. de Coniur. Catil.
Those (says he) who consult, ought to be void of all affections and passions
which obfuscate the spirit, and hinder it from discerning the truth. And the
Philosopher has this excellent sentence, or rather Oracle, worthy to be
written in letters of gold, That it is a most apparent truth, that none can be
truly Prudent, if he be not good and just. Wherein even by this natural
reason, he condemns of imprudencie and timerity what commonly is called
worldly Prudence. And the spirit of God tells us in holy Writ; Ezod. 23.
That covetousness and bribery, blinds the hearts of the Prudent, and
concupiscence perverteth their spirits; with the like words of holy Scripture;
showing us that the smoke of vicious passions dim the light of Prudence in the
eye of understanding. Dan. 13.
But what either more solid or safe instruction is there (for the right
learning to rule our passions) than Gods word? What more harmonious music
for the stilling these furious devils, than the sound of this divine Book?
what more direct rule to moderate these natural motions, than the Law of the
Author of Nature? what more powerful arms to overcome them, than his
precepts? what stronger restraint to contain them, than his fear? They
transport Nature, they surmount reason, they slip from moral virtue: Humane
Philosophy cannot master them: there is nothing save only the law of God which
can rightly regulate them; it belonging solely to God to subdue man's spirit.
The Law of God is without imperfection (says the Prophet) and does perfectly
convert souls. For there it is where we learn the true force to vanquish the
passions of the ^rascible; and the true temperance to rectify the motions of
the concupiscible part. It is there, where we are instructed by Gods own
mouth, who has not only truth it self to instruct us, but supreme authority
to command us; mildness against choler, love to our enemies against hatred,
pardon against vengeance, resolution against fear, patience against
persecutions; whereon is formed in the soul a divine form to overcome
whatsoever might terrify us: it is therein where we are taught the fear of God
against the baits of the flesh, the vanity of the world, against the desire of
Riches, the obligation and danger of great Offices, against the ambition of
honors, whence the soul draws a blessed temperance to slight all whatsoever
allureth to the contrary. Being thus armed with sorce against the fear of
apparent mischiefs, and with temperance against the love of all perishable
substance; it can no way fear any thing but evil it self, which is iniquity,
nor love, but the true good, to wit, virtue. No assaults can cause us to waver
from our duty, nor baits draw us to injustice. And herein consists the true
Prudence of the Serpent (according to holy Writ) who exposes his whole body to
preserve his head. It teaches us that this Prudence knows how to forsake
(upon just occasion) both goods, honors, and life it self to conserve
justice: a right necessary quality for public persons, who in the execution
of their offices (if therein they seek public good) find not their
particular advantage, but diverse baits to slight, and many assaults to
overcome. Here you see how the Law of God is the sacred School of true
Politic Prudence. Jnstruct your selves (says God) O you that judge the earth:
serve God in fear. It is from thence the Magistrate ought (as Samuel did) to
take his light and conduct, to administer affairs by true Prudence: It is
thence the noble acts of fortitude are seen to spring, in the resistance of
all assaults when at any time virtue is engaged in difficult times. From thence
it is we see occasions of heroic acts of temperance in scorn of dignities,
and honors to proceed. Acts which crown their Author with immortal honor,
and fill these with confusion, whom they cannot draw to imitation. Briefly it
is from thence, a magnanimious heart deriveth this generous Prudence, and this
resolute spirit; the testimony whereof he produces in his life, the fruit in
his offices, and the glory in his good name.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK. Of those virtues which do form honesty and integrity for
the well employing of sufficiency.
CHAP. 1. Of Politic Justice in general.
NAture has not contented her self, in having bestowed on all things,
necessary faculties whereby to operate, but she has further added to those
faculties, certain inclinations and dispositions which cause them to tend to
their objects, for the production of their actions. For the eye, besides the
faculty of seeing, has an inclination to visible objects; the care to
harmonies, the taste to savours, the smell to sweet scents. Now this
inclination is added, to serve as a provocation to the powers, lest they should
remain idle. So God framing and adorning the soul, does not only bestow
thereon those virtues requisite to understand how to operate rightly, but does
besides, add others which incline, dispose, and give it a propension toward
the objects convenient for the production of virtuous acts. Wisdom and
Prudence are the two general virtues which acquire to a Politician, the
sufficiency, worthily to govern Commonwealths; justice and honesty, with the
virtues thereon depending, follow after, to infuse into the soul, the
disposition, inclination, motion, and propension to employ to good purpose both
Wisdom and Prudence; which without justice and honesty, would in truth not
remain idle, but become pernicious These being not virtues, but dangerous
vices: Wisdom in a perverse soul becoming deceitful; and Prudence in a
dissembling one, malicious. It is as the Peach-tree, which receiving the
quality of the soil where it is planted; in Persia is poisonous, elsewhere
nutrimentall. It is the Camelion, which taking its tincture from the objects
nearest unto it, being near clay, appears of a muddy color, near gold, of
a glorious hew, near filth, of a foul color; near a Diamond, it casts the
luster of a precious stone So the will imprinteth the quality, the die and
color in the action, either good if it be sincere, or evil if it be
pernicious.

For there is this difference between the works of injustice, and the actions
of virtue, that in the former there is no regard but only to the dexterity; in
the latter, the workmans honesty is considered, there, the hand, and art
perform all; here, the heart and intention have the greater share. So as if
the heart be not good, the intention upright, and the end lawful, the work
cannot be exemplarie, though it appear excellent. If the Architect build a
fair house for a foul end, his irregular intention disgraceth not his skill:
but if he who produces an act of virtue, propose to himself an unjust end, his
intention depraveth his action, and the wicked quality of his heart deriveth it
self into his work. A fault (as S. Augustine says) which has blemished the
most beautiful actions of moral virtues, appearing among the ancient
Ethnickes: who have proposed to themselves for the end of their actions, not
(purely) justice, but some of them profit, others revenge, some delight, and
the most virtuous among them, ambition and vanity. The heart being the
beginning of natural life, is likewise the principle of goodness in moral
life; nor is there any other difference, save only that in the body it dies
last, and in matter of virtue, the first. For in the body, all other parts dye,
before the heart wholly decay; but in the matter of virtue, so long as the
heart remains alive, whilst the intention continues sound, and the will
sincere, all the actions are vigorous, good, and laudable; yea and those which
in regard they were vicious in their subjects, could not merit glory, being
virtuous in their conclusion, are yet worthy of excuse. But the heart of virtue
once dead, the intention perverted, and the will corrupted, all is rotten, and
the most fair virtues become infamous vices, and the most glorious acts
punishable crimes. This is the secret of this sacred word in the Gospel: From
the heart issues all evil. Lib. 6. Eth. cap. 12.
Wherefore the Philospher says, that every laudable action is composed of two
pieces: of Prudence, which chooses a good subject; and of moral virtue, which
makes an election of an upright end: and as gold borrows of the earth its
matter, of the Sun its form, luster, and value; so virtuous actions ought to
take from Prudence, both Counsel, means, and measure, as their matter; from
justice and honesty, the right end, and sound intention, as her form, soul,
and esteem. Here you see, that no action, be it private or public, can either
be good or honest, if it be not just.

CHAP. 2. That an unjust action cannot be profitable to States, against
Machiavill.
I Further affirm, that it cannot be profitable to the public. For diverse
level not their actions and counsels to goodness and honesty, but only to
utility: and following that pernicious maxim of the Pyrrhonians, that there is
nothing just of it self, and by it its own nature, but only out of the
opinion and custom of men; and as that Barbarian in Tacitus says: In a great
fortune that which is most profitable, is fullest of equity: or as Eudemus
blasphemed, That whatsoever was profitable for Republiques, was just, Perverse
Axioms, which nature condemns, reason reproves, God has in abomination,
and people detest, and which under color of profit, raise the cabane of ruin.
Since to banish Justice from humane society, is as much as to tear the soul
from the body, and to take the Sun from the world* It is as much as to change
(as S. Augustine says) Kingdoms into Colonies of thieves; it is to arm man
against man, to introduce license; with license, disorder; with disorder,
desolation. Now those who measure the justice and honesty of things by utility,
of what kind of utility intend they to speak? of particular, or public? If
of particular, they discover themselves; if of public, they deceive
themselves. If they call that just, whatsoever they find profitable to
themselves, they show themselves traitors to public good: or if they imagine,
that what is unjust, may be advantageous to States, they err in the
principles. For if a State be no other than a general society of men in Cities
or Provinces united together under the authority either of the whole multitude
as in a Democracie; of principal persons, as in an Aristocracie, or of a
Prince, as in a Monarchy; whereon is this society founded, but upon Union?
whereon this union, but upon obedience? upon what is obedience founded, but
upon laws? and whereon laws, but upon equity? To take equity from laws, is
of laws to make them violencies; to violate obedience, is to destroy it, to
destroy obedience, is to dissolve union, to dissolve union, is to dissipate
society; and to part society, is to subvert the State: what follows then, save
only that what is just, is the conservation of States, and what unjust, is the
destruction thereof.

Justice conserves, maintains, a domes all in nature and art; much more in
policy and humane society, which only are capable of Justice as we prove at
large.
Nature her self teaches us this. For it is the union of the four qualities
which conserveth our bodies: an union fastened by the knot of their mutual
concord, as their peace is established upon that temperature, which upholdeth
and represents (in their commerce) a kind of natural justice. But if one of
these usurping over another, the temperature be thereby disturbed, justice
being thereby violated, peace is broken; peace once broken, union is dissolved,
and the structure is destroyed. That which conserveth this inferior world, is
the marriage of the four elements, a marriage knit by their accord, as their
accord is founded upon the justice of the proportion, and equality conjoyning
them in one* So as if one offering injury to the other, this equality happen to
be disturbed, justice being thereby wounded, their accord would be dissolved,
their concord destroyed, their conjunction soon be unloosed. Art herein
confirms what nature commends to us. See we not in Music, how every
voice keeping his tone, without troubling the tone of others, this justice they
observe, frames their accord; whence proceeds the harmony, the sweetness,
and grace of Music. Now if one voice usurp upon another, violating hereby
this justice, it troubles the accord, and of this pleasing sound formerly
composed of so many well ordered voices sufficient to ravish the spirits of all
hearers, there remains nothing save a tumult of confused jarres, enough to
dull the ears of all auditors. Do not measures in Poetry, clauses in
Rhetoric, reasons in Philosophy, numbers in Arithmeticke, the compass in
Geometry, the rule in Architecture, the disposition of colors in limming;
briefly, the so well observed proportions in all the works of art and
industry, do they not represent in some sort, a kind of shadow of justice? If
therefore Justice adorn, and conserve whatsoever is in nature, and what art
produces; if all beautiful things borrow from thence their gracefulness,
solid matters their force, things living their subsistence, inanimate things
their ornament; and since even those things which seem incapable, can
notwithstanding not subsist, without some show thereof: How can it be that
humane society, which alone is capable of right, and reason should any way
maintain it self amidst injustice, injury and violence. Would not a State
without justice, resemble a body without the temperature of humors, a world
without the equality of elements, a Music without the harmony of voices, a
work without the proportion of those parts which composeth it? what would such
a work be but a mere deformity? such a music but a confusion? such a world
but a Chaos? such a body but a dying one? such a State but a disorder, tending
to its ruin?

Proof of the same truth, both by authority and example.
The sentence of all Sages has authorized these demonstrations, and the
examples of all ages have verified the same* Has there ever been Philosopher,
who has not held this maxim? a lawmakers, who has not followed this
principle? or State which has preserved it self otherwise than by justice, or
has been ruined but only by violence? Whiles Justice flourished in
Commonwealths, we have seen them prosperous: but no sooner had violence and
oppression crept in, but they presently inclined, either to utter ruin, or an
absolute change. Is not this worthy of admiration, that even the same thing
which ruineth Justice, cannot maintain it self without her. Robberies founded
upon iniquity, cannot possibly continue, did not thieves observe among
themselves a kind of equity. So weak and fruitless is injustice, she is not
able so much as to uphold her own building, how shall she then support what
Justice has founded? If therefore it be evident, that in gross and general
injustice, is the destruction of States; how can it be, that by ro^^^le, and in
particular, an unjust counsel* or act, can be truly profitable? Can the fruits
be good, if the tree be infectious or poisonous?

CHAP. 3. That Injustice even against strangers cannot be profitable to States,
contrary to the tenets of Machiavilians.
But it may (happily) be said, that Injustice is indeed pernicious in the body
of a Commonwealth, but abroad and among strangers it may be profitable. See we
not first, that he who offers an injury, teaches others to afford the like?
that he who gives the onset, obliges himself to suffer assaults? and that in
justling others, he shakes himself: that in the vain attempt of his forces
he puts himself into hazard to show his own weakness? that in an evident
mischief, the blame is inevitable, and the issue uncertain? that (as an
ancient Author says) States are as Tortices, free from touch or stroke, so
long as they keep themselves enclosed in their shells; but are tender, weak,
and in small assurance so soon as they come forth. It is an easier matter to
enterprise matters, than to atchieve them: and (as the Scythian Ambassadors
said to Alexander in Quintus (urtius) It is an unadvised course to look upon
the fruits of trees, and not to measure their height; and that in conclusion,
either a vain attempt, or a short joy is the ordinary fruit of violence.
Besides, has not the experience of all ages and States sufficiently showed to
the whole world, were it not blinded, that whatsoever humane iniquity raises,
divine Justice ruineth? that humane laws punish particular robberies and
divine public injustices, that those mischies whereto the earth affords
impunity, cannot obtain it of heaven? that whatsoever seeks its raising by
force, finds in the upshot its ruin in a greater force. The Wolf which
devoureth the Lamb, is after eaten by the Lion: briefly, that greatness
proceeding from injury, may indeed make a fair show, but cannot endure.

The answer to the objection: that diverse great States have laid their
foundation upon injustice and usurpation.
I am not ignorant, that injustice and usurpation have been the ground of
diverse great States, and this by the secret permission of God, who willing not
the ill, but permitting it, either thereout to draw good, or to show his
vengeance for sin, makes use (when he pleases) of the malice of one nation,
to punish the sins of another: since both the good and bad are under his pay;
they give in their names, and the wicked, before they are aware, afford their
helping hand. Isa. ca. 10.
J will send Assure (says God in Isaiah) against a perverse Nation, against a
people which I will destroy in my fury, I I will take him as an instrument of
my revenges, but he himself shall not think so, and his heart shall not dream
of fighting for my justice, but for the vanity of his own ambition. See here,
how God making use of the malice of wicked men, secretly and unwitting to them,
on purpose to punish others of like condition, does sometimes suffer them to
raise the foundation of their greatness upon injustice and usurpation: but
even as in nature, corruption is often the cause of the generation of things,
yet does not corruption at all conserve them, but does again destroy what
formerly it had framed: so Injustice having raised these States, has not at
all conserved them; but (necessarily) that which took its origin from
Injustice, must borrow its conservation of Justice; and when again, not
contented with the just dominion a long possession had acquired, they have
strived to extend their limits by Injustice, they have in the end broken their
forces, even against the weaker side, and the same iniquity which built them,
has at all times abolished them.

God, before whose eyes the earth is a Theater, the world a fable, Empire a
game, and the revolutions of ages a days pastime, has proposed to men a
thousand like spectacles of his Justice, which over-turneth (in an instant) the
long workmanships of their iniquity. Kingdoms are transferred from Nation to
Nation, E^clus. 10.
in punishment of their iniustices. It is the decree God has pronounced, and
which he has not ceased to put in execution in all successions of ages. "God
has dried the roots of proud nations (says the Sage) he has overturned and
extirpated them even to the foundations, he has buried their name with their
honor, and has blotted out their memory from the whole face of the earth. And
where, I pray you, are all those ancient Empires, which have devoured each
other, the iniquity of the latter furnishing sufficient instrument to Gods
Justice for the punishment of the former? These mighty workmanships of Fortune
have fallen to ground, not leaving any other relics of their greatness, save
only what the blast of hearsay, or the credit of a crasie paper, have been
able to transmit unto us; to testify how heretofore they have been extant.
Yea, and among all others, that of Alexander planted with most violence, has
least endured; whereas the Roman Empire, where justice has been more
observed, has been both more glorious and stable than all the rest. So far
forth (as Saint Augustine says) that God gave them this length of temporal
greatness, in recompense of their moral Justice. But among all States now in
splendour, is there any one that has longer flourished without interruption,
than the State of France, which during the sequence, revolution, and
vicissitude of above twelve ages, gathering still greater strength, and more
and more establishing it self, has acquired even amidst the tides, and
inconstancies of transitory things, a kind of eternity? And what maintains
it but justice, having often caused it to suffer, never to commit violences,
having diverse times seen it self both oppressed, and a Patron of the
oppressed, but never an oppressor; and which containing it self within the
limits God has allotted her, and Nature planted, has not suffered it self at
any time to seek further, save only either to recover her own right, or to
repress, and repulse injury, or to revenge another wrong, alone resembling to
Nilus, which only among all other Rivers, never quits or shifts his channel,
but to do good. All this shows, that both reason, authority, and experience
should cause men to conclude, that whatsoever is unjust, is not only shameful
and unseemely for Empires, but moreover both unprofitable, hurtful, and
pernicious, though not (at all times) for the present, yet at least for the
establishment of any perdurable greatness, which all States are to aim at:
and that after all, (what the holy Ghost has determined in Scripture is
undoubted) That only Justice raises people, Pro. 14.18
and that there is nothing but Justice, which gives a firm soliditie to
Thrones.

CHAP. 4. A digression from this discourse of justice, to the title of Just,
wherein our King holds his name and reign.
I Do willingly enlarge my self upon this discourse of justice, seeing our
King, slighting the title of Great, which his Scepter gives him; of
invincible, which his valor prepares for him; Imperial, which his virtue
allows him; of Conqueror, which his fortune affords him, together with all
these pompous and specious tules his modesty rejects; desires only to merit
the title of lust, and to cause France to taste the fruits of so fair and
mild a name. He well knows that Justice is the supreme perfection of Royal
greatness to draw near God, the strongest arms to subdue men; the most
sacred Majesty to imprint reverence, and the happiest conquest a King can
atchieve. If a King be a flower among men, Justice is his beauty; if a fragrant
odor, it is his sweet perfume; if gold, his value; if a Diamond, his luster;
if an heaven, his influence; if a Sun, his light; if an Angel, his office;
if the lively image of God, Justice is the pourtrait of his resemblance; if he
be the States eye, Justice is the apple of that eye; if the arm, its nerve; if
the hand, its force, if the heart, its life; if the head, its intelligence; if
the soul, its reason^. If he possesses only riches, Griffins who keep gold,
surpass him; if only strength, Bulls surmount him; if only courage, the Lion
exceeds him; if only tallnesse of stature, the Elephant is yet higher; if
only subtle, the Fox is craftier; if only arms, the wild Boar is better
provided; if only pompousnesse, the Lilly is better decked than Solomon
himself. But if he be endued with reason, he over-ruleth all; and if with
justice, he deserves to command over all. Let dignity make him the greatest,
power the strongest; treasures the richest; yet does Justice make him the most
worthy, let him secure himself by his arms, guard himself by his treasures,
command by his laws; but let him reign by Justice. In brief, Justice is the
rampart of his strong places, the Bulwark of his Cities, the prop of his
Crown: the mother of equality, the cement of union, the pillar of authority,
and the eye of obedience. Our King, touched with these considerations, and
inspired from heaven, as Solomon in his tender years, to understand the
importance of his charge, and weight of his Scepter, has addressed the like
prayer to Almighty God, exhibiting the same demand, as Solomon did in a
semblable necessity: 1 Reg. 3.
O Lord, thou have made me to reign in the place of my Father, thou have
placed me in the midst of a people which thou have chosen, amidst an infinite
people, the number whereof passes all that can be counted: Give then to thy
servant a docible spirit, to the end that discerning good from evil, he may
judge the people with justice and equity. This is the prayer he made to God,
and the grace he demanded from heaven in his tender years, as did Solomon,
requiring (as he did) not riches, not prosperity, not victories, not conquests,
but only wisdom and justice. Now if this prayer of Solomon were so pleasing
to God, as he not only granted him what he demanded, but further added what
he required not: Because (said he) thou have not demanded a long life, nor the
death of thine enemies, nor abundance of treasure, but rather wisdom to
discern judgment, and afford justice; behold, I have agreed to thy desires,
and have given thee a wise and intelligent heart, even so far forth, that
times past have not yet seen the like, nor shall future ages ever behold: but
for an overplus of my favors, I will give thee what thou have not as yet
asked, abundance of riches, and the greatness of a glory, which shall surpass
that of all thy predecessors. If God recompensed the holy and just desire of
Solomon with so many graces, shall we imagine he will now be less liberal to
the Nephew of Saint Louis, bearing his name, and walking in the steps of his
virtues? or that he will not grant to the like prayers, the same graces? to the
same vows, the like gifts? to an equal disposition, equal benedictions? The
Philosopher in his Ethics, Lib. 5. Eth. cap. 1.
compares Justice to the morning star^e, which prepares the Suns way, and
proclaims light to the world Since therefore this fair star has begun
to appear in the rising of thy Sun, O France, and since thy Sun has
chosen justice for his morning star, what can thou expect from the
progress of his course, but a day of peace, being (as the Prophet speaks)
the work of justice, O^us Iustitiae pax. Isa. 31.
so as if any cloud arise to darken his light, it shall only be to cause his
vigor the more to appear. And since the Scripture says: Domus Iu^i plurima
s^rti^ude. P^c. 15.
That the house of the just is a strong Bulwark; what storm, what tempest,
what attempts can prevail against the Kingdom of the Just. Pursue gloriously
(O generous Prince) thy begun course, effect thy holy desires, and by thy laws
establish the reign of Astraea; in the age of iniquity: March on (O clear
Sun) after this fair star, the fore runner of thy glory, and the messenger
of our felicity. Dissipate by these lights, the clouds of corruption, and God
will remove far from our heads, all the storms of mischief: Make thy France
a Temple of Justice, and God will make it a fortress of force. Plant Justice
there as a rampart, and piety as a defense; and God will there place felicity,
peace, and assurance, as limits.

See thou not already, O France, the fruits of the vows, and the effects of
these generous designs: Do thou not behold his justice as his morning star
shouting forth the point of his first beams, how it has expelled that law,
which exposed the palms of virtue, either to the hazard of not springing, or
to the traffic of avarice? See you not how it begins to open the gates of
honor to merit; which could not there enter, had it not in its hand either the
title of succession, or (as Aeneas) the golden branch, to give it passage. See
you not how virtue which lay neglected, begins to look up, and gloriously to
triumph? Rejoice O ye seats of justice beset with Lillies, we hope again to
see that no Hornet shall henceforth corrupt your flowers, but that only swarms
of Bees, daughters of heaven, shall there compose the honey of justice. And if
this age had as great a disposition to receive the ancient order, as our Prince
has a desire to renew it: should we not already see the iron of our ancient
Manors quit the rust, to resume (as he does) the shine and luster of the
golden age? But who can sufficiently celebrate all those other benefits which
his justice has produced for France in the first April of his age and reign,
renewing this ancient miracle of the I Will of Naxis, where the Vines put forth
their fruits together with their flowers?

That brutall rage of Duels, sacrificing the fairest flowers of the French
Nobility, by a bloody death, to an immortal damnation; the course whereof
could not, either by so many edicts, or prohibitions be any ways stopped: has
it not in conclusion laid down its arms in the hands of his invincible
justice? This Monster was conceived by a foolish passion of an imaginary
valor, as the Centaures, by the embracement of a cloud: vanity produced it;
folly bred it up, blood nourished it, yea the best blood in the whole body of
the State, as the monster whereof the Prophet Abacuc speaks, Abacuc 1. Esca
ei^^ electa.
which gapeth only after choice morsels: Great ones, Nobles, Hectors, were his
prey, and the obstinate error of spirits, passing into point of honor, did
yet further inflame (by the sting of glory) this fury and slaughter. What pity
was it to see the ancient but chery of the sacrifice of men's bodies renewed,
before the Idol, not any longer of a Moloch, or of Saturn, but of a glory as
false as it was cruel; yea and the blood of reasonable creatures which the
Pagans immolated to vain deities, Christians so profusely to pour forth the
like before the Idol of the vain phantome of honor? Whither go thou (O
blind Fury) and to what excess of folly and mischief does thy transportation
cast thee, causing thee so sinisterly to interpret a word, as that for a me^
Puntillio, for a Chimaera of vanity, conceived in thy phancie, to expose thy
blood in a meadow to iron, thy body to death, thy soul to perdition, and thy
honor it self for which thou undergoest all this to public infamy of divine
and humane laws? understandest thou not reason condemning thee? Edicts
threatening thee? God pursuing thee? the heavens thundering, and hell opening
under thee? Thy life which thou owe to God, to his Church, to thy King and
Country, go thou basely to prodigalize in a quarrel, where the combat is
unworthy, the conquest wicked; and the defeat fatal? where the combatants
keep close, the vanquished loses his soul together with his body, the
vanquisher takes his heels, his flight is his triumph, the fear of laws his
crown, the gallows his gain: briefly, where a slight matter is the subject,
a foolish persuasion the motive, a false honor the object, an assured
opprobrie the end, an immortal sorrow the issue, and an eternal misery the
fruit and recompense. O how deaf, blind, and obstinate is a soul once seized
upon with passion! deaf, not being able to hear the truth; blind not knowing
how to confess its error; obstinate that will not retire out of the abyss of
his assured ruin. All these charges, menaces, and chastisements of heaven and
earth, instead of repressing this giddy rage, did but further provoke it: yea,
Henry the Great, whose invincible arm suppressed the Hydra of our civil
wars with more than an hundred heads, could not yet subdue this furious
monster of Duels, either by his Edicts or authority: he had dissipated the
storms of our seditions, locked up war with iron chains, placed peace upon
pillars of brass; yet amongst all these sweets of peace, this unchained fury
of Duels, robbing France of her most valiant children, still afflicted her with
more fatal effects of so bloody a war. She lamented her daily losses, and so
many remedies uneffectually employed, caused her to fear lest this mischief
were incurable. When behold, her Lewis, stanching (as a Jasper sent from
heaven) by his sagenesse and prudence, the blood this fury drew from the veins
of his most noble subjects, has suddenly stopped her tears and griefs. And
as Fortune heretofore stayed the Conquests of Philip, to the end his son
Alexander might find subject to show his valor, so seems it, that heaven
limiting the good fortunes of Henry the Great, by the defeat of the Hydras of
our seditions, has purposely refused him the victory over this monster of
Duels, to reserve it for our Alexander, and thereby to share between the
Fathers valor, and the Sons Justice, the glory of the entire quiet, and
safety of France. Thou owe (O France) the beginning of thy good fortune, to
the Fathers arms, the perfection to the Sons laws. The one (Great) has
raised thee, the other (Just) has confirmed thee, the one by battles, has
laid the plat-forme of thy reestablishment, the other by his ordinances does
daily build and perfect thee. The one by his victories has cured the wounds of
war, the other by his prudence, that of Duels, which still continued bleeding
in thy body. Thou now see that accomplished, which wanting to thy wishes,
seemed to be deficient to thy good fortune; this rage is laid asleep, not
without astonishment; this fury extinguished not without admiration: the blood
distilling from thy veins by this channel is now happily stayed: This
generous blood formerly shed to thy loss, is now happily reserved for thy
defense. Nor have thou small occasion of doubt, to whom thou art more obliged;
whether to the Fathers valor, which has purged thee of the bad blood of
Rebels; or to the Sons justice, which has reserved for thee the best blood
of thy children. It is reported, how neither prohibitions, nor menaces of
laws, could at all stay the fury of the Milesian Virgins, immolating
themselves by a bloody death, till the infamy of being exposed naked after
their death, cured their spirits of this frenzy, shame gaining that of them,
which fear could not effect. So, since Duels have not (at Court) found this
vain applause, serving as a spur and object to their savage ambition; and
that our King is not satisfied in the only prosecution of them by his Edicts,
but has farther pursued them even to his Louure, by hissings and dishonours;
his Royal discretion has thereby found the true remedy against this blind
passion, which obstinating it self against the terror of all torments, could
be only overcome by the apprehension of this disgrace. A false honor
nourished it, a true shame has healed it.

Who therefore sees no, if he be not blinded, and who acknowledges not if he
be not ungrateful, the visible wonders of divine providence, in causing his
royal enterprises to be achieved with so great success, and more honor,
against all impediments; in such sort as to oppose his designs, is not to stop,
but advance their current? would not one say that heaven had passed a contract
with him, to overthrow whatsoever resists him? or that his Genius, which
managing all wills, forces likewise and captivateth all attempts under his
authority, all perils under his prosperity, and all disasters under his good
fortune? See we not (so soon as any storm rises against him) how heaven
brings him, (not as the Ancients have said of D^metrius) Cities surprised in
the hunting-toyles of his fortune, Plutarch in the life of D^met.
but hearts more happily submitted to his obedience by the nets of love and
duty? Seems it not, that God suffers not those assaults which molest him,
but only for his farther glory? As weight is to the Palm Tree causing it to
become more stiff; or fire to gold which refineth it. So it is credible, that
heaven, amorous of the title of Just, whereat his intentions aim, and whereof
his laws and wisdom have already afforded us the first fruits, works all
these miracles in sight of nations, to let the world see, that the victories,
triumphs, obedience of subjects, the good affection of the people, and all
sorts of prosperities do crown and accompany Justice. Plato in Hipparchus.
Plato reports how Hipparchus caused this excellent sentence to be engraven
upon a pillar erected in the market place of his chief City: Apply thy self
to that which is just: But our King even from his entrance to the Crown,
carries the same imprinted in his heart, he produces the fruits thereof in
his actions, he heapeth up the honor thereof in the general praises all men
afford him; already does History erect unto him a pillar more durable than
marble and brass, therein to leave engraven before the eyes of all after-ages,
the glory of the name of Just: and heaven conferring all these happy successes
upon him as a salatie and recompense, adds yet (for his farther honor) to
the crowns of Justice, the triumphs of valor.

Go on gloriously, O Son of Great Henry, and Nephew of Saint Lewis, in the
first traces of thy just designs, and let these fair beginnings hereafter
serve thee as a spur; and thy self, to thy self as an example. What more
royal or divine thing is there than to measure his counsels and actions?
conformable to what the Roman Philosopher said: That among Blephants, the
greatest conducteth the rest, but that amongst men the best is the greatest. To
that likewise which another answered to a certain flatterer who extolled the
greatness of a Prince: How is be greater than I, if he be not more just? And
who is greatest think you, as the holy Ghost speaks by the mouth of the
sage: He who observes justice, shall there find greatness and exaltation.
Justice is the root of immortality on high in the glory of God, here on earth
in the memory of men.

CHAP. 5. Adivision of Politic justice, into three members and parts, what
the Politic owes to God, what to himself, and what to the public.
I Here resume the clew of my discourse, and do beseech the Reader (if this
digression has seemed tedious unto him) to consider, that the sensibility of a
good so nearely concerning us, is never overlong to those who taste it, nor
the discourse to the relator; and besides treating of those benefits which
Justice brings to States: so present an example, has served as a confirmation
under the title of a digression.

I will therefore now descend from this general consideration of Politic
Instice, to the particular duties of so beautiful and useful a virtue.
Justice is as the herb called Trefoil, or the triple pointed Trident; or
Gerion with his three heads: For man having three principal objects of his
actions: God, himself, and his neighbor: Justice obliges him to all these
three; from whence are derived and sprung three offices and general duties of
Justice. These three branches rising from this root, does again divide it
self into three other small slips, producing the several fruits of such
duties as we are to yield to God, to our selves, and all men; and this
differently in consequence of the different obligation arising out of the rank
and place each man holds in the order of civil society. So as that Politic
Justice, whereof we speak, does first of all produce from its stock, three
great branches, to wit, these three general duties, the first toward God, the
second toward our selves, the third toward the public: these three branches,
do after each of them shoot forth other small twigs, namely the particular
duties to each one of these three, whereto Justice obliges the Politician. Our
duty toward God produces two: Religion with piety, and the right intention in
counsels and actions. The duty toward ourselves, other two; the care of a good
name, and the regulating of our actions and comportments. The duty toward our
neighbor produces four: good example, solicitude, fidelity, and the love of
public good. Now herein are comprehended all the other virtues, all the
endeavors and fruits of particular actions, which issue and are derived from
Politic Justice.

We will deduce all these points in order, through the sequence of this book:
but so as those who making Nosegayes in a garden composed of diverse quarters,
content themselves to take a single flower from each several border.

CHAP. 6. Of Religion and piety; being the first duty of Politic Justice,
reflecting upon God.
REligion is the first duty of Politic Justice, concerning God, not only out
of Philosophical reason, affirming how nothing acquireth greater credence and
authority toward men, Princes, and Magistrates, than to be esteemed Religious,
beloved and favored of God; as it is manifest by the examples of all such who
have either founded, polished, or governed Republikes: but chiefly because
those who here on earth supply Gods place, J have said ye are Gods, (says the
spirit of God in Scripture) are obliged by a more particular tie than the
generality of men: to acknowledge him whom they represent. All waters come from
the Sea, and return thither; all power, all authority and superiority comes
from God, and ought to return to him. It comes from God by extraction, it
should therefore return from us to God by homage: if the motive of
acknowledgment and duty have no less power over men, than Nature has
over-things inanimate. We see even among men, that those who have not their
dignities by extraction, but hold them of others, as from a Prince or King, are
obliged to increase in humiliation and acknowledgement toward their superior,
as they rise in greatness and authority over others: for should they (as
Sejanus) pervert their Masters beneficence into matter of slighting, pride and
rebellion, they would thereby convert their exaltation into occasion of ruin.
So the great ones of this world, who hold their dignities not of nature making
all men equal, but of the will, providence, and ordinance of God, which has
distinguished them into diverse ranks; as they are more obliged to God than all
other men; so ought they be more humble, grateful, and religious toward God
than others; and by how much the more his favor exalts them, by so much the
more should the consideration of their original meanness humiliate them. See
we not, that the farther a tree shoots up his branches toward heaven, the
lower it sinkes its root into the earth? the higher a house is, the deeper is
the foundation; and the wonder herein is, that its profundity supports it
sublimity, and the sublimity would become its ruin, were not the depth of the
foundation its firmest solidity. Is not this an instruction to the great men of
this world, that they should abase themselves by homage, Religion, and piety
toward God, in proportion as God raises them in authority over men: and if
the humility of this acknowledgement be not the foundation, and support of
their greatness, their own pride will be their destruction. God will debase
thee (said Daniel to King Nabuchadnezzer, who would not acknowledge God, but
rather seek to make himself God) God will debase thee even so far, as thou
shall learn, that the most high has dominion over the reign of men. The
Angels of the highest order are most obedient to God, most prompt to execute
his will, and who more then all others, acknowledging their own impotency, and
his omnipotency: and he who in his creation was the principal of all other
Angels, was not cast down from his rank, but for having fallen from this
humble acknowledgement. God puts down the proud, and exalts the humble,
says the Scripture. And in truth, if we observe in Histories all those proud
and impious persons, who as Nemrod strive to scale heaven, and lay the
foundation of their greatness in Atheism and irreligion, we shall find that
they have all of them builded Towers of Babel, that God has confounded them
all, and left the marks of their follies in their confusions, and of his wrath
in his revenge: we shall in conclusion see this truth of the wi^ked Antiochus
his confession, which Gods chastisements as a rack, wrested from his sinful
lips: Truly (says he) it is a just thing to subject our selves to God; and
that a mortal man should not dare to march equal with God. We shall on the
contrary side observe, that the piety of Princes has caused their estates to
flourish, and their religion has at all times maintained their crowns. Who
has reigned either longer, more happily, or more gloriously in Iudaea than
David? Solomon before his prevarication? Ezechias? Josias? At Rome, than
Constantine the great? In Greece, than Theodosius the younger? in France, than
Charlemaine and Saint Lewis? is not this to prove, that religion and piety
propose temporal prosperity for recompense? Time is her course, eternity is
her aim. Yet would God show by these examples, that (in consequence of his
promise) when we first seek his Kingdom, his justice, and the observation of
his laws, temporal blessings are further added, as by accessory and dependant
rights.

But that which should further incite those who have the government of States,
to a higher strain of Religion and piety toward God, than ordinary persons,
is the greatest need they have more than all others, of his illumination in
their counsels, of his conduct in their enterprises, of his force in their
executions, and of his provident care in their various occurrents, dangers and
difficulties. How often find they themselves entangled in Labyrinths, whence
neither humane reason, nor moral virtue can any way dis-engage them. And then
it is when they stand in need of a more sublime instinct, a more eminent light,
and more heroical virtue: which Aristotle himself, though a Pagan,
acknowledged in his Ethics; where he terms this virtue Divine and
supernatural, and those who are therewith adorned, divine persons. And in
another place he says, that those who find themselves touched by this divine
instinct, ought not as then to take advise of humane reason, but only to
follow the interior inspiration, by reason they are inspired by a better and
more sublime principle, than is the knowledge of reason, or the motion of
nature. But who sees not, that they who administer the weighty affairs of
Kingdoms and Commonwealths, where reason and humane Prudence often comes
short, have more need than all others of these instincts and these divine
motions, which God (doubtless) does more easily communicate to those whom a
true devotion draws nearer unto him. D. Tho. 12. Quest. 68.
Theology informs us (upon this subject) that for the inducement of souls
to these sublime motions poducing the generous acts of heroical virtues, God
imprinteth in them certain divine habitudes and supernatural inclinations
which are called infused gifts of the holy Ghost. Gifts which being distributed
by God, not so much for the particular good of the receiver, as for the
general good of others, seem to be more particularly reserved for them, who
have the charge and conduct of States, whether spiritual or temporal.

But is it not apparent, that those who become the most pious and religious
toward God, are the best disposed subjects to receive these spiritual
endowments, necessary for the high attempts of generous actions? Upon whom
shall my spirit descend, (says God by the Prophet) but upon him who humbles
himself before my face, and who fears my words? The fear of God, daughter
of true piety, is one of those gifts of the holy Ghost reduced to the number of
seven by the Prophet Isaiah: Isa 11.
A fear which dejecteth not the spirits (as Libertines will have it) but does
rather raise them, and by submitting them to God, elevateth them over the whole
world.

Examine History, and ye shall find, that they who have had piety and the
fear of God engrafted in their souls, are the men who have produced the
bravest acts, both of Magnanimity, Constancy, Wisdom, Prudence, Valor, and
Counsel, as well in war as peace: nor have they been weak in any thing,
save only in iniquity, a thing wherein the world so much shows its strength.
But iniquity is not strength, it is no better than weakness, either of the
understanding, which error blinds, or of the Will which passion
transporteth, or of the Appetite which pleasure captivateth, or of the Sense
which the world deceives: whereas piety and the fear of God arming the
understanding against falsity, the will against concupiscence, the appetite
against voluptuousness, and the senses against all snares, it causes the
soul to become valiant, invincible, and inexpugnable against all manner of
attempts, and proper for the production of generous actions and heroical
achievements.

Now besides that piety toward God disposes the soul to great and glorious
actions, (a requisite disposition for all good Statesmen) it moreover
procures the favor and love of God, thereby to cause all their designs
gloriously to succeed, and happily to surmount all oppositions. To this purpose
we read in our Histories, that Philip the King of France, after so many
battles, victories, and triumphs, which crowned him with immortal honor,
applying himself yet daily more and more to piety, to the exaltation of
Religion, to the foundation, enrichment, and adornement of Churches: certain
Statesmen intimated unto him (under color of public good) that so great
liberalities exhausted his treasure, and that he might employ this beneficence,
both to better purpose, and with greater glory to himself, in advancing the
poor families of soldiers, and gentry, then in adding more to the riches of
Churches and Altars. Ye then wonder (answered this wise King) at what I do
for the worship of God: but if you reflected upon the frequent necessities and
perplexities wherein we have been formerly plunged in our wars and battles,
and out of which the merciful hand of the Almighty has a thousand times
visibly protected and saved us, beyond all humane reason and likelihood, having
wrought so great things both for the safety of our person, and the glory of our
State: ye would find no excess, but rather a defect in what I do for his
service. I allege this sage answer as proceeding from a King who understood
the truth thereof by experience; to show, that if great persons, and those who
stand at the helm of great States and Empires, did feriously consider the
occasion they have to invocate the favor and particular assistance of God,
amidst so many traverses, obstacles, and difficulties, as daily encounter in
eminent affairs, they would become more pious and religious toward God, then
diverse of them for the most part appear to be.

CHAP. 7. Of the duties and particular fruits of Religion and politic Piety.
But since Religion ought not to be vain, nor without works, nor piety a tree
without fruit; the fruits therefore of piety fit for a right Politician, are
zeal toward the worship of God, obedience to his ordinances, reverence
toward his mysteries, respect to his ministers, and submission to his Church.
God has placed in heaven (says an holy Father) two great lights, the Sun
and Moon; and on earth two sovereign powers; the spiritual and temporal:
but as in the heavens, the Moon borrowes her light from the Sun; so on earth
the temporal ought to receive from the spiritual, the light of true wisdom,
necessary for its guidance. The law of God, which the Church proposes and
explicateth, ought to regulate the world; the light of God which this Sun
distributeth, ought to illuminate it; It goes astray if it follow not this
light, and it loses this light if it turn the back from this Sun.

CHAP. 8. Of the integrity of the Intention, which is the other duty of that
Politic Justice which reflecteth on God.
THe integrity of intention in counsels and actions, is the other duty of
Politic Justice toward God. For it is a quality requisite in every just and
honest action; as the form which gives being to moral honesty: but the
intention cannot be sincere, but by relation of the action to the true end of
man, which is God. So as the action cannot be good and just if it tend not to
God, either by the hearts intention, or at least by the nature of the work,
which of it self has relation to God, by means of the beauty of that object
it reflecteth on. And in this sense, all the excellent actions of Pagans and
Infidels, performed for the beauty of virtue, not for vanity, profit,
vengeance, and other vicious and irregular ends and affections; had of
themselves a kind of relation to God, though man be not aware thereof: Nay, it
is moreover the opinion of the most learned Divines, that these actions (by
their condition) appertain to eternal reward, though the hindrance of
infidelity causes them to fail in the attainement. For whatsoever is effected
(purely) for a virtuous end, is good; what is good, is gracious in Gods sight;
that which is agreeable to God, is conformable to his will, either revealed
unto us by his law, or ingrafted in us by nature; and whatsoever is suitable to
his will, belongs to life everlasting: since the Scripture says: That life
is found in the observation of his will: but each thing belonging to life
everlasting, is not sufficiently availeable for the acquisition thereof, if
faith, charity, grace, and all other necessary qualities do not concur. Who
knows not that the faith of a Christian dying out of the state of grace, is
notwithstanding a thing belonging to eternal life, in its own nature: yet by
reason of sin, though it appertain thereto, it arriveth not thereto: As the
child who is debarred of his paternall inheritance to whom it belongs, when
at any time the right acquired by his origin, becomes unprofitable unto him
by his offense. So all good moral actions, have naturally right to the
inheritance of celestial felicity, which is man's last end; but they fail
thereof through their default, when either sin, or infidelity makes their
former right unusefull to them. Now this is sufficient to show, that all
actions purely performed for a virtuous end, be they particular, acconomicall,
or Political, level and go directly toward God, though man dream not at all
of any relation to that end.

This foundation laid, I say, that to cause a Politic action to become just
and honest, it must be armed with a right intention, and which tends to God:
if not by the express cogitation and aim of the soul, yet at least by the
good and lawful quality of the object. But the object is good, when it is
conformable, either to natural reason, being the unwritten law, or to Gods
law, which is the written reason; or to just humane laws, and those not
contrary to God and nature, which is Reason; explicated, enlarged, unfolded,
and proposed by those who have authority, serving as a rule to all particular
actions. Every maxim, constitution, and action, being not squared, and added
to one of these three Rules, can reflect upon no other thing, than either
pleasure, profit, ambition, or some other disordinate passion: unlawful
objects, not being able to imprint in a moral act other than injustice and
dishonesty.

All this does punctually show us, that it is an obligation in Politic
justice concerning God to conform, by a right intention, our propositions,
counsels and actions, either to natural reason, or to divine law, or to just
humane laws, and by this means to cause the State to tend to God, which is
the common end both of the Church and State, of spiritual and temporal* of
body and soul. And truly since Justice wills us to afford to every man his
due, temporal States being of Gods institution and demaine, Justice commands
us, that an administration conformable to his will, should have relation to his
glory. Thither it is all ought to aim, namely amongst Christians who
acknowledge whence they come, where they are, and whither they tend, as knowing
their original, their estate and end. The whole world is made for man, and man
for God; now though he has two distinct parts, the body and soul, two
different motions, one of reason, the other of appetite: and consequently two
several estates, spiritual and temporal; yet so it is, that he has but one
only final end, which is the enjoyment of God. He is therefore obliged to
cause all to aim at God: body and soul; reason and appetite; the spiritual
and temporal: As the Prophet David who said unto God: Both my soul and my
flesh thirst after thee. All within me, aspireth to thee O Lord, my soul and
the powers thereof, my flesh with its dependencies, these two parts composing my
all: though different in nature, unite themselves by affection, and having but
one end, have likewise but one desire, causing their diverse motions to tend to
the same Center. See here, that not only the soul, but the body likewise
ought to aim at Almighty God, who is the final end, and will be the crown of
both: when after the resurrection, the soul faelicitated by the vision of the
Godhead, shall make the body happy by the redundance of her beatitude, so as
both of them shall enjoy God: the soul by vision, the body in its manner, by
the sensibility of these sweets: the soul by union, the flesh by participation
and society: the soul by the intermise of the light of glory, the flesh by the
communication of the souls glory. So as if God be the end, the Crown, and the
sovereign good, not of the soul only, but likewise of the body. And if these
two parts composing man, ought equally to aim at God; is it not altogether
necessary, that Politic power having charge to direct whatsoever belongs
to the body, should propose God both for object and end, as well as the
spiritual power, which governs these things touching the soul? If the flesh
cause man to perish, can the spirit save him? If the temporal make him slip
from God, the spiritual desiring to conduct him to God, shall it not see it
self frustrated of the desired end? To undo ones self on the one side, is no
less than to be lost on both sides: since the soul follows the body, the one
part the other, and the whole the parts.

CHAP. 9. Of the care of a good renown; being the first duty of Politic
Justice toward our selves.
AFter we have given to God our sincere Intentions, we after owe to our selves
the care of a good name, which is necessary in a Magistrate, for profiting the
public, as the communication of the Suns light is for illuminating the world.
Moses in Deuteronomy required this quality for those he intended to place over
the people, Cap. 2.
and this point depends on the other: for as a straight body casts an
upright shadow and a counterfeit one, a crooked: so commonly a good conscience
casts the shadow of a singular reputation, a wicked one, the shadow of a bad
fame. And though the intention be a secret of the heart, not coming to sight
before the eyes of men; yet does she shout forth (as a hidden root) the fruits
of such actions, as discover the treee. Ye shall know them by their fruits:
(says truth it self.) It was no unfitting resemblance, when the Ancients
compared virtue to the body, and a good name to the shadow following the same.
For as the body perspicuated by the light, casts a shadow, which may be called
the daughter of light, and of the body: of light causing it by encountering the
body; and of the body, producing it by being reflected upon by the light; So
virtue lightened by public acknowledgement, produces reputation, which may be
termed Ioynt-daughter to virtue, and acknowledgement, of acknowledgement which
seeing virtue, takes notice thereof, and of virtue which encountered by
acknowledgement, produces it. So that as the shadow is the production of the
body lightened, so honor is the child of virtue acknowledged. But it
happens that in the morning the Sun reflecting a far off upon the body,
the shadow goes before; toward noone, beating plumme upon it, the shadow
walks aside by it; toward evening, leaving it behind, the shadow follows it.
The like it is in rare and eminent persons: the first view of springing virtue,
begins betimes to cast before them the reputation which precedeth them,
levelling the way for them to great actions. In the midst of their course being
exposed perpendicularly to the eyes of all men, glory marches along by them;
and afterward in the evening of their age, the certain proofs they have
showed of their virtue and goodness, go before them as a clear Sun, to
prepare for them a renown which shall follow them eternally in the memory of
after-ages. Observe all the Ancients who have appeared upon the Theater of the
most famous States, honor has gone before them at their entry, accompanied
them in their course, and followed them after their death: honor has been
the Herald, which marching before them, has opened the way for them to great
designs: honor has been their inseparable convoy in the execution of their
famous exploits: honor has moreover been their immortal crown after their
decease. And it is a touch of Gods divine Providence in the conduct of
sublunary States; so to govern those whom he pleases to make choice of as
instruments of his favors, and for the safety of Empires, as he causes the
glory of their virtue betimes to appear amidst the darkness of most corrupted
ages, putting them into credit, in the midst of disorder, raising them in the
middle of ingratitude, maintaining them in the throng of envies, illustrating
them among calumnies: affording them this honor not for a subject of ambition
and vanity, but for occasion and obligation, to employ the virtue afforded them
for public utility, and after they have showed themselves worthy cooperators
with his Providence in so great a work, he for ever conserveth the memory of
theirnames, to the end their virtue having been useful for the age they lived
in, their example may serve for future times.

Good fame therefore is the inseparable shadow of virtue in public persons;
and as Mathematicians measure the height of the body by the length of the
shadow; and as the Ancients have discovered, (by the extent of the shadow of
Mount Athos) the sublimity of its eminent top; so shall we seldom be deceived
in taking the model of the virtues in eminent persons, from the measure of
their reputation. For it is a maxim verified by experience, that most men
following the tide of natural inclination, are more subject to scandalize,
than praise; and if they err in their judgments concerning those who govern
them, they are sooner transported to rash censures, than to waine praises. The
very shadow of one single vice, suffices to procure public blame, a thousand
virtues being no more than necessary to acquire general approbation. All men
take notice of faults, few inquire into perfections. We rather discover in God,
what he is not, than what he is: and imperfections which cannot possibly suit
with him, do sooner present themselves to our imaginations, than perfections,
though absolutely essential in him. A small error was soon espied in
certain pictures Apelles exposed in public, but a thousand excellent touches
therein were not at all observed. Philopaemons dwarf like stature was
contemned, but the magnanimity of his spirit uncommended. One hour of Eclipse
causes the Sun to be more gazed at, than a thousand clear days. All men
look upon the Sun in Eclipse, but there never was any, save one only
Eudoxus, who lost his sight by the over great pleasure he took in fixedly
beholding those glorious beams. Those soldiers who followed Caesar's triumph,
published his vices, but concealed his victories. Briefly, one single
imperfection among a million of excellent endowments in a public person, is
sufficient to stir up the sting of tongues. As one only ulcer in a sound
body, is enough to draw flies to fall upon it. So as the most certainetriall of
a virtue appearing in public, is the good reputation and common approbation of
the people, by so much the less suspected when it praises, as it is more
inclinable to carpe, than commend: and in that nature and custom inclining it
to invectives, there had need be a very solid subject to draw it to
commendations. The general voice is very defective in what concerns the
knowledge of such truths as we are to follow, and in the election of those good
things we are to affect; since the senses, not reason rule these decrees. And
truly herein this sentence is verified, That the greatest voice is the worst.
But in the approbation or reprobation, in the blame or praise of public
persons, experience has almost at all times verified this contrary Maxim: The
voice of the people is the voice of God. And it is a strange thing to consider,
how that which causes them to err in the judgment of general truth, keeps
them from erring so easily in the approbation of particular actions: The reason
is, for that before they approve any action, but chiefly a public one
concerning themselves, as being good, and just, it is necessary the benefit be
so clear, so evident, and palpable, as to cause it self to be perceived by
its utility, and to discover it self by its own clearenesse. Settled and well
framed spirits, judging by Maxims, presently perceive a far off, the good of
a public action; but the muddy-brain'd multitude judging only by the sense,
sees not at all, but when experience has so manifested it unto them as there
is no question to be made: It knows not how to commend, but when it tastes
the fruit. Wherefore in this point, the voice of the people is ordinarily an
Oracle. Besdes, the knowledge of what is worthy of honor, is general to all,
and is often more clear in those, in whom art has not corrupted nature, and
who not knowing how to cloak ill, by reasons, precepts, and apparances of
good, cannot admit nor approve good but ^^its naked purity, and in the
ingenuity of ^^s natural grace.

Moreover, God often pronounces his judgments by the mouth of the people.
Balaams she-Asse speaks, and God inspireth words. Sucking babes unloose the
string of their stammering tongues to praise virtuous persons: now it is God
himself who makth use of babes and sucklings, to raise the praises of virtuous
persons to farther perfection: they afford the tongue, God gives the motion;
the suffrage is from earth, but the sentence from heaven.

All this proves, how the common voice of the people in the praise and
commendation of famous persons, seldom straye^h from truth: and chiefly when
it is not only a common and universal voice, but a constant, firm, and
persevering approbation. For, to be only approved by the people for some short
time, or during the hear of some plausible action, is rather to be esteemed a
sudden flash of fortune, than any true testimony of merit: it is rather a
reproach than a glory: since this may well happen to most wicked persons, to
the seditious, to Saturnines, to Gracchies. But to be constantly, and with
perseverance commended by common suffrages, cannot be other than justly, and
with reason. Phocion himself, and Aristides have not enjoyed this privilege,
to whom though virtue has not been deficient, yet has good fortune failed
them. And truly, to conserve constantly an untainted reputation, amidst so
many affections, opinions, judgments, passions, motions, various interests,
among so diverse oppositions, affairs, difficulties, favors, disgraces,
alterations, vicissitudes; and worldly revolutions; I cannot say whether one
has more need of integrity, of prudence, or of good fortune; or rather of an
equal share in all the three: The gold is well refined that abides this
touch, the liquor well purified which passes by this Alembeck, the child
worthy of Sparta which this vinegar tries; the lot very legal that swims upon
this Rone, the Palm very strong which boweth not under this burden; the only
and singular Alpheus which conserveth the sweetness of his waters, through the
brackish waves of this Sea: and that name is happy and right fortunate, which
can pass through so many censures, without being interessed, and by so many
mouths without being blasted.

CHAP. 10. Of the obligation concerning a good reputation for profiting the
public
THis general consideration of the reputation which accompanies the virtue of
public persons, opens me the way to speak more particularly of what
concerns this subject. And first, of the obligation which they who desire to
profit the public, have, to endeavor to acquire, and conserve this good
repute. A good reputation makes not the virtue greater, but only more
illustrious; it affords it not any farther perfection, but greater glory; and
as the light of the Sun adds nothing to the beauty of the Universe, but
does only manifest it, and expose it to sight: so honor is a light which
augmenteth not, but discovers the beauty of virtue: Praise increases not,
but declares merit. Now it is not sufficient for man (borne for society) to be
good in himself, if he appear not so to others, and that he be acknowledged
for a good man, not so much for his private glory, as for the public avayle;
since if contenting himself with the testimony of his private conscience, he
neglect that of a good name: he is unjust toward himself, depriving himself
of the honor due to virtue; and more unjust toward others in frustrating them
of the fruit of that good example he owes them. For it is another fruit of
honor, that by making virtue more illustrious, he thereby makes it more
useful, and by how much he causes it to be more cognoscible, the more
profitable does he make it; the praise he produces being as a sacred seed
causing either the secret reproach of the opposite vice, or the desire of a
like virtue to spring in all hearts. It is moreover the nature of good to
become more profitable, the farther it is diffused. Whence it is, that all
things naturally have either seed to communicate by the production of their
semblables whatsoever good they have, or an inclination to diffuse themselves
to the end to communicate them. Salt has not its savor, but to the end to
bestow it; Musk its scent, but to impart it, the Sun its light, but to make it
common. All whatsoever has any perfection capable of communion, is borne for
others: should virtue then alone be to it self? should it be solitary in the
world, or so envious, as to hide her beauty, or so particular, as thereof to
deprive the public? If she conceal the good she has through envy, she is
criminal, if by negligence, she is vicious, if to avoid the danger of vanity,
her over-advisednesse makes her timorous, and this overmuch fear
reprehensible. It is requisite she avoid her detriment, yet not that she
abandon her duty. Virtue bears the obligation of profiting the Public
continually annexed thereto, and the generality have right to demand this debt
of her, whereof she cannot duly discharge her self, without endeavoring to
acquire and conserve a good fame in producing laudable and inimitable actions.
Let men see your good works, says the Scripture: whereupon diverse learned
Divines have held, that although every man be absolute master of his own goods
to give or dispose them at his pleasure, yet that he is not absolute disposer
of his same, but only the faithful guardian and dispencer thereof; he owes
the conservation thereof to the public, though he neglect it for his own
particular: nay, though he were Master, yet so it is (as the Civilians say) it
^oncerneth the Commonwealth, that pri^ate persons should not mis-employ their
goods; how much more then that they wrong not their reputation? If therefore
the good fame of private persons be the publi^ke intrest, what shall we say of
that of public persons, and of such who raised up to the throne of honors,
are obliged to cause, their virtues to appear by so much the more illustrious,
as it is farther exposed to the view of all men, and by so much the more
profitable, since it ought to be useful to all others?

That degrees and dignities do particularly oblige public persons to conserve
their reputation, as in the world, and in man the little world, the parts which
hold the most eminent places, have more luster and beauty than the rest
The rank they hold sufficiently shows, what they ought to be, and what
manner of persons they ought to appear. Do we not plainly see* how
whatsoever is most high, and eminent in the Universe, has more gloss and
majesty then the rest? So as one would say, that nature desired to divide to
each thing; either beauty according to the rank, or a rank proportionable to
its beauty. The celestial bodies raised on high above the rest, as upon the
fane or pinnacle of this beautiful Temple of the world, have they not likewise
more splendour than all other bodies, and seems it not that the clarity they
have, makes them worthy the place they possess? Among elementary bodies, fire
holding the highest place, is it not the most pure? and the earth enjoying the
lowest rank, is it not inferior to all the rest, as well in beauty as
situation? In the order and disposition of the parts, whereof man's body is so
gracefully composed; the face as most eminent, is it not accompanied with a
greater variety of graces, adorned with more attractions, animated with more
lively colors: and the eyes placed in the upper part of the face, as stars in
the firmament of this little world, show they not in their excellency (far
surpassing all other parts) the justice nature observes in the distribution of
ranks? Are not these, as it were secret instructions given by nature to those
who hold the highest dignities among men, to raise (by a good reputation) the
splendour of their virtues, in equality with their ranks, and to show themselves
most worthy of honor, as it imports they should be most honored, as being
the face and eyes of the States body, the Sun and firmament of the
Commonwealth? when the earth shows clearer than the skies, and the feet
fairer than the face; is it not a prodigy in nature, a monster in reason, and a
disorder in policy?

That a good name is needful for public persons, for the authorizing their
dignity and virtue.
Now besides the degree they hold, the very service they owe to the public,
obliges them to the care and observation of their renown, without which all
their actions being without reputation, will prove unprofitable, and all their
advises as the Oracles of Cassandra, hissed at, and rejected, how good or true
soever they be. For as the Coin not marked with a lawful stamp, passes not
in matter of merchandise, though it be of good gold or silver: so the words and
actions, not carrying the mark of a good reputation, suit not with general
approbation, even when they are just, and may be useful. The substance is
good, but the stamp is rejected. Truth it self loses its grace and weight in
the mouth of such as are suspected of vice and untruth, and even virtuous
actions are not readily received, coming from such whose innocence is
questionable. We fear them, as we do Presents sent from enemies, either that
they are mistaken, or that they seek to deceive. No man will believe (as the
fable says) that the Fox will give sound advise, or that the Wolf can do
good, the skin is suspected though the counsel be sound. Who knows not,
that in a certain ancient Republicke, a good law which a suspected person
propounded, would never be admitted before the same, was proposed by a person
of known integrity? So much does suspicion enervate, and a good esteem
maintain credit.

Nor does the defect of a good renown only breed suspicion, but even scorn,
which does utterly ruin authority, and (therewith) all the fruit of sagest
counsels, and fairest actions. Opinion rules all the world, and sets the
value on all things, yea even on men, and on virtue it self: It extends its
empire, or (if you please to have it so) its usurpation over the most sacred
things: and virtue it self I mean, that generous virtue vaunting to extract
her estimation from her self, sees her self constrained (of she desire
authority) to beg it of opinion. If she rest satisfied with her own
conscience, she must be forced to please her self in print: but if she will
appear, and make her self useful to men, she must necessarily have two
witnesses if she intend to be receiueable: and that to the private testimony of
the conscience, she add the suffrage of public esteem.

CHAP. 11. Of the means to acquire, and conserve a good renown.
But to acquire, and conserve this good name, The first means is avoiding ill
so necessary for the maintenance of the authority of virtue, and the dignity
of high charges: the most assured means is that which King Agesilaus shows
us: To say that which is good, and to do what is honest: which in a word is, to
show our selves irreprehensible in our counsels, and actions. If you will have
good renown, learn to speak well, and to do better (says Epictete in
Strabo) Whereupon Socrates gives this brief instruction to Magistrates, for
the acquiring a good name, to wit, to endeavor to be the same they would
appear. For both mines of gold, and springs of water, though hidden, do
notwithstanding continually send forth certain marks upon the surface of the
earth, which discover them, the former small grains of gold, the latter
coolness and humidity: So likewise true virtue engraven in the soul, daily
sends forth certain and evident signs of her presence, and as flashes of
her light Dissimulation may counterfeit truth, but never imitate her, and less
perfectly represent her. The Ape bears certain touches of man's face, but
every man still knows it for an Ape. The painted grapes of that ancient
Limmer, had the form and color of true ones, but they deceived only birds.
The counterfeit Cow of Myron, deluded only other cattle. The apples of Sodom
deceive the eye beholding them, but not the hand touching them. Counterfeit
gold may impose true apparances upon the eye, but it cannot cosen the test.
Apparances and pretexts, may well disguise vice, but facts will manifest it:
and if Midas have Asses cares, he is much the nearer to hide them, or to
stop men's mouths; when Reeds and Canes having neither eyes to see, nor
cares to hear, will find a tongue to discover and divulge it. There is
nothing so bidden, but comes to light, (says the Scripture.) A good name, and
chiefly in men elevated to honor, is a tender business, and of the nature of
flowers, which lose their smell and grace if they be but only touched It is
therefore not only necessary to preserve it from blame by avoiding ill, but
even from suspicion, in eschewing whatsoever carries the shadow thereof: blame
foyleth honor, suspicion blasteth it: and though, after difference, virtue
rest entire, yet does the authority thereof remain wounded: and as the Sun
eclipsed by the opposition of the gloomy body of the Moon, remains still
clear in it self, but darkesome to us. So virtue eclipsed by the mischievous
encounter of suspicion and public distrust, though she be at all times clear
and shining in her self, yet so it is, that she becomes obscure and useless
for others.

2 In producing the works of virtue.
To leave one term, is not to touch the other. To avoid evil is as much as not
to be ill, but it is not presently to be good. Virtue (faith the Ph^losopher)
tends to operation: to avoid blame, is not to be reproachable, but it is not
instantly to be commendable. Praise is due only to virtuous actions: but to
fly vice, and practice virtue, to avoid reproach and merit glory, is the
perfection. It is from thence the splendour of a fair and solid renown
resulteth. Men cannot praise, but what they prize, nor prize but what they
know; nor know but what they discover. Virtue appears not, it is hidden in
the soul, but the reputation her works produce in the opinion of men, is a
light causing her to be both admired and reverenced. To this purpose the
Astrologers say, that we see not the Sun, but the light thereof only: and
the Philosophers, that we discover not the presence of spiritual substances,
but by their actions. The good odor discovers the Musk, good works virtue.
We see not God, the Angels, the soul, nor the wind, but we perceive Gods
presence in the world; the Angels in their place, the soul in the body, the
wind in the air, by their effects: of God by his Providence, of the Angels by
his wonders, of the soul by its discourse, of the wind by its blast. Would
thou have thy virtue commended? let us see it. Desire thou we should see it?
cause it to operate, show her works, and we shall perceive her presence,
afford us her fruits, and we will return her due commendations. How will thou
have us know, that thou art in possession thereof, if thou producest it not, or
that it is living in thee, if it have no operation? It cannot be without
living, nor live without working Habitude (says the Philosopher) is in the
power, virtue in the action; virtue cannot be idle, if she be so, she dies; if
she dies, she is no more. Fire leaves to be, when it gives over burning; the
spring dries up when it leaves running; the tree dies when it puts forth
no more leaves. The Crocodile (as they say) leaves to live, when he makes an
end of growing: the heart loses life as s^one as motion. The life of all
things ends with the^r operation. So virtue ceasing to operate, is either not
any longer any thing, or will speedily be reduced to nothing; She is either
dead, or drawing on toward her end, her vigor is extinguished with her
action, and her idle languishing and dying habitude only remains.

CHAP. 12. Of the ordering of life and manners, which is the other head of
Politic Justice toward himself.
Virtuous actions then are necessary, both for the conservation of virtue, and
for the production of honor and praise, which is her light and luster. Here
may enter, nay here ought all virtues to meet, not only Politic, but even
those virtues proper to a private man, as temperance, chastity, sobriety,
humility, modesty, benignity, and others, which regulate their lives and
manners, who are therewith adorned: these being not precisely necessary in a
Magistrate, as a Magistrate, but very fitting as he is a man, and more as he is
a Christian* Nay, I say as a Magistrate, he ought to possess them in a higher
degree than the vulgar; since in a selected person, nothing ought to be
ordinary, but all choice, all high, and all proportionable to the place he
holds: For as man (as touching the body) participateth of the elements with
beasts, and plants, but yet in a more excellent manner, proportionable to the
dignity of his reasonable nature, raising him above the rest of corporal
things: so those virtues practiced in a slack manner among the people, ought
in Princes and Magistrates to be far more eminently exercised. For they being
instituted not only for the maintenance of peace, but of good manners likewise
among the people, they owe for the one, vigilance, and conduct; for the other,
example and good life, and if peace requisite in society, be not ordained and
appointed but to cause them to live virtuously, and according to the laws of
just reason, it seems that those who govern them, are not so much redevable
for their good guidance in causing them to live in peace, as for their good
example in procuring them to live well. The one is but the mean, the other the
end. Wherefore it is, that not only Politic virtues, but all the rest
likewise are right necessary in Magistrates, even by the laws of Pagans, and
by the decrees of humane wisdom. Who knows not the Carthaginian law,
commanding such a temperance, as it even obliged men to abstain from wine? Who
is not acquainted with the Roman laws, so strictly enjoining Chastity to
Senators, and to others raised to honors, as the privation of their dignity
was the penalty of their impudicity? It is apparent that Quintus Curtius, (of
an Illustrious family) was degraded from the Senate by the Censors for his
adul^eries, S^l^^st in Con^u. Cat^^^^.
and that Lucius Sulpitius, of a Confularie family, for a small suspicion of
incontinency, was not only dismissed from his dignity, but moreover cast into
prison? Who has not read what that ancient Chancellor to Thierry, King of the
Goths said; That Purple could not be dyed, but by Maiden hand^: which
sufficiently shows how it cannot be worn but by modest persons. Who is
ignorant what the same King Thierry writ to a certain person whom he appointed
for Judge: Be, said he, the Temple of Innocence, the sanctuary of temperance,
the Altar of Justice; let every profane thing be far removed from so sacred
a charge, under a religious Prince, Magistracy ought to be a kind of
Priesthood. I allege this, not to swell paper, but to confirm my proposition,
that even humane laws, without speaking of Christian and divine obligations,
though far more perfect and strict in this case, require in those who govern,
besides the virtues necessary for good government, those likewise requisite for
well living. For how can any expect to be rightly governed by him* who lives
disorderly himself? by h^s conduct, who knows not how to guide himself? or
look for public and punctual discipline from him, who suffers passions and
vices to bear chief sway in his private family? If an ancient Author say,
That he who is not a kind husband, cannot be a good Senator: and the Apostle,
That he who rules not well his family, cannot govern the Church well: How
can he who is not an honest man, ever prove a good Magistrate, or that he who
suffers shipwreck of a good conscience, should have care of the Commonwealth?
He (says S Basile) who suffers himself to be transported by Passion, how
can he govern others by reason? He, in whom will, sensuality, and a very beast
bear sway, how can he be thought fit to govern men? He who no longer will do
himself Justice, how can he afford it to his neighbor? The man who is
mischievous to himself, how can he be good to others, says holy Writ. Can one
communicate what he has not, or give what is not in his power? The Gospel
says, We gather not Grapes from Thorns, nor Figs from Thistles. This shows
the connection and tie, which is between Politic virtues, and those in a
private person, which indeed are as the Basis and ground of the former, as
nature is before dignity, the man before the Magistrate, and the substance
before the accident. The Justice which each man owes to himself, obliges
him, first to regulate his soul, his affections, his passions, his motions and
vices; and then he shall become the more capable to render Justice to others,
by how much he shall know by himself what is due unto them. Natural and
divine laws do only propose our selves to our selves for a rule and measure
of what we owe to our neighbors.

Moreover, the ordering and suppression of passions and vices is requisite in
Magistrates, by reason these darken the understanding, deprave the affections,
and make man incapable to give good and wholesome counsel; since the vicious
and irregular soul, either sees not what is good, through imprudence, or
suppresseth it our of malice; but also by reason the vices and excesses of
those who govern, do at all times draw after them the ruin of States.
Luxury, riot, and intemperance, draw them to great expenses; and prodigal
expenses, to extortions, injustices and violencies. One abyss draws on
another; Steph Tornacensis. 215.
said an ancient Bishop of France. The pit of pleasures draws on the gulf of
expenses, and the abyss of expenses, that of rapines. Thence it is, that the
ancient Roman laws prescribed the measure and mediocrity in matter of
apparel, train, and table, to all those who governed the Commonwealth For,
in truth, all vices in great persons are prejudicial to the Public, since
neither fire, water, greatness, or power, cannot exceed their limits; but this
excess does speedily overthrow all the ordinary bounds, and all the most
commodious preventions in the world. These observing order, are most useful;
but quitting once their confines, they become most pernicious. The Sun
quickening all things by its light, causes all to quake at its Eclipse. If
avarice possess them, extortion follows; if ambition, private plottings; if
choler, cruelties; if hatred, revenge; if envy, look for commotions, the
overthrow of all States.

Who knows not that the hatred of Marius against Silla, of Aman against
Mordocheus, of Theophilus, Patriarch of Alexandria, against Saint John
Chrysostom, of Licinius against Constantine the Great, transported the first
to the ruin of all the City of Rome; another to destroy the whole nation of
the Jews; a third to disturb all the Eastern Church; and the last to
prosecute all the Christians within his Empire. Of so great importance is it,
that the passions of great persons should be contained by the bridle of reason,
as the fury of wild beasts under iron and chains. So woeful a thing it is,
when a fool and a sword, vice and authority, passion and power meet together.
But virtues concerning the government of particulars, are yet necessary in
public persons, for a concluding consideration; to wit, for the acquiring
reputation and good same, being things of no mean consequence for the
maintaining authority. For, though men be obliged to reverence power, so it is
notwithstanding, that they cannot reverence it heartily, unless it be visibly
accompanied with a good life. Otherwise they cause us to be of Salvians
opinion: That dignity in an unworthy person, is an ornament in the dirt: Or as
Saint Basil said, That he who is a servant to sin, D. Basil crat de Prinscip.
is unworthy to be master over men.

True it is, that nature made all men equal, but if order will have a
distinction of ranks, Justice ought to make this distinction, and merit the
election. And though both divine and humane laws command us to honor our
superiors, though vicious and irregular; yet so it is, as we distinguish in
this case, between the dignity and the person, between the Image of Isis, and
the Ass that carried her. Reverence is always slack, and subject to the
least oppositions and chances, when it is, as it were divided between honor
and scorn.

It follows therefore, that the true means to maintain the honor of any
office, is to join thereto a good life, which causes the person to be
reverenced.

CHAP. 13. Of good Example, which is the first duty of Politic Justice
toward the Public.
HEreon depends the last office of Justice, concerning those things the
Magistrate owes to the Public; being no other than good example, vigilance,
solicitude, fidelity, and love to public good. He owes to himself the
study of virtue, for ordering his life, and the honor of his dignity: he owes
it to the public for a pattern and subject of imitation. The Philosopher
says, Arist. Bonus omnium mens^ra.
That the just man is the rule and measure to all others. Since being what all
men ought to be, he shows to all what each man ought to do. And truly,
since the rule of man's life is no other than the law of just reason, he who
lives accordingly, is he not the living law, and he animated rule of all other
men's lives? No v who better deserves to be a director and moderator of men,
then he who may be the rule of their lives? and who can better regulate their
lives, than he who rightly directs them? To whom can it better belong to
govern them, than to him who is able to rule them; or to rule them, than to him
who rightly governs them. To whom better suiteth, either power seconded by
virtue, capable to conduct men to their true end; or virtue, armed with power
to draw them thereto? The States and Policies regulating humane society, aim
(as I have lately toached) not only to cause men to live peaceably, but
virtuously likewise, and suitable to the laws of reason, being the true good of
man. This was the Maxim and aim of Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon, Licurgus,
Solon, and of the Roman Civilians; of whom Tertullian in his Apologeticke gives
this testimony, that their laws were near approaching to innocence. And all
those who have at any time either described, erected, or polished Republickes
and Empires; but chiefly Christian States, which take their rule and level
from Gods law, aim at this one end: For (as an ancient Bishop of France said
very gravely) Moses gave the form of living to the Hebrews, Numa to the
Romans, Steph. Tornacensis. Epist. 166.
Phoroneus to the Grecians, Tr^smegistus to the Egyptians, and the Son of God
to Christians. Nay, they raise themselves higher, and aspire even to conduct
men to God, concurring with spiritual power, and lending thereto forces and
succors toward so pious an enterprise. Whereupon Constantine the Great was
not in the wrong, when he termed himself a Bishop out of the Church; since
the same care and vigilance which Bishops have within the Church to train up
souls to God, either by persuasion, example, commandment, or by the threats
of the spiritual sword: the like had this religious Prince abroad in Policy
concerning his State, by his persuasions, by his exemplary life, by his laws,
and by the power of the temporal sword. Not putting (by usurpation) the sickle
of his authority into the Churches harvest; but zealously affording the
charitable hand of public force to the reapers therein. Now Princes and those
who have the administration of States under them, have double means to arrive
to this end, whereto they ought to tend: justness of laws and exemplarity of
their lives. The law commands, forbids, permits, punishes, recompenceth;
commands good, forbids evil, permits what is indifferent, punishes
transgressions, rewards obedience. When example comes from whence law
proceeds; without commanding, it commands the good in doing it; without
forbidding, it forbids evil, in flying it; without speaking, it permits what
is lawful in practicing it: and besides, it makes all men clearly see the
equity of punishment, in avoiding what the law accounts criminal, and the
justice of recompense, in performing those things she rewards. The law, for
its enforcements, has Judges, Sergeants, Executioners, Tribunals, Gallows,
Whips, the Sword and constraint. Example has only mildness, attractions,
sweetness, love, reason; yet does it sooner reduce men under the yoke of its
Empire, thus naked and disarmed, then the law, as well armed as it is. For, the
arms of law can only strike the body, but the shafts of example slide even
into the heart and soul. Gayning the heart, the whole man is caught, the Will
is enchained, the affections captivated, and are sooner drawn to their duty by
the mildness of reason, than by the rigor of commandment. Men (says Seneca)
trust more to their eye, than their ears, to what they see, than to what they
hear.

Besides (as the Philosopher says in his Ethickes) Good presented in
particular, Arist. lib. 10 Eth. ca. ^.
and single, does more move by example, than in general, and in gross, as the
law propounds it. Example has more efficacy than Philosophy to teach, more
persuasion than eloquence to incite, more authority than the law to command,
and is of greater force than arms to compel: Without arguments it convinces,
without discourse it persuades, without menaces it commands, without
Sergeants it constrains, and forces men; yea, even those who will neither
credit reason, nor consent to persuasion, nor obey authority, nor fear any
force, cannot refuse imitation to good example. And though the law, and force,
have often more power to deter men from vice, yet at least it cannot be denied,
but example has greater power to incline them to virtue, which is the end of
the law; and the aim of its menaces and chastisements. Example proposes
virtue not as dead, in writing, but lively in action; it shows reason, not
imperious in its precepts, but attractive in its operations; it intimates the
law, not by the commandment of the superior, but by his life; which does more
powerfully command And truly, since civil Lawyers say, that the Magistrate
himself is the living law, ough he not likewise to affirm, that his good
example is a lively and perpetual promulgation of the law? Hence arises the
obligation, tying those who command, to join good example to just
commandments, to establish the one by the other, and not to destroy obedience
in inferiors by neglect; or authority in themselves, by vice; and in all men,
good manners by licentiousness. But besides the power, we are to observe the
credit Example has over hearts: Is there any thing more just, than from whence
the law proceeds, thence should the model for the observation thereof issue;
and that the same power, intimating it as needful to reason, should make it
grateful to the will. Men whom nature has made free, would not be ruled
Despotically, and servilely (as the Philosopher says) but Royally and
Politickly. They are rather to be induced by reason, than hated by constraint;
and by showing them by example the Justice of commandments to cause the
necessity of obedience to become voluntary by the desire of imitation. But if
the superior do that himself which he forbids, or does not the same he
commands, he either condemns his law by his life, or his life by his law,
showing how either his law is unjust, or his life irregular, or both the one or
other ridiculous.

To which purpose Seneca writing to Lucilius, spoke a word to be engraven in
the hearts of all Commanders. Seneca ad Lucil. Ep. 30 s^ tibi omnia sub^cere
v^li^, te sub^ce vations, multos reges ^i ratio te rexerit.
If thou will (says he) subject all things under thee, suffer thy self to be
ruled by reason; if reason rule thee, thou shall rule the world.

Moreover, greatness and dignity draws a strict obligation with it of
shining by good example, and of imitating the Sun and Stars, which are not
elevated above the heavens, but to show day to the earth. So as if inferior
bodies take their light from superior ones, is it not requisite, that in
humane society, mean persons take it of Magistrates as the earth does from
heaven? If in the order of the Hierarchicall glory, the higher degrees (as
Saint Denis says) illuminate, purify, and perfectionate those of inferior
orders: if in the order of Grace* the Angels inlighten, instruct, and purify
our souls, inferior unto them: if in the order or nature, the celestial
bodies afford day, ornament, and Grace to elementary bodies, is it not fitting
for the accomplishment of universal order, that in the oeconomie of Policy,
those who are as heavens and Angels to other men, should enlighten, purify,
and elevate them to perfection, by the example of their virtues? The law of God
obliges them thereto in diverse sorts, both by the name he gives them, calling
them the little Gods of men, and by the commandment he enjoyneth them to
shine in good works: and by the charge which he imposes upon them, to
regulate their inferiors, and by the rank he allows them above others, and
by the menaces of a more severe judgment, and more rigorous pains he
intimates unto them in case of transgression.

For, their life is of such consequence, as it gives the motion and inclination
to all people; all ages lean to that side where the balance takes it draught;
inclining either to the left hand toward vice, or to the right toward virtue,
by the estimate of their example. Such as are the governors of the City, such
are the Inhabitants (says the spirit of God in the Scripture,) they are not
such as his laws would, but such as his manners are: they harken not to his
commandments, they imita^e his life; they regard not the dead law, but cast
their eyes upon the living law, which caused this ancient Chancellor to
Thierry King of the Goths to say; That it is easier for nature to err, C^ssi^d
l. 3 v^r. F^ 12. F^^^^^e: ^^rare natura^^ quan P^t^^ce^em (...) ^^mare
R^^^pu^^can^.
than that a Prince should frame a Common wealth unlike himself. One shall
sooner see Plants and living creatures fail in the generation of their likes,
Briars to bear Roses, Poppies Pinkes, Brambles Bays, Cypres trees Shrubs,
Wolves Lambs, Hindes bring forth Lions, and Buzzards Falcons. For we shall
never see Princes and Magistrates frame an age unlike themselves; lust if they
be wicked, regular if they be dissolute; chaste if they be immodest; religious
if they impious Under Romulus, Rome was warlike; under Numa religious, under
the Fabritij, continent; under the Cato's, regular; under the Gracchi,
seditious; under the Luculls and Antonines, intemperate and dissolute; under
Constantine the Great, the Empire is Christian; under ^ulian idolatrous; under
Valens, Arrian. The example of King Jeroboam caused the whole people of Israel
to enter into latry: whereas during the reigns of David, Ezechias, and Josias,
religion and piety were seen to flourish. Wherefore the scandal, which the
lives of great persons give is called Manslaughter in Scripture: since as S.
Augustine relates, Ose 1.
he who lives dissolutely in the sight of all men, kills (as much as in him
is) the souls of all such as observe him; inflicting death on all those who
imitate him, and offering the like occasion even to those who follow him not.
Sin (says Saint Gregory) has a great and powerful bait, when the dignity
causes the sinner to be honored; and hardly can a man be persuaded not to
imitate him, whom he is obliged to honor. His life is the rule of public
discipline: his manners are a seal set upon the comportments of all men, and
his example the common Prototype or Pattern, by which the world forms it
self. So as this obliges Princes, and Magistrates, exposed to the view of
all, to become such, as if all men look upon them, all might safely imitate
them. They are to consider, that being raised to such eminency, they are no
less exposed to eyes and tongues, than high mountains to hail and thunder;
and that, as Seneca says, Those who command, run a greater hazard, than
those who are judged; since these only fear the sentence of some Senate,
which condemns none but upon good proofs, and justly; whereas those are
exposed to the indiscreet censure of a rash multitude: and that as Julius
Caesar said (in Salust) In a great fortune, Salust. in conjur. Catil. In maxima
fortuna minima licentia est. Boet. lib. 4. de Consol. si miserum voluisse mala,
potuisse miserius est.
liberty is small: for if power has much, obligation has little, and that as
Boe^tius said: To have willed evil is a miserable thing, to have withal been
able to do ill, is yet more miserable.

CHAP. 14. Of vigilance and solicitude, being the second duty of a Magistrates
Justice toward the public.
GOod example ought to be seconded by vigilance and solicitude: Offices are not
conferred upon any for themselves, but for others. These be noble and divine
servitudes (says Xenophon) honorable slaveries, whose fetters are of refined
gold, (as the Emperor Commodus said) but, though of gold, they are still
chains, though honorable, they are still servitudes, yea therefore the rather
chains, since they tie men under color of honor; and therefore the rather
servitudes, because they oblige us to serve all, under the title of commanding
all; and carrying only the name of commandment they impose a duty, they
require pains, and expect the effects of service. Their very name imports
this duty, and since the name is drawn from the propriety of the thing,
thereby to signify it; he who sees himself honored with an Office, Three
things do: prin i^a^ly show the care Magistrates owe to the public: 1. the
name of Offices.
what reads he in such a name, but the burden he has taken upon his
shoulders, and the presage of such toils as he must necessarily undergo?
Sees he not how heat gives the name to fire, light to the Sun, courage to
the Lion, reason to man, the charge to honor, and labor to the charge? can
he counterfeit the name without showing himself unworthy to bear it, or quit
the care he commands, without losing the honor he communicates? O how do
they abuse themselves (says Caius Marius in Salust) who seek to join in one,
two incompatible things! Salust. do Bello Iugurth. Ne illi fallun^, qui
diversissimas res, pariter expetunt, i^navi^ veluptates, and praemia virtatis.
the pleasures of sloth, and the recompense of virtue: Many (O ye Romans said
farther this States man) when they sue for honors, show themselves humble,
diligent and industrious: but when they have attained their pretensions, they
pass their lives in pride and loytering: but in mine opinion, I hold we are
all obliged to do quite contrary: For by how much the Republicke is preferable
to the Consulate and Praetorship; Ego existimo quanto ipsa Respublica pluris
est quam Consulatus, and Praetura, tanto maiori cura illa^^ administrari quam
hac p^^i dobere.
by so much ought we to contribute more care to administer that, than to demand
this.

The origin of charges confirms what their name signifies: For nature having
made all men equal, the superiority of one above another, proceeds not but
from necessity of conduct, 2 The origin of Offices.
for maintenance of order, and for avoiding confusion. Whence it is easy to
see, that he who has a dignity, enjoys it not for his own ends, but for
others: since being equal to others by his natural condition, he is
constituted over others, only by reason of the obligation he has to watch for
them. So as at the same instant he is placed over all, he obliges himself to
serve all, and sels them his own liberty, when he accepts the honor. If
after this he will live to himself, and take no care for others, he forgets
what he is, and what he owes; and desiring to recover the liberty he has
sold, he obliges himself to restore the honor he has received in exchange.
If thou will not do mejustice, be no longer King, said a poor silly woman to
Saint Lewis King of France, when one day this great King wearied with the toil
he took in hearing the complaints of his subjects, and in doing them justice
in his own person (as his holy custom was) he at length retired to take some
rest: a word which suddenly stayed him, controlling his private necessities, to
satisfy the public obligation of his office. Now therefore if the Sovereign
acknowledges himself to be tied to forsake his own rest, for the care he
owes to the public; can those who only represent his person, presume to
alter the obligation of their solicitude, converting it into occasion of
solace? ought they not acknowledge that the Sovereign communicates part of
his authority unto them, to discharge himself upon them, of some part of his
obligation and care: Even as the Sun imparteth part of his light to the Moon
and Stars, to the end by their influences derived from his, they may cooperate
with him toward the generation, conservation, and (if I may so say)
administration of things of this inferior world. Know they not what Salust
said to Caius Caesar: Salust. ad Caium Caesar ein de Repub. ordinaua^.
That all those who by their dignities possess a rank of more height and
eminency than others, are likewise obliged to take more care than all others?

Moreover, the Scripture terms them Sentinels, who are appointed over the
people; and the rank which raises them is as a loope-hole, from whence they
ought to watch for the good of all, whilst others rest. The waking eye
watching over the Scepter, and the Lion, King of beasts, who sleeps not but
open eyed, were the Hieroglyphics the Egyptians made use of, to denote
providence as associate to power, and vigilance as inseparable from authority.
God whose power extends it self over all creatures, does likewise manifest
his providence over all: he sends his eye as far as his Scepter; he beholds
with the one, whatsoever he touches with the other. The Prophet Jeremy saw a
watchful rod; both to show his power supereminent above all, and his mercy
most vigilant over all things. The Angels to whom God has appointed the
guidance of the heavens motions, the care of Empires, and charge of souls,
cease not to watch continually; they never lose sight of what they have in
charge. And the Prophet Ezechiel beheld them in form of creatures full of
eyes. The heavens commanding the Elements and all inferior bodies, turn
incessantly, keeping continual watches about them: and the Sun is placed on
high to give light and to show day to all, to rejoice all, to quicken all, to
be as the common father, and that by his heat to fructify, and make apt for
production all whatsoever is engendered. Observe you not that his vigilance
executes his charge, that his care enobleth his power, and how swiftly he
runs; and like a Giant (as the Prophet speaks) leapes from one end of the
heavens to another, in the execution of his office?

Man having the charge and conduct of all this inferior world, casts his eye,
his spirit, and care over all: he posts from Province to Province, crosses the
seas, sounds the depth, overpasseth mountains, climes rocks, descends
precipices, opens the entrails of the earth, searches into the virtues of
living creatures, plants and minerals, disposes and applies all to the use
appointed by nature, nor does any thing, subject to his dominion, escape his
providence. The wit of man which owes direction to all in man; to his powers,
his motions, his several members, and whole body; do you not plainly see how
it has received from God a prompt, quick, and active quality, to foresee all
these dangers, and to provide for all those necessities? Briefly, whatsoever
God has established in this world with any power and superiority, does bear
witness of his providence over all things subjected unto him? Care does at all
times attend on power, the rod is watchful, the Lion holds his eyes open, and
the eye accompanies the Scepter. Are not these so many lessons to those, who
constituted in dignity, are as the moving spirits, the heavens, the Suns, the
Intelligences, and the petty Gods of this world: to show, that as spirits they
owe us vigilance, as heavens, expedition; as Suns, light; as Angels, tuition;
and as Gods their care and providence. If public charge be conferred upon
thee, be not puffed up above the rest, but have care of them, says the spirit
of God in Scripture. Honors and Offices are not subjects of ambition, but of
care and travail. Besides, it is an unworthy thing, after one has sought for
offices, as though he merited the same, to behave himself therein as though
he scorned them.

CHAP. 15. Of Integrity, which is the third duty of the Justice requisite in a
Magistrate toward the public.
INtegrity follows in the next place, without which all the rest are but
hurtful; providence provideth but for its private interest; exterior
exemplarity does but gild or plaster covetousness; good same is but a bait to
entrap; seeming piety but a cloak for dishonesty, and prudence but a forge of
all iniquity. In a word, all other qualities without Integrity, (mother of
fidelity) are but instruments of particular profit, and public loss. It is
the most requisite part (as the Apostle says) in oeconomists and Stewards of
households, such as public Magistrates are, who having only the trust and
dispensature of power in their Offices, cannot without public injury, seek
after their propriety. And the Gospel speaking of the good servant constituted
over a family, calls him faithful, and prudent, giving fidelity the first
place, as being first in the order of necessity, though posteriour in order of
nature, and dignity. And truly, fidelity, though without prudence, seeks at
least the public good, though it find it not; but prudence void of integrity,
seeks nothing less. Imprudent integrity, if it chance to hurt, it is
unwillingly; but unfaithful prudence both hurts and endeavors to be
harmfull: the former is in some sort excusable, the later is merely malicious:
besides, the one may happily do some good by chance, since it is inclinable
thereto; whereas the other cannot but do mischief, since it aymeth only
thereat, upon the matter: It is easy to be observed in History, that if
imprudent fidelity has been the ruin of one City, prudent infidelity has
overthrown a hundred; and that for one error the former has fallen into through
indiscretion, the later has committed thousands of faults upon set purpose. Was
Rome ever more powerful than when it was most simple, and least subtle? but
so soon as it became learned, and more prudent, was it not at the very brink of
its ruin? This is not to prove that ignorance raised it, or that prudence
ruined it, but only to show how the integrity of her innocent age, though rude
and gross, caused her to flourish, and how the corruption of her riper age,
though far more wise and subtle, did at length overthrow her: and to prove,
that simplicity joined with fidelity, profits more than prudence, (if malice
merit that title) with particular interest.

So long as their Commanders refused the Sabines gold, and Pirrhus his
presents; Salust. d^ Corjur. Cat.
whilst (as Salust says) they desited eminent glory, and indifferent wealth;
whilst they disdayned not to match the conquering Laurel with the laboring
Coulter, the Arch triumphall with the toyling Cart, dignity with frugality,
this flourishing Republic daily more and more extended the limits of her large
dominions, even to become Mistress of the world. But so soon again as the
ambition, avarice, and infidelity of Magistrates had reduced her to so sad a
desolation; that the houses of particular persons (as the Roman Orator says of
Mark Antonies) became Marts, Cic. Philip. (...).
where whole Provinces were set to public sale, and where all was venall; her
self (said the King of Numidia) being to be bought, Salust de bell^ lugur. Et
ipsa Roma venalis esset, si haberet emptarem.
if Chapmen could have been found for her; she then began by little and
little, to settle from her greatness; and altering her ancient form of
government, she withal changed both state and fortune. What was it that so
often exposed Athens and the other Grecian Republics to the fury of foreign
and civil wars, and in conclusion to their final overthrow? not want of
capacity, but defect of fidelity? Greece never so flourished with Philosophers,
Orators, and eminent States^men, as when her prosperity began to decline. But
(as it is said) that when Castor rises, Pollux sets, and when Nilus
swells, other rivers settle; so sufficiency augmenting, integrity
diminishes; tongues turned golden, manners steely; wits puffed with science,
empty of perfect prudence: Gold breeds the squinzy in the mouths of some;
Ambition breeds apostumes in the hearts of others: Fortresses though otherwise
inexpugnable by soldiers armed with iron, yet can they not maintayn the breach
against Asses laden with gold. Loyalty becomes vendible, and Cities also, and,
in proportion, as corruption increases, prosperous fortune decays. It is
said, that where gold grows, no plant will prosper, all withers in that
soil, all is barren; so likewise in those parts where the love of gold takes
root, not any good or wholesome counsel can spring, virtue withers there,
fideli^y swooneth away, prosperity perishes, and the greatness of Empires
roll on to their utter ruin. Since gold began to creep into credit (said
Seneca) the true honor of all things is fallen to ground; Sen. Ep. 215
we being mutually become Merchants, and Traffiquers, no further enquiry what
each thing is, but only at what rate it is sold: Sen. c. 1. l 4. d. benef.
we no longer love (said the same Author) virtue on free cost: which
notwithstanding has not any magnificence, if she be at all mercenary.
Whereupon Salust writ to Caius Caesar, Salust. ad Ca^. Cas. de Rep. orain.
as a true maxim of State, That in Republics where gold and silver are in
request, virtue is discredited; since gold ravisheth all recompenses due to
virtue, and virtue barred of reward, has nothing remaining but gaul and
grief. For though virtue be of it self amiable, yet so it is, that most men
know not how to court her, but only for the honor and utility she brings. So
as gold (over powering and doing all) virtue becomes fruitless, and is
presently unfollowed. Since only the golden key is able to open the door to
honors, men importunately and pressingly flock to usury, peculates, cheatings,
concussions, and deceipts, to hoard gold, which can and does all things, and
humane society becomes a Park of savage creatures, where the weakest become a
prey to the wealthiest; or a Sea, where the greater fishes devour the small
floaters. Then does that happen which Salvian spoke of the miseries of his
time. Those honors which few purchase, Salvian. de providentia. Dignitates
quas pauci emunt, omnes solvunt, pauperes emptiones nesciunt, and solutionem
sciunt.
all the world pays for; the poor which are not at the sale, contribute to
the charge. They are not culpable of the ambition of riches, yet bear they the
burden. This caused Licurgus to banish gold from Sparta, purposing thereby to
cut of all occasions of such disorders. But it is not needful to banish gold
from Cities, but only to bar covetousness from seazing on souls.
Covetousness, plague of all virtues, root of all vices, spring of all
perfidiousnesse, mother of all mischiefs, and which (as the Trojan Horse)
produces the subversion of all States. For since those who should study the
public good, have no other aim than their private interest, does not the like
happen to the body Politic as would fall out in humane bodies; if the stomach,
appointed to concoct meat for all the members, should only perform this office
for it self; or if the lungs, whose office it is to communicate respiration to
the whole body, should keep it solely to it self, the body receiving this
wrong from the noble parts, could not subsist; and civil society enduring a
greater from those, from whom it ought to expect conservation, how can she
avoid her utter ruin?

CHAP. 16. Of the mischiefs which the respect of private profit produces.
FIrst, the respect of private interest smothers (in all counsels profitable
for the public) all the good whatsoever prudence conceives, malice destroying
it before it appears; whereupon sufficiency becomes unserviceable; and no
sooner does Philips gold begin to shine, but Demosthenes his mouth is stopped; so
soon as the eyes are dazzled, Eccl. 20.
the mouth is silent, (says the Scripture.) Besides, this passion is a mist
darkning the understanding, causing it to resemble the sore eye, not seeing
things as they are, but as it self is, not receiving the true colors of
objects, but imprinting therein its own. So the spirit preoccupated by private
interest, cannot (in consultation) discern the truth of things, regarding only
its proper vice in all places; and, even in public, aiming only at his own
particular: his profit is a perpetual object unto him in all his counsels, he
in all things sees his beloved gold, he finds it all over, changing into gold,
not as Midas, all he touches, but whatsoever he sees. Whereupon Tacitus
uttered this true maxim; Tac. l. 1. hist.
That private profit is the poison of sound judgment, and of the right
affection of men. And Titus Livius, Tit. Live. l. 22
That private affairs have at all times, and ever will corrupt public
counsels. Wherefore Aristotle in his Politics says; Arist. lib. 3. Polit cap
3.
The Thoban Law forbade all men from meddling with the public, who had not
abstayned for ten years from all traffic and merchandise.

Yet is not this all when we say, how this passion hinders good counsels,
blinds the spirits, and deregulateth our wills: It farther produces more
fatal effects, when power furnishes us with instruments for malice. It is the
nature of fire never to be satisfied with flaming, proportionably to the
combustible matter it meets with; if it find no subject to work upon, it
quickly goes out; if it have small nourishment, it burns slowly, and, as
though abundance made it hunger-starved, the more it finds, the faster it
devoures it, and the more it consumes, the more insatiable it appears. This
is the lively image of covetousness, which, as fire, converteth all to his
private advantage. The matter it finds, quenches it not, but quickens it,
gain slaketh it not, but provokes it: it is petty in the poor, ardent in the
rich, but ravenous in great ones; and when at any time it falls upon a great
fortune, augmenting and mounting like fire, it ruins Cities, and lays Empires
wasle.

They whom the fire of passion does once inflame, become absolutely blinded; the
like happening to them which David said; The fire is fallen upon them, and they
have not seen the Sun. They consider not, that there is nothing so shameful
and base, as profit drawn from the groans of miserable persons: it is as much
(as Saint Basil says) to make our selves Horse-coursers, Hucksters, and
Pedlers of public calamities. And as husbandmen desire rain and ill weather
to cause their grain to grow, so those not only desire, but (which is worse)
they covet to extend and amplify the peoples afflictions, to raise themselves
out of their ruins, and to force them to shed tears, to ripen their gold, an
accursed harvest of so fatal a seed.

That Emperor who raised tribute upon urine, S^^tonius i^ Vespasiano.
was perhaps only to be laughed at; but those who by their concussions, and
violences, force the tears of afflicted people to become tributary to their
avarice, perpetrate not only a base, but an inhumane act. Now though (as to
this other) the money thereby raised, is muskefied to themselves, yet is it most
stinking both to men who curse them, and to God, who condemns them.

Therefore the great mischiefs which covetousness hatcheth, having regard
only to private interest, sufficiently show how important and requisite
Integrity proceeding from Justice, is to him who undertaketh a public charge,
who is not to reflect upon what is permitted to his power, but what is
committed to his faith. It is a holy depositure, which faith ought to observe,
and not suffer covetousness to convert it to its own use, or rather abuse.
And if the Law term that sacred which is deposited into the hands of
particulars; how much more is that sacred, which is committed to public trust?
Integrity breeds fidelity, affords good counsels, nourishes prudence,
enlightneth the spirits, regulateth desires, rightly disposes affection
toward duty, suffering it self neither to be corrupted by profit, nor made
flexible by favors, nor vanquished by fear, nor altered or allured by time,
to violate right and justice. It is inseparable with the love of public good,
which is the highest, and most orient pearl in the crown of Politic Justice.

CHAP. 17. Of love to public good, being the last duty of Politic Justice
toward the public.
Justice taken in its proper signification, Arist. lib. 5. Ethic. cap. 1.
is the only one among all the other virtues, reflecting upon the good of
others; nay, it self is the good of others, says the Philosopher in his
Ethics. For all the profit of a just act casts it self out of him who does
it, upon him for whom it is effected: As it is said of the Suns heat issuing
as by starts, and reflection out of its sphere. The Sun casts his beams
upon all things, notretayning them for himself; so the profit proceeding from
justice, does wholly diffuse it self upon others, the merit of it only
remaining to it self. And to this virtue does that golden world belong, which
Seneca spoke of virtue in general: Her reward is, Seneca. Ep. Virtutis pretium
est, non posse pretio capt.
that she cannot be allured by reward. She proposes to her self the sole
interest of others, not only without regard of her particular profit, but at
the cost of her proper interest, casting them at her feet in discharge of her
duty, and rather than to violate right and reason, she is ready to renounce
all dignities, as Phocion did his country, and as did Aristides; or life it
self, as Regulus. Nay, if it so happen, (as it sometimes may) that she must
either renounce her renown, or wrong her conscience; in this extremity the
Magistrate pursuing justice, is rather to choose to be good, and appear
wicked, than to be really bad, and seem good in the sight of men; since in
his solicitude for their safety he will not fear their censures: for the
people often judge rashly of the actions and counsels of superiors; and in
this case justice requires not the opinion of men, but their profit, and
slighting what is said, searches what should be. We must remain stiff (says
Seneca) in the execution of a just and honest counsel, Sen. Ep. 81.
even against all opprobries and infamies. No man seems more to esteem
virtue, than he who not to lose the conscience of an honest man, does not at
all fear (when occasion is offered) to lose renown. But justice framing man in
such fashion, as for the good of others he neglects himself, it becomes a
virtue proper to those who have the managing of other men's affairs, and among
all, Arist. lib. 5. Ethic. cap. 1. Virtus sola ex omnibus virtutibus, alienum
bonum videtur spectare, qui ad alterum spectat. Agit enim qua alteri conducunt,
aut Principi, aut Reip.
(says the Philosopher) to those who are encharged with the public good,
either of the Prince or State. It is the essential and inseparable quality,
constituting the nature of their office, and without which they leave to be
what their titles import, and are as men in picture, being nothing less than
men, though they retain the name and form.

So the Scripture terms the Pastor who has no care save for himself only,
but an Idol, since he is not what men call him; he is called Pastor by
relation to others, and he only feeds himself; so as he is no better than a
painted Idol, having in him nothing less than what his name imports, nor is
any thing so little as what he appears to be. A title likewise belonging to
all those (who obliged to the public) regard nothing save their particular
interest; and are (to say truly) none other than Idols, and phantomes, whose
appearance dazleth our eyes, and whose name deludeth our ears. And truly,
since they are not established over the public, but with obligation to have
care on them; they violating the duty of their dignity, disgrace its glory, and
not performing what they promise, they are not really what they style
themselves. They are rightly Idols, since the figure only remains; not quick
bodies, since the soul is vanished. One may say of them as David did of the
Idols among the Gentiles: They have eyes, but see not, ears, but understand
not; mouths, but speak not; feet, but walk not: for they have eyes, but
connive; ears, but counterfeit the deaf, dumb mouths, and feet fixed to the
center of their proper interest, since they walk not toward their obligation.
They have hands, but feel not; for they being ordinarily employed in touching,
and taking, they lose both sight, hearing, speech, and motion. Wherefore the
The bans painted their Judges and Magistrates without hands; Pitrius in
hierogly. l. 38
since when their hands are over long, it is much to be feared their feet will
become gouty, their tongues tied, their cares deafned, and their eyes dimmed.
And the Scripture says; That those who take bribes, do likewise retain
injustice. I intend not hereby to prove, that injustice destroys authority,
being both by divine and humane right inviolable; but only that in such persons
the honor and merit of possessing places of judicature perishes: the title
remains, the merit is missing. Justice therefore tending to the good of
others, is as it were an essential quality to public persons, obliging them
to love, and daily to procure the general good; which not only laws and
reason teach us, but even nature it self dictates unto us. For is it not
apparent in all sublunary things, that whatsoever is destinated for common
good, operateth not for it self, but imployeth it self for all? Do not the
heavens send forth their influences, the Sun his beams, the earth its
fecundity, the trees their fruits, fountaynes their waters, Bees their honey,
Silk worms their subtle webs for all? Does not the liver distribute blood to
all the veins, the head motion to all the nerves, the heart vigor to all the
members? Is there any thing in nature which converteth to its own use what it
has received for the common good? See we not in reasonable creatures a
desire, in unreasonable ones a motion, in insensible things a kind of
inclination toward the general good of the Universe, whereby their particular
good subsisteth? Is it not true, that by natural instinct the hand casts it
self before the body, to receive upon it self the strokes coming upon it;
and how each part is inclinable to preserve the whole, though to its own
ruin? Shall not then knowledge, reason, and justice cause that in man, which a
mere natural inclination effects in all other things? But is there any thing
either more glorious, or which draws the creature nearer to the imitation of
God, than to seek and procure public good? to go less therein, is it not a
sign of indigence, and to enlarge our selves, a token of abundance? Who is so
abundant as God, and who diffuseth himself like him? poverty pincheth, and
restrains; plenty enlarges, and dilateth. Moreover, whatsoever is most
excellent, and principal in all things, does it not communicate most, and
become most abundant? The highest, and most elevated among the Angels, do they
not take greatest care, both of the heavens motions, of the worlds government,
and of mankind in general; those of inferior orders having the oversight
only of some single Kingdom, Province, or City? and the lowest orders, those
who have the single conduct of each particular person? Among the stars, the
Sun holding the highest rank, does he not bestow his lights, and influences,
both upon the celestial and elementary world? The Moon succeeding in the
second place, to the elementary globe only. The stars, as least in dignity,
to a certain species, or individuity of sublunary things? But (I beseech you)
is there any thing so noble in the world, as God? in man, as the soul? in the
body, as the heart? in the tree, as the root? All the tree is nourished by the
root, the heart causes life in the whole body, the soul guides the whole
man, God governs the whole world.

To practice virtue in our own particular, is a great matter, but to exercise
it toward others, is much more glorious; to make use of it toward many, is
excellent; but to impart it to all, is supereminent. And even as (says the
Philosopher) he who is malicious toward himself, and others, Arist. lib. 5.
Polit. cap. 1.
is the worst and most wicked of all men: So he who practices virtue both
toward himself and others, is the best and most just among men. It is the
highest pitch of virtue, the consummation of justice, the perfection of man,
and the degree nearest approaching to the Divinity.

CHAP. 18. The Epilogue of all this Discourse of Justice, by way of Epiphonema.
BUT Plato says, that if virtue could be viewed living, and animated with her
proper attractions, she would cause admiration in minds, and amorous motions
in all hearts. Discourse can only represent her in picture, and Eloquence is
not stored sufficiently with lively colors, to inspire thereinto the soul and
beauty of a natural body. So as to behold Justice (which my weak pencill is
forced to express) in her lively and native grace, it is necessary to cast our
eyes upon some living model; (if the world yet affords any such) expressing in
it self the beautiful idaea of this eldest daughter of God, which the pen is
unable to depaint. O more worthy the name of Great than Alexander, or Pompey! a
man given from heaven, and more resembling God than man; he who mouldeth
himself upon this image, and whose soul is the table, his virtue the pencill,
his actions the colors, and whose life is the soul of that living image,
drawn upon the prototype of this divine pattern: God in this man's heart has
engraven a lively knowledge of this truth, that those whose dignities cause
them nearest to resemble him, ought most nearly to approach unto him by duty
and love; and that the degree of piety should equalize that of preferment; that
the greatness of the benefit received, should be the model of
acknowledgement. To consider likewise, that the highest Angels are most ardent
in his love, the promptest to know and accomplish his commandments. And from
this Principle (as from a celestial seed) we see, spring the blessed maxims
conformable to eternal verities; Just counsels, sage advices, the
administration of earthly things according to celestial laws; briefly, all
the fruits worthy of this Christian, and divine Philosophy. He then sees how
Justice being obliged to allow to each man what is his right, that after the
service due to Almighty God, the regulating of our manners being a right due to
our selves, holds the first rank in obligation, and ought likewise to have
the first place in discharge; he knows how the rule which ought to be as
the model to all the world, ought chiefly to be very direct in it self. That
the words of Justice are found to be of very flat taste, if the soul savor
not the fruits. That to govern well, and live wickedly, if it be not
incompatible, is at least dishonest. That sage counsels do only profit others,
but a lewd life endammageth its author. That there is nothing so foolish as to
follow the Silkworm, who spins silk for us, and ends her days in the action;
industrious for others, to himself pernicious: he in conclusion sees, how
after he has set himself in good order, the last duty of Politic Justice is,
to be careful of the public good, and to despise his proper interest.

That it is as much as to make himself precious, not to be bought or allured
by any reward. That there is nothing so glorious, as to show himself
incorrnptible in an age wherein the glittering of gold tempts the fidelity of
all, and overcomes the constancy of many.

That Integrity then is most laudable, when by reason of corrupted times,
covetousness seems to be excusable. That it is an unworthy thing, to make
the earths excrements men's Idols; and that those base metals Nature buries in
her lowest bottoms, should usurp the principal place in the affections of a
reasonable soul. That it is a shame and reproach to Christians, to see very
Pagans show greater integrity, and more incorruption, and affection to the
public good in the administration of Offices, than we do. That the ancient
Romans (as Valerius the great, witnesses) namely those of the Aelian family,
rather chose to be poor in a plentiful Republic, then rich in a poor one.
And that now, even those who profess the knowledge of the true God, blush not
at all when they impoverish whole Cities, and Kingdoms, to enrich their
private families with public spoils.

Out of these considerations arises and springs this excellent resolution,
of despising our particular, out of zeal to the public, and to show our
selves liberal of riches, covetous of virtue, and surmounting gold (the
conqueror of all things) to make it appear we are invincible. From thence
arise all those wholesome counsels which the generous liberty of a soul free
from covetousness produce; together with all those famous acts of loyalty
toward our Prince, of moderation in power, in support of innocence, of
resistance against injury, of incorruption against all sorts of tentations, of
the peace of Cities, the repose of Provinces, augmentation of Empires, wholesome
laws, just governments, and all those fair designs which Princes conceive in
the inclinations and motions of those generous persons, which after God, and
themselves, are the principal motions of their souls, and our safety. For
even as those stars meeting in conjunction with the Sun, do much avail
toward the causing his influences to become good and favorable unto us; as the
Pleiades, which cause the light to appear pleasing and gracious unto us at the
Springs return, whereas the Canicular stars make it scorching in Summer: So
those who by their just and good counsels, move the will and authority of good
and just Princes; concur with them, and are the organs and instruments of a
fortunate age.

Symm. Bonis and justice Princi^ib^^s, bon^ and decora suadentes instrumenta
sunt boni saeculi.
O happy ages, who enjoy such miracles and alike treasures; miracles (in truth)
for the rarity; treasures for their necessity. O fortunate France, who amid all
thy miseries have never wanted those brave Catoes and Phocions, who have a
thousand times saved thee from ship wrack, at what time danger causing the
ambitious to ^^^nk, and fear the timorous to retire; zeal has bestowed on
thee the good, courage the valiant, and God the necessary. O great souls, who
conceive these generous designs, not to breath but for the public, and to
banish their particular: you quit a slight profit, and carry away the Laurel
of an incomparable honor: what you trample upon, is but a little earth, and in
exchange; the approbation of Kings, the suffrages of Provinces, the acclamation
of people, the culogies of History, the benediction of men, the glory of God;
here on earth commendations, and on high immortal Crowns are your rewards.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK. Of Virtues and Qualities which give vigor and grace to
execute.
CHAP. 1. The proposition, and divisi^^^ of matters discused in this last Book.
TO know good, and to will it, to know it, and to seek it, to see it, and tend
toward it, all this is not the attaynment thereof: Power is necessary for the
compassing what we aspire unto: For what benefit were it for brute beasts to
have sense, to apprehend, and an appetite to incline toward things fitting for
them, if notwithstanding they wanted both feet and wings to convey them whither
their appetite inclines them for the obtaining what their sense apprehends.
The Art and will of sailing, plowing, painting, building, what use would they
afford to the Pilot, Plowman, Painter, or Architect, if the last wanted his
trowell to set hands to work, the next his pencill for the expression of his
idaeas, the third his plough to stir the earth, the fourth his rudder and
sails to part the waves? Knowledge is unprofitable where power fails, and
vain the desire which cannot arrive to its aim. The wisdom of God knows
all things, and his bounty is boundless; but had he not equal power to bring
to light both what he knows and wills, his bounty would remayn fruitless,
and his wisdom worklesse: the one could not appear, the other not communicate
it self, nor should we know either how much the one knows, or how greatly
the other loves us? It is (therefore) not enough to have treated of, and
handled (in the two former Books) the virtues instructing the understanding in
the knowledge of good, and those in particular disposing the will to love and
search the known good, if we do not farther add those qualities requisite to
enable us for the production, and putting them in practice, to the end to arm
politic virtue with all her necessary pieces. First then, wisdom and prudence
afford capacity and sufficiency; Justice, honesty, and their associats, inspire
a good affection, and right intention. It remains that I show those parts,
adding thereto force and efficacy. But even those virtues serving for knowing
and willing good, do also concur to the enablement and action. For every
virtue is a habitude and perfection added to the powers of the reasonable
soul, to afford it the dexterity, the vigor, the ease, and facility to
operate, and act agreeably to the rules of reason: Whereupon the Philosophers
generally call Virtue, an operative habitude, since every virtue tends to
action: and (as Aristotle says) Virtue is no other, than a quality making him
good who possesses it, Arist. lib. 2. Eth. cap. 6. Virtus est qua honum facit
habentem, and opus ejus reddit bonum.
and his operation laudable. So as Saint Augustine was in the right when in
general he names Virtue, A quality for the well ordering the actions of this
life: and more briefly; The good, Virtus est qualitas qua recte vivitur. Aug.
l. 2. de lib. arb. c. 18. and 19. Virtus est honus usus liberi arbitrii. ibid.
and right use of freewill. So in that every virtue reflecteth upon the action
as its aim and fruit, those virtues showing light, whereby to know good, and
inclining us to love it, do likewise afford us the ability to produce it. The
same vigor of the root, of which the tree makes use toward the conception and
form of the fruit, is likewise serviceable thereto for the production and
perfection thereof. And the same wind causing a ship to lanch forth and sail,
does likewise drive it into the haven. The like agility animating the runner of
the Olympic games to appear in the lists, does also cause him to perform his
race, to touch the goal, and gain the prize, and that which begins to give him
motion to his course, does consequently afford him both progress and victory.
Wisdom and Prudence are not only (even before the action) useful for the
understanding of what is fit to be done, and of the means we are therein to
use, but they further guide the course of the action; and the one serving as a
fane, the other conducting and prescribing the measure, accompany and carry it
to the desired end. In like manner, justice, honesty, and all virtues thereon
depending; besides, that they dispose and inc ine the soul to honest and
laudable actions, they are likewise very useful in the exercise of the very
actions themselves; not only causing man to be willing, but to be able also to
do good; yet do I find notwithstanding certain qualities and virtues properly
destinated for the disclosing and producing of what prudence has conceived,
and justice designed as honest, and profitable. Virtues and qualities, without
which justice has (often) only good wishes without fruit, and prudence sage
counsels without success. Now these qualities are chiefly required in public
persons, encountering in their most pious enterprises a thousand obstacles
through which they are to break; lets which they are to rebate, difficulties
which they are to overcome, and this not being feaseable for them without
necessary arms; their honesty remains useless, and their wisdom
fruitless, if they be thereof unprovided. I reduce these qualities to four
heads; Authority, Good Fortune, Courage, and Eloquence. Authority causes sage
and just counsels to be received; Good Fortune makes them succesfull; Courage
adds credit thereto; and Eloquence persuades the performance: and in truth,
without Eloquence they often appear bitter, without Courage weak, without Good
Fortune fruitless, and nullified without Authority. So as Authority causes
them to overcome all obstacles, Good Fortune all difficulties, Courage all
resistances, and Eloquence all humane aversions, and passions. Yet will I not
say, either that Eloquence is a virtue, or that Authority, or Good Fortune are
inherent qualities and fastened to man as habitudes. Courage, arising out of
Fortitude and Magnanimity, justly holds one of the first ranks among politic
virtues, as I will show in the sequel of this Discourse. But Authority, and
Good fortune, are but exterior gifts of God, being not in us, but by his
only favor, when at any time he authorizeth us among men, causing our good
counsels happily to succeed both for his glory and the general good. And as
for Eloquence, it is no virtue but an Instrument causing virtues to be of
validity, and an ornament decking and beautifying them. Now (to place these
four qualities in their proper ranks, and offices,) know; that authority
conferreth credit; Good fortune, successefulnesse; Fortitude, resolution, and
constancy: Eloquence, persuasion, gracefulness, and as it were Beauty: And
all these four united, give perfection to Politic Virtue, and a Period to my
intended Work.

CHAP. II. Of Authority.
THe Authority, whereof I speak in this place, is not the dignity nor power
which the charge conferreth but a reputation, or (if you please) a wright and
price, which general opinion and esteem (with a joint consent) affords to the
virtue, counsel, deeds, and words of certain persons, clevated to high
offices; which all look upon as Gods on earth, or as men sent by God for the
public benefie and safety of all. For there are dive^^ advanced to dignities,
who, though ad^^^ed with virtue, and endued with judgment, and science, yet
being unfurnished of this Authority which opinion affords to some
particulars, they miss the principal instrument setting a value upon men
among men; though their counsels be never so good, and well grounded, yea even
where sufficiency equally shines with integrity; yet so it is, they are not
so much as listened unto. What in some other man's mouth would carry weight with
it, loses its estimate in theirs, and their Prudence is like the Gold and
Pearls in some Countries where the Inhabitants either regard them not, or
slight them, as not knowing their worth. Who knows not that Cockles marked
with the public stamp, are the current coin in certain newly discovered
Countries, namely in Congo. For, it is not the scarcity of gold and silver,
which reduces them to this extremity, but either the ignorance, contempt, or
a contrary custom. Gold and silver abound there, but these people yield the
precedence to base Cockle-shels, if not in price, at least in employment: The
former loosing in these men's opinions, the rank and dignity, Nature allows
them. Gold was not in use in the City of Sparta, by Lycurgus his Laws, but
Iron only, which bearing the public stamp, was able, and did all things in
matter of commerce; whilst gold (though more rich and precious) lay
unprofitably moulding in some obscure retreat. The like estimate the public
stamp gives to coins, general opinion, but chiefly that of the Prince,
(whence authority has its reflection) bestows upon men. Without this stamp,
gold is not valuable to iron: with this Mark, iron passes for gold. It is not
so much the worth, as the esteem, which sets a value upon all things in the
Commerce of this world. It is the like of wisdom and virtue, as of the
precious stone called Phengite: which though right beautiful, and of excellent
luster, yet remains it dull and dark, if the Sun shine not thereon: so the
most excellent qualities languish and wither, as unknown and despised, if the
light of public esteem, does not thereto add both luster, and authority. For
we are to acknowledge the powerful Empire, which opinion has either acquired,
or usurped over humane spirits, an Empire of such extent, as she takes notice
of all things, and so absolute, as there is no farther any appeal from the
Decrees she pronouneeth. And though an ancient Sage said: that truth is the
strongest and most powerful thing; yet so it is, that opinion often robs her
other rayments, and seizes on her scepter: so as if she once establisher
throne in men's thoughts, truth will be ill troubled to regain possession: she
commands without contradiction, she governs at pleasure, she rayseth what
delights her, and represseth what she disesteemeth, she sets the price on all
things; on wits, on virtues, on industry, on science, and whatso ^^^ieth not
her seal, is scarce saleable, though it be otherwise valuable. Wherefore (as
I have cursorily touched in the second ^ooke.) Virtue desiring to become
profitable for the public, ought to seek the suffrage of public opinion to
be authorized, and by the authority which opinion acquireth for her in men's
spirits, to allow weight to her counsels, and effects to her just intentions.
And truly, it is fearce credible how much power and efficacy the opinion men
conceive of any thing, has to make it receivable, nay good and profitable. The
opinion of the Doctors sufficiency, and of the virtue of his receipts,
curethm^^^ sick folks, than the medicines and ^cceits themselves; yea, this
pers^^sion has sometimes been so powerful, as the only sight (...) the
Physician has cured the Patient. It is said, that the Tortois conceives
merely in seeing, by the force of imagination; and Physicians hold, that
children carry the characters imprinted on them, of those objects their mother
have fixedly beheld or apprehended upon their conception* as that woman whose
eye and attention being seriously bent upon the figure of a Moore, conceived
and brought forth an Ethiopian. And (...) ^^^es who conceived spotted lambs,
an^^^oured as the^wigs were which the shepherds laid in their sight along the
channel where they went to watering. The field need to be large, should I
follow all those effects of the imagination, causing such miracles in the
world, as to make men sick by force of apprehension, and again to cure them by
the same means, drawing their remedies whence their maladies arose: yea, to
cause horns to bud in the forehead of Cyppus King of Italy, by suffering the
sight of Bulbaiting to take over deep root in his fantasy, where he was a
spectator; to produce monsters, to surpass common courses, and to sport with
the order of things, causing men some half dogs, others half fishes, and
others half horses, to come to light: Infants of the imagination, prodigies
and amazements in Nature. But no farther to enlarge my self in the recital of
these curiosities, I allege this, only to show how the like force imagination
has in natural things, opinion has in moral, and civil occuriences. For is
it not a wonder to set sometimes a mutinous multitude, gr^^^bling, and foaming
with sorry, like the waves of a rought sea overturning and ma^^^cring all they
meet in opposition, with sire, sword, staves, stones, and other weapons which
rage lights on taking, and ^aling away all by their viol^^ed, as do the (...)
of an overst wing rement; to stay at (...) to upon the first sight of a grave,
and reverenced person (...) as the Po^^^scribeth.

Tum meritis si forte gravem, etc.
Who once appearing, suddenly does stay
Their boldness, and their fury does allay,
Imposing silence: And his mouth, whence drops
A sweet distilling honey, calmes and stops
Those raging waves, and mad attempts begi^
By giddy choler, by sad temper won.
It is no marvel, that as the swelling rage of the Sea, threatening to swallow
the whole earth, breaks it self upon some sandy shore; so this tempest of a
mutinous people, appeaseth it self, at the approach of a disarmed person, and
that opinion stays, what force, Iron, and arms were unable to stop. The
esteem and opinion conceived of this man's virtue, dissipateth all this storm:
as it is said, how the waft of an hat diverteth thunderbolts and Canon-shot.
But is it not yet a more remarkable example of the efficacy of opinion, to see
a whole army already routed, to resume courage at the very sight, or voice of
some renowned Che^^etaine, as though one single man inspired strength into all,
or as though all fighting in one, all by one, or one by all, should obtain the
victory. It is neither the strength, nor courage of the Captain which causes
this wonder, for what could one man's strength add to a complete army, were he
an Hercules, an Alexander, or a Caesar? It is then the Opinion (only) they
have conceived of his valor and conduct. Opinion inspiring courage in the
greatest Cowards, force in the most feeble, ardor in the coolest: and does with
more spiritfull promptness than the sound of Trumpets, or the influence of the
Star of Mars, animate all men to fight. In like manner the Pilots experience
redoubles the Saylors courage amidst the affrights of most terrible tempests.
The masters presence sitting cheerfully at the poope, affords them more hope,
than heretofore St. Elm, shining in the Bole of the Mast. The sight of him is
their Sea-marke and Pole-starre, he warmes their hearts, and redoubleth their
strength to strive against the storming Billows. And the credit, their Masters
authority has acquired, saves more ships, than either Art, or dexterity. The
like happens in a Counsel and Assembly, where the Authority of some one man in
special credit and reputation, effects more, either toward the passing of a
good and sound advice, or the rejection of an unjust proposition, then his
reasons, his discourse, or Wisdom. When he had yet scarce spoken, his
authority begins to incline them to what he would say, fearing lest they should
not soon enough conform themselves to his advice; his authority keeping them
under command, and his very silence in suspense; and no sooner does he begin to
speak, but each man has his eye fixed on his face, and his ear to his voice:
he imprinteth what he speaks, and persuades what he pleases: and the weight
of his name, more then his words, causes their judgments to incline to that
side whereto this balance draws them: so as ordinarily all others suffer
themselves to be attracted to him as the Iron to the Adamant, without being
pressed by any more powerful force than that of his only presence; so great
power has Authority and Opinion over our spirits. The examples of this
Verity are very frequent in Histories, where we shall often observe how the
presence of one famous person by his only Authority has quashed civil
Commotions, inspired the Soul in Assemblies, led the dance, and motion to
Hearts, Tongues, and Hands, and turned the Wills of all men whether he
inclined. The Authority of Phocion at Athens, of Cato at Rome, has often
wrought the like wonders; when any question arose either of causing a good
counsel to pass current, to reject reproveable ones, to establish justice or
repel violence. And this Authority is one the most powerful arms of
Politic virtue for the execution of Heroical enterprises.

CHAP. 3. Whence this Authority is derived.
ALl good proceeds from God (Sourse, and Fountain of all Goodness) and
particularly the Authority whereof we now treat, flows from this fountain.
It seeming that God himself with his all-powerfull finger has engraven a
certain touch of extraordinary Majesty upon their foreheads whom he intends
to authorize, and make useful for humane society. It is said, how that diverse
families in Rome had certain hereditary marks, as of a fitch, a dried pease, or
an iron-mole, appearing upon the forehead, or face of their children, causing
their name and origin to be immediately known, even to those who were not
acquainted with their persons. So God seems in all States and Kingdoms to
make choice of certain families and races, as instruments of his Providence, in
the conduct and advancement of public good, in so much as all their
descendants bear a certain character, and show a kind of gracefulness
causing all men to acknowledge them, authorizing them without further trial of
their sufficiency, than this only honor following them as an hereditary title.
And to prove that God makes election of some families, which he marketh, (as
with his signet) conferring authority together with the name, though experience
does sufficiently declare the truth thereof, the sacred Scripture does yet
farther furnish us with fair precedents, and remarkable examples: For we read
of the race of the Machabees, L. pr. Ma. c. 5
having been chosen and inspired by God to releeve Iudaea from the oppression
of tyrants and usurpers; now this election falling out succesfully, and to
their honor by diverse notable victories, and famous triumphs, Joseph and
Azarias pricked with an envious emulation, conceived a design to gain
reputation, in emulation of the Machabees. They furnished themselves, they
raised an army, they put themselves into action, they assailed the enemy, but
to their shame, which presently followed their disrout, and flight. Since (as
says the sacred Text). Ipsi non erant de semine illoru^ per quos salu^ facta
est in Israel.
They were not of the race of them from whom the safety of Israel ought to
come. A remarkable word, whereby God declares unto us the election, which his
providence makes of certain families, whereof he intends to make use, as of
his instruments, in what he designeth for the common safety of Empires. So
among all the families in the world he (heretofore) made choice of that of
Abraham, therein to conserve the worship of his name, and the hope of the
salvation of all mankind. He (after) elected the family of Levi, for the
Priesthood; the family of Judah, for the Crown; and the family of the Machabees
(as I have formerly said) to revenge the reproach offered against Israel.
Athens and Rome have likewise had certain names and races fatal for their
glory, and who might well be termed the pillars and bases of their greatness.
And our history conserveth the memory of diverse illustrious families, which
seem to have been destinated by heaven, to defend the beauty of our Flower de
Luces from the injury of times, and to maintayn amidst the frowns and storms
of fortune the majesty of our Kings, and the glory of their Crowns. Their
names are so well known, that should I place them upon this paper (it not being
of necessity) I might be suspected of flattery. But I say, that the descendants
of such families, carry even from their mothers womb, not as our old Romans,
the mark of a burning sword imprinted on their thigh, but the authority of an
hereditary reputation engraven on their names, preparing and leveling them the
way to brave and illustrious actions. Which causes me to say, this authority
is a gift from God, since the lot of our birth is not at our election to make
choice of the place of his origin. Every one (as Seneca said right elegantly)
would usurp the birthright of some rich and renowned family. But even when we
are not, God (who bestows our being upon us) chooses for us, and appoints
both the time and place. Nor is this authority whereof we treat, in this regard
only, a gift from heaven; but likewise in that God bestows on some, certain
natural graces, authorizing and making them thereby pleasing both to King and
people. So God authorized Joseph in Egypt, in the eye of Pharaob; Daniel in
Babylon, in the sight of Nabuchodonosor; Mordochay in Assyria, in the opinion
of Assuerus; Esdras in Persia, in the good grace of Artaxerxes; and diverse
others upon several occasions, who making use of this authority, not for their
particular emolument, but for public employment, have appeared as sacred
anchors in strongest tempests, to deliver Gods people from imminent ship wrack.
And here may enter all those gifts called gifts of nature, and fortune, and
those likewise called Theological; to wit, gifts of grace bestowed gratis,
depending not on us, nor our merit, but on the pure disposition and liberality
of God. For as the Poet Lucretius said; Lucret. Largus enim liquidi fons
luminis aetherius Sol irrigat assidue coelum candore recenti. Suppeditaqu^ n^v^
confestim lumint lumen.
That the light of the Sun is not composed of one continued piece, but
reflecteth upon us by the concurrence of many and diverse beams, which he
darteth upon us so thick each after other, as we are unable to perceive the
intervals or spaces between. So Authority being the light of virtue, rises and
shines by the happy encounter of diverse excellent parts. First, the nobility
and antiquity of blood, greatly authorizeth a man's virtue, (as we have already
showed:) and though some would say as Ulysses answered to Ajax; that the famous
acts of our forefathers are not ours, but theirs: yet in truth they are ours by
a double means; ours by title of succession, giving us right not only to the
possessions, but to the honors also of our Ancestors: and yet more ours by
right of imitation, when we tread in the steps of their virtuous examples. And
though some others have affirmed that nobility of race being an external good,
adds nothing to humane posterity; yet, to take it even in the most rigorous
sense, this external good joined to internal endowments, is a surplusage of
good, so far forth as he who has not this benefit, is deficient in a
necessary good; and whosoever has this prerogative above others, though otherwise
all things be equal, yet has he still advantage over him. And besides, we do
not consider man metaphysically alone, abstracted and divided from other men,
but reflect upon him as in civil community and society, where doubtless the
splendour and nobility of race, does readily confer that estimation and credence
upon him, which a new commer, how wise, and virtuous soever he be, shall not
acquire till he have given diverse good testimonies of his actions. Wherefore
Salust observes, that the ancient Romans were of opinion, that it was a stayn
and blemish to the Consulary honor, if they should confer it upon a new
commer, though adorned with virtue, and merit: yet when all is said, we must
avow that nobility without virtue, is but disgraceful, as on the other side,
virtue without nobility remains low priced; but nobility adorned with virtue,
and virtue embellished by nobility, rayseth a man to the highest rank of
honor: and he in whom these two concur, has the glory a man can astayn
unto, since he has the hereditary joined to the acquired right. In a second
place, riches add much to authority, when they come either by just succession,
or by lawful and honest acquisition. Now it is the like of riches, as of
waters which cannot be clear and wholesome, if their source be impure: for if
we see a family abounding in temporal substance, men presently dispute how it
was raised; as the Geographers do of the river Nilus. Dogs are ordinarily
suspected by reason of their dangerous teeth, the Wolf for his wide throat,
the Lion for his paws, the Eagle for his tallents, the Fox for his crafty
tricks, and all beasts of prey for their fraud and violence. And though Cacus
forced the stolen cattle he conveyed to his Cave, to be drawn thither back
ward, yet so it is, that the simplest persons could go directly thitherto
discover what they supposed to be there concealed. But when riches are
lawfully acquired, they contribute much credit to virtue, besides the service
they afford thereto in the execution of her just and generous designs. Arist.
lib. 2. Eth cap 8.
Whereupon the Philosopher desired the goods of fortune, as necessary parcels
toward the entire accomplishment of man's beatitude. D. Thomas 12. qu. 4. artic.
7.
And even Saint Thomas (the master of Theology) receives this proposition, as
for what concerns the imperfect beatitude of this life, wherein man has not
only a soul contenting it self with interior blessings, but a body likewise
needing external benefits; but in the life to come we being then quit of this
frail flesh, God alone shall be our absolute good, and our perfect felicity,
though after the resurrection the body being again reunited to the glorious and
immortal soul, corporal benefits again concur, though not as essential
and necessary, yet at least as adjuncts, and well befitting the perfection of
our beatitude. So as you see on all sides how external substance adds
something to humane felicity, yet not to cause us to be of the Peripatetians
opinion, who in conformity to their Aristotle, supposed a man could not be
happy in this life, without the affluence of external things, since to the
contrary, Christian discipline prefers the indigence of things before
abundance, and the despisement thereof before the possession; but we only say,
that a well ordered reason making use of temporal blessings to Gods glory,
they become a great and powerful instrument in the exercise of virtues, in the
well using whereof consists our present felicity. Riches are of themselves
things of indifferency, the well bestowing them makes them good, and the abuse
thereof causes them to become naught, and as they serve for subject of vice in
the hands of wicked persons, so afford they weapons to good men's virtues; and
chiefly to the virtue appearing in public, and which (rightly to show it self
upon this worlds Theater) has use of exterior assistances. Without which
virtue becomes weak and languishing, and though not without merit in Gods
sight, yet at least without action, fruit, and glory before men. For as the
faults which are only in the will, are no way prejudicial to civil society,
and consequently deserve no punishment by humane justice, according to the
Civilians rules (save only in case of high treason) where all is punishable,
Voluntatis poenam nenso patitur.
both the desire, the effect, the heart, the hand. So the good which is only in
intention, brings no commodity to the public, nor does it from thence merit
either glory or recompense. But virtue wanting the instrument of riches to
bring to light her fair designs, is constrained to smother thousands of good
intentions, as being unable to disclose them; and as much as poverty bereaveth
him of diverse occasions to appear, and profit in public, so much glory,
credit, and authority, does it cause him to lose: So as his generous
inclination elevating him on the one side, and his disability dejecting him on
the other, Alciat. Vt me pluma levat, sic grave mergit onus.
it happens to him as to the party in the Emblem, whom the weight clogged as
much as the wing elevated. Moreover, the things of this world are so disposed,
and the judgments and affections of men have taken such a propension, Pecunia
obedinut omnia. Prove. c. 10.
that all yield unto, and obey riches; as the Wiseman in the Scripture
affirms. Gold (says the Philosopher) serves as a surety or safe pledge to
obtain what we seek for: Nummus est quasi fide jussor habendi pro co quodcunque
home volucrit. Arist. lib. 5. Polit. c. 6.
whence it happens, that being able to do all, and effecting every thing in
humane occurrents, it acquireth great credit to the possessors, and bereaveth
those of as much who enjoy it not.

CHAP. 4. The sequence of the same Discourse.
MOreover, offices, honors, and dignities do greatly contribute toward the
acqu sition of Authority, and chiefly when they are the recompense of merit,
and not the preys of ambition, or hire of vice. For when any illegal or
dishonest way has served as a plank or ladder to rise to honors, in this case
a man cannot exercise his office with requisite resolution and liberty, but
shall infallibly encounter diverse oppositions founded upon taxations, tainting
public credit. But he whose virtue has served as a step to raise him to
dignity, goes on with a resolute heart, bearing his head aloft; his constancy
rayseth his courage, and in whatsoever just or honest thing he undertaketh,
honor marches before him, freedom accompanies him, and authority attends
him. Dignities are the theaters of virtue, there it is where she appears,
producing her fair actions to the view of all men. Offices authorize men,
provided those men honor their places, and that one may justly report of them
as was said of Epaminondas the Thebane. That they in such sort behaved
themselves in their places of honor, Honores it a g^ssit, ut ornamentuns non
accipere, sed dare ipsi dignitati videretur. Justinius lib. 6.
as they rather seemed to add ornament to their offices, than to receive any
from thence. And truly, as the Suns light communicating its beams
indifferently to all things, does not yet illuminate any but transparant
bodies, disposed to receive the impressions of his brightness, as crystal
and glass. So dignities in an ambitious and corrupted age, may fall into whose
hands so ever; but the splendor of that honor, and authority they afford,
shall never illustrate any but such whose virtues are able respectively to
honor and authorize them. Offices are as casting counters, of high price in
the hands of rich Merchants, when they cast up their great accounts, but little
or nothing worth in a poor man's possession, who has no sums to reckon;
nevertheless, if dignity without sufficiency has no great reputation;
sufficiency without dignity cannot authorize it self among men, but remains
unknown, unprofitable, and idle in the obscurity of retiredness; as mines of
gold undiscovered in the bowels of the earth; so as many times tynne and copper
are used in the course of traffic, whilst they supposing they want gold,
suffer it to remayn rusting. It avayleth much for the common good, to employ
that to public use which may bring a general profit. That the Sun be placed
in the firmament, the taper in a candlestick, and virtue in the throne of
honors, since being raised and authorized, it is useful to all men; but
despised and neglected, it receives injury whereby all are endamaged.

Now among all the benefits of fortune authorizing virtue, favor and credit
with the Prince, holds the highest rank, when it is employed not for
particular, but for general good. For as an ancient Poet said; Principibus
placuisse viria non ultima laus est.
It is not the least of commendations, to be pleasing to great Kings and
Princes: nor is it a small conquest to game their hearts, who possess the
herats of all men, it is as much as by winning one heart, to conqu^^^ all. What
can be more eminent or illustrious, said that ancient Chancellor of Thierry,
King of the Goths, Cassiod. cp. 3. lib. 1. Car. Quid majus quaritur, qua^ hic
invenisse laudum testimonia ubi gra tificatio non potest esse suspecta:
Regnantis quippe sententia judicium de solis actibus summis; nec blandiri
dignantur animus dominii potestate mun^^ us.
than to have merited the commendations and approbation of those whose
greatness takes away all suspicion of flattery: for the esteem Kings make of
any proceeds merely out of the opinion they have of their lives and actions;
and a spirit guarded with the authority of sovereign command, will never
vouchsafe to applaud any by adulation. So as there is not any thing which does
more authorize a man, than the Princes approbation, whose esteem and judgment
affords reputation and passage to men, as their stamp does to coins. After
the benefits of fortune, follow the gifts of nature, of body and mind, being
right serviceable for conferring credit and authority upon men. For only
corporal beauty and majesty is so powerful in captivating hearts, and
imprinting in men's spirits, I know not what kind of reverence, as it has
seemed in former ages worthy of Crowns and Empires. And God being pleased to
bestow a King upon the people of Israel, made choice of Saul, whose comely
stature, and majesticall port, seemed to gain him the pre-eminence of that
dignity above all others, as well as that of his body: Ab humere and sursum e^^
minebat super omne^ populum. Reg. l. 1. c. 8.
He appeared (says the sacred Text) higher than all the people, by the head
and shoulders: As this other of whom the Poet speaks; He appeared above all,
by the whole shoulders. Jesus Christ himself, who to give us example of the
worlds contempt, trampled upon, and rejected honors, riches, and all
advantages of fortune, did not yet despise this gift of nature, but would
surpass all the sons of men in gracefulness and beauty of body, Speciosus
forma pra fil^e hominum. Psalm.
whereby his port replenished with a most venerable majesty, acquired him a
sweet but sovereign authority over hearts. And Saint Basil makes an excellent
observation; Bas. de vir. ginitate.
that God having given man the command and power over woman, would (in
recompense) advantage woman above man in corporal beauty, to the end the same
authority which man had over woman by prerogative of dignity, woman should get
the like above man by her graceful attractions. To be short, there is not any
more strong charm to gain hearts, and possess wills, than corporal beauty and
majesty, establishing an insensible empire over all beholders without need
either of laws or guards.

So as if the baits and attractions of the mind meet with those of the body,
it is sufficient to make a man lord of all hearts, and absolute king over all
affections, since by his exterior graces he gains the vulgars opinion; and
by his interlour, the judgment and estimation of the wise and prudent; so as
captivating some by the body, and others by the spirit, he makes himself
master of all. Now among the gifts of the spirit, strength and solidity of
judgment is preserable to all others, and it is that chiefly which causes a
man to be reverenced, and does most authorize him. For whatsoever in this world
is most powerful, is at length forced to yield to the strength of reason: he
then doubtless, who has the efficacy to cause the reason of his counsels most
perspicuously to appear in his words and actions, shall at all times remayn
the strongest, and folly invincible, what aslaults soever aremade upon him.
Riches, credit, dignities, favors, friends, knowledge, and cloquence, may
overcome, (for an instant) but in the end reason will overruled: and he who
has the abilities to make right use of these arms, he is furnished with
instruments to surmount all things.

To all those gifts of fortune and nature, the gifts of Grace, which Divines
call freely given, and which God bestows for the common and universal good of
mankind, on those whom he intends to authorize, and make useful for
community, add much weight and efficacy. Such are the gifts of counsels,
knowledge, prudence, cloquence, and other heavenly gifts, (which considered as
gifts of Grace) have in them something of higher and more sublime
consideration, and produce more powerful effects than the same qualities
considered (simply) as acquired habitudes. And this one thing does greatly
authorize a man, when there is any one thing observed and acknowledged in him,
surpassing the ordinary talents of men, and which testifies some particular
grace and favor from God.

CHAP. 5. The sequence of the same Discourse, how we ought rightly to employ
those good parts wherewith we are endowed; thereby to gain Authority.
IT is a common proverb; That each man is the maker of his own fortune:
signifying thereby, that God is not pleased to work all, but that man ought
also to cooperate on his part toward the raising of his reputation, whether
temporal here on earth, or eternal in heaven. We have spoken of the parts,
qualities, and gifts of fortune nature, and grace, which make a man eminent in
this world, and which acquire honor to him among men. But it is not all, to
have the heavens liberal to some, and largely to impart its favors, if
themselves be not prudent and sage to manage these advantages discreetly, and
to employ them religiously to Gods glory, profitably to public good, and
happily to Gods honor. For as it is said, that Eagles and Serpents have
certain precious stones in their heads; and that Griffins in the Northern
Scythia, keep, in certain caves and vaults, great heaps of gold and silver; but
because themselves know not how to make use thereof, this treasure which they
possess, is of no profit to them. The same it is (sometimes) of men, who
endowed with diverse commendable qualities, which might make them famous, and
recommendable, yet those excellent parts remaining hidden and smothered in
their custody, they remayn fruitless, and themselves without fame or credit.
Now it is not to be denied, but that some are followed with I know not what
kind of infortunity, choking all their worthy performances, in whatsoever
they design, and in all their attempts: On what side soever they turn, it
still crosses them at all points: and no sooner does any hope of favorable
success begin to appear amidst their endeavors, but it either forces it to
wither in the blossom, or snatcheth it out of their hands. Now be it that
their actions never fall upon a favorable opportunity, or that the disposition
of persons, times, places, with other necessary circumstances causing an action
happily and gloriously to show it self, still cross them; it commonly happens
unto them, as to flowers withering in their bud, or as to Children who die in
their birth, either because they came into the world over-soone, or too late,
and in that they missed the moment of birth, which nature requires: Or be it
that God, to whose providence we ought to refer all things, since all is
subject unto him, yea eve^ those things which to man are casual, being
foreseen by him) is not pleased to give them authority in this world; either
reserving them for some greater good, or foreseeing that the progress of
their fortunes, would in conclusion cause his grace to decay in them: Divinae
Iustiti^ emultari optimarum fortitudinem naturalium donation^bus. Diouys^is.
or (as Saint Denis said) God being not willing to enervate the force of his
grace, by conferring temporal benefits upon them; or else, to the end to
punish the offenses of the age, and to deprive it of the benefit which the
public might reap by the government of honest, capable, and useful
Magistrates; in consequence of those threats he has denounced in Scripture: or
for some other respect, (always holy and just, though hidden and concealed)
howsosoever, it is certain by daily experience, that diverse, endowed with
laudable and excellent parts, are yet still put back, and live retired without
name, or authority, though it be no fault of theirs, nor any defect in them, of
sage and prudent conduct, hindering them from appearing recommendable, and
worthy of Employment. Now, these men ought to rest contented with the testimony
of their conscience, being more valuable than all the Scepters and Crowns this
world can afford: and which is the only reward, whereof neither fortune nor
humane ingratitude can bereave Virtue. To deserve honor, and not to have it,
is more honorable, then to enjoy it without desert; and the praise was
incomparatively greater, when the question was asked why the people of Rome
erected not Statues for Cato in the public places of the City, Plut in Cato.
then when they enquired why any were erected for him. The virtue we see
uncrowned is always most esteemed by those who best know how to set a true
estimate on things: whereas (on the other side) there is nothing more
disgraceful, than an honor or recompense, the cause whereof we enquire. But
howsoever it be true, that misfortune still attends some men's merits, yet so
it is notwithstanding, that as many impute the offenses they have fallen into to
the Devils temptation; So men, often cause both fortune, and the time to alter
through their own errors. For supposing they have commendable qualities, they
either are ignorant how to make right use of them, or they absolutely abuse
them, or neglect the right taking hold of occasions; so as either the pains in
the profecution thereof affrights them, or idleness disturbes them, or
pleasure perverts and deludes them. If they be Nobles they degenerate, if rich
they employ not their wealth honorably; If of high Dignity, they invalidate
their charge; If wise, they force their knowledge to serve their particular
contentments, and not the public good; If endowed with other laudable
qualities, they suffer them to remain unusefull, as the Dragons of the Gardens
of the Hesperides, which keep the golden Apples, and know not how to gather
them: No marvel then, though being full stored with rare endowments, they
still remain empty of fame and reputation. Some likewise conceal their
Talents as Ants do their Eggs and grain, to enjoy the tranquillity of a
private life, which they prefer before all things: Now, of these men there is
no wonder if they have what they look for, and miss what they avoid: But if
they do this out of a true neglect of the world, and a pure love toward God,
they are worthy of admiration, but if only to avoyde labor, and for their
private content, (which most often happens) forgetting their obligation on
purpose to follow their humor, and preferring their particular pleasure,
before the common good, they are not so much as worthy of excuse. It is not
therefore sufficient to have happy advantages, and commendable parts, for the
acquisition of fame, and authority, toward the opening a way to public
profit, the principal piece being the true employment of them to good purpose:
since of these things (as of gold and riches) the use is more worth than the
enjoyment, and the employment better than the possession.

Now to make right use of heavenly gifts, and thereby to establish and
authorize our selves: Pains, prudence, and good fortune is to be required: Of
pains, to find out occasions, of Prudence to make election thereof; of good
fortune to find, and profitably to employ them. Good fortune being independent
on us, ought to be remitted to Gods providence; Pains, and diseretion being
in our power, are part of our duty.

And principally those who are descended from illustrious, ancient, and
authorized families ought to acknowledge, that to maintain the authority of
their Ancestors, they are to support the reputation thereof by virtue; and that
if they intend to inherit the glory and same their fore fathers have acquired,
they ought to succeed (by imitation) those brave actions which have made them
so illustrious. Where virtue is not hereditary, glory cannot succeed, that
failing, this tends toward its ruin, and the flowers fading speedily
follows the roots decay. Nobility may happily pass, together with the
blood, from Fathers to their Children, but the honor never passes but with
merit. Descent allows the one, but imitation (only) can transmit the other:
and if the one follow the name, the other attends virtue. For it is a Maxim
in Philosophy: that things are conserved by the same means they are acquired,
and are lost by their contraries. As water which gains its purity by motion,
conserveth it by the same, and loses it by rest: and Iron receiving its heat
from fire, preserves it in fire, and loses it, being removed thence. Now it
is not the blood nor the name, but the generous acts, which have acquired
credit, and authority to illustrious families. Wherefore it is not the
succession of name, and arms, but the hereditary sequence of virtuous actions,
which can maintain and conserve it. So as if Children degenerate from their
Ancestors, and if instead of travel, idleness; in place of industry,
voluptuousness; and pleasures, instead of continency, and Justice,
dissolutions and pride slip in; the greatness and authority of families, do
instantly decay; and as Salust says; Imperium his artibus retinetur quibus
initio partum est. At fortuna simul cum moribus immutatur. Salust. de Co^ur.
Catels.
Fortune changes with manners. The world affords us daily experience of this
truth, wherein we see, that vice, and carelessness abase the credit of diverse
families; which industry and diligence had raised to great honor and power;
and the fathers glory, instead of serving as an ornament to his Children,
becomes a shame and scandal to his posterity. For as Cajus Marius, reproched
the Roman Nobility, who sought to put themselves into authority by the renown
of their Ancestors, whose steps they traced not; Quanto majorum vita preclarior
tanto horum socordia flagitior.
The more illustrious and commendable (said he) the lives of Predecessors are,
the more shameful and vituperable are the Childrens vices: The glory of
Ancestors, serves as a light to their progeny, causing all they do, be it
good or bad, to appear to the public view. Maiorum gloria posteris quasi
lumen est, neque bona eorum neque mala in occulto patitur.
And this ought to serve as an advertisement to those who are descended from
famous and renowned fathers: All civil Law and Nature may well allow them
their fathers inheritance: but how only virtue can maintain them in the
possession of their authority, and how they acquire not so great reputation by
issuing from their race, as they undergo an obligation to become worthy of
their descent, and to do as Spring waters, which still remount as high as
their Sourses.

CHAP. 6. The sequence of the same Discourse.
AS the greatness and celebritie of a Family does no way contribute any
authority to those who are base and unworthy of the name they bear. So neither
do riches give any addition of honor, either to Prodigals abusing their
fortunes, nor to misers who know not the right use thereof. But those who
understand rightly, how to use them upon occasions, have a great help both in
the raising and maintaining their reputation. Liberality, and magnificence; are
two virtues of great splendor in public, making the Authors both famous,
and far renowned. The one, by benefits and rewards, by Prudence dispensed; by
knowing how to make election of persons, causes, times, and places; the other,
by honorable expenses, employed in remarkable actions, or in public works,
having reflection either on our Countries honor, or on the glory and service
of God: For as the Philosopher has observed, Honorabile^ sumtus sunt maxim
qui ad divinum sacrificium pertinent. Arist. lib. 4. Eth. cap. 2.
The most glorious are those which concern the service due to the Deity. Now,
if every great action ought to have an eminent object, what object can be more
worthy, or more proportionable to the large expenses of magnificence, than the
honor due to the Divine Majesty. The house I will build shall be great and
sumptuous, because our God is great and Majesticall (said King Solomon when he
designed the building of that Majesticall Temple, one of the worlds Wonders)
alleging no other reason for the incomparable Majesty of his work, but the
only greatness of God. For those vast expenses, diverse put themselves unto,
upon vain and frivolous occasions; the memory whereof is as soon past as
smoke or wind, and its subject often as shameful; deserve not the name of
magnificence, but rather of profusion, bringing no credit or glory at all, but
blame and reproach to their Authors. As to give indiscreetly, is not to
understand how to bestow, but is only not to know how to keep: So to spend in
these unworthy and frivolous occasions, is not to be magnificent, it is not to
be well advised. It is the object that gives the form, the esteem and value,
to the action. But bounty is rightly bestowed, and expenses well placed;
liberality casts a a luster, magnificency appears: and both these acquire
great authority among men: to those who rightly manage them.

To give, and do good, is to imitate God, who has not only goodness to
will, but power and riches to enable him to do good. To imitate the bounty and
magnificence of the Almighty, is to make our selves admirable among men: and as
our Savior said in the Gospel. Those who are in honor and credit among men,
are called Benefactors. Wherefore the rich ought to use it as we do our blood:
which men more carefully conserve than any thing whatsoever, when there is no
necessity of spending it; but where there is question of maintayning Gods, our
Kings, or Countries cause, or to gain honor in a battle; there is nothing
which the courageous and magnanimous lose more freely or readily. Upon such
occasions it is cowardice to keep our blood, glory to lose it. So the right
use of riches, is to conserve them with moderate care, when it is neither
necessary, useful, nor honorable to spend them; but when any occasion is
offered, either to do good for others, or to show magnificence in any famous
act; It is necessary to employ them at such time with the like cheerfulness
as the Soldier dispends his blood, and at all times more to esteem Honor
than gold, Authority than goods.

In this manner, liberality and magnificence, are means of acquiring and
maintaining credit by riches. But in case of honors, States, and dignities;
Justice, moderation, love of the public, and the defense and protection of
the poor and impotent: do gain very much. For when we see those who are
placed in dignities, to make no other use of their power, but to cause right
and reason to take place, to support innocence, and to bereave iniquity of its
liberty to do ill; yet notwithstanding, not to have a heart more puffed up
with vaineglory, but only a mind farther charged with care, and not to grow
passionate but for public interest, and not seek by their proper labors,
but only the good and quiet of others, not to rule for themselves; but by
commanding to be serviceable to all, to show themselves as terrors to
oppressors, and the safety of the oppressed, and not to employ Authority but in
defense of what needs support, or to resist what cannot otherwise be repelled
but by such a Justice as is armed with power: is the thing in truth which
ravisheth all men with admiration: It is that which acquireth, and maintains
credit in public opinion, causing those who execute such actions, to be
reverenced as the Gods of other men. In this sort, Job represents the credit
he had among those of his Nation, namely by his Justice, and equity. When I
drew near (says he) the Gates of the City, Job. cap. 23.
and when they prepared a Chair for me in the middle of the place, the young
men retired, and the old men arose and stood up out of Honor; The Princes gave
over speaking, holding the finger on the mouth. The Governors were silent, and
their tongues were fastened to their pallats. The Ear that heard my discourse,
esteemed me right happy, and the Eye contemplating my gravity, gave testimony
to all men of me: Because I had delivered the poor, who had only cries and
sighs to defend them, and the oppressed Orphan who found no relief: I have
comforted the afflicted heart of the Widow, I clothed my self with Justice,
as with a Garment of Honor, and a Diadem of Glory. I have bin the Blind man's
Eye, the Lame man's foot, and the Poor man's Father. See here plainly (in this
example drawn out of Scripture) how the credit and authority of a Magistrate,
is the fruit of his Justice and Integrity. It is fitting that a Soldier know
how to use his arms, if he will have them defend him: It is likewise
requisite, that he who is endowed with worthy qualities of the mind, know how
to employ them, if he intend they should grace him, and put him into, or
maintain him in authority. For he must understand how to take his favorable
times, moments, and occasions to produce and manifest them. The observation of
seasons, constellations, days, and hours, is not more necessary for those who
undertake husbandry, to plant, sow, graft, or to inoculate successefully. If
either Prudence, or good fortune fail at this point, we shall never advance
any thing: and be it that we trip by indiscretion, or slip by misfortune in
this passage, we shall still make the nose and ground meet, save only that
Imprudencie herein is blamable, Infortunitie excusable.

But to conclude all this discourse concerning Authority; The acquiring thereof
is not all, we must likewise beware we abuse it not, or loose, or weaken it
by-imploying it to every frivolous purpose, and without necessity. For as
those who daily take Physic, make it useless and inefficacious, by the over
frequent use thereof, taking away its vigor and operation by the custom: So
those who in all affairs and accidents are overstiffe, and will strain their
Authority to the height, enervate, and weaken it, so as resolving never to
slacken or unbend the bow, they in the end do absolutely break it. It is
fitting sometime to give that way in less important occasions, which a man
would not do, in the obtaining what is fitting in more principal occurrents:
it is not necessary in passing a River to go directly against the stream, and
to afflict our selves with an unnecessary toil, but rather to overcome its
force in by asing the current, and by a little descending and not by direct
mounting to break its force and make way. Who so knows how to give way when
in discretion he ought, shall overcome all with patience. We are to keep the
shoot-anchor for great tempests; Credit and Authority for eminent occasions;
small ones ought not to detain it, to the end, great ones may meet it, in its
full measure. We have an excellent example hereof in Tacitus, where a famous
Senator (Cajus Cassius) speaks these notable words to the Senate in a
Subject of consequence. Tac. lib. 14. Anual. 1.
I have diverse times not opposed many scarce reasonable things, which have bin
proposed in this assembly, to the end not to destroy by over importune and
frequent contradictions all the Authority I have; but to keep it entire for the
Commonwealths necessities, if happily affairs stand in need of firm and free
Counsel. Here you see how Prudence ought to husband Authority.

CHAP. 7. Of good Luck.
ORder is transmuted, when the Blind lead the cleare-sighted. Nevertheless in
worldly affairs, if Fortune guide not Prudence, yet does she at least open the
way for it, and causes it to attain its aim. Prudence may pass on without
the conduct of fortune, but not arrive to the end whereto it aspireth, without
the favor of fortunes Convoy: So as Prudence inventing sage Counsels, and
Fortune affording happy events; The cleare-sighted disposes the way, but the
blind finds the passage. It is not therefore sufficient to have Prudence for
the proposing of good Counsels, and Credit and Authority to cause them to be
received; if fortune accompany not the execution to make them successful. For
though it be true that the Wiseman ought not to be answerable for events, they
being out of his Jurisdiction, but only for such Counsels as depend upon
himself, yet so it is notwithstanding, that he both seeks and desires his
pretensions, as all other things do, and when for the obtaining thereof, he
has performed what he either ought, or is able to effect; in conclusion he
finds himself frustrate. The glory of his Prudence does not greatly content
him, without the fruit: and if he merit not reproach, yet seems he worthy of
compassion: since the vulgar in matter of affairs regard not the counsels, but
the events: they more esteem a naughty counsel with happy event, than a good
and sage one, which succeeds not; and good fortune once sailing him, both
Wisdom, Prudence, Judgment, and all things seem to be wanting in the opinion
of men. Truly those who having on their part performed what they ought; yet
do only want success, may defend themselves with the answer, which Siramnes a
Persian Gentleman, made to certain of his friends, who wondered why his
Enterprises were so improspcrous, his propositions being so pithy. Plut. in his
Morals of the notable saings of Princes, Kings, and Captains.
The reason (said he) is, because I am only Master of my discourse, but Fortune
of the effects. Yet notwithstanding, when good counsels take effect, men
always esteem them the best, and when they succeed not, the contrary event
causes them to be in some measure suspected. In a word, Prudence without
success is a fair tree without fruit, and it is the fruit, not the tree; the
success, and not the counsel, men chiefly desire; since counsel is not
sought for, but in hope of the desired event, the way but for the mark, the
Medium but for the Terminus and the means but for the end.

Now that good Luck, whereof I speak, proceeds not, either from that blind
Fortune, which spirits yet more blind have forged, nor from that imaginary
destiny of inflexible decrees, whereto Heathenish Antiquity has subjected the
Counsels even of Jupiter himself, nor on the disposition of Celestial bodies,
whereto the vanity of Nativity-casters, submit the whole order of things
happening here on earth, whether Natural, voluntary, or casual. Fortune is a
Fable, Destiny a Dream, and that necessity the judicial Astrologers pretend
to be imposed by the Stars upon humane and free actions, or upon casual and
accidental events; is an evident error, and a manifest impiety. For as
concerning those effects depending on natural and necessary causes; the order
of the World and Nature, ranging inferior bodies under superior ones; gives
to those Authority, to those dependancie, and regulateth the actions of
elementary Bodies by the Law of the influence of Celestial Bodies. All that
God has made is established with order (says the Apostle). Quae a D^o sunt,
ordinata sunt.
But what power would men ascribe to Stars, either over humane actions,
proceeding from the Will, or over casual occurrents, which being accidental
effects, cannot by consequence have any Natural, certain, or limited cause.
Nature being appointed to a certain and infallible end, Natura ad unum
determinatur.
according to a Philosophical Maxim; what authority or command can she have
either over man's will being unbounded, free, and indifferent, to the one or
other, of two contrary objects; or over that, which being merely casual, may
either happen or not happen? The Stars being corporeal, what can they
imprint upon the soul of man being spiritual; unreasonable things, upon
reasonable ones; what is necessitated, upon what is free; or a thing determined
upon an indifferent matter? In like manner, concerning casual accidents what
subordination can casual and accidental things, have to the influences of
Stars, being regulated, necessary, and infallible things? Is not this as much
as to strive against all reason, and to abuse the weakness and credulity of
spirits; so much as only to dare (I will not say maintain) but even to broach
such absurd propositions. The Stars then (O man) shall be culpable of thine
offenses, authors of thy good works, causes of thy prosperities, instruments
of thine infortunities: if you do any good they shall have the merit, and
consequently the reward shall be due to them, and not to you. If you offend,
they shall bear the blame, and you may justly cast the punishment upon them.
And why are Laws among you, if the Stars impose laws upon you? If the
stars be the causes of your good and bad actions, and you only the
instruments, to whom is the penaltic of ill, or crown of good due, to the
workman, or his tools, to the cause, or to the instrument? See you not
plainly, that if these propositions were true, you offer injury to the Stars
to appropriate to your selves the reward of the good which they do, and wrong
to your selves, to inflict on your selves, the punishment of the evil you
commit not? Who sees not how these propositions overthrow all reason, all
justice, all virtue, all order, and all policy. In like manner, if it be the
Stars which send good fortunes, or fatalties, prosperities or adversities to
men; they then govern the world, it is they who raise some, and repress
others, who distribute honors, give victories, transfer Scepters, and
dispose of Kingdoms. But if this be thus, wherefore is merit raised in one
time, and why at another time does ambition obtain all Honors? Is it because
the Stars one while make use of justice, an otherwhile of favors? Why in one
age does Industry confer dignities, in another gold, or advantage in blood:
is it because the Stars alter and accommodate themselves to the abuse of
times, as well as men do? Why in one Nation does Election confer Crowns, in
another Succession? Is it by reason the Stars follow the fashions of
Countries; and do diversely distribute their benefits, according to the laws
of Kingdoms? But they do well in accommodating themselves to laws, lest they
should be resisted, and find some more compulsive thing then their own
power. Of two, borne at the same instant, and under the same Constellations,
why is the one prosperous, the other miserable? and the aspect of Stars
being so equal in both, why should the effect be so different? Who sees not
that the Startes consisting of natural and necessary causes, appearing in all
times and places, and in all and every where after the same fashion, producing
so inconstant and various effects, according to places, moments, and
circumstances, cannot be any constant cause of human events; but in their
conceits, who have neither rule nor reason.

Natural reason clearly shows the vanity of their discourse. Insigna coel^
nolite m^th^re qui timent gentes, quia l^ges populorum vana sunt. Ierem. c. 10.
Scripture condemns them as full of Superstition, error, and impiety. Fear
not the signs of Heaven, which Idolatrers dread, because the Laws of the
Nations are vain: says the Prophet Jeremy: and the Church rejects and
detesteth them, Astrologia, and planetarii damuatur a Christiana and vera
pietate De Aug. l. 4. Confess.
as contrary to true piety. Judicial Astrologers, and the Planetaries (says
Saint Augustine) are condemned by the Christian Law. And Saint Epiphanius
reports, that Aquila Ponticus, who in the Primitive Church, De Epiph. l. de
some. and mensuris.
in the Emperor Adrian his time, translated the old Testament out of Hebrew
into Greek, was expelled out of the Church, for addicting himself to
judicial Astrology. All the Holy Fathers, with joint consent have impugned
this error; D. Bas. in c. 14. Esaias.
and St. Basil says, That it confounds man's spirit, and takes away Gods
Providence. Yea, even the Laws of well insticuted Republiques among the
ancient Pagans, have banished these judiciaries and deviners of good events, as
pernicious to civil society. And we read in Tacitus of a Decree in Senate
made in the Emperor Tiberius his time, Factum est Squatus consulium de
Mathematicis Italia Pellendis, gonus hominum quod in urbe nostra and expellotur
semper, and retinebitur. Tac. lib. 1. Ann.
to expel them out of all Italy. Whereupon this grave Author adds a very
remarkable observation, that this kind of men have at all times been chased
out of Rome, and yet have they continually been retained and supported;
Expelled from thence by public Laws, but fostred by the superstitious, and
foolish credulity of particulars. So as neither humane actions, nor casual
accidents, depend at all upon the disposition of Stars, neither as efficient
causes, nor as singes or tokens of what happens. Against the error of Origin,
who affirmed; that though the Stars cannot be the causes of what is done,
either freely by man, or casually by hazard, yet so it is, that one may know
what will happen by the inspection of Stars, as by the reading of a book,
where God has written, and imprinted with his finger, in great and legible
Characters, all the order of future things, as in a Table, or Pattern of his
divine prescience, which he has exposed to man's sight. An error which the
Scripture condemns as well as the former; forbidding us to have recourse to
Stars in any sort, save only to know times and seasons, and what happens by a
natural, and necessary order.

But first, as for what concerns humane actions, they have not any near and
interior cause, but only man's free will, resolving either upon good or evil:
And as for more remote and exterior causes: when man operateth rightly and
sutably to reason: God concurres, as the mooving cause, (either by his general
concurrency or particular, in an natural order, as some will have it) natural
and moral actions, or by a particular grace, or by a supernatural order, in
Christian and supernatural actions. After the law: (whether divine, or humane)
the just customs of those Countries where we inhabit, and the good example
either of Ancients, or of such with whom we converse, are the exterior
means, interiourly moving the will, to incline it self toward good: And when
man is inclinable to evil; his irregular actions, cannot be imputed (besides
his proper inclination being the interior and principal motive) but to the
Devils impulsion to the persuasion of wicked persons, to pernicious example, to
the attractions of Creatures, or to occasions depending upon, and inclining
toward vice: but to the Stars they can no way be referred, but indirectly: in
that Stars may incite passions in the inferior appetite, and these passions
the will. As for what concerns casual events (being the subject of our
question) they have no other cause, save only the disposition and casual
encounter of certain circumstances of times, places, and persons, whereon such
uncertain affects depend as upon unsure, and irregulated causes. But I call
this chance casual (as to us) but not as to God: to whom nothing is
accidental, but all foreseen by his prescience, and ordered by his
providence. For if even a poor Sparrow falls not to ground without Gods
Providence (as the Gospel speaks) were it not a manifest impiety to
suppose, that any thing could happen to man which God foreseeth not by his
foreknowledge: and if good; ordained by his express will: but if ill;
permitted by his secret and hidden Will, but always holy and just providence.
So the good fortune (whereof we speak) causing good designs and sage counsels
happily to succeed, proceed not but from the casual disposition, and encounter
of circumstances which are to concur toward the production of happy
successes: This being often casual, as concerning our providence, but at all
times forescene, and ordered by that of God: who so well disposes the places
times, persons, and affairs, in favor of such as he intends to make use of
in the execution of eminent actions, as all things make way, and succeed
favorably for them.

CHAP. 8. That this good Fortune follows some, and how it is to be managed.
THis good Fortune being understood according to my explication, is an heavenly
gift which God has in such sort annexed to certain persons, as it follows
and accompanies them in all places, as the shadow does the body. To deny this,
were to be ignorant of what Histories affirm, and whatsoever daily happens in
humane affairs. For who can rightly consider the Progress and pursuit of
Augustus his fortunes, who among all the Emperors and Monarchs of the earth
has merited the name of Happy: but he must observe the disposition, and order
of Gods Providence causing affairs, humors, times, and other circumstances to
meet in the same point, and manner as was fitting, did raise, and lead him as
by the hand to the sovereign authority of the worlds Empire. Julius Caesar had
already begun to cast the platform of Monarkie; but because things were as
then not absolutely disposed for so great an alteration; Love of liberty, and
the zeal of maintaining the same, still boiling in their breasts: the success
was not answerable to his courageous resolutions, and his designs wanting no
valor to under take it, failed only of fortune to bring it to effect. But at
the same instant, when Augustus began to appear in the lists, all things
showed themselves favorable, and inclinable to his wishes. The people incensed
for the death of Caesar, against those who defended the Common wealths liberty.
Affections, and humors inclined to alteration: Anthony under pretext of
revenging this death, fighting with general approbation against public
liberty. Cicero deceived under Augustus his appearance (as then named Octavius)
putting him into reputation, and opening (unawares the first passage to his
future greatness: After this, the conspiracy between Anthony and Lepidus for
the ridding their hands of the principal heads of the Republickes faction, and
so to share the Empire between them three. The opposites suppressed,
resistances removed; The Empire divided; Lepidus soon giving place to his two
Companions; Anthony in the end to Augustus: all Authority collected, and
reunited in him alone: a triumphant army on foot to maintain it: The peoples,
and great persons their affections ready to receive him: his enemies, either
dead, subdued, or won with rewards; Conspiracies either repressed by fear, or
vanquished for want of power, Adversaries overcome, or dispersed by clemency;
In a word, all things disposed to Crown and Proclaim him Emperor of the
World, who sees not plainly. Gods providence disposing all things in his
favor, in this tissure, and linkes of prosperities. Now were it that God by
means of the temporal Monarkie in Rome, intended to lay the foundation of the
spiritual, which JESUS CHRIST, who was pleased to appear in this world, came
to establish in his Church; Or were it that by an universal peace proceeding
from the conduct of one only head, he intended to dispose men to the reception
of the promised Messiah, who brought peace upon the Earth; or were it, that by
reducing all Nations under the authority of one Emperor, he would open by these
means (as St. Leo observes) the course of the Gospel; which was to be
announced, and published to all Nations: Or besides all these reasons were it
for some other secret, or hidden cause, one may clearly know and perceive that
this greatness of Augustus, is not a work of his virtue but of his good
fortune, and his good fortune, not a work of hazard, Destiny, or the Stars,
but of Gods Providence. I allege this so vulgar, and well known an example,
to show that the good fortune which follows some persons, depends only on the
concurrence of circumstances rightly disposed, and ordained by Gods Providence,
willing that these their designs should succeed, to make use of them toward
the execution of his Eternal decrees, whether they imagine or aim at any such
matter or otherwise. If their designs be honest and just, he imployeth them by
his express will; If wicked and unjust, he suffers them, and by his wisdom
draws there out the good he intends.

But this good fortune seems to be so far affected to some, as it not only
follows their persons, but even all things concerning them, or that have
relation unto them: as the Prosperity of Augustus followed all his
Lieutenants, who with incredible good fortune obtained for him infinite famous
victories. Alexander the Great; his fortunes followed his very pictures; and
the Ancients were of opinion, that his pourtraicts carried about the neck, made
those happy and fortunate who wore them: And we read in the histories of
Bohemia, how that famous Captain John Zisca, who never lost Battle where
himself was present, had so great conffdence in his good fortune; as he
ordained, that after his death his skin should be taken off, and a Drum to be
headed therewith with, which he commanded should be beaten up, in the head of
the Army; persuading himself that the like good fortune continually following
his person whilst helived, would likewise follow his skin and carcass after
his Decease. The same felicity following famous Commanders in war, causing
them to perform brave exploits: does likewise accompany (even in matters of
peace) those generous souls; whose counsels, and directions God blesses for
the prosperity of States: in such a measure, as all they advise, succeeds, and
is effectual; when as whatsoever others, no less prudent, and capable, shall
propound, or seem to set forward, becomes vain, and fruitless: to show us
that in the decrees of humane Prudence; Fortune, (or to speak more properly)
Gods Providence, will maintain the Empire. But though the enjoyment of good
fortune, be a thing not otherwise depending on us, then is the finding of a
hidden treasure; which not the design, but the luckie accident causes to come
to pass. Yet so it is that as a good husband makes better use of this found
treasure, then a prodigal who spends all* so a Prudent and sage person does
better employ his good fortune, then does a fool or indiscreet person, who
loses it in abusing it. It is God then who gives this good fortune, but it
is man who makes use of it: his favor conferres it, but our Prudence must
employ, and manage it. And as Gods grace does not exclude but command man's
cooperation in things concerning his eternal salvation: So Gods favor
restrains not, but requires man's concurrencie in what has reflection upon
the conduct of temporal affairs; and the good fortune he confer reth on
some, has such depen^an^ic on his benificence as their Prudence, their
Diligence, and their Industry are at all times req^ilsite ^^ward the validity
thereof. For God makes not use of man as of an inanimate and unreasonable
Instrument, cooperating nothing of himself toward the work man's art, but
suffering him to perform all; but he employeth him as an instrument endowed
with soul and reason. who being moved, ought also himself to stir, and
following his proper, and voluntary propension, upon the first motion his mover
gives him, to finish together with him the designed work. Good fortune
followed Augustus from his Cradle even to his Grave; but observe how he has
at all times employed it by his pains, husbanded it by his diligence, managed
it by his wisdom: so far forth as he has left it questionable, whether his
Prudence be more obliged to his fortune, in having so faithfully followed it,
or his fortune to his Prudence, in having so sagely conducted it. Alexander
likewise was happy; Fortune seeming to make choice of him for her Favorite;
but had he slept in Idleness, had he not seconded his Fortunes by his
Travailes and Courage: his Fortune would never have laid him in the Bed of
Victories and Triumphs, which acquired him the Title of Great. It is therefore
necessary, for those who are seco^ded with good success in their designs and
counsels, to endeavor on their parts, to employ it profitably, and to manage it
discreetly; I say discreetly, since fortune is often offended with such as abuse
her favors, who attempt all things, who unadvisedly undertake actions: and who
without sounding the foard, fall into the precipice: supposing their good
fortune has compacted with their impradencie, obliging her self to follow it
at all points. There is no treasure so great, but Prodigality can draine it,
nor Fortune so propitious, that folly will not frustrate. And it is ordinarily
seen, that the most fortunate, are in conclusion crushed with the greatest
miseries; for being over confident of their Prosperity, they commit the
grossest absurdities: so as the same good Fortune which in favoring blinds
them, in blinding overthrows them, causing them out of their own folly to
pay use for her former benefits. We are to acknowledge, that Fortune being blind
may trip, standing on a Bowl she may turn, having Wings she may fly away, If
Prudence show her not light, Discretion settle her not, and the reverence we
bear her oblige her not to stay.

Discretion ought to be seconded by Modesty; since Pride and insolency are the
most dangerous rocks threatening the prosperous. They are ordinarily engendered
by good Fortune, yet do they commonly spoil and ruin their productrix. For
presumption moves men, not at all to measure their forces, throwing them
headlong into hazards, whence good fortune cannot disingage them; it causes
them to scorn others, this scorn rayseth envy, out of envy arise Counter
checks, enmities, and contradictions, which in the end shake the fortune of the
most prosperous; for having carried themselves over insolently in their
advancements. So as better counfell cannot be followed, than to imitate the
modesty of Agathocles, who from the Pottery, being raised to Royalty, Caused
Earthen Vessels to be mingled with those of Gold and sil^ver, at his Table, to
the end the remembrance of his former meanness, might hinder him from growing
proud of his Present Groatnesse. What felicity, therefore soever followth the
prosperous, he ought never to forget he is man; and how the very thing
seeming to raise him above others, is but only the puff of a frail Fortune,
which may forsake him in a moment; as the Wind causing a Ship to sail often
leaves her in the middle of her Voyage. We are to consider, that there are
diverse things, which contribute toward the conservation, and maintenance of
good Fortune, and chiefly the good will and friendship of other men, which is
lost by Pride, but gained and maintained by moderation. But since good Fortune
is a heavenly gift, and a favor from God, (as I have formerly showed) the
most assured means to maintain it, is an humble acknowledgment toward him who
bestows it; an acknowledgment consisting of two points: In rendering him the
honor and glory by thankesgiving; and in not employing it, but in just
enterprises, and conformable to his holy Will, by a pure, and upright
intention. For when we abuse Gods Benefits, or alsume the Honor thereof to
our selves, or when we employ it only to our own particular profit, or when we
make use thereof, against the Giver; God ordinarily revoketh his gifts, or
turns them to the ruin and Confusion of ungrateful persons.

Whereupon, we see in History, and daily Experience, that those who have the
greatest good Fortunes and Prosperities, in this World, often fall upon most
fatal and unfortunate ends. Wherein we are to acknowledge the Justice of Gods
Judgments, in the chasticement of their ingratitude.

CHAP. 9. Of Fortitude and Courage.
Justice often encountreth diverse impediments, in the execution of the good it
designeth; Lets (I say) so strong sometimes, and so violent, as Authority
cannot overcome them, nor can good fortune divert them; if Fortitude and
Courage break not through and surmount them. Fortitude therefore is a right
necessary virtue, to perform, and execute, by overcomming all opposite
resistances. And it is hereof we are now to treat.

Nature has imprinted in all things a certain inclination, not only to
procure good, and avoyde evil, but even to resist things contrary, either
hindering the pursuit of what is profitable, or casting in our way, what is
hurtful unto us. Fire has a natural propension, not only to raise it self
aloft, from interior places, not agrecable thereto, and to tend to its
natural sphere, and convenient residence; but moreover to resist all things
corrupting it, or hindering its mounting. Water has not only an inclination to
slide toward the Sea, the place it seeks for; but a swiftness and violence to
make it self way over banks, ditches, rocks, and mountains, resisting her
course. A stone, besides the weight, causing it to fall to its center, has the
strength and hardness, to crush and break things opposite to its descent. All
living creatures, besides the natural appetite, inciting and drawing them
toward objects pleasing to their senses, are, besides, stirred up, by a secret
instigation, to arm themselves, either with beak, teeth, nails, or other
natural weapons, against whatsoever shall hinder them from the approach or
enjoyment of those things they affect. Man likewise is not only endowed with
the concupiscible apperite, inclining him to the purchase of things suitable to
his nature, and to the avoiding their contraties, but with an irascible
appetite likewise, serving him as a spur, and affording him vigor, to fight
against all resistances restrayning him from the good he aymeth at, and
against all mischies attempting and assalting him. The flashes, and motions of
this irascible appetite, as hop, bold nesse, and choler (the three principal
passions of the irascible) being well ordered and conducted by reason, serve as
soldiers to virtue, to fight under her Ensign against such difficulties, and
resistances as she encounters in the execution of her designs. So Saint
Gregory of Nice, Greg N^ss. Nemesiu l. 4. Philos. ca. 13. Iraest armigera
concupiscentiae.
elegantly terms Choler, a soldier under the pay of concupiscence, fighting
for her against all things opposing her pursuits; A soldier arming himself in
loves quarrel, to overthrow, and surmount whatsoever shall cross her desires.
Now if Temperance does so evenly regulate the desires of love, as to cause man,
not to love, or desire, but only what is conformable to reason; In this case
the motions of the irascible part, arming themselves against oppositions, are
just and reasonable, and serve as instruments for virtue. For the Stoics were
in the wrong in condemning all Passions as vicious, As Lycus King of Thrace,
who destroyed all the vines in his kingdom, because Wine inebric^ated the
passions Hier ep. ad C^esiphon. contra Pelagiu. Ex homine passionem tollere,
hoc est bominem ex homine tollere.
and in striving utterly to bereave us thereof: since passions are natural to
man, vice being not derived from nature, but from the will. Wherefore the
Philosopher rejects this Proposition as false. And the church it self, at a
famous Council in Saint Hieromes time, condemned as heretics, certain
Anachorites, who would introcuce a kind of Apathie and impassibility. Since
(says this holy Father) he who wholly takes passions from men, does as much
as he who breaveth man of his humane nature. Nay, I will say more, it is to rob
man of the spur toward virtue. For God has ingrafted these transports and
motions in man, not to follow them as bruit beasts, without reason, or
restraint; but to make reasonable use thereof, as provocations exciting us to
the eschewing of ill, and pursuit of good. Reason shows man both good and
ill; the Will inciteth us toward good, and diverteth us from ill: Passions well
ordered by reason, serve as spurs to the will, to put her forward with more
ardour, and vehemency whither reason conducts her, and her motion leads her;
But chiefly when the good which virtue proposes is difficult, and hardly to be
executed: for virtue at such times intreates the passions of the irascible, to
lend her strong hand, and as soldiers to take arms for her assistance; And
presently at her summons, Hope, (the first motion of the irascible) begins to
arm and to put her in heart: Hope is seconded by a generous Audacitie, as with
a second Champion, who surmounting the consideration of all obstacles, which
might stop his course, exposes and puts himself forward without all fear
of danger, to such means as may serve him to execute his resolution. But if
the resistance of wicked persons oppose and cross him, Choler as a third
soldier comes to the rescue, which pricking and awaking the soul, as with a
quickening sting, heats and inflames her with a holy violence against iniquity.
But by reason these three soldiers are dangerous if they be not moderated by
the laws of good discipline; and in that hope may prove rash, Audacitie
foolish, and Choler precipitate. We are therefore to be wary, lest
presumptuous Hope engage us not in desperate enterprises, indiscreet boldness
into impossibilities, blind Choler into inevitable ruins: But rather that
consideration guiding Hope, discretion boldness, and reason Choler: virtue by
this means may employ these three Champions in the sage, valorous, and happy
execution of her intentions. For there is this difference between those who
follow the violence and brutalitie of their passions; and others who regulating
them by reason, make use of them only as incitements toward virtue: that the
former foolish cast themselves upon the very swords, point which nature has
given them; the latter employ it prudently to the right use: the former hereby
finding only therein their ruin, the latter extracting thence their glory.
Those if they enterprise any good action, suffer themselves to be transported
precipitately to their downfall, soon losing their fyrinesse in the progress
of what they undertake: The second governing their transports by judgment,
revigorate their resolutions; the further they engage themselves in dangerous
enterprises; showing more courage in the conclusion, than in the beginning of
their achievements; to which purpose the Philosopher has pronounced this
approved Maxim: That the Audacious before perils, put themselves forward,
Arist. lib. 3. Eth. ca. 7. and aces praevalentes sunt anto pericula, in ipsis
autem discedunt.
but in dangers they fly. Temerity casts them thereinto, Timiditie forces
them to retire. Now this happens by reason this sort of audacious people who
follow the first apprehension, give themselves no leisure to foresee all the
difficulties opposite to their designs. So that as the Andabats they cast
themselves headlong into dangers, and being once engaged in the medley, and
there encountering greater oppositions than they imagined, they are amazed, they
shrink and recoyle. But those who guide their rage by reason, foresee all the
perils they may probably encounter in their designed affairs, without
precipitately plunging themselves thereinto; Wherefore, not passion, but
judicious reason causing them to put themselves upon dangers, they at first
seem cool, taking their times, and managing their forces: but being once
thoroughly engaged in danger, they then incite their slacknesse, as does the
Rhinocetos, generously employing the spur of boldness, and of Choler, to put
forward their resolution.

But herein Prudence is to be required, as indeed all virtues hold hands, one
having need of another mutual assistance, but yet (as the Philosopher says)
it is the proper office of the virtue of Fortitude, to rule and govern the
irascible passions; Prudence does indeed govern the motions of Hope,
containing it within the limits of what it can, and ought to hope, according to
the circumstances of affairs in present agitation; since it is the sign of an
imprudent soul, to cast its hopes as far as his desires, and his desires as
far as his dreams; But it is the virtue of Fortitude, which restrains the
motion of Audacitie within the bounds of discretion, and choleric motions
within the limits of reason. For a great Fortitude is to be required for the
repression of the formers indiscretion, and the latters violence. And it is no
small argument of weakness, to suffer our selves without bit or bridle to be
transported to their motions. Whereupon Seneca says, that choleric persons
are impetuous in their passions, and threatening in their comportments, but
weak, slack, and pusillanimous in heart: So as Prudence and Fortitude
regulate these three Passions, and rank these three soldiers under the laws
of discipline. to be after employed with discretion, and successefulnesse in
the execution of brave and magnanimous enterprises.

CHAP. 10. Of the necessity of this fortitude in matter of execution.
ANd hence rises the courage wherewith these who have public charge, ought to
arm and defend themselves. A courage which reason guides, Prudence
accompanyeth, Discretion rules, Fortitude upholdeth, which a generous
boldness animateth, and which a sanctified zeal inciteth to overcome such
resistances as Justice meets withal. For what does it avayle them to be wise
in knowing what is fit to be done, prudent to invent the means, just to
appropriate affairs to public good, authorized, and happy to cause them to be
received, and succeed; if besides all this, they be not courageous, and
magnanimous to break through all obstacles opposing execution. The Philosopher
says: We are to proceed slowly and leysurely in the consideration of an
Enterprise, Arist. lib. 6. Eth. cap. 6. Diu delibera^dum, sed cito faciendu^.
this being the proper office of Prudence: But in matter of execution,
diligence, quickness, and promptitude is to be used; this being indeed a
part of Prudence, but more properly the effect of Courage. We are to conceive
our designs at length, and without precipitation; as the Elephant who carries
her fruit ten yearees; or as the Palm which stays (as is said) a hundred
years before she produce her dates; or as Nature, which employeth many Apes,
in the forming of gold, and does slowly set forward in the production of her
most excellent works: and not to do as the Bratche and Bear, who with
overmuch haste never perfectly finish or form their little ones in their
bodies, but produce them blind, as the Bitch does, or imperfect as does the
Bear; whereupon the old Proverb arose: The over-hastie Bitch brings forth
blind Whelps. Canis festinans cacos parit catulos.
But on the other side, the Enterprise being once maturely couceived, and
formed by a slow deliberation, it is fitting to disclose, and cause it to
appear by a prompt and hardy courage; and not to do as the fearful Hindes,
who stopping their fruit as much as they may, out of the apprehension of pain,
bring them not forth (as is said) but when they are constrained by a greater
fear, when thunder affrights them. It is a great weakness to produce that
slowly and fearfully, which should be effected quickly and courageously: For
such executions resemble outworne Mines, making a greater sound than they
afford substance; And as courage is required in prompt execution, so is it
necessary for happy achievement. For, Fortune is ordinarily amorous of
courage, and does hardly favor any other then the hardly. She assisteth the
stour, and rejects the timorous; says the ancient Poet. Great fears meet
with mighty perils, and hardy designs with happy events. In Combats (says
Salust) those who are most fearful, run the hardest Fortune; Salust in
conjur. Catil. in praeliis iis est maximum periculum, qui maxim timent audacia
pro mure habetur.
Confidence serves as a Counterscarpe; all things resist the fearful; all
yields to the daring. He who fears the Nettle, only touching it with his
fingers end, is instantly pricked and stung; but he who graspes it closely in
his hand without fear, feels no offense therein. To fear resistance, is to
be already overcome; he who knows how to despise it, knows how to vanquish
it. To do, we must dare. Who fears all, does never any thing. The fearful
forge difficulties to themselves, even in casie achievements; and precipices,
in playnest ways: They daily consult, often design, never execute; and they
are so far from being able to break through the obstacles appearing, as
they even avoyde those which are only in their imagination: themselves
destroying their bravest designs by their proper Idaeas. They do as
Demosthenes, Plut. in Demost.
Who thinking to fly from Soldiers, fled from Thistles: or as the Roman Army,
surprised with a Panick fear, In seeing the Moon in Eclipse: Tacit. lib. 1.
Annal. Quintus Curtius.
or as that of Alexander, Who seeing the ebbing and slowing of the Sea,
affrightedly trembled, and would not stir a foot. These vain fears are very
fatal, in public persons, who in their most just enterprises, meet with true
obstacles enough, without suffering groundless apprehensions, to forge
imaginary ones. How many tempests, Winds, rocks, and dangers threaten a Ship,
before she arrive at a safe harbor, how many difficulties, traverses, and
rancounters, justle a just design, before it touches the mark? So as if the
Pylote did not as well arm himself with courage, as with the Helm at the
Stern, and the Magistrate as well with Fortitude, and courage, as with
Prudence: The former with his Helm would yield to the first Storm, the latter
with his Prudence, to the first opposition.

The wicked never fail to countercheck the just, who seek the common good;
and because they want reason, audaciousnesse seconds them. If courage surmount
not impudence, in vain does Justice resist iniquity. If impudence encounter
pusillanimity, iniquity will triumph over Justice. All men yield not to right
and reason, wherefore authority, and fortitude is given to Magistrates; but
what would their authority serve them, if courage did not strengthen it? The
hand makes the sword terrible, and courage causes authority to be respectable.
What use has a cowardly slave of a sword having no valor? It is said, the
Tortois has no heart, and that is the cause she marches so slowly, seeming to
have no vigor.

Those who are so slow and cold in execution, as though they durst not touch
upon it, make men suspect them to be heart less, and thereby afford subject for
the basest persons to cross their designs.

CHAP. 11. That the effeminate and timorous, are not proper for any matter of a
high nature.
Noli quarere fieri Index, nifi virtute vale as or rum pere iniquitates populi.
THe Holy Ghost in Scripture advertiseth the effeminate and timorous, not to
undertake public Magistracies: Seek not (says he by the mouth of the Wise)
to be made Judge, if by thy virtue thou be notable to break the iniquities
of the people.

Soft Natures are not fit for any great employments, being therefore unable
either to bring profit, or to gain glory in a State by the rank of
Authority; they ought to content themselves with the honor proceeding from
obedience. But ambitious persons follow vanity, without regarding fortitude;
and (as the swallows) the Winds carry them whither their wings could not
convey them: they resemble the Ivy, which being of a clyming Nature, yet
creeping on earth seeks for Walls and Trees to raise it self by these
supports, whither the strength of the root could not cause it to mount: and
being crept up whither it aspireth, it only produces leaves and little
Berries, to perpetrate its sterilitie. Such are the fruits of the Ambitious,
which not their proper merits, but the prop of favor rayseth to dignities.
Being once mounted to the top of their pretensions, supported by favor,
friends, and money, they tolerate all, they connive with disorders, they
nourish abuses, they let loose the raines to licentiousness, favors tie them,
promises overcome them, threats astonish them, they only seek to maintain
their credits at the peoples cost; and all the profit they yield to the
Commonwealth, is only the leaves of pomp and pride, and the seed of a like
Ambition, shooting forward and increasing with their honors, even to posterity.

Olivier, Chancellor of France spoke properly to this purpose; when he
compared the French (who in their own Natures are ambitious) to Apes, and
Monkies, who lighting on a Tree, mount, and climb from branch to branch, to
the very top; and when they can get no higher, they sit down, and show their
tails: So (says he) those of our Nation, without staying till they be called
to dignities, and without endeavoring to make themselves capable, or examining
their own sufficiencies, aspire to the highest pitch, whither favor can
prefer them, they climb from branch to branch, from honor to honor; and at
length being at the height, and in the worlds eye, they discover their
weakness, and want of abilities to all men, Salust. in conjur. Catil. Qui
demissi in obscuro vitam agunt, little fama, and fortuna pares sunt: Si quid
deliquere panci sciunt; Qui vero in excelso atatem agunt, little facta,
cunctimortales novere.
and the seat of honor is often no other then a Stage in this worlds Theater,
exposing them to laughter. For (as Julius Caesar in Salust says) those who
live obscurely, rest unknown, and their renown walks even with their
fortunes, if they fail in any thing, few take notice of their faults. But
those who live in great eminency, are exposed both they and their actions to
the to the sight of all men.

CHAP. 12. What things are necessary to acquire and conserve the greatness of
courage.
1 A stoue and generous nature.
But diverse things are to concur toward the forming of this Fortitude and this
greatness of courage: a quality requisite for affording to the public the
fruits it expects from great Offices, to cause their authority to be
regarded, and to support and maintain honor in a stout and generous nature:
For neither does nature employ all materials for the forming of gold, nor
Phidias to make his Jupiter, nor Apelles for the painting his Alexander: And
Plato said, how the Gods have composed ordinary men of earth and mudde; but
those they have appointed for the government and administration of Kingdoms
and Empires; of Silver and Gold, and other precious metals. See we not,
whatsoever holds the first rank in all things, is composed of the purest
materials? the Carbuncle among precious stones, Gold among metals, Fire among
the elements, the Empyreall heaven among celestial bodies, the Sun among the
Plants, Man among living creatures.

Air and fire are predominant in the composition of man's body, being the most
perfect creature on earth: water and mudde in the composition of worms, and
other more imperfect creatures. The natural constitution is a great
disposition toward moral virtues, being of the order of natural things, and
namely toward the height of courage, fitting for those who hold the principal
ranks among men. Whereupon the Philosopher says, that other Sciences are
taught, Asta arts discuntur, politica sort contingit.
but the art Politic happens by lot. As though he would say that the
natural disposition, a thing independent on our will or industry, but
proceeding from above, does greatly contribute thereto. For nature is a great
foundation for Politic virtues, and chiefly for magnanimity: a virtue proper
for high enterprises.

After the ground work of a natural disposition, 2. Good education.
good education is of extraordinary efficacy, and the Poets report Achilles to
have been so generous and courageous, because he was bred up with the marrow
of Lions. Plut. in Lycur.
Lycurgus his dog which so generously seized upon his prey, whilst the other
of the same litter, minded nothing but the Kitchen, and scraps; sufficiently
show the different effects of good and bad education, either for the raising or
repressing of courage. Good discipline made the Spartans magnanimous, and evil
education the Cretensians idle, the Sybarites effeminate, and the Ionians
faint-hearted. Semiramis educated in generositie, knew how to lead armies.
Sardanapalus bred up in delights, knew nothing but how to spin: So as by good
instructions women become men, and by base education, men turn women.

Wherefore Plato, Lycurgus, and all such as have either described, or erected
Republikes, have (before all things) recommended the good instruction of youth:
since one cannot expect other than crooked trees from ill set Plants. Nature as
yet soft and tender, easily slides, as water, on that side to which education
turns her; it inclines as does the young tree, on which side soever one bends
it; receiving as white paper, all impressions thereon engraven, either of
virtue or vice; of cowardice or courage. This caused Socrates to be so curious
in drawing to him all the young youths of the most illustrious families in
Athens; Plutarch. in Alcibiade.
to frame them by Philosophical instructions, by lively and fervent
exhortations, and by the sharpness of his reprehensions, often drawing tears
both from the hearts and eyes of his tender Disciples, who after became those
courageous Captains, and generous Magistrates, whose immortal memory all
after-ages have conserved and honored. And the ancient Romans placed all the
youths of most noble families (who by the privilege of their rank were after
called to highest places in the Republike) with those great Statesmen, whom
even to this day we admire and reverence; to the end their conversation,
instructions, and example might betimes inspire, and infuse in those tender
souls, the seeds of their virtues, and the generous instinct of their grandeur
and courage. For Lions whelps learn not their generosity but among older
Lions; so as if they be bred among other domestical creatures, their education
bastardizeth their nature; and the under growths of Palm trees transplanted
near to vulgar fruits, become barren, but planted near male Palm trees, they
afford their fruits, show what is in them, and make it appear what they are:
So great power has education, and culture, not in men only, but even in bruit
beasts and Plants.

3 To be free from ambition, and from the inordinate love of dignities.
But Physicians inform us that the bodies tumor resembles its good liking,
though it notwithstanding prove its ruin. So Ambition, being the hearts
swelling, counterfaits the greatness of courage, yet does it prove the owners
destruction. And herein diverse deceive themselves, who imagine to train their
children in virtue and generositie, by imprinting in them, and causing them
together with their milk to suck vanity, and the ambition of dignities;
though in truth there is not any thing which makes them more base, or less
worthy of what they wish for on their behalfes. The Philosopher affirms those
creatures to be most hardy and generous, Arist. lib. 3. de part^^us animalium.
which have the least hearts: because natural heat cannot so well warm and
inflame with courage a great, as a little heart: as fire both better warm a
small, than a great house. The world commonly calls those who ambitiously aim
at honors; men of great heart; and the despisers thereof, men of a little
heart. But when they come (after) to the trial, they soon see the vanity of
their Judgments. Since those who they supposed to have had so great hearts
basely shrink at any resistance; as great bladders full of wind, which lose
all their swelling upon the least prick: whereas those, who seemed to have, so
low, and little hearts, discover upon occasion, the greatness of their
courage. We then see, the fire of virtue heats not those hearts which are full
of ambition, and swollen with vanity; but theirs (doubtless) who rightly
reflecting on themselves appear lowly, hiding their magnanimity in their
humility. So as one of the principal dispositions to the greatness of courage
requisite in a Magistrate, is to be free from am^itious Passion, which
softeneth the heart as it swells it, taking from them as much fortitude as it
affords them vanity. It belongs not to any to show himself generous, and by his
generosity to validate his offices, but to him who knows how to despise them,
and I cannot conceive how those who pursue them, should thus prostitute them,
there being none who truly know how to honor them, but those who slight them.
The One passion feeds the other, love rayseth fear, he who in offices more
affects honor than obligation, does more fear the loss of dignity, than of
virtue, and this irregular love captivating him to so base a fear, causes him
to prostitute his charge to impiety. Wherefore to cut up this mischief by the
roots, we are to extirpate this disordinate love of honors and dignities out
of our hearts. If thou will cease to love, thou will leave to fear, (said
Seneca to Lucilius) and fear once displaced, Sen. Epist. 5. De^^^es timere, si
amare de ^er^^.
courage is at liberty, to exercise (upon occasion) the heroical acts of
generositie.

CHAP. 13. A pursuit of the same subject.
THe love of honors ought to succeed a better love; and the fear to loose
honors, the fear to forsake true honor, by committing any unworthy act. If
this love maintain this fear, this apprehension will censure true magnanimity
of courage. It is sufficient testimony of magnanimity; to be fearful in this
wise. It was to this fear (says Plutarch in the life of Cleomenes) that the
so generous and magnanimous Spartans erected a Temple, signifying thereby, that
the fear of committing any thing against their duties, was the nurse of
magnanimity. But the most noble love is to love God, the greatest honor is to
seek his glory, and the most generous fear is to dread to offend him. Thy
words have made my heart tremble (said the Prophet David) he trembled before
God, Psalm. 118. A verbis tuis trepidavit cor meum.
and was confident before princes, proclayming his pleasure unto them; before
Lions tearing them in pieces with his bare hands; before the armed Golias
assaulting him without any weapon, save a silly Sling. This assurance which he
showed before men, proceeded from the fear he had in Gods presence. The Tree,
though never so well rooted, forbeares not to shake toward Heaven, but stands
stiff to ground; and the same wind causing the top to tremble, reinforceth
the root. The heart yiedling to celestial fear, knows not how to dread any
earthly thing; and the same apprehension causing it to tremble in Gods
pres^nce, makes it immovable before all the baytes, threats, and assaults, the
world can afford. When Justice, or Gods honor is any way interessed, we know
not how to fear any but God (says the great St. Basil Bishop of Caesarea to
the Emperor Valens his President, who pressed him in his Masters behalf by
all sorts of threats to subscribe to a point by him propounded against the true
faith; To whom the President having replied, that he never met with any man who
answered him in such a sort; happily thou have never met with a Bishop (replied
this generous soul) we are really to confess the true fourse of great courage
necessary not only for Bishops and Spiritual Princes, but for those likewise
who govern the Temporal, to proceed from the zeal to Gods glory, whereto all
should have relation: a zeal, I say, derived from his love and fear. The mere
Philosopher has acknowledged this verity by natural illumination, Arist. lib
2. Rhet cap 5. Intrepids and confidentes sunt, qui pii in D^um sunt, Arist.
codor^ loco: Qui been so habent erga diuna audaciores sunt.
when he uttered this approoved sentence: Those who are pious and Religious
toward God, are generous and unremoveab^^. And this other to the same effect:
Those who are best disposed toward divine things, are the most magnanimous. A
word pronounced by Nature, convincing those Libertines, both of vanity, and
impiety, who by over-farre searching into Nature, and shutting their eyes
against the light of Heaven, choke in them elves (by the just judgment of
God) not faith only which they despise, but Natural reason also, which they
so much Idolatrize: for they fall into so great an excess both of impiety;
and stupiditie, as to say that Piety toward God, causes the courage of men
to become base and pusillanimous, in that they see it make men humble and
modest. As though one should say, that Physicketakes away the seeming good
estate of a Dropsy man, because it bereaves him of the tumor. But to make
these wretches blush, we shall only need this voice of Nature pronounced by
the Philosopher, without alleging that of the Holy Ghost speaking in
Scripture: Our Lord is the protector of my life before whom shall I tremble?
(Says the Prophet David) If Armies rise up against me, my heart shall be
without fear. And to terrify these upstart Giants, who strive to find this
height of of Courage, not in God but themselves; there needs no Army but a word
only. A promise, a threat, a favor, a worldly interest presently casts all
their goodly magnanimity to ground, showing to their confusion, that to be
puffed up, and yet truly magnanimous, to be arrogant and withal generous, are
two things like in appearance, but opposite in effect. The one proceeds from
men, and the other is derived from God, from whom all good flows to us. The
Magistrate who has the fear of God, Piety, and zeal engraven in his heart,
who considers how among men he represents Gods person, holds his place, and
administreth Justice in his Name, will (upon this reflection) be enflamed with
a sanctified generositie, to conquer injustice; Exciting, and awaking himself
by this spur, as the Lion preparing himself for the Combat. He crusheth (as
Job said) the chaps of the wicked, and snatcheth the prey they would not leave,
from between their Teeth; he opposes himself, as a strong Bank against the
Inundation of iniquity; he respects neither power, greatness, credit, nor
riches, but only right, and reason: he resembles the River Euphrates, which
stops not its course in the encounter of never so high Mountains. He
prefers his duty before his honors, his estate, and his life: and if
therefore he endure Persecution from men; he expects the crown of his
constancy at Gods hands. This it is, which cherishes true magnanimity; Nor is
there any thing (as Saint Basile right divinely says) can cause the Soul to
become more stout and generous, Bas. hom. de Invidia.
than an affection, unbound from the world and fastened to God: The fleighting
of perishable goods and honors, and the object of eternal Treasures. Sen Ep
68. Sapientis animus coelo impositus cum sollam, aut tribunal ascenderit,
intelligit, quam humili loco sederi^.
The spirit of a Wise man (says Seneca) elevated toward Heaven by
Contemplation, when he shall after be seated upon the Tribunal, or upon the
Curiall Chair, acknowledges how low and despicable that seat is. This
knowledge causes him to slight it, and this sleighting gives him greatness
of courage: and as he is not ascended thither but in performance of his duty;
so is he at all times ready to come down for justice sake. It is the true
ascending to come down in this kind.

But it is reported that the Gallican Hercules did not so much captivate people
by the force of his arms, as by the golden chain of his tongue. And Homer
continually ranks the valorous Achilles, with the eloquent Ulysses; to show
that courage and eloquence, a generous soul, and a graceful speech, make an
happy conjunction, causing that politician, of whom we speak, to be like to
Pericles, courageous and copious, generous and eloquent, a man on whom Minerva
on the one side had bestowed her wisdom and Fortitude; and on the other side
Pytho the Goddess of persuasion had upon his lips builded her Temple, to
enable his Prudence, his Justice, and his magnanimous courage, by the forces of
cloquence.

Eloquence therefore as the ornament, and embellishment of Politic virtues,
ought to be the last touch in this Table.

CHAP. 14. Of Eloquence, being as the Ornament of Politic virtues, giving
vigor and gracefulness to make them estimable.
GOD was not only pleased to have so richly built and so elegantly designed the
parts of this great Universe; but would further, to this structure and
distinction, add an admirable ornament beautifying the Heavens with so many
stars, embellishing the air with such a variety of Birds, adorning the Ocean
and other waters, with so excellent a variety of Fishes, the Earth with so
agreeable a diversity of Animals, Trees, Fruits, and Flowers, and the very
Earthes entrayles, with so many rich Minerals: to the end that this Beauty
shining and sparkling out of all this ornament, might add both perfection and
fame to this great Fabric. Nor has he adorned and beautified the world in
gross, but each particular member thereof, likewise affording to the Stars
light, to flowers their tinctures, to trees their verdure, to metals their
gloss, to precious stones their luster, to living Creatures either Feathers,
hairs, or scales, serving them not only for defense, but comeliness; to man
the beauty of visage, the ornament of hair, the gracefulness arising out of
the uprightness of his body, and out of the harmonious proportion of all the
parts whereof he is composed. Art, Natures Ape, strives likewise to raise all
she produces, by some kind of embellishment. The Art of painting by shadows
and lively colors. The Architect his Pillars by Freeses and Artificial
Forms. The Goldsmith his Jewels, by enamell. Briefly, all Arts add Ornament
to their Actions, to make them appear perfect. The same which Ornament is in
all the works of Nature and Art, it seems to me that Eloquence is in a man of
excellent parts, adding to his virtues as luster does to a Diamond, or lively
colors to a picture, both state, grace, and light. And truly, if reason be
the Ornament of man, speech the: Interpreter of reason, and Eloquence the Grace
of discourse; who sees not, that Eloquence is mansornament; and if speech
raise man above all other Creatures, what richer ornament can a man desire said
the Roman Orator, Cic. l. 1. de Inve^t. Praecla rum quidda^ videtu^ adeptus is,
qui qua re homines best^is prastent ea, in re hominibus ipsis antecellat.
than to be excellent above other men, in the same thing wherein man is
superior to all Creatures.

If therefore he, who more than ordinarily pursues virtue, does likewise
extraordinarily follow the light of reason; To whom can Eloquence be more
beseeming, than to the virtuous; to the end, that the same order, which the Law
of reason ha^h settled in him, the sweetness of persuasion may communicate,
extend, and imprint in all others. But to what virtue is this ornament more
suitable, than to the virtue Politic, which being borne for others, procuring
the good of others, appearing (for general profit) upon the Theater of honors;
ought to issue forth well adorned, to show her self in her full trim, with all
things that may contribute to make her recommendable, and useful in the
presence of all men: I say, recommendable, for can any thing acquire greater
authority to the virtue appearing in public, than does Eloquence ravishing
men with admiration? I say likewise, useful: for even as in Nature Utility
and Ornament are inseparable, and there being nothing more profitable for the
world, than what does most adorn it, as the Sun and light. This is also
particularly seen in Art, as in Architecture, wherein Pillars being the
beauty of the building, are likewise the supports: So Eloquence, Cic. 3. de
Oratore. Multum ego in excellent Oratore, eodernque vire bono pono esse
ornament^ in universacivitate.
which we term the ornament of Politic virtues, is no vain one, but
wherein benefit accompanies beauty, usefulness is annexed to gracefulness,
and the good thence arising to humane society, equaliseth the delightfulness.
And as the eye contributeth much ornament to the body, and with all great
commodity: So the I loquence of a virtuous States man highly adometh the whole
body of the commonwealth, but does much more profit it. For wisdom (indeed)
gives good Counsels, Prudence fitting means to bring them to perfection;
Justice, good intentions; courage, brave resolutions; but what wisdom
knows, what Prudence makes choice of, what Justice procures; what good
soever courage resolves on or attempteth; Eloquence persuades, and makes it
well liking to others, so as it adds to all the parts of Politic virtue,
not only gracefulness and beauty, but vigor and authority. I will not here
resolve upon, what the Orator Cassins, and the Lawyer Scavola disputed upon in
the Roman Orator: to weet, whether Prudence, Cic. lib. 1. de Oratore.
or Eloquence laid the first foundations of Republickes and humane societies:
yet may one safely say; Isrash Eloquence were unable to make this masterpiece,
dumb Prudence could not effect it, but the one had need of the others
assistance: Eloquence requiring the reasons of Prudence, and Prudence the
persuasions of Eloquence. But holy Writ, and Gods revelations summon me to
soar yet higher, and to refer the Source of States and Commonwealths not to
men but God, not to humane Prudence or Eloquence, which had never known
neither that by its counsels, nor this by its allurements, how to curb men
naturally borne to liberty, under the yoke of obed once; but rather to the
natural inclination ingrafred by God in the soul of man, to live in society,
and for living in this society to establish order, and to submit themselves
unto some one. Now it is very probable, that those to whom men have subjected
themselves in execution of Gods o^dinance ingra^ed, and imprinted in them, have
been the most excellent, of all other, not only to invent by Prudence, just
and profitable decrees, but moreover to make Iust^ce appear, and to persuade
profit by word of mouth. And though the Law having higher authority uses no
preface nor persuasion, but only a full and absolute commandment; Yet surely
those who first proposed Laws to men, were obliged to make it appear unto
them by discourse, that their commandments were just, not tyrannical, their
authority reasonable and not violent. Whereupon the Roman Orator says, That
the ancient Lawmakers, Cic. lib. 3. de Orat.
Lycurgus, Solon, Pittacus, and others were endued with wisdom, to invent
good Laws, and with Eloquence also to persuade the admittance thereof. Yea,
the Scripture it self notes, how when God established Moses at a Lawmakers,
and conducter of his people, Moses alleging for his excuse the defect of
Eloquence, hoping thereby to have discharged himself of this Commission: God
was pleased, not only to give him power, and wisdom, but moreover unlosed his
natural stammering and stuttering in speech, to the end he might propose and
establish his Laws, not only wisely, and with authority, but gracefully
likewise, and with persuasion. And the Son of God being come into the World
to settle the State of his holy Church, and to give men the law of perfection,
was pleased to accompany his infinite wisdom in ordayning, and his sovereign
authority in commanding, with his divine Eloquence in persuading: so as the
Gospel says, That the sweetness of those gracious words flowing from his
mouth, M^rahane ur o^^^n^t in verbis gratia qua procedebat de ^re cjus. Nu^quam
sic loqu^^us est homo.
wrapped all men in admiration; causing them to protest that never any man spoke
with so much truth, sweetness, and force. So indeed, the Eternal, increated,
and subsistent word, framed his speech, and his sacred mouth was the Organ, his
word the conceit, and his voice the sound of the divine word. And when
afterward he sent his Apostles to erect the Spiritual estate over the whole
world, the Foundations whereof, he had formerly laid in Iudaa, tongues were the
last piece wherewith he armed them, after he had stored them with wisdom,
counsel, and authority. But heavenly tongues, to the end that as their power
and wisdom was spiritual, so should their Eloquence be also, and that from
whence the Law and Commandments which they intimated to men did proceed, even
from thence, and not from humane Art, should their persuasion be derived. But
since God (the sovereign and absolute Lord of man) has found it fitting, and
convenient to use toward us (as being desirous to draw us unto him) not only
commandments, but exhortations (as the Apostle speaks) would he not hereby
instruct us, Tanquam de^ exhortant^ per no^*
he (I say) who sees apparently the most secret and most hidden passages of
man's heart, that nothing does more excite, or has greater power, and Empire
over man, than speech and plausible persuasion, and that discourse sooner
gayneth hearts by the sweetness of reason, and pleasing force of truth, than
rough Authority by the terror of her power.

CHAP. 15. Of the Efficacy of Eloquence.
IT is therefore a happy advantage, when Eloquence, and the faculty of
discourse, concur jointly with their wisdom and Authority, who rule, or
govern men; nor can one desire either a fairer ornament to their dignity, or
stronger arms for their virtue. For we have not to deal with brute Beasts,
which absolute force may captivate, nor with Angels without passion, to whom
reason simply and barely proposed may at all times satisfy: But we have to do
with men, who have reason, which we are to know how to satisfy by reason, and
passions which we are (when occasion is offered) to understand how either to
appease and sweeten; or stir up and inflame by discourse: How often has
sustice lost her cause, for want of being represented with requisite esticacie
before men preoccupated with passion? What caused Socrates to be condemned in
Athens, and P. Rutilius at Rome, both the one, and the other being innocent;
but only, that the former contented himself to refute the calumnies of his
accusers, by simple and naked negations; and the latter forbad his Advocates to
use any strength, or vehemence of speech in the maintenance of his innocence.
The Roman Orator indeed says, that if one might plead his cause in Plato's
imaginary Republicke, before Philosophers exempt from all passions, and humane
perturbations; It were well to be wished, that only reason should govern
humane affairs, and that passion should have no power over them. Since (it
being so) the naked, and simple proposition of what were just, would happily
suffice without any Eloquence to draw them to good. But since only to wish this
order among men, is not to establish the same; it is fitting (as much as we
may) to rectify the disorder, and rather to reflect upon the remedies of
present mischiefs, then upon the vain wishes of a happiness, not to be had.
And since depraved inclinations, passions, vices, voluptuousness, and perverse
habitudes, have so far preoccupated humane spirits, as lies seem oftentimes
Truth unto them, and iniquity Justice; what better remedy to make way against
all these impediments to right, and reason, than the force of reason it self,
explaned by Eloquence, illustrated by lively words, and animated by efficacious
gestures and motions: Reason (I say) which presented to so ill affected
spirits, simply, and nakedly, would be presently rejected; but appearing with
the grace and winning garb of this sitting ornament, it wins the hearts of
the most refractari^, it insinuates it self into the worst dispos^d thoughts,
cures most ulcered humors, and (which is a most happy kind of healing) it
cures them with content. It is said that the Aspick, suffers it self to be
charmed by the Enchanters voice, forgetting its natural rage. The Lyra
appeaseth the Tiger, Music the Dolphin: David's Harp the Devil tormenting
Saul: The sound of Flutes asswageth the pains of the Gowt. And one of
Alexanders Musicians, had a tune, wherewith he could suddenly calm the fire of
his fury, and cause it to lay down Arms in the height of his greatest
heat. Eloquence has yet farther power over human passions, to moderate,
bend, calm, overcome, and to cause them (though it self unarmed) to yield up
their weapons to reason. Eloquence charms the Senses, mollifieth hearts,
inciteth Affections, frames desires, in other men's passions, commands
without law, reigns without Scepter, forces without Sergeants, leaves men
to their freedom yet exercises in them a secret Empire. It finds Wolves, and
makes them Sheep; encountreth Lions, and leaves them Lambs, not touching
Bodies, but transforming Souls, and changing Wills, without altering Nature.
What was the Eloquence think you, of that Philosopher, who commending Eloquence
in presence of a debauched young man, crowned with Flowers, clapping his hands,
tripping about, and dancing to the sound of Flutes, in habit and gesture of one
who celebrated the Feast of Bacchus; entering into his School in this equipage,
with purpose to scoff at him, did so lively pierce him with the Darts of his
discourse, as he presently caused him to cast his Flowers from him, to quit
his caprings, to break his Flutes, to settle his countenance, and to testify
by the change of his comportment, the alteration of his Spirit. What force
(suppose you) had Pericles his Eloquence, being commonly termed Thunder, and
Lightning; who by speaking, imprinted in all hearts, certain strong
incitements, and stirred up all spirits with unusual transports, enclining them
to Wisdom. What kind of vehemence (imagine you) had that torrent of
Demosthenes his Eloquence, which so long stayed the course and success of
Philips good Fortune, without any other arms then his tongue? What vigor had
the speech of Phocion, who a thousand times raised the courage of his Country
men, by his enflamed discourses, no less than he did their Fortunes, by his
victorious arms. But the authority these Orators acquired in Athens, and the
profit they brought to their Republic appeared clearly by this example. At
what time the Athenians reduced to extremity by Alexander the Great, could not
obtain peace at his hands but under condition to send him (as Prisoners) their
Captains and Orators; it came to this pass, that in retayning their Orators,
they satisfied him in banishing their Captains: so as therein they showed how
much they preferred Eloquence before valor; supposing it to be more availeable
for them to maintain the tongue, than the sword in the City. What shall I say
of the Romans, with whom Eloquence did at all times march hand in hand with
valor: these two having raised their Republickes in Power, Greatness, and
Glory, above all the Empires of the World.

CHAP. 16. That Eloquence does principally appear, in popular States, but that
it may be likewise very useful in Monarchical Governments.
Truly as the popular Estates of Athens and Rome have caused Eloquence to be
of high esteem, so does it (in truth) seem that Eloquence in such places is
most useful being of more splendor in popular estates, where it is necessary
to persuade the people to what is profitable for the public, than in
Monarchical States where those who are encharged with public government, are
only to propose their counsels and opinions to the Sovereign, and thereupon
receiving his commands to intimate the same to the people; which without all
comparison is more majesticall, firm, and solid for the good and quiet of men,
then the opinion; or advice of a Tribune or Orator, confirmed by the suffrages
of a rash multitude. It therefore affords not so large a Field to the power of
spirit, nor so ample a subject to Eloquence. Nevertheless, as certain Birds
who make no use of their wings for flying, and soaring in the air, yet employ
them notwithstanding in their walking on earth, therewith putting themselves
forward with more speed and strength: So Eloquence not meeting with those
spacious places in Monarchies to soar in (if I may so say) with displayed
wings, does yet at all times show her dexterity and promptitude even in those
straight limits enclosing her: and her wings, though useless unto her for
flying, do yet at least help her to walk with greater vivacity.

Besides, the inconstancy of worldly affairs affords but over-many subjects
even in best settled Kingdoms; on the one side to cause the peoples fidelity to
appear toward their Sovereign, and on the other side to employ Eloquence in
his Service, and for public profit. Occasions* (I say) which are no more to be
desired than Physic: but when these occurrents happen, Eloquence (at such
time) joined with virtue and authority, shows her abilities highly advancing
the glory of her Author. And when we have said all, Eloquence is a golden
Collet for a Diamond, and a precious ornament, either to virtue or dignity,
authorizing that, and raising this, it makes both of them estimable, and which
ravishing men by her inticements as the Roman Orator observes, causes them
who possess it to be admired and reverenced as little Gods among men.

But most commonly whatsoever is excellent is rare: There is but one Sun in
the Firmament, yet above a thousand Stars, pibble stones are plentiful, but
Diamonds are only found in some corner of the world; Carbuncles are scarcely
discovered; Incense is only gathered in Saba, the Balsamum heretofore but in
Judea; Ambergris but in Orcades: it seeming that Nature desired to add
raritie to the excellency of her most beautiful works, thereby to augment
the estimation. The Roman Orator has particularly observed Natures sterility
and nigardice in the production of Eloquent persons. She has afforded (says
he) speech to all, discourse to some; but Eloquence to so few, as it is
wonderful to consider how in all ages and States there are a competent number
of excellent Captains, learned Philosophers, perfect Architects, complete
Painters, right sufficient Artists, in all the liberal and mechanical
Sciences, and scarce one indifferent Orator; which truly is to be admired,
since Eloquence has never been wanting unless (perhaps) in this age, adoring
nothing but the Gold of Honor and and recompense; being (as an ancient
Author says) the two Devils governing all humane counsels and enterprises.
Yet notwithstanding Floquence (though honored) rewarded, and labored for by
all the best wits that ever were in Fame, has successefully happened to so few,
and so rarely, as peradventure the Phoenix (though the only of her kind) is
more frequent in the World than an excellent Orator. If it be true, that in
every age (at least) one may be found. Greece hardly produced four or five,
and Rome two or three, that merit the Title of Eloquent. And besides, (even in
this so little a number) one would say that Nature desired to be sparing,
contenting her self to bestow on each of these some parts of Eloquence,
fearing (it may be) she should have undertaken too great a task and an over
hardy enterprise, had she essayed to assemble all the qualities thereof in one
man. For according to the Roman Orators judgment who made the lots. Socrates,
had the sweetness; Lysias, the sharpness; Hyperides, the exactness;
Aeschines, the discussion; Demosthenes, the force and vehemence of Oratorie; to
whom (I pray you) have all these perfections jointly met, to make up a master
piece of Eloquence? As for the Romans: Cicero has, with advantage gained the
prize from all those of his Nation and perhaps from all the Greeks; And Seneca
made no question to equalize this excellent wit to the greatness of the Roman
Empire; yet does he acknowledge himself to come far short of the Idea he
conceived of a perfect Orator. So as Censurers, and Critics, have (in him)
espied, I know not what seeming flat diffuse and sinewlesse; It being said of
him as he said of Demosthenes, that he much pleased his ears, but filled them
not at all. I will speak nothing of Ecclesiastical Orators, who in their
discourse have sought for a more sublime thing than Eloquence, though some
among them, and namely the Fathers of the Greek Church, have bin therewith
sufficiently furnished had they bin pleased to make show thereof not only to
come near, but even to equalize Secular Orators. But as Seneca said of a
Philosopher, They rather sought to speak and write to hearts, than to ears.
They were Gods Ambassadors, and their Embassy was addressed to hearts. Speak
to the heart of Jerusalem, said God to his Prophet. But men are either so
weak, as they do nothing of perfection, or so curious as nothing contents
them: so as it is no marvel, if they have conceived such an Idea of Eloquence,
as whereof they neither have bin, nor are able ever to see the effect. But to
return to Plato, and to speak only of what has heretofore been, and may
again happen. There are so many qualities requisite to form an Eloquent
person, not such an one as may be imagined, but such an one as may
peradventure be met withal; that when Nature produces any one such, she
assembles (as did Xeuxis) all the rare touches of most complete Beauties to
make this portrait. She affords him a quick apprehension, a fruitful
imagination, an happy memory, a solid judgment, a clear wit, an infatigable
patience, to gather (as does the Be) the flowers of all Books, and Sciences,
the reasons of Philosophers, Logicians arguments, the secrets of Naturalists,
the Decrees of Lawmakers, Historians Treasures, Grammarians purity, the terms
of Poets. and enricheth him with the spoils of all Liberal, and Mechanical
Arts. For Eloquence ought to speak of all things with propriety, abundance,
and Ornament, never becoming empty; and to resemble a River, which never
stays but runs incessantly, one while slyding easily over the Plains,
otherwhiles, roaring impetuously athwart Mountains; sometimes boiling and
foaming against Rocks, carrying all before him that he encounters, drawing
along all impediments, always full, ever equal, save only that he swells,
and mounteth the farther he is from his Fountain, showing at all times the
most vigor where he encounters most Difficulties. That Beauty (says Seneca)
wherein some one agreeable Feature only appears deserves not the name of
Beauty. That Forest is not fair, where only two or three goodly Trees
appear among a sort of shrubbes; nor is that Oration Eloquent, where one
Member only is complete, and the rest defectuous; but that wherein the
Proportion, and Perfection of the whole, crowns with its luster the Beauty
of each part. Eloquence is a Queen, who goes not any whither without the
attendance of her Ornaments, never showing either want, or scarcity,
presenting her self in all places where she comes, with Gracefulness and
Majesticall Royalty: and for the Entertainment of the Train, and Pomp
suitable to her quality, she exacteth Tribute from all Arts, and Sciences.
Wherefore the ancient Greeks did not separate Eloquence from Wisdom, and
knowledge of things, but terms it, the Wisdom and faculty of well-speaking
(as the Roman Orator well observed.)

Whereas on the other side, this superfluity of words, void of solidity, being
in so great fame in this Age, deserves (in the opinion of the Wise) the only
Title of Folly. Poets feign, how Ixion embracing a Cloud in place of the true
Juno, begot only Centaures instead of Children: So these talkers, embracing in
their discourse, the shadows and Phantasmes of their imagination, for want of
the reasons of solid learning, supposing thereby to produce Eloquence, bring
forth only a Monster, causing by its novelty, admiration in weak spirits, but
horror by its deformity to all judicious persons. Their discourses are as
these imperfect Creatures which are termed Insecta: rising not by generation
but corruption; since not the vigor of spirit, but the vanity of a flowing
brain produces them. The wit not nourished with the good juice of Letters,
and Sciences, and chiefly of Philosophy, striveth in vain to conceive, or
utter a masculine, and vigorous discourse; and if it chance to vent any thing
by the force of imagination, the sound whereof may seem to appear of weight,
and consequence, it is but the found of an empty Cave, puffed with Wind, and
void of substance.

CHAP. 17. Of the Counterfeit Eloquence of this Age.
But Science, and Learning, being only the seed, and substance of Eloquence,
there is farther to be required (for the conferring Essence, and form
thereon) Fecundity for Invention, Discretion for Choice, Clearenesse for
Disposing, Facility for Expression, Elegancy for Ornament, Example for
Illustration, Motions for Inflaming; Tunablenesse of voice, and Gesture of
Body, proportioned and framed for the addition of Perfection. And (for the
further acquisition of all these parts) an excellent natural wit, a deep
study with extraordinary practice. By this, the ancient Greeks and Romans,
(laborious, and assiduous in that exercise) obtained their great glory in this
Art. Which our Demosthenes has well observed in his French Eloquence, where he
has so worthily handled this subject, that to speak after him were to gleane
after harvesters, and to croake after the Swans tune. I will only say, that
comparing the Writings of Ancients, with this brood and swarm of Books, which
this Age produces as Mushromes over Night, and faded next morning; one may
easily observe the same difference, as there is between the Dwarf like men of
these times, and those huge and robustious Heroes of the first Ages, described
unto us by Poets. Now be it that each thing has its resolution, or that Nature
is decayed, or the World inclining toward old Age, is unable to form so full
and vigorous a discourse, as in the age of its virility; but returns as
decayed old men to its childish babbling; or that men in vain desire to search
the cause of this decay, the effects at least are evident. It is needless to
speak any thing of these Court writers, and Discoursers, who of themselves
arrogate the authority of prescribing Laws to Speech, and Eloquence, yet have
none other than a Minion like Gebridge, and some cold and dull rancounters of
words and phrases; like those Sophists whom Plato in mockery calls, Fencers of
words; Plato in soph. D Basil. l. ad Libanium.
and whose discourse S. Basil compares to little Cakes kned with Honey having
only a certain distastefull and flat sweetness to tickle the taste of little
children, but no substance for manly food. The same a certain Lacedemonian
said of the Nightingale suits well with these. Thou art a voice, and naught else.

Let us now speak of those, who after the fashion of Tragedians, will march
all upon the buskin, savoring only singularity; thinking they speak not at
all, if they astonish not men with unheard of, monstrous, and prodigious
matters. As those greenesicknesse-girls, who find no taste in any meats which
Nature allows of, or are comfortable to the stomach, but choose rather to eat
ashes, coals, and spiders, a true evidence of a depraved taste. So the wits of
this age, rejecting in their discourse all solid conceptions, conformable to
reason, and common sense; as vulgar and despicable fall into fantastic
imaginations, having neither sense nor foundation in their brains, a sign
doubtless of wits weak by Nature, or weakened by vanity. The one perhaps
meriting excuse, the other worthy of double reproach. When they undertake a
discourse, they enter not upon the matter, nor do they aim at the conclusion,
but stray at the first step, and presently loose themselves in a Labyrinth of
unprofitable passages, confused adaptations, and frivolous similitudes, which
they join and patch together as shreds of diverse stuffes and colors, with
rough, and course thread. If they happen upon any strange, obscure, or blundered
conception, their discourse catches hold, and draws it thereto, as the wind
Caecias, does clouds and storms. If there be any new found stone in India, if
any flower, or fruit at the worlds end, whose name is unheard of: If any
monstrous Chimera's amongst Plato's and the Rabines Dreams; if any rusty
medall in the Monuments of Antiquity: there is no subject, how far fetched
soever, but is brought in, and drawn by top or tail. And this is that which as
rare and new, stirs up applause in all the Theater. And as Saint Hierome
said; Such Lettuce is as fitting for their lips, as Thisties for Asses.
Briefly, the common style of this Age, is not to discourse rationally, but
fantastically, out of the Chimaera's of wit, where a Bulls or Horses body is
seen issuing from a man's head, like those Monsters which Lunati^ he persons
forge in their brains, and which Painters portrait in Grotts, and the wind in
Clouds. Such wits imitate certain women, who being only great with winds,
produce nothing but vapors; and when their outcries and violent throws have
drawn together the whole neighbouthood, to see some goodly child come into
the World, they are delivered of their great bellies, or rather of their
tumors, by the discharge of a little enclosed air, expelled by force, but
received by laughter. Or it happens to them as to that Mountain, (the report
whereof ran ^^^rant in all places) which was said to be in labor; every one
ran thither hoping to see some goodly and strange wonder, but when all the
assembly expected to see some great body of a Giant to issue out of her
intrailes, as a worthy fruit of such a big belly, nothing was seen come forth
but a ridiculous Rat, a worthier spectacle of so foolish an attendance. The
mountains are in labor, but are delivered of a ridiculous mouse. Now this
proceeds from an unbridled desire, possessing these wits void of common sense,
to appear learned, and eminent before the ignorant, not being aware how
therein they show themselves ignorant before men of understanding, and
ridiculous before all clear Judgments. For it is the custom of poor men who
desire to appear rich, to add either to their habites, their houses,
movables, or banquets, certain unseemely and unseasonable ornaments, clearly
out of ordinary use, still the more therein publishing their poverty, where they
think to conceal it: and as ugly women who borrow the counterfeit beauties
out of painting and Vermilion, thereby discovering their uncomelinesse to their
farther shame, in seeking to hide it. The same Marble wherewith the deformity
of tombs is adorned and beautified, causes even those, (who otherwise would
reflect on no such matter to consider how these are but graves, full of
fleshlesse bones and rotten Carcasses. A piece of rich purple or velvet patcht
upon the torn sheeps russet of an old pil'd cloak, serves only to make the
misery it covers more apparent by its splendor. To be short, the same
Ornaments wherewith we seek to conceal manifest defects, do but make them
remarkable in stead of covering them. So these Chimericall inventions, these
Phantomes of the spirit, these forced Metaphors, these begged resemblances, and
these borrowed common places ill applied out of the poverty of a barren and
constrained discourse, cover not but disclose their authors ignorance. They will
forsooth avoid vulgar words, and common conceits; but they see not how it is
the same of words, as of coin, whereto only use affords currantnesse, dis-use,
reiection: So among the conceptions of the Spirit, the most ordinary, and most
usual, are the soundest, and most receiveable: the extraordinary and
particular, carry either the mark or suspicion of some folly. Beaten ways are
the directest, by-pathes, cause us to wander. To avoid the common fashion in
matter of apparel, is to make our selves ridiculous: To quit ordinary terms,
and conceptions in discourse, is to cast our selves into extravagancies. Nature
so long as she is not vitiated, produces only ordinary things; and no sooner
does she bring to light any unusual matter, but she falls sick, and
brings forth Monsters. But this is one of the diseases of these times. And
Seneea said right well, That the style and speech at any time current, is the
Index of the Humors and Manners of that Age. Speak that I may see thee, (said
a Philosopher). Speech comes from the heart, and the Channel discovers the
sources quality. This age attributes all to apparancie, nothing to solidity; we
strive not to be, but to appear; we dream more of plastering, than building;
other men's eyes govern us, not our own knowledge: nor had opinion ever so much
power in the world, nor truth so little. The style of our discourse bears the
marks of this giddy passion, for we seek not the marrow but the color, not
the substance but the sound, not the weight of reasons and sentences, but the
glitterings of vain inventions, or I know not what rancounter of words beating
the air; and often lost, and vanishing fill the ear, and leave the
understanding hunger-starved. It is the ecchoing, but empty vessel, whereof
the Apostle speaks, The sound whereof proceeds only from the wind it is full
of. And as the Apples of Sodom are fair, shining, and golden to their view,
who see them far off as they hang on the trees, being easily deluded with
their outward beauty; but coming near to touch them, they presently fall in
pieces, causing amazement in them who thinking they had gathered Apples, find
nothing in their hands but ashes. The same it is of the most of our discourses,
which the affected fabric of painted words and phrases, beautifieth with some
small luster, which bea^s upon the sense; but if you nearly observe it, at the
first touch this seeming shine vanesheth into smoke: we therein finding
neither Juice, Grace, nor Beauty. Yet is not evil unusefull for the World;
since, though otherwise useless, it at least serves as a foil to what is
good, as Darkness to light, black to white, shadows to lively colors, and
spots to fair faces, by the rancounter of their opposites. So either the
monstrous, or masked style of the most of these wits distasted with whatsoever
is good and natural, beautify the writings and discourses of some small
number, who raising the honor of French Eloquence, speak and write with
Elegancy, Purity, and Soliditie. I will pass them over in silence, since they
are sufficiently known, and public Judgment, affoordeth sufficient glory to
their name, without expecting any from my pen, yet am I willing to add this
word; to the end, that having spoken of their vices, who by prodigious
writings, daily defame and dishonor our Language, none should suppose, I
desire to suppress merit, or smother their praise, whose native, judicious,
and solid Eloquence does highly illustrate and adorn the French tongue^

CHAP. 18. Of the Eloquence proper for the Politician, and the Conclusion of
this Work.
AFfected Eloquence (if it deserve the name of Eloquence) is unseemely for all,
1. Quality.
but chiefly for those who treat of important affairs. Nor is this great
Ornament and Pomp of round set words, wherewith Orators swell their vein
beseeming them. And the Ancient say, The vigor and integrity of discourse.
that if Jupiter should speak to men, he would not make use of Demosthenes,
but of Platoes style. For the discourse of grave persons should rather taste of
the Philosopher, than Orator; and it is rightly befitting them, when Sentences
are their Figures, Maxims their pauses, Reasons their ornaments, a strong,
solid and round brevity their Eloquence; 2. Brevity.
briefly, when the words flowing from them, show not the fyle of a laborious
Art, but the quick and pleasing juice of a well digested Prudence. The
Lacedaemonians spoke but little, but spiritfully and solidly, their words were
as rich Diamonds, small in Bulk, inestimable in worth. Men value not either
precious Stones, or Discourses, by the Greatness, but Gracefulness. A little
Carbuncle is more worth than a whole Rock, a quick Sentence than a quaint and
frivolous Oration: To speak little, and say much is the perfect Eloquence. It
was a Law in the Areopagites Court, to speak nothing from the matter. Phocion
was called the Axe of Demosthanes his Discourse, Arist. l. 11 Rhet. Ne quid
extra re^^ diceretur.
in that he cut short his unprofitable preambles: and doubtless it is the true
Rule of Discourse, in matters of Consequence, not to extravagate into idle and
superfluous matters, but to aim directly at the mark. And questionless, if
one speak not but to attain his end, as one walks not but to arrive whether he
tends; It is folly to go by the Bow, when the shortest and best way is by
the string: and he in whose election it is, if he please to take a direct way,
will nevertheless go winding and turning by oblique paths, makes men imagine,
either that himself wanders, or desires others, should go astray who follow
him. If he casually miss his way, he shows his ignorance; If he wilfully
wander, he appears malicious: The one shows he is deceived, the other that
he would delude others. 3. Simplicity.
The Speech seeking truth, ought to be simple, and without composition (said an
Athenian) not bare without juice, and gracefulness, but simple, without
windings and ambagies, not single, without energie, but plain without
captiousnesse, not silly without natural, and fitting attractions, but plain
without the mixture of idle allegations: not simple in regard of roughness,
but in respect of clearenesse, roundnesse, and ingenuity. The simplicity of
Discourse signifies not a rude and ill-polished Ineligancy, but rather as the
Gospel calls the eye simple, which is pure, clear, and neat without
dimnesse, or Clouds. So is the oration simple, whence a pure and elegant
splendour banishe^h confusion and obscurity: Si oculus tuus sit simplex sic
totum corpus tuum lucidum erit.
and to speak properly, there is nothing less simple, than rude, and gross
Discourses, which a heap of slack and idle matters entangle and confound, nor
any more simple than a quick and elegant Discourse; the purity whereof
expels riddles, and the solidity superfluities. Philosophy terms the
Celestial bodies simple in comparison of Elementary bodies; and Theology
attributes simplicity to God and Angels, in respect of things composed of body,
and matter: so as simplicity (taken in the true sense) is the perfection of
things not signifying any defect of gracefulness, ornament, or beauty, but an
happy privation of impurity, imperfection, and mixture. The Heavens as they are
the most simple bodies, so are they the fairest, and most luminous, their
Beauty proceeding from their simplicity, and separation from all mixture of
strange Bodies. The Angels, more simple than all other created things, are
likewise more excellent: their excellency consisting in that they are single
and divided from the Union, and marriage of material things. God who is most
simple, and most perfect, his perfection arises out of his simplicity, and his
simplicity from his being exempt from any composition: which indeed denotes a
defect in things, not having all in them, but are forced to crave alliance of
some Exterior thing for the obtaining of what is deficient in themselves. So
the most excellent and elegant Oration is that which is the most simple, not in
being unfurnished of her Graces, and Attractions, but in having all her
Ornaments in their vigor, her Colors in their proper juice, and without
borrowing strange, farre-fetcht, and superfluous Ornaments, to extract her
Beauty out of her proper substance, her Vermilion from her good Blood, and as
the Gold his shine from his own soliditie.

This is the Eloquence worthy of persons in authority, who are to comport
themselves in their Discourse, as in their apparel, wherein they avoid not
ornament and richness, but curious fashions, and the borrowed embellishments
of affected artifice. But if the meanness of their habit seem something to
derogate from their State, the bareness of discourse seems more to debase it:
since the robe only shows what they are out of themselves, and speech
marketh what they are in themselves. Besides, if God has beautified all the
parts of man's Body, and above the rest, those most exposed to view, as the Eye
and Face with Graces and Attractions, why should any desire that the principal
part in man, discovering and showing the Soul, and the interior, declaring
and manifesting man; Speech (I say) the lively Image of the heart and th^^ght,
should appear, base, naked, and unfurnished of convenient ornaments? The
increated word of God, being his Eternal Word, is by the Apostle called The
Splendor of the Father: as representing his Beauty, the perfect beauty of the
Eternal Fountain, whence it flows, which is the Divine Wisdom. The Speech of
man, is the light and splendour of man, causing him to appear and shine, it
being the lively pourtrait of what is most excellent in man, to wit, reason,
and understanding. If therefore it be his splendour, is it seemly it should be
void of gracefulness, or this special ornament abject, and neglected? What
can cause him to shine, if what ought to be his light, darken him: and whence
should his honor issue, if his principal ornament dishonor him? Beauty takes
nothing from requisite simplicity in a grave and serious Oration, but is rather
its simplicity; since in speech, as in all other things, simple and pure: pure,
and fair; fair, and perfect, are the same. Holy Scripture being the revealed
word of God, is simple; not soft, enervate, forcelesse, or idle; as is their
Discourse, who strive to defend their rusticity, by this example, and because
they are both lofty and lowly, they presently suppose they have attained the
glory proper to the simplicity of the Divine style: whereas in truth that is
rather; quick, energicall, powerful, and spiritfull, stored with delightful
graces, of transpersing points, enflaming motives, and of secret but divine
sweetnesses, discovering more attractions, than all the Orators on Earth have
ever been able to utter in their elaborate discourses. Thy word is more sweet
than honey to my mouth, (said the Prophet.) Who hearkens thereto finds himself
catched, who reads therein is transformed. And that Theopompus who admired the
hidden energy of this divine word, yet offended with the simplicity of its
terms, seeking to beautify it with the flowers and pruned words of humane
Eloquence (as Eusebius reports) was not aware that its simplicity is more
persuasive, than all the Art of Orators: Being therefore punished from above
for this transport of folly, he tasted the just punishment of his idle
enterprise. Simplicity therefore excludes not the gracefulness, and strength
of Discourse, but only the paint and superfluity, which (to say truly) though
adorned with painful reserches; and pompous speeches, does notwithstanding
bereave it of its sinews, and Original Beauty.

Profit is another requisite quality in Political discourse; namely, 4 Profit.
not to speak but for the public. Thy discourses are as the tall and fair
Cypress trees, which bear no fruit (said an Ancient, to a young man) who
mounted upon the Orators chair, entertained the people with vain and
unprofitable speeches. It is indeed allowable for Sophisters and Declamours who
speak not but to please an Idle assembly, to frame to themselves Imaginary
subjects, and thereupon to enlarge their discourse, and to sport at pleasure to
excite a vain admiration, and bear away a more vain applause, sowing wind,
and gathering smoke. But these mouths (as that of Oracles) which are
consecrated to public utility, are never to scatter their words in the air,
nor ever to enter upon subjects of importance (though plausible and pleasing to
the vulgar) out of their due places, times, and seasons; but rather at all
times to attend the necessity, and opportunity of speaking in hope of fruit.
Speech is like grain, which out of fitting places, and convenient seasons,
though good, is yet unprofitably sown, producing only shame, and loss to the
seedes-man. And as for sowing to profit, we are to expect the disposition of
time and soil. So he who will speak fruitfully will still attend the
disposition of affairs, and spirits, since if affairs be not rightly
disposed, he spoils, instead of accommodating them. If spirits he^rritats in
stead of calming them and all the profit he gets by his pains, is, that by
spoiling the business, he shows his indiscretion, and by exasperating
spirits, he reveals his own rashness.

Discreet and generous liberty.
But on the other side, when necessity requires a free and bold speech, and
when occasion seems to open it self toward the fruit, which we may probably
expect; we are then to appear with a discreet and generous freedom, Naves cum
magna sint circum ferun tur a modico gubernaculo: ita and lingua modicum
me^brum est, and magna exaltat lac. c. 3
being the last and principal quality of civil Eloquence. S. James in his
Epistle compares the tongue of man to a Rudder or helm, wherewith a ship is
guided; which chiefly suteth with the tongue of Magistrates, and men of
Authority, who by the motives which their speeches inspires in the hearts of
Princes and people, turn, and manage with their tongues, as with an Helm in
Steerage the flo^ing vessels of States and Empires. Now it is necessary that
he who stands at the Helm be courageous to resist storms and tempests; for
then it is when he is put to it; either thereby to save the ship, or as a good
Pilot to die with helm in hand. Free speeches are necessary in public
necessities, and then it is, we are either to deliver affairs from shipwreck
by the freedom of speech, or perish in speaking generously. The Scripture
calls the words of Wisemen Stings, and sharp nails, for they ought to be free
and faithful, but freedom of speech cannot be without sharpness, nor truth
without stinging, as it is said, how, though honey be sweet and pleasing, in
its own Nature, yet being applied to sores it will prick and sting: Honey was
disallowed in the Sacrifices of the old Law, Levit c. 1. D Hiero ep. 35.
which S. Jerome explicateth mistically, saying, That a discourse steeped in
the Honey of a flattering adulation, not having the sharpness and sting of a
free and biting truth is not a Sacrifice pleasing in Gods fight. For they who
are in Office and Authority, are nor tied only by a civil, but by a natural
and Divine Obligation, to speak boldly and freely, when either Gods honor, or
the public good requiteth; and if at such time they either flatter or palliat
affairs, to please men, Deu^ dissipabit ossa eorum qui hominibus placent
consis si sunt quoniam Deus crea^it cos.
God will scorn and confound them (says the Prophet) and will break their
bones, to wit, their power, and greatness, whose Interest they prefer before
Justice.

But to behold the lively model of Politic virtue attended by all these
qualities, I have represented; there needs no more but only to cast our eyes
upon the excellent Orations of ancient Captains, Magistrates, and Statesmen
of whom we still read in the Greek and Roman Histories. We shall there
discover a quick strength, a round brevitie, an elegant purity, a solid
utility, and a courageous liberty. Their words are strong, their reasons
pressing, their clauses short, then sentences quick, and their points
piercing. Their discourse not drawn at length but succinct, which as a well bent
bow shoot, not sweet flowers at our ears, but sharp thorns at our hearts:
nothing vanquishing idle or vain, all tends to the point, all bears weight,
all conduces to the matter, nor can a word be wanting, but part of the sense,
clearenesse, vigor, or necessary gracefulness for persuasion will be found
defective One ma therein observe (after occasions fi^ly ap phended, to speak
with profit) truth declared to purpose and with resolution: excellent maxims
deduced from experience, being the soul and spirit of Civil Eloquence, and
in conclusion, the happy effects, springing from the sage and free discourses
of these brave and generous spirits; violences expressed, seditions assuaged,
wicked designs choked, good counsels established, wars quenched, hearts
reconciled, Laws authorized, people delivered: briefly, estates preserved by
those eloquent and prudent tongues, and these great vessels saved from
shipwreck by the conduct of so small a stern. Wherefore all such as will hoist
sail in the great and surging Sea of Civil affairs, ought above al things to
study, and exercise themselves in the well guiding this stern: which (well
handled) saves common wealth, but il and slackly managed, or imprudently
conducted, it exposes them to a thousand dangers. Nay the Emperors themselves
slighted not this point. Caesar, Augustus, Tyberius, were no less exercised
in Eloquence than in arms. And Iacitus in his Annals observes, that the first
Emperor who was forced to speak by proxy, and to study Orations, and other
men's composures, was Nero, who weakened with voluptuousness, made use of
Seneca's wit in this service.

But the tongue is not only the guide of Empires, The conclusion of this work.
but the sacred Rudder also of the Churches ship. Saint Peter's successors are
the Pilots, and their tongues (Heavens spokes-men; and interpreters of the
verities of Faith) conduct and guide it through all winds of errors, and
storms of Hell, and the world: or rather the Holy Ghost, who gives motion to
their tongues, and who descended upon them in form of tongues to cause them to
speak: is both the Pilot governing the Helm, and the Helm conducting the
Vessel. It is in this Ship I sail, it is to this Celestial tongue I submit
these insufficiences of mine. If among so many words any Errors unawares have
slipped in. It is this Helm, whose conduct I protest to follow, if against my
will and intention, I have strayed in the prosecution of this discourse.

FINIS.

