Money is my Master:
Yet once it was a servant unto me,
But now for want of Money I am in misery,
Yet I do hope to find some remedy.

To the tune of, Better late thrive then never.


I Have bin the Master of money good store,
but now alas it is nothing so,
For now I am grown very exceeding poor,
and cannot well tell what to do:
It Is want of this money for that was my friend,
And when I had store I it lewdely did spend,
I thought I should never of it seen an end,
This money is many men's master their master,
It Is money is now grown my master.
Perhaps some will say it is but as dross,
but I say it is a fine metal,
For he that wants money is possessed with a cross,
and is like to enjoy but a ltittle:
For he that has money may have what he will.
Look what he desires his mind to fulfill,
With brave entertainment and kind welcome still,
It Is money is many men's master their master,
This money, etc.
Whereas I had store of silver and gold,
then I was respected with Gallants,
But now I have none their love is grown cold,
and I Am more rejected then valliants.
Those that I have feasted with wine and good cheer
From me stand a loft and will not come me near,
Because I want means it puts me in fear.
It Is money is many men's master their Master,
It Is money, etc.
Thus lack of this money makes all men foregoe me,
as if they never saw me before,
But if I had money i am sure they would know me
and I should have company store:
They would come unto me with tales and with lies,
And many brave projects they soon would devise,
But let men be careful, such are cunning spies,
It Is money is many men's master their master,
It Is money, etc.
Now I all alone may sit like an ass,
whilst others are frollickly drinking,
And freely carrowsing the cup and the glass,
I to my self sadly am thinking,
How they are in danger to fall in the snare.
Wherein I am tangled with grief and with care,
Therefore I advise you such lewdness forbear,
It Is money is many men's master their master,
It Is money, etc.
This money's a servant likewise I may say,
to them that do carefully use it,
But it is uncertain and soon runns away,
and specially if once you abuse it:
I mean if you wast it in drinking and pride,
At Cards Dice and whores full fast it will slide,
Leave off all such follies for thus I have tried,
That money becomes my master my master,
It Is money that now is my Master.
The second part,
To the same tune.


LIkewise there are ome to money are slaves,
and do esteem it as their God,
Then more that they have the more still they crave
but those are most impudent bad:
For money was made for to pass to and fro,
As for them that hard it 'twill turn to their woe,
But for my own part I did never do so.
For money is now grown my master my master,
It Is money is now grown my master.
This money is grown such a conqueror,
as Alexander was never greater,
He gaind all his credit and honor by war
But money now wins it more better:
There are many brave sparks march in silver and gold,
That the face of a foe they did scarce e're behold,
It is their great maintenance that makes them bold
And these are right masters of money of money,
O these are, etc.
This fine Master Money is grown such a man,
that many would feign enter in it,
But never since those witches from La^caster came,
could I have the fortune to gain it:
'Twill one day be better but certain never worse,
If ere I get Money again in my purse,
I Will lay a gray groat I Will take a better course,
And seek to be a master of money of money,
I feign would, etc.
This lack of this Money does trouble my mind,
that I am full sorely tormented,
I have much a do a kind Hostis to find,
that will with me now be contented:
Quoth she give me Money for I ^ill not score,
She says she has chalk enough behind the door,
But I must entreat her to set up some more,
Till I can be, etc.
Now he that has Money though it be but a boy,
he shall be made welcome most friendly,
The love of brave Gallants be soon may enjoy,
and he shall be used most kindly:
There Is no age nor wit no strength can prevail,
It Is Money may do it for it is a sure bail,
and he that has it can seldom times fail,
This money, etc.
Now thus to conclude and so end my ditty,
you that have money make good use on it,
For friendship is cold in Country Town and City
if once you be driven to want,
Therefore now be warned, for here you may see
The griefs and the sorrows that now possess me,
And this was all long of my bad husbandry.
It Is Money is many men's master their master,
It Is money is now grown my master.
FINIS.
Printed at London for Francis Coules.


