A short treatise of certain things abused
In the Popysh Church, long used:
But now abolyshed, to our consolation,
And Gods word auaunced, the light of our salvation.
Matthew. vii. Every tree that brings not forth good fruit shall be hewn down
and cast into ye fire

Psalm. cxxiii Our soul is escaped even as a byrd out of the snare of the
foular / the snare is broken and we are delivered.

Mat. xv. All plants yt my heavenly father has not planted, shall be plucked
up by the rofes

Psalm. cxviii. It is time (O Lord) to lay to thine hand, for they have
destroyed thy law.

Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.

Preserve me (O god) for. in the do I trust. Psalm. xv.
GRace which is the mercy favor and acceptance. Apoc. i.

Of God our heavenly father, be given to this audience
Peace, from Jesus Christ, our health and satisfaction
Which is the true tranquilite, of a quiet conscience
Be ministered unto you with a more relyced sentence
Than all tongues be able to make declaration
My intent is to declare, if a while ye will keep scilence
How gods word is florisshed, the light of our salvation
We have been drowned with dreams, as our forefathers have been Ps. 106

Lyuinge in wilful ignorance, not searching for ye verite
Believing to have sight, when we have not seen
But heapinge sin upon sin, committing iniquite
For lack of godly knowledge, brought into captivity Eccl. 21.

So yt ye blind lead ye blind, as Christ makes demonstration Mat. 15

And both fell in ye lake, of utter darkness or tenebre
But now gods word is florisshed, ye light of our salvation
The shepeheardes that should feed the flock, as Ezechiel does say Eze. 34.

And has famysshed them for fode, woe unto them all
That thus suffers ye sheep to perisshe, going a stray
From ye hands of such blind guydes ye lord does us call
The sick have they not healed, ye weak have they let fall
But chuclishly and cruellye, be they had in estimation
Come away good people, from their doctrine diabolical Apo. 18.

For now gods word is florisshed, ye light of our salvation
A great color of holiness in ye Popes church has been used
The which is plain wickedness, as gods word proves right
4. re. 17.
To mainteyn the old customs, of most men now refused
The verite clean banisshed, and truth put to flight
if god had not been merciful, all men had lost the light
Blind was the cerimony, for all the sainctification
But now it is evident, to every christen wight
How gods word is florisshed, the light of our salvation
In ye stead of gods word we had holy bread and water
Holy palms holy ashes, holy candles holy fire
Holy bones holy stones, holy crewittes at the altar
Holy censars holy bannars, holy crosses holy atyer
Holy wax holy pax, holy smoke holy smyer
Holy oil holy cream, holy wine for veneration
Holy coope holy canepy, holy relics in ye quier
Thus gods word could not florissh ye light of our salvation
We have had belles christened, vestimentes consecrated
Chalices anointed, high altares washed and hallowed
Images tabernacled, dead men's bones shryned
Coniured Crosses censed, spittled and spattled
With turn and half turn, the people was deceived
Seist me or seist me not, and much more abhominacion
Feattes of legerdemayne, by these iugglers invented
That gods word should not florysshe, the light of our salvation.
Upon the high holy euennes, as they do them call,
They range all the belles a solemn noys to hear
There had we euensong: complyne, and salve with all
Of yt was song or said, them selves were never the nere
1. cor. 14
For it was in a foren tongue, as it does well apere
Another to them nor us, was there edification
For it was all lip labor, song they never so clear Esa. 29.

Syldome preach they christ, to be the light of our salvation
The next day following we had matynes, with prime and hours holy
Many a deus in adiutorium, all in the latten tongue
Coniuring of holy water, followed then immediately
Procession after ydolles, all the church yard long
High mass with devout sensinges, ruffling it in priksong
Then ran we to take holy bread, without signification
These plants be pluct up, be they never so strong Mat, 15

They were not graffed on gods word, the light of our salvation
With these old customs and such like, god is displeased sore
As in the first of Esaias, there is demanded plain
Who required these of you, such things I do abhor Esai. 2

your Sabothes and your solemn days, your fastinges are in vain
New holidays and fastinges, from my heart I do disdain
God says he is weary both of you and your oblacion
He byddeth you labor in his vine yard, and therein take pain
To teach the people Gods word, the light of our salvation
Sone it is seen what pains, in this vyneyarde they did take
For every quick spring that brought forth, the fruit of Gods verite
They cried out on him heretic, burn him at a stake
He speaks against our Ceremonies, and therefore shall he dye
Throw such wretches in prison, and let the caytyfes lie
And if they be not willinge, to make their recantation
Famysh them for fode, or murder them pryuely
Papists make traditions yt light of their salvation.
They speak against tradycions the light of our salvation.
Than scourged they the simple souls / with their whyp of correction
And there on hanged.vi. strings, surely fastened with a law
This whyp was very mete, for their pestilent complexion
For through such tyranny, the peoples hearts were raw,
Thus many faithful members, from the truth did draw
Untyll our noble king, of his mercy and compassion
Psa. 123
Brake this cruel whyp, that kept the people in awe
And has advanced Gods word, the light of our salvation.
Bewail does our Balamytes, disclosynge their own nature
Even as unshamefast shauelynges, threteninge Christ's pore sheep
Saying, if the sword were on our sides, be ye sure
As it has been before, than would ye not ones pepe
But now that ye think all good order, is laid down to sleep
ye make a bragging and a boastinge of your exaltation
Now who but ye gospellers, that Christ's flock does keape
ye teach the people gods word, the light of our salvation
Thus was their hands defiled with blood, their fingers with vnrightuousenes
Deuouringe up the gospellers, in every town and city
From their lyppes proceeded lies, their tongues advanced wickedness
Without respect to the truth, they judge nothing treuly
Esa. 57
They hatched Coccatrice eggs, as we have seen it plainly
And weaued spyders webbes, by their cruel consultatio^.
Now he that eats of their eggs, shall not escape but dye
Or be an ennemy to the truth / the light of our salvation.
The chiefest thing they set by / is almost fallen away
I mean their masking Mass, by so many Popes devised
For through it the Lords supper, has been in great decay
And the right institution, blasphemously blemysshed
Thus in the Popysh church, it has been long abused
But now verite will have the matter, in examinacion
He says plainly such abusion, shall no more be used
It shall be tried by Gods word, the light of our salvation
This Mass as they supposed, was alone sufficient
To pacify Gods wrath, for our wretched mysery
Free forgyuenes of sins, being never so unpenitent
Might be received at the Mass, this was their doctrine daily
No small time were we blinded, with such Popysshe peltry
Making us to pay, for the holy consecration
Like thieves that were vnsaciat, they robbed soul and body
Without the fear of Gods word, the light of our salvation.
Christ held not the bread over his head, it is not in the Scripture.
But brake it and divided it, to his Apostels all Mar. 14

Christ bad them not knele to it, of this ye may be sure
if ye do search the Scriptures find it so ye shall
Christ willed them to reseeue it, in the memorial 1. Cor. 11

That his body for our sins, suffered pain and passion
To pacify the fathers wrath, when we in sin do fall
Thus was he offered ones for all, the light of our salvation He. 7.1.

Mark how blyndly we were fed, with our popysh ge^tylinen
Mark how with false doctrine, they have bleared our eyes.
Mat. 16
Mark how craftily we were fed with Phariseys leaven
Mark also how they repyne, ye gods word should arise
Mark what deuylish doctrine, these dreamers did devise
Mark how cruel they have been, to Christ's congregation
2. Ti. 4.
Mark how much they have maynteyned, phantasyes and lies
Nothing regarding gods word, the light of our salvation
Of long time have they caused us, commit abhominatio^
Robbyng god of the honor, which to him is dew,
^^. 7.17
By inuenting false gods, of their Imagination
Making thereof a sacrifice, and if they prove this true
They must confess they crucify, gods son again a new
For if their bread be Christ, by transubstanciation
Than offer they in sacrifice, this must needs insewe
God and man flesh and blood, the light of our salvation
Mat. 16
Does not scripture say, into heaven Christ ascended
Acts. 7
And dwelling not in temples, made with man's hand
Heb. 10.
But sat him down for ever / until the world be ended
Making intercession, both for free and bond
That unto his godly promise, faithfully do stand
This should be to the Idolatres an honest reformation
To drive them from Idolatry, for fear they be fond
Enemies unto gods word the light of our salvation
Ihon. 6
Christ is the bread of life which descended from ye deite
if any tate of that bread he shall live evermore
Ihon. 8
Christ alone the son of God makes us free
Matt. 1.
And from all our sins, clearly does us restore
Christ for all penytent hearts, has laid up mercy in store
Romans 4
Christ dyed for our sins, and rose for our justification
We believe to find him a merciful savior
For god has chosen him to be the light of our salvation
Now seeing we have Christ to be our only advocate
In whom God the father, has a special delight
Let us hear him, for he alone does invoke Mat. (...)

And of our sins clean forgyuenes, we have in Gods sight 2. Pet. 1

What need we than to seek help, at any other wight
But even only in the merits, of Jesus Christ's passion Ephesians. 1.

Bewaylinge our great mysery, desyringe day and night
To find him a merciful God, the light of our salvation. Heb. 1.

All we have offended, and have need of Gods glory Romans (...)

No man is found righteous, and pure in his presence
yet through his son Christ, we be forgyuen freely
For he has made a sacrifice, for our sins and offense Heb. 7.

He is our reconciler, peace maker, and defense
He it is that shed his blood, only for our redemption
And would have all men saved, this is his pretense
Thus are we cleansed by Christ, the light of our saluaciou
No small cause have we to rejoice, if we do consider
How our merciful God, has for his flock provided
Replenyshinge us with meat, that endures for ever
I mean his eternal word from which we were divided Ihon. 6

By way of persecution abhorred and deryded
But thanks be to the lyuinge God, which for our consolacion
Has overthrown the enemies, that thus enterprysed Act. 9.

To persecute the Gospel, the light of our salvation.
And where we lived in fear, to confess the verite mat. 25.

By hydinge our talent, as servants unprofitable
Now is that yoock broken, and we set at liberty Psa. 113

Plenteously to publyshe, the truth without fable
Let us therefore beware, we be not found variable
But lay a sure hold to the ploughe, with heart and cogitation Luke. 9

Continuinge unto the end, strong steadfast and stable 1. Cor. 15

In no wise to renounce the truth, the light of our salvation.
Apo. 17
Forsake the whore of Babylon, and the mark of the beast
Forsake her marchantes all, for they be most pestelent
Apo. 18.
Forsake the wares that she sold, from the most to the least
Forsake her holy holiness, that she esteemed excellent
Forsake the deuelysh doctrine, that she did invent
Apo. 17.
Forsake and flee utterly, from her abhominacion
Apo. 18.
For Kings and Princes were disceyued, that to her did consent
Persecuting Gods word, the light of our salvation.
Let us forsake all ceremonies, that to Scripture be not consonaunt
Psalm. ^^
Tradicions of forefathers, wherein we have been lead
And with the lively word of God, let us now be conuersaunt
For therein shall we se, with what baggage we were fead
Wanderinge in the Popes laws / forsakinge Christ our head
2. Pe. 2.
Heapinge upon our selves, the more greatter damnacion
Thus were Tradicions and Ceremonies, maintained in the stead
Of Gods true and sincere word, the light of our salvation
Let us earnestly therefore desire, with an heart unfeigned
Tim. 1.
That in all thing we do, God may have the glory
yea, and embrace this heavenly word, which we have received
Not in talk / nor to receive it as a carnal liberty
But to bring forth the fruits of the spirit, so that thereby
It may apeare manifest, in our Godly conversation
To be a light unto the world / forsakinge all iniquite
And to persevere in the truth, the light of our salvation.
And doubt not all that the heavenly father has not planted
He will pluck up by the rotes, they shall no more endure Mat. 15

This in his eternal word, he has it promised
Therefore be not unfaithful, for his covenant is full sure
Heaven and earth shall perysh, this is without recure Luke 16.

But his word shall never pass, by no determination
Untyll all thing be ended, therefore I you allure
To trust wholly in his word, the light of our salvation
Honger and thurst for righteousness, than shall ye be satisfied Mat. 5.

Mortify the flesh, with the deeds thereof also
Let no filthy communication, out of your mouths proceed Ephe. 4

But as it becomes saints, even so look ye do
Blessed be he to whom sin, is not imputed to Psalm. 31.

Neither in his spirit is there found dissimulacion
Such shall inioye the heavenly joys, knowinge no kind of woo
But have the fruicion of Gods sight, the light of our salvation
And above all thing to embrace, Gods eternal verity
Which unto a Christen man, there is nothing so acceptable
For as much as in it / is contained syncerely
The dewtie of all persons, a doctrine most profitable
And in especial to this, we must be agreeable
To love God above all thing, this is the chief foundation
And our neygbours as our self, thus shall we without fable
Receive at the hand of God, the light of our salvation.
Let us be thankful to our God, for his etern verite
With which he has most plenteously endewed our noble King
So that among all his affairs, he may setforth gods glory
With no less zeal than he has done, sense his first beginning
I mean, Edward the sixth, over us now rayninge
Right Inheritour by dissent, of this realm or dominion
That out of his Princely heart, there may dystyll and spring
Gods power and lively word, the light of our salvation.
Also for those good ladies, of the same stock and lynage
Mary and Elyzabeth, systers unto his grace
The heavenly Lord endewe them, unto their last age
Even as their noble father did, all Popery to deface
And Gods eternal Testament, always to embrace
For there in shall they learn, by the heavenly instigation
To follow the fruit of the spirit, and thereby to purchase
The Celestial kingdom, the light of our salvation.
For the most honorable Council, with my Lord Protector
Which stryueth strongely with the enemies of God night and day
In his procedynges and doings, the Lord be his director
With his holy spirit also / to rule their hearts always
That through their spiritual labor / all Poperye may decay
And utterly banyshed the land / with Godly reformacion
Suppressinge all false doctrine / and to set such a stay
That Gods word may increace / the light of our salvation.
And that it may please the (O God) to illumine the spirituality
As Bysshoppes and all ministers / with knowledge and understanding
Of thy most blessed word / to set it forth with synceritie
And unfeignedly follow / both in doctrine and lyuinge
Fedinge Christ's flock / with the word everlasting
Not compelled thereunto / nor for hope of promocion 1. Pet. 5

But for favor which they bear to it above all thing
And thus shall Gods word florysshe / the light of our salvation.
Let Christ be preached the savior / wherein we may trust
Rebuke every sin / beware of Deuelysh Doctrine 1. Ti. 4.

Double tongued men / in no wise be they must
Not given to fylthy lucre / nor to much wine 1. Tim. 3

But having the mysterye of Faith / in conscience pure and clean
And or they presume to minister in the congregation
They ought to be well proved, this does saint Paul determyne
And then to feed us with the truth, the light of our salvation.
And even as it is their dewtie, to rebuke sin
So is it our parts also, to ceace from sin always
Consyderinge Satan was the first / that did it begin
Therefore be they our watchemen, as Ezechiell does say Eze. ^^^

Now, if we have a warninge, and will fully decay
Our own blood upon our headdes, this is without negacion
Read the text and more plainly, se it there ye may
Thus God would have all men saved, the light of our salvation.
And for us pore communs also, the Lord be our over sear
That above all we may desire, peace and quiet rest
Both of soul and body, for that do we require
So shall we prosper in all goodness, and God pleased best
And at the last to be with Christ, this is our request
Which is the head of the faithful and Christian congregation
receyuinge there a kingdom, ever to have rest
In joy and bliss without end, there to have our salvation.
AMEN.
James. i. Every good gift / and every perfyt gift is from above, and
comes down from the father of light. Proverb. ii. For it is the Lord that
gives wisdom / out of his mouth comes knowledge and understanding. Psalm.
cxv. Not unto us (O Lord) not unto us, but unto thy name give the praise.
Timothee. i. To God only / give the glory. Quod, Peter Moon
Imprinted at Ippyswyche by me Ihon Oswen. Cum Priuilegio ad Imprimendum solum.
1548


