THE LANDGRAVE of Hessen his princely receiving of her Majesty's Ambassador.

Imprinted at London by Robert Robinson. 1596.

To the Right Honorable Lady the Lady Marie, Countess of Warwick.
RIght Honorable, gessing at your La. acquaintance with the Princess, and this
(blast) being a matter of pleasure, fit for a spare hour in an afternoon,
yet for the manner of it, worth the writing done in so good order, and greatly
to her Majesty's honor by the Landgraue, I have presumed (under correction) to
put out and present your Ho. the relation of our entertainment in Germany.
Hoping by your La. protectiue, favorable acceptance of it (to walk between
these two hills whose perfections and excellencies I cannot highthen, but
discover, in the vale of my lowness, and obscurity if without thanks, for my
labor, yet for my good meaning, without blame. Ready to be sacrificed for her
service to whom of duty we owe our selves and all our endeavors. Desirous to
honor him to whom of love it is due having honored her Highness her
Ambassador and his company so much, and to perform all good offices to your
Ladyship.

Your Honors ever to command. Edward Monings.

HIs Lordshippe came to Brunswick the 16. of August, where the next day in the
morning, met us a gentleman called ( Johan 1. Res.
von der Bruck sent from the Landgraue to attend and 2 Personae
entertain him. This show ed good intelligence, and 3. Actio nes.
care had of his coming, for the 17. day he was with us betimes, commanded if
he met not the Lo. Ordo.
Ambassador there, to go to Breme. We gave him entertainment, and when his
Lordship was ready and called for him, he came and delivered his message in
french to this effect. That the Landgrane (his master) giving him his titles,
had sent him to meet, and in his name to welcome his Honor into his country,
declaring how long desired, and therefore very acceptable Mauritius dei
gratia Langr: Hassiae Co. Cattzaenelaenbogend Diests, Sigenhau Nidda.
his coming was, and therein how deeply he stood bound unto her excellent
Majesty, that it pleased her Highness, so graciously to send un to him, and
greatly beholding to my Lord Ambassador, that in regard of the length and
danger of the journey, had passed so great a travail for his sake, with many
other ceremonious and gratulatory speeches, till he came to the point, that
upon very urgent and necessary occasion, the child was Christenned, telling
the time of her birth, the 7. of April, and baptism the 27 of Iulie, with the
giving her the name of Elizabeth by the Landgraue Ludowicke of Marpurg the
Princes uncle and eldest of his house who was appointed Debuty at the
Christening, but that the solemnity was reserved till his Honors coming, and
therefore diverse Princes, Lords, Ladies, and gentlemen, invited and commanded
to attend at the Court, and wait upon him.

And because the Prince his master had been given to understand, of his
Lordshippes hastening (as he did, and that with the venture of his health in
the service) he besought him, to take such easy and convenient iourneys as
might be best for his honors provisions by the way, and to that end had sent
him, to do his Lordshippe all service and attendance. To which my Lo. making a
regratulatory answer, after having given him good words, made him good
cheer, and the next day we went five leagues to Heldeshem the 19. fiueleagues
to Hamel (through the mountainous and pleasant woodie part of the Duke of
Brunswicks and the Bishop of Padenborge their lands, and so we came to
Hixtunne in the Stift of Corui.

At Hixtunne met us another ancient grave Gentleman called Raven von Aina
luxen a dweller in those parts, and who came with no message, but was sent to
bring my Lord to a castle of the Princes called Zappenburch.

This Castle is seated out of common passage, built upon a hill, in a great
forest, whither by a craggie and unbeaten way we came late by mooneshine. My
Lord Ambassador, was received with all honor and expectation who through the
soldiers ranked on both sids (as they be very cerimonious) went in with his
Coaches to the inner Court, where he alighted, Master Mezenburgh Steward of the
Princes house, and before sent Ambassador into England, with a troop of
gentlemen of the Landgraues, met him at the staire foot, carried him up by
torchlight to his lodging and in the great Chamber, made a long saluting,
welcomming, excusing, rejoicing, and thankful oration in the Princes behalf,
which in few words was fully answered, and so we went to supper. The Princes
Officers and gentlemen were appointed to wait, only Master Mezenburgh sat
with my Lord and his company to govern the table. His Lordshippe was served
with three courses after our fashion very pletifully and so were all his
servants to the meanest, with distinction of diet and great regard was had. And
this action was in all things as honorably, as wisely, orderly and exactly
well performed, as was possible, for what the country did aford his Lordship
had, or they could devise by art, and order discreetlie was done to honor
him, insomuch that his entertainment as honorably as passed measure, as his
bounty wisely kept proportion.

Here his Lordship stayed three days, which was so apointted for his better
disposition and refreshing, the first day he rested, and the second was the day
of rest, and a latin sermon was made him: in the morning upon Monday the
weather brake up, and for after dinner a hunting was appointed.

From the Castle we passed a league down the forest, into an open vallie,
where the length of half an english mile, the Toils were set up on both
sides to keep in the game: the pleasure of the place, was as much as the
sport, for we were in sight of diverse Towns and villages, as Quiddelburge,
Rottam, Kellam, etc. and from the hill Schoneberg (a fair hill) out of the wood,
fell the game down into the vallie, where in the midst, was a green tent of
cloth, set up for my Lord Ambassador with a rewe of bows, to shaddowe the
company, hide their dogs and losen them at the dear as they passed by, the
country was up on both sides of toils upon waggens, with their broad bore
spears and dogs: in half an hour, six stags and two wild swine, which were
the more spared for being out of season, were cruelly murdered and so the
slaughter ceased and master Meze^burgh taking his leave went to provide, at
Cassel. Thus love and bounty still went before us in preparation and the next
day we followed.

The Princes own coach covered over with a large carpet of black velvet, and
laid with long cuishions drawn with 6 horse, driven by two Coachers suited in
green, after the manner of the Princes of Germany, was prepared for my Lo. and
his own english Coach to follow with 6. horse empty, except his Lord appointed
any to go in it, six besides were made ready for his co^ panie, and thus
provided with waggans for our cariadges, ready set forward, the Princes
gentlemen took their horse, being gallantly mounted, and with conuoy of the
soldiers in the Castle, whom my Lord had rewarded, we were carried through a
park adjoining, a league out of the forest, where with a volly of shot they
took their leaves, and so went back to Zappenburch.

We had 3 leagues to Cassell, and within one, the way was strowed at our
coming with horsemen, that put forward to meet my Lord Ambassador, and still
our company increased, who went the nearest way over meadows, the ditches
leuealed and cut down for the purpose, great expectation there was on both
sides, and we were not frustrated, for within an English mile off the town,
upon a rising ground piked out, going up the hill, we discovered first a
strange fellow mounted upon a Cammell, with the manner of a herald before him,
this was a blackmoore of the Princes, sent a little on the one side before, to
discover our coming, and appointed to look back for a watchwoord, which when
he had done, and kneeled down a far off, to my Lord Ambassador with his
beast, like to a cloud rising above the sunneafter her set, between the light
and us, appeared a troop of horsemen coming up the hill, who in a stately
manner trotted toward us.

They were thus marshaled, threescore swarte Ritters three and three in a rank
sternely came before, there followed six trumpets in the Princes colors white
and red, after came a gallant sort of gentlemen every way well and richly
appointed with jewels, and most of them chains of gold, there followed his
empty horses of honor and maintenance, belonging to his fendatorie
Graffchafftes, caparisonned with white and red tafetie, with plumes and all
their furniture suitable, after these six hincshmen two and two suited alike with
chains, helmets and iauelins in their hands: then came the Princes and the
nobles and Master Dorstetell (going before the Dukes of Hostein and Luneberg,
who were sent to meet the Lord Ambassador,) stayed the troops, which had
passed along sidewise of us, till these Princes met, who alighting, my Lord
went out of his coach, and this Master Dorstetell came and made his speech in
Latin, full of receipt, love, and courtesy, showing that these Dukes were sent
to meet and entertain his Lo. by the way and to accompany him to the Princes
house, which his Excellency desired him to use for his being there as his
own, for which my Lord thanked the Prince very kindly, and after having
embraced the young Dukes, he was entreated to take horse, and they set forward,
the great ordinance discharged, etc. and with all petty complements and
ceremonies such as Princes use for ornament, and to make (as their persons are,
so their actions to be more estimable to the common world) we entered with as
many hitters behind as before, the whole number being near 300. horse, into
the town of Cassell.

They were up in arms, the captains and companies of the town standing in
order on both sides of the streets, stoutelie pick and gunne, even to the
Princes Castle. this his troup dismounted and gone in, my Lord was brought to a
stately upper hall, where at the door the Landgraue Maurice met and embraced
my Lord Ambassador. And in this honorable assembly he delivered his Embassage
and his letters, to whom the Prince spoke Latin, and after gracious
entertainementes given, carried him to his lodgings, putting my Lord before him,
where after all behavior becoming so great a person, and wherein he had very
extraordinary grace and facility he left his Lordshippe.

His lodgings were five rowmes, which took up one end of his house, being a
goodly quadrangle, somewhat more in length then in breadth, and like the Loner
at Paris, hie and stately, he had two dining chambers, two drawing, and
between these two, his bed chamber, for his more private and quiet being. His
Lord. own dining chamber was a very curious room, made no doubt of purpose,
to entertain strange Princes, all of marble, the doors, the flower, the
sides, windows, roof, and all things pertinent being of carved gray marble,
and for the rareness, I will more particularly describe it.

The doors are bordered about with timber to keep the stone together, and
coming in, the flower even and smoothly paued, the chamber just square, the
sides made like a wentscot, with crestings, indentments, and Italian pillar
work, and hereby divided into 27 panes of carved Imagerie, to the half
proportion of a man, bearing upon their shoulder points, escouchons with the
blasoned arms of his signories, the electors count of Palatine Duke of
Saxony, Mararquish of Brandenburgh, and other houses of his friends and allies
of the protestant part, over these an other course of indented doors and carved
hollow works distinct with pillars, and in this compass next the roof, on
the four sides four stories carved, of the creation, the passion, the
resurrection, and judgment very cunningly done, in length about two yardes,
compassed in with a frame of marble, as though they hung loose, the roof is
wrought with knot work, and thus to see to being in the chamber nothing but
marble, whereof he has the mine in his country, the trouble of his rowme is
great in winter when to keep the stone from cracking and loosening, the stone
is continually kept hot.

The next rowme to this was a fair square chamber hung with tapestery, where
the gentlemen dined, for commonly at the marble table, where the Dukes of
Holstein, and Luneburgh, or the Granes of Nassaw, and of Zolmes, with Sir
Richard Fines, Master Brakenburie, and others as it pleased his Lo. to appoint.

The third was a fair drawing chamber, seated round about, and covered with
scarlet, above the seats hung round, with a rich small wrought tapesterie of
an ell broad, of Emblem work, and verses written underneath, over this upon
a ledge of wentscot were diverse large tables of sundry devises well painted
with their posies to garnish the chamber, and among al, that was the best which
had this Motto (Mayor autem horum est charitas, for it waxed cold. The roof
was likewise flourished with painting and devises, these rowmes had the through
light of four fair windows, and in this chamber were two square tables, one
richly covered with a carpet of cloth of gold, and the seat laid round
with four long cushions of the same, which was extraordinarelie covered
morning and evening for breakefast and banquet, two of the Princes grooms
appointed always to be here and wait, and here they sat sometimes in
conference and counsel.

Next to this was my Lords bedchamber, with two fair damask field beds,
prepared for my Lord and master Edward Clinton his son, the pariture of
this rowme, was a painted tree that grew up at the door, the body bulking
out very naturally of stone painted barkelike, and the branches spreading all
over the seeling of the chamber, full of fruit, and hanged down upon the
walls, with other pictures to fill up empty places. The story taken out of
Daniell. There his: Lo. had at a little fide table, delicate preserues and
conserues set and covered over with a veil of laune wrought with gold and
silk, and all things for his chamber very fitly.

Beyond these four was there a fair drawng chamber hung with arras, which
parted his honors lodging from the other side of the house, that so he might
not any way be disturbed. And now I speak of lodgings, I will discribe the
manner, the strength, and conuenience of the Princes whole lodging, being a
thing worth noting and then return unto his entertainment.

His Castle standing upon the river of Fuld between the two sides of Casse
joined with a bridge of stone generrally commands the town and country,
and is particularly fortified for his own dwellinge, for the first. A parcel
of ground of some 100 yeardes broad he has enclosed, on both sides, which
compasses the town and yet is impropriat any pleasure or use of his own, As
for his walks, orchards, laying in his prouisi ons of wood, etc. upon the
cuntrie, this is storngly fortifi ed, moated, countermured, mounted, bulwarkt,
flank red, and withal possible fortification made so strong, as he is there by
easily able to prevail against the seige of any outward enemy, and beat them
from the field, upon the town, only shut up with a single wall, to keep it
private from the townes-men, that they may entende their streets houses and
trades, standing more upon the credit of their good service, then their
liberty: Within this place, he has a goodly armorie not much inferior to the
Duke of Saxony where his ordinance, armor, weapons, and munition, are kept in
great good order and readiness upon any occasion, all stratagemicall engines
and devises which belong to offensive or defensive exploites. Sucha kind of
forteresse as this has the Duke of Saxony at Dresden. The Duke of Brunswicke
at Woll fenbuttel and the Duke of Werkenberg at Stugord above his castle, for
these I have seen diverse other Princes of Germany which will be absolute, for
they have great reason as the Grave of Embden knows by late experience, to be
diffident of their subjects that dwell in their great towns.

For his private dwelling, his Castle is deep and broad moated, to
countergarde his house within the town, where upon the rampers twenty and
four are appointed to keep continual sentinel in order, his gates ar kept
with a double guard, and two bridges, drawn up every night and guarded, the
inward part as I said a square long court, paued and vated round about with
a large great vaute under ground, which is used for his sellerage, full of
vessel twenty, forty and some of an hundred tun, the lower rowmes are the
Offices; on the right hand a common large great hall, and other common roemes
and lodgings; on the left, the middle story was upon our side the upper hall
where his excellency met my Lord Ambassador, on the right side a very goodly
great Chamber and on the left a gallerie answerable, which William the
Landgraues father addorned with the pictures of all the Princes of Christendom
from Anno 60. unto 88. the number of 140.

The third story are fair lodging Chambers round about the upper end from
the top to the bottom bebeing the Princes own private lodgings joining upon
the Chapel. The fourth and fifth stories for gentlemen servants, etc.

On the back side he has fair tilt yards places for the Quintine, the
running at the ring, rideing, and other exercises for his pleasure, gardens,
with banqueting houses, artificial fountains, and water works, fish ponds
etc. With his housed gardens of range trees, lemons, pomgranets, and diverse
outlandish fruits, and simples, after the custom of the Germane Princes who
in all outward things are very glorious and apparent.

But to his intertainement where I left, my Lord after an hour resting in his
Chamber, the Prince sent two principal of his Counsel, to salute him and to
know his Lor. pleasure, where he would suppe, wishing rather if it pleased
him, to keep his chamber, after his travail then otherwise, and to appoint
what hour he would for sermon the next day, which he did at nine.

In the morning master Brackenburie appointed the ordering of the chapel for
the solemnity, and Doctor Gregorius Schonfelt Concionator anlicus Cassellanus,
who suceeds master Eartholomaeus Meyer in his supreme perintendencie preached,
his sermon was brought over.

At the solemnity my Lord was very richly and well appointed, as became him,
to her Majesty's honor, and his own, and their admiration, sitting alone on
the right side of the Chapel, in a place prepared for him within a trauesse
of the Queens, the row me hung with crimosin tafetie, with chaires and
cushions of crimosin velvet, over against him satt the Prince, with the Dukes
of Holstein, Lune, Burg, and the Graves of Zolmes, Nassaw and others, who did
him all the sermon time great reverence by much standing, His Lor. performed
it graciously and master Brackenburie her Majesty's Gentel manusher stood all
the sermon time at the turning up of the trauesse, and with allow reverence
gave him first his prayer book which master Cotton of the warderobe had
ready, after sermon they proceeded to the solemnity, and first came master
Edward Clinton taught by the Gentleman usher what to do, with a goodly rich
cup of gold set with stone, wherein were comfits and with three reuerences they
went both and presented it unto her Majesty's deputy who took a taste, after
they presented it, unto the Landgraue and the Dukes who did the like, then came
Sir Richard Fines in the same manner with a cup of wine, and last they went
both, one held the basen, while the other gave water, and the third the towel.
When this was performed in the midst of the chapel, upon a little pause, my
Lord Ambassador accompanied with this honorable train, went toward the
Princess her chamber to present the gift, whither before we came: we first
passed through (in an utter chamber) a garden of fair young ladies and
gentlewomen clad in colors, who stood like the rainebow, and they compassed
the one half of the room by which we passed into the Princes her bed chamber,
where were none but Ladies, and a solemn presence. First stood three of the
Landgraues sisters, the Lady Anna Maria, holding the princes little son Otto
by the finger. The lady Hedwig and the lady Sophia, the other sisters
Elizabeth her majesty's goddaughter Christina and Sabina being dead, there was
the lady Anna countess of Nassaw and many of the Graves wives, of the
Landgraues country that waited on the Princess. And she her self as Horace
says of Iulium Sidus stood by her bed side, Velut inter ignes luna minores
with her Majesty's goddaughter set upon the midst of a feeld bed of green
cloth of tissue, with white and green plumes all very richly embrodered.
The prince went with my Lord Ambassador toward this fair Lady, and by master
Wroth had speech with her touching her Majesty's good will toward her, and
the gratifying her with a present etc. which master Mezenburge an answered, and
while this was doing the presct was brought in, and set upon the Cubbart, this
done the Prince, and my Lord Embass. took their leaves, and left this sober
company of Ladies, and gentelwoemen, as they found them in their chambers, he
brought my Lord to his loging and so they parted. Within half an hour The
pres. a rich cubbert of plate.
after he sent him word, it was his pleasure and desue, that his Lo. should
dine with him in his great chamber and sit in state, which my Lord with some
straining of courtesy took upon him, he was set alone at the bordes end, the
Landgraue and his Lady sitting beneath him about two yeardes with the young
Dukes of Hollnn. and the Graves of Nassaw, John, Phillipe, Willelns and
Ludowick, the Grave Phillip of Zolmes of whittenstein, and others, at the
bordes end, there waited on my Lord Sir Richard Fines as cupbearer who in this
journey did her Majesty great honor and service at the Paltzgraues, as he
went to Venice, he gave the cup with three cursies and essay, there waited with
him Master Brackenburie, and thus was there a royal feast continued, in great
solemnity and variety of excellent music, and in the midst of Dinner, the
Prince began a health unto her Majesty whom he often reverently termed,
mother, this health went round and while it was a drinking, there was a devise
of a castle (served upon the table in a charger, which had a warer running
about it, with fish swimming in it (very artificially done which shot of, of
it self is blows as big as petronell, and all besmoked the room with
gunpowder, which with sweet perfumes burnte was soon avoided, after this roy
all dinner, the Ladies first withdrewe, and then the prince brought my Lord
again unto his chamber, giving him place, and honoring the person whom he
represented, the most effectually, and affecttionately he could. He staid not
there an hour, but Barriers were in hand, which being set cross the court,
all these states were at windows to see them above, and when the Judges were
set below, there came in two ensigns of pikes and shot, that compassed them
round, to keep the peace, then came 15 to 15 Knights the one side in gilt
armor, the other in silver, who taking up their ends, the herald red their
orders, and they went to their sport, first with the spear, then the sword,
after pele mele and brake a marvelous deal of Iron work, and while these hott
Knights were swetting in their harness issues such a furious Ambuscado of
crackers that flewe out of the bar painted over green to hide the treason,
that it parted them. This quarrel ended without bloodshed, and judgments
given, the Herald proclaimed triumphs for the day following, and the company
full of the pleasure, love and honor of this solemn meeting dissolved, the
Prince withdrewe, and my Lo. was private.

The next day the Prince sent my Lord by the High-marshall M. Benneberge his
good morrow, as he did always sometimes by one sometimes by an other greet
him with honorable salutations twice or thrice a day, and the Grave of Zip was
appointed to accompany my Lo. who being a fat corpulent man, had little to do
at their actiuities, after dinner his Lo. was carried to the Tiltyard, but
without the Prince, he was so busy about his sports, marshaling other men,
and putting him self in order, being an actor in them the more to honor her
Majesty and the day. The first Triumphs were the running at the ring, wherein
they had extraor-dinarie devise of three circles wrought the one within the
other with a Cross parting them, and making differences of hitting, above or
below, on the right side or on the left, that in the midst being the compass
of a french. Crown which was the best for wagers, no man might run: for
under ten nor for above a hundred dolors, marie they might run a trust, there
were judges appointed to decide, these great matters who disposed of prises and
the Lords and Ladies being placed in a open place builte for the purpose the
Triumphs began. There came in first with six staffers and six Trumpets
masked with their devise the two Chalengers Mastrr Deuet a very proper
horseman and Master Dorstetell a Counselor, who ran with all the rest and
last one with another for the prise, then came there seven Companies, which
made several entrances: first with music then with devises, their Lance
bearers and them selves following, and last their servants and their empty
trapped and Caparisoned horse.

The Duke of Luneburgh brought in the Seven deadly Sins, and he placed
pride (indeed he used us somewhat strangely) then came in an other compaeie
with the Sciences, and another with the Nine Muses, one came in Post two masked
like the Sun and the Moon whose devise was the Seasons of the Year but of
all the Vnbekent ritter, came in like a Prince with his music of Sackbotes
and Cornets clade in green Tafetie to the ground six before and six behind,
with the most harmonious noise that could be, answering one another like an
Echo. This kind of music had a princely air, his devise was or might be
fitly, the four Cardinal virtues, carrying the globe of the earth and sphere
of heaven among them, and Consulting who after came himself masked like Jove,
ri ding all in white crowned, and with a tripertite sword in his hand under a
Crimosin Canopie borne over him, whereon was written at the two ends Pramia
bonie, and Bona malis on the one side Virtute and Consilio and one the other
the Emblem of a fagottewith Concordia fimul manet. After the lanciers came and
his empty horse, this unknown knight after having run six courses whereof
he missed, but one, came up to the Princess, andkept my Lord Ambassador
company.

The Landgraue in his triumphs as in all things else kept so good decorum,
that the best was reserved for the last, wherein the Princes her brother
representing Casar Albert Octo Gr. of Zal(...)is.
came in for his devise with the four Kings of America, Africa, Asia, Europa,
so naturally set out, every country in his kind, for music, attires of
going carried before him in their several fashions of coches and state as
could be devised, the credit of the Princes triumphs, was that they were
costly all things being made new for this meeting, that they were many full
of variety, performed in season and good order.

After supper as their manner is upon a triumph day there was a daunse, in the
gallerie I spoke of. The prince and my Lord Ambassador being set at the upper
end the Duke of Hotstein began with the Princess, and the Duk of Luneburgh
with the Lady Anna Maria and so the rest of the Lords and ladies in their
order with drum and trumpet for their music.

After the first setting in, there was a summonning of Knights that were to
receive favors of their Ladies, either for their good runninge or their
devises that day. And when they had first been thanked, with commendations of
their doing and exhortation with inioyment given them that as they had done
that by way of exercise and pastimes, to honor the Prince and Ladies, so they
should be ready indeed upon just occasion to show their manhood in the
defense of them both and of their country, after they received some reward,
and with a cranse with their Ladies gave daunses with them, when these honors
were done the well deseruers this day, the triumphs for the next day were
published, but to avoid satietie they were discreetely referred to the day
after, a day of pause was put in between both, wherein they met in council.
Thus entergreabley the time was passed and upon Saturday the twenty seven of
August the principal devise and triumph was performed.

There came in the morning an Embassadoure from the county Palatine, Dereon
Sehenberg who came to inuit the Landgraue to be godfather to the Paltzgraue
son and heir, there came in the afternoon in the midst of their sportes
the Paltzgraue of Zueienburch with his Lady and his little son but their
coming was, only to see the Lord Ambassador.

Without the town there was a castle: builte, and the water drawn from the
river to moate it about so broad that it bore a boat to and fro, the place
for standings and perfourming of this sport was railed in and made convenient,
and the substance of the matter was, of an enchaunter that had forsooth dwelte
there long, and by two or three giants in his castle taken diverse prisoners
Knights and Ladies, and by his doings much endammaged his country, whereupon
the Knights of Hessen put them selves in arms and appointed a day for the
incountering of the giants and the rasing of the castle, and the giving
liberty to a fair Lady that was prisoner there, now for their defense they
kept open tent and hunge out the Flagge of defiance to all knights that passed,
who if disposed might by the sounding of a horn first come in, and try their
valors and their fortunes, for by both these this Lady was to be delivered,
and not otherwise, for trial of their dexterity and valor there were four
things to do, first to run at the Quintin. Next the turney. Then the tilte
without a pale: and last the sword and target wherein if the knight were at any
overcome he was prisoner, and for their trial there were Judges, if he went
through, yet had he a point of destiny to prove, whether it were his fate
forsooth to draw the enchaunted sword out of a pillar that stood by the
castle.

The Knights of Hesse came at their day appointed, not to make devises but to
show their manhood, they were many and very gallantly armed and kept in
such order as (which graced the triumpth) there was always a continued sport,
without intermission or loss of time and three or four actions to be seen at
once. The places were divided with railes and as one thing was done, there
were wild fellows that losened the chiane of the outer gate and let them by
degrees unto the but castle, the fats had appointed it for the Dukes of
Luneburgh who drew out the sword, delivered the Lady, and brought out a
strange ugly company from the castle which being gone the fire works began
for strangeness and admirable device exceeding all the rest, some for
mounting, some burnning in the water, some for their strange tearing of the
air upright, some turning here and there after an hundred fashions, brustinge
out into such noyses and spectacles, as though heaven and earth had gone
together. These and the rest were surely princely vanities, but betwixt jest
and earnest there were two coronets of horsemen set to keep the feelde, while
these things were a doing, for it was late and night before they ended.

Thus full of entertainment it was time for my Lord (as he did wisely) to
speak of parting and not to put this royally minded Prince to too great
trouble, who was within few days to go to Amberg and to meet the
Paltzgrane. There should have been a daunse this night as before, but being
late it was performed in like manner as I told the next day being Sunday when
the Prince, my Lord, the other Ambassador, the Paltzgraue of Zueinburch, and
his Lady dined together in the Landgraues great chamber after a private and
domestical manner, for by this time the extraordinary company was retired, the
Landgraue supped with him in the Marble chamber where he told him as it was
given out before, that the next day morning he meant to ride abroad a hunting
with his Lordshidpe.

Before they set out the Landgraue rode with him about his fortress, showed
him the secret places of it, with his armorie appointing dinner to be served in
the garden at the banquettinge house, after in a barge we crossed the water,
where were coches ready and the Prince went that night tewo leagues to
Milsungen, where he rejoiced and was exceeding merry full of state and grace in
speech and beheauiour, his answer unto my Lord I noted who saying to him upon
occasion that the Prince of Hessen was not there and therefore would he be the
bolder. No my Lord quoth the Landgraue (in english) the prince of Hessen is not
here but the great Hunts-master. The next day he carried us to his town of
Rotenberg which is so called of the red moulde of the hills yet between them
runs a very rich vale where this town is situated. Here we stayed two dais,
and had a fresh fit of entertainment with huntings greater then the first
but in that kind.

The Prince has here a goodly house, where are one of the five choice things
of Germany which are the Armorie and Stabell at Dresden, the banquetinge house
at Stutgart the hunts kammer of Munchen and the hall of Rottenberg. Here
called he to his The desc. of the Land.
counsels his lieftenaunt Baltazar Gedel a worthy grave wise gentelman, and
whom the employed upon the borders of the Abbacye of fuld, which is the
Emperors. But to speak at length after a timely observation of this noble
Prince whose rare gifts and virtues and discretion in the cariadge of
himself, and mannaging affairs sufficiently discover him, he His body.
is a perfect man (in my opinion) and a most perfect Prince.

First a goodly personage, of stature tall and straght, for his proportion, of
a good presence and a gallant countenance, manly visaged, with a fair big
black eye, deep aburne hair, comlie in behavior, gracious and presuasiue in
speech. And this body has a mind suitable unto yt.

For his gifts of nature are great, sharp to apprehend, and sound in
judgment, mingling his gravity with pleasure, his courtesy with state, and
honor, love with stoutnes, thereby winning the affection of His mind.
strangers, and keeping his subjects in a lovely fear, Master of his
affections, temperat, bounded, not to change, in whom the upper parts command
the nether.

His education prince-like, generally known in all things, and excellent in
many, seasoning his grave and mor important studies for ability in judgment,
with studies of pastime for retiring, as in poetry, music, and the
Mathemitikes, and for ornament in discourse in the languages, French, Italian
and English, wherein he is expert reading much, conferring and writting much he
is a full man, a ready man, an exact man, and so excellent a Prince that a man
may say of him without flattery as Tullie did of Pompey, vnus in quo summa
sunt omnia, and for my private opinion I think there are but few such men in
the world.

His experience in all good courses greater then his years, though for the
inconstancies, advantages, and courses of the bad world, it increase with time
in all men. For art does perfect nature and is perfected by experience. In his
government wise, in himself absolutely ruling vehement yet loving and beloved
of his sub iectes, void of cruelty or exaction, gentell, gracious, not
governed by one nor distracted by many but advised. And as Traiane the Emperor
was called paterpatrie by the Romans, so has this Prince a term among his
people of their (Goodness without end.) For his exercise given much to
hormanship, and to his lawful pleasures, in the vain of his age, more given
to spend then to gather, and whereas his Grandfather advanced his house by
matching with Sophia Duchess of saxony, and his father with sabina Duchess
of Wurteynberg, he has married virtue and beauty, following rather the
contentment of his mind like a great Prince, then the filling of his purse, or
his greater advancement choosing so virtuous and so beautiful as his countese
by whom he had first a son named Otto, and now her Majesty's God daughter
Elizabeth: his ways may prosper for they are right, and his counsels take
effect, for they tend to piety.

After his entertainmentes here at Rotenberg, he would gladly have carried my
Lord Ambassador to his best house at Smalecole, for as he is goodness without
end unto his subjects, so showed he love without end to her Majesty, but his
journey of Amberg, would not permit it, therefore we returned back by
Spauengberg from whence he suddenly went from us before, where at we maruailed
but coming to Cassel he met my Lo. Ambassador extraordinarily gallant, and
received him so freshly as though he had but now begun his entertainment. This
judgment and discretion he used to the last, embracing this favor of her
Majesty, in the most estimable and kind manner, that was possible, and
showing greater parts then of a duchman. Upon parting he presented my Lord with
Princely gifts, as cups of Iuorie, Amber and Crystal, and to fit his humor
with turks and Ginnets, furnished very richly, whiat other secret gifts were
given between them, I know not: but after mutual presents, and gratuities,
dispatching of letters, and preparing for our Journey to Breme the Prince sent
one Master Branch for Frence, who went with us, dined with the Ambassador he
and the Dukes of Luneberg and Holsteine, who after dinner in all terms of
honor and of courtisie bad my Lord farewell. And so these Princes parted.

His Lordshippes entertainment in the Low Countries.
I Cannot but in gratitude insert to this discourse a word or two of my Lords
bountiful and loving entertainment going and coming through the low Countries.

Wherein this good people showed their grateful minds unto her Majesty, as by
whose, Sovereign Counsel and asistance (to say truly) they live in that
peaceable liberty wealthy and very flourishing estate that now they are in,
which is no little honor to her sacred person, throughout the world. That
this kingdom which was wont to suffer, and be led by others, is in her time
become Active so farforth, as through Christendom to be principal, for the
setting up and maintenance of the truth, not only in her Majesty's own
dominions but abroad, in spite of the world and the Devil, Etiam rumpant ur vt
Ilia Codre. God Continue her, for his Christ es sake.

The last of July my Lord embarked from Year-month in a ship of the Queens
and landed at the Brill where by the Ho. the Lord Buroughs appointment
Captain Turner his Honors deputies Governor in the Garrison, prevented the
Burghmaisters, in my Lords entertainment, who were very sorry for it desiring
his Lo. to return that way.

We crossed the water to Maidensluse and went by scute to Delst where her
Majesty's Agent Master Gilpin with Captain I axley and some other gentlemen,
met with my Lord and returned with him presently to the Hague.

The Princes were in service and at Hulst, but five of the states general, one
for Gelderland, one for Frizeland, two for Holland Delft and Leadon and one for
Ouerissel came and entertained my Lord, feasting and accompanying him, de
fraying all manner of charges and sent further letters of Commendations unto
other towns to do the like taking order by one Captain Corbet that when his
Lo. came to Delphzill he should for his Honors safe conduct procure either a
ship of war, or fifty soldier.

My Lord was at the Hague saluted further by the County Edgment and the French
Ambassador and being desirous to fee her, went and saluted the Princess of
Orange with her young son.

From thence we went to Leaden, where my Lord was feasted likewise, and so at
Harle and at Amsterdam it cost them two and three hundred guldens at a meal,
for there was no spare, and for the most part they defrayed, his Lo. wagons and
his cariages.

From Amsterdam we sailed to Enchusen whither coming late, we came unlooked
for, and betimes in the morning went to Harli^^^^ and the same day to Lewarden.

His Honors entertainment in this Province passed all the rest, for they can
better skill of it, Frizeland being the more noble, though Holland be as honest

At Lewarden Master Docomartin the Here Suasenburch and others gave my Lord
Ambassador courtly and gracious entertainment, besides the cost they bestowed
of him which for his supper came to twenty pound.

From hence we went to the territory of Grominoen where the states, keep in
continual garisonne eight companies, whereof the one half falied out at my
Lords coming, and carried him into the town in great triumph, the Trumpet and
a Coronet of hormen going before him to his lodging on the market place, where
above all that I have yet spoken of in these parts, he was entertained and
feasted.

In the morning the Seargent Mayor carried him about the fortress, and showed
him of the siege, and manner of taking it by Grave Maurace and after dinner
four or five of the principal accompanied him toward Delphzil appointing
Captain Gorbet to go with him, where my Lo. was likewise receive at the
watch-masters house.

From hence after having seen the sconse next morning we crossed the water to
Embden where my Lord staying for answer from the Grave, for his conuoy, he was
put to cost and so at Leere Oldenborge and Breme, where he stayed not, but
went to Forden Cel, and so to Brunswicke travailed at great charge until he
came to Zapponbunch, and so likewise from Cassel till he came back to Lewarden.

At our return from Cassell we came down the wessel by Munden Nuneburg
Minden, Breme, where my Lord met a man of war of Frizeland and with him
coasting and crossing the Islands, came first to the schonse of Northmer Horn,
and went from thence to Dockum.

At Lewarden again they did him courtesy and defrayed his charges where he
hoped to have met Grave Willelm but he was at Groningen, we came the same way
we went to Amsterdam, where were the states of Holland at their provincial
Council, there being a general meeting within few days after at Lewarden.

From thence his Lordship went to Vtrecht, where he had marvelous
entertainment: it were a story alone to report it.

From Vtrecht we crossed over again to the Hague where Grave Maurice invited
his Lo. to dinner, here were the Duke of Bullone, the Graves of Hollac Emden,
Egmont and many gallants; returning through we came to Rotterdam where he was
entertained, and from thence to Dordred where likewise he was received very
bountifully.

At Dordrech my Lord took ship for Middelburgh having appointed to conuoy
him two men of war where through Zeland by the towns of Der Go^^e Zerricher
Campb^re and Arnhem, we 'arriued and at the English house my Lords charges was
borne by the Burger-maisters: we hastenned from the sickness to Flushing where
the Lord Governor Sir Robet Sidney met and received my Lord into the town
accompanied with many gallante Captains and Gentlemen, being by, and provided
him of shipping and all things necessary for our passage embarked the sixth of
October and with a prosperous wind the seventh arrived in England.

FINIS.

